FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10557

1 June 1982

USSR Report

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS
‘ CFOUO 4/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

MWUSEONLY
m publicationa contain informtion pri-rily fro- foreign
newapapera. pcriodicala and booka, but alao tron newa agency
traneniaeiona and broadcaata. Hateriale tron foreign-language
oourcea are tranelated; thoec fro- Bngliah-language aourcee
are tranecribed or reprinted, with the original phraaing and
other characteriatica retained.

leadlinca, editorial reporta. and naterial encloaed in brackcta
[) are aupplied by ms. Proceeeing indicatore ouch ea [text]
or [Excerpt] in the firat line of each itea, or following the
laet line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation wna
proceeaed. here no proceaeing indicator ia given, the inﬂor-
ution waa uu-arired or extracted.

Untaailiar nanea rendered phonetically or tranalitezated are
encloacd in parentheaea. Horde or nausea preceded by a quea-
tion nrk and encloaed in parentheaea were not clear in the
original but have been aupplicd aa appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notea within the body of an
iten originate with the aource. ‘l'i-ea within it-e are aa
given by aource.

The contente of thie publication in no way repreaent the polio
ciea. viewa or ettitudee of the u.s. Govern-ant.

OOPYRIGI‘I LAWS AND REGULATIONS MINING WHIP '0?
mmms REPRODUC. HEREIN REQUIRE mu DISSBMINATION
0' THIS WEICA‘I'IOII BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

PHYSICS mu Hamemncs
(2000 mm

Cements

manure:

navy Liquid Nave: ...........................................
was mum

Phone nucmtiooo or anti-ode use: hold in Want

‘mmm oooooooeeocoooooooooooooooooeeoooooaaoeoooooooooo

(incantation of Three-Pun ”119106 Using howl: Gnu

mu .0...CO....000.......0.0....0...CCOOOUOOOOOOCOOOCOOQOO

we M‘um 0: W mmdwa ooooto-oopo-oooooooooooo

Investiution of 80-1: mm beenbimtion bur mm
b, “901' m1”. “at 1. 1006 m 0.0000000000000000...90000.0

Vibrationai More: Rulings in m. an: Option Wk”

cw km 0! Pbotodiaooointion laser mu Cyclic
Cmumm of wow. nmmroml 1m OOOOOOOOOOOOOO...

w mm“ 01"”. 0.0...0000......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
Promotion of Sour Motion in Mao-mm .................
Sphericd Microtu-get Imdiotion by 2-Mvntt .Iodino hum-u

Miotion Divergence in Paves-on we: Alplifimhoing
Acsive Elaouto of Rectangular Crou Section ..............,

Using Solid M1 in We Loser... ........ ..............
lawman“

omoe All) 886W?!
Lem-Induced nonlinear neeonenoee 1:) Continuous spectra...”

Local Moxutiooe or Continnone Him-ore and Their
W “mow.” eeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeee‘eeoeeeeee

W08

new-dung Angular Coordinetee of Automation Objeote
M "M ”£00100me Wt W eeeeeeeeeeeee

m M. Wm. 0.0000.000000000000000.000000..’OOOOOOO.
man mama
Denee Puma Pea-meters, ﬂighd’reeeure end Intenee Motion

Puleee Thet- Artee When Powerful Proton nuxee Intereot
nth mama-0’ 00....COO...0IOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOQOOVQOOOO

mmmmv
FLUID names

III: 332
Ill" LIQUID "AVIS

heningred '50!th m In MI W tamer: in hueeien I901
(eigned to preee 8 Apr 81) pp 24. 193-196

[Annotetion. prefece end tehle of contente tron hook "theory of "even on the
Surfece of e leevy Liquid". by Yuriy Zoeinovich Aleehkov. lsdetel'etvo
Leningredekogo univereitete. 2623 copiee. 196 pegee]

[Text] The textbook elucidetee topice of the theory of vevee on the eurtece
of e heevy liquid. end interection hetveen ouch vevee end eolid eurtecee.
Ceeee ere ex-ined vith high-enlitude vevee in the preeenoe o! depth-veriehle
currente. with vevee in ehellov veter iron the_ etendpoint of the nonlineer-
diepereion epproxinetion. end eleo queetione of me propegetion on the enr-
fece of e liquid of veriehle depth.

For edvenced univereity etudente in nechenice end nethenetice coureee nejorin;
in epplied nethenetice end nechenice of liquide. .eeee end ple-e.

Prefece

‘l'he etudy of x;ion of e liquid with tree eurfece nd ite interection with

e eolid body i'. of coneiderehle intereet for euch fielde of knowledge no
hydraulic engineering. naphyeice end ehip nevigetiou. with thie in eind.

our book tehee up queetione of the theory of nevee on the eurtece o! e heevy
liquid end their interection with eolid eurfecee thet ney be either etetionery
or in erhitrery notion.

Ae to the neture of the liquid. it ie taken an ideel end inconpreeeihle. end
notion in eeeued to be irrotetionel. In thie ceee. quentitetive oveluetion
of the interection between the liquid end e eolid eurfece ie determined tra
eolving the eppropriete nonlineer houndery velue prohlen of potentiel theory.
Such nn epproech to prohlene of netheneticel nodelin; of eone phyeicel eitecte
ceueed hy veve notion of liquid 'enehlee theoreticel deterninetion of the pe-
renetere of notion of the liquid end ite force ection on therent oheteclee.

The firet chepter in introductory. It given verioue torne o! equtione o!

notion of liquid. end fornuletee principel houndery conditione inherent in
veve notione of liquid.

1
"WWWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second chapter is devoted to investigation of the properties of free pro-
gressive waves of finite qlitude. This topic is presented with lasin-
coapleteness for practical calculation of the par-eters of such waves.

lent. the third chapter engines problsns of the theory of forced traveling
wavee of finite .plituds. The exposition is liaited to the case where
steady-state waves occur on the free surface. An investigation is aade of
the inportant case of resonance of the free surface in the nonlinear approxi-
nation.

The fourth chapter outlines problans of the theory of both free and forced
waves on a current that varies with depth. Conditions of existence of poten-
tial waves with such a current are explained. The solution of the problaa
is given with third-epproxiaation accuracy.

The fifth chapter offers aaterial on quantitative evaluation of the force
action of high-sqlitude weves on a vertical wall in the case of frontal ap-
proach of waves. This problaa is generalized to the case of approach of waves
of finite anplitude toward a vertical wall at an arbitrary angle in the sixth
chapter.

The seventh chapter gives the derivation of equations of the theory of long
waves in the three-diaensionsl case of a liquid of variable depth.

Problems of wave propagation in a liquid of variable depth are especially
inortant for probleas of aarine hydraulic engineering. At the ace tine.
they are very difficult in the sense of explicit construction of a solution.
The eighth chapter gives an aeyaptotic solution of the linear problen of wave
propagation on the surface of a liquid of variable depth. and also offers '
a solution for the problan of wave passage froa one depth to another. and
wave passage over a vertical barrier.

The ninth chapter ex-inss problsns of wave diffraction by vertical cylindri-
cal surfaces. The case of wave diffraction by two arbitrarily oriented verti-
cal walls is of particular interest for applications.

The tenth chapter presents the theory of interaction of a aoving solid with
a liquid of finite depth. Final results are found for the case of a slender
body.

The eleventh and last chapter is devoted to questions of interaction of irreg-
ular waves with solid surfaces. The state of the sea due to wind action aust
as a rule be described by randon functions that are solutions of the corre-
sponding hydroaechanical probleas. Such an approach enables accounting for
the action of wind waves on various obstacles.

The list of problens arising fron interaction of waves with solid surfaces
requires a mist of approaches for solution. This book uses the asth of
the anall para-ate: for constructing the solution of nonlinear boundary value
problaae. the Lyapmov-Scl-idt nethod for studying nonlinear integral equa-
tions. the aethod of separation of variables. conforIal napping techniques.

2
POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the method of reducing a linear boundary value probl- of elliptical type
to an integral equation by the fundamental formula of the theory of harmonic
functiona. methoda of the theory of random functione.

0n the whole. the book ueee analytical methode both for direct cometruction
of a eolution for the external problen of potential theory and for reducing
thie problem to a form convenient for ueing numerical methode and computere.

In accordance with the above. thie book deele with the field of applied mathe-
matice on problema of fluid dynamice. It examinee determinietic and etochee-
tie modele of wave motione of a heavy liquid.

Formation of the ecientific intereete of the author baa been coneiderebly
influenced by the worke of A. 1. Nekraaov. 1!. Ya. lochin. L. 11. Bretenekiy.
Ya. I. Sekareh-Zen'kovich and Yu. H. kylov. who have contributed prominently
to the development of wave theory. The etudy of their vorke bee opened up
poeaibilitiea for eolving new probleme of both theoretical and practical in-
tereet.

Many pointe of the book have been diecueead directly with Frofeeeor Ya. I.
Sekereh-Zan'kovich. to whom the author ie eincerely grateful for ueeful ed-
vice.

Contente
Preface 3
Chapter 1: Bquatione of Liquid Motion 5
1.1. Deecription of liquid motion in Euler variablee -
1.2. Boundary conditions 3
1.3. Deecription of liquid motion in Lagrange variablea 10
Chapter 2: Free Progreeeive Havoc of Finite Aqlitude 12
2.1. Determining velocity potential and ordinate of free eurface -
2.2. Liquid particle trajectory 20
Chapter 3: Forced Any-attic Havee of Finite Anlitude 24
3.1. Formulation of problem and reduction to integral equation -
3.2. Solution of problem in caeeun‘ vn 31
3.3. Solution in caee 110' v; 35
Chapter 4: Surface Havee on a Current 42
4.1. General formulation of the problem -
4.2. Free wavee 44
4.3. Forced wavea 49
Chapter 5: Action of Haven of Finite Amplitude on a Vertical Well with
Frontal Approach 57
5.1. Foreulation of problen in Euler variables and method of eolution -
5.2. Have height at the wall. and load.on the wall 62
5.3. Solution of the etanding wave problem in Lagrange variablee 63
Chapter 6: Interaction of ﬂavea of Finite Anlitude and Arbitrary
Direction of Propagation With Vertical Hell 77
6.1. Formulation of the probl- and method of eolution -
6.2. Determination of velocity potential 80
6.3. Load on the wall 86

3
MWWEONLY
60‘.
6.5.

Chapter
7.1.

702'
Chapter
8.1.

8.2.

8.3.
8.6.
Chapter
9.1 0
9020
Chapter
10.1.
10.2.
10.3.
10.6.

10.5.

Chapter
11.1.
11.2.
11.3.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Caee of deep vater
lelation betveen height of interference vave et veil and height
of incident wave
7: Uevee in Shallow Hater
lquationa of long-wave thoery
Solitone end knoidal vevea
8: Have Propagation Over Guru“ of Varieble Depth
lay nethodior deecribing proceea of Ir‘e propagetion vith con-
tinuoua change in liquid depth
Linear hydrodvnenic 'problen of wave propagation over the «niece
of a liquid of variable depth
Rave peeeage tron one depth to another
Paeeage of vavee over a vertical obstacle
9: Diffraction of Gravity "even by Verticel Cylindrical Surfacee
General formletion of problen. mlee
Gene of gap for-ed by two arbitrarily orionted vertical walla
10: lotion of Solid in Liquid of rinite Depth
tormletion of problea of notion of eolid in liquid
torced oecillatim of aolid in liquid of finite depth
General one of vibrational notion of aolid
Oecillatory notion of eolid in the preaence of travel at
conatant velocity
notion of elender body at variable velocity in liquid of
finite depth .
11: Interaction of Irregular Havee with Solid Surfecee
Deacription of irregular developed vem on the open eee
Diffraction of irregular veven
Oecillation of aolid due to irreguler wavea

leferencee

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'etvo Leningradahogo univereiteta. 1981

6610

(:80: 1862/95

11
MWMONLY

89
91

95

106
110
120
131
163
156
159
161
168

168
176

180
186
192
mmwm

UDC 621.371.255
MB nucruanous 0? ”TM! um Pm I! mum mom

Hoecov IVANTOVAYA mm in hueeian Vol 9. So 1(115). Jan 02 (eanuecript
received 13 Teb 81) PP 9-13 ,

[Article by H. s. belen'kiy and v. 1.. Hironov. lnetitute of Optice of the
Ataoephere. Siberian Departaent. 088R Acaduy of Sciencee. Tenet]

[Text] a nethod ie propoeed for calculating the phaee fluc-
tuatione of aultinode radiation in a aediul with rando-
inhoeogeneitiee. ueing the concept of average diffraction
raya. An inveetigation ie nade of the influence that the
initial coherence of the eource field and diffraction con-
ditione have on the radiating aperture. and the effect that
turbulent conditiona of propagation have on epetial etruc-
ture of the phaee function and on the variance of trenor

.f the eource image. The reeulte of theory are chpared
with experinental data obtained in the actual atnoephere.

Phaee fluctuatione of wavee propagating in the ataoephere conaiderably linit
. the capabilities of varioue practical laeer eyetele (Ref. 1. 2]. Earner.
deapite the fact that many eourcee ueed in eyeteae of thie kind have finite
temporal and epetial ecalee of field coherence. phaee fluctuatione of partly
coherent radiation in a turbulent atnoaphere have not yet been calculated.
Thie paper prm-oeee a method of calculating phaee fluctuatione of a eultinode
laeer bean in a aediu with randoe inhonogeneitiae. and inventigatee the ray
that the etructure function of the phaee and aeeociated variance of iuge
tremor depend on initial source field coherence. conditione of diffraction
by the radiating aperture. and turbulent conditiona of propagation.

The initial dietribution of the field in the plane of the radiating aperture
(x-O) ie given in the fore lief. 2]

u.(p)~epr-p’(I/2a'+sz)+ls.(p)l. (I)

where a it effective been radiue. k ie the wave umber. I in focal length

of the traneaitter. 81(9) ie randon phaee dietributed by e nor-a1 law. The
average value of phaee 81(9) to zero. and the atructure function takee the.
fora 803 (p)- n’llmﬂ. Bare Zak ie the initial epetial coherence radiue of
the fiel . Phaee fluctuatione of the wave in the plane of obeervation (x-X)
in a turbulent atnoephere are deecribed by the relation

I70! 0mg“. Ufa. ONLY
.POIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY

s(x. p)-S.(X. o)+s.(x. ,5); (2)

where 810. o) are rando- phaea diatortione in e ho-ogeneoue nediu due to
fluctuatione of the field on the radieting overture. sax. p) in tendon pheee
advance ceueed by turbulent inhaogeneitiee of the atnoephere. Pomle (2)
ie inplied by the etocheetic wave equetion with randoe boundary condition

(1) when it ia eolved either by the eethod of geonetric option or by the
neth of nooth perturbation. in a consequence of the etetietical indepen-
dence of quntitiee 81 and 8;. the etructure function of overell phase fluc-
tuatione in eccordance with (2) taken the for:

D,(X. p)-.-D“(X. m-I-DAX. p). (3)

When calculating 0.10. p) in e honogeneoue field. we teha coneideretion of
the fact that for e been with initial field dietribution (l). dieregerding
onlitude fluctuetione the reletion nu. o)/l'a(l. 0)-erp[40.1(l. 0)] ie
eatiafied. where r; ie the nutuel coherence function of the eecond-order field.
Then a, the coherence rediue of the unbounded plane wave po-H- [cu-(1.6mx
63X)" '. c}. in the etructure cheracterietic of fluctuations of the index

of refraction]. wa heve fro. the reeulte of laf. 3

'I.D..(X. n)=p'?4lo:(l-X/n'+(x1u)'u+9116». (4)

lormle (6) definee the chenge in etructure faction of the pheea of e nulti-
node leeer he- in e haogeneoua nediue due to field diffrection by the redi-
ating aperture.

to calculate tendon pheee advance of the wove Sta. 9) due to etnoepheric
turbulence. we not the concept of averege diffraction raye lief. 1.. 5). In
accordance with Ref. 4.. 5:

.\' '
S.(X.n.)q+*,\'¢.(x.o(X))dnp(X)'-n.. (S)
0

where the t1 ere fluctuatione of pernittivity of the sedit- at points lying
on the average diffraction rey arriving at the obeervation point (X. 9:).

the trejactoriaa of reye of e nultinode be. in a eediu with tendon inhouo-
aeneitiea are deternined analogooely (Ref. 1.. S]. In accordance with Ref.

o. 5. the eolution of the nonlineer differentiel equation thet deecribea the
trejcctoriee of averege diffrection reye in the paraxial approrinetion
(pg/id) with eccurecy to taree of order (mix): coincidee with the expreeeion

x .
p (x) - 9. exp [—j' v (E. 0. m 6) 43]. (6)

whore r in the inotentanaoua dietanca along the path.

‘ C an 0/“
NEON-M“ [n 4.: n+‘lm I'

MWWONIX
is the curvature of the average phase front of the collineted (X/P-O) ban.
n-kai/x is the Fresnel paraneter of the radiating aperture. q-X/koi is a
par-star that characterizes turbulence intensity on the path. on Inf/9:.
According to Ref. 6. paraneter n at the output of a laser vith spherical cavi-
ty in the case of a large number of transverse nodes of oscillations (lb!)
can be evaluated by the formula 01:“.

The average diffraction rays found fron relation (6) for e nultinode ben
under conditions of veal: (ed) at an." and strong ('1’!) at Rain (1]. e)
intensity fluctuations are defined by the expressions

I]?
WWW (7)

and

—l
P(x)-m[l———1—d—7¢+ Z "I Hyman. '.] x (a)
x In + mag (xIXW‘PI‘ [e + ‘Iﬂql~‘"

respectively. The trajectories of these
rays at different parsneters q. o and n
are shown in Pig. 1. It can be seen that
the spatial position and shape of the
average diffraction rays of a restricted
collinated been depend on the coherent
properties of the source and turbulent
conditions of propagation. In particular.
with increasing paraneter n at arm the
beans of the nultinode laser approach
the rays of a spherical wave (0(x) -
ads/X). curve 4). while under conditions
of strong intensity fluctuations (cpl).
Fig. 1. Average diffraction rays with the additional condition «1'qu
of nultinode laser been (XIV-0. they becone close to the liniting position

 

Q- l) in turbulent atnosphers: of rays of a single-node (0-!) be. (9(a)-
lnn-l. q-O; 2-n- 10, q - 0; p1(x/X’/’. curve 6). In this case. the
3—n-102. q-O; lone-10‘. q- rays of a nultinode laser are situated
1-102 or c- 1. 0-0; S—o- 10. closer to the axis of the he- even in
q- [0; 6--n- 1-10, q- 10’ coeparison with the rays of a spherical
“We

Relations (5)-(8) enable us to calculate the spatial statistical character-
istics of phase fluctuations of optical saves. To calculate tine character-
istics we should use the expression for rando- phase advance at tine delayed
by t as written using the hypothesis of frozen turbulence Ref. 1]:

I
8AM». 0- ' cn(x.o(x)-vi(x)t)dx.
T

where V; (x) is the component of wind velocity across the path.
[OI 0PM“. US! ONLY

‘l'he spatial stmcture of the phase function of a nultinode been in a nediul
with Kolnogorov turbulence spectrun takes the for-

o..(x. a. a. a. ”-762. a. «mix. a). (9,

where Data. 9) is the structure function of the phase of a plane wave.

I x
ﬂow-“Pie” [-§-$v(§.ﬂ.q.u)d§]dx. (10)

At the special values mo. 94-. fornulas (9). (10) imly known results
Inf. 1. 2] for an unbounded plane wave (1-!) end a spherical wave (1- ’l.)
respectively. and at o- 1 these formlas coincide with the corresponding ex-
pressions for a single-node been obtained in Ref. 5. 7. In particular. it
was shown in these papers that in the case of a single-nods spatially re-
‘stricted been (no 1. 9-1) under conditions of strong intensity fluctuations
(11>!) the par-star 1- 2[1. whereas in the region of weak fluctuations (qd),
y- 2/5. In the case of a mltinode laser 91 at q»l and oq"¢ﬂ¢q. fornula
(10) also mun 1-1/1, and when qcl we have

7‘9» 4' ¢)-||+a§"l':"l=.(-'I.. m: '/.;—m.

Pro- thia we see that with the sane scatter of observation points (o-const)
the structure function of the phase of a spatially limited bean in the region
of strong intensity fluctuations (q>>l) is less than this quantity for both
plans and spherical waves. According to hf. 6, 5. this is due to the ap-
proach of average diffraction rays (sea Pig. 1). which reduces the average
phase difference at observation points.

Phase fluctuations of a wave received by an optical system cause ilage tre-or
[lef. 1]. Using the results found above. we calculate the varianca of the
tremor of, which f roe Ref. 1 when 9b»“l. (pb is the average beaa size in
the plane of the receiver. at, is the radius of the reception lens) is uniquely
determined by the structure function of the incident wave phase. Taking our
lead free Ref. 1. we get fro. fornulaa (3). (9)

tin-0:: +1(D.q.¢)0’u. (11)

where of“ is variance of the trenor of the fee” of a fluctuating source in

a ho-ogeneous aediu. 030-2-0.97/[h’ (2419‘ '9. '1 is the variance of inge
treaor for reception of an init 11y coherent infinite plane wave in turbulent
ataoaphere. when a>>l and n<<a , formula (0 is considerably siaplified and
takes the fore 0.1(1. o)- Dana/ha)“. here of“- (ama/z, where all is the
angular sire of the source.

Thus with increasing path length x. the. variance of iaage trenor for 1 partly
coherent source in turbulent atnosphere on the one hand decreases since
oﬁ1~X". and on the other hand increases since 03. ~x. Differentiating
forsula (11) with respect to x. we can deter-inc fro. the condition doc/dx-O
the position of the plane of mini.- ternor of the inage on the path. however.

MOFHGALIJSIONLY
Pig. 2. Inge tr-or vari-
ance as a function of para--
eter a at fixed para-stars q
and qt: lung- 10. q-0.l;
2--qk-o-lo. q- 10'; 3—“-
0-10. q-lo'; s-ak-IO‘. «1- Fig. 3. hperi-sntal date
0.1-10 froa hef. lO oints). straight
line IS:- 051 (1) and calcu-
when these results are used in prac- lation by fornulas (lo-(12) at
tice. it should be borne in mind that 1.9- l.‘ I (8) and . (8)
fornuls (11) is derived without con-
sideration tut. 8] of the finiteness of coherence tine 1.; of the sauce or
the response tine r of the receiver. If we consider the fact that for sany
sources and receivers of optical radiation “<4. then the phase fluctuations
310:. o) of the source will be averaged out by the receiver. and foraula (11)
will take the for:

 

0.1-7“). v. 9003;. < 12)

Relation (12) defines the variance of insge truer at arbitrary values of
the para-stars o. q and 0. The special case of inge tre-or in reception
of a single-node been (a- 1) using results found in Ref. lo. 5 was considered
in Ref. 9. The results of that paper follow froe formla (12) at o- 1.

Fig. 2 shows the dependence of the ratio 03/03,. on par-star a at different
values of q and «13- (s- l)/ﬂ. he can see that for fined turbulence conditions
of propagation («1(1) the variance of bags trans: of an appreciably incoherent
source (curve lo) is 2.7 tines less than for a source of the seas also with
larger coherence radius (curve 1). Besides. we can see that under conditions
of strong intensity fluctuations (q>>l), the inags trenor variance in recep-
tion of spatially liaited beans (no 1) is less than for either a plane wave
(1- l) or a spherical wave (7- 8la). Let us note that this result cannot be
obtained by the ordinary neth of geonetric optics (without the use of aver-
age diffraction rays) or by the nethod of moth perturbations (Ref. 1. 2].

'rrenor of the image of a partly coherent source in a turbulent etnosphere
was experimentally studied in Inf. 10. The neasurensnts were lads with a
thereal source of diasster 2r-0.3 - and wavelength 1-0.5 us placed in the
focal plane of a radiating lens with focal length rL-zso - and angular sire

9
”WMMY
FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY

of the aperture at distance at equal to 241/!- 5". The optical neaeureaenta
were accolpanied by gradient neaeursnents of paraneter cn on an average height
of bean propagation h- 2 n.

The neaeured values of a: and the res deviations lei! calculated free data
for ca by formla (12) at the special value 7- ’l. for path of x- 1750 n taken
fro- lef. 10 are shown on Fig. 3 together with theoretical curves 5};- £0031)
conputer-calculated by fornulae (10). (12) at values of the paranstera a. q
and a corresponding to conditions of experiment lief. 10]. Curve 2 corresponds
to the Kolnogorov spectra of turbulence. curve 3 corresponds to the spectg
density of fluctuations of the index of refraction of for- ”(nu-0.033031: 3x
[1 - exp(-x’/x%)) that accounts for finiteness of the external turbulence acale

Lo (K‘o ' ZI/Ls) -

Under the conditions of experinent (Ref. 10]. 31-6. 0-1.6-10’. l<q<3.)~lO’.
.‘rhs acale of at was determined fro. the formula ok-OJllrL/r. The eetinate
L.-0.7h lief. 2] m need for the external turbulence scale.

It can he seen from Fig. 3 that the propoeed nethod of calculation enablea
quantitative deacription of variance of the tracer of the image of a partly
coherent source in turbulent atloephere. The reduction of neasured rna devia-
tiona of bags tremor v6:- oheerved in Ref. 10 as coepared with the valuee
calculated by the formula for an unbounded spherical wave (straight line 1.
03- ’53-) is due both to the influence of the external scale of turbulence
and to t curvature of the average phase front of the he- and of the asso-
ciated average diffraction raye that ie caused by the median [lef. b. 5].
Let us note that for a single-node laser this effect was experimentally oh-
eerved in the atnosphere in Ref. ll.

streams

l. ratarskiy. V. 1.. "Raeproatraneniye voln v turbulentnoy atnoafere" [Have
Propagation in Turbulent Atnosphere], Moscow. vaults. 1967.

2. Gurvich, A. 8.. Ken. A. 1., Mironov, V. I... Khaelevtsov. s. 8.. "Laeemoye
izlucheniye v turbulentnoy atnoefare" [Laser Radiation in Turbulent Ataca-
phere]. Noacov. Naulua. 1976.

3. Belen'kiy. H. 8.. Ion. A. 1.. Hironov, V. I... rvamovara mm.
Vol lo. 197‘]. p 517.

6. lelen'kiy. H. 8.. Hironov. V. I... "l‘etiey dokladov. Pervoye Vaeeoyuznoye
aoveshchaniye po at-oefernoy optike" [Abstracts of Papere. First All-
Union Conference on Atmospheric Optics]. Part 1. Ionsk. 1976. pp 138-1102.

5. lelen'kiy. u. 8.. Kironov. V. l... J. 0PT. soc. All!” Vol 70. 1900. p 159.

60 mtyuny.np A. Ge, Akin-DOV. Se Aep 001’”", rue Dag Wm. Vs Gap

Chirkin. A. 8.. PIS'HA V 2mm. mm'm I WARRIORS“)? PIZIII.
Vol 6‘. 1973. P 1511.

10
MWWONLY
7.

8.

10.

ll.

madam. v. «5.. Bolcn'kiy. u. 8.. "reusy dokladov. Chcmrtyy
Vuooyuxnyy shpoziun po ruproatrancniyu luernogo islucluniya v
“amine" [Abstracts of Papa“. tomb All-Union 8mm on Propan-
tion of Laser union in Atmsphou]. Touch. 1977. pp 183-187.

hate. I. I... RADIO SCIENCE. Vol 12. 1977. p 223.

Miran". V. 1... Room. V. V.. Chan. 3. II" WHA "88!!!! new
ZAVIDINIY: mmnzmma 23. 1980. p ‘61.

Gutvich. A. 8.. hlltotratwa. K. A" mm “8“!“ new
ZAVEDIRIY: mtouzm. Vol 11. 1968. p 66.

Belon'uy. n. 5.. Boronoytv. V. V.. Gabon“ 1!. 1'... mom. V. I...
Trubachav. B. A” mm 1 mommy V01 69. 1900. P 595.

common: Imtel'stvo 'tho 1 cvyn'". "Kmtovaya elcktrooih". 1982

6610

080

: 1862/!“

11
POIOH'ICIALIRONLY
MWIBIONLY

unc 621.375.826
CHARACTERISTICS OF lull-PASS “9an U8!” mm M8 m

lioscow "Wife mm in Russien Vol 9. In 1015). Jen 82 (nenuscript
received 10 Jun 81) pp 121-125

[Article by l. Ye. lrodov. V. P. Degtyerevs. A. V. Ivenov. P. l. Iveshkin.
V. V. Iorohkin. P. P. Psshinin. A. ll. Prokhorov end P. V. Berov. Physics In-
stitute ineni P. II. Lehedev. 0883 Acedely of Sciences. Moscow]

[text] An experinentel study is done on the enrgy cherec-
teristics of e three-pese telescopic qlifier with neo-
dyeiu glsss ective el-ent. The psper givee the results

of e si-plified nodel celculetion of the process of enlifi-
cetion of e ehort leser pulse in such en .plifier with
cmd opticel errsngelent. The high levels of output
energy (1)0 .1) end gein thet ere echieved show the pronise
for the use of such mlifiers in the output steges of power-
ful leeer syeteee.

One of the noet inportent prohlsne for powerful leser systems is to inrm
the efficiency of using stored inversion. One of the weys to hendle this
prohlen is to use eultipees qlifiere. perticulerly in the output stegee

of such eystene. The edventegss of nultipses telescopic .plifiere neke thee
fusible es the heeis for effective uplifiere with lsrge value of ective
eediu [Ref. 1. 2]. the outlook for using such qlifiere in the quesisteedy
stete hes been rather well confined by theory end uperinent lief. 3-5].

Per lese research hee been devoted to the possibilities of telescopic upli-
fiers opereting in e follow-up node (for .plifying short leser pulses) (Ref.
2. 6). end nore theoretical end experinentsl resesroh is needed on the ques~
tion of the efficecy end edvieehility of using th for powerful leser fecili-
ties.

The theoretical study of energy cherscteristics of teleecopic elplifiers in
the follow-up node is s rether conpliceted letter es the celculstion of upli-
ficstion of en ective nediun with severel intersecting end interfering weves
requires sinulteneous solution of equetionc for the electronegnetic field

end the ective nediu. Sieplificetions end eodel epproxinetions thet ere
neturel in such s eituetion require thorough suhetsntietion end experinentel
verificetion. Por eque, cereleee celculstion end eelection of the per--
eters of e quesisteedy-stete telescopic eqlifier is quite detrinentsl to

its energy cepehilities llef. 3. S).

12
”WW“?
This paper is a report on an experimental study of the energy characteristics

of a three-pass telescopic

tion of some uplifier parameters.

Optical System of the Implifier

a diagran of the base .plifier of

the nut-35 facility is shown in fig. 1.
The .plifier consists of active ele-
ment 1 nessuring 50: 240: 720 I and

a three-pass cylindrical telescope.
lean dimensions are magnified fron
30x40 . at the input to 210x40 -
at the output of the amplifier. The
input beam passes the first time
active element 1 and is reflected from
total—reflection cover prism 3. The
front side of prism 3 has cylindrical
curvature. and therefore on the second
and third pass the reflected been has
cylindrical divergence along the 260-
side of the active elenent.
2 split the initial beam in two
from entering the input aperture
cover prisms ‘0.

through Pig.

the now separated beam passes a

enlifier with neodyeiu glsss active sleaent that
is the base uplifier in the powerful UNI-35
also gives a simplified energy model for such an amplifier.

multichannel facility. The paper

enabling optimisa-

 

1. Optical disgrae of ~11-
fier in side view (a) and top view
(b): l-osctive element; Z—wedges;
3-total-ref1ection cover prism
with cylindrical surface; bwcover
prisms; 5--cylindrical half-lenses;
6~pming lamps

After reflection by two
third time thrOugh the ampli-

fying media. and then after the two cylindrical half-lenses 5 it leaves the

amplifier . ‘l‘heae half-lenses

compensate for the divergence of the hens.

and two parallel beans are produced at the output of the nplifier with plans

phase front having dimensions of 501105 n each.
possible to keep the radiation flux density below the

the amplifier nakes it

The use of divergence in

level of destruction of the glass while increasing the total beam power by

uplificstion. 0n the other hand,

enough to ensure

the radiation energy density can be great
sore complete extraction of the

stored inversion.

To increase the efficiency of the nplifiar and get uniform mlplification

along the 1.0- side, an arrangement
side surface of the active element nsde
of the rays in the side
pumping was by 36 Il’P-OOOO-l laps

240x 720-mm surface of the active element.
with plane phase
after the prmplification system of
The laser pulse was

pass amplifier was a beam
bution of the cross section obtained
the UNI-35 fscility.
of 60 ns.

Results of the Experiments

‘No series of experiments were done.
the .plifier (in the first series)
series) was measured as a function

13
POI

was used with two reflections from the
of @822 glass.

view and the wing geometry
(18 each on top and bottoe) through the

The optical path
are shown in Fig. la.

Incident on the input of the three-
front and unifore intensity distri-

single-frequency and had a duration

The energy after the first pass through
and after three passes (in the second
of the input energy.

The nessurensnts

OFFICIALUSIONLY
POI 0W“. USE ONLY

were done by a ayatea of caloriaetera. The relative error vaa reduced to ~53
by uaing autual calibration of the caloriaetera during the eaperiaent. ‘l'he
min; energy per 1.1» vaa 3.6 and 6.9 U. Lat ua note that in the aecond
aeriea of experiaanta. a photochroaic filter with initial tranuiaaion of

30: can placed in front of priaaa 4 to prevent aelf-emcitation of the ”li-
fier uith 6.9 J pmping.

The gain K; on the firat pane. and K on three paaaea were taken aa the ratioa

mm. and 03/0” where Q. in input energy. Q; and Q. are the energiea after
one and three paeaea reepectively.

lca’ leaulta of Ieaaure-enta of gain after
the firat pm with 3.6 k.) ming
are ahovn in fig. 2. It can be aeen
that gain fella fro. 46.5 in a weak
field to -6 at input energy denaity

   

5
A Q.’ 1/“:
0 " Q00 J/CI: J
tig. 2. Gain (1) and energy 2
denaity (2) after firat paaa

  

in awlifier ea functiona of ' -
input energy danaity vith 09. J on
puwing at 3.6 h.) per leap; 1'18 3

I _ Bxperiaental (pointa)
“Lao“ ﬁoépgﬁfioﬂﬁ :3 and theoretical (aolid curve)

plota of energy denaity at the
(”1“ curvea) uplifiar output a a function
of 0.5 J/cn‘. the results of energy of input worry at Mina of
density aeaaureaenta after three paaeea 3.6 U P“ 1.9
aa a function of the input energy denaity
are shown in fig. 3 for the aaae pulping. l'ha total gain is l: 3000 in a weak
mm. m ~45 u input energy denaity of 0.5 J/n’.

2

At input energy of 6.5 J and puping of 3.6 J per lap. the output energy

of the a-plifier vaa 200 J. When pulping uaa increased to 6.9 U per law
and a photochro-ic filter wee included (aa aentioned above). an Output energy
of 3000 J vaa obtained at the one input energy.

It in iaportant for further optiairation of mltipaaa teleacopic aeplifiera.
including for aelecting the optima teleacope aegnification. type of glue
and ao on. to develop aethoda of calculating auch .plifiera that would give
good agre-entvith experiaent.

ﬂathod of Calculating I-plifier

Aa can be aaen fron the optical diagraa ahovn in 171g. 1. exact calculation
of the enlifier ia a coaplicated problea becauae of the preaence of three-
diaenaional regions with intaraection of two and four diverging been. 'ro
deacribe the procaaa of radiation .plification in a three-paaa optical ar-
range-ant we uae certain ainlificationa that reduce the equationa to one-
diaenaional equationa.

1h
POIOIIICIALUSSONLY
The process of uplification of a light pulse that is short conpared with

the tine of puping and relaxation of the upper l'aser level when passing
through the active sediun in the simplest case is described by equation [fron
Ref. 8]

%-A(x)ll—exp(-¢°)l-W. (1)"

where 0(x) is the nueber of photons passing through a unit of area with co-
ordinate x during the pulse; Mr) is initial inversion; o is the induced redi-
etion cross section; 8 is the coefficient of inactive absorption. Using the
results of Ref. 9 and ensuing that the s-plitudss of two waves are equal

for regions of intersection of two beans. we get the following equation with
consideration of their interference:

%-%§L[I—I,(2oo)exp(-200)l—W. .(2)

where 10(206) is a Bessel function.
If we disregard interference in equation (2). we can write it as

%-%‘-‘ltI-up(-2mn-uo. (3)

Calculations show that equation (2) by couparieon with (3) gives a correction
in the gain on the firet pass of approxinately 5! at energy densities typical
of our experieents.

In theoretical calculations of the first pass of the pulse. equations (1)

and (2) were used for regions without intersection and with intersection . '
waves respectively. In nuerical integration. technical data for B were used.
and consideration wee taken of the transverse distribution of inversion in
the active elsnsnt as previously seasured in independent experieents (Ref. 7].

Generalization of equations (1) and (2) with transition from one pass to a
three-pass arrangssent of an asplifier with cylindrical divergence reduces
to the necessity of accounting for two factors: the divergence on the second
and third pass. and the presence of regions where four be-s intersect in

a coeplicated three-dimensional configuration.

Divergence can he eieply accounted for by adding another ters to the second
nesber of equations (1) and (2) l-O/(x.+x)] that describes cylindrical diver-
gence: .

 

 

%:AII—exp(—o¢)l—§O- “1, ; (A)
a A 0
T-TlI-I.(2°0)exp(-2°°n-W- “4., v (5)

where n+1: is the radius of the jlindrical wavefront in the qlifying sedi-
us. and x. is determined by the para-stars of the optical cavity.

FOIOFHCIALIJSEONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In rogiona whoro four wavoa intarooct. wo can writa an oquation analogoua
to (S) for two wayoo:

%-+|l—I;(200)up(-M)l-W- “1. ° (6)

 

hora wo havo nado tho ainplifying aaouption that only two pairo of wavoo

aro intorforing. ‘rho foraalian of accounting for tho coaplox configuration
of thrao-di-onoional rogiona of intarooction roducoa to tho following ainpli-
fication in our calculationa. A ainglo calculation in done for tho oocond
and third paaooa by oquationo (lo) and (5) without conaidaring tho intorooc-
tion of thooo paaaaa. than anothor calculation io dono by oquationa (5) and
(6). aaauing total ovorlap of tho aocond and thixd paaooo. 'i'ho final output
onorgy donaity 19 it obtainod by avoraging thooo rooulta with opocific woight
Proportional to tho voluo of tho rogiono with and without intoraoction.
(Such a oinlification aooaa foaaiblo oinco tho rogiono of intoraoction of
four wavoo occupy a all part of tho voluo of tho .plifying nodiun. and
booidoo tho bo-o intoracct at mall angloa.)

Diacuaaion of tho laaulto

Spocific calculation of tho firot paoo in tho qliiior wao dono by foraulaa
(l) and (2) whore tho froo paranotor wao tho crooo aoction of tho inducod
tranaition. hoot agroaont with oxpcrinont io obtainod for cos-10'” ca:
(ooo Pig. 2). Ho woro pronptod to vary a in latching oxporilontal data with
calculatod rooulta by aoao ocattor of tho rooulto of aoaauroaonu of tho croaa
ooction of indu ad tranaition by difforont acthodo that. 10-12]. looidaa.

wo did our colculationo of tho firat paoa by using tho nodal of varioblo o
propoood in lot. 10:

a-nuuléomo. .m

By varying a. in thia caoo. wo wara aloo ablo to got agrooaont botwoon oxpori-
nont and calculation at o.- 3.5.10". cat. which dittora fro- tho etc-5'10".
cl2 obtainod for glaao of tho o-o grado (61.822) in Raf. 10 by tho noth

of noaauring tho luainooccnco with dopopulation of invoroion by a laoor pulao.

‘l'ho problon of tho crooa ooction for tho otinulatod tranoition ia vary ilpor-
tant froa tho standpoint of deter-lining tho onorgy otorod in tho nplifying
aodiu. ‘l'horoforo to got thia quantity uoro ouctly. and conaoquontly dotor-
aina tho anti- onorgy that can bo takon tron tho laaor qlitiat. aoro ox-
poriaontal and thoorotical raaoarch ia noodod.

Swing up. wo can oay that for tho firat paaa of our qlifior at an input
onorgy of l J/caz tho output onorgy undorgoao oaturation. i. a. a conaidorobla
fraction of tho otorod onorgy io convortad to radiation.

A oocond conaoquonco of chic atago of Ioaaura-onto and calculation can bo
tahon aa thoir oatiotactory agroaaont. which juatitioo tho chooon conputa-
tional achaaa and onabloo cowloto calculation of a throa-paaa .plifiar.

tho rooulto of ouch calculation with the uao of oquationo (4)46) aro given
togathor with morinontal roaulto on Fig. 3. Agroonont can bo conoidorod

momcuatuscouu
sstisfsctory. Sane difference betvecn sxpcrinental and calculated plots can
be attributed to approximation in accounting for interference and the inancad
transition cross section. as wall as to possible reduction of inversion due

to mlification of luinescence. The results show the good outlook for using
telescopic mlifiars in powerful lsscr eyatcna with short radiation pulse.

In conclusion. the authors are sincerely grateful to V. V. Ravdin. Yu. I.
Sidorenkov snd V. 1. Clwrnouyrdin for assisting with the experinenta.

was
1. Anan'yev. Yu. A.. KVAN'I'OVAYA “MIRA. Vol 6. 1971. p 3.

2. 2vcrev. V. A.. Kulikov. V. 1a.. Ovchinnikov. V. 11.. Shagal. A. 11..
OP‘l'Ilo-HIKIANICHBSIAYA mmsmr'. No 6. 1978. p 25.

3. Gorlsnov. A. V.. Kslinina. A. A.. Lyubinov. V. V.. Orlova. 1. 3.. Petrov.
V. V.. zmnum. Puma! SPIKTROSIDPII. Vol 17. 1972. p 617.

6. Anan'yev. Yu. A.. Sheratobitov. V. Ye.. 2mm manna! nzm.
Vol 63. 1973. p 1016.

S. Ansn'yev. Yu. A.. Koval'chuk. 1.. V.. Sheratobitov. V. Ye” WAINVAYA
”MIRA. Vol 3. 1976. p 1612.

6. Vsrtapetov. s. K.. Vovchcnko. V. 1.. Kraeyuk. 1. L. Psshinin. P. V..
"Terisy doldadov. Pervsys Vseeoyurnaya konferentaiya 'Optika laserov'"
(Abstracts of Papers. First All-Union Conference on Laser Optics]. bonin-
grad. 1977.

7. Brodov. H. You Gsvrilov. ll. 1.. Ivaehkin. P. 1.. Korobkin. V. V..
Nikolayevakiy. V. 6.. Serov. I. V.. KVAIITOVAYA alumna. Vol 5. 1978.
p 1072.

8. Hikayelyan. A. A.. Ter-Hiksyelysn. H. I... Turkov. Yu. 6.. "Opticheakiye
gensrstory na tverdon tele" [Solid-State Lasers]. Hoacov. Sov. radio. 3967.

9. Atutyunyan. V. 14.. MAL KSPBRWAL'IUI I MICE!” mm.
V01 S36. 1967. p 183.

10. Rudnitlkiy. Yu. P.. Snirnw. R. V.. Sokolov. V. 1.. Preprint ran-3094..
Institute of Atonic Energy i-eni 1. V. Kurchatov.

ll. Dianov. Ye. PL. Karssik. A. Ya.. Korniyenko. A. 8.. Prokhorov. A. 11..
Shcherbskov. 1. A.. KVANTOVAYA “MIRA. Vol 2. 1975. p 1665.

[2. Avakysnts. L. 1.. Buzhinskiy. I. 11.. Koryagina. Ye. 1.. Surkova. V. V..
KVAN'I’OVAYA umm. Vol 5. 1978. p 725.

COPYRIGHT: Iadstcl'etvo "Radio i svyaz'". "Kvantovaya alektronika". 1982

6610
C80: 1862/1110

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

UDC 658.328.28621.3.038.8.006.1
m mum N am muons

m m' m manna m am in m 1981
(signsd to press 30 Apt 81) pp 2-5. 113

[Annotstiom formed end table of contents fsc- book "3“. ”erotica of

Loss: Installations". by Boris Nikolsysvich Roth-new and stgsniy

mtriyevilch Chistov, Izdstel'stvo "Hoshinoetroysniys". 7000 copies.
9‘8“

[M] mm

the malts of investiqstions on the psobls- of ssfe cpoxstion of losers us
systsnstissd for the first tins in Soviet literstuts. the spooific sp-
plicstions of losers in indnstty. the biologicsl effect of loss: seission end
psotocticn ftce this type of rsdistion ore considered. the onusctoristico
of :oflsctsd loss: .ission end oirdispeteed systsos are presented. Dots us
presentsdonmmlpsotootimsystuofpetsonnslsmsdinopcsting
losers. uobookisintondedforsvidstsnseof spsoislists involvodincpsr-
stion of loses instsllstions end slso vocksts of ssfoty services of industrisl
sntotptisos end the stote ssnitsry inspection.

During the post for veers production mousse hosed on locsl hosting of
esterisl to be tasted by less: nission' hove coined considerable develop-sot.
According to the sstinste of spooiolists, lose: technology will booms one of
tho lending technologies in the future.

Outinnous oneneion of the spplicotion of loser instsllstions in diffcsnt
etsssofhmsctivityisselstsdtotectuihntofslsrqenwetofpsr
scnnolfos'sssvicinqtnu. Alongvitbthsmiwemsstiessausdvsntsgss
over otbsr equip-sot used foe sinilor purposes. loss: instsllsticns :spcossnt
s specific hsssxd to the bsslth of nsintsnsnoe poroonnel.

 

0

lbs ten 'losos' nesns 'liqht qlifiostion using stimlstsd snicsicn.’ lbs
wood consists of the initisl letters of the ”lion phnee Light mlificstion
by stimlotod mission of ”distinct-dour. his ton is not sooepted in
soviet end foreign litssstuxo.

18
mommies“
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lasor anissi'on is a now physical factor which doos not at prosont roprosont
such a hazard as air pollution by ch-ical and radioactivo substancos or high-
and suporhigh fraguoncy radio wawo gonoration. This circulatanco is rolatod
to localization of boans of lasor .ission in liaitod spacos. m. asdi-
cal and biological rasoarch carriod out in tho USSR and abroad indicatos tho '
potontial hazard of diract and rofloctod lasor osission to tho huan organic
and prinarily to tho ayas. Accoqanying hazardous and harnful production
factors--radiation of pulping laws. aloctraagnatic fiolds, noiso. noxious
chonical substancos rolassod frco lasar installations and targots. x-radiation.
plasma phonooona and so on--occur during oporation of lasor installations.
Thu. cno can bo subiactsd to tho cabinod offocts of various hazardous and
harnful production factors which, togothar with lasor mission, owriso a
hygianic background undar which lasor oporation occurs.

Tho probl-I of lasor safoty was first posod in 1968 in [38), whoro tho cooploa
approach to study of hazardous and haraful production factors was indicatad
and this problon was than suppl-Isntod ccnsidorably and dovolopod in [27].

Lasar production installations gonorato non-ionising radiation with ansrgy
below 10 kov, which has a difforont natura of intaraction with notorials than
ionizing radiation. At tho sans tins. tho oporation of powarful and supor-
powarful lasors nay bo acconpaniad by tho dovolopnont of ionizing radiation.

A spacial working group was assignod tho task of analyzing tho status of pro-
taction against nonionizing radiation (including that from lasor .ission) at
tho ‘l‘hird Intarnational Congross on Radiation Protoctim Washington. D. C.,
1973). organizad by tho Intarnational Radiation Protection Association

(IRPA). Tho conclusions on tho work of tho group of spacialists wars outlinod
at tho auropoan Congrass of IRPA (1975), which can bo for-ulatod in tho follow-
ing nannor: uso of apparatus that gonoratos non-ionizing radiation loads to
incroasad hazard of workoro boing irradiatod; tho offoct of this typo of rad-
iation on tho hoalth of parsonnal has boon littla studiod; tho roguirononts

on protaction and practical safoty guidolinos aro froguantly basod on critaria
diffaring considorably in diffarant countrios; intarnational cooporation sin-
ilar to that oxiating in tho fiold of protaction against ionising radiation
is roquirod.

The nood to work out univsrsal principlaa of protaction against non-ionizing
radiation and also critoria. standards, dofinitions of basic concopts and tho
sari-u pornissibla lovols of non-ionizing (lasor) radiation was pointod out
at tho Fourth Intarnutional Congross of IRPA (Paris. 1977). Sinilar problo-s
woro discussad in our country (Odossa, 1977).

who rapid ratoo of introducing lasor installations into tho national oconooy
contributad to intansiva rasoarch boing conductod in tho fiold of safo oporo-
tion of thosa installations.

A spocial-purposo study of hazardous sourcos whon using rasoarch and indus-
trial lasor installations was roquirad to solvo tho problono that arooo. ‘rho
basic roquirooonts of safoty on installation and oporation woro fornulatod
during dovoloposnt of tho first industrial lasars. Thoroforo, introduction of
production procassos using lasor installations was dovolopad on tho basis that
includod aspocts of lasor safoty.

19
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It ahould ho notad that tho uao of laaota in now production plocooaoo io
ohanotaxiaod by tho initial phaoo in dovalopnt o! laaor toohnology. Dur-
inothonouttowyoaxathoophoroot infloancootlaaotowillhooxpondod
cultinuouoly and now doaiono oi laoo: imtallationo will ho dovolopod. thoro-
ion. itioquitanotmaltoaxpaothoththoappoaxanoaotadditionalhaaardo
ouoandhautul graduation factoroandthouanifootationtoaorootatdooroo

of alnady uiatino tactoco. «rich roptooont no hazard at pcoaont.

Than oro no apocial papoto dovotod to tho probloo o! laoo: aatoty in Soviot
and tocoion litaxotuzo. nowovar, today'o "quit-auto iodicato a nood tot
auchopublioation. mthiaxogatdthoouthoi-ootthiabookhavotahonon
th-aolvoo tho labor of gonozaliaino and ayat-atiaing tho multo o! soviot
and tonightuoaxch undo! ohaxoctotiaimthoomontotatoof thopa'obl-
of pcoviding aato working oonditiono than waking with laaoxa.

‘l'ho auﬂloro will bo oratoful to all who otptoaa thoi: opinion of tho oivon
hook, thoy will bo oxatotul to: W and wiahoo and will taXo th- into
account in thoi: tuttho: work on thia pcoblu. It ia toquoatod that manta
and wiahoo ho aont to ndatol'atvo "Minoatroyoniyo‘ at tho addsooau
107076, hoocow. 3-76, Wkiy poroulok. 4.

W8 Pogo
Moword 3

Chaptor l. Claoaitioation of man and Iain hopocta of Thai:

Uao in Production Procoaaoa 6
1. Iain ooncopta and datinitiona 6
2. Claaaitication of laaora 6
3. Uoo of laoota in production pmcoaaoa ls
Gupta: 2. Gonoxal Problono of mo: sataty 25
l. huardoua and hantul production factoto that «many
laao: oporation 25
2. Biological ottoct of laaoz niaoion 28
3. “foot of la“: uiaaion on tho oyoo 3l
4. afoot oi laooi' oniooion on tho akin, intatnal organa and
mania- oa a wholo . d1
5. nonin- poniaoiblo lovola of laaor oniaoion N
chopto: 3. morqy Charactoriatico of mo: aliaaion and
Dovicoo and hathodo of Roootding It 46
' l. m choractariotico of looor uioaion d6
2. Dovicoo to: Ioaauting onozgy chaxaotoxiatica of laaor
.iaoion 49
3. liotlndo of Ioaourinq tho onorgy choractoriatica of
laoa: ooioaion SB
4. Spatial diattihution of laaor aniooion 61

20
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mo: i. iirsniopouod synta- rot-0d Upon Interactions of nut
‘ motion and "amino
1. W. of studying W cyst-o
2. Each (or cup-2m1 study of u: pollution of the
mm m by air-dim must
3. Minnie: o: nit-dioporud mun and aim
«dialysis product.

Chino: 5. 191” Gaming boxing Wtion of Lou: Installation.
1. Minis-i o! oound tot-tion won incarnation of mu
ﬁiuion and now
2. mun-tin Moonrise“. of noiu. found during use

machining of oolido

Gupta 6. Providing sue ”king Cmditiono w nothing With mm
1. an: utoty synt-
2. min. of reducing hazardous and hot-fol production factor.
3. mono of maturing ham and huntul production new.
4. Analyzing tho down of mo: «hey

Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: deotol'otvo 'mhinoouoyoniyo', 1981

6521
can: 1862/1“

21
MWWONLY

38:

76

80

B7

89

103
106

111
IDIOFHCIALIISEONLY

one 628. 3714635 .05

WHEAT!“ 0P Be-te men WWW!“ um srmum BY mm m
um X '10.6 ll

Moscow “MAYA “MM in kussian Vol 9. No 1015). Jan 82 (esnuocript
received 29 Apr 8!) pp 92-98

[Article by V. A. Danilychev. V. D. 2vorykin. I. V. Kholin end A. Yu. Chugunov.
Physics Institute ileni 1’. ll. Lebedev. 08$! Acad-y of Sciences. Moscow]

[rest] An experinental study'is done on the In lasing char-
acteristics of a recodunation laser in which the working
nixture is the plane produced in optical breakdown of a
eixture of heliu and xenon by CO; pulsed laser asission.
basing was observed on four transitions of Xe I (A- 2.03.
2.65. 3.63 end 3.65 us) when it is contained in the eixture
in aeounts of docs-1.3: at a total pressure of 20-760 I lg.
It is shown that population inversion arises due to heating
of the gas in the wave of absorption of laeer emission end
subsequent rapid adiabatic cooling of the resultant plan-a
during expansion. An investigation is ends of the way that
the lasing pareeeters depend on concurrent gesdynanic pro-
cesses.

Introduction

Population inversion in a nonequilibriu intensely recodining plane is of
considerable interest for developing new types of lasers that enit in the
m and x-rey bands. lasers with nuclear puping, enabling conversion of the
energy released in a reactor to coherent mission. powerful lasers with ex-
citation by electron been or hard ionizing radiation and the like list. 1].
One of the eethods of getting a dense nonequilibrim plaue is to heat a vapor-
ired solid or gen by a powerful laser pulse followed by rapid cooling of the
resultant pls'sen as it expands into a vacuua or into the atient gas Inst.
2. 3]. Induced eaiseion in such a supercooled plasma upon recﬁination of
eingly ionized ions and electrons has been observed in eixtures of gases Ar.
Kr and Xe with he [let 6] and also in Cd vapor [lab 5]. However, nsny in-
portent relations of the output para-stars of the recodoination laser. and
in particular the way that these para-eters depend on plasee heating condi-
tions and on the gasdynaic processes taking place in the gas have not been
duly explained.

i

22
POI OFFICIAL 153 MIX
upper states of the Xe atom has been achieved recently in a different experi-
mental facility upon excitation of the Be-Xe mixture at high pressure (up

to several atmospheres) by a rapid transverse electric discharge (Ref. 7].
upon nuclear pumping by ”’0 fission fragaents [Ref . 8. 9] and by products .
of the reaction Be(n. p) 3I! [Ref. 10. 11], and also upon expansion of planoids
produced in a hypocycloidal pinch (Ref. 12].

2. Experimental Facility

A diagram of the experiments is shown in
Fig. l. The emission pulse of an electron-
beam-controlled C0; laser with energy of
8‘20 J and half-amplitude duration of

1’ = 150 ns (~250 us on the base) (see Fig.
2a) was focused by cylindrical NaCl lens I
(P- 150 mm) on the surface of aluminum tar-

 

get 2 in a strip 1.5 a wide with length Fig. 1. Diagram of the experi-
Z< 95 In. The target was accomodated in manta: l—cylindrical [Until

a hermetically sealed chamber (not shown lens; 2-alumintm| target; 3-
on the diagram) filled with lie-Xe mixture opaque mirror of the plasma
with concentration ratio from 19000:! to laser cavity; 6—semitrans-
76:1 and total pressure from 10 to 760 Ill Hg. parent cavity mirror

The emission of the plasma arising near the

target was coupled out along its axis through 1.1? side windows in the chaﬁer
set at the Brewster's angle. The optical cavity of the plasma laser 0.8 m
long was formed by opaque spherical mirror 3 with radius of curvature of 3 m
and semitransparent dielectric mirror I: with reflectivity of ~90: in the near
infrared region of the spectrum. sputtered on a lithium fluoride backing.

The energy and shape of the lasing pulse were mes-lured by a sensitive calorim-
eter and FD9E-lll grenanium photodiode with time resolution of -0.l us. The
lasing spectrum was studied by an HDR-Z monochromator with diffraction grating

of 100 lines/mm and by calorimeter. The absolute error of wavelength measure-
ment was no more than 20.01 pm.

3. Results of Experiments

Fig. 2 shows oscillogras of the laser pulse
on A- [0.6 pm that heats the plasma (pulse
shape was registered by a gremanium detector
with time resolution of ~1 ns), the pulse of
plasma self-radiation in a broad spectral range
of 0.6-2 um determined by the sensitivity range

 

of the photodiode, and the pulse of induced Pig. 2. Oscillograms of €02
plasma radiation on 1-2.03 um. To isolate laser pulse (a). 0.6-2 um
this last pulse from the wide-band thermal thermal emission of plans
radiation of the plasma. the photodiode was (6). 2.03 III 9186-8 @1801“!
covered with germanium foil transparent to (e); l us/div
POI OMCIM. USE ONLY

radiation with A) [.8 us. Induced plasma radiation was observed in a tuned
optical cavity in which the output nirror had eini-un losses at A! 2 un.

when the opaque nirror of the cavity was covered. this -ission disappeared.
unlike the thernal self-radiation of the plasma. which showed al-ost no change
in .plitude when this was done. CoIparison of the oscillogran shows that
lasing in the pla-a developed after teraination of the CO: laser pulse,
attaining its greatest value only after ~l us. whereas the naxilul thersal
radiation corresponds to the stage of plaua heating by laser mission with

x - 10.6 m.

The neasured lasing wavelength 1-2.03 no is identified with transition

Sdl’lzlf-6pl‘h]. in atonic Xe (Ref. 13]. when another cavity output mirror
mused with approximately the sue reflectivity of ~90! in the 2.5-3.7 u-
region, lasing arose sinultaneously on several transitions between excited

mm of x. 1: sav/zlg-epl‘lzl. (1-2.65 ue). 7p[‘/,1,-7a[’/zlf (3.43 ua).
79(7211-7-[7212 (3.65 pa). 11g. 3 shows the dependence of total lasing energy

llaso "3 3las- "J
n .

00

 

a I 1 J u-
Pig. 3. Dependence of lasing Fig. lo. Dependence of lasing
energy 31“ in please (AI-2.65. energy 81“ at X-2.03 ue
3.103. 3.65 us) on distance be- (broken line) and 2.65. 3.1.3.
tween the optical axis of the 3.65 pa (solid line) on pres-
cavity and target surface h for sure p for aixtures of Rede-
aixture Bede-760:1 at pree- l9000:l (l). 3800:l (2).
sure p-200 a- llg (1) end 760. 760:1 (3). 380:1 (lo) and 76:1
Illg (2); pulse energy of CO; (5); 3-25 J.h-l.8ee

laser 3- 25 J

31 , in these three lines on the position of the optical axis of the cavity
re ative to the target surface h. The best conditions are realized at a dis-
tance of 1.6-2.0 cn iron the target. the leill- of the curve for 31“(h)
moving away free the target eoeewhat as the gas eixture pressure decreases

fro- 760 to 200 - ﬁg.

Fig. 6 shows the lasing energy 31“ at the optima position of the cavity

axis relative to the target as a function of the conposition of the mixture
and its total pressure p. The greatest lasing energy (~0.06 and ~0.15 3.1)

is reached for a nixture with Xe content of about 0.131 (ﬂezh- 760:1) at
overall pressure p I 200 II Hg. A reduction in the percent content of Xe in
the sixture. just like an increase. reduces the lasing energy throughout the
pressure range. For any aixture. the curve Bl”(p) has a naxinul with position

that is coaparatively weakly dependent on nixture cmosition: an increase in
the precentage of Xe by a factor of 250 shifts the sexism iron ~250 - 3g

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(nezh- 19000:1) to 125 m 113 (76:1). however. the lasing energy in the high-
pressure region falls off nuch nore steeply.

.._..\_ .,._.

slaggjfl .? N I.” Qs “I“: ‘1... "J

    

a "b ‘ #5, 'j‘—'

Pig. 5. Lesing energy 31“

(1-2.65. 3.63. 3.65 ue) as Pig. 6. basing pulse energy

a function of CO; laser pulse 31.. as function of plesne

energy E or flux density (1 length l for nixture Exte-

for eixture he:Xe- 760:1 at 760:1 at p-200 In ﬁg (1) end

p-ZOO-ﬂg (l)end760-llg 760-11g (2): 3-25.!
(2); 13.1.8 c-

Pig. 5 shows 21.. as a function of C0; laser pulse energy E or the correspond-
ing flux density q of laser emission with A- 10.6 ms for nixture leae- 76031
at different pressures. At p - 200 - 11g. lasing energy increases eonotonicel-
ly with increasing energy of the stieulating pulse; at values of 3325-!) J

(q I (1.2-2.0'10' U/cn’) saturation is observed. This effect is eore strongly
pronounced at high pressure of the nixture p- 760 - lg. where there is even
sons reduction of lasing energy at 8216 J («128.107 w/cez).

Pig. 6 shows the dependence of 31.. on length 1 of the active region. obtained
by reducing the longitudinal dimension of the focusing spot on the target
(with a corresponding reduction in the length of the resultant pla-e) by
using diaphragea to restrict the cross section of the laser been. Since the
radiation density distribution over the cross section of the CO; laser been
was rather uniforn (within ~201). the energy per unit of length of the plane
Ell-2.5 J/ce reneined unchanged. The dependence 3(1) neasured in this way
was close to linear. The shortest ple-a length I h at which lasing still
takes place in a nixture of nun- 760:! is larva; cn at p-200 - lg.

and zthr 3 3.0 ca at p- 760 - Hg. Assuing that losses in the optical cavity
are detereined only by its transparency. we find the average gain for lines
with 3-2.65. 3.53. 3.65 ue in the plane: "313.. In (R1R2)'1-o.1 a"
(p- 200 - 11g) and r- 0.016 cl" (760 - 113). where the reflectivities of

the mirrors in the cavity are R; - 1.0 and R; -0.9.

lo. Distussion of Results

To interpret the relations found above. let us turn to results of investige-
tion of gasdynanic processes that develop in a gas under the action of power-
ful CO, laser pulses (Ref. 6. 16. 15]. After the first instant of initiation
associated with vaporization of the target. subsequent plane foreation takes
place due to heating of the gas adjacent to the target in the laser .iesion

MWLMONLY
FOIOI’I’ICIALIJSEONLY

absorption wave lief. 16]. At the optim- pressure for develop-ent of lasing
in the plans p.200 - lg and qs 1.5-10‘ “Icea corresponding to pulse energy
BI 25 J at which the principal asesureeents were ssde (see Fig. 3. 6. 6).

the absorption wave in Be propagates in the light-detonation node (Ref. 15].

to evaluate the velocity v“. pressure Pew and specific internal energy cm
of the light-detonation wave. and the degree of coepression o of the gas that
is heated in the wave. we use the following relations Ref. 16]:

vu-lﬂf—l)!“ «my». (I)
n..-o.v'..l(r+I)-la(r—Iwnpwq'vum): (2)
w' v ‘ m rm,
‘c-=6I=rﬁirﬁ'rn(?=l) (a) - (3)

Min-(7+ 0/1. '. . . - (4)

where y is the effective adiabatic exponen g o. and p are the initial end final
gee densities. Setting 1-1.3. os-bA-IO' g/u'. we get for he at 9-1.1!”
10’ H/ce’ and p-ZOO - llg: 'cu' 3.3010‘ ca/s. p -2.l°10' dynes/cn . ‘cn'
8.8540" ergs/g- 36.6 eV/atoe. 0- 1.77. During the laser pulse. the wave
front propagates to a distance haven‘t I0.5 cs free the surface of the target.

The tenerature '1' of the resultant plans as found by the interpolation for-Ila
of Ref. 17

8-2.5 A'I' 0'40")” War.“ sV/stoe . (5)
(where o.- l.79~10'~ g/cs’ is the density of Be under nornel conditions.

A-b is its atoeic weight), is 61 kt. ‘rhe squilihrim degree of ionisation
obtained on the basis of the Saha equation (Ref. 18)

 

-’ gaLLVL-Lgid’iuM—mn (6)

(where I-2I..6 .v- 3.92%“ «a. 1. the ionization potential of Ila; u. a 1.
u; s 2 are the statistical sue of the ato- and ion; 6-p/p.-o.0/p. is rela-
tive density) in this case is 080.87. which corresponds to an electron con-

centration in the plans of I‘ll 10" on”.

Thus by the instant of coepletion of the laser pulse. an extended. hot. dense
plane has been set up near the target with high energy concentration. As

a consequence of the high rate of collisions between particles. themdyn-ic
conditions in such a pla-a should be close to equilibriu; in particular.
the processes of recoebination of ions and electrons are coupeneated by re-
verse processes of ionization of stone. A reduction in taperature and den-
sity of the plases upon subsequent adiabatic expansion should result in a
situation where. beginning at a certain instant the degree of ionisation pres-
ent in the plea-s is greater than the equilibrim value corresponding to the
new conditions. This is due to the fact that the rate constant of recombina-
tion in triple collisions of ions with electrons (the principal necheniu

at high particle density and not too low tewpereture) Inst. 18] 0-5.2.104/1"

26
Nl OFFICIAL l5! ONLY
changes with fal ing temperature more slowly than the equilibrium degree of
ionisation n-6 exp (-I/ZkT) in the cooled plasma (a¢l). The determining
process in such a supercooled plasma becomes recombination, whereas the proba-
bility of the reverse process falls off exponentially with decreasing tem-
petature.

Hith the exception of photorecombination. which plays an insignificant part

at high electron density. all other processes of recombination in triple col-
lisions or with the participation of molecular ions lead to preferred forma-
tion of atone in upper energy states (Ref. 18]. In subsequent relaxation

of excitation dounward through energy levels with favorable ratio of probe-
bilities of transitions. population inversion may be formed betveen certain
pairs of levels [Ref. 1]. The rate of formation of excited atoms of Is. on

the upper laser level. assuming that all particles formed as a result of recom-
bination relax through this level. is determined by the equation

11.3.3-9 [xv] ~z—v WI» (7)

where [Xe*]. lXe+l are the concentrations of atoms and ions in the plasma.
v- ognhge-Arad is a constant that determines the loss of Xeﬁ from the upper
laser level due to inelastic electron impacts and radiative transitions. The
resultant inversion is proportional to the concentration of excited atoms

Xe* on the upper laser level, and thus depends 7n the concentration of parti-
cles in the plasma and the cooling rate (8--‘l"9 2).

To describe the gasdynamic processes that accompany expansion of the dense
hot plasma initially heated by the laser pulse into the ambient cool gas.

a theoretical model of a strong cylindrical explosion is used with instan-
taneous energy release occurring along the axis of symmetry (Ref. 19]. The
validity of such an approach corroborated by experiments of Ref. 6 in plane
geometry. is justified by the short duration of the C02 laser pulse and the
small initial dimensions of the plasma formed close to the target as compared
with the lasing time of ~1 us (see Fig. 29) and plasma dimensions of ~1.6-
2.0 cm (see Fig. 3) that are typical of lasing development.

The change in plasma temperature in the process of adiabatic cooling is eval-
uated by the equation of the adiabat

TcsP:I-”I'”T(0P(0"-W'n (8)

Assuning that the pressure of the gas superheated in the light-detonation
wave after a fairly long time t>rbecomes equal to the pressure in the cen-
tral region of a strong cylindrical explosion with linear energy release Ell
[Ref. [9]:

p(1) dam/law“. (93

where the coefficients k, and 5 depend on the adiabatic exponent 7. If we die-
regard energy release in the recombination process and do not account for
the change in the internal energy of atoms during cooling. then. assuming

FOI¢OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

101.67 “-0.58. kz-0.06) and BIZ-2.5 J/cn, we get for t- 1 us the ts-pera-
ture sstiaate 1" 7 K. Accounting for the nsntioned circustsnces by intro-
ducing an effective adiabatic exponent 7-1.3 (5- 1.3. kz-0.0B6) gives 1'3

N u. The pie-a density in the expansion process up to this instant falls
by a factor of 15-”. The reduction of density and the associated slowdown
of reconbination rate are apparently factors that lisit the power and ties

of lasing in the given arrangsaent.

The reduction of particle concentration in the plans also explains the re-
duction of lasing energy at low gas pressures on Fig. lo. 0n the other head.
with increasing pressure p3 200 - lg one also observes a reduction of lasing
energy. which in this case is due to transition to the supersonic radiative
node of laser saission absorption wave propagation with A- 10.6 un in he Inf.
15]. Such a transition is sccowanied by a sharp rise in wave velocity and

a corresponding reduction of tanerature and degree of ionisation of the heated
pla-a. Besides. the lower energy concentration in greater pla-a voluae
should reduce the efficiency of subsequent adiabatic cooling. These seas
factors explain the reduction of lasing energy with an increase in the energy
of the stiaulating pulse 3) 16 J on Fig. 5; the corresponding 4;! 8-107 Ulc-
precisely coincides with the threshold of transition fro. the light-detonation
to the supersonic radiative wave in Is at pressure of p- 760 - Hg as neasured
in Ref. 15.

In the estinates given above. no consideration was taken of the influence

of call additives of Xe to a. on the concurrent gasdynaaic processes and

the par-eters of the heated plans. Preliainary experiasnts have shown that
even a sun nount (-0.11) of Ar or Xe appreciably alters the pattern of
gasdynalic processes in Ila. considerably lowering the threshold of establish-
aent of the ultrasonic radiation wave. It is this circustance thst apparent-
ly explains the reduction of lasing energy observed on rig. lo when the Xe
content is increased above 0.13! in the aixture rather than the occurrence
of a relsxetion channel that is parasitic for the given laser srrangenent

due to the fornation of diner aolecules of let as suggested in Ref. lo. At
Xe concentrations typical of the given experiments and rate constants of the
reactions

Xe’-: Xe -:«He l"; X¢;+H¢~

Xc’ + Xe -:- Xe .92. Xe; + Xe.

Sari-4°10 ’2 cs‘ls (Ref. 20). eh-zJ-no ’1 «‘1. that. 21] (these con-
stsnts are given for gas tesperature ‘r- 130 K. and decrease with increasing '1')
the ties of foreation of Xe! nolecules is several orders of nagnitude longer
than the characteristic tins of lasing developnent (~l us). however. such a
aechsnisa can occur at a higher pressure of the aixture Def. 7). and also

in experilenta with nuclear pulping lief. doll]. where the duration of the
lasing pulse is several hundreds of aicroaeconds.

In conclusion we' note that with lore detailed consideration of ele-entary
processes in ths cooled plssaa it is necessary to account for a nuaber of
plasaa-cheaical reactions that nay appreciably influence the rate of recon.
bination and formation of inverse population.

28
M emu/u. USE ONLY
S . Conclueione

ﬁne ee e reeult of experieente thet were done en inveetiution wee uncle of
the my thet die-ion per-etere of e ple-e reconhinetion leeer nein; e nix-
ture of lie-n nepend on condition of plane heeting by powerful 00: leeer
puleee end on the concurrent geedyn-ic proceaeee. Deepite the feet thet

the efficiency of the laser errengenent coneidered in this reeeerch wee quite
low. the neth iteelf of producing e dense eupercooled pleeu by e puleed
00¢ leeer iequite pranieing for etudying the necheni- of forntion of in-
veree populetion in reconbinetion leeere.

The principal reeulte of thie reeeerch were reported et the Fourth Inter-
netzonel Conference on Leeere end Their Applicetione" Ref. 22].

1. Gudrenlw. L. 1.. Yehovlenko. s. 1., "Pleuennyye leeery" [He-e Leeere].
Hoecov. Atoniedet. 1978.

2. Kuzneteov. I. H.. Reyur. Yu. P.. 2mm mm mm 1
MING! nzm. lo 6. 1965. p 10.

3. Gudunko. L. 1.. Filippov. 8. 8.. Shele'pin. L. A” 2mm ”lemma!
1 mnucnsra! FIZIKI. Vol 51. 1966. p 115.

6. Silfvnet. H. 'l'.. Suto. 1.. IL. Hood. 0. R. Jr.. APPL. ms. was. Vol 31.
1977. p 335.

s. Silfveet. u. 1.. Szeto. L. a.. wood. 0. 3. Jr.. OPTICS tarts. Vol 4. 1979.
p 271.

6. Boylco. V. A.. Denilychev. V. A.. avoryhin. V. 1).. Kholin. I. V.. Chugunov.
A. Yu.. KVAMOVAYA mm. Vol 3. 1976. p 1955.

7. Chapovehy. P. I... Lieiteyn. V. IL. Soroltin. A. 3.. Q1108 cans. Vol 16.
1976. p 33.

8. Schick. I. IL. Nller. J. I... Shneider. R. T.. APPL. ms. 13118. V01 26.
1975. p 327.

9. Voinov. A. H.. Dovhysh. 1.. Ye.. Krivonoeov. V. IL. Hel'nikov. 8. P..
Keukevich. A. T.. Pod-oehenekiy. I. V.. Sinyenekiy. A. A.. ”8'!“ V
zaumw. MICHZSKOY PIZIRI. Vol 5. 1979. p 622.

to. De Young. R. J.. Jelufke. N. n.. Kohl. 3.. APPL. PHYS. errs. Vol 30.
1977. p 19.

ll. ﬂansfield, C. 11.. 31rd. P. F.. Devin. J. V.. Hintt. '1'. L. Eluck. I. 11..
APP]... ms. 1.3118. Vol N. 1977. p 660.

‘20 he. J.e 3.. mr.r1.ndp De Re. “I. 3.. ”no OPTICS. Vol 19) 19”. P 33‘3e

mamaﬁusaouu
‘3.

16.

ls.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prokhorov. A. 11.. «1.. ”8prsvochn1k po hur-” [Lust Handbook]. Noscov.
80v. rsd1o. Vol 1. 1978.

Dan11ychsv. V. A.. horyun. V. 1).. mun. I. V.. Chumnov. A. Yu..
“MAYA mm. Vol 7. 1980. p 2599.

loyko. V. A.. Vlsdhh'ov. V. V.. Dsn1lychnv. V. A.. Duvsnov. I. 11..
2voryk1n. V. D.. (honn. I. V.. PIS'HA V mm. ”16838101 rum.
Vol 6. 1978. p 1373.

Isyssr. Yu. 9.. "Lsurnsys 1skrn 1 rssprostrsnsn1ys rssrysdov" [Lusr
Sport and D1schsrgs Propsuuon]. Honor. looks. 1974.

tsnuun. H. A.. Popov. Is. 6.. "Isluchstsl'nyys mysrvs udrsnykh voln
v youth" [lad1st1vs Propsrt1ss of Shock Vms 1n Gssos]. Hoscov. Banks.
1977.

ul'dov1ch. Ys. 3.. lsyssr. Yu. P.. "rum ndsrnykh voln 1
vysokotslpsrsturnykh g1drod1nn1chssk1kh ysvlsn1y” [Phys1cs of Shock Ham
and ugh-Tapersturs ‘l'hsrnodynsuc Phone-ans]. noscov. Books. 1966.

Sodov. 1.. 1.. "ﬂorody podob1yo 1 rssnernosu v awn" [nsrhods of
Dinsns1ons1 Anslys1s 1n Includes]. Moscow. looks. 1977.

Men. .1. K.. Johnson. A. 11.. .1. cm. ms" Vol 63. 1973. p 5235.

“mt. Co “on “'8'. ‘0 Vs, “if. ,s as. ‘W. C. ‘0. 1m Jo. Vol 03-13,
1977. p 769.

Dsnuychsv. V. A.. ZVoryldn. V. 0.. noun. 1. V.. Chngunov. A. Yu..
"errh Intsmst1ons1 Conforms on huts and 111.1: Appl1cst1ons". 1019113.
1981. p 75.

COPYRIGHT: Isdstsl'scvo "30110 1 mos”. "Kvsntovsys slsktronﬂu". 1982

6610

080:

1862/1“

MWLUSEONIX
VMIMWMD‘SYMUINOP‘HCALW

Hoecov KVAII'IOVAYA mm in Rueeian Vol 9. Ho 1015). Jan 82 (macript
received 3 liar 81) pp 36-63

[Article by A. s. biryuhov. l. I. Serikov and A. )1. Starih, Phyaica Inatitute
ineni P. I. Lebedev. 0883 Acadcay of Sciencee. Hoecov]

[Text] A theoretical analyeia in node of a co. gaadyn-ic
laaer aditionelly puped by eelf-radiation. lt ie ahovn
that ueing optical-channel feedback bringa about a 5-15!
inrovenent in efficiency of converting therlal energy to
radiation.

There hae recently been an upeurge of intereat in phenonena that take place
vhen laeer radiation flow through gaaee. The preaence of abaorbing dopnta
in'gae nay lead for exanple to population invereion of levele. The action
of nearly all optically puped gee laeera ia baeed on thia effect. In acne
caaee the abaorption of radiation ia accoqenied by a teqorary drop in t.-
perature. Thia in the eo-called "kinetic cooling effect” expert-anally ob-
eerved in Ref. 1. Additional optical puping nay aleo inprove the energy
characteriatica of gaadynanic laaere [Ref. 2].

The geadynanic laeer haa the diatinguiahing feature that the nadir- ia at
appreciably different levela of deviation fro. therlodyna-ic equilibriu in
each croaa aection along the flov. Excitation of the upper working atate
and extraction of the luinoua energy aey be coneiderably eeparated in apace
and tine. Becauae of this. by ueing the difference between relaxation ratee
of levela and taking advantage of the reaonant propertiea‘ of the eyeten it
in poaeible to increaae iabalance by uaing "poeitive feedback” through the
optical channel. Additional pulping for gaadynanic laaera vaa coneidered
in Ref. 2. where it was ahovn that increaaing the vibrational energy of a
ayato- of anharnonic oacillatora under the action of radiation can ilprove
writing efficiency of a (:0 laser. At the one tine. in the opinion of the
authora of Ref. 2. efficiency ahould not be inproved for ateady-etete CO;
gaedyn-ic laaera with feedback.

Our paper analyree the feaaibility of ilproving the working efficiency of

002 gaadynanic laeere under conditione of .additionel ming by eelf-uiaaion.
‘ihe principal conclusiona of the reaearch were reached in 191‘; here theae

MMWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conclueiona are re-exanined quantitatively in the light of recent data on
the rate conatante of elenentary relaxation proceeeee.

The working principle of the gaadynanic laaer in that ao.e of the enthalpy
atored in internal degreee of freedo. of the gee .oleculea ia converted to
luinoua energy of coherent radiation when it ia heated and aubeequently rapid-
ly cooled by expanaion. In typical co; laeera. the enthalpy of vibrational
degreee of freedo. in ~10! (at initial tenperature of ~2 kl) of the total
enthalpy. and only a .ell fraction of thie anount can be tranaforaed to re-
diation. l‘hia in due to the coIparatively low (at) quanta efficiency of
converaion. relaxation loeeee and entraiuent of a certain mount of the
vibrationally excited donor gee (Ila) out of the optical cavity. an that the
overall efficiency ae a rule doee not exceed ~11. The najor loeeea of vibra-
tional energy are deter.ined by relaxation proceeeee in the enall (51 c.)
near-critical zone of the nozzle where gee tenperature and deneity are high.
Nearly all the flux of Ice: energy goea to vibrational degreea of freedo.

via co, .oleculea. 8ubeequently the vibrational energy ia ninly "frozen."

If a proceaa that ia free to coupete with vibrational relaxation in introduced
artificially into the region of the critical croee aection of the nozzle.

thie will reduce loeaee coneiderably. Since in thie region the .ediu. ie

in the nonequilibrit- atate but far fro. inveraion. eo that the populationa
of the lower writing levele of the CO: are high. euch a proceaa .ay be the
abaorption of CO; laaer enieaion caning fro. the optical cavity of the one
gaadynanic laeer. Convereion of particlea fro. the rapidly relaxing lower
level to the alowly relaxing upper level increaeee the effective tenperature
of population of vibrational atatea of N2 and any-attic levele of 00; coupled
by quaei-reeonant exchange by co.parieon with a gaedynanic laaer without feed-
back. An a reault. the nonequilibriu. of the .ediun in greater when it
entera the optical cavity. It would eee. that the increnent in energy coupled
by the cavity out of the flow in the ateady atate ehould correepond to the
abaorbed energy. and that efficiency ehould not increaae. And this would
actually be the caee if the relaxation rate of the lower level over the entire
extent of the nozzle were ao high that ite population would be deternined

by the gee taperature. however. if we take conaideration of the finite rate
of interaction of thin level with tranelational degreea of freedon. then the
reduction of ite population upon abaorption of reeonant radiation .ey lead

to an additional increase of energy in the cavity. At the aa.e tile. an arti-
ficial reduction of population of the lower level in the rapid relaxation
zone ia accoIpanied by local diaruption of quaai-equilibriu between the cor-
reeponding vibrational and gaa teqeraturee. and aa a coneequence by conver-
eion of can of the energy of tranalational degreee of freedo. to energy of
defamation vibratione (kinetic cooling effect). and than via radiation to
any-atric vibratione. which also in conducive to an inprovenent of lace:
efficiency.

0n the baeia of the eilpleat argrnente. let ua aetinate the increase in energy
of a CO: gaedynanic laaer when feedback ie included.

beyond the output .irror of the gaadynanic laaer cavity we place a rotating

optical ayaten. and direct radiation into the near-critical part of the nozzle.
ea ahown in Fig. 1. He will take the phyaical conditiona in the gaa etrean

2
l-‘OlOﬂ’lCliLlBEONLY
in the absorption and cavity regions as iden-
tical with the conditions in certain average
cross sections 1 and 2 of these regiona re-
spectively. He lake the following signifying
asemtions: the energies of vibrational “
quanta of II; and soy-attic vibrations of '
co; coincide; due to rapid internolecular
W' exchange of quanta. the teqeratures of
population of the energy levels of these nodes
‘. _ of vibrations are the sane and equal to fur).
\— ——" ‘7' where x is the coordinate along the noerla;
for the sane reason of strong interaction
Pig. 1. .Diagr- of gasdyn-ic we seems that the temperatures of ey-etric
laser with feedback and deformation vibrations of co; also are
the one and equal to 133(1). and that the
gaa teeperature of the expanding flow behaves as in an ordinary gaadyn-ic
laser without feedback (we disregard kinetic cooling). We will consider
a 00342-le gas nixture with call nole fraction of water vapor “20(53.
so that with good accuracy we can asst-e 73‘ +7”: 0 l. "a will further asst-e
that the upper level in cross eection l is roren" (Ia-conat at x> :3).
while the lower level on section 1-2 loses the n-th part of its population
so a consequence of relaxation.

 

Maxi-I- energy in the optical cavity is reached upon tranailluination of

the working transition in section 1. Let us find the s-plitude of this naxi-
m and the energy necessary for saturation; than their difference will give
the output energy of the laser with feedback.

Let the average under of vibrational quanta per nolecule of CO; or I; in
cross section 1 before interaction with the saturating radiation be equal

to c}. and for ey-etric vibrations of cog- to cf. After absorption of light
the populations of the upper and lower working levels of CO; (with consider-

(here it in also seeuned that absorption occure at a rate appreciably exceed-
ing the rate of V'r-relexation of the lower level. but lore slowly than rota-
tional relaxation). The energy necessary for traneillt-ination of the working
transition in cross section 1 will he

NM. (1)

where hv is e quantu- of laser mission.

In cross section 2 we get eg’h-e' and sg'hae’O—ohnd the eaxinun energy extracted
by the cavity fron a unit of ease of the gas is
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 8 is the efficiency of the cavity; Q“) and A") are the vibrational
stat-at- and relative threshold inversion of populations in cross section 2.

In order for the output energy of the systen with additional self-pt-ping
to be greater then that of a conventional gasdynanic laser with the sale stag-
nation para-stars. the condition

a: =(E“,—E.)/E.—l>0 (3)

lust be net. E.--lt°—r'(l- --a)—AI Nh vﬁ/l(l+t'—as'¢)(l+s') Q] 1. an output energy
of the gasdynanic laser without feedback; Q a'nd a are the vibrational stat-
su and relative threshold inversion respectively in cross section 2.

Substituting (1) and (2) in (3). and setting Own-IQ. Am~Awe get with accuracy
to terns of the second order of .allness with respect to a: a}, A.

4—1:? MI-a)-1oo (o— n

If—l—r—————-_—I——
6 | r,-—sl(l—¢)~A ﬂ("'l1m.) (‘)

Estimates show that 6>0 over a fairly wide range of a. b. 700. although the
gain is low in absolute Iagnituda. being ~5-lSX.

We can cone to an analogOus conclusion if we do not assune that the working
transition in cross section 1 is transilluinated. In this case. condition
(3) takes the for-

5=¢(l-¢)/ll—¢ (2—a)|>0 for K04)". (5)
where q is the fraction of energy absorbed in cross section 1.

These have not been rigorous argunents. and they only confirn the possibility
in principle of inprovensnt of 00; gasdynanic laser efficiency in the presence
of feedback. Accounting for the positive contribution of the kinetic cooling
effect is nore coqlicated since it requires einultansous consideration of
the population kinetics of levels and gaedynanic equations.

Since the radiation produced by feedback passes through the near-critical

part of the noula where the gas denuty gradients are rather high (and con-
sequently so is the index of refraction). the luminous flux at the output
becones divergent due to refraction and the..finite dimensions of the tone

of absorption along the flow since the va _ s conponents of the light be-
snerga at different angles to the initial" rection of propagation. Bstinates
show that for typical pressures. tenperatures and noasle profiles used in
gasnd lasers. gradients of the index of refraction nay reach -2 10' ~lcn.
Such gradients cause naxinu deflection of rays of up to ~0. 5‘ on character-
istic propagation lengths of -l n. which is too snall to be taken into account
in nodel calculations. 0n the other hand. whore necessary the refracted rs-
diation that is coupled out can be "i-provad" by an optical systen for transfer
to the object.

POROFHCIALIJSEONLY
to get the quantitative characteristics of a gasdynanic laser with additional
self-pulping. a solction was found tor the self-consistent probla of finding
the steady-state value of energy coupled out of the systen.

m approxiaation of an inviscid thermal/y nonconductive gas was used, and
it was IBM.‘ that in tine :- (tr-x1) u, where :1. x, are the zero coordi-

_ ‘:
natea of the absorption and cavity regions respectively and u- (j u(x) ctr) / (1,—3.)
II
is aone average velocity of the flow on segnent (:1. art). the intensity of the
incident radiation is constant. In this case. when 0<t<t. the flow can
be taken as steady-state. and the syste- of equations that describes gas notion
in the presence of external radiation sources is represented as

‘- ‘F‘-Me (6)

here Kk- a/axk is a differential operator; Pu and H are vectors with con-
ponents

Fun 0
' Pusan + Pau- l 0
F =1 . - :
‘ on. (I- + Wm M g
INA” I I 98! 5

o and p are the gas density and pressure; uk and u|I are velocity coaponenta

along the coordinate axes; 7’s 2, u}; his the total enthalpy of the nixture;
l-l
Ipu‘u.+pb“|. [944.81. Inﬁll are colt-n natrices with 11- 1-3. 1- l-n. where

n is the nunber of independent nodes of vibrations in the given nolecular
systen; 6k. is the Kronecker delta; :5 is the average umber of vibrational
quanta of type 3 per nolecule; g and g: are the specific powers of the sources
of luinoua and vibrational radiation. Systen (6) is closed by the equa-
tion of state of the gas.

To determine g for a cog-nz-azo nixture. the generally accepted nodal of
partial vibrational teaperature was used. where the teaperaturea of the syn-
Detric '1'; and deforaation nodes 1‘; in CO; due to strong Ferni interaction

are the sane. while the values of the corresponding vibrational quanta satisfy
the condition 2hvz-hv3. The energy levels of 820 due to rapid VT relaxation
were considered to be populated with the gas teaperature. Thus g in (6)

are non-zero only for the aggregate of defer-national. syI-etric ( -2) and
say-metric vibrations of CO; (1- 3) and excited aolecules of N2 (5- 6). Hith
consideration of induced transitions under the action of the resonant radia-
tion field

«Ia-mm: ..,+(:#),. .

The first two terns in (7) are responsible for intra- and intermolecular vi-
brational exchange and V'r-relaxation. and the third tern is responsible for
the change in the number of vibrational quanta in the j-th node in the inducing

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL [BE ONLV

field. In the optical cavity.

(£1), - (26.1- 5.1) #5:. . (8)

where 8'- his: k, is the index of a-plification of the nedim on laser tran-
sition 2(20) (oo 1-10‘0) in C02: u is the Iolecular weight of the nixture;
A is Avagsdro's umber; J. is intensity of radiation in the cavity.

The general expression for terns (dc /dt)wc and (dcj/dt)" is given in Ref. 3
and the elenentsry processes that de ernine than are taken the sane as for
ex-pls in Ref. i. the corresponding ‘rate constants for these processes are
taken fra Ref. b. 5. “it; ~

The index of .plificstion we’d calculated by a standard fornula (s. g. see
Ref. 6) with fora factor of the vibrational-rotational transition line defined
by the Vocgt function. The coefficients of inset expansion of the lines

by different conponents of the nixture were considered tobe tenperaturs-
dependent. and were selected on the basis of Ref. 7. 8. The linstein coef-
ficient of the working transition was taken as 0.187 e" (Ref. 7].

For quantitative analysis of the gasdynasic laser with feedback. a flat slit
nozzle was selected, designed for undetsched gas flow and uniforn distribution
of par-stars in the output section. with contOur given in lief. 9. The height
of the critical cross section a-l -. degree of expansion (-20. disension
of the nozzle in the direction of the z-axis L-l a (see Fig. l).

The solution of system of equations (6) with sources of form (8) for given
chenicsl conposition of the nizture end stagnation conditions (pressure p.

and taperature 1'.) was begun in the subsonic part of the nozzle and was found
as in Ref. 9 by an inplicit difference neth of second-order approxinstion.
In the cavity. the condition of steady-state lasing (Ref. 6]

a.) - — In (R.R,)I'2L-h: (9)

'R

I-!
was added to (6). where a.) —( \' k.(x)dx) Ala-n20 on is the length of the

I
cavity in the direction of flow; Ill-0.98. R;-0.9 are redlectivities of the
nirrors. The zero coordinate of the cavity was conbined with the coordinate
of the naxisun in distribution kv(x). Pros the solution of (6). the intensity
J. in the cavity was found that satisfies condition (9). The power coupled
out was deternined by the expression [lef. 6]

Gu<h.>J.HL1|(I + I’m/2. (I _ym|-'. (10)

where I! is the height of the cavity. equal to cat-2 on. All this power was
injected into the supersonic near-critical part of the nozzle. and the point
of injection of radiation corresponded to the maxim- index of absorption In.
For a given aperture 3 of the bean coupled out of the cavity. the intensity of
radiation introduced into the absorption region was cslculated free the ratio
J-G/s (in the calculations aperture 8 was taken as 0.35 cn’). The cross

POI OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

section of the absorption region was the field bounded on two sides by the
outline of the nozzle (see Fig. l) and by the dimension (x1. x3) along the
flow determined (at fixed x1) fro- the condition that s be equal to the area
of this field. To find the distribution of parameters along the z-axis. cal-
culation of the flow was done in several cross sections ”a in each of which
the acting intensity was deter-lined fro- the known k: Jn-Jexp (M). In
doing this. the quantity g in expression (8) for the source was replaced by
(-kJn). Using distributions of nonequilibrim paranetars found in this way.
new boundary conditions at the input to the optical cavity were calculated
by averaging with respect to z.

The described cycle of calculations was repeated until trensillulination of
the working transition was attained in the absorption region, and the inten-
sity in the cavity stopped changing. The unabsorbed part of the incident
radiation in region 1 is the output power of the gasdynanic laser with feed-
back.

   

517."

   

I."

Fig. 2. Distributions of vi- Fig. 3. Distributions of

brational and gas tenpera- vibrational and gas tempera-

tures in the near-critical tures. index of alplifica-

region of the nozzle for a tion a and population in-

nixture of cozzuzmzo- version All in the cavity

25:7lo:l; To- 1500 K. Po ' region for the some conditions
2.5 ate as in Pig. 2

Let us give some results of calculations. Fig. 2 shows typical distributions
of vibrational and gas temperatures in the absorption region and sonewhat
downstream for cog-rich mixtures. For comparison, the broken curves show

the distributions of these parameters in the absence of additional resonant
optical pumping. It can be seen that a rapid drop in '1'; without additional
pmping is replaced by a rise when feedback is switched on. The simultaneous
increase in ‘1'. but to somewhat less of an extent can be attributed to the
fact that the quasi-resonant exchange of quanta between 602 and I: does not
have tine to "track” the change in T; acconpanying optical punping. He can
also see that due to the strong coupling of T2 and 'l' and the large capacity

NI OFHCIaAYI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the energy reservoir of translational degrees of freedon of the nolecules.
the corresponding reductions in ‘1'; and 1' are not so appreciable.

Pig. 3 shows the behavior of vibrational and gas te-peratures. the weak-signal
snplification index n and population inversion an on transition oo°1-1o°o

of 002 in a channel of fixed cross section of the nozzle in the cavity region.
As in Pig. 2. the broken curves correspond to the behavior of equilibrim
para-stars in a conventional gasdynanic laser. Since the sodium is sore non-
equilibriul after passing the absorption region in the presence of additional
optical pining, inversion and anplification arise earlier (higher upstrean)
and reach greater min:- values. The total store of vibrational energy in

h; and on say-stric levels of 002. and the extracted radiation energy are
greater. The part of this power 0; that is not absorbed in region 1 is greater
than Go—the output power of a gesdynanic laser without feedback with the one
stagnation paraneters.

       

l1 5. J];
5
o
a
J
2
‘ f. 1/8
b a
5
s . .' '
Pig. Io. Curves for 6 (1) Fig. 5. Curves for 6 (l)
and AT (2) as functions of and E (2) as functions of
the nole fraction of CO: in stagnation pressure 99 (a)
cog-Nz-Ilzo nixture at Yu 0- and Ya 0 at 7 10+», -0.803
0.01.10-1500K, ”-2.; at. an p.-68atn )

Pig. lo shows the dependence of the quantity 6- (01/60 - 0-1001 (analog of 6
in (3)) on the sole fraction of 002 in the nixture. Also given here is the
change in depth of cooling of the gas at with increasing 7002 (AT- 'l‘*-'l‘,
where 1* is the gas temerature in the cavity region in a syste- without ad-
ditional optical pulping). The data of Pig. A show the practically linear
relation between 6 and M. which confirns the conclusion about the large role
of kinetic cooling in gasdynanic lasers with self-pmping.

Calculations show that.an increase in the relative content of water vapor

at enall po and 5 leads to an increase in AT since it is mainly through 820
that coupling is realized between vibrational and rotational degrees of freedon
in the nolecular nixture. In the region of low Yugo (£11). 6 has a pronounced
sexin- and falls off due to increasing relaxation losses of energy of the
upper level with increasing 1320.

FOR 0mg USE ONLY
The results given above demonstrate the feasibility of improving efficiency of
converting thermal energy to energy of coherent emission in a certain model

gaadynanic laser with high carbon dioxide content when the specific vibra-
tional energy converted to radiation is low (55 J/s).

To determine 6 in real gasdynamic lasers that use combustion reactions for
thermal pmping of vibrations of N2 and 00, molecules. calculations of such
lasers were carried out in the presence of feedback. Lasers were considered
that operate on products of combustion of acetylene in air. The use of acety-
lene as a fuel gives working mixtures with high stagnation temperature

1'. ~ 2500 It at low CO; and 320 content that have a considerable store of vi-
brational energy (~100 J/g). The calculations were done for a mixture of
acetylene with air containing 6.52 C232. The equilibrium composition and
stagnation temperature of the coatustion products were calculated in accord-
ance with Ref. 10. It was found that with a change of initial pressure (at
air temperature of ~I)0 K) the composition of the combustion products and
the temperature To very little. and at p.- 10-150 atm nay be taken as equal
to To-287S K. YCO -0.ll7. m2-0.73. Y02'°°69' Yugo-0.073. It was as-
sumed in the calculations that the vibrational levels of molecules of the
mixture are just as effectively deactivated by the presence of trace amounts
of O. u and on in the combustion products as by lle molecules. The profile
of the expanding part of the nozzle was selected to maximize the power of
the extracted radiation for a given nixture composition and given stagnation
parameters with simultaneous realization of undetached flow (Ref. 11. 12].

Degree of expansion of the nozzle was (-160. height of the critical cross
section a-0.35 In.

Results of calculations of 6 and specific energy output E in such a gasdyn-ic
laser are shown in Fig. 5. The drop in 5 and B with increasing stagnation
pressure (Fig. 5a) can be attributed to an increase in the rates of relaxa-
tion processes. reducing the effectiveness of pmping radiation. The low
absolute values of 6 are due to the low percent content of co, in the mixture
and the shorter time that the gas stays in the absorption region for nozzles
with high 1;. and consequently lower "kinetic cooling" of the systn. The
optima on the curve for 6(7320) (Pig. Sb). in contrast to gaedynamic lasers
with lower degrees of expansion and stagnation parameters. shifts toward
greater 7 0 and is determined by competition of two factors: increasing
depth of ﬂiinetic cooling" and increasing relaxation losses.

Thus our analysis has shown the feasibility of increasing efficiency of a
C02 gasdynamic laser by introducing optical feedback. 0n the standard laser
transition 00°l-10°0 this efficiency say be increased by 5-151. Obviously.
the resultant conclusions can be applied in some measure to other gasdyn-ic
lasers using triatouic molecules (N20. C82. COS).

REFERENCES
l. Gebhardt. F. 6.. Smith. D. C.. APPL. PHYS. LB‘ITS. Vol 20. 1972. p 129.

2. Shelev. v. u., Hargolin. A. n.. xvmmvua 3mm. Vol 2. 1975.
p ms.

F0! OFFICIAESIJSE ONLY
3.

A.

50

6.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

POI OIYIOAI. USE ONLY

31m. A. 8.. "ID? PIZICW INSTITUTA mm P. I. mum”. '
MADE!!! MI! 8883. Vol 83. 1975. P 13.

Andcroon. J.. "mumbokwc hury: Wedeniyo" [Gudynnic Luau:
Introduction]. Moscow. Kit. 1979.

"my“. A. 8.. Konyukhav. V. 3.. Lukmﬂwv. A. 1.. Satan. 3. 1..
mm mum'm 1 mmmam F1231. Vol 66, 1971.. p 1268.

1.0m. s. A.. "caaodin-tcllesuyo lusty" [Mm-1c Laura]. lie-cow.
“auto. 1977.

”ith. A. 30. yolk”, A. Yu.. Mtymm. "o no. StrikOV. I. I0.
“MAYA WM. V01 3. 1976. P 17“.

Volkov. A. Yu.. Data. A. 1.. 1.0ng. A. 3.. ludtyavtuv. Ye. 11.,
Sobolov. 1!. IL. Preprint lo 6. 1..“ch Physics Institute. Hoocov.’1971.

Mryukov. A. 8.. Serikov. i. 1.. Stlttk. A. 11.. Shelcptn. L. A..
“MAYA unmm. Vol lo. 1977. p 787.

8.0km. G. 0.. Potiyev. V. A.. MAL WCBISIJM'M mm: 1
MMTICIBQOY ”2111. Vol 18. 1978. P 1283.

Louv. 8. A.. Marov. V. IL. “MAYA WM. Vol 3. 1976. p 960.

linkarov. V. "a. Mk. Yu. V.. mun. mm mm! I
1303311an PIZIKI. No 5. 1978. p 23.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'otvo ”Radio 1 max”. ”Kvantovaya cloktronm". 1982

6610

080:

1862/1110

MOMMUSEONLY
unc 621:373.826.038.823

CU misc 0’ WISSWIATIM LASER um CYCLIC CHCM‘I'IG OP cams
mm WIDE

Roscoe “Amara numm in Russian Vol 9. No [(115). Jan 82 (nanuacript
received 20 Peb 81) pp 20-25

[Article by V. Yu. Zalesshiy. A. H. Kokushkin. and s. 8. Polikarpov]

[Text] Continuous stinulated enission is achieved in a
photodiasociation iodine laser with cyclic recirculation

of gaseous fluorofornyl iodide. An estinste is nade of

the irreversible loss of nolecules of working gas per unit
of e-itted energy for opti-un rate of scavenging and optin-
extraction of radiation fron the cavity. this loss is less
than I! of the gas flowrate for a cw chenical iodine laser.

1. Introduction

Certain possible laser applications -- large-base interferometry for solving
geophysics probl-s. quantun frequency standards. fiber-optics co-unications
- require stable lasing for a prolonged tine free the laser used. The prob-
1a- of cw lasing duration in the case of the indicated uses for the iodine
laser deserves attention since frequency stabilisation by an electric-discharge
absorbing cell with iodine stone is of interest in the first and second cases
(Ref. 1], and in the second and third cases a wavelength of 1- 1315 In nay

be lore preferable.

In Ref. 2. 3. consideration is given to develop-ent of a cw photodissociation
iodine laser. and develop-eat of an iodine laser with purely chalical Ming
is considered in Ref. 6-7. In the forest research. lasing with power of

~l H for a period of ~1 s has been attained with photodiasociation of (013).“
noleculee in a stress of gas passing one tine through the wing region 17 c-
long at a rate of ~13 I/s [Itch 2]. Puping was by PER-7 high-pressure nercury
laps. Ref. 3 reports on an atts-pt to achieve cw lasing with pu-ping by core
efficient low-pressure nercury lama Iade by the Brown boveri Colpany.

The second research area has net with greater success. Continuous action

of a chenical iodine laser or an oxygen-iodine laser is based on producing
netastable oxygen nolecules 0201!) in the reaction Hp.+0.+2NaOH-> MAH-
2H.0+2NaCl. nixing stress of oxygen and iodine (in argon). dissociating iodine

MMLWONLY
'0. OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

noleculee in proceeeea 20.(‘A)+o.(’x)+o.(‘z) and 0.0:» 1.»o.('r)+21.

end finall traneferring oxygen excitation to iodine atone in the proceae
0,0104- 1( P,,,)+0,(’2) + 1(2P1/1) lief. 8]. A report wee given in let.

5. 6 on attainent of continuoue etinulated .ieeion in chenical iodine laeere
with power of 100 and 155 H for eeveral ninutea.

Deepite euch inreeaive reeulta in developnent of the cw chenical iodine laeer.
it nay turn out to he nore euitahle for epplicatione where relatively low
power (‘9 to 0.1-0.2 If) in required with duration that in not too ahort (lo-
20 ninutea) to uee the cw photodieeocietion iodine laeer in which it ia rela-
tively eiqle to realiu cyclic circulation of the working gae in a cloeed
eyetu. Hith coneideration of thie circuetance. it ie intereeting to con-
pere the expenditure of working fluid per unit of energy of leeer .ieeion B
in the cw chenical and photodieeociation iodine laeere.

Aa shown in let. 7. netaatehle oxygen at the output of the chnical reactor
nekee up MI ”-602 of all the oxygen in the cw chenical iodine laeer. and
the traction n; ueed for excitation of the laeer level ie 3: lief. 7]. i. e.
um: I 12 of the expended oxygen.

Under nornal conditiona. expenditure of the nain conponent of the gee nixture
(oxygen) in 3chen' (thn1n¢)" - 27 cn’lJ. where l. in the Loecl-idt nmr.
and hv ie the energy of a photon of laeer enieeion (LS-10'" J).

In the cw photodieaociation iodine laeer with cyclic circulation. the working
gas is not conauned upon leaving the laeing region. Moreover. not even that
part of the gee with [I noleculea eubject to photodieeociation and ueed in
laaer traneitione ie conpletely coneuned. A fraction m of the iodine atone
forned in photodiaaociation ia reconhined with radicale. aa a rule in a rapid
reverae reconhinetion proceee

3+ 1+“. (1)

again forning noleculee of working gee lief. 9. 10]. The other part of the
atone and radicale (l - m). which ie ueually anall and depende on the etruc-
ture of the radical R and other conditione (one below). reacts with fornation
of final producte l; and 13. and is irrevereihly coneuned.

The canon-prion of working fluid in the cane of the cw photodieeociation iodine
laeer can he evaluated by the fornula 3phot' (l- ns)/(thf*na)o where f* is
the quanta yield of excited atone in an act of photodiaeociation. and n. in
the fraction of excited atone that participate in enieaion of leeer radiation.
For working gee 017.1. ”10.9. m: n. 10.6 (nee below). and the eetinate givea
rpm. =o.19 ca’IJ. which in 11.0 tinee leea than in the caee of the cw chenicel
iodine laeer.

Earlier [lab 11] we reported on calculatione of enlificetion and atinulated
enieeion of the iodine laeer ueing fluorofornyl iodide with eingle-paee flow
of working fluid. In the preaent paper we have aet ouraelvee the taek of
achieving atinulated eniaaion in a cw photodiaaociation iodine laeer with
cyclic circulation of the working gae CPgI in a cloeed eyeten. and evaluating

momélzatuseomv
eolO'”. s/ce'

0 I. 00 ‘0 It.”

Fig. 1. Calculated tine de- Fig. 2. Diagr- of working
pendences a(t) for Ch! (1. gas circulation
2) and (“3)3CI (3. ‘)e Con-
stants of quenching by work-
ing a. 5.540“7 (1. 2) and
640"“ c-’/- (3. 0; photo-
diseociation probabilities y
and nolecule concentrations
n respectively 0.1 a" and
5-101 on" (1. 3). 0.05 .‘1
and 2.5.1017 c." (2. I.)

 

 

the feasibility of increasing the lasing duration to levels that would he
of practical interest.

Laser iodidee are considerably different in their photochnical properties.
Re are of the opinion that fluorofornyl iodide CF31 has better prospects
than trifluorofornylnethane iodide (Ch) 3C1 for use in cyclic circulation.

It is a weak quenchant of iodine atone. and is relatively ineffective as s
third body in the iodine ates: reconbinstion procesa

1+1+|u+12+1u (2)

(R is a radical) that leads to accmlation of a strong quenchant — l; nole-
cules; thanks to the relatively short-wave vorking absorption band. Chi has
a rather large absorption cross section on wavelength X-ZS‘ m for the funda-
nentsl radiation of low-pressure nercury laws (4.1-10'“ ca’) and also. thanks
to volatility that is highest of all laser iodides. the release of nolecular
iodine sdnixture is relatively good. Iodide (Ch) 3C1 used in Ref. 2. despite

the sbsence of radical losses in the process
nun-u l, (3)

(which apparently is not realized in the case of MB)“: radicals). is mat
likely unsuitable for thia process since it has high self-quenching (according
to our data 13-20 tines stronger then Chl), does not prevent acet-ulation of
I, molecules in process (2), has a low absorption cross section for photons

1:3
ms omcm. us: on“
POIOFFICIALUSEONLY

with 1-256 I. (1.3~10'" cn’). and olnost no I; adnixturo ie released by
cooling.

For cowarison of iodides Chl end (613)301. Pig. 1 above oone calculated
I
[3.1. m can dopendencoo of integral ¢'(t) «I Ndl'where n u overpopulation

of levels. As shown in hf. 11. awlification (with longitudinal flow of
working gas) is proportional to a if gas velocity io assigned. and to oh
if the length of the illminotod part of the laser tube is assigned.

2. basing in Cyclically Circulating Working Gas

Cyclic circulation of the working gee was acconpliohod by using the sane fa-
cility as in Ref. 11 with certain nodificatione. ‘rhe puping errangonent

is shown in Pig. 2. The gas was put into notion by titonitn centrifugal blow-
or 1 driven by a 3.5 U (EA-2A electric notor with neurotic clutch.

rig. 3. Oscillogr- of etc. luineo-
cenco daning with pulsed excitation
in two cross sections of the tube 3 ca
apart along tho flow. observed in e
downetro. cross section (1). The other
luinescence oacillograne were taken in

stationary 8M (blower turned off)

Zuc - 2 no

The IoloCular iodine was absorbed. and condensed on the surface (~2ooo 133)

of cooled (-60'0) copper plates -- tho loin elonenta of tho working gaa ro-
generation ayoten 6. To increase tho reserve of working gas and anooth out
the velocity pulsations. a 3.5-liter buffer tank 2 was included in the circu-
lation oyste- preceding the input to tho laser tube. The velocity v of the
goo in tho laser tube neasured by the double luinoecence pulse nethod (Ref.
1] at a working pressure of 4 kPa was only 1.1 n/a (Pig. 3).

Upon entering quart: loser tube 3 with dinner of 16 - and with Brewster
windows. the ass was oplit into four stroane flowing along tho tube at equal
velocities. end then rejoined first into two and subsequently into one etrean
at the output fro. the laeor tube before entering cooler S. The four illni-
nated sections were in contact with the output orifices to avoid absorption
of laser radiation in tho uninverted active nediu. Stinulatad mission was
realised with on optical cavity having losses of 3.5: per pass (round-trip)
lief. 11] consisting of two opaque spherical nirrors with radius of curvature
of 1 I separated by 1100 en for total length of the illuninoted part of the
laser tube 13-bZ-20 c- (nulbor of branchingo b-lo).

In contrast to Ref. 11. whore 7-0.05 a". the probability of photodiaeocia-

tion was incroaoed by a factor of shout 1.5 by using additional aluim- foil
reflectors.

”MMWY
Pig. 6. Recording of laser radiation registered by the
terninal photodiode in one of the experinents at CPgI pres-
sure of to Us. gas velocity of 110 cn/s and total length
of illuinated laser tube sections of 20 cm
ham- 1 ninute

Lasing started usually within 2—5 a (sometimes longer) after adeission of the
working gas 617,1 (6-6.5 kl’a). Within about 2 minutes after admission. it
began to damp out. and lasted about 6-6 minutes (Pig. lo). 1. e. about III-£5
cycles. The duration of one cycle tcyc-V/(stvb) - 8 a. where V is the volume
of the closed circulation system (7 liters). at is the cross sectional area

of the laser tube (2 ma). Hith a lull addition of fresh CPyl. lasing lasted
for 10 ninutee.

An oscillogr- of the lasing signal

at the naximn (Pig. 5) with power
supply to two mercury (low-pressure)
pulping lamps by an alternating current
of 8 A shows that the lasing threshold
was exceeded by a factor of about 2.

 

Doping of stimulated emission can be
explained by insufficient capacity
r13. 5. Oscillograms of pumping (a) of the regeneration systen. In ad-
and laser (6) emission dition damping was also enhanced by
Zuc- 2 ns hydrogen-containing quenchsnt impuri-
ties that got into the working gas.
apparently from sections of the rubber vacuum hose used to connect components
of the gas circulation system. This is evidenced by a reduction in lifetime
of excited iodine stars in the quartz tube with 16 nm diameter from 20 ms
right after admission of the cut at pressures up to 2.5 We. to 8-10 ms
10 minutes after admission (with the pumping 1-pa turned off).

3. Laser Power

After replacing the cavity mirrors with a flat opaque mirror and a spherical
mirror with radius of curvature of 10 n and transmission of 1.51. an DD-Z
instrusent was used on the side of the spherical nirror to measure the power
of laser eeiasion. which was found to be 2 law at C231 pressure of 6.5 kPa.

Radiation power is determined by the formula

P'-=nm.l‘hvan..

1;
FOR L US! ONLY
FOIOFHGALUSEONLY

where n,- 0.3 ie the fraction of power recorded by the receiver; lip-bed-
45.01; ”is. the cross sectional area of the laser been ¢~2. S -; l-S en;
1- 0.07s

Substitution of Mars gives P- 1.311. all. and canarison with the experim-
tal value of P gives us lie-0.6. The fact that m. differs frat unity can

be attributed both to quenching and to entreinent of excited stone out of

the laser tube.

Analysis of factors that influence the power of the cw photodissociation iodine
laser shows that there are at least three reserves of power that could he .
tapped to increase the power level by two orders of negnituda without appre-
ciable design changes.

A. An 22W in gas velocity. According to our estilatee. the kinematic
viscosity of era gas is -lcn ls. Tripling gae velocity (to 33) eels) while
retaining the dineter of the laser tube (16 -) would not yet turbuliae the
flow (which would present a hazard due to the increased contribution of quench-
ing on the mile of the tube) since then the Reynolds umber would be -500.

By correspondingly increasing 1. we would get a total length of the illuineted
part of the laser tube of l;-60 on end coefficient of power increase Irv-3.

At the sane tine. there would be a considerable increase in eeplifieation over
the threshold. enabling realisation of the following two power reserves.

3. Increasing the fraction of useful cavity losses (i. e. the Weston
of the output mirror). He would seems that the corresponding coefficient
of power increase kn could be taken as two. which corresponds to ns- 0.6.

c. Increasing the cross sectional area of the laser beam with large mess
over the threshold, cud also using longer-focus (or even flat) mirrors with

radius of curvature up to 30-40 m. Apparently. a reel increase in been din-
eter fro. 2-3 to 10 I would give a corresponding coefficient k.- (10/2. 5)2-16.

The use of ell three reserves (kvknks'96) we would hope could increase the
poser to P s 200 all.

One could also expect a considerable power increase by using transverse pup-
ing of the working gas as in the cw chuical iodine laser. m1: leaving
the option. tine of illuination and gas velocity essentially unchanged.
transverse circulation would appreciably increase the region of optical pulp-
ing of the gas streea. and hence the laser power.

REFERENCES
l. Orayevskiy. A. 11.. “MAYA “MIRA. Vol 5. 1970. p 1850.

2. Andreyeve, 1'. l... Birich. G. 11.. Sohel'nen. I. 1.. Sorokin. V. IL. Struk.
l. 11.. KVAN'I'OVAYA WM. Vol 6. 1977. p 2150.

3. Hitte. K. 6.. Burkhard. K.. Luthi. II. In OPTICS cums. Vol 28. 1979.
. p 202.

”OFFICIALUSIONLV
6.

5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.

ll.

Bound. D. J.. Heller-etc. H. 8.. launch. I. L. Pchclkin. ll. 3.. J. 0PT.
800. AND... Vol 68. 1978. p 652.

hand. I). J.. Menu-tut. H. 3.. Pchelkin. II. R. at n1.. APPL. ms. 1.3113.
Vol 36. 1979. p I00.

hoard. D. J.. LASER FOCUS. Vol 15. No 6. 1979.

Richardson. R. J.. Htmll. C. 3.. APPL. ms. ms. Vol 35. 1979. p 138.
Deﬁant. R. 6.. Thrush. B. A.. cum. ms. Lms. Vol 9. 1971. p 591.
Andi-cyan. ‘1'. I... Kumtlova. s. V.. molov. A. 1.. Sobel'un. I. 1..
Soroktn. V. IL. PIS’HA V 2111mm usvnm'm I MICE” rum.
Vol 13. 1971. p 631; KBDIIYA W80“!!! mu. Vol 6. 1972. p 618.

Yerohov. 1.. 8.. Zaleukiy. V. Yu.. Sokolov. V. IL. WARWVAYA WM.
V01 59 1978. P 863.

Zaleukty. V. Yu.. Yershov. L. 8.. Kokmhkin. A. 11.. Poliku'pov. s. 8..
KVANTOVAYA MIMI“. Vol 8. 1981. p 330.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'otvo "Radio 1 maz'". "Kvautovayn olektronih". 1982

6610

(:90:

1862/1”.

F0! OFﬂC’ﬂl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 08! MIN

UM 535
LASER PUSPIATB GLASSES

hoscov my: 1081A“!!! m in Russian 1960 (signed to press 28 lov 80)
pp 2-8. 12-15

[Annotatiom preface. introduction excerpt and table of contents fro- book
"Laser Phosphate Classes". by Niholay Yefinovich Alekseyev. Valentin Pavlovich
Gapontaev. hark Yefrsnovich Zhabotinskiy. Valeriy Borisovich Kravchenko and
Yuriy Petrovich ludnitskiy. ledstel'stvo wllauka". Glavnsya redaktsiys
fisiko-satenaticheskoy literatury. 2600 copies. 352 pages]

[text] The boot gives a detailed description of the physical properties of
new effective laser saterialso-phosphate glasses activated by rare-earth ions.
The possibilities and outlook for using these Interials in lasers of various
types are da-onstrated.

Data are given on the structure of phosphate glasses and on the spectral-
lminescence. lasing. thereto-optic and nonlinear optic characteristics of
laser phosphate glasses activated with lid“ ions. An exninstion is nede
of processes of energy transport and luinescent quenching in phosphate
glasses. and of luinescent sensitiaation in glasses coactivated by ions of
Nd“ and Yb”. Yb” and Br". Figures 113, tables 67, references 545.

Preface

Phosphate laser glasses. now being acre and lore extensively used in the sajor
industrialised nations. first made their appearance in the Soviet Union. Phos-
phate laser glasses are especially isportsnt for setting high-poser and super-
poverful lasers. and lasers that operate in the pulse-periodic node.

At present it can be stated that a certain stage in research and developeent
of phosphate laser glasses has been comleted. that their advantages have
been recognised. and that e start has been ends on industrial production'and
use in series-produced lasers. This is shot sakes the proposed book of cur-
rent interest.

It should be noted that the last systenetic survey on laser glasses vas pub-
lished sole ten years ago. and like its predecessors it contains practically
no inforlation on phosphate laser glasses.

NIOFl-‘ld‘ABLlBEONLY
The authors of this book have taken part in research and develop-ant of any
phosphate laser glasses free the very first. so that a considerable portion

of the book is based on their own papers. and the book itself sakes no pretense
to coqleteneas in coverage of the nultifaceted probl- of laser glasses.

The book presents the results of physical and spectral-luinescence studies
of phosphate laser glasses. investigation of processes of excitation of rare-
earth ions. excitation transfer and relaxation processes in laser glasses.
These data denonstrate both the advantages of phosphate laser glasses over
other gleam. and the potential capabilities that they edody. The book
also presents physicochenical and lasing characteristics of these glasses.
and gives a couparison with silicate laser glasses.

The book is intended for physicists interested in research on laser saterials
and processes that take place in lasers. for technologists working on improve-
nent of laser materials and active elenents Ilsde fron thee. and for laser
designers who need the specific characteristics of active elenente without
which it would be impossible to design and build lasers.

The book is nade up of six chapters.

Chapter 1 exaaines the require-ants for physical paraneters of laser glasses
that arise fron the problee of optimizing the characteristics of lasers of
different types and purposes. bong such parameters are for exa-ple the
spectral-luninescence pereneters that detersine the energy characteristics
of lasers. including efficiency. The corresponding pareneters for lasers
that operate in the free lasing node differ appreciably froe those necessary
for the node of short and ultrashort pulses.

Particular attention is given to paranetara that deteraine the applicability
of glasses in high-power and superpowerful lasers for which nonlinear charac-
teristics. optical and thermal stability and therno-optic distortions becole
as ieportant as efficiency.

Chapter 2 deals with the structure of phosphate glasses. which is appreciably
different fron that of silicate glasses. and in the final analysis is respon-
sible for their advantages. The physicochenical processes that occur as phos-
phate glasses are being nade determine their structure. which has features
inherent in inorganic polyners. This in turn determines the near environ-en:
of activator ions and the structure of succeeding coordination spheres. thereby
datersining the excellent spectral-luinescence and lasing characteristics

of phosphate laser glasses as well as the capability for controlling their
therIo-optic characteristics.

Chapter 3 exaaines current concepts of the mechanisms and principles of oc-
currence of processes of non-radiative transfer of the energy of electronic
excitation in laser glasses. An analysis is made of different varieties of
ion- ion transport. including the process of nigration of excitation energy

as well as processes of nay-photon non-radiative relaxation of excited states
of rare-earth ions due to interactions with oscillations of dopent hydroxyl
groups and structural elements of the glass proper. The exposition is based

FOR OFFIC’I‘XL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

primarily on original results of the authors. most being published here for
the first tine. For purposes of exhaustive substantiation of the uniqueness
of the properties of phosphate glasses. the authors have deened it necessary
to extend the range of objects that are analysed by including other activators
ad glass-forming systems. asking the results fundanental in nature. The
ideas and results of this chapter have played a large part in development

of laser phosphate glasses.

Chapter 6 is devoted exclusively to phosphate-neodynm laser glasses and
the possibilities for using then in lasers of different types.

The basic content of chapter 5 is nsde up of data on the thermo-optic proper-
ties of phosphate laser glasses; the investigation of such properties has
enabled goal-directed synthesis of cowositions with characteristics that

are optinized for application to specific Jobs. In particular. this chapter
emines probless that arise in developing glasses for pulse-periodic lasers
and high-energy laser systens. In both cases. the advantages of phosphate
glass over silicate laser glasses show up with particular clarity.

In chapter 6 an analysis is sade of the spectral-luinescence and lasing char-
acteristics of erbius-doped laser phosphate glasses. and an emination is
made of the specifics of designing lasers based on these materials. Particu-
lar attention is given to erbiu lasers stimulated by nec:_rmiua laser emission
since conbined systems of this type can give us sources of emission in the

1.5 as range that are siailar to neodymim lasers with respect to emission
characteristics. and in some respects are even superior to then in the mode

of amplification of short and ultrashort pulses.

The linited space of the book has precluded emination of the properties
of phosphate laser glass coactivated by neodyniul and ytterbius. which has
good prospects for use in powerful amplifiers. Those interested nay refer '
to the primary sources given in the bibliography.

The list of references. which includes 565 titles. has been brought up to
the end of 1979. It contains the IOOt significant papers. but lakes no pre-
tense to be complete.

The authors thank all researchers who have given permission to use the graphics
fro. their publications. Appropriate citations are made in the text or in the
captions to figures.

The authors thank their colleagues at the Institute of Radio Engineering and
Electronics and the Institute of General and Inorganic Chemistry imeni N. S.
Kurnakov. and the Rubina scientific Production Association with whom they
have cooperated in research and development of phosphate laser glasses. and
also those at the Physics Institute ineni Lebedev and the State Optics insti-
tute ineni Vavilov for constructive criticise.

The materials of the book are distributed among authors as follows: 1!. Ya.
Alekseyev - “5.1-4.3. 6.8-4.10; V. P. Gapontsev - chapters 3. 6;

POROFII'IOALUSEONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

H. Ye. Zhabotinskiy - the introduction; V. B. Kravchenko - “1.6-1.6. chapter
2. §§Ss‘g 5e2; YUe Pa Rudnitﬂkiy — §§lel-1039 “‘e"‘c6g “e7g §Se3s

Introduction

[Excerpt] It was not until [966 that a collective of workers doing research
at the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics of the Soviet Acadely
of Sciences (including the authors) cause to the conclusion of the potential
capabilities of phosphate laser glasses. if such naterials could only be
produced. This conclusion case out of research results obtained by this col-
lective in studying luainescence of ions of rare-earth eleaents and poly-
phosphoric acids. as well as free known ideas about the structure of phosphate
glasses. The work attracted a collective of researchers from the Institute

of General and Inorganic Chelistry ineni Kurnakov. among who. a pre-elinent
part was played by V. V. Taapkin and the late 6. V. Ellert.

The result of this purposeful research was develop-ant of a method of synthe-
sizing phosphate laser glasses based on netsphosphates of alkali and alkali-
earth elements. The very next year saw the develop-eat of laser elelents made
of neodyniuu-activated phosphate glass; these eleaents had satisfactory
physicochenical characteristics and surpassed silicate glass in lajor laser
characteristics. For exasple. the width of the lasing spectrum of the new
glasses was only 6 K as cospsred with 80-120 K for the silicate glass. and
efficiency was 1.5-2 tines higher under, the sane conditions of excitation.
Soon this glass. designated as grade Les-1.0. bees-e the first industrial phos-

phate laser glass. A disadvantage of the asterisl was relatively low chuical
stability. '

It should be noted that research on the feasibility of developing phosphate
laser glasses was being done independently at the ties by Leichbein and his
colleagues in France. They published detailed results of spectral-lames-
cence studies of some phosphate glass co-positions activated by neodyliul.

and reported on attainaent of lasing.

Phosphate laser glasses of the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics
developed jointly vith L208 [expansion not given] -- [.6840 H, LGS-bl and
LGs-lsz - have improved physicochenical characteristics.

The second generation of phosphate glasses of the Institute of Radio Engineer-
ing and Electronics was intended especially for use in large industrial and
research facilities in which severe require-eats arise for both the thereo-
optic characteristics of the glass and its efficiency. The athernal charac-
teristics of [.684 phosphate laser glass have subsequently been reproduced

in the corresponding silicate glasses.

Phosphate laser glasses of the second generation should include sole neodyliun
glass coapositions developed by the State Optics Institute ineni Vavilov and
1.208. industrially produced as grades GLs—Zl. (ms-22. ans-23. fats-26. 1138-55
and 155-56.

1
F0! OFFICfAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The next stage in develop-ant of phosphate glasses was synthesis of "athernal"
phosphate glasses with reduced teaperature dependence of therno-optic charac-
teristics (type [.0840 . with reduced concentration quenching of luinescence.
and accordingly with high activator concentration (ms-x glass developed by
the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics. and lithim-neodylim
phosphate glass developed by the Physics Institute ineni hebedev). Recently.
research on high-concentration glasses has started outside the Soviet Union
as well.

Despite the advances that have been nads in inproving the characteristics

of phosphate laser glasses. there is one area where it is no aatch for yttriu-
aluinua garnet. and that it is the node of rapid pulse recurrence. 0f aajor
importance in this node are the that-onechanical characteristics of the na-
terial. especially heat conduction and nechanical strength. Yttrim-aluinun
garnet crystals have considerable advantages over glass with respect to both
these characteristics.

Conventional netth of hardening glass. such as quenching. have considerable
disadvantages. the worst being being the prolonged tine for reaching the work-
ing state, and inpairnent of them-optic characteristics.

At the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics of the Soviet Acadauy

of Sciences. original nethods have been developed for hardening active elements
nade of phosphate laser glass. As a result. elenents that operate at a pulse
recurrence rate of up to 10 us develop nearly the sane average power as YAG
elenents of the sane size under identical ming conditions but at consider-
ably lower cost with note extensive availability.

M nore advantages of phosphate laser glass should be noted.

One of these shows up in large facilities intended for getting short and ultra-
short pulses with high energy and high radiation density. The liniting pro-
cesses here are nonlinear processes that lead to internal danage due to self-
focusing. Accordingly. the limiting energy flux densities in phosphate glass
are about twice as high as in silicate glass.

The second advantage is due to the aors effective energy transfer between
rare-earth ions in phosphate glass than in silicate glass. Utilisation of
this advantage has enabled developnent of high-quality srbiu laser glass
sensitized by ytterbiun ions. 0n the basis of this glass the authors succeeded
as early as 1969 in being the first to achieve lasing in the 1.56 I- region
using free-lasing neodyniu glass lasers as the source of excitation. Sub-
sequently. such erbiu glass was brought to the state of industrial production
(grade Les-s). This step required in particular that a solution be found

for the coeplicatad job of deep desiccation. Sysystenatic studies were also
done on the spectral-luinescence characteristics of erbiua glasses. as well
as a nunber of questions involved in optinising the uission characteristics
of erbiu lasers with both laser and lamp pulping. In [973. one of the authors
gave convincing arguents for the feasibility of using erbiun re-rsdiators

of neodyniua lasers as anplification stages of powerful laser systems intended
for a variety of applications. '

POI Oﬂlégl. USE ONLY
Another sensitized laser phosphate glass developed and systematically studied
in these same years at the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics

is glass activated by ions of neodymium (sensitizer) and ytterbium (activator)
that is promising for use in the final stages of power seplifiers of pulses
with average duration from 10“ to 10'. s.

Recently our industry has developed and produced several types of phosphate
laser glass that are being used in active elements for different purposes._

Outside the Soviet Union. the leaning has been toward silicate glass, and
the development of phosphate glasses has not been taken seriously.

However. quite recently the situattion has changed. Industrial phosphate
glasses have been produced in Japan. and more recently in the United States.
These glasses are being used in large process lasers and facilities for heat-
ing thermonuclear plasma in the United States. Japan and France. Developers
of laser systems for other applications have also begun to take a new look

at phosphate glasses.

The possibilities of phosphate laser glass are far fron exhausted. in many
laboratories fundamental research is continuing for further improvement of
the characteristics of phosphate glasses and glasses with several vitrifying
agents including phosphorus. we should expect a considerable increase in
the average poser and pulse energy of lasers based on glasses of these types,
attainment of lasing on new long waves. a further reduction in the duration
of ultrashort pulses. utilisation of active fibers and the like.

Contents ' Peso
Preface 5
Introduction 9

Chapter 1: General Requirements for Physical Parameters of Laser Classes 16
1.1. Spectral-luminescence parameters that determine energy character-

istics of glasses 16
1.2. Nonlinearity of glass refractive index 29
1.3. Resistance of glasses to laser emission 36
1.6. Therno-optic distortions in active laser elements bl
1.5. Theraophysical properties and thermal strength of laser glasses 59
1.6. General characteristics of laser glasses 67
Chapter 2: Structure of Phosphate Glasses 77
Chapter 3: Nonradiative Transfer of Energy of Electron Excitation in
Laser Classes 96
3.1. Classification of nonradiative transfer processes 96
3.2. Ion-ion excitation transfer - theoretical concepts 106
3.3. Ion-ion transfer -- experimental results 116
3.4. Ion-vibration excitation transfer 152
Chapter 4: Neodymium-Activated Phosphate Glasses . 175
4.1. General characteristics of neodymiua laser glasses 175
6.2. Spectral-luminescence characteristics of neodymium phosphate
glasses 179

FOI‘OFFK§}I.USE(NVLY
‘03s
‘e‘e
6.5.
‘06s
‘07s

‘08.
6.9.

‘elOe

I'OI 0H1CIAL USE ONLY

Spectroscopic nethods of aaaeuring sone luinescent and lasing
characteristics of needy-ins glasses

Induced radiation cross section of lid” ions in glasses

Laser nethods of deteninins the induced radiationﬁross section
lffective cross section of induced radiation of Id in phosphate
glasses

hplification of laser pulses in phosphate glasses activated by
ltd + ions

Losing characteristics of neodyniu-sctivated phosphate glasses
Phosphate glass lasers that nit .in the free-enission node
Using phosphate glasses to produce short and ultrashort pulses

Chapter 5: Them-Optic Properties of Phosphate Glasses and Selection

5.1.
5.20
5.3.

of leodyniun Glasses for Lasers of Various mes
Theron-optic characteristics of phosphate glasses

Phosphate glasses for pulse-periodic lasers
Glasses for high-energy laser systems

Chapter 6: Brhiun Laser Glasses

6.1. Specifics of erhiua lasers and requirusnts for the active aediun

6.2. 8pectral-1uinescence properties of erbium glasses

6.3. Brbiul lasers with leap pulping

6.6. Erbium laser re-elitters. Free-lasing node

6.5. Possibilities of erbiu- laser re-eaitter under conditions of stim-
lated emission and .plification of short and ultrashort pulses

References

195
200
209

215

219
226
236
238

260
260
262
279
286
286
296
315
320

328
333

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo ﬁlauks". Glsvnaya redaktsiya fisiko-aate-aticheskoy
literatury. 1900

6610

can:

[862/129

NI ML USE ONLY
“DC 537.876.23.029J8551.510.5
PlOPAGA‘l'IOR 0P LASER RADIATIOIU I'll MPH!!!

Moscow mmmmrs umnooo mmn'a V anosrns in Russian 1981
(signed to press 6 Apr 81) pp 2-4. 285-288

(Annotation, preface and table of contents fron book "Propagation of Laser
Radiation in Atnosphere". by Vladimir Yevseyevich Zuyev. lrdatel'stvo "Radio
i svyss'". 3256 topics. 288 pages]

[Text] The book generalizes principal results of theoretical and «perinatal
research on the conplex problen of propagation of laser radiation in the atnos-
phere. The basis of the exposition is research by the author and his students
done at the Institute of Optics of the Atnoephere. Siberian Dcpartnent of

the USSR Acadeny of Sciences. as sell as other results published both in the
USSR and elsewhere. An exanination is node of the Iajor aspects of linear
interaction of laser sniasion with the atnosphere: refraction of laser bans.
absorption and scattering of laser radiation. fluctuations of laser be. per--
eters due to atnospheric turbulence. An analysis is node of nonlinear effects
that sccowany propagation of intense laser radiation in the ataoephsre. The
book discusses problans in using lasers to study the ataosphere and the pro-
cesses that take place there. including processes of pollution by products

of nan's industrial activity.

The book is intended for scientific workers and specialists vorking in the
field of physics and optics of the atnosphere. neteorology. aatronony. gaodssy.
optoelectronics and laser technology. Figures 71. tables 20. references 829.

Preface

Although no nore than 20 years have passed since the first laser was asde.
laser technology has found a nultitudc of applications in science and in prac'-
tice. Problees of laser radiation propagation in atnosphere have taken a
special place in this situation. Successful utilisation of laser systens
for co-unication and tranuission of intonation. detection and ranging.
surveying and navigation and the like necessitates quantitative data on the
influence that atmosphere has on the paraetera of a laser be- carrying sole
useful inforlation. Besides. the totality of data on propagation of laser
caission in the ataosphere could be extensively used for solving problene
that have nothing to do vith the use of lasers. bong such prohlena is de-
ter-ination of the radiation tern in veathu forecasting equations. solution

MMUSEONLY
70.09110“. USEONLY

of inverse problem of satellite meteorology. deternination of the heat balance
of the earth as a planet. getting rid of the aggravating influence of the
atnoaphere in data of astrononical observations and much sore.

Propagation of laser radiation in the atnosphere is accoqanied by quite an
array of linear and nonlinear interaction phenaena. And not one of these
effects shows up by itself. According to purely qualitative features. these
phenoanna can be divided into the following najor groups: refraction of rays
of the laser ban; absorption of laser be. energy by atnospheric gases; scat-
tering of laser bean energy by aerosol particles. fluctuations in air density
and the like; fluctuations of laser be- paraneters caused by atnospheric
turbulence.

Bach of the enuerated groups of phanonana of interaction between laser radia-
tion and the atnosphere can show up in redone of both linear and nonlinear
optics. 0n the other hand. each of these groups has clear specific features
that must be taken into consideration in corresponding theoretical and experi-
nsntal studies.

The high nonochronatiu. spatial boundedness. capability of getting large
powers and energies and short durations of laser pulses have occasioned rigid
require-ants in fornulating the corresponding theoretical and experinental
studies on the propagation of laser enission in the atmosphere. In nest cases.
it has turned out that information accuulated over nany years of research

on propagation of optical waves in the atnosphere does not suffice for the
corresponding quantitative evaluations as applied to lasers.

The broad front of research that has developed in the coupler progr- of
propagation of laser radiation in the atnosphare has not only advanced the
problen itself. but has also been a stinulus to develop-ant of new areas in
science and engineering. fore-oat song which are those involving relate laser
probing of the atnosphere. and ultrahigh-resolution laser spectroscopy. It

is only just and proper to include in such new areas the field of nonlinear
optics of the atnosphera that has arisen and taken for. over the last 10-12
years.

Progress in solving the problen of propagation of laser radiation in the areas-
phere is docuented in thousands of articles published in various journals.
dozens of surveys. and several nonographs dealing with individual aspects

of this couple: issue. In this connection. it seas topical to attewt a
nonographic generalisation of the problen as a whole. The proposed book is
written to do just that.

The nonograph generalizes najor results of theoretical and uperinental re-
search done in the Soviet Union and elsewhere. A considerable portion of

the natarisls appearing in the nonograph were obtained by the author and his
numerous students and colleagues at the Institute of Optics of the Atnosphere.
Siberian Departnent. USSR Acade of Sciences.

The author considers it his exceptionally pleasant duty to express sincere
gratitude to his coworkers A. B. Antipov. Yu. 8. halin. 0. K. Voytaekhovshaya.

POI oméfl. USE ONLY
V. N. Genin. I. l. lppolitov. B. V. Kaluy. G. H. Krekov. A. V. Kusikovskiy.

V. P. Lopeaov. V. P. Lukin, G. G. Hatviyenko. I. 3. “sets. L. I. lee-elova.

A. A. Pershin. V. V. Pokasov. 1. V. Samokhvalov. V. A. Saposhnikova. 8. D.
Tvorogov and V. V. Fomin for all kinds of assistance in working on the manu-
script of the book. The author is especially grateful to Yu. P. Arsbinov.

H. V. Iabanov. Yu. D. Kopytin, Yu. 5. Hakushkin and V. L. Hironov for their
effective help in preparing some of the materials. and for constructive criti-
cism of the manuscript on specific chapters. improving the quality of the
finished book. The author is greatly indebted to Professor Yu. G. Yakushenhov
for valuable critical co-ents made in revieving the monograph.

All consents and suggestions on the content of the book can be addressed to:
Hoskva, 101000. Glavpochamt. a/ya 693.

Contents page
Preface 3
Chapter 1: Refraction of Light Waves in the Atmosphere
Introduction 5
1.1. Ground refraction on oblique paths 6
1.2. Ground refraction on horizontal paths 8
1.3. Random refraction 9
1.4. Spectral behavior of optical refraction 10
1.5. Influence that accuracy of determining various parameters has on
accuracy of calculating angles of ground refraction 11
1.6. Experimental studies of geodetic refraction 16
1.7. Conclusion 20
Chapter 2: Absorption of Laser Radiation by Atmospheric Gases
Introduction 21
2.1. Principal definitions 21
2.1.1. Coefficient of absorption. Optical thickness. Spectral
transmission (absorption) 21

2.1.2. Function of transmission (absorption). Integral absorption 22
2.1.3. Applicability of formulas for estimating absorption of laser

emission in the atmosphere 24

2.2. Absorption by individual line 25
2.2.1. Shape of spectral line 25
2.2.2. Line intensity I)

2.3. Shape of far limbs of lines 31
2.3.1. Mathematical principles of the theory 31
2.3.2. Definition of the limb of a line 33
2.3.3. Exponential and quasistatistical wings 34
2.3.4. Spectral dispersion of nultipole interactions 36
2.3.5. Comparing theory and experiment 37

2.4. Origination of absorption spectra of atmospheric gases 39
2.4.1. Energy and spectra of molecules 39
2.4.2. Rotational energy and rotational spectra of molecules 39
2.4.3. Vibrational energy and vibrational spectra of molecules 40

2.5. General characteristics of absorption spectra of atmospheric gases 42
2.5.1. Absorption spectrum of water vapor 42
2.5.2. Absorption spectra: of carbon dioxide 42
2.5.3. Absorption spectrum of ozone 43

FOR omcazt USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.5.6. Absorption spectra of oxygen 66
2.5.5. Absorption spectru of nitrogen peroxide 65
2.5.6. Absorption spectra of nitrous oxide 65
2.5.7. Absorption spectru of sulfur dioxide 65
2.3.8. Absorption spectn- of netbane 66
2.5.9. Absorption spectrue of carbon eonoxide ~ 66
2.5.1 . Absorption spectra of nitric oxide 66
2.5.11. Induced spectre of eolscules 67
2.6. Methods of calculating paraneters of lines and coefficients of
absorption of ateospberic gas eolecules 68
2.6.1. Vibrational-rotational Schrodinger equation 68
2.6.2. Methods of solving Schrodinger equation 50
2.6.3. Foreulss for line intensity 53
2.6.6. formulas for balfwidth and shifts of lines 56
2.6.5. Sons results of theory of vibrational-rotational transitions
in eolecules 59
2.7. hperinental netbods of detersining absorption coefficients 66
2.7.1. Laser Spectroscopy 66
2.7.2. Pourier spectroscopy 70
2.7.3. Caparisons of different neth of eeasuring absorption
coefficients 71
2.8. Tables of par-eters of spectral lines of ateospbsric gases 72
2.9. Absorption function for laser sources 76
2.1 . Absorption of laser radiation for oblique directions in the ateos-
pbere 75
2.11. Linits of applicability of Bouguer lav 77
Chapter 3: Scattering of Laser Radiation in Ateosphers
Introduction 78
3.1. Holecular scattering 79
3.2. Scattering by a single particle so
3.2.1. Coefficients of scattering. absorption and attenuation 80
3.2.2. Scattering indicatrices 82
3.2.3. Scattering by particles of sspberical shape 82
3.3. Scattering by s systee of particles 83
3.6. Scattering matrix 86
3.5. Scattering by clouds and eists 86
3.5.1. Hicrophysical para-stars of clouds and eists 86
3.5.2. Voluetric coefficients of attenuation 88
3.6. Scattering by mag 88
3.6.1. Hicrophysicsl pars-stars of .og 88
3.6.2. Voluetric coefficients of attenuation 91
3.7. Scattering by precipitation 93
3.8. Scattering indicatrices of polydisperse aerosols 95
3.9. brightness of radiation with forward and backward scattering 98
3.9.1. Brightness of forward scattered radiation 98
3.9.2. brightness of backseattered radiation 106
3.10. Lieits of applicability of bouguer lav 105
3.11. Polarization characteristics of scattered laser radiation 109
3.12. Unsteady scattering 113
3.13. Intensity fluctuations of spatially baunded he‘s in scattering
eedia 118
58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.13.1. ' txperieents in nodel aedia 118
3.13.2. Fluctuations of transparency of different kinds of pre-

cipitation 119
3.13.3 Calculating fluctuation characteristics 1
3.16. Optical nodela of aerosol atmosphere 1
Chapter 6: Propagation of Laser Radiation in Turbulent Atlosphere
Introduction 129
6.1. Sons general intonation 130
6.2. Broadening of laser bea- by turbulent atnosphere 135
6.3. Distortion of coherence of laser beam field in turbulent atmosphere 416
6.6. Random shifts of laaer beans in turbulent atmosphere 166
6.5. Fluctuations of laser bean intensity in turbulent ataosphere 166
6.5.1. Approximate calculations of strong fluctuations 167
6.5.2. Experimental research 161
6.6. Distribution of probabilities of intensity fluctuations 163
6.7. Randos spatial intensity spikes 165
6.8. Averaging action of reception aperture 166
6.9. Phase fluctuations in laser bell. 169
6.10. Correction of turbulent distortions of laser beans 173
6.11. Conclusion 177
Chapter 5. Nonlinear nffects when Laser Iadiation Propsgates in Atmosphere
Introduction 178
5.1. Optical breakdown of gases 178
5.2. Nonlinear spectroscopic effects in eolecular gas sedia 186
5.2.1. Spectroscopic saturation effect 185
5.2.2. Dynaic Stark effect 187
5.2.3. Effects of action of radiation field on inter-olecular
interaction potential 188
5.2.6. Stinulation of cheaicsl activity of molecules 189
5.2.5. Change of characteristics of laser mission in resonantly
absorbing molecular ssdium 189
5.3. Thermaliution of molecular gas in resonant excitation by laser
radiation 191
5.6. Effects of thermal self-stress of laser beans 196

5.6.1. Unsteady thersal aelf-defocueing of laser be- in atmosphere 195
5.6.2. Angular displacements and distortions of laser bans in

atnoaphere due to aide wind or scanning 200
5.6.3. Bxperinantal studies of thersal self-stress of laser bemas 206
5.5. meml self-stresa of laser beams in atnospheric aerosol 209
5.5.1. General characteristics of state of the problen 209
5.5.2. Classification of thermal nonlinear effects in aerosols 210
5.5.3. Optical action on particles 211
5.5.6. Action of intenae laser radiation on polydisperse water
aerosol 219
5.5.5. Influence of recondenaation processes on vaporization of
water aerosol under action of laser radiation 223
5.5.6. Nonlinear scattering of laaer radiation by thsrnal and
acoustic halos in vicinity of absorbing particles 226
5.5.7. Unsteady acoustic self-focusing of laser radiation in gas
nediun vith absorbing centers 22!)

5.6. Laser emission propagation in nonlinear randonly inhoeogeneous India 233

F0! OFFICIAE9IBE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY

5.6.1. Salt-atraaa of laser baa-a in nonlinaar randoaly inhoao-

genaoua aadix- with lov-inartia nonlinearity aachani- 233
5.6.2. Thar-a1 intaraction of intanaa laaar radiation with
abaorbing turbulent aadiu 235
5.7. Salt-(owning of laur radiation dua to Iarr affacta and alactro-
atriction 237
5.8. Bffacta of atimslatad acattaring of intanaa radiation in atloaphara 238
5.9. Conclusion 262
Iafarancaa 263
Subject indax 286

comma-r: Irdatal'atvo "Radio 1 man”. 1961

6610
680: 1862/1152

60
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
SPHEIICAL 111W“ IRWIATIW BY 2-merr moms LASER

Hoscov mum MPHW'NOY 1 ”10m PIZIKI in “0011!! Vol 82.
No 2. Feb 82 (nenuacript received 2 Oct 81) pp 559-661

[Article by I. ll. Abseyev. 11. ll. Beenseyuk. V. G. Besuslov. A. V. leesereb.
A. V. Veselov. 1.. 14. Vinogradskiy. V. A. Geydeeh. I. V. Galskhov. A. 8.
Gesheyev. V. A. Yeroehenko. A. I. Zeretskiy. G. A. Kirillov. 8. B. tor-er.
Ge Ge ‘Whmm, Se 1‘. Kulikov. Yu. V. ur.t°vp Vs H. "11mm. Vs De
Nikoleyev. G. P. Ohutin. V. I. Penkretov. V. T. Punin. I. 1!. lukeviehnikov.
A. V. Ryadov. V. A. Baylin. A. To. Senik. s. A. Sukhsrev end A. l. rmtikov]

[Test] The power of the lskre-IV iodine lseer is increased
to ~2 T" by shortening the durstion of the lsser pulse with-
out losses in energy. The authors are the first to sttain

e neutron yield of 10s neutrons in the "exploding shall"
stete in iodine lsser irradietion of lit-filled epheticel

eicrotsrgets .

Experiments on leeer irradietion of spherical nicrotaruete 150-170 I- in die-
eter with well thickness of 1 us filled with DT-ges to pressures of 10-60 ate
were done on the Iakre-IV single-channel iodine lseer [Ref. 1] with eeieaion

ueyelength of 1.315 tn.

To irrediste the sphericel tergete. the output be- with Master of 270 n
was divided by been splitters into four been that were focused on the tsrget
by per'ebolic nirrore with P-270 II. Accurecy of eining et the terget in
these experinents use 10-20 5.. To ieprove uniforeity of irradietion. the
terget wee placed in s plene where spot size wee 200 1-.

To prevent self-excitation of the systee made up of the naster lsser. .plifi-
cetion eteges end terget. opticsl decouplere were used in the for. of biseuth
filns sputtered on s glsss becking. end else eetureble shutters based on dyes.
This gave an energy contrast of K32 107 end power contrest of “22-10' in

the output been. le- divergence er the Output of the fecility wee e(1-2)-10"

rsdien.
In the first experinents. 500 joules of laser energy were injected into the

tsrget ch-ber. At this energy level. the preferred node for getting high
neutron yields is the "exploding shell" state lief. 2]. This stste cu be

l-‘OIOW'ICIéAiUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

realised if the feat electron tangerature is sufficiently high: 210 keV. which
requires a power density of 210’ Ill/cl: on the surface of the aicrotarget.

To get such radiation power fluxes at the given energies and target sites.

it is necessary to have a laser pulse duration of $0.3 us. A reduction of
pulse duration was achieved both by increasing the steepness of the heater
laser pulse and by selecting the working conditions of the .plification
stages of the iodine laser. As a result of the steps that were taken. a pulse
duration of r-0.320.05 us was attained at the laser output, which agrees
with results of calculations. It is significant that in contrast to neodyniu
lasers the energy at the output of the facility did not decrease when pulse
duration was shortened fron 1 to 0.25 us.

The energy balance in the laser plan was deter-ined by specially developed
calorinetars. For the experinent in which the greatest neutron yield was
registered (-1.5-10‘ neutrons/pulse). the energy injected into the chamber
was 4.80 J. of which 280 J reached the target. and 50 J was absorbed by the
target. ﬂux density of laser radiation on the target was e10u H/cn .

1(lc) s J/Clz

 

3c. m
Fig. l. Plaaaa x-ray spectrua

The x-ray spectra neasured by the aethod of filters is shown on Fig. l. The
temperatures corresponding to soft and hard parts of the spectrua were '1': 1 hell
and 1‘}. I 9 keV respectively. The te-perature of the corona close to the criti-
cal surfsce as deter-ined fron the line spectrun (relative intensities of

the resonance lines of heliua-like and hydrogen-like silicon ions) was 0.8 keV.
The teaperature near the surface where electron density was Ito/b as deternined
froa the distance between spectral mine ’lau. was 0.9 keV.

The x-ray self-iaage of the target produced by a clears obscure (see Fig. 2)
showed that the m-m is coaparesaed by a factor of about 30.

The results of assuring the neutron yield are shown on Fig. 3. where the
experimental values of neutron yield are plotted along the axis of ordinates,

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Imu-

Fig. 2. buy self-inn of target (a)
and characteristic deusitooctcr plot (b)

Fig. 3. Conparison of upon-ants].
results on R-yicld with Livernorc
laboratory results: O-qxperinsnts
on lskrs-Iv laser; O--data of Liver-
norc laboratory; the line parallel
to the axis of abscissas shows the
sensitivity threshold
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the expected valuee are plotted along the exit of abecieaae. These valuee
were deterained fron a eeeienpirical nodal lief. 2] deecribing the reeulte

of experinente done at Liver-ore Laboretory in the United Stetee in the "u-
ploding ehell" etete. which are ehovn on the ease figure. he can be aeen.

our reeulte are in good agreeaent with the experinental date of Liveraore
Laboratory. The teat electron tenereture neeeured in the experinente ('9 heV)
for the given thickneee of glue aicrotargete (-l 3-) ehove that the ”exploding
shell" etate nee realised in our expert-ante ae well.

Le a reeult of the reeearch. the power of the lekra-IV facility has been in-
creeeed to 2 N by ehortening the duration of the laeer pulse Iron 1 to 0.3 M
with alnoet no loeeee of energy. Thie ie the firet tine that an iodine leeer

hae been need to get a neutron yield of ll)s and volt-attic cowreeeion of
about I!) thee in irradiation of ephericel nicrotargete filled with M-gae.

1. Inner. 8. 3.. IZVBS'I'IYA man MI! 889: SIRIYA FIZICBMYA. Vol ‘6.
19”. p 2&2.

2. Store. I. K. et 01.. P1118. m. 1.311.. Vol ‘0. 1978. p 1570.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'etvo "Nauka". "Zhurnal ekeperinentel'noy i teoreticheekoy
fiziki". 1982 -

6610
080: 1862/130

MMMMV
UDC 517.9:621.378.325

RADIATION DINING! IN Pm LASER AMPLIFIERS USING ACTIVE mm 0?
RECTANGULAR CROSS SMIN

Hoscow mm AKADEHII "All! 888]! in Russian Vol 261. llo 6. Dec 81 (unuscript
received 7 Sep 81) pp 1333-1336

'“ title by Academician A. ll. ‘rikhonov. V. Ya. Arsenin. V. l. Pavlov and
a. th. Perganent, Institute of Applied Mathematics ineni H. V. Reldysb.
USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] The investigation of typical singularities of wave fronts of radiation
propagating in active elenents of laser systen .plification stages. and
thereby the feasibility of focusing a powerful light been on a slall target

is an inportant job in planning nodern laser facilities and solving problees
of controlling then.

Due to inhomogeneity of the telperature field. stresses are set up in the
volume of the active elenent that give rise to voluetric thernal distortions
of the optical nediun (corresponding changes n' in the index of refraction

for different polarizations of enission) (Ref. 1] and lead to end surface
deforestions [Ref. 2-4]. Since there is a considerable difference between

the typical tines of the laser pulse (-10" s). the puping pulse (-10" a)
and elastic wave propagation (-40“5 s). end surface deforlations and volu-
netric theraal distortions can be taken as static during pulse mission. lon-
linearity of the medium leads to self-focusing.

Our research show that when poverful'radiation propagates in an active eleeent
of rectangular cross section. the co-bined action of end surface defamation
and large-scale self-focusing may lead to a systee of appreciable eIission
intensity marina in the far zone. which is experinentally confirled. A sta-
tistical approach to description of snail-scale self-focusing enables correct
calculation of the growth of noise intensity throughout the vol‘sae of the
active elenent. as well as evaluation of their characteristic spatial scale.

This paper gives the results of conprehensive calculations of propagation

of power laser enission '. an active element with consideration of volunetric
thermal distortions of the optical nediun, end surface defomtions. large-
scale self-focusing and growth of minor small-scale perturbations of randon
nature. Calculations were done for an active elonent of rectangular cross
section ends of neodyuim silicate glass. Such elenents were selected because

6
FOR OFFICIEI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

they are extensively used in present-day laser facilities Ref. 5. 6]. and
in addition they are distinguished by considerable end surface defornations
on the large side of the cross section Inf. 3. 4]. Theoretical studies and
experimental data [Ref. 3. lo] show that the shape of the distorted and faces
is close to a parabolic cylinder. and the mum of flexurs any reach several
wavelengths. depending on pooping conditions. Calculations of eniasion are
based on the parabolic approximation.

Propagation of powerful enission in an active ale-ant in the presence of ran-
don snall-scale perturbations is preferably described by equations for the
statistical annents of the electric field (Ref. 7] derived by averaging the
parabolic equation. Calculations have shown that in such an approach the
increase in noise intensity is sore appreciable than in other approaches;

the influence of thernal distortions in this case is slight. Evaluation of
the distribution of noise intensity in the far zone (Fig. l) is in good quali-
tative agreement with experimental data given in Ref. 8. The position of

the sexism values of noise intensity 1. is deter-ined by the amplitude of

of the output radiation. As long as the
noise dispersion reaains appreciably less
than the nean field (isolated spikes in
the field say be appreciable). the phase
front of the average field at the output
of the active element varies insignificantly
in dependence on the level of noise disper-
sion. As a consequence. there is also lit-
tle variation in the distribution of inten-
sity of the average field in the far zone.
Therefore. under these conditions. calcula-
tions of the influence that thermal effects
and large-scale self-focusing have on the
phase fron'.s can be done without considering
Fig. 1. Central cross section the presence of noises.
along the rule for distribution
of average field intensity (1) Let the x-axis be directed along the short
and noise intensity (2) in the side of the cross section of the active
far zone. There are no thernal element, while the y-axia is directed along
distortions. Scale is not ob- the long side. and the t-axia is along the
served direction of enission propagation. The
nodification of the conventional quasi-
optical equation fc; complex anlitude of the field polarised along one of
the axes (x or y) with consideration of theml effects in the case of syn-

netric pmping takes the for.

 

35 k’ ”-4 928'
21k — + A15 + —-- n,|5|’5 o-———’— s +—-—s-m5-o.
a: 'I. L n.

here Al is the transverse laplacian; I. is the length of the active element;
f is a function that describes the distorted end surfaces; the index of re-
fraction of the Iediun nx. -no+3§nzlnlz+n;' ; k-nomlc is the wave umber
in the nediun with index 0 refraction no; 8 gain. The equation is solved

66
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY
in the region of the rectangular parallelepiped. and end surface defornationb
2

are accounted for by the tern Eff—Q. In doing nuserical calculations. the
baundary conditions were assigned in the fore: BI.-0. where S is the lateral
surface of the active element excluding the input and output faces. Gaussian
beans were assigned on the input face with intensity level of -l Gila . The
tenperature distribution in the punping zone was taken as parabolic along

the short aide of the cross section of the active elenent (Ref. 9].
n3}, -(P:Q)T(x), where P and Q are the them-optical constants; the char-

acteristics of the laser glass are taken .ro- Ref.10. wavelength l-l. 06 an.

The following was established by nt-ericel calculations. Without end surface
' deformations. both in the presence and in the absence of voluletric therIal
distortions. there is a single mim- in the intensity distribution in the
far zone with greatest intensity. and a nmber of local wine at which the
intensity values are considerably lower. In the presence of end surface de-
formations. as their nagnitude increases there is at first sonerhat of a re-
duction in width of the intensity distribution in the far zone. Then as end
surface defamation: increase there is an increase in the width of the distri-
hution. and the principal intensity laxim- splits into two local mine of
appreciable aaplitude with equal intensity situated along the short side of
the cross section (Fig. 2. With a further increase in end surface defornations

 

Fig. 2. Calculation of enission
intensity distribution in far zone.
Magnitude of end surface defam-
tions: eaxlflzl. 1.x; n'-0.S-10’7T(x);

 

x I Fig. 3. mission intensity distribu-
'I'(x) - l-31l"(m) I: ﬂ'0-015l|*(;§) 1; tion in far zone (experinent). the
angular distance between naxine is
|x| <h/2; h is the short di-snsion of in couplets agreenent with coeputa-
active element cross section. Dis- tional results of Pig. 2.
tance between naxina ~200 u- at focal '
length of 200 cs.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLV

a greater nder of local mine of considerable intensity nay show up. Such
intensity distribution in the far zone is indicative of considerable radiation
divergence.

bifurcation in the distribution of intensity in the far zone along the short
side is confirmed by experimental data (Pig. 3) Inf. 11].

within a certain range of variation in their mamitude. volt-uric thermal
distortions nay lead to a reduction in the divergence of powerful radiation.
and in this case. bifurcation in the distribution of intensity in the far
zone begins at greater magnitude of end surface defornations. Within a cer-
tain range of variation in the magnitudes of and surface defornations and
volmetric theraal distortions. the reduction of divergence of powerful emis-
sion demonstrates some nutual cowensation of distortions of the phase front
due to large-scale self-focusing and thermal effects.

Appreciable nutual compensation of distortions of the phase front can be rea-
lized by selecting spatial distribution of the input beam intensity at certain
magnitudes of end surface deformation and voluetric thermal distortions that
bring the radiation divergence close to the diffraction linit. 1n model cal-
culations this is realized by taking the input intensity profile in the form

of a paraboloid. and the aptitude of end surface deforaationa equal to 0.67-1

and u’ an 1.10”.”le «fa-Y]

1. Anan'yev. Yu. A.. Grislnanova. N. 1.. ZBURIIAL rumor SPEKTROSKOPII.
Vol 12. No 6. 1970. p 668.

2. Anan'yev. Yu. A. et al.. lbid.. Vol 5. No l. 1966. p 51.

3. Pavlov. V. 1.. Perg-ent. A. Kh.. Ponomarev. A. V.. Chernyak. V. 11..
Preprint. Institute of Probleas in Mechanics. USSR Acadeny of Sciences.

No 8. 1978.

lo. Pavlov. V. 1.. Pergament. A. (11.. Ibid.. No 66. 1979.

5. Korobkin. V. V. et al.. "Tezisy dokladov Vos'noy Vseeoynznoy konferentsii
po kogerentnoy i nelineynoy optike" [Abstracts of Reports to the Eighth
All-Union Conference on Coherent and Nonlinear Optics]. Tbilisi.
Hetsniyereba. Vol 2. 1976. p 235.

6. Burdonsky. 1. N. et al.. APPL. 0PT.. Vol 15. No S. 1976. p 1650.

7. Pavlov. V. 1.. Preprint. Institute of Problems in Mechanics. USSR Academy
of Sciences. no [06. 1980.

B. Fleck. J. A. Jr.. lbtria. J. 3.. 31188. 1833 J. QUART. W..
v01 03‘1“, N0 5. 1978. p 3530

68
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. Poms-rev. A. V.. Chcmyak. V. 11.. Prom-int. Instituu of Monte Energy.
“2-3079. Hoecow. 1979.

10. Avakymu. L. I. et a1.. KVAIIOVAYA nnmm. Vol 5. lo 6. 1978. p 725.

ll. Tahonov. A. 11.. Arum. V. Ya. at 31.. "Thirteenth Europa!) Conforom
on Laser Interaction Rich Hatter”. Leipzig. 1979. p 98.

COPYRIGHT: Izdutcl'stvo "Sanka". "bouldy W1 rank 8883". 1981

6610
(:80: 1862/96

l-‘OIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"DC 621.373.826
081” sure mu. 1!! WC LASER

Moscow “mm 3131mm in Russian Vol 9. lo 1015). Jan 82 (nanuacript -
received 23 liar 81) pp 125-129

[Article by H. Sycsewski and Cr. Bartossek. Polish Military Technical Acade-y.
Harsawl -

[text] Sti-ulated enission is realised in a gaedynsnic
laser using .eolid-state fuel of the ballistic powder type.
Thereodyn-ic calculations are done on the conposition of
products and the teqerature when fuel is burned in differ-
ent gases. Analogous conbustion conditions are realized

in an experinent. Based on analysis of the results of the
experinental studies and calculations. an interpretation
is given for the dependence of laser energy on the rig/co,
ratio and tenperature in the codmstion chader. and the
role of the 002/330 ratio is deterained.

Previously we had discussed the results of studies of gasdynasic lasers using
gaseous fuels (Ref. 1-6]. In this paper we have atteapted to achieve lasing
by using solid fuel. There have been studies of solid fuels that belong to
the class of shock-sensitive initiating explosives Inf. 5. 6]. Therefore.
practical use of these substances involves the hazard of uncontrolled explo-
sions. Also. it is i-poseihle to use large charges of such substances that
would enable prolonged laser operation. It is our opinion that the solid
fuel studied in our research is free of these disadvantages.

Ref. 7 reported on use of nitro conpounds to fuel gasdynanic lasers. but un-
fortunately it is not known which nitro cowpounds they were. If the definition
is taken literally. the authors of Ref. 7 were not studying the organic ni-
trates treated in our paper. since the mhanisu of combustion of organic
nitrates and sronatic nitro conpounds are different. as are the conditions

of the axperinent. our results are not co-parable with those of Ref. 7.

In addition to achieving lasing on coahustion products of fuel of the ordi-
nary snokeless powder type. we investigated the inflmnce that the tine of
stay of the products in the coahustion cinder. gas conposition and tawerature
of the gas nixture have an the energy characteristics of the laser. The re-
sults allow us to optinise the conditions of gaedynenic laser operation for

70
ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY
n variety of energy characteriatice and fuel canpoeitiona. In our opinion.
east of the observed patterne can be attributed to cheaical causes: cowo-
eition. propertiee and interaction of coabuetion products.

Bxperiaentsl Teclmique

The experiments were done on s facility described in Ref. 1. with the excep-
tion that a glowing wire wee used in place of spark ignition. The laaer oper-
ated in the pulee-periodic node. The eolid fuel wee injected into the con-
buation ch-ber with 30-liter voluae through an orifice covered by a door.
After cloning. the chﬂer wee filled with the appropriate gae nixture.

The coubustion chanber wee connected via an electrongnetic valve to a two-
dineneional flat nozzle (200 II wide with critical croes aection 0.7 - high).
The optical cavity wee placed at the end of the nozzle. end beyond the cavity
wee a low-preeaure chatter (pl 2 We). After fuel ignition (charge of ~31 g)
in a plate I - thick. the preeeure in the ch-her roee until the instant

of total coebustion (duration of the proceee -l.2 a). The valve waa opened
at the required inetant after ignition (before or after coqlation of con-
bustion). The generated signal was recorded by a aeniconductor (aercury-
cadliu telluride) radiation eeneor. energy wae asaaured by calori-ster. end
preaeure by e atrain-gage aeneor (Fig. l).

I ~. \5'
I \\
| P.
“Ha I:
l-«r. . i 1
zl" _f__.—-I f~—.-. . ,._....... .-.:

Fig. l. Micel oscillogr- of laser operation: rc—powder

conbuetion tine; r-walve opening delay tile (relative to

tine of powder ignition); p-dpressure in codauation chadaer;
Ininteneity of laeer eaiaaion

Reeulte of Thernochenical Calculations and Statue of the Queeticm

According to thernochenical calculations. coehuation of the investigated fuel
(40% nitroglycerin. 602 nitrocellulose) ia deacrihed by the equation (for 1 kg)

Cu.uH.....0.7...N....-> 7.36 co. + ".3700 + l0.77H,O + 2.2111. +
+0.29 0.+0.|5 NO+5.20 N..

The teaperature of the conbuetion producte ie ~3100 K. To attain the appro-
priate coepoaition and te-perature of conbuation products. the fuel nuet be
heated in the proper gee etnoephere. The table gives eoue reeulta of calcu-
lationa.

71
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Product conposition and conbuation tapereture
of principal investigated Iixtures

  
 

   

00.. '96 19.1 3
38 5 13.9 16.0
. S 30.4 0.3
".0. s 23.9 5.9
m. 95 5.9 -
38 95 0.3
. as 0.4
om
0.9
2 24
oo

  

Conposition 1 corresponds to burning 1 kg of powder without air. (to-position
2 corresponds to combustion of powder in a quantity of air that exceeds the
stoichionetric nount by 201. Coqosition 3 is obtained like conposition

2. but with the addition of nitrogen to reduce the tenperature of the gas
Iixture to 2500 K. ‘

Composition lo is sinilar to conposition 3; however. eons of the nitrogen is
replaced by carbon dioxide (in the sass nolar quantity) to give a ratio of
Nzlcoz-loJ». According to research that we did using acetylene list. 3] such
a ratio is optimum lxpsrinents done with coupositions 2-6 were carried out
in various versions.

Results of Experiments and Discussion

Since solid fuel burns note slowly than gas. the question arises of when the
valve should be opened during coabustion of the charge to trigger the laser
so that stimulated enission is milked.

Fig. 1 shows an oscillogran in which the valve is opened after coepletion
of conbustion within tine rc relative to the instant of ignition.

E. J; anaxv HPa

l’ig. 2. Integrated laser
emission energy (I) and
naxinun pressure in con-
bustion chadur (2) as
functions of delay of valve
opening relative to the in-
stant of powder ignition

 

72
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
,m
* ‘\ Pig. 3. Integrated energy of
; laser anission as o function

of ratio of Ila/co; in the co.-
buotion products

 

I J 5 I —y “”1.

Fig. 2 shows the way that radiation energy (throughout the ties of laser oper-
ation) depends on the delay of valve opening relative to the instant of powder
ignition. This curve was obtained for conposition lo with the position of
points averaged froo thraa loamuonts. Karin:- praaauras in tho cb-hor
p.“ were determined for the sane points.

It is not quite clear why there is a sharp drop in laser energ at r > tc.

In all probability. such an abrupt fall-off of laser energy cannot be attrib-
uted to heat transfer fron the couhustion products to the walls of tho ch‘er.
Apparently consideration oust be taken of the kinetics of reactions of ad-
ditional coobustion of gases that arise on tho first stage of goaification

of tho powder (dissociation processes. for-ation of 3.0 instead of 11¢ and

so on).

Major anphasis is given to tho investigation of option ratios of uzlco, and
002/!le in the coobustion products (working gases).

The principal cooposition that was studied was M in which tho 33/00: ratio
was varied without changing tho total odor of soles of the gases. This
caused only a slight change in tawerature of the products (2250-2500 K) due
to the different specific heats of II; and 003.

The curve for fab/C02) (Pig. 3) is surprising in view of remlts found with
sea fuel [Raf. 3]. when acetylene is being burned. tho optim- ratio of
N2/CO;I6.5. while in the investigated solid fuel it is 10. We asalne that
the reason for this-difference is larger water content in tho pander conbue-
tion products (cognac-2.86) than in coobustion products of the option to.-
position of an acetylene oixture (cognac-6.5). An increase in the relative
aoount of water increases the optim- llz/OO; ratio. This is indirectly con-
fined by the results of Ref. 8. although the values of the given ratios
differ.

The practical value of these studies is that the heat released in burning

of powder is sufficient not only for heating the coobustion products. but
also for hasting an additional quantity of gas (ha-c0; nixture). Under such

POIOWICRLUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions it will be sore advantageous if nitrogen is used as the dopant gas.
and an additional alount of co; in the cold state is nixed into the super-
sonic flow in the nozzle.

In addition to the investigation of cooposition lo. otudios-vere also done

on co-position 2 and oioilar high-teapotaturo coopositions. In place of one
of the N2 of composition 2. an mount of 00; was added such as to coupensate
for its dissociation. giving a ratio uzlooz-Im (as in cooposition 6).

Since under corresponding conditions 00 lay act in the sane role as R: lief.
9]. in this case it is advisable to consider the ratio (00+llz)/002. When
a high-teaporaturo nixturo is used. the given ratios asst-e an option value
of 300-305.

Thus it has been established that with increasing tenperaturo of the coobuo~
tion products. the option rotios H.100. and (om-mica. decrease. while
002/33031.0 (with consideration of the dissociation of 3,0). Putting it
briefly. tho detrilontal effect of voter on laser emission decreases with
increasing tenporatures. nigh-towerature coopooitions are interesting in
that in optimal coopositiono tho level of the generated energy is equal to
the energy obtained in lov-teaperature option: co-positions (see Fig. 3).
whereas in the latter case tho gas expenditure is oore than double that in
the for-er (in cooposition lo. 1.562 kg of air and 3.212 kg of N; are added
per kg of powder. while only 1.552 kg of air is added in conposition 2).

Let us try to explain theoretically vhy water does not deactivate co; sole-
cules as the temperature of the gases increases. In accordance with references
cited in Ref. 11. we know that relatively strong interaction of a chenical
nature takes place between soleculos of 3.0 and 00;. There is a certain de-
bastion of co. noleculea in this process:

o-c-o o ,o 'o o u’0
h ~'/ \ // \ ,0
0 .—p 9 co—. C 4—. C
u’ \u 6 o o’
u’ ‘u *uv' ‘u ‘u

The energy of vibrational excitation of carbon dioxide ooleculos is dissipated
in this interaction. the reaction energy being of the order of 33.“ J/nole

(8 heal/loin). At high gas tooperature. when the energy of translational
notion (k‘r) approaches the indicated value. the noleculeo cease to interact.
In the sudden cooling in the nozzle. there is no ties for interaction to be
restored. The result is high inversion of vibrational levels of CO: molecules
despite the large water content in the working gases.

The authors than]: V. K. Konyukhov for constructive criticia during prepara-
tion of the Ianuscript.

7h
roe omcm. use on“
l.

2.

3.
‘0

s.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

newness
Sycmkt. 14.. A3081"!!! murmur: I SPALANIA. Vol 6. 1975. p 586.
Sycmﬂu. 11.. Ibid.. Vol 8. 1977. p 287.
Sycmokt. H” llutkonld. J.. mid" p ‘59.

Bartouuk. 62.. Sycuvold. 5.. arm mm mam MICE”.
Vol 28. 1979. p 2.

Yellin. 11.. Gabai. A.. J. APPL. cm. nan-scum... V01 25. 1975. p 103.

Dzhldzhoyev. H. s.. Korolev. V. V.. Mrkav. V. 8.. Plotomko. V. 1'.. 7
Khokhlov. R. V.. P13.“ V mm mm.” 1 MICE” mill.
V01 13. 3971. p 730

“local”. A. K.. Vuyultn. V. A.. Gmtkov. V. P.. Dtdyukov. A. 1..
Dronov. A. P.. Orlov. V. 1.. Ptakunov. A. L. Charm. Yo. 11..
KVAN‘I‘OVAYA “MIRA. Vol 1. 197‘. p 639.

Minter. I. A.. AMA J.. Vol 10. 1972. p 388.

Kozlov. 1.. Ivnnov. V. 11.. Selenium. I. K.. nzm (”MA I mum.
Vol 18. No 6. 1979. p 88.

Kondrat'yev. 11.. Nikitin. Yo. Y... ”‘1.th 1 uklunin gasofunykh
roaktuy" [Kinetics and Dachau. of Gas-Plano Reaction]. Moscow. Inn.
1976.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatol'etvo "mate 1 ovyu'". "Kvmtovaya elektrouﬂu". 1982

6610

C”:

1862/!“

MOI'HJELIBEONLY
F0. OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

OPl'IGS AND W?!

UDC $63.b2:621.37$.9:S35.375.S:S37.228.5:S39.18¢.22
BASH-m mm M II muons srscm

Novosibirsk um; WWW! mm W” V 3m
max: in Russian 1981 (signed to press 1 Jul 81) pp 2-5. 156-180

(Annotation. preface and table of contents free book "Laser Induction of
Nonlinear lesonances in Continuous Spectra". by Yuriy Isay'evich Geller and
Aleksandr Kua'nich Popov. Institute of Physics ineni b. V. Kirenskiy. Siberian
Departmt. 0883 heed-y of Sciences. Iadatel'stvo mm". 1700 copies.

160 pages '

[Text] This nonograph is devoted to develop-ant of the theoretical principles
of nonlinear laser spectroscopy and resonant nonlinear optics for the case

of transitions to a continuous spectra (continual) and to auto-ionization
states. The authors give nethode of using laser eniasion to fora narrow non-
linear rssonances siniler to artificial auto-ionisation levels in arbitrary
sections of continuous spectra. An investigation is nade of the effect that
laser snission has on actual auto-ionisation states. The back discusses the
use of these effects in nonlinear spectroscopy. for generating coherent vacm-
ultraviolet and soft radiation by Isthods of resonant nonlinear optics.

for selective action of radiation on latter.

The book is intended for scientific workers interested in current problens
of laser physics. nonlinear spectroscopy and nonlinear optics. as well as
for instructors and students.

Pigures 20. tables 2. references no.
Preface

Lasers that can be tuned with respect to frequency of quasi-onochronetic radi-
ation have opened up extensive possibilities for studying and using resonant
nonlinear processes that acconpany interaction of intense optical snission
with atonic-noleculsr systene. These processes are actively used in studying
setter by nethods of nonlinear spectroscopy lief. l. 2]. in selective action
on latter to initiate controlled chenical reactions and to separate isotopes
Ref. 3. s]. for nonlinear conversion of laser emission frequencies to the
pioneering vacuu ultraviolet and soft x-ray bands of coherent radiation

(Ref. 5-8]. Transitions between discrete levels and the continui- play an
inortant part in solution of this class of problens. The basic theory of

76
ron omcm. use on“
nonlinear spectroscopy and nonlinear conversions of laser radiation vith par-
ticipation of transitions to the continua has been developed to a web lesser
extent than the theory of corresponding effects for the discrete spectra.

This book is the first aonograph that has been specially devoted to the prin-
ciples of the theory of nonlinear resonances and nonlinear-optics transfer-a-
tions of radiation with the participation of transitions to the continua.
Considerable attention is devoted to the influence of strong resonant laser
saission on the spectral characteristics of auto-ionisation resonances in
absorption. ionization and generation of “. frequencies by Iathods of non-3
linear optics of gaseous aedia. 0f considerable importance are the prospects
that have been opened up for selective action on spectral characteristics

of the continuum. The aonograph describes possibilities for inducing nonline-
ar resonances siailar to artificial auto-ionisation levels in arbitrary sec-
tions of the continuous spectrt- (continuu). as well as capabilities for '
continuous control of their characteristics. Uses are pointed out for these
phenonena in optics and nonlinear spectroscopy of the vacuum ultraviolet and
soft x-ray bands. for generating coherent radiation in these bands of the
spectrum. for producing polarized electrons and for selective ionization of
isotopes.

The authors are grateful to coworkers of the laboratory of coherent optics
and the theoretical division of the Institute of Physics iaeni L. V. Xirenslriy
of the Siberian Depart-eat. USSR Academy of Sciences for constructive discus-
sion of the uterial of the monograph.

REFERENCES

l. Letokhov. V. 8.. Chebotayev. V. P.. "Printsipy nelineynoy lasernoy
spektroskopii" [Principles of Nonlinear Laser Spectroscow]. Moscov.
Nauks. 1975. 280 pp.

2. Bautisn. S. 6.. Sairnov. G. 1.. Shelagin. A. $1.. "Nelineynyye resonsnsy
v spektrakh atonov i aolehul" [Nonlinear Resonances in Spectra of Ate-s
and Nolecules”. Novosibirsk. Nauka. 1979. 312 pp.

3. Letokhov. V. 8.. "Selective Action of Laser Radiation on Hatter".
USPBBI FIZICBESKLKB MAUI. Vol 125. No l. 1978. PP 57-96.

lo. Letokhov. V. 8.. Hur. s. 3.. "Laurnoye rasdeleniye isotopov" [Laser Sepa-
ration of Isotopes]. IVAN'I'OVAYA KLEK‘I‘RONIIA. Vol 3. No 2. 1976. PP 268-287:
No 3. PP 685-565.

5. Sorokin. P. P.. Wnne. J. J.. Amtrong. J. A.. ﬂodgson. I. ‘1'.. "lesornantly
Enhanced Nonlinear Generation of Tunable Coherent Vacuu Ultraviolet (WV)
Light in Atonic Vapors". Annals N. Y. Acad. Sci.. Vol 267. 1976. pp 33-50.

6. Popov. A. 1.. "Resonant Nonlinear Optics of Gaseous Systeas and Generation
of ruv Radiation" in: "Fri-eneniye laserov v atonnoy. aolekulyarnoy i
yadernoy firike" [Using Lasers in Atonic. Molecular and Nuclear Physics].
Moscov. Nauka. 1979. pp 131-1107.

71
POI OI'I'ICIA USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Mint]... Jo. 81'. Ca Yea Bckhll'dt. Re Can '.G.ur.t1°n of Colttellt m1.-
tion in the KIN by Fifth- and Seventh-Order Prequency Conversion in [are
Gases”. rats J. cum. mom. Vol 08-16. lo 8. 1978. pp 581-596.

Contents page
Prefsca 3
References 6

Chapter 1: Principal Concepts of Nonlinear Spectroscopy and Resonant
Nonlinear Optics for Transitions Between Discrete Levels 5

.1. Classification of nonlinear effects in spectra of spontaneous
mission. anlification and absorption in three-level quanta

systems -
52. hission and absorption of radiation on discrete transitions in
the presence of a strong field on an adjacent transition 8
2.1. General expressions for power of .ission and absorption
of a probe field in the presence of a strong field -
2.2. Classification of strong-field effects 11
£3. Mixing of frequencies in resonant nonlinear aedia 16
3.1. Particulars of resonant nonlinear optics of atonic-
noleculsr aedis -
3.2. Conversion factor 16
3.3. Phase latching. nonlinear susceptibility. and optim-
resonsnt conversion conditions 18
References 22
Chapter 2: Spectral Characteristics of Absorption and Ionization on
Transitions to the Continuun and to Auto-Ionization States 26
n. Continuous spectrun and auto-ionisation levels -
{2. Matrix eleaents of transitions to the continua 26
2.1. Spin-orbital interaction in the continua -
2.2. Influence of spin-orbital interaction on nstrix elenents
of transitions 27
93. Photosbsorption probability. photoionization and recoabinstion
cross sections in the absence of auto-ionisation levels 29
3.1. Oscillator strength for transition to continuun 30
3.2. Photoioniaation and recostinstion cross sections 31

3.3. Spectral characteristics of photoioniration cross section
of hydrogen-like stone in the absence of spin-orbital

interaction 33
3.6. Spectral characteristics of photoionization for non-Coulonb
potential in the absence of spin-orbital interaction -
3.5. Influence of spin-orbital interaction on spectral character-
istics of photoionization 36
56. Polarisation and angular distribution of photoelectrons 35
6.1. Polarisation of photoelectrons integrated with respect to
angles of dispersal -
6.2. Angular distribution of photoelectrons 38

6.3. Dependence of degree of polarisation of photoelectrons
along the direction of radiation propagation on angles of
dispersal 39

78
l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.6. Dependence of degree of polarization of photoelectrons
along arbitrary direction on angles of dispersal

£5. Discrete level in continual. Pano theory
5.1. Have function of continua containing discrete level
5.2. Probability of photosbsorption into continual containing
discrete level
56. Nonstationary theory of interaction of discrete states with
continuum
6.1. Principal equations of probability amplitudes and density
matrix
6.2. Some methods of solving principal equations
67. Spectral characteristics of index of absorption. index of re-
fraction and photoionization cross section on frequencies of
transitions to auto-ionisation states
7.1. Density matrix and linear polarization of atom
7.2. Indices of absorption and refraction, ionization cross
section
7.3. Physical interpretation of parameters 1:2 and q. inter-
ference of transitions
References

Chapter 3: Formation of Narrow Nonlinear Autoionisation-Lika Resonances

5|.

§2.
63.

M.

gs.

§6.

in Continuum Under Action of Strong Laser Radiation

Change in shape of line of photoabsorption in transition to

continuum under action of strong laser radiation

1.1. Scheme of transitions of Raman scattering type

1.2. Scheme of transitions of two-photon absorption type

1.3. Doppler broadening of nonlinear resonance

1.10. Conditions of occurrence of induced autoionization-like
resonances in absorption

1.5. Accounting for energy dependence of matrix elements of
transitions to the continua

Narrow nonlinear resonances in ionization and recombination

Induced nonlinear resonances in continua in case of inter-

action between intense radiation and several closely situated

discrete states

Nonlinear polarization effects in photoabsorption on transitions

to continuum

5.1. Rotation of plane of polarization and degree of ellipticity
of radiation

6.2. Conditions of experimental observation of nonlinear reso-
nances in photoabsorption

Nonlinear mixing of frequencies with participation of transi-

tions to continuum. Comparison of nonlinear susceiptibilities

for a discrete and a continuous spectrun

Laser induction of nonlinear autoionization-like resonances in

continuous for lasing based on frequency mixing in gases

6.1. Induced autoionization-like resonances in nonlinear
susceptibility

6.2. Induced resonances in index of refraction

6.3. Doppler broadening of nonlinear resonance

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

61
62
63

66

51

S3

55

56
58

61
62

65
67

68

70

72
77

81

85
88
89

92
93
NOR 0FFKJAI.USEI)NLV

57. Influence that stochasticity of laser radiation h;s on induc-
tion of nonlinear resonances in continuous absorption spectru-
7.1. General expressions
7.2. Phase sodulstion
7.3. Frequency nodulation
7.6. Alplitude-phase nodulstion
7.5. Discussion of results
§8. Angular distribution and polarization of photoelectrons in
nonlinear resonance frequency region
8.2. Principal fornulas
8.2. Using induced resonances to control angular character-
istics and polarization of photoelectrons
59. Influence of population saturation effects on nonlinear pro-
cesses with participation of transitions to continuun
9.1. Resonant Deny-photon ionization in strong fields. and
quasisteady interaction
9.2. Influence of ionization and saturation effects on process
of nonlinear frequency sixing
§10. Principal features of occurrence of nonlinear resonances in
continua and some prospects for their practical use
References

Chapter 6: Narrowing of Autoionization Resonances in Laser Radiation

Field
ﬁl. Narrow netastable autoionization resonances
§2. Narrowing of autoionization resonances in photoabsorption in
laser radiation field
2.1. Splitting of auto-ionization resonances in strong radi-
ation field
2.2. Narrowing of autoionization resonances in photosbsorption
§3. Autoionization resonances in nonlinear susceptibility
3.1. General expressions
3.2. Porn of autoionization resonances in frequency dependence
of stimulated emission power
3.3. Nonlinear susceptibility in presence of several closely
spaced autoionization levels
54. Narrowing of autoionization resonances in nonlinear suscepti-
bility in strong pumping field
55. Discussion of capabilities of nonlinear spectroscopy of sutoioni-
zation states
References
Corrections in Proofreading
51. Narrowing of autoionization resonances in nany-photon ioniza-
tion spectra .
32. Experimental observation of induced autoionization-like reso-
nances in spectral continuu-
References
Appendix

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Nauka”. 1981.

6610

050: 1862/12!

FOR OFFIL...e USE ONLY

96

97
98

102

103
106

107

109

113

115
119

122
123

125
126
129
132
136
138
140
145

166
168

159
152
153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 68l.513.6
LGIAL DEW‘HWS 01' CWUS ems AND mm mm DENNIS

Leningrad MWICHBS‘AYA mmm' in Russian No 11. Nov 81
(nanuscript received 13 Nov 80) pp 11-13

[Article by V. G. Taranenko, G. P. Koshelev and h. S. Ruenyuk]

[Text] 0f considerable interest at the present tins in connection with the
growth of adaptive optics is research and developnent of mirrors with control-
lable profile. Such eirrors. called active nirrors. enable inprov-ent of

the characteristics of large-scale astrononical systems Int. 1]. end dynuic
coqensation for randon phase distortions of the nave field Ref. 2]. An
adaptive airror can be nede in the forn of a reflecting surface synthesized
fron individual separate. or as a continuous reflective plate whose surface
acquires a predetermined shape under the action of special drives.

The Iain complication in controlling the surface shape of a continuous airror
is the necessity for taking consideration of nechenical interaction of adja-
cent points of the reflecting surface due to the finite rigidity of the reflec-
tive plate. This gives rise to the problen of studying the nechanical proper-
ties of a continuous active nirror.

This article gives the results of neamrenents of the principal character-
istics of continuous nirrors over a wide band of controlling signal frequen-
cies. A nirror 140 In in disaster wee made for the research. with seven piezo-
electric drives controlling the position of surface points. Each drive was
made in the fore of a stack of piesoceraeic disks. One drive was placed at

the center, and the other six were situated at the vertices of a regular here'-
gon inscribed in a circle 70 - in disaster. The entire structure was put .
together with epoxy cenent. The experinentel date are the results of studies
of a series of mirrors of the described design with deforneble plates of vari-
ous thicknesses made of naterisls with different elastic properties: alt-incl.
copper and steel. The thickness of the deformable nirror surface was 3-12 -.
Local defornations were neasured by an interferoeetric nethod. Selected as
the neasured paraseters were the amplitude of deformation. 1. e. displace-eat
of the nirror surface under the action of the controlling voltage at the naxi-
me point. the function of surface response to the action of the drive. and
the frequency response curve.

81
POI OFFICIAL l5! ONLY
F0. (WHOM. USE ONLY

   

ill
06
at,
a!
- ..‘.-.l..i_ 4—4...'._A.—'
" w m szu.v . III””’.”I.H"
Fig. l. Amplitude of reflective Hg. 2. Response function of active
plate defornation as a function nirrors with drive 20 - in dianster
of controlling voltage: l—dis- nade of copper 3 - thick (curve 1)
place-ent of piezodriva; 2. 3. lo and 6 a thick (curve 2). of alt-im-
--daflection of reflective surface 6 - thick (curve 3). 9 II (curve 6)
of plates 3 - thick nade of alu- and 12 - Chi-Ck (curve 5). Ind of steel
nimn. copper and steel respec- 3 us (curve 6) and 6 _- thick (curve 7)

tively; S. 6. 8-sa-e for plates

6 I thick; 7. 9~for alminnn

plates 9 and 12 - thick respec-
tivaly

The experinental dependence of detonation alplitude as a function of con-
trolling voltage with drive diaster of 20 - is shown in Fig. l. The nean
square error of neasurenent was 1.026 1-. It can be seen that the nplitude
of defornation is linearly dependent on the size of the controlling signal
at voltages up to 200 V. The coefficient of proportionality in this case
depends both on properties of the netal used and on the thickness of the
reflective plate. Analysis of the results shows that within an error of no
more than 101 the deformation uplitude can be expressed by the anirical

fornula

10"Bh' .
C “hub-m . (I)

where «k. is the drive sensitivity in un/V; U is the controlling voltage in
V; B is Young's nodulus in III-z; o is the Poisson ratio of the nateriel used;
h is the thickness of the plate in n. Expression (1) implies that the upli-
tude of local deformation decreases linearly with increasing ratio D/h. where
D is the bending stiffness of the plate. The for-31s enables selection of
the stiffness and thickness of the plate during developnsnt of an active nir-
ror. and evaluation of the uplitude of the phase shift at a predeternined
drive sensitivity. Heasurenents were done in the frequency hand of 0-1 kHz.
The exparinsntal data show absence of frequency dependence of defornation
qlitude in this band.

POIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Results of measurements of the response function are shown in Pig. 2. Dis-
tance r was reckoned from the center of the drive toward the center of the
adjacent drive. The mean square error did not exceed 0.02. The curves are
plotted for active mirrors with drive 30 mm in diameter. Mirrors of materials
with relatively low Young's modulus (aluminum. copper) have a response func-
tion close to the Gauss function. In particular. for a copper plate 3 mm
thick. the response function can be represented with accuracy of 5! by an
expression of the form

/(r)-e-p(-.5§'1).

and for a 9-mm aluminum mirror with the same accuracy in the form

ltr)-¢xp(—-ﬁ-).

The res onse function of an active steel mirror is approximated by the curve
exp(-a '5) or, according to the terminology of Ref. 2. a "supergaussian"
curve. For example. when the plate thickness is 3 mm. the dependence

[(r) .. cxp(— 15%)

approximates the experimental results with accuracy of 51.

The cemented molybdenum active mirror described in Ref. 2. despite its ap-
preciable differences from mirrors of the investigated series. also had a
"supergaussian" response function. Apparently, gaussian and "supergaussian"
curves are typical of plate active mirrors with rigid securing of drives.

From the standpoint of controlling the surface, it is preferable to use an
active mirror with narrow response function that precludes interaction of
drives. The value of the response function on the edge of the adjacent drive
will he called the engagement factor. The value of this factor correlates
with the value of the response function at r equal to half the distance between
centers of the drives. Analysis of Pig. 2 shows that the mutual correlation
coefficient is 0.79.

Fig. 3. Response function

of aluminum mirror with re-
flective plate 3 mm thick for
drive diameter of 5 mm (curve 1).
100 mm (curve 2) and 20 mm

(curve 3); drive boundaries

are indicated by the broken lines

 

8%
FOI‘OFFIJA USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pig. 3 shows the response functions of nirrors with drives of different din-
eters. The measurements were made with an alt-im- plate 3 - thick. As

a result of reduction in drive diameter. the distance to the edge of the ad-
jacent drive increases. and the response function widens. As can be seen
from the figure. there .s actually no resultant change in the engagement
factor.

The frequency properties of active nirrors were studied in the 0-12 k3: band.
In this study. the uplitude of the controlling voltage sent to the pierodrive
corresponded to low values of the deformation anlituds (~0-15 ul). During
the investigation. resonances of the 3H- copper mirror were observed on a
frequency of 10.5 Idle. and of the steel nirror of the sane thickness on a
frequency of 11.2 m. The frequency response curve for these mirrors in
the resonance region is shown in Pig. 6. Calculation of natural oscillations
of a plate fastened at drive locations is a
complicated problem. For a rough estimate of
the resonant frequencies of a nirror. we can
use the formula [Rah 3]

‘ no.2”: (—
V-W] timer;- (2)

 

| _ - derived for a circular plate secured around
gTI-Tﬁ-f .‘ “'2: "' the edges. ﬂare R is the distance to the edge

of the adjacent drive; 9 is the density of the
V' n“ material. Calculated values of v-9.l kill for
[’13. ‘0. Frequency response a copper mirror. and v- 11.5 kiln for a steel
of active mirrors in the nirror are close to the experimentally found
resonance region: l--copper values (Fig. 4).

nirror; 2--steel mirror
The following conclusions can be drawn:

1. For controlling voltages reaching hundreds of volts applied to the piezo-
drive of an active mirror. the amplitude of mirror defornation is a linear
function of the controlling signal.

2. The amplitude of defamation of an active nirror decreases linearly with
increasing ratio of plate stiffness to its thickness. and may he approxinately
calculated from formula (I). For comparatively thin plates of soft metal

(e. g. alminul plates 3 - thick). the defamation amlitude is practically
no different fron the amplitude of motion of the free drive, while for stiff
plates (e. g. for eluninun 12 - thick or for steel 6 - thick) the deforna-
tion amplitude falls to ahOut half.

3. The response function of active mirrors can he approximated by a gaussian
curve (for "soft" metal) or by a "supergaussian" curve (for "stiff" metal).

lo. An increase in the width of the response function at fixed drive dineter
as a rule is accowanied by an increase in the engagement factor, the value
for nirrore of the given series changing over limits of 0.01-0.2.

8h
roe omcm. use ONLY
S. The width of the response function at a fixed distance 1. between centers
of the drives increases with dec easing drive die-eter. and nay he approxi-
nately 0.3-0.“ on a level of e . whereas the engegenent factor practically
does not change.

6. Defornation of an active nirror in the frequency range up to 1 kn: does
not depend on the frequency of the controlling signal sent to the piesodrive.

7. ”pied values of resonant mechanical frequencies of active nirrors in
accordance with experi-ent are in a region above values of the order of 10 has.
and nay be approxinately estimated by fornula (2).

In conclusion. it should be noted that the investigated range of paraneters
of active nirrors covers typical values characteristic of systena for cor-
recting atnospheric phase distortions. and for adaptive optical cavities of
IR lasers. 1. e. the given conclusions are valid for an extensive group of
netallic active nirrors with piezodrive that realize dynamic phase front cor-
rection.

”WES

l. Vanyushkin. Yu. A.. Denisyuk, G. V., OPTIKO-WICHBSAYA
PRMSIILUNOST'. No l. 1975. p 55.

2o Pear.°n. Jo Eve nausea, Sea 308‘. v0]- 67. no 3) 1977. P 325.

3. Filippov. A. P.. "Kolehaniya deforniruyellykh sisten" [Oscillations of
Defornable Systeaa]. Moscow. Hashinoatroyeniye. 1970.

COPYRIGHT: OPTIKO-MHANICEESKAYA PRMSHLENNOST' . 1981 .

6610
680: 1862/115

85
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOIOFHCIALlISEONLY

OWNS

unc 522.20

mum Aim WINNIE O? W owners In USING om-
mm mm srsmas

Leningrad mmmu mmsr' in luaaian No 12. Dec 81
(nanuecript received 8 Oct 79) pp 1-3

[Article by b. N. Aveenin and Yu. A. Seliveratov]

[Text] Along known nethode of daternining angular coordinates of astronomical
objecta we can single out for examle Turner'a nethod baaed on atatietical
processing of data with k) 3 reference etara. and (orthogonal) nethoda of
four conetanta uaing two reference atara end traditionally taken an approxi-
eate (Ref. 1, 2].

Optoelectronic eyetene with high penetrating capacity and comaratively narrow
fielda of view (28< l') are being extensively uaed in aetrononical practice
lief. 3). Thia aituation enhancee the topicality of nathode for determining
angular coordinatea that niniaiea the nmer of reference (catalog) etara.
Under thaae conditiona. it nakee aenee to re-exanine our attitude toward or-
thogonal nethoda that nay be ieproved in accuracy by atatiatical proceeaing
at k>2. eepecially if atepa are taken to enaure equality of acelee along

the axes. and perpendicularity of exec of the ayaten of neaaured coordinatea.
Differential effecta have ineignificant influence for narrow-field ayetana
lief. l. 6].

This paper auggeete a neth of detenining anguler coordinatea of aetrononi-
cal objecta generalized to nuﬂrer of etere k>.2. and cowuting coordinatea
of the object by the nethod of laaat aquaree.

The relation between ideal and neaeured coordinatea when uaing orthogonal
nathoda can be expreaeed by the fornulaa lief. l. 2]

h-IXJ'I' O)“. +(.
y- —5Xg+.’[+lc

l-I. l.-

where x. y are the neaeured coordinates. and E. n are the ideal coordinatea
of reference stars.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
If these are mutton in the fore
"m-hdﬁn‘hhﬂn‘hIts-$06.44..»
"2.1-!” “-81.09 +01: + '0. +5”
or in aatrix 'fora
(7-x: +2
where t is the aatrix coepoaed by rvoa
I... Izm- m. 1.0) and 3... KIM-tn... m.
then the solution of the systea of equations will be
o-X’X. K-Q‘l. Z-x'i’, 3-- K2;

where 3 is the vector of eatilates of ﬁne constants; Q is the atria: of
noreal equations that takes the for.

l 3: " 3|

0_ M3" 1 [41114] La] 4:3 .
I‘ll _ lie] I 0
I!" “I‘ll 0 k

Use of the cellular nethod of utrix inversion [Ref. 5] with consideration
of may and other characteristic peculiarities of aatrix Q enabled us

to find a successful forl of transition fro- the leaeured coordinates to ele-
ments of the eatrix K. bypassing stages of foraation and transposition of
eatrix X. as well as formation and inversion of aatrix Q. Leaving out inter-
eediate transforaations, we give the final fora of natrix K:

K - 0" - (X'Xf‘ '-
n o - Ix.) -Ix.1
_ L o k — 12.1 Ix.)
W ‘ I‘ll " [’1] R. 0 '

- In! In] 0 R
where R- [1}] + [4] w -3. R- mp- mp.

For eluente of the vector of free terns of the nor-a1 equations we find

ME.) 4- Ibis]

t~.\'?— IlﬁaItl‘ﬁa] .
lnl
Isa

Then the ideal coordinates of the object to be deterained are obtained fro.
the expressions

c. o O ’ ‘ '° '.
‘ - - KL. :IJ‘ '- XIW' “I“ - "'“"

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

while the equatorial coordinates of the object are calculated fro. known
for-ulae lief. l]

“'““(W§i3m)“

‘es-smc [I—Up+mp-£L.Fb.g—? “on“ FM] .

where A. D are equatorial coordinates of the center of the frane.

The error of the resultant coordinates of the objects In. 85 is col-prised
of the error of reduction 85 and the error of neasured coordinates of the

object 5,:
8,—2‘.+u3,. and x.-x.,+ux .

where the scale factor 11- “ii-a; [Ref. l]. The error of reduction in solving
a syste- of 2]: equations with four unknowns by the nethod of least squares

is defined by the variance lief. 6]

«(m-aﬂmrw'm-nli

re*the weighting factors P; and P; of functions 5105-}; 05; and £1.05-
Xz’ogl of balanced ele-ents i are found fros the fornulas “of. 6]

P--i2(%)js~+22(%'=)(%5)w
Mace) ware- m».

Considering that “ob/3:13:06» P1 agd P: can be represented as quadratic forns
corresponding to vectors 31.05 and 11,05 and satrix K [Rah 7]:

.0 I. p 9
P. ' ‘1... Kline. P, —;g,.. K13.»

the final appearance of fornulsa for evaluating accuracy will be

e. (3.)- 1/;1g—5 P.+M’e' (bomb.
hie-Va )p.+m(x,,).

As an example. we give the results of processing of a ﬁne with field of
1x 1' and center coordinates A- 3"68' and 0- 25'33'. The coordinates of the
reference stars and of the luminaries to be deter-ined. for which catalog
stars were selected. are given in Table 1. while the results of calculating
the positions of the luminaries and their errors are given in Table 2.

 

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 2

 

I «m. . (8-) l i... l . (hi
Proposed aethod
I aha-20w: o’m xwoma- now
2 3 08 «J94 0.00m 28 ‘2 13.03 0.0"
3 3 ‘9 £2,529 041101 2529”.” 0.010
' ‘l'urner' a method

l WWW 0'” ﬂ'ﬁ'ﬂla' 0.0!l'
2 8 40 «.205 0.0010 ‘ 26 42 ”.03 0.014
3 3 49 42.529 0.0001 ' 2s 29 am 0.010

 

The calculation tine by the propoeed method on the 3384-6 couputer was about
0.1 s. and by the Turner aethod -- about 0.18 s. while the question of con-
parative efficacy of one aethod or the other night be a topic for independent
study. we can aaeune a priori that the orthogonal aethod is more efficient
for optoelectronic systems. if only because the probebility that two stars
will appear in the field of such cysts-s is higher than for the appearance
of three stars Ref. 8].

W38

1. Bugoelavskaya. Ye. Ya.. ”Fotogrsfichsakaya astronstriys" [Photographic
Star Measure-eats]. macaw-Leningrad. Goatekhisdat. 1967.

2. Deych. A. It. ASTRONOHICEBSKIY 2mm. Vol 25. No l. 1958. pp 66-58.

89
was OFFICIAL use our
3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Abram». A. II. at 31.. "l'oioviziomyo ootrononiya" [rolovioioo Astron-
m]. ”a“. “M. 197‘.

marksman. V. 3.. mm mm AMIZICEBSKOI onsnvmn.
Vol 1. I976. mp 126-132.

Vary-m. V. A. or :1” "Vychiolitol'noyo utmtiko” [Counter Hotho-
ntico]. Ibocov. Nodro. 1976.

Chobotorov. A. 8.. ”Spa-ob uni-en'ohikh kvodrutov o oonov-i toorii

veroyotnootoy" [ﬂatbed of but Squat“ Hith Principles of Probability
Thooryl. Ila-cow. Goodezizdat. 1958.

loll-an. l.. "Vvodeniyo v tooriyu utrito" [Introduction to Intrix ‘l'hooryl.
Hoocov. but... 1976.

Solivorctov. In. A. et a]... MUG-WICBSKAYA WW'. [Io 3.
I980. P 10.

COPYRIGHT: OP‘I‘IKO-WICBSKAYA PRMSIILDINOS‘I'. I981.

6610

650:

1862/116

90
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
II'OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m MG! couvnms
lloecov am in luooien lo 20%). Peh 82 pp 15-21.

[Excerpte fr:- article "Rev Claee of Inego Convertere”. by Doctor of Phyeical
end nothooatical Scioncoe lgor‘ likolayevich Kuponote. oonior ecionce vorkor.
Phyeice lnetituto inoni P. 1!. Lehedov. USSR Lode-y of Sciencee]

[kcerpte] non and P312

Another well known type of inogo converter thot helonge in the clue of opace-
tine light noduletore lo the PM. eo called iron the tiret lottere of tho
vorde 'Tockalo-Reedout Optical Modulator”. In controet to the phototitue.
here the photoeeoiconductor and electro-opticel proportioe hove boon coohinod
in one cryetel. noceooiteting doeign changoe in tho etructuro. Doually thin
traneporent dielectric layoro are produced on both outfacee of tho cryetel
plate (vhich heo o thickneoe of the order of hundrede of eicrcootore). end
traneperent olectrodoo ore eputtored on thoeo layero. In thie eey. o ootol-
dioloctric-eoaiconductor-diolectric—ootal (1081!!) etructure ie tor-ed. Ae
before. in thio etructure tho inteneity dietrihution in the input inago ie
converted to opatiol dietribution of the photoproduced electron-hole paire.

Ae a reeult of the drift of eloctrone end holee in tho external electric field.
the carriere nettle on the ourface trapo on intorfecee with tho dielectric.

eo that the epeco charge eot up coopeneotoe tho field on illuinatod ooctione
of the eoniconductor cryetol. Ae e reoult. tho epeco-chorge ourtace reliof

ie converted to corroeponding dietrihution of changee in the index of refrac-
tion of the cryetal. noduleting the light been tron-ittod through the cryetal
with uovelength lying outoide the region of photoeoneitivity of the union-

duc tor .

The high reeiotivity of the hie-nth oilicate and gernonote cryetale need in
the non (of the order of 10” We.) end the preeonce of dielectric til-o

on the one hand enehleo chorge accmletion whereby week luinoue fluxee con
he regietered. and on the other hand onwreo elm relaxation of the opaco
charge after upoeure. i. o. i-ogo etorege for prolonged poriodo (up to one
hour in derknoee). Broeure ie by intonoo illu-inetion of the etmcture vith
shorted electrodoe. The uni-n tine of a eodulation cycle. i. o. onergieing.
readout end eraeure of the converted inage. liee in the oillieecond range.
.33». 0.509“

c — «I: 333»
n; 2. in: :98
«nu cl .uluu «mounusa
~.e ul .1qu nounusa
ecu > .uaouuo» uaanam
o nix-cued .nouuanooqu
ad 8:333»
8‘ 3.568 .3938

«noxn .»u«>uu«naow
!.Au«>«u«oudo «o dean‘s

           

.uOdnunun
gnu-hue

:9:- a»?

«a Han-nun
caucus and: noun-«nouocudzo

nan-3.x! 2.3

    

nauuuouoam

 

13?. 33.3

Quoocuseol unuuu «luau-00s. can-Huouunoo huuuoauoo no coda-«Monocuuao
Other characteristics of converters
of the PM type are given in the
Table. Also given there are the
spatial light modulation parameters
of a very successful Soviet nodifie.
cation of the Phat—the Pall [from
the letters of the Russian words

for image converter (neobrasovatel'
IZobrasheniy)]. This device differs
in the direction of the optical

axis in the semiconductor plate.
and as a result it has greater sen-
sitivity and spatial resolution.

Liquid Crystal Image Converters

Selection of the electro-optic effect
in liquid crystals is deternined

by the specific problen to be solved
by the image converters. For exam-
ple. devices based on controllable
birefringence enable modulation of both the phase and intensity of the light
(when polaroids are used) in converted images. They are distinguished by

the greatest sensitivity to input signal. but require greater care in manu-
facture. and feedback compensation for tenperature drifts of the phase of

the light. While devices based on other effects in liquid crystals enable

for practical purposes only amplitude conversions of images. they are charac-
terized by greater stability. the twist structure providiu high optical con-
trast: (greater than 100). and light-scattering c-slle providing a wider angular
aperture of the nodulated input flux (tens of degrees).

 

Diagr- of PM structure: ludi-
electric; 2-transparent electrodes;
3-photoseniconductive electro-optic
crystal; lo—light-generated charge
carriers; S—charge carriers on traps

Liquid crystal image converters have the same working principles as the rep-
resentatives of the class of space-time nodulators that have already been
considered—phototitus and non (mz). M converter arrangements are used
that have their own design and other peculiarities associated with the presence
of a liquid electro-optic medium and the chosen type of photossmiconductor.

For example. both arrangements have glass substrates and spacers that deternine
the thickness of the liquid crystal layer (usually 1-30 5-). Contact of the
liquid crystal with the electrode or photoconductor is often via a thin (about
10 nm) specially treated dielectric layer to ensure a certain orientation

of the molecules in the layer. To maintain the temperature interval within
which the liquid crystal state of the substance can exist (usually chosen

in a range that includes room temperature). the devices may be thernostatically
controlled, including by passing current through auxiliary transparent elec-
trodes on the substrates. '

In the liquid crystal image converter arrangenent that is similar to the photo-
titus. high-resistivity polycrystalline or amorphous layers of cabin sulfide,
arsenic sulfide and other materials produced by sputtering to a thickness

of a few un are used as the photoeemiconductor. Therefore the range of sen-
sitivity of such converters lies in the blue-green or red region of the spec-
trum. The greatest percentage modulation at maximal efficiency approaching

93
FOIOI-‘FIGALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1001 is attained as soon as the energy of the exposing radiation has reached
a value of the order of 10" chm’. The resolution of an inge converter
with liquid layer thickness of the order of l :- and with low dielectric eni-
sotropy enceeda 100 lines/-. Tine parameters are eainly determined by the
properties of the liquid crystals used; a frane frequency close to the televi-
sion standard of 25 It can be attained fairly sieply. '

Still higher paruters are realized in inage converters which. like the PM
or P812. use a single-crystal seniconductor plate. but with a liquid crystal
layer as one of the dielectrics of the IDS structure. In this case. the semi-
conductor is only a few tens of an thick.

In the [08 structure with liquid crystal. the photosensitive and electro-
optic parts of the device are once lore separate. Nevertheless. the working
principle of the IDS structure with electro-optic data readout is not dis-
turbed as a result. It retains the property of accumulating charge carriers
forned during exposure (photoproduction) until they conensate the external
field in the body of the semiconductor. As a result. the iaage is converted
to a potential relief on the interface of the semiconductor with the dielec-
tric. There is a voltage differential in both these layers. and in one of
then (in the given case in the liquid crystal). an optical response is pro-
duced.

The sensitivity of the insge converter to the exposing radiation depends on
the paraneters of the semiconductor (quantu- yield. carrier concentration
and so on). and the liquid crystal (on the type of electro-optic effect. the
threshold voltage of reorientation of nolecules. dielectric anisotropy). and
it increases when the total resistivities of both layers are ntched. In

a structure based on gslliua arsenide and a liquid crystal with positive di-
electric anisotropy. a threshold sensitivity of 10‘“J/cn1 with respect to
energy and 5-10" w/a’ when converted to radiation intensity ie reached even
in the red region of the spectrum. The naxinun optical contrast that is rea-
lised upon reorientation of the liquid crystal nolecules through a nell angle
corresponding to phase nodulation of the light by I. exceeded 100:1. For

a structure based on cabin sulfide in the green region of the spectra the
sensitivity exceeded 100 008‘! units (about 10'" J/cnz). 0f importance is
the fact that using different semiconductor crystals enables coverage of a
spectral range of sensitivities of converters fron the ultraviolet to the
near infrared (see Table). sane of the devices being quite wide-band, e. g.
those based on silicon.

Another inortant advantage of the ms structure with liquid crystel is the
capability for attaining short tines of turn-on and turn-off of the optical
response of the order of 10"-10". It is also possible to register light
signals of duration 10" s or less with subsequent visualization with the
response tine of the liquid crystal. The resolution of such structures with
high-resistivity semiconductor crystals reaches ”0 lines/Ila.

If we now conpare the parameters of optically controllable space-tine light

modulators (laboratory prototypes) with those of the sinpler but currently
eore widely used representativea of image converters-uphotographic file-

roeomca'iuseontv
we can notice that spatial modulators of light with the same sensitivity band
and resolution not only have the capability for operational data storage (in
the range of seconds for liquid crystal converters. and minutes for the non
and phototitus). but they also enable image conversion with a true frequency
of hundreds of hertz or nore in the dynnic mode in the same (single) section
of a stationary recording msdiu. with the implied additional functional capa-
bilities. They can be used for visualising ultraviolet and infrared images.
for displaying information in the form of two-dimensional blocks of optical
signals and images, for carrying out dynamic conversions of images (for ex.-
ple contrast inversion. color change. converting images from "incoherent"

to ”coherent" and the like). including television and aerospace photographic
images. and for intensifying brightness and large-screen projection of sipsla
and images.

Particular mention should be made of

the capabilities for image handling
with such converters in coherent-optics
systems of analog information process-
ing. Image converters are the principal
functional components of the systens.
since in addition to image input (includ-
ing from CRT and image converter tube
screens), they can perform some of

the operations already mentioned above
on the images. carry out spectral anal-
ysis and dynamic filtration (in particu-
lar outlining and the like) by an algo-
rithm dictated by an external optical
signal (image). add. subtract. coware
and recognise images.

 

Diagram of image converter based on
a photosensitive HDS structure with
liquid crystal: l—glass substrate;
2--transparent electrode; 3--dielec-
tric layer; louseniconductor crys-
tal; 5--dielectr...: mirror; 6-liquid
crystal layer; 7--apacer; 8-orient-
ing cover '

Space-time light modulators fit best
vith parallel processing of information
in large blocks. 1. e. in the form of
images. The ease and high productivity with which conversions are ads by
converters of the given class is often striking (computers carry out conver-
sions in series with respect to individual points of an image). For exmlple.
image adding is a consequence of simple parallel mutation in the device of

the spatial potential reliefs that arise tron each image. Subtraction obvious‘
ly requires the reverse action-oin the phototitus and PRO)! it is done with
shorted electrodes (after recording the first iaage). and in the liquid crys-
tal structure it is handled by transmitting rf voltage that changes the con-
ditions of molecule orientation and ensures forced relaxation. Cuparison

of input images with a standard, or in other words recognition is accaplished
when the input image is passed through a hologram of the standard (including
dynamic holograms registered by the converter)-in accordance with a correla-
tion light signal in the output plane of the corresponding device. The in-
tensity and position of the signal characterise the coordinates and the mea-
sure of closeness of the image to the standard. and when feedback is present.
these paranetera enable control of input iaages or automation of image process-
ing.

POI 051102;. USE ONLY
POI OPEN“. USE ONLY

Bxperinental aodels of the iaage converters are now being aade. and organiza-
tion of industrial production has begun. At the sac tine. intense develop-
nental work is in progress on a variety of opto-alactronic systems that use
these converters. Thus it can he stated with confidence that the new class
of iaaga converters - optically controlled spatial light nodulators - will
taka an inortant place in technology of the near future.

was

1. Kustd'. B. 8.. Parygin. V. 31.. ”Hetody nodulyatsii i skanirovaniya aveta"
[Light nodulating and Scanning Methods]. Koacov. Ram. 1970.

2. "Prostranatvennyye nodulyatory avat‘a" [Spatial Light Hodulators]. Lenin-
grad. Nauka. 1977.

3. Sonin. A. 8.. "Kantawy prirody" [Centaura of lature]. Moscow. Atonisdat.
1980.

lo. Blinov. 1.. IL. "Blektro- i aagnitooptika ahidkikh kristallov" [Electro-
and Hagnato-Optics of Liquid Crystals]. lioscov. ﬂanks. 1978.

COPYRIGHT: lsdatel'atvo ”Nauka" "Priroda". 1982

6610
080: 1862/118-A

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm $18108

000 335.2

DIES! W Pm. RICE-P3388033 AID MS! RADIATIW mass TIA: nus
mmmnms mmnmsrmss

Hoscow W WWI m 8883 in Russian Vol 261. lo 6. Dec 81 (eenuscript
received 27 Apr 81) pp 1337-1339

[Article by A. V. Dobkin. ‘l'. I. halyevine and I. V. lie-chinov. Institute of
Physics of the Earth i-eni 0. Yu. Sl-idt. 0883 Acadely of Sciences. lloscow]

[Text] As intense fluxes of radiation or fast particles veporiee the surface
layers of a barrier naterisl. they heat these layers to high teqeretures

and cause dispersal at high velocities. In this situation. high-pressure
pulses arise on the barrier. This effect is currently attracting attention

in connection with the problen of inertial nuclear fusion. however. it is
also of interest for simulating explosions and iapect of aicroneteorites
against an obstacle. acceleration of nicroscopic objects to high velocities.
studying equations of state of natter under extras conditions. as well as

a nuber of other scientific and teclnlological purposes (fornetion of holes
and the like). In connection with the rapid develop-eat of powerful ion
sources (see for exemle Ref. 1-5), we give the results of sons calculations
of the parenetere of a dense plesaa heated by intense ion fluxes. and also

of the resultant high-pressure pulses_ upon the obstacle. These calculations
supple-ant the estinates of Ref. 6-8 shed at deternining the feasibility

of initiating fusion reactions. He will show that inact of an ion been
against an obstacle nay also give rise to powerful pulses of intense radiation
in the ultraviolet and x-ray bands eeitted by hot plane.

On the initial stage of the interaction process the thickness 1: of the plane
layer is eesll coepered with be- radius R or radius of curvature of the ob-
stacle n. Calculations were done on one-dimensional (plane) msteedy radia-
tion-gasdynnic processes that occur when protons with energy of 0.1-10 Nev
interact with an aluinm obstacle. The eethod of calculation is sinilar

to that used previously in an analogous problem concerning the action of laser
radiation (Ref. 9]. The calculations were done with detailed consideration
of the spectral nekeup of the radiation. and detailed tables of optical and
thernodynasic properties of en elueinu-plaua were used lief. 10]. to accel-
erate the calculations. a eethod of frequency-averaging radiation transport
equations was used (Ref. ll] that was quite effective. In deternining the
law of release of proton energy in the asterial. consideration was taken of
the interaction of protons with bound and free ple-e electrons lief. 12].

‘ MMLISIONLY
me Ol-W'Ml. USE ONLY

Fig. l ehowe the distribution of pleae
.91, perenetere —- teqereture ‘1'. preeeure
GI P. end eleo the flux deneitiee of protone
q end eelf-redietion of the pleue q,
with reepect to the neeo n of the vapor
et tine t-l ue (when the totel veporieed
neee ny-b.8 Isle-z) for the ceee where
the energy of protone incident iron the
outeide Co'l HeV, end their energy flux
deneity q.- 10 cw/ee‘. Ae cen be eeen.
the protone penetrete to only ‘I. of the
'18. l. bpicel dietribution 0‘ neee. the reneining cool pert of the neee
plun- Per-I-t-u with "tweet to being heeted by redietion of the hot leyer.
I.” in th. two-dinneionel Cl“ In eccordenoe with eetinetee of Ref. 13.
the deneity of the redietion flux mitted

 

into wecum reuchee $0! of the on.

After the quentity x becolee cowereble with R or r.. effecte of leterel
epreeding of the wepor jet begin to heve en influence. leeding to increeeed
treneperency of their peripherel leyere. end to penetretion of the perticlee
into deeper leyere oi the Interiel. A queei-eteedy node of heeting end vepo-
. ritetion erieee thet wee coneidered for the cue of leeer redietion in let.
llc end 15. Anelogoue solution of the eyet- of equetione for eteedy-etete
redielly ey-etric flow tron e ephericel terget of rediue r. cen be need to
find the dietribution of ell perenetere with reepect to rediue r. Thin die-
tribution ie ehown in Pig. 2 for the ceee .
q.-11.s Gil/a3. e.-1 nev. r.-1ee.
when 1,-15 eV. All quentitiee (rediuv r.
preeeure P. velocity u. teqereture ‘1' end
proton energy t) ere nornelieed to their :
veluee in the ”criticel” croee eection.

where the Jauguet rule in net (theee veluee
ere denoted by the eeteriek). Ae cen

be eeen. e nerrow cool layer of denee

vepor of the eubetence erieee at the eur-- I
fece of the berrier. end fer tron the

eurfece there ie little chenge in tenpere-
ture. The proton energy in the criticel
croee eection t. in ebout helf the velue

of c.. Preeeure on the berrier P. - 10.6 I I
hber. end preeeure in the criticel croee U z '
eection P.-0.¢P.. The one retio between Pig. 2. Distribution of per-:-
C. end “.1. end P. ie obeerved for other etere with reepect to rediue
veriente on well. The distribution of of ephericelly ey-etric eteedy-
perenetere with respect to r in einiler. etete pine-e corone

    

Choice of the "conbuetion" rete in the queei-eteedy etete tekee «:oneideretion
of the fect thet in the ecouetic croee eection e certein condition ie eetie-
fied between work Derforned during expeneion of the diepereing gee end the
energy releeee. In the given ceee. it cen be written ee

98
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
whoro tho dioonoionlooo conotant 1.1o of tho ordor of unity.

Rooulta of oyotonotic calculationa of difforont varionto of ouch a probl-
can he roprooontad in tho torn of tho following rolotionox

’. . 2'3 0:" '3... ‘:.7S .
r. . 554:! f? 0'0." .

uhoro tho di-onaionalitioo of tho quantitioo aro: Poukhar: ag—w/cn‘;
1’0““: co-de; T.-CV.

(2)

Conparioon of tho rosultant calculatod to-poraturaa and prooouroo with thooo
for tho caoo of a noodyoiu laoor [Bah 15] ohowo that at tho o-o q. and
rodiua ro-l on thoy aro oinilar if proton onorgy ”-200 hov. For protono
with onorgy c001 Nov. tho tooporaturo io noarly an ordor of oagnitudo highar.
and tho prooouro an ordor of nagnitudo lowor thon for a noodyliu laaor. Lot
uo noto that mdor tho action of radiation of tho contiuona opoctrun of a
high-towaroturo oourco. quaoi-otoody flow and hoatin; of vopor nay arioo:
'tho prooouro in thio caoo ia oonoohat highor than for protono with tg-l Nov
(for radiuo rg-l co). ‘

Calculationa ohow that ao tonporoturo riooa. ouch toctoro ao aloctronic hoat
conduction nay hovo an offact. tor ox-plo. at q.- 3-10~ mic-3. to-IO Nov
and r.-0.6 ca. whon 'r.- 100 oV. onorgy fluuoa duo to aloctronic hoot conduc-
tion aro about I): of tho «1.. hoins of tho oano ordor of unitudo ao onorgy
looooo to radiation tron tho plaona. ‘l'ho aunt of prooouro P. on tho harrior
rrchoa ~10 that. and tho donoity in tho critical crooo ooction io o.I0.l

3 co .

Thuo tho action of an ion hoaa on on ohotaclo onahloo attaiuont of high don-
oitioo of hot plana and croation of high-prouura pulooo on a harrior. ao
woll ao producing radiation pulooo with a opoctrm that oxtondo up to tho
ultraviolot and aoft x-ray rogion.

moss
I. Oloon. K. D.. nzm W. Vol. 3. No 3. 1977. p A65.

2. Groonopan. u. A” n-or. 1).. A.. Sudan. I. 11.. J. Am. ms.. Vol 50.
No 5. 1979. p 3031.

3. Filippov. N. V.. Iilippova. 1‘. 1.. PIS'I‘IA V 23m mnm‘m
I 1101311631301 FIZIKI. Vol 29. Ito 12. 1979. p 750.

lb. lit-phrioo. 8.. menu: ”SIN. Vol 20. lo 12. 1900. pp 1559-1612.

S. Grihov. V. A.. Krokhin. o. It. ”Kratkiyo ooohohchoniya po fiziho" [lriot
Roporto on Phyoicol. Hoocow. Vol 6. 1980. p 53.

MMMONLY
6.
7.
8.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

M OFFICIAL US“. ONIN

Uhterberg. L. W PHYSICS. Vol 17. lo 1. 1975. p 69.
Sharer. J. 11.. mm 1081“. Vol 15. lo 5. 1975. p 952.

Ivenov. l. 1.. Rel-yum. A. A.. Lewent'yev. 0. A.. PIS'HA V mm.
mm £12111. Vol 2. no 3. 1976. p 129.

Bergel'eon. v. 1.. MW. 1. v.. xm'rovuA macaw. Vol 7. 110 n.
1930, p 2356. -

India. V. 9.. Dobkin. A. 9.. loeerev. 1. 3.. etttcle depoeited in All-
11an Inetitute of Selena“: end ‘recl'mtcel Infomtion. Io 370-79 dep.

ltenchinav. I. 17.. MIA ”MIRA 1 mm. Vol 34. lo ’9. 1970.
p 706.

Gott. Yu. v.. 'Vut-odeyetuye cheettte e veehcheetvon v plenennyth
1ee1edoven1yekh" [Petttcle Interectton 91th letter in Plane leuetch).
Hoecov. 1978.

Dobktn. A. 17.. Koeerev. I. 3.. Henchman I. 17.. mm. 13131116113807
112111. Vol 69. No 7. 1979. 9 1405.

Nachtnav. I. V.. “MAYA 24411911111111 1 mm. Vol 31. no 2. 1967,
p 300.

Helyevtne. ‘1. 3.. lie-cw. I. V.. 28113:» PING? mum I
TWICE” PIZIKI. No 5. 1972. P 58.

COPYRIGHT: Itdetel'etvo "Neon". "Douedy Aha-I11 ml: 8888”. 1981

6610

cso:

1862/96 DID

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY