FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10189
15 December 1981

USSR Report

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS

(FOUO 11/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS

(POUO 11/81)

CONTENTS

FLU I D DYNAMICS

LASERS

Synthesizing Method of Calculating Planar Boundary Layer in
Weak Polymer Solutions with Laminar, Transitional and
Turbulent F10" zonefvqua-ca-oaoaoaoaaaoaaaoo-soooooaoosoooaaao

Laninar Boundary Layer and Its Stability in Honk Poly-er

solutions.cocoouaooooooaaooooooooaoooooooollooooooooooooooooao

U811 Turbulence 1“ Weak Poly-er solutionsaeooooooo'saooooooaosoo

Viscous Drag of Two-Dimensional Foils Moving in weak Polymer

Solution...................o.........oo.oo...-o...............

AND HASHRS
Electric POUR? Supplies for Lasers..........uuu"nun”...u
Tunable Lasers......................................-o..o.oo....

Characteristics of Gasdynamic Losers Using Conbuation Products
"1th Unstable cavities...ao-oaacsaaaaoaaooaooaooocooooosasoooo

Characteristic Features of Driven Amplification of Free-
Running Photo—Dissociaticn Iodine Laser Pulaea:
D‘Jr.t1cll Control.0'0...O...0..OIOIOOOIO'OOIOOOOOOIO...DOOIOICO

Characteristics of Explosion Gan Dynamic Laser Utilizing
Acetylene Combustion Products............o..-.oo..............

Atmospheric Air Breakdown by Neodymium Laser Eniooion for Large
Focal Point Diameters....................-....o...............

13

23

31
36

61

46

56

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Henory of Eduard Sergeyevich Voronin.........................

Closed-Cycle Tut—Flow Pulsed ()02 Laser With Carbon Dioxide
Recovery Unit....o...................o..o....ooou..c.o.......o

NUCLEAR PHYSICS
Diffr.ct1°n Method. 1n “mtmn Phy.1c.OOOOOOOOOIIQIOIUIUUOIOOOIO
OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

Use of Degenerate Parametric Proceuen for "eve Front Correction

(survey)...cocoonDooooolcoocolootoooeoootooooooo'oooootooooooo

Pulﬂed X-Ray Technology..............o.........................o
Study of Hide-Aperture PIOC RCOOHICOI yield.not0.000000000000000

Selfillaing FieldSOIOOOOIn.00.0.00...II.OOOIOIOICOOOCOI'IOOOOOOO

PLASMA PHYSICS

High-Teuperature Plum Diagnosis Methods.......................

HATHMTICS

Heth“ of collective Recomitiono'ooooootooloooooooooo.ooooooooo

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

73

75

80

86
107
120
129

162

145
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FLUID DYNAMICS

UDC 532.526.3

SYNTHESIZING METHOD OF CALCULATING PLANAR BOUNDARY LAYER IN HEAR POLYMER SOLUTIONS
HlTH LAMINAR. TKANSlTlONAL AND TURBULENT FLO“ ZONES

Moscow lZVESTlYA AKADEMII NAUK SSSR: MEKHANIKA ZHIDKOSTI l GAZA in Russian No 3.
Hay-Jun 77 (manuscript received 10 Jun 76) pp 42-68

[Article by V. V. Droblenkov and c. l. Kanevskiy. Leningrad]

lTextI investigation of the influence of small polymer additives
on flow characteristics of viscous fluid is currently one of

the most promisingareasof research on friction drag reduction.
One of the interesting problems here is the study of the influ-
ence that small polumer additives have on characteristics of

the transition region of flow in the baundary layer. as well

as on friction drag in the case of laminar. turbulent and tran-
sitional sections in the boundary layer. This article gives

a possible method of calculating the planar boundary layer and
friction drug for the case of motion of a solid in weak polymer
solution; with constant concentration with consideration of the
change in flow conditions in the layer. based on the use of inte-
gral relations. Problems associated with development of the
boundary layer on the body as the polymer is fed in. and problems
involving the influence of degradation or destruction of the
polymer in the solution are not considered.

I. The laminar boundary layer is calculated by Pohlhausen'a method with approxi-
mation of the velocity profile by a sixth-degree polynomial (Ref. 1]. assuming
that small polymer additives have practically no effect on its development. This
nSSumption is confirmed by data of experiments done in tubes [Ref. 2]. In calcu-
latine the laminar boundary layer. the equation of momenta is integrated. the ini-
tial data being determined from the exact solution for the nieghborhood of the
critical forehudy puint [Ref. 3].

The point of onset of laminar-to-turbulent transition is taken as the point of
beginning of break-up of the laminar velocity profile, corresponding to the region
of inception of turbulent spots. The point of loss of stability and the further
development of perturbations beyond this point are determined by methods of linear
stability theory. it is assumed that adding trace amounts of polymers to the flow
has no cf:ect on the position of the point of loss of stability nor on the develop-
ment of small perturbations in tne laminar boundary layer. This assumption is
confirmed bv the results of calculations of stability and development of

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

perturbazlons in a laminar boundary layer with trace polymer additives [Ref. 4].
The weak influence of polymer additives on development of perturbations in a laminar
boundary layer means that the beginning point of transition can be taken as inde-
pendent of the presunce of polymer additives in the flow. which is confirmed by
results of measurements in tubes and flat channels [Ref. 5].

In such assumptions. the following relation can be used to determine the point
of loss of stability:

(1.1) lle.'-4084+4000 ll! [0.359 (1—4.3)!

Here Reg is the Reynnlds number of loss of stability calculated with respect to
thickness of displacement 6* and velocity on the Outer surface of the boundary
layer U5. and 1 is Puhlhauscn's form factor. Formula (1.1) is derived by approxi-
mating the results of calculations of Rev with respect to linear stability theory.

Immediately beyond the point of loss of stability there is a build-up of the a-pli-
tudes of pulsation velocities with consideration of the existing distribution of
pressures over the body [Ref. 3]

II

(1.2) In 1i .- l [(c.. “0'. m Ilo‘

I . It.

where Re* is the value of the Reynolds number at the given point. A is the aupli-
tude of velocity pulsations at the same point. A0 is the same quantity at the point
of loss of stability. c1 is the rate of build-up of perturbations. The value of
the integral in relation (l.2) is determined by using dependences 1n (A/Ao) calcu-
lated from linear stability theory for constant values of A. which can be approxi-
mated by the fol lowing relations:

(1.3) In L:- - 0+ b Re'+c Re" (Re.‘<Re‘<Re.’)

Is

In 1:- n (1.11:) +e (Ro‘-Re.°) (RO‘>R°-')

(r0 nonmwmaz'. lh [—0.41 (1.5%)]

c — [e(llo.‘-- llo.') — (In 31-11..) J (Re.°—Re.‘)"

bne -:’.'c lle.'. au-h llc.‘—c Re."
Ref-50004 3287 are it; (1-2.6) (I.<0)
n. ,'--;'»om I 4330 u. [0.506 (1—2.6) l (l>0)

( In %) -3.5o+2.3c n.[o.458 (1-2.0) l
\ a

II. is assmm‘d in the cnlculut ion that the point of onset of the luninar-to-turbulent
transililm is Situated where the quantity 1n (A/A.) reaches a critical value defined

by tho formnln

(1.4) (mi) -2.l—3.0|ns

II.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Relut ion (LA) is obtained on the basis of analysis of experimental data on the
luminar-to-turbulent transition and is valid in the range of variation of the degree
of turbulence of the external flow c from 0.02 to 1.81. The value of c in formula
(L6) is in percent.

The influence of small polymer additives on characteristics of the turbulent boun-
dary layer can be accounted for either by using rheological relations that describe
the connection between the stress tensor and the strain—rate tensor in polymer
flows. or by using semi-empirical methods in which the influence of polymer addi-
tives is accounted for by the change in universal turbulence constants. We will
use the second approach. which was demonstrated in Ref. 6. 7 to be promising for
calculatitw the characteristics of turbulent shear flows of weak polymer solutions'.

By analogy with the description of the averaged velocity profile in pipe flow of
weak polymer solutions. we propose using a logaritlnic velocity profile with Cowlea
parameter and an additive constant B that is a function of the parameters of the
dissolved polymer .mci the flow parameters

1 ' II
(1.5) i-_|n!_"_+_(1_mﬂ).+a
v’ x v x 6

In .lt‘:'ul'd.'ll‘.c(‘ with Meyer correlation [Ref. 8] it is assumed that the universal
turbulence constant - in weak polymer solutions does not change value. and is taken
as equal to It - 0.1;. and the parameter 3 is represented as follows:

0

(1.6) B-B.+AB, Alf-0. v‘<v.‘; AB-a|g%. u‘>v.’
0

Here y is the tran‘werse coordinate. v* is dynamic velocity. ll is the Cowles param-
eter. -‘. is the thickness of the boundary layer, Jo is a universal constant that
retains its usual value 80 - 5.2. a is a parameter that accounts for the prOperties
uf the dissolved polymer and its concentration in the solution, V! is the value

of dynamic vel )CiLy corresponding to the beginning of development of the Thoma
efiect. 0n the basis of experimental data it is assumed that the value of VI is
determined chiefly by the kind of dissolved polymer and its molecular weight. The
numerical values of l. and v1: are found on the basis of analyzing experimental data
on flows of polymer solutions in tubes (Ref. 6-8] with consideration of the kind

.u‘ polymer and its concentration in solution.

The t‘llill‘dr'tul‘lsticu of the turbulent boundary layer are calculated by the method
of Rel . 9. In this calculut ion. the following are used: the equation of moments.
the equation ol l'l'ln'lr-r. capture and the law of friction on the wall as found from
rolal lon (l.')) at y '- .‘-.

In dctermining the averaged veloc‘ty profile. the integral characteristics and
the coefficient of local friction in the boundary layer in the region of laminar-
to-turlmlent transit ion. starting from the beginning point of the transition right
up to the region oi .n completely developed turbulent boundary layer. the following
assumptions; are used that are based on analysis of experimental data. The region
of incept inn 0! turbulent spots (beginning point of transition) coincides with
the virtual beginning, ol the turbulent boundary layer. The thickness of loss of
mmentum or the laminar boundary layer calculated from the forebody critical point

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coincides with the thickness of loss of momentum of the turbulent boandary layer
reckoned from its virtual onset at a value of the intermittence coefficient 1 equal
to 0.5. Distribution of the coefficient of intermittence lengthwise of the tran-
sition region :onforms to normal gaussian distribution.

Analysis of experimental data. and taking the transition layer as one in which

the laminar velocity profile at a given point exists for a time interval proportional
to l- y. while the turbulent velocity profile exists for a time proportional to y.
enables us to represent the velocity in the transition region in the form [Ref. 10]

(1.7) My) -(i—1)u.,(y)+~gu,(y)

Here uL(y) is the velocity profile in the laminar boundary layer reckoned from the
forcbody critical point. uT(y) is the velocity profile in the turbulent boundary
layer reckoned from its virtual onset, and defined by relations (1.5) and (1.6).

The values of the intermittence coefficient at each point along the length of the
transitional region that are necessary for calculations by formula (1.7) are deter-
mined from the condition of equality of the intermittence coefficient to 0.5 at

the point where the thicknesses of loss of momentum of laminar and turbulent boun-
dary layers coincide. and equality of the entire extent of the transition region

to four standard deviations for gaussian normal distribution.

2. This method was used to do systematic caICulations of boundary layer charac-
teristics on a flat plate and wing sections over a wide range of Reynolds numbers
and degrees of turbulence of the outer flow. Comparison of the results of calcula-
tions done in application to an ordinary liquid with experimental data of Ref.
l0-l2 shows satisfactory agreement [Ref. 13].

To analyze the influence of small polymer additives
on the characteristics of flow in the transition
zone. boundary layer calculations were done on a
flat plate. The computations were done at Reynolds
number Re calculated with respect to plate length

L and plate velocity Uo equal to Re= 5'106. degree
of free turbulence -= 0.52. and vﬁ/Uo- 0.01. The
results of calculations of the coefficient of local
friction Cf. dimensionless thickness of displace-
ment 6*IL and dimensionless thickness of loss of
momentum 6**/L as a function of dimensionless longi—
tudinal coordinate X= x/L are shown on Fig. l.
Curves 1 correspond to a value of o-O (ordinary
liQuid). curves 2 and 3 correspond to values of

.r- U) and 20. These calculated parameters corre-
spond approximately to motion in Polyox “SR-301-

(vt '0.023 m/a) with concentration C? 0, 10 and

30 ppm with velocity Uo- 2.3 m/s. The arrows indi-
cate the points ol beginning and end of the laminar-
to-turbulcnt transition on Fig. l.

 

Calculations show an appreciable increase in the length of the transition region
when polvmer additives are introduced into the flow. Their influence leads to a

I.

FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
FOI_0FFHJA1.USEl0NLY

'cdurllon of the maximum value of the coefficient of local friction in the tran-
Si ionul flow region. and to downstream displacement of this maximum. Due to the
influence of polymer additives, the position of the minimum thickness of displace-
ment is shifted downstream. and the quantity 6* decreases in the region of the
developed turbulent layer. The thickness of loss of momentum 6** under the effect
oi polymer additives decreases everywhere. beginning from the point of onset of
the transition.

The results of calculations of the friction drag coefficient of a plate assuming
purely turbulent flow at n- 10. “No-0.01. L-0.9llolo m. are compared with data
of experiments with towing of a plate in a solution of Polyox "SR-301' at concen-
tration of (2- 13 ppm and plate length of L- 0.9106 m (Ref. 2] on Fig. 2. Here

   

 

” u '5 n a: to" a a: to m;
Fig. 2 Fig. 3

cant 1 corresponds to laminar flow around the plate. curve 2 corresponds to turbu-
lent flow of ordinary liquid. and Curve 3 corresponds to turbulent flow of polymer
solution. The results of the calculations are in satisfactory quantative and quali-
tative agreement with experimental data.

The influence of degree of turbulence on the coefficient of friction drag of the
plate CF when it is moving in a weak polymer solution (Polyox “SR-301'. Ci [0 ppm)
at Re- S-l06 is illustrated by Fig. 3. Line 1 corresponds to flow of an ordinary
liquid. and line 2 corresponds to flow of polymer solution. The arrows indicate
friction drag in the case of purely turbulent flow. it can be seen that as the
degree of turbulence increases. friction drag rises both for the case of motion

in solvent and with motion in a polymer solution. However. the relative reduction
of friction drag of a flat plate ACp/Cpo due to adding trace amounts of polymer
to the flow changes weakly with a change in the degree of turbulence. and in the
given vase amounts in 25-281 (here CFO is the friction drag coefficient with notion
in Sulvvnl. and icy is the absolute value of change in the friction drag coeffi-
t-lcnt ) .

The results of aneutigution of the influence of Reynolds number on friction drag
of u plate in a flow of weak polymer solution are shown on Fig. 5. Curve 1 corre-
Spuuds tn purely turbulent flow of an ordinary viscous fluid around the plate,
curvc 3 corresponds tillaminar flow around the plate. and curve 3 corresponds to
slow or ordinary fluid around a plate at degree of free turbulence c-0.51. Curves
6-7 turrespond to results of calculations of flow of a polymer solution around

a plate at 7i=l0 and v*-(L023 m/s. curves 4 and 5 being plotted on the assumption

5

FOR 0F31C1AI.US£1DNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 6

of a purely turbulent flow node in the boundary layer. while curves 6 and 7 were
plotted in calculatlmus at e -O.SZ.

In doing the calculations shown by curves 4 and 6. the Reynolds number was varied

by changing the length of the plate it constant flow velocity of 0° - 2.3 n/s

(vt/ no: 0.01). Curves S and 7 are the results of calculations as the Reynolds
number is changed by varying the velocity of flow around the plate at a constant
length of L- 3 m. The results confirm the fact that with flow of a polymer solution
of the same concentration around the plate. the influence of the Reynolds number

on Cp differs depending on whether it is varied by changing the length or changing
the velocity.

when there are laninar and transitional sections present in the boundary layer

on the plate, the curves for Cp as a function of Re deviate from the curve of lami-
nar friction drag at a constant Reynolds number for the given degree of turbulence
independent of the parameters of the dissolved polymer, and these curves asymptoti-
cally approach the corresponding dependence for the purely turbulent flow node
(curves 3. 6. 7 on Fig. 1.),

ficient of local friction for a boundary layer on
a 122 Zhukovskiy section at lie-50106 and 2-107 and
u- 0 and ID. The calculations were done for a section
with length L- 2 m. For the chosen Reynolds nuabers
the ratio vt/Uo when using Polyox lvlSlZ-IiOi'I (ya-0.023
n/s) is 0.00586 and 0.001é65 respectively. The cal-
culations used the experimentally measured velocity
distribution on the outside surface of the boundary
layer of the Zhukovskiy section at zero angle of
attack [P:f. 12]. Curves a refer to flow of an ordi-
Fig. 5 nary fluid around the foil. while curves b are for
flow of a polymer solution. Curves 1 correspond
to a Reynolds number of SolO‘. and curves 2 refer to a Reynolds number of 2~l0’.
The arrows indicate the boundaries of transitional flow zones. Just as in the
case of zero-gradient flow. the addition of trace amounts of polymer causes an
appreciable increase in the length of the transitiorll flow region in the boundary

layer.

‘ 9 ﬁ’[" :"_"1' ' " '"'1 Fig. 5 shows the results of calculations of the coef-

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN3l10FF1C1AL UGIICHVLY

 

Mixed boundar Turbulent boundary
la er. (-0.5; 1 er

   

     

‘ 232 ‘05 235
I I 32.3 H 8 32.8

“.0
“.3

 

The values of relative drag reduction ACp/Cp° (in percent) for the Zhukovskiy sec-
tion are conpared with results of calculations for a flat plate in the Table. Here
i is the plate and ii is the 121 Zhukovskiy section.

The data of the Table show that the relative reduction of friction drag with intro-

duction of polymer additives into the flow is soneuhat greater on the foil than
on the plate. other things being equal.

Just as in the case of zero-gradient flow. the presence of a laninar—to-turbulent
transition on the Zhukovskiy section has little effect on the relative reduction
of friction drag due to adding trace amounts of polyners to the flow.

REFERENCES

l. Schlichting. H.. Ulrich. A.. "Zur nerechnnng dea Unschlages laminar-turbulent".
.l. DTSCH. LUFTi-‘AHRTPORSCHUNG. 1962.

2. "Cidrobionika v sudostroyenii“ [Hydrobionice in Shipbuilding]. TaNII T318. 1970.

3. Schlichting. H.. ”Teoriya pogranichnogo sloye" [Boundary Layer Theory]. Moscow.
"Nauka". 1969.

a. Droblenkov. V. V. Kanevskiy. G. 1.. "Laminar Boundary Layer and its Stability
in Weak Polymer Solutions”. IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAB! 8883: HERBANIXA ZHIDKOSTI
I GAZA. No 6. 1974.

S. Khabakhpasheva. Ye. H.. Perepelitaa. B. V.. "Fields of Velocities and Turbu-
lent Pulsations when Trace Amounts of High-Polyner Substances are Added to
Hater". iNZHENERNO-FIZICHESKlY ZHURNAL. Vol la. No 4, X908.

6. Vasetskaya. N. 0.. loselevich. V. A.. "Constructing a Senienpirical Theory
of Turbulence of bleak Polymer Solutions". IZVBS‘I'IYA maul “AUX $583: ‘13-
KHANIKA ZHIDKDSTI l GAZA. No 2. 1970.

7. loselevich. V. A.. Pilipenko. V. N.. "Turbulent Flow of Fluid With Polymer
Additives in Boundary Layer With Longitudinal Pressure Gradient". DOKLADY AKA-
DEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 213. No b. 1973.

8. Meyer, H. A.. "A Correlation of Frictional Characteristics for Turbulent Flow

of Dilute Viscoelastic Non-Newtonian Fluids in Pipes". A. I. Ch. B. JOURNAL.
Vol 12. No 3. I966.

FOR‘OFFK]AI.USE(NULY
9.

IO.

ll.

12.

I3.

COPY
I977

51HR(HHHCJAI.US£10NL¥

Levkovich. Hodley. Horlock. Perkins. "Family of Integral Methods of Calcu-
lating a Turbulent Boundary Layer". RAKETNAYA TEKHNIKA I KOSHONAVTIKA, Vol 8,
No I. I970.

Dhawan. S.. Narasima. R.. "Some Properties of Boundary Layer Plow huring the
Transition From Laminar to Turbulent Motion". J. FLUID HECH.. Vol 3. No 6. 1958.

Schubauer. G. 8.. Klebanoff. P. 5.. "Contributions to the Mechanics of Boundary-
Layer Transition". NAT. ADVIS. COMM. AERONADT.. Rept. No 1289. 1956.

Preston, J. H.. Sueeting. N. 3.. "The Experimental Determination of the Boundary
Layer and Hake Characteristics of a Simple Joukovski Aerofoil With PartiCular
Reference to the Trailing Edge Region". AERONAUT. RES. COUNCIL. REP. AND HEH..
No 1998. 19k).

Droblcnkov. V. V.. Kanevskiy. G. 1.. "Hetod rsscheta polozheniya i integra1'-
nykh kharakteristik perekhodnogo pogranichnogo sloya" [Method of Calculating
Position and Integral Characteristics of Transition Boundary Layer]. manuscript
deposited in All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Information

No 1795-96 from I Jul 74.

RIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Mekhanika zhidkosti i gaza”.

6610

CSO:

8144/0203-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 532.526.2
LAMINAR BOUNDARY LAYER AND ITS STABILITY IN WEAK POLYMER SOLUTIONS

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADD‘III NAUK 8853: mm ZHIDKOSTI I GAZA in Russian No 6.
Jul-Aug 71o (manuscript received 1 Jun 73) pp 156-158

[Article by V. V. Droblenkov and G. I. Kanevskiy. Leningrad]

[Text] The article gives the results of a study of equations of a laminar boundary
layer and its stability in weak polymer solutions. The matheaatical model that
describes the properties of flows of polymer solutions is s rheological model with
consideration of the temporal relation between the stress tensor and the strain-
rate tensor [Ref. 1]. Analysis of these equations shows that the relaxation proper-
ties of a liquid influence flow stability in large leasure. The calculations show
an increase in velocity profile stability in the boundary layer. and also a change
in the nature of distribution of Reynolds stresses with consideration of the relaxa-
tion properties of the liquid.

With regard to relaxation properties. the equations of motion of a viscous incon-
pressible fluid disregarding mass forces take the form [Ref. 1]

(1 N 1 lap AV * ‘1 (AT!) (1'? o
——--— r +v +——— . 1v -
) at p ' p «1'

Here T is time. It is relaxation viscosity, and the other symbols are conventional.

Let us assume that when trace amounts of polymers are added to the liquid. the
basic concepts of boundary layer theory remain valid. Then the boundary layer
thickness 6 can be estimated as follows: 6 c I; and 6a.. where I. is a characteristic
linear dimension of the body.

Let us carry out the usual estimates in equations of motion (1) for the case of
flow in a flat boundary layer [Ref. 2]. The ratio of relaxation terms to inertial
terms will be characterized by the relaxation number Rx-k/oL’.

Estimates show that the magnitude of terms that depend on relaxation properties

of a liquid has the same order as the inertial terns and the terns that depend
on ordinary viscosity only under condition

(2) How?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this case. we get the following syste- of boundary layer equations in dimensional
variables:

«U 00 w 1 .u- w I: a 0'0 0P
(3) _... _§V-—-_——§y_-§__(_ —-
01' 0X «IV 9 0.\ M" 9 JT 0}" CV

If the relaxation number Rx has order (6/1.)n at n) 2. the terms that account for
the relaxation prcperties of the liquid can be disregarded as coupared with the
inertial terms and terms that depend on ordinary viscosity. and the boundary layer
equations take their usual form. In the case where the relaxation number has order
(6/1.)“ at n< 2. we can disregard all terns in the boundary layer equation other
than the tern that contains pressure. and the terns that account for the relaxation
properties of the liquid. The equations of the boundary layer in dinensional for.
then are written as follows:

I!"
(‘I - -— e k1 (— u U 0,
«X J? d)’ ' Tr rye

Introducing the stream function of the main flow 0- 0(Y) and the stream function
of perturbing motion ¢(X. Y. T) in equations of notion (l). and using conventional
methods and assumptions of the linear theory of hydrond stability [Ref. 3],
we get the stability equation with consideration of relaxation properties of the
liquid
0(49) * aoamv) a. 0'0
0T 0? 0X 0X 0}"
01: 0‘0 O‘cp 0‘0 0'0 :‘9 0‘0
- ----—- +
( over new)“

HMO) 000(le_
0—! 0X

(5)

                 

 

 

         

0X 0)” UY‘ 0X J)’ 0)"

Equation (5) is linear relative to function “X. Y. 2). and its solution can be
sought in the form

(5) «'0'. Y. T)-ﬂ'(Y) up “(ax-57)]

Ilere NY) is the amplitude of the stream function of the perturbing notion. a is
a real quantity associated with perturbation wavelength x by the relation 1- Zrla.
B is a complex quantity 8- Bro-131.

Let us use the notation s/a- C and convert to dinensionless quantities. taking

as the characteristic velocity that on the boundary layer surface 0;, and taking

6 as the characteristic linear diaension. We write the stability equation in dimen-
sionless form

J‘ 6‘
(1) (In-r) (—- of) -iy--; (Lacs—4w)
‘1' ‘ll'

k d‘ d’ '
+——- [ﬂu-r) (—I--2¢'—-I-es‘l)+ﬂ._d—I—
' d'l "1'

Ill-U/Ug. c-C/Uu. m-I'ld. R.-U.6/v. [In-kip”
10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here t- :5 is the wave number, f- o/U16 is the dimensionless amplitude of the stream
function. The order of terms that account for the relaxation properties of the
liqaid coincide with the order of terms that account for ordinary viscosity when

(8) Hon-Mon

Comparison of conditions (2) and (8) shows that the stability of liquid lotion
is more sensitive to its relaxation properties. Analysis shows the feasibility
of using conventional velocity profiles of principal motion to study the influence
that small polymer additives have on the stability of a laminar boundary layer.

‘l‘o integrate equation (7) with boundary conditions of non-penetration and sticking
on the wall (Y1 ' 0) and matching of the solution with the "inviscid" solution on

the outer surface if the boundary layer (y1- l)

(9) I‘dI/dvu' 0 (vi-HO)
III 4! d"
_- ‘ —— — - o -‘
(I0) 0] 4' ﬂy. 0 (1 d9. + d'.‘ (g. )

a sweep method was used [Ref. lal.

An investigation was made of the stability of the Blasius velocity profile approxi-
:tht-cl by :n SIthl-tlt')‘,ruu Pohlhausen polynomial at Rxl-O, 0.0001. 0.001.

   

’0

gaff—"1

    

 

'm (m m 1.2.5

Fig. I Fig. 2

The real and imaginary parts or the eigenvalues found in the calculations at a
Reynolds number ol R. =3|00 as a function of wave number are shown in Fig. l. Curves
l-‘l .lrt‘ depemlences of the imaginary part of the eigenvalues (c1) on wave ntnber

for Rs; equal to 0. 0.00m and 0.001 respectively. Curves lo and 5 correspond to

lht‘ rml purl of (h..- cigenvalues (Cr) at Rx; -0 and Ran-0.001. The results show
that the relaxation properties of the liquid have an insignificant effect on the
rate of propagation of a perturbation (er) in the boundary layer, but appreciably
reduce tln- rate of perturbation buildup (c1).

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pig. 2 shows curves of neutral stability (cl-IO) plotted from the results of calcu-
lations for values of Rxl- 0 (curve I) and Rx1-0.0001 (curve 2). The critical
value of the Reynolds number corresponding to the point of loss of stability with
transition from an ordinary viscous fluid to a fluid that has relaxation properties
increases from R1- 2150 to Rf-ZSZO at a value of Rx;-0.0001. This stability
improvement is qualitatively confirmed by existing experimental data showing pro-
longation of the transition of the laminar flow mode to turbulent in weak polymer
solutions [Ref. 5].

Our calculations show that the relaxation properties of a liquid have almost no
influence on the distribution of rms values of pulsation velocities across the
boundary layer. although they appreciably change the magnitude of Reynolds stresses.

REFERENCES

l. Pavlovskiy. V. A., "Theoretical Description of weak Aqueous Polymer Solutions".
DOKLADY AKADEMII KAUK S’SSR. Vol 200. No 6. 1971.

2. Loytsyanskiy. L. 6.. "Hekhanika zhidkosti i gaze" [Mechanics of Liquid and
Gas]. Moscow. "Nauka". 1970.

3. l.in'. 1's. Ts.. "‘I‘ccriya gidrodinamicheskoy ustoychivosti" [Theory of Hydrody-
namic Stabilityl. Moscow. Izdateo'stvo inostrannoy literatury. 1958.

(o. Sapozhuikuv. V. A.. Shtern. V. N.. "Numerical Analysis of Stability of Plane
Poiseuille Flow". ZHURNAL PRIIGADNOY WEI I TWICHBSKOY FIZIKI, No 10.
I969.

5. white, V. D.. McElligot, D. H., "Transition to Turbulence in Dilute Aqueous
Solution of Polymer Mixture". TEORETICHESKIYE OSNOVY INZHENBRNY‘KH RASCIIB‘I‘OV.
No 3. 1970.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'srvo "Nauka". "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Hekhanika zhidkosti i gaza".
I974

6610
C80: 8144/0203-0

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OIIWCIAI.lEiE(HVLY

UDC 532.517.4
HALL TURBULENCB IN HEAR POLYMER SOLUTIONS

Moscow [ZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: HEKHANIIA ZHIDIOSTI I GAZA in Russian No b.
Jul-Aug 75 (manuscript received 13 Dec 74) pp 26-32

[Article by V. V. Droblenkov and L. S. Sitchenko. Leningrad]

[Text] An examination is made of problems of constructing a
semiempirical method of determining the characteristics of wall
turbulence. based on scaling theory and dimensional analysis.

and application of the mixing-path hypothesis. and generalization
of this method to the case of turbulent flov of weak polymer
solutions close to smooth and rough surfaces.

1. Physical considerations that lead to formulation of a universal law of distri-
bution of averaged velocity U close to a wall can be applied to the description
of any single-point moments of the velocity field in this region. including for

determination of the rms values of velocity pulsation components l<ui> {1- l, 2. 3).
Reynolds stresses -p<u1u2> and correlation coefficient K--<uiuz>/ <u ><u > (Ref.

1]. Here the u1 are the components of pulsation velocity with respect to coordinate
axes. subscript 1 corresponds to the longitudinal x-axis. subscript 2 corresponds
to the transverse y-axis. and subscript 3 corresponds to the transversel z-axis.

All single-point moments within the limits of a layer with constant values of tan-
gential stresses r - To - const may depend only on the transverse coordinate. the
value of the tangential stress 1. at the wall, density p and the coefficient of
kinematic viscosity v. i. e. may be represented in the form of a product of some
degree of dynamic velocity v*- Jro/o multiplied by a universal function of dimen-
sionless coordinate yv*/v that is unique to each of the moments and to given param-
eters of the polymer dissolved in the liquid

(1.1) Whvoldud. i-i.2.3: -—(u.u.>-v.’l.(yo)

At sufficiently large values of y*, the statistical state of turbulent pulsations
should no longer depend on viscosity and the addition of polymers to the flow.

and the functions f1(y*) should approach certain constant values that are the same
both for a flow of ordinary liquid and for a flow of weak polymer solutions:

(1.2) /.(oo)-A.. ”4.2.3.4

To determine the form of functions f1(y*) it is convenient to use the mixing-path
hypothesis. according to which

13

BO! OFFICIAL USIICH'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--- 0” . au ' au *
(L3) V<u.'>-z.- -. «1.2.3. —< .. _ - __
0!] l ' um.) P( 051 ) M’K(ay )

Here I and 21 are mixing lengths analogous to integral scales of turbulence. By
introducing dimensionless velocities and using dimensionless coordinate y*. we
can write relations (1.3) in the form

)‘(n,")-v.l..0l.'o/0ys. (III. 2, 3
(1.4) -- (mm) —u.‘l.:(«Il/./0y.) =u:=.‘1..l,.K(aU./ay.)‘
I,.-I,I‘./\', I.---h'./\‘I U.-U/v.

Expressions (1.1) and (1.4) imply that

(1.5) My.) -l.o0(/./0!lo 1" 1. 2. 3: kw.) 'ls'WUo/allo)"
- I..!_-.I\'(iIlI./.I_v,.)'

The value of I, in a constant-stress layer can be determined from the formula
[Ref. 2)

(1.6) 10-7.on l—vxp(---y./u)]

1n the case of an ordinary viscous liquid r-O.4, a- 26-27. Corresponding to ex-
pression (1.6) is the fol loving value of the dimensionless derivative of averaged
velocity:

0y, 1 1-11le i+Y1+4x‘y,'i l-exp(—y,/a)]’

Re1at ions (1.6) and (1.7) define the Reynolds stresses and the averaged velocity
profile throughout the constant-stress layer. including the viscous sublayer. the
buffer region and the zone of logarithmic velocity profile. The value of coeffi-
cient A. is identical to unity.

 

 

Dimensionless mixing lengths Z“ that determine the behavior of pulsation velocities
in the wall region may be represented in a form analogous to (1.6)

(L3) . l..-:1.xy.l1—n.cxp (—C.y./a)]

Coefficients A1 are determined from the rms values of pulsation velocity components
in the region of tho lnuarlthmic velocity profile. where y./a>l. and consequently
exp(-y*/'l) ‘ 0. Viscous tangential stresses in this zone can be disregarded compared
with turbulent stresses; then 3U*/3y*r~'1/xy.. With consideration of these arguments
(m) I..=.4.xy.. HEM“. when we»!

Analysis of experiments enables us to determine the values of coefficients A1

(|.|1)) .-l.-'2, 11,-4.1. II.=1.5

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Coefficients 31 and C‘ determine the behavior of 11 and £10.) in direct proximity
to the wall. 1. e. at low values of y*. and can be sued fro. representation of

the functions f1(y*) as Taylor series with respect to y. in the neighborhood of
point y*- 0 and satisfaction of baundary conditions at y*-0

’I(y.) -‘3y.+bgy.'+¢‘.”..+. . . .
OJ 1) II (”0) ‘brye’+l‘aye'+. . . y'...0

I.(y.) -s.y.+b,y.‘+c.y.‘+. . .

At the same time. representation of 21* in form (1.8), expansion of exponential
function exp(-c y./.:) in a series as yﬁ-vO and the condition 30*I3yﬁil implied
by expression (1.7) as “*0 lead to the relation

'|.|‘.’) My.) =-/l.x(l—B.)y.+A.B.C.xy.’/a+...

Coefficients 31 and c1 are found from the condition of coincidence of values of
v’<u’1> defined by relation (1.12) at x-OJ: and a- 26. and experimental data on
distribution of components of pulsation velocity within the confines of the viscous
sublayer

(1.13) n.—o.r.25. 11,-1, 13,-0.99. c.-1. 0,-0.5. C.-0.7

Corresponding to these values of 31 and c. are the following values of the first
coefficients in series (1.11):

(1.14) a.—o.3. b.-0.01922. 0,-0.00846. a.-o.ooo. Ira-0.010

Expressions (1.1). (1.4), (1.5). (1.7) and (1.8) at values of x-Ou‘o and a-26
and coefficients A1. 81. C1 defined by relations (1.10) and (1.13) completely de-
termine the rms values of the components of pulsation velocity in the viscous sub-
layer, the buffer region and the cone of logaritlIIic velocity profile for flows
of ordinary viscous liquid in a boundary layer. circular pipe and flat channel.

0n Fig. l. the results of calculations of functions f1 (1- l. 2. 3) at x-OJo and
a- 26 are compared with experimental data obtained in a circular pipe [Ref. 3]

and in a flat channel [Ref. 1.]. Curves l. 2, 3 correspond to calculated values

of ft for a constant-stress layer. Points A. S. 6 designate experimental data
(Ref. 3] at a Reynolds number of Re- 5.105. 7. 8--at Ra's-10‘. 9. 10-data of

Ref. la. The Reynolds number Re-Uod/v was calculated with respect to pipe dineter
d and velocity on its axis Uo. Points lo, 7. 9 correspond to values of f1. 5. 8.
9--to f z. and points 6-—to {3. Agreement of calculated and experimental data can
be taken as completely satisfactory.

2. The extent of the region in which tangential stresses can be considered constant
and equal to their value at the wall is considerably dependent on the type of flow.
and amounts to 10-152 of the characteristic transverse dimension of the turbulent
flow. the boundary layer thickness 6. half-width of the channel b. or pipe radius r.
In the external part of the boundary layer. or in the paraxial region of the flow

in a pipe or channel. the pulsation characteristics are considerably influenced

by the nature of the distribution of tangential stresses 1. Here the defining
transverse scale is not the dimensionless coordinate y*. but rather the ratio of

15

FOR 0PM“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

an g5
Fig. l

the transverse coordinate y to the characteristic transverse dimension of the flow
n-y/b for a channel, n-y/r for a pipe. and n1-y/6 for a boundary layer. The
dimensionless derivative of the averaged velocity profile in the general case can
be written as follows Ref. 5]:

 

. .’.|) 51—”:- I= _2:.—_.—:. 1"";
0y. HHHh‘t. 1.

In the case of flow in a straight circular pipe or flat channel
(2.?) 1.=l—n

It is impossible to get the exact form of function t*(y) for a boundary layer.

To describe the distribution of tangentional stresses across the turbulent boundary
layer. we can use their approximation in the form of a polynomial with respect

to powers of m in which the coefficients are deteruined fro. the boundary condi-

tions on the wall and on the Outside boundary of the layer [Ref. 5). In the case
of an arbitrary longitudinal gradient of pressure p when two conditions are used

on the wall and two on the outer boundary of the layer. the form of function 1*(y)
is determined by the relation

(1.") 1. -'-.'h|.“ : L'II."Fmrh(‘—m)'

Here 4- 6.3p/lolx is .u form factor that accOunts for longitudinal pressure gradient
and varies over a range of ~3<¢<¢n The negative values of 0 correspond to

16

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOR OFIHCIAL USIZCNULV

accelerated flow in the boundary layer. while positive values correspond to deceler-
nted flow. and the value ¢I-0 corresponds to a zero-gradient boundary layer.

In the outer part of the layer or the central region of flow in a pipe or channel.
formula (1.6) for mixing-path length 2* becomes inapplicable. In these zones it
is more correct to consider the mixing path approximately constant. According

to the recommendations of Ref. 5,

(2.4) 120.0756. m-d
(2.5) Izow, lam/m, n+1

in the case of a boundary layer and flow in a straight circular pipe and flat chan-
nel respeCtively. To retain the distribution of 1* in form (1.6) in the wall region
and convert to expressions (2.4) or (2.5) in the external or paraxial part of the
flow,lt isconvenientrouseiimodificationof the interpolation formula proposed

in Ref. 6. Then to describe 7* over the entire cross section of the flow. instead

or‘ (1.6) we can write

(1.6) I.- xy.[1—v.\p(--uo/n)INN—0m)
(27) l.=xy.11—c-xp(- -y./a)lexp(—En)

where D- 1.65 in the case of a baundary layer. which corresponds to the value

‘* 20.0768&* at "3: 1. 6'- 6v*/v; E- 1.05 in the case of flow in a circular pipe
or flat channel, which assures a value of Z*-0.14r* or Z*'0.llob* at n- 1. r*-
rv*/-.-; b* -bv*/v.

The rms values of pulsation velocities can be determined by using expressions
(1.5). (2.1) and (2.2) or 12.3). In this connection, the formulas for mixing
lengths !1* derived for a constant-stress layer should be corrected analogously
to the expression for 1*. A necessary auxiliary condition in constructing then
is onSurlng a correlation coefficient Kl-O on the outer surface of the boundary
layer or on the axis of the pipe or channel. This condition is met by the ex-

pressluns
(2.8) I..-A.xy.l l—B.cxp(—C.yo/d)1°XP(-Dc‘ln)/"-'1I
(2.9) 1.. u—A.xy.l 1—D. exp(—C.yo/n) lcxp(— anvil-1|

Coefficients A1. 31. 61 retain the same values as in a constant-stress layer.
Coefficients D1 and Hi were determined from the results of measurements of pulsa-
Lion characteristics in the external part of the boundary layer and the paraxial
region of flow in a pipe or channel:

(2.10) [Lt-2.6, I). 45.]. 0,-2.4

(2.11) E.-2.0, E. 1.5, E.-1.8

Relations (1.5). (2.1). (2.3). (2.6), (2.8) at the values of coefficients (1.10).
(1.13) and (2.10) define all three components of pulsation velocity in the baundary
layer. while expressions (1.5). (2.1), (2.2). (2.7). (2.9) at the values of coef-

ficients (1.10). (1.13) and (2.11) define the corresponding quantities for flow
in a stralght circular pipe or flat channel.

17

FOR OFFMJAI.USEiONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Calculated and measured values of J<ui>/v* are compared on Fig. 2 for flow in a
circular pipe. and on Fig. 3 for flow in a boundary layer on a flat late. Solid
curves 1. 2. ‘3 on Fig. 2 correspond to the calculated values of hub/v. at r*-
8750. and the broken curves 6, S. 6--at r*- 1150. Points 7. 8. 9 correspond to
experimental data [Rot 7! at “-8750. while points 10, ll. 12 correspond to the
data at r*-1l50. Points l. lo. 7. 10 correspond to values of J<u§>lvv points

2. S. 8. ll--to values of Rug/vi. and 3. 6. 9. 12--to “may/v“ 0n Fig. 3 the
results of calculations of hug/vﬂ at 6* -2960 and 0-0 are shown by curves 1,

2. 3. while the corresponding experimental values obtained in Ref. 7 with season-
moms in :1 turbulent boundary layer of a flat plate at 6*- 2960 are shown by points

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIJR40IWNCIAI.lEﬂE(IVLV

lo. 5. 6. As can be seen from Fig. 2. 3. agreement between the calculated graphs
and the experimental data is quite satisfactory.

The resultant relations can be considerably simplified in consideration of only
the outer part of the flow in a boundary layer or the central region in a pipe

or channel. In these cases we can disregard effects of molecular viscosity, which
simplifies formula (2.1), that can then be written as

(2.12) aU./oy.-vx_./I.
At y*/a>l. formulas (2.6)-(2.9) are considerably simplified and transfomd to

(2.13) lo-xy. exp (—Dn.); Lo-Amy. exp (—D.n.)/)'l—n|
(ll/I) I.-xy. exp («[51]). l..-/1.v.y. Mp (—E.n)/H—n

Relations (2.l2)-(2.llo) with consideration of distribution of 1* in fora (2.2) or
(2.3) enable determination of the rma values of components of pulsation velocity

in the case of a boundary layer and with flow in a pipe or channel in the following
form:

(2.15) Y<u.'>-V.A.cxp [ - (D.—D)u.lV1+t..—2n.'+0m11-m5
(2J6) an-u.n.mp[—(n.—mm

The values of A1, D1. 81, D, E remain as before. Expressions (2.15) and (2.16)

are valid for the case of developed steady-state turbulent flow of an ordinary
viscous liquid at n. >0.l. 1> 0.1. It is noteworthy that in the case of analysis
of the outer or central part of the flow the pulsation characteristics in developed
turbulent flow are totally independent of the wall coordinate Yr being determined
only by the relative distance from the wall. In or n.

3. The relations given in sections 1 and 2 can be extended to the case of turbu-
lence with flow at surfaces with uniform grainy roughness. To do this we can use
an expression for the mixing-path length in which an additional factor is introduced
to account for roughness influence along with the smoothing factor Ref. 2]

(3.1) l.-xy. l i-exp (Ve/¢)+cxp (-60y./¢h.)l

The numerical values of the coefficients in formula (3.1) are chosen from the con-
dition of coincidence of experimental and calculated values of the coefficients

of hydraulic drag of rough pipes. llere h*-hv*/v. h is the average height of the
roughness bumps. At h*- 60. effects of molecular nature and the influence of rough-
ness cancel each other out and l*- icy". At h*>60 a mode of developed roughness
obtains, and at h*<60 there is a transient state.

The influence of roughness shows up mainly in a narrow wall region. In the outer
part of the layer or in the central part of the flow in the pipe and channel the
turbulence characteristics are nearly independent of wall roughness. This means
that the same correction factors as in the case of smooth walls can be used to
describe the outer part of the flow for rough surfaces. Then throughout the flow
cross section the mixing-path length 1* will be determined by the relations

(3-3) l.-xy.[ l—cxp (y./a)+cxp (—60y./aho) ] exp (-Dn.)
(3.3) loxuoU-oxp (-y./a)+oxp (—60u./eh.) ] up (—5n.)
19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Formulas (2.8) and (2.9) for mixing lengths that determine the rms values of the
components of pulsation velocity must be corrected for the case of flow at rough
surfaces in a similar way. Assuing that he.“ is the limit in analysis of any
single-point moments of the velocity field. we can get the following expressions
for 11* in the case of flow in a boundary layer or in a pipe and channel:

(3.4) I..=A.xy.l I -BL\|1 (—C.y./s)+8.exp (—C.-60y./oll.) ]X
Xexp(—D.n.)/l’ 1—1].

(3.5) 1.. -/1.xy.[ I -B. mp (—C.y.la) +8. up (-C.-00y./oho) IX
Xexp (-EmWH—‘l

Coefficients D. 3. A1. 3 . C . D . £1 and the parameters It and a retain their former
values. At h*-0. formu as bl -(3.5) are transformed to expressions (2.6)-(2.9)
for flow at smooth surfaces. The components of pulsation velocity in the case

of a boundary layer are determined by relations (1.5), (2.1). (2.3), (3.2). (3.1.),
(l.l0). (l.l3) and (2.10). and for flow in a pipe or channel--by expressions (1.5).
(2.1): (2.2). (3.3). (3-5). (1.10). (1J3) and (2.11).

The results of calculations show that the influence of roughness is localized in
the region immediately adjacent to the surface at a distance of the order of the
height of the roughness bumps. leading to appreciable reduction of anisotropy of
wall turbulence.

lo. The computational relations that we have obtained. and that determine the pulsa-
tion characteristics of flow near a wall are also applicable to description of

wall turbulence in weak polymer solutions. In this case it is sufficient to seems
that the parameter a defining interaction of effects of molecular and molar nature
is a nonlinear variable. and is associated with the kind of polymer, its concentra-
tion in solution. and some of its characteristics such as molecular weight. He
can use the relations proposed in Ref. 8 as expressions that relate the value of

a to polymer characteristics. The constant a: is assumed to be independent of the
introduction of polymer additives to the flow. and it retains its usual value of

-: -0.4. Other things being equal. increasing concentration leads to an increase

in the value of a. which corresponds to an increase in the lifetime of Klein vor-
tires. This result is confirmed by studies done in Ref. 9 on flows of polymer
solutions in a viscous sublayer region using a model of breakup of Klein vortices.

Available experimental and theoretical results lead us to assme that the influence
of polymer additives on the characteristics of turbulent flows shows up primarily
in the wall region of the flow. These results indicate the possibility of using
relations obtained in our research at a- var(26<a<u) to describe wall turbulence
in shear flows of polymer solutions.

0n Fig. A. the results of calculations of components of pulsation velocity for

.1 constant-stress layer at «1- 125 are compared with data of measurements for flow
of 0.0122 solution of polyacrylamide in a flat channel [Ref. 4]. Curves l. 2.

3 correspond to calculated values of hub/v” points ll correspond to ex ert'nenral
values of r’ﬁ/vf and points 5 correspond to experimental values of (u >/v*.

In complete accord with experimental data. we observe a sharp rise in «up/vit at
small values of y‘. and a reduction in quantities hub/v. and ¢m§>/v* in this
region as compared with flow of ordinary viscous fluid. Introducing small polymer
additives leads to an increase of anisotropy of velocity pulsations near the wall.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HR (“Hi ‘I u INF (‘NI \

   

Fig. 6 Fig. 5

Fig. 5 illustrates the combined effect that introducing polymer additives to the
flow and varying the Reynolds number (changing r*) have on the distribution of
pulsation characteristics across the entire flow of liquid in a pipe. The calcu-
lations were done at ..-- 26, r‘- 500--curves 1, lo, 7; a- 300. r*- 500--curves 2.
5. 8; 1- 300. r - 230--curves 3. 6. 9. Curves l. 2. 3 correspond to calculated
values of J<ui>lv*. curves h. 5. 6--to l<ug>/v*. and curves 7. 8. 9-to ¥<u3>/v*.

The results of the calculations show that introducing polymer additives to the flow
leads to an appreciable increase of the dimensionless longitudinal component of pul-
sation Velocity and a considerable reduction in the transverse and transversal
components throughout the pipe cross section. Haximun values of V<ui>/v* with
increasing 1 are shifted considerable distances away from the wall. At the same
value of n. a reduction in r‘ that corresponds to a reduction in Reynolds number
leads to some reduction of maximun values of components of pulsation velocity.

and a shift of the position of these maxima to considerable relative distances

from the wall. with increasing a as r. decreases. the maxima of ¢<u§>/v* and
J<u%>/v‘ become more and more weakly expressed. and at large a and small r* the
transverse component of pulsation velocity remains nearly constant over a considera-
ble part of the pipe cross section (curves 5. 6 on Fig. 5). The results can be
attributed Lo an increase in relative thickness of the viscous sublayer and buffer
region as the ReynoldSIumwer decreases or as trace amounts of polymers are added

to the flow.

The results of the calculations and their comparison with experimental data show
that the relations proposed in this paper are in total accord with known experimental
[acts and principal assumptions regarding averaged turbulent flow of an ordinary
viscous liquid and weak polymer solutions in pipes. channels and a boundary layer
thrOughont the entire range of possible Reynolds number variation.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJI‘OI1RCJAI.thEGNVLY

The derived computational relations can be used to study the influence that surface
roughness. Reynolds number. longitudinal pressure gradient and addition of trace
amounts of polymers to the flow have on the characteristics of wall turbulence.

and also in constructing integral and differential methods of calculating the boun-
dary layer. using the equation of turbulent energy balance.

9.

REFERENCES

Honln. A. 8.. Yaglom. a. H.. "Statisticheakaya gidromekhanika" [Statistical
Hydromechanicsl. Part I. Hoscow. "Nauka". 1965.

Van Driest. E. 8.. "0n Turbulent Flow Near a Hall". J. AERO. SCI., Vol 23.
No II. I956.

Laufer. J.. "The Structure of Turbulence in Fully Developed Pipe Flow". NACA
REPT.. Nu II74. I950.

Khubakhpasheva. Ye. M.. Perepelitsa. B. V.. "Fields of Velocities and Turbu-
lent Pulsations When Trace Amounts of High-Polymer Substances are Added to
Water". lNZHENERNO-FIZICRESKIY ZHURRAL. Vol 15. No 4. I968.

Fedyayevskiy. K. K.. Ginevskiy. A. S.. Kolesnikov. A. V.. "Rascher turbulentnogo
pogranichnogo sloya ueszhimayemoy zhidkosti" [Calculating a Turbulent Boundary
layer of Incompresslble Fluid]. Leningrad. "Sudostroyeniye". 1973.

Szablewski. H.. "Eine neue Konzeption furdie Berechnung tnkompressibler turbu-
lentcr Grenzschlchten". IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: MEKHANIKA ZHIDKOSTI
I GAZA. No 2. 1970.

Klebanoff. P. 8.. "Characteristics of Turbulence in 3 Boundary Layer With Zero
Pressure Gradient". NACA REPT.. No 1247. I955.

Vasctskaya. N. 6.. Ioselevich. V. A.. "Constructing a Semiempirical Theory
or Turbulence of weak Polymer Solutions". IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: HE-
KHANIKA ZHIDKOSTI I CAZA. No 2. 1970.

Black. T. J.. “Viscous Drag Reduction Examined in the Light of a New Model
of Wall Turbulence" in: "Viscous Drag Reduction". N. Y.. Plenum Press. 1969.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nnuka". "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Mekhanika zhidkosti i gnza".

I975

6610

C50:

8I46/0203-C

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 532.526.2/10
VISCOUS DRAG 0P THO-DIMENSIONAL FOILS EWING IN WEAK POLYMER SOLUTION

Moscow 12VESTIYA AKADEMII NAUK SSSR: MIRA ZHIDKOS'II I GAZA in Russian No 3.
Hay-Jun 79 (manuscript receivedl3 Feb 78) pp 59-65

[Article by V. V. Droblenkov and G. I. Kanevskiy. Leningrad]

[Text] Dcterminat ion of viscous drag of solids remains one of

the major problems of applied hydroaerodynamics. Of particular
interest is the study of how small polymer additives introduced
into a flow can affect the parameters of flow of a viscous fluid
around a body and its viscous drag. This article gives a possible
method of solving this problen as applied to flow of a weak hono-
geneouu polymer solution around a symetric foil.

Viscous drag is comprised of friction drag and the pressure drag
that arises due to redistribution of pressures over the surface
of a body as a consequence of forces of viscosity. The entire
flow region is divided up into a narrow zone of viscous fluid
flow (the boundary layer and wake), and an external region of
potential flow of inviscid fluid. The problem is solved by a
method of successive approximations with consideration of the
influence that the differentiated zones Lave on each other. The
values of viscous drag found by direct integration of tangential
stresses and pressures are conpared with data of experiments

and with quantities determined from the characteristics of the

far wake.

Methods of calculating boundary layer characteristics when weak
polymer solutions f low around solids. including with consider-
ation of laminar. transitional and turbulent flow zones. have
been fairly well covered in Ref. 1-5. Methods of determining
the characteristics of a turbulent wake with consideration of
the flow peculiarities in the near wake are proposed in Ref.

6 and 7. Methods of calculating the potential part of the flow
have been quite thoroughly worked out. The nonviscous part of
the flow influences the viscous region through pressure distri-
bution over the outside of the boundary layer and the wake.

The influence of the viscous region of flow on the characteristics
of the potential flow zone shows up in the form of additional

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

velocities on the interface between the given regions. The theo-
retical possibility of accounting for this influence has been
pointed out in Ref. 8 and 9.

I. An integral method is used to calculate the boundary layer with consideration
of laminar. transitional and turbulent flow zones [Ref. 5]. The presence of trace
polymer additives in the solution is accounted for by Meyer correlation for the
profile of velocity u in a turbulent voundary layer [Ref. 10]

.
if; - _‘ [n K _(1-coa1‘3— y)+B.-l-AB
U K

(1.1)
AB-Q W<mﬁ AB-ah—:,1ﬂ>m‘

Here y is the transverse coordinate. v* is dynamic velocity. r- 0.4 and Bo -5.2

are turbulence constants. E is the Coules parameter. 6 is boundary layer thickness,
u is a parameter that accounts for the properties of the polymer in solution and
its concentration. vt is the dynamic velocity corresponding to onset of the Thoma
effect.

The characteristics of the nearby turbulent wake are determined by using the inte-
gral method of Ref. 7. The profile of velocity u and tangential stresses r in
the wake are approximated by the relations

—-1-(1—" il-[U-vexd *—.—;‘)+% —< "-m

(1.3) T-zx.(1—Z: -)(1-1)k'—-cxp(-k T‘

here Us is the longitudinal velocity component on the outer boundary of the wake.
Um is the velocity on the axis of the wake. k and y are lengthwise variable wake
parameters. a is the density Jf the fluid. :1 is the coefficient of turbulent vis-
cosity taken as variable with respect to the length of the wake. The turbulent
wake parameters 6*. k. 1. <1 and the dimensionless velocity defect l- Um/Ug on

the axis are determined in the process of integration of the following system of
first—order differential equations: equations of moments and energy. equations

on the axis of the wake (discrete layer), equation of mass capture. equation re-
lating turbulent viscosity to averaged velocity [Ref. 6].

it is assumed that the influence of small polymer additives on flow characteristics
of a visc0us fluid shows up in restructuring of turbulent exchange near the solid
surface in the flow--in the viscous sublayer and buffer region [Ref. l-S]--and

has nu direct influence on free turbulence. which includes the development of the
turbulent wake behind the foil. in these assumptions, all peculiarities of the
influence of polymer additives on flow characteristics in the wake should be ac-
counted ior in the change of initial data for flow calculation. and also in some
change of characteristics of the potential part of the flou--in change of veloci-
ties and pressures on the outer boundary of the wake.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The initial values of the wake parameters are determined from the following condi-
tions: continuity of thickness 6. thickness of displacement 6*. and thickness

of loss of momentum 6** upon transition from boundary layer to wake; equality of
tangential stresses on the trailing edge of the foil to maximum tangential stresses
in the initial section of the wake; equality of velocity U, on the axis in the
initial section of the wake to velocity u1 on the outer boundary of the viscous
sublayer on the trailing edge of the profile. The latter condition is implied

by the assumption that in direct proximity to the trailing edge at a distance of

the order of the radius of the rear body round-off. the b0undary layers that develop
on the upper and lover surfaces merge with elimination of the viscous sublayer. Then

(I. u. u. 7,
1.4 — ll - — a: -._ _
( ) Us Us I). 2

u./v‘ -3.9+0.997 (IQ-PAH) -0.005l 1 (ll.+A[J)’

where Cj is the local friction coefficient.

Conformal mapping theory is used to calculate potential flow around a flat contour.
The function that maps the exterior of circle of radius a on the auxiliary plane
onto the exterior of the investigated contour on the physical plane is found by

the method of Ref. 9.

Effects of the reverse influence of the viscous part of the flow on the outer poten-
tial flow are modeled by introducing a system of sources and drains situated on

the surface of the contour and on the axis of the wake, their intensity being de-
termined in accordance with the Spence scheme as the derivative with respect to
contour arc of the product of velocity on the outer boundary of the layer or wake
multiplied by the thickness of displacement [Ref. ii].

The calculation was done by the method of successive approximations. 0n the initial
approximation the characteristics of the boundary layer and wake are assigned,

using either data on flow around a flat plate. or the results of calculations on

a similar variant. To ensure convergence when carrying Out successive approxima-
tions. a relaxation coefficient equal to 0.5 is introduced as in several papers
using the method of iterations [Ref. 12]. The process of successive approximations
is terminated upon attainment o“ a predetermined accuracy of the calculation; in

the given method it is required that the velocities on the outside of the boundary
layer on the trailing edge of the foilxuituo successive approximations must differ
by no more than 11.

The coefficients of friction drag Cp and pressure drag Cp are calculated by inte-
grating tangential stresses and pressures over the surface of the contour

(1.5) c, _L__2jc, 55)}(1)

' 0,590.7, L
. "r "u ‘
(1.6) cam-=2 Jim—9.). (a a.)—ld(L)

25

FOR 0F11C1A1.USB(H‘LY
Ffﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USIZCNVLY

where Uo ls velocity of motion. L is profile length. t is profile thickness. q

is the coefficient of pressure on the surface of the contour, qi is the coefficient
of pressure on the surface of the contour in an inviscid fluid. the subscripts

"+" and "—" refer respectively to the the forebody and rear body parts of the pro-
file. and 4 is the ordinate of the profile surface.

The distribution of pressures pw omer the surface of the contour is determined

with consideration of the change in pressure across the baundary layer from the
formula

(1-7) p.-p.+9 I—r- dn
b

where p5 is pressure on the outside surface of the boundary layer determined vith
regard to velocities caused by the reverse influence of the viscous zone of flow;
r is the radius of Curvature of streamlines of the inviscid fluid calculated for
the boundary layer region; n is the normal to the stream lines in the inviscid
fluid; u is the velocity at the investigated point in the viscous fluid. Formula
(l.7) is obtained from the condition of dynamic equilibrium of an element of the
viscous fluid as it moves along a curvilinear trajectory [Ref. ll]. Use of formula
(l.7) is based on the assumption that the stream lines inside the boundary layer
in the viscous and inviscid fluids coincide. In this connection. its use is re-
stricted by the dimensionless abscissa x/L-0.95; hereafter the quantity Pu"p6
will be taken as constant.

Viscous drag with respect to the characteristics of the far wake is determined by
using the Squire-Young formula [Ref. 9]. applicable to the cross section of the
wake situated 20! of the length of the foil behind its trailing edge

n. a" (I.
u — '.' 9 - -— .—
“ 8) C' (rapt/:1. L (11.)

O “NO”

 

where .\'**. U5 and HI -S*/6** are determined at x/L- l.2.

2. in accordance with the proposed method. systematic calculations were done on
characteristics of flow around symmetric wing profiles at zero angle of attack
over a wide range of variation in the Reynolds numbers and degree of turbulence
of the oncoming flow.

02: ,-—-—--—-—

  

-0.Za’ .‘

a: ' ayz L0

FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY
l/L

 
   

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

   

 

     

 

0.0550 6.124 6.50 -- 1.22 5.23 9.31 1.35 7.06
0.0550 22.70 7.l8 7.22 0.60 6.58 3.46 1.35 7.”
0.1040 10.67 8.52 9.02 I .96 0.54 9.15 1.90 7.20
0.1040 24 .27 8.92 9.” 1.64 7.3! 0.76 I.” 6.70
0.|536 10,45 9.” 9.74 2.|4 7.76 0.34 2.43 7.41
0.1506 10.67 9.84 9.50 1.30 7.94 9.51 2.39 7.12
0.2069 3.2!" 13.16 -- 4.80 8.36 I2.56 3.70 8.76
0.2069 5.355 12.02 12.50 4.24 0.58 11.63 3.10 0.45

 

The results of calculations of the distribution of pressure over the surface and
drag coefficients for a series of generalized Zhukovaltiy foils are compared with
data of experiment (Ref. 13] on Fig. l and in the Table. Omitted in the Table
and hereafter for all coefficients of viscous drag is a factor of 10". Curves
1-4 on Fig. l. plotted in the calculations at a degree of turbulence 5-1.752.
and experimental points 5-8 refer respectively to foils with relative thickness
t/l. equal to 0.055. 0.101.. 0.1506. 0.2069 tested at Reynolds numbers Re-lloL/v
of 2.27.10“. 2.1.2740“. 1.6670105 and 3.2!31-10s respectively. The experimental
values of viscous drag coefficients given in the Table were deterainad from data
of dynamometric measurements (I) and from the results of measurements in a wake
(ll). while the friction drag coefficients were calculated as the difference between
Cx and Cp [Ref. 13]. Comparison of the results of calculations with experiaental
data shows satisfactory agreement. which means that the proposed method can be

used to analyze the influence of various factors on the characteristics of flow
around flat symetric foils.

To analyze the influence of small polymer additives on the characteristics of

flow and viscous drag. calculations were done in application to a symetric foil

of [5% thickness. The computations were carried out for Reynolds nmbers equal

to I07 and 10’ at a degree of free turbulence c-0.SZ. At both Reynolds numbers.
the flow paraneters were calculated in an ordinary viscous fluid (o-O). and in

a weak polymer solution (e- [0). At Re- 10’, the velocity of foil notion was taken
as equal to 1.15 m/s (Va/Uo- 0.02). and at lie-10'. 00-8 m/s (W/Uo- 0.0029).

Such calculated parameters correspond approximately to notion in a solution of
Polyox "SR-301' (v5 ~ 0.023 m/s) with concentration c-O ((1-0) and c I 10 ppa

(a - IO) .

 

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 4

The results of calculations of the coefficient of pressure q on a foil and the
distribution of velocity on the outer surface of the boundary layer and wake 1150
are shown in Fig. 2-4. Curves 1 correspond to pressure distribution with motion
in an inviscid liquid. curves 2 and 3 correspond to notion at lie-107. and curves
I. and 5 correspond to motion at Re- 10’. Curves 2 and lo are the distributions

of velocities and pressures with motion in a polymer solution (0- 10). and curves
3 and 5 are the distributions in an ordinary fluid (a-O). Fig. 5 shows the results
of calculations of the thickness of the boundary layer and wake 6/1. (curves 1-4),
and the thickness of loss of museums in the layer and wake 6**/L (curves 5-8).
Curves l. 2. 5 and 6 correspond to lie-107. and curves 3. 1., 7 and 8 correspond to
lie-10°. Lines a correspond to flow of an ordinary liquid around the foil. and
lines b correspond to flow of a polymer solution (oi-10).

The results of calculations of visc0us dragand its components for the investigated
contour are sumrized as follows:

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI(MHHCJALIEEEONLY

n. e Una/8 c, c, 0,0, c;(nl

10’ 0 1.15 save 1M3 7.519 7.23
10’ 10 1.15 am 1.413 GA” 0.11
10 0 800 343 11"! £83 ‘15
10 10 m 2.316 W m > is:

Here (I) are the values of c, as deter-
mined by integrating tangential stresses
and pressures over the foil. (1!) are
the values of 01 calculated from the
characteristics of the far wake.

Analysis of the given results of calcu-
lations leads us to the following major

polyner additives have on characteristics
of the flow of a viscous liquid around

a flat symmetric contour. A reduction

in the integral thicknesses of the haun-
dary layer and wake as a result of intro-
ducing polymer additives into the flow
leads to a reduction of the reverse
influence of the viscous flow zone on

The naxinum influence of the viscous flow
r the contour, and of velocities and pres-
ary layer and wake will be observed in
-body relief peek end on the trailing edge of the foil. 0n

 

a viscous fluid is in some measure analogous to the effect of increasing the Rey-

gration of pressures and tangential stresses agree satisfactorily with the corre-
sponding quantities determined from the characteristics of the far Hake. Introduc-
tion of trace polymer additives into the flow reduces viscous drag. the degree

I. loselcvlch. V. A.. Pilipenko. V. N.. "Turbulent Flow of Liquid With Polymer

Additives in Boundary Layer with Longitudinal Pressure Gradient”. DOKLADY AKA-
DHHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 213. No ’0. 1973.

2. loselevich. V. A.. Pilipenko. V. N., "Drag of Flat Plate in a Flow of Polymer

Solution With Variable Concentration", IZVBSTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: MEIEANIKA
ZIHDKOSTI I CAZA. NO 1. I974.

29

FIHR(HNWCJAI.USI¢NVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Scdov. L. 1.. Vusctskaya. N. 6.. Ioselevich. V. A.. "Calculation of Turbulent
Boundary Layers With Polymer Additives". PROCBEEINCS OF INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE
ON DRAG REDUCTION, Cambridge. 1974. Cranfield, S. A.. 1970.

a. Hassid. S.. Porch. ... "Boundary Layer Development of Polyner Solutions in
Pressure Gradients". PROCEEDINGS OF INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON DRAG REDUCTION.
Cambridge. 1974. Cranfield. S. A.. 1974.

5. Droblenkov, V. V., Ksnevskiy, G. 1.. "Synthesizing a Method of Calculating
a Planar Boundary Layer in weak Polymer Solutions With Laminar. Transitional

and Turbulent Flow Zones". IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: MEKEANIKA ZHIDKOSTI
I GAZA. No 3. 1977.

6. Sokundov. A. N.. "Application of Differential Equations for Turbulent Viscosity
Ln Analysis of Planar Non-Self-Sinilar Flows". IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR:
MEKHANIKA ZNIDKOSTI I GAZA. No 5. 1971.

7. Droblenko. V. V.. Kanevakiy. c. 1.. "Calculation of Nearby Turbulent Planar
Rake" in: "Gidrodinamika vysokikh skorostey" [High-Velocity Hydrodynamics].
Leningrad. "Sudostroyeniye". 1976.

8. Prandtl. L.. "Cidroaeromekhanika" [Hydroaeronechanics]. Moscow. lzdatel'stvo
inostrannoy literatury. 1959.

9. Loytsyanskiy. L. 6.. "Hekhanika zhidkosti i gaza" [Mechanics of Liauid and
Gas]. Moscow. "Nauka", 1970.

10. Meyer, H. A.. "A Correlation of Frictional Characteristics for Turbulent Flow
of Dilute Viscoelastic Non-Newtonian Fluids in Pipes". A. I. ch. E. JOURNAL.
Vol l2. No 3. I966.

11. Spence. D. A.. "Prediction of the Characteristics of Two-Dimensional Airfoils".
J. AERO. SCI.. Vol 21, No 9. I954.

12. Nakayama. Neytel, Landveber. "Interaction of Flows at the End of a Body of
Revolution. Part 2. Iteration Solution for Flows Hithin the Limits of the
Boundary Layer and wake and in the External Region". TEORETICHESKIYE OSNOVY
INZHENERNYKN RASCHETOV. Mir. No 3. 1976.

13. Page. A.. Falkner. V. M.. Walker. R. 8.. "Experiments on a Series of Symmetri-
val Joukowski Sections". AERONAUT. RES. COHM.. REP. AND HEN., No l261, 1929.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'stvo "Nauka". "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Hekhanika zhidkosti i gaza".
1979

6610
C30: 9244/0203-A

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.U83¢HNLY

LASERS AND HASBRS

UDC 621.311.6:62l.375.826
ELECTRIC POHER SUPPLIES FOR LASERS

Hoscow lSTOCHNIKI ELEKTROPITANIYA LAZBROV in Russian 1981 (signed to press 6 Jun 81)
pp 2-8. 169

lAnnotation. editor's foreword. introduction and table of contents from book "Elec-
tric Power Supplies for Lasers". by Konstantin Dnitriyevich Shlelev and Gennadiy
Vasil'yevich Korolcv. Energoizdat. 6000 copies. 169 pages]

[Text] An examination is made of electric power supply circuits for small-scale
gas. solid-state and semiconductor lasers working in cw or pulsed modes. Principal
methods and arrangements are given for igniting gas lasers and optical pulping

’rvns of solid-state lasers. A number of schemes are given for controlling emission
parameters by acting on the output characteristics of the electric power supply.

Fur engineering and technical workers involved in developing electric power supplies
for gas, solid-state and semiconductor lasers used in instrument eaking.

Editor's Foreword

In handling the tasks set before the Soviet people by the Twenty-Sixth Congress
of the CPSU. of greatest significance are probless of increasing the efficiency
of social production and improving the quality of goods produced. A leading role
here goes to the latest advances in Soviet and worldwide science and engineering.
It is generally acknowledged that one of the most outstanding phenomena in the
field of physics over the past two decades has been the development of quantum
electronics. and its component part--laser technology.

A distinguishing characteristic of laser technology is not only its revolutionizing
role in many practical areas of human endeavor. but an unprecedented pace of intro-
duction in the national econony. It was only a little sore than three years from
the time that the first lasers were eade until they were being used under industrial
conditions. A lot of the credit for this goes to engineers and workers who carried
on the work started by the creators of this new field of physics-the eminent Soviet
scientists. academicians N. G. Basov and A. H. Prokhorov.

Considerable credit for the rapid introduction of advances in laser technology
into the national economy goes also to the specialists responsible for developing
the electric power supplies for lasers. Important factors in this work were the
searches for workable ways to match the current-voltage characteristics of laser
euitters to the external (load) characteristic of the source of electric supply.

31

FOIIOFFNJAI.USEGNHLY
iNJRlOITNC1AI.IJSEE(NHLV

minimizing energy losses and meeting requirements on the range of control of the
pumping parameters of active elements in lasers. It should be pointed out that
there has not yet been much research on unifying the parameters of laser emission
with the requirements for sources of electric supply for laser emitters.

This book will enable more complete formulation of requirements for electric power

supplies for lasers and selection of circuitry with a view to maximizing efficiency
and minimizing size and weight. which is very important for developing laser-based

devices.

The book describes some original design features, presents engineering formulas
for sources of electric supply for lasers, and makes recommendations on selecting
the main functional elements of such sources.

Comments and suggestions should be addressed to ll3ll4. Moscow. M-llb. Shlyuzovaya
nab.. l0. Energoizdat.

V. H. Vakulenko.
USSR State Prize Laureate

Introduction

The development of lasers is a grand achievement of recent years by scientists
and engineers in the Soviet Union and elsewhere. Gas. solid-state and semiconductor
lasers have now found wide application in various devices and systems.

High coherence and monochromaticity of optical radiation of all kinds of lasers
make them useful in a variety of communication systems, locating devices. range
finders and altimetcrs. devices for measuring velocities and angles of turn. and
interferometers.

Atomic helium-neon lasers have feund wide application in instrument making. Thanks
to frequency stability of emission. these lasers are used in interferometers.

in optical communication lines as message-handling devices. as firing simulators

on weaponry. and as a basis for ring gyroscopes. At cw emission power of up to
50—60 kw. helium-neon lasers consume no more than 50-60 H of power from the electric
line.

lon lasers differ appreciably from atomic lasers with respect to optical radiation
power. reaching several watts per meter of the active element. and have found ap-
plication in submarine lidar. as well as for control of chemical reactions.

Practically all molecular lasers use carbon dioxide as the active element with
various additives of nitrogen and helium to raise efficiency to 301 and optical
radiation power to tens of watts per meter of length. Carbon dioxide lasers are
being successfully used in lidar and communications. and also as process lasers.

Direct current is ordinarily used for exciting cw operation of gas lasers. The
power of the source of electric Supply in this case is determined by the type of
laser that is used and its linear dimensions. In cw gas lasers. the maximum radia-
tion power per unit of length of the active element and the necessary power of

the source of electric supply are as follows:

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 
  
    

 
 
  

Power of sources
of electric

supply. HI-

Types of
lasers

Average
efficiency. 1

   
    
   

   

Atomic 0.03 (0.1) 100
Ion 0.1 (0.2) l0,000-20.000
Molecular 10 (30) 500-5000

In miniature devices (interferometers. gyroscopes). gas lasers are used in which
the length of the active elelents does not exceed a few dozen centimeters. In

this connection. the power of the electric supply does not exceed tens or hundreds
of watts. Pulsed operation is used to increase the power of optical radiation

of all kinds of lasers (gas. solid-state and semiconductor). As compared with

cw operation. pulsed operation for example of gas lasers enables an increase in
optical power of the laser by a factor of about ten. Despite considerable powers

of pulse radiation. the average consuption from the electric power supply remains
small. By using Q-switching in the laser cavity. optical radiation can be increased
by a factor of 103-10“ as compared with power in the continuous mode.

Atomic gas lasers (He-Ne. lie-Xe. lie-Cd and others) in pulsed operation have not
found any practical use. Among the pulsed gas lasers. the ones that have been
extensively used are those based on gas ions (Ar. Kr. Xe. he) that emit in the
ultraviolet and visible regions of the spectrm. These pulse lasers. working in
the pulse mode. are being used in underwater navigation and signaling. in metrology
and holography.

Nitrogen gas lasers in free emission radiate a pulse power of about 100 Hi at pulse
duration of 10 ns and recurrence rate of 1-100 Ila. 'i'hese lasers are designed for
use in photochemistry. high-speed photography and other scientific purposes.

Carbon dioxide molecular gas lasers in the free emission mode radiate a pulse power
of 80-!00 v. the pulse duration ranging from 1 to 10 us. and the pulse recurrence
rate is from l H: to 1 kHz. in Q-switched operation. these same lasers can reach
a radiation power of 1 RH with recurrence rate of up to 100 klla. with cw pulping.
Emission pulse duration in this case does not exceed 50 na.

Rods of ruby. neodymiua glass and YAG:Nd are used as the active element in solid-
state lasers. The overall dimensions and mass of such active elements are consider-
ably less than in gas lasers. Therefore. thanks to their compactness. solid-state
lasers that operate in the pulsed 'aode have found application in airborne lidar
systems. range finding and target illumination. ‘i'hese lasers are characterised

by high pulse power at pulse duration of up to 100 ns. Solid-state YAG lasers

that operate in the continuous mode are used in coununicatione systens.

Semiconductor lasers (CaAs. lnAs). thanks to relatively high efficiency (up to
602), compactness. and a capability for optical frequency tuning have found appli-
cation in pulsed altiseters. range finders and long-range cousunication systems
(in both pulsed and cw operation). However. semiconductor lasers show a rather
wide spectrum of the output signal and a greater angle of beam divergence.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)! 0i1ﬂ€1Al.lEﬂi(NVLY

Laser devices can be used both under stationary conditions (transmitting laser
devices. lidars. beacons). and in a variety of mobile units: aerospace vehicles.
satellites. surface transport. The primary source of electric power for such
devices can be both industrial AC line voltage and DC supplies (batteries. accumu-
lators). Therefore in developing sources of electric supply for lasers this is
one of the decisive factors in choosing electric circuitry.

A characteristic feature of pulsed laser devices is the considerable level of output
pulse power for a comparatively small average power consumed from the line. Minimum
mass and overall dimensions. high efficiency and reliability are among the major
requirements for sources of electric power for lasers.

At relatively low average laser radiation power. there is a considerable increase
in requirements for stability of output parameters of optical emission in time.
which depend on the output characteristics of the primary sources of electric power.
It is known that accumulator voltages may vary over a range of :20! of the rated
value. Besides. the power of primary sources of electric supply (accumulators.
converters) is limited and commensurate with the power required for excitation
(supply) of the laser itself.

Contents page
Editor's Foreword 3
Introduction 5
Chapter I: Characteristics of the Laser as a Load on the Source of Electric
Supply 9

1.1. Methods of gas laser excitation 9
1.2. Current-voltage characteristics of gas lasers 11
1.3. Parameters of optical pumping lamps of solid-state lasers 19
1.4. Problems of ignition of gas lasers and optical pumping lamps of solid-

state lasers 22
1.5. Current-voltage characteristics of semiconductor lasers 23
Chapter 2: Circuits for Electric Supply to Lasers From AC Line 26
2.1. Block diagrams of sources of electric supply for lasers with cw and

pulse radiation 26
2.2. Uncontrolled rectifiers in electric power supplies 29
2.3. Stabilized scurces of electric supply for gas lasers 39
2.4. Using controlled rectifiers in electric power supplies 47
Chapter 3: Transformerless Electric Power Supplies 57
3.l. ways to r.iuce mass and overall dimensions of electric power supplies 57
3.2. Electric power supplies using voltage multipliers ' 64
3.3. Using devices with intermediate frequency conversion 68
3.4. Pulsed sources of electric supply for solid-state lasers vith frequency

conversion 76
3.5. Electric power supplies for semiconductor lasers 80
3.6. RFpumplngoscillntors for gas lasers and ring lasers 98
Chapter 4: Electric Power Supplies With Piezotransistor Converters 102
4.1. working principle and parameters of piezoelectric voltage transformer 102
4.2. Generators for excitation of piezoceramic transformer 112
4.3. Piezotrunsistor current stabilizers for gas lasers 122
4.4. Piezntransistur converters in pulsed electric power supplies 126

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAL.USE(NVLY

Chapter 5: Circuits fur Igniting Gas Lasers and Tubes for Optical Pumping of

Solid-State Lasers 132
5.1. Ignition voltage of gas-discharge devices 132
5.2. Gas laser ignition cirCuits 135
5.3. Circuits for igniting optical pumping tubes of solid-state lasers 161
5.4. Ignition of gas lasers and optical pulping tubes with inpact action
on a piezoelectric transducer 168
Chapter 6: Laser Radiation Control Circuits 151
6.1. Gas laser radiation intensity :odulation 151
6.2. Stabilizing power of gas laser optical emission 157
Peferences 162

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. 1981

6610
C50: 1862/32

35

513R CM"H(1AI.IE§BIOBHJV
l1)! OWWHCJAI.lEﬂE(HVLY

UDC 621.375.826
TUNABLE LASERS

Novosibirsk LAZERY S PERESTRAIVAYEHOY CHASTOTOY (SBORNIK NAUCHNYKH TRUDOV) in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 2 Oct 80) pp 4. 121-125

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from book "Tunable Lasers (Collection of
Scientific Papers)". edited by Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences
Veniamin Pavlovich Chebotayev. Institute of Thermal Physics. Siberian Department,
USSR Academy of Sciences. 500 copies. 126 pages]

[Text] The collection contains the exposition of techniques and results of experi-
mental research on a wide range of lasers with tunable frequency: dye lasers.
color-center lasers. Landau-level magnetotunable laser, high-pressure pulsed gas
lasers. optically pumped iodine laser. and line-tunable electrochemical HP laser.

Also described in the collection is a volume holographic grating recorded in a
crystal of LiNb03:Fe’+ for laser tuning.

The collection is intended for specialists in the field of nonlinear optics and
lnse r spect roscopy .

UDC 621.375.826

LASERS USING F-CENTERS 1N LiF AND NaF CRYSTALS

[Abstract of article by Gusev. Yu. L.. Kirpichnikov, A. V., Konoplin. S. N. and
Narcnikov. S. 1.]

[Text] A report on the results of research to develop pulsed lasers using color
centers in LiF and NaF crystals.

The crysrals were irradiated with different doses from a Co-60 source of gamma
radiation to form F}. F;. P; and F; centers. An investigation is made of the emis-
sion characteristics of lasers on these color centers with pumping by dye laser,
ruby laser. a VAC-neodymium laser and its second harmonic.

Overall tuning range is 0.62—l.k um. An investigation is made of questions of
time stability of the color centers and their resistance to pumping radiation.

It is found that F; and F3 centers are stable. A simple method is described for
restoring FT centers by luminous radiation (ultraviolet or radiation of the second
harmonic of the YAC:Nd laser).

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An efficiency of 201 in the pulsed node is attained on F; camera in the Na? crys-
tal. An estimation of the lasing threshold for cw operation gives 100 all with
focusing area of [0'5 cm2 and intrscavity losses of 10%. In principle. the band
from 0.9 to 2.9 um can he covered on P3 centers in different crystals. In conclu-
sion. the field of application of color-center lasers is discussed. Figures _4.
tables 1.. references 10.

UDC 621.375.826
FREQUENCY DOUBLING 0F TUNABLE CU F-CENTER LASER
[Abstract of article by Verbovsltiy. V. 1.. Klement‘yev, V. M. and Pecherskiy.Yu. Ya.]

[Text] The paper gives a brief description of a tunable cu laser on PAH” centers
in the KCl:Li crystal. and presents the Iajor characteristics of the laser. Fre-
quency dOubling is reported for enission of a color-center laser. as well as the lie-
Nc laser in a variety of nonlinear optical crystals. Converted radiation powers
obtained for the PAH-1) laser are ~10" ll in the AgGaSz crystal. and for the lie-Ne
laser -IO'7 N in the new nonlinear crystal ZnGePz. The given results can serve

as a point of departure for developing the corresponding elements of frequency
synthesis and measurement systems. Figures 2. references 8.

UDC 621.387.330.3
TUNABLE-FREQUENCY RADIATION SOURCES BASED ON PULSED GAS LASERS

[Abstract of article by ishchenko. V. N.. Kochubey. S. A., Lisitsyn. V. N. and
Chapovskiy. P. 1..]

[Text] The article gives the results of research aimed at developing pulsed
wavelength-tunable lasers in the near ultraviolet. visible and near-infrared bands.
Three versions of such devices are considered: high-pressure electric discharge
lasers on atomic lines of inert gases. exciner lasers and dye lasers. Laaing wave-
length regions. monochronaticity of euission and tuning characteristics are deter-
mined for each case. Operation in a aaster oscillator-uplifier scheme is studied
on the excimer laser exsnple. It is pointed out that such an arrangement has good
prospects for practical use of tunable lasers. Attention is called to the impor-
tance of developing spectrometers required in scientific and applied problens.

A pulsed laser spectrometer with high rise resolution is described that is based
on a high-pressure (:0, laser. and used to study some of the transition character-
ist 1‘28 of argon on the 0.9l2 us line. Figures l7. references ‘2.

UDC 621.387.330.13
INVESTlGATION 0F EMISSION PROPERTIES 0? CU DYE LASER

[Abstract of article by Beterov. 1. FL. Vssilenko. L. 8.. Zakharov. H. 1.. Shishayev.
A. V. and Yursllin B. Ya.]

[Text] The article gives an analysis of a method of obtaining a single-frequency
lasing mode in a cw cye laser. This technique is based on the strong coupling
that arises due to the effect of spatial saturation of gain than a selecting element

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the form of a thin absorbing film is introduced into the cavity. An experimental
study 01 this method and of the causes that lead to broadening of the emission

line of a single-frequency dye laser has enabled development of a cw dye laser

with emission linewidth of l mllz. continuous tuning range of 3 CH: and maximal
radiation power of 180 mu at pumping power of 3 H. Figures 9. references 20.

UDC 621.378.33
SINGLE-FREQUENCY EMISSION IN PULSE!) DYE LASER HITIDUT FABRY-PEROT ETALON

[Abstract of article by Lebedev. V. V. and Plyasulya. V. M.]

[Text] The paper gives the results of an experimental study of working conditions
of a pulsed dye laser in which the spectrum is seletted by a system of two flat
diffraction gratings. A rhodamine-6C solution in ethanol was used as the active
medium. and the second harmonic of a YAC-neodymiu laser was the pumping source.
with optimization of laser parameters. single-frequency emission was attained in

n rnnpe of SSI- 567 nm. Frequency tuning was by simple rotation of a diffraction
grating with spacing of 0.025 cm”. Figures 6. references 10.

UDC 772.773

VOLUME PHASE HOLOCRAPHIC GRATlNG IN LiNbOg: SPACE-FREQUENCY SELELTOR 0P TUNABLE
LASER

[Abstract of article by Barkan. I. 8.. Lebedev. V. V. and Vorob'yev. A. V.]

[Text] An investigation is made of time. temperature and concentration dependences
of processes of formation and relaxation ofa volume phase holographic grating [WHO]
in iron-duped LiNbO; crystals. The diffraction efficiency, dispersion, angular

and spectral selectivity (resolution) are measured for VPHG's that have spatial
frequency from 500 to ISOO lines/m. and thickness from 3 to lb mm. It is shown
that there is a good outlook for using thick VPHG's as a space-frequency selector

in making u tunable laser with short optical cavity. large aperture and high spec-
tral and angular brightness of emission. Figures 10. table 1. references 19.

UDC 621.373.826

TUNABLE OPTICALLY PUHPED CH 1; LASER
(Abstract of article by Hatyugin. Yu. A. and Ustinov. G. N.]

[Tt'xll A report on m experimental study of lasing on the electronic transition
B‘ ::U- X‘}'+ r of molecular iodine with pumping by emission of a cw 66-rhodamine dye
laser. Emission of the iodine laser was observed in the range of 0. 67-1. 24 um.
According to estimltcs. the total number of lasing in this band is of the order
of 10". Threshold pumping power was on a level of 10-30 ml! for a lasing band of
l. l— l.2 um. and 30-100 ml! beyond the limits of this band. An investigation was

made of the shape of the laser emission line. Figures 7, references 20.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UN 621.373.826

CH CHEMICAL HF LASER WITH LINE TUNING
[Abstract of article by Pecherskiy. Tu. Ya.)

[Text] The paper describes the design and characteristics of a cw chemical HP
laser that is tuned by an intracavity prism. Lasing is achieved on 13 lines in

a range of 2.64-3 um. Maximum lasing power is 0.55 W. It is shown that amplitude
noises in the laser radiation are concentrated mainly in the frequency region below
5 kﬁz. Amplitude stability of :11 is attained in the noise-optimum mode. Lamb
shift parameters are given. Frequency is stabilized with respect to its center.
Figures 6, references 10.

UDC 621.375.826

HAGNETOTUNABLE CH SPIN-FLIP LASER

[Abstract of article by Gavrilov. V. P.. Pastryakov. Ye. V. and Pedorov. s. A.)

[Text] The paper describes the construction of a cw magnetotunable spin-flip laser'
with pumping by different C0 laser lines in the range of 5.2-5.6 um. Lasing is
achieved on the Stokes frequency in industrial specimens of a type with concentra-
tion from 5-10“ to 2.2-10‘s en".

The authors discuss the outlook for using an external cavity to smooth the tuning
characteristic and increase the output power of the spin-flip laser. Emission
power of the spin-flip laser is increased with external mirrors on transmission-

enhanced specimens with 6- 1.1.1015 cm". Figures 5. references 11.

UDC 621.378.33

PHASE SYNCHRONISM IN THREE-FREQUENCY COLLINEAR PARAHBTRIC INTERACTION 0? "AYES
IN UNIAXIAL CRYSTALS

[Abstract of article by Barykinskiy. G. M.]

[Text] A simple algorithm is proposed for exact calculation of tuning curves that
are required for making tunable parametric light generators and sum and difference
frequency oscillators based on three-frequency parametric interaction of waves

in optically uniaxinl media with square-law nonlinearity. The given algorithm

is also applicable to biaxial crystals in planes of principal cross sections. and
is easily programmable.

The resultant algorithm is used for computer calculations of tuning curves for
crystals. Figures 3. references 7.

39

FI”!(NWH(1AI.USB(MVLY
FORfMﬂﬂCIAL.USE(NNLY

UDC 621.375.826
INTRACAVIIY LASER SPECTROMETER BASED ON LASER USING P3 CENTERS IN L1? CRYSTAL

[Abstract of article by Gusev. Yu. L.. Ivanov. A. P., Harennikov. s. I. and Sinitee.
L. N.)

[Text] A report on development of an intracavity spectrometer using stable P;
centers in the Li? crystal. Stimulated enission of the color-center laser was
excited in a longitudinal arrangement by neodynim laser pulping. Lasing in a
range of 1.156-1.168 un was achieved in a nonselective cavity.

The sensitivity of the intracavity spectroneter was 3.10-5 cII‘l with color-center
laser pulse duration of 1 us. The spectra-eter registered 19 absorption lines
of atmospheric air in the IR band. Figures 2, references 4.

“DC 621.375.826
NONLINEAR LIGHT ABSORPTION BY COLOR CENTERS IN ALKALI NALIDB CRYSTALS

[Abstract of article by Gusev, Yu. L.. Konoplin. S. N.. Kirpichnikov, A. V. and
Harcnnlkov. S. 1.]

[Text] A report on investigation of the effect of nonlinear dependence of absorp-
tion on light intensity in L1? crystals with P; centers. It is suggested that
this effect can be explained by the change in population of electronic levels.
CaICuIation agrees well with experiment.

A saturation effect was also observed in Li? crystals with P: centers under the
action of ruby laser emission. and in a KCl crystal containing N centers under
the action of YAG:Nd laser emission with A- [.06 um.

Q-switchcd operation with frequency of up to 30 kHz is attained by using the non-
linear absorption effect in L1? crystals with F; centers. Figure l, referencze h.

COPYRIGHT: Institut teplofiziki SO AN SSSR. 1980

6610
C50: I862/26

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

CHARACTERISTICS OF GASDYNAHIC LASERS USING COMBUSTION PRODUCTS RITE UNSTABLE CAVITIBS

Novosibirsk FIZIKA GORENIYA I VZRYVA in Russian Vol 17. No 6, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 21 May 80) PP 109-113

[Article by A. 1. Didyukov. c. I. Kozlov and I. K. Salerneva. Moscow]

(Text! The use of unstable cavities in gasdynamic lasers enables emission with
high directionality on large volumes of homogeneous active medium. The most exten-
sively used unstable cavities in practical applications are telescopic cavities
formed by two cylindrical or spherical mirrors.

In Ref. I. numerical calculations on vibrational relaxation were done and power

was optimized for gasdynaaic lasers with planar cavities using mixtures of CO;-
Ng-CO-Hzo-Hg produced by burning different fuels. In this paper we will study the
optimization of characteristics of gasdynamic lasers with unstable cavities as well.
The energy characteristics of gasdynaaic lasers are analyzed on the basis of simul-
taneous solution of balance kinetic equation of vibrational relaxation in the com-
bustion products [Ref. 1] and equations of radiation transfer in the geometric
optics approximation [Ref. 2].

In accordance with Ref. 3. the intensity of radiation at an arbitrary point (x,y)
of a cavity formed by cylindrical mirrors with common focus (x..y.) is related
to the intensity at a point of the ease cross section located H tines closer to
the cavity axis (H is the magnification factor) by the expression

 

la. y) - Hz. y)l(:. — ’°“. v).

‘I
F(I.U)=£#¢W[ 5

any)

(1)
K“(') all.

where s(x.y) is the beam trajectory in the geometric approximation as waves travel
in the positive and negative direction of the y-axis; 31, k; are mirror reflectivi-
ties. Kv is the gain of the medium.

The condition of existence of the solution of equation (1) is the condition of

steady-state lasing
F (.r.. y) - i. (2)

The quantity F(x.y) calculated for points in the plane of a large mirror (yI-O)
may be represented as

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Po. 0) = '31: m. Map. — 1,74. v). + x.[:. + 193v. 19)] an].
O
. (3)

here l is the distance between cavity mirrors.

The transport equations imply that the intensity of waves propagating in the posi-
tive and negative directions of the y-axis are related to intensity near the concave
mirror by the expressions

 

 

l‘ (1. y) -- 1(1, 0) exp[_flt’.(r. y')dy']. ' (4)
O
. . pv—rr y ;
I (:.:I) I( ’:_y° ,0) hi" np‘

_ I“ [WE y'] an], (5)

A net—point method was used for simultaneous numerical solution of system (l)-(5).
the equations of kinetics for vibrational degrees of freedom [Ref. 1] and the boun-

dary conditions on the mirrors
PR, 0) -R.I'(.r, 0). I'Ix, l) - R,l‘(:. l) (3)

The axis of the cavity x- x. divides it into two parts: stimulated emission length
[1 and amplification length 12. The solution for the stimulated emission part

can be obtained only by an iteration method. The emission field is determined

from the given distribution of gain and intensity on the axis of the cavity

[(xo. 0)- lo from (I). (a). (5). The resultant intensity distribution enables

us to find a new distribution of gain in the volume of the cavity. Corrections

are made to the initially arbitrary quantity Io until the systems of equations

of distribution of the field and the gain obtained as a results of solution meet
the condition of steady—state lasing (2). The solution in the right-hand part

of the cavity can be found by using the same methods, but with assigned distribution
of the field on the axis of the cavity [(xo, y).

Numerical calculat ions of the energy characteristics of a telescopic cavity have
been done for a mixture of IOZ CO; - 601 N; - 202 CO - 5! H20 - 51 H; pre-expanded
in a planar logarithmic nozzle with height of the critical cross section of 0.02 cm
and degree of expansion of 50 [Ref. [1. The stagnation temperature of the combus-
tion products was taken as 2000 K. and the stagnation pressure was varied. Of
greatest interest is the way that lasing power P and working efficiency of the
cavity -. depend on various parameters. Fig. I shows the function P01) with laser
parameters I: 50 cm. I; - 5 cm. Z; - 15 cm for mixtures with stagnation pressure

po - 20 (I). 40 (2) and 60 atm (3) respectively. The broken curves show the effi-
ciency depondences for the same mixtures.

Calculations show that for small values of M. efficiencies differ insignificantly.
This shows that the main contribution to power in cavities with low magnification

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FonioFFKJAl.USE(NVLY

is from the stimulated emission part. and conse- P kH/cm
quently the energy losses due to vibrational ’
relaxation are insignificant. As H increases. 6
there is a drop in efficiency. and this drop

is faster the greater the gas flux density.

While the efficiency of the cavity falls with ‘
increasing pressure in the investigated range
of variation of parameters. the power has an
optimum value with respect to pressure that
varies depending on the magnification of the
cavity. Low-density mixtures are most advanta-
geous (from the standpoint of power production)
at high magnifications. The optimum values

of po decrease with decreasing M.

 

Fig. 1

Use of a telescopic cavity avoids the excessive constriction of emission at the
input to the cavity that is observed when planar mirrors are used. Nonetheless,
at small M there is considerable spatial inhomogeneity of the distribution of I.
As calculations show. radiation denstiy in a cavity with small.H under typical con—
ditions of casdynnmic laser operation may vary by an order of magnitude along the
flow. An increase in M leads to smoothing of the field distribution. although

the efficiency falls at the same time.

Ref.& proposes using telescopic cavities based on triple-prisms with spherical
lures or their two—dimensional analogs in the flow system. Such cavities are es—
scutlally telescopic cavities in which only theconcaveruirror. or both mirrors

are replaced with internal-reflecrion prisms. As it travels through such prisms,
the curvature of the light beams is transformed in the same way as with reflection
from the mirrors that they replace. but the beam itself is reversed relative to
the axis of the cavity.

For the sake of dofiniteness we will consider a cavity in which the concave mirror
is replaced by a prism. As shown in Ref. 5. such a cavity has very little sensi-
tivity to the presence of optical inhomogeneities. In the geometric optics approxi-
mation. self-consistent calculation reduces to simultaneous solution of equations
of kinetics for vibrational degrees of freedom. and radiation transport equations
(a) and (5) with boundary conditions on the mirrors

1' (1. 0) Mr (2:.- .r. 0). I‘ (z. 0) .. R,I”(x. 0). (7)

The distribution oi field and gain is found by an iteration method. Used as the
initial distribution was the distribution lt(x,0). constant with respect to the
x-coordinate. and approximately corresponding in order of magnitude to the intensity
on the axis of the analogous telescopic cavity with ordinary mirrors. The character
istlc distribution of radiation intensity in plane yI-O is shown in Pig. 2. The
reSults refer to lasing in a mixture with po- 60 atm. cavity parameters 1- lOO cm,
£,- 19- 3 cm and M-=2. The use of an internal—reflection prism instead of a mirror
leads to pracrically uniform distribution of the overall intensity along the flow.

Comparison of the energy characteristics of the conventional cavity with those
of the cavity in which one or both mirrors have been replaced with triple-prisms
shows that they are similar over a wide range of variation in the flow parameters

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 2

 

and cavity dimensions. For example when H is changed from 2 to 5 for a mixture
with po- 50 atm. efficiency differences do not exceed 102.

The energy characteristics of unstable resonators can be controlled by an external
source as well. An unacceptable increase of angular divergeno: of radiation re-
sults from formation of a convergent wave in a telescopic cavity by adding a mirror
or name other reflective surface that partly covers the plane wave. or from intro-
ducing a convergent wave from an external source Inst. 6]. The situation can be
changed if a divergent external beam is used to control laser operation. One such
arrangement. proposed by Yu. A. Anan'yev et al.. consists in introducing radiation
of given intensity from an external source into the central part of the telescopic
cavity. In our work. a check was done on the effectiveness of this scheme for

the telescopic cavity of a gasdynamic laser.

Typical distribution of relative intensity I+IIo in the plane of a large mirror

is shown in Fig. 3. The values of 1+ are normalized to the intensity in the center
10 that arises when the telescopic cavity is working in the mode of stimulated
emission. Curve 1 corresponds to distribution I*/Io of a conventional telescopic
cavity with par:.meters Z- 100 cm, 1; - 5 cm. 12-15 cm and H-2. The stagnation
pressure of the mixture was po- 20 atm. Curves 2 and 3 refer to distributions
i+llo in the same cavity with a hole 0.2 cm wide in the large mirror through which
radiation is injected with intensity of 1000 and 500 Val/caz respectively (Io- 680
w/cm ).

injection of rudiatinn from the outside causes redistribution of the radiation
density in the cavity. if the radiation density that is injected exceeds 19.
intensity distribution is set up in the cavity higher than the lasing emission

leVul to the left of the axis. and lower than this level to the right of the axis

of the cavity (see Fig. 3. curve 2). When the intensity of radiation injected

from the outside is lower than 10. steady-state distribution is formed with lower
intensity in the stimulated emission part. and higher intensity in the amplification
part of the cavity (see Fig. 3. curve 3).

Calculations have shown that injecting radiation from the outside does not improve
the energy characteristics of the gasdynamic laser: power and efficiency. The
most appreciable effect is on density distribution. Thus the telescopic cavity

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJI OlﬂﬂC1A|.!ISE:(HNLY

arrangement with variable flux in the center is efficient from the standpoint of
redistribution of the power of the outgoing radiation flux to the right and left
of the axis and change in load on the nitrate.

1.

REFERENCES

Kozlov, G. 1.. Ivanov. V. N.. Selezneva. I. K.. FIZIKA GOBENIYA I VZKYVA,'
V01 15. No 4. I979. p 88.

Anan'yev. Yu. A., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, V01 6. 1971. p 3.

Anan'yev. Yu. A., Koval'chuk. L. V. et 31., KVANTOVAXA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 1.
l974. p S.

Virnik. Ya. 2.. Cerasiuov. V. B. et al.. KRATKIYE SOOBSHCRENIYA P0 FIZIKZ.
No 6, I979.

Anan'ycv. Yu. A., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol Vol 1. 1973.

Anan'yev. Yu. A.. Goryachkin. D. A. et a1.. KVINTOVAYA ELEKTRONIIA, Vol 6.
1979, p 8.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Fizikn goreniya i vzryvn". 1981

6610

CSO:

1862/12

65

FIE)(MW1(1AI.[§HE(HVLY
FOR OFI'IC‘IAI. USE ONLY

UDC 621.375.826

CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF DRIVEN AMPLIPICATION 0F FREE-RUNNING PEOTO-DISSOCIAIION
IODINE LASER PULSES: DURATION CONTROL

Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 5 (107), May 81
(manuscript received 6 Aug 80) pp 988-995

[Article by V. N. Kurzenkov]

[Tait] Abstract: Resultserepresentedfrmmexperimentaletudies
ofthe rocessofnonlinearanplificationoffree-running
photo issociation iodine laser pulses under condi-
ditions of synchronous or leading pumping of the
amplifier. A sharp reduction in the guise dura ion
and an increase in peak power ram 10 watts/cm to
a level exceeding 106 watts/cm was demonstrated
with input pulse delay times similar with respect
to magnitude to the duration of the amplifier pump-
ing pulse. Attenuation of a significant part of
the trailing edge of the pulse was detected, which
was caused by nonpyrolysis transition of the active
medium of the amplifier to the absorbing state
which is connected with the process of molecular
iodine quenching of the excited atoms.

Figure I shows [hr experimental setup used to investigate
the passage of light pulses emitted by a free-running photodissociation iodine

laser (FL) through an amplifier. In contrast to the monopulae systems [1], in this
case the interaction time of the radiation with the active medium of the amplifier

is comparatively large. which permits the evolution of the pulse to be followed
as the- 10559:. build up Hll h time. As it turned out. these losses can he of

I resonant nature.

The gain on the line F - 3 9 F' - 6 hfs of the 2P1/2-2P3/2 transition of an 1127

atom was studied in the experiment. A laser with two-tube pumping and compensated
magnetic field provided an energy density at the amplifier input of 0.1-0.5 joule/
cm for a time of 50—70 microseconds. The amplifier was made from a cavity tube
with active medium 50 cm long. Pure c3! 1 or a mixture of it with SF6, Xe was used
as the filler. The measuring system permitted simultaneous recording of the shape
of the pulses, energy. dynamic and static divergence at the amplifier input and out-
put. The PL radiation was fed to the input of the amplifier either synchronously

with pumping with a duration of rpunp - 100 microseconds or with an adjustable delay

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINIfNﬂﬂ(]Al.USEilVLY

Tdelay - 0—250 microseconds. The measurement results demonstrated that the shape of
the pulse and output power essentially depend on tdelay' For Tdelay - 0 the dura-

tion and shape of the panoramplified pulse in practice did not change (Figure 2.
a). With an increase in Tdelay’ the pulse is shortened (Figure 2,b), and for Tdelay:

Tpump' it is shortemd drasticallKPigure 2, d), which is partially explained by the
high gain at its front [2].

Attention is attracted not only by drastic shortening of the pulse on transition
from synchronous pumping to driven amplification. but also the fact that in the
latter case the intensity of the output signal decreases to zero, and not to the in-
put signal level (Figure 2, c, e, f). that is, the main part of the input pulse
passes through the active medium of the amplifier with amplitude attenuation. It
must be noted that it is quite complicated to determine the magnitude of the attenu-
ation in the recording system used as a result of the sharp difference of the ampli-
tudes of the input and amplified signals. In the system shown in Figure l, oscillo-
graphic observations of signals from photomultipliera 5, l6 recording the input and
output pulses. time scans of the omission field in the far zone using image con-
verters 10. 20 and also calorimetric measurements of the powers at the input and
output of the amplifier (K and K2) were used. In Figure 2, c. e. f. oscillograms
are presented which were ohtained under conditions where the amplitudes of the input
signal and amplified signal differ insignificantly, and with the same sensitivity

of the measuring channels do not go beyond the limits of the dynamic range of the
recording system. The amplitude of a lasing pulse with duration of ~100 micro-
seconds passing through an unpumped amplifying stage is clearly visible (Figure 2,
e). For the same level of input signal (Figure 2. c) the lasing pulse is not
recorded at the amplifier output on completion of the amplification process in the
C3F7I medium undergoing photolysis at a pressure of 15 mm Hg (Figure 2. f). The
same picture was observed on the image converter in the time scans of the dynamics
of the vmisﬁion field in the far zone. The attenuation of the input signal at the
time corresponding to the maximum of the lasing pulse can be 210 according to
the experimental estimates. Thus, it was established experimentally that under de-
fined conditions in the photodissociation iodine system consisting of a free-running

laser and driven amplifier. the lasing pulse front nonlinear amplification stage
is replaced by Chnppinu this pulse.

The investigated system can be used without the application of additional modulators
l0 reshape luw-powvr pulses of arbitrary shape and duration emitted by a free-running
dISSUliarinn FL Insvr Into microsecond or shorter pulses having stable shape

and maximum power Jl lhv front. The indicated method can be used in one
amplifying stage to obtain pulses with a duration to 3 microseconds with respect to
the base with gain of ~50 at the front with respect to the mean power level of the
input signal. The front duration did not exceed 0.1 microsecond. By comparison with
other methods of shaping analogous pulses used in iodine systems, for example. using
magnetic fields [3, 4]. this method, with its simplicity, is appreciably more effi-

cient inasmuch as additional amplification of the pulse power is realized during
the shaping process.

The energy characteristics of the output radiation with driven amplification and
synchronous pumping of the stages, as the experiments demonstrated, differ signifi-

cantly. Uith synchronous pumping (tdelay - 0). when the lasing pulse is fed to

47

INDR‘0F11CJAl.l£ﬂE(HWLV
FOR 0511C1A1.USE(NVLY

Figure 1. Diagram of the experimental setup: 1 -— FL [iodine photo-

dissociation laser]; H1 -— exposed plate with p - #2;

-- aluminum mirrors; 2, 6. 13, 14 -— light dividing wedges; b, 15 -—
focusing lenses; 5, l6 —- photonultipliera; 8, 18 - projecting ob-
jectives measuring the vmission divergence; 9, 19 —— glass plates;
10, 20 -- image converters: 21 -- cameras; 12 —- amplifying stage
using a cavity tube; Kl-K3 ._ graphite calorimeters.

 

Figure 2. Oscillograna of pulses at the input (a,

b, d, e —— upper signals, c) and output of the

amplifier (a. b, d, e --lmmr signals. f). Scanning:

a. b -- 10 microseconds/div; c—f - 25 microseconds]
div.

the amplifier simultaneously with the pumping pulse, additive summation of the ener-
gies of the input signal and the energy stored in the amplifier was observed. During

driven amplification for ‘delay 3 Tpunp and input signal power density of 2-7 -

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢OFWKJAL.US£(NVLY

  
   

m N 00 ‘g. I" (.)

Figure 3. ﬁner at the amplifier output H as a
function of the delay time t for a driven
amplifier. delay

Key: , microseconds

a. 1delay
b. H, joules

kilowatts/cmz. the energy at the output corresponded to the energy stored in the
amplifier, and the total energy of the long input pulse in practice had no influence
on the magnitude of the output power which depended to a much greater degree on
the delay time. decreasing as Tdela increased. An example of this relation is
presented in Figure 3. The power y losses with long delays'can be connected
with inversion losses in the attenuation processes and, possibly, weak superlumines-
cent (amplifier 5c||_excitation did not occur). As follows from Figure 3,

with a delay I . the energy at the amplifier output becomes less than the energy of
the input signal. At this time significant power gain is observed at the pulse
front. The magnitude of To determined from the energy comparison. in the general
case, obviously cannot characterize the time the inversion is maintained; determined
by the intensity equalization time. this time was 100-4000 microseconds in different
series of experiaents. With an increase in ‘delay > 1pump’ the output power de-

creased in practice to zero. The energy measurements show, therefore, that the
inversion relaxation in the absence of emission is a comparatively slow process.
with a characteristic time of 20.1 millisecond. Here the effect of attenuation of
the Iranian part of the input pulse is manifested. which is expressed in the re-
corded ANNTKy cqunlily in the presence of amplification at the front.

One of the causes of attenuation of the input pulse in the postnmplification stage
can be distributed linear losses on inhomogeneities in the active medium of the
amplifier. The source of such inhomogeneities in the iodine system basically is

the dynamic disturbance waves arising during pumping and leading to random defor-
nations of the index of refraction of the medium [5. 6]. Actually, measure—
ments of the radiation pattern demonstrated that the active medium of the ampli-

fier is a complex dynamic lens sharply deforming the initial wave front. Depend-
ing on the delay tine, the shape of the radiation pattern of the amplified emis-

~ion, reflecting in practice the instantaneous pattern of the inhomogeneities,
muiﬁlsiwﬂfﬁumly,ltu acquiring the form of continuous distribution, now the form of

A9

INDR‘OFIﬂCJAI.l£5l:(MULY
[WHICHHWCJAI.USIZONLY

collapse of the compression waves which is very intense under the cavity tube pump-
ing conditions. In this case lhi‘ pattern width increased from ~l to -10
mrad, but by estimates this is insufficient for the observed signal attenuation.

The upper bound of the signal attenuation as a result of emission at inhomogenei—
ties of the medium was determined by direct experimentation. For this purpose the
amplifier was filled with a mixture of c F l ( at ordinary experimental pressures)
with air. As a result of collision QUGJERIHB of the excited iodine atoms by
oxygen molecules. the system was converted to the absorbing state. Additional
amounts of an inert gas (Ar. Xe) or C0 . SP , air to a total pressure of 200-600

mm Hg lowered the absorption cross secgion go much that the active medium became
optically transparent on the transition frequency P - 3 to P' - 4. However. as is
known [6]. with an increase in the gas pressure the inhomogeneities do not decrease.
but, on the contrary, increase. Under these conditions, for different pumping levels
of the amplifier the relative reduction in the laser pulse power on passage through
an Optically inhomogeneous medium of a pumped amplifier did not exceed 10! together

with the residual absorption. Thus, the radiation attenuation in the postamplifying
stage is explained not by the losses at the inhomogeneities. but by absorption.

For analysis of the possible causes of transition of the active medium of the ampli-
fier to the absorbing state let us consider the basic processes developed in an
iodine system in the photolysis and postphotolysis stages:

RJ+hv'-;)R+J°l (1)
R+R- .: (2’
R] g n+1; <3)
J‘-H|V - J+2IW: (6)
J+J+KRL J,+M; (5)
J--rJ,—. 5+3, (6)

Key: a. pump b. 1

The radicals R - C3F7 and their complexes R2 - C6Flh formed under the effect of the

pumping light hvll do nor have absorption bands on the lasing frequency “I [7],

and Lhurelorc they cannot lead to radiation absorption. Consequently, it is natgral
L0 assume that absorption is of a resonance nature and is realizedln the 93/2- 91/2

transition of atomic iodine. It is obvious that for realization of this mechanism
a large number of iodine atoms in the ground state and the presence of a process
contradicting absorption saturation are required. The accumulation of iodine atoms
in the ground state is realized by several channels, but the process ofciimu.lpd
rmi>\iun (4) itself is the basic process in the presence of the input signal. it
must be noted that the transition of the medium to the absorbing state takes place
in a time appreciably less than the lifetime of an atom in the excited state '1'1 2
0.1 millisecond and much greater than the transverse relaxation time T2 5 10 nano—
seconds; therefore -ml>uiun cannot convert the medium to the absorbing state.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The inversion, as is easy to demonstrate on the basis of the balance equations
which are valid in the given case, asynptotically approaches zero.

in parallel with process (lo), a recombination process (5) develops which leads to
accuuulation of iodine molecules. Let us note that in the postphotolysis stage

the reaction of inverse recombination of the iodine atoms with the radicals is not
considered as a result of absence of radicals which are quickly bound into complexes
in process (2%. Molecular iodine, which is an extraordinarily effective quencher

of the state P leads to the occurrence of another channel for the accmlulation

of iodine atomsllfn the ground state in process (6).

As was demonstrated in [8], the process of thermal dissociation of the initial alkyl

logide (3) can take place independently. which also leads to an increase in the
l( P ) atom concentration. The rate of this process is deternined by the tempera-

3/2
ture oi the active medium and, according to the authrs as reference [9], at ten-
peratures close to critical (~1000 K), it can reach 10 cm' X sec‘l, which lust
lead to total decomposition of c F71 into radicals and unexcited iodine in the
time ~10 microseconds. Under the conditions of the investigated experiment, the
process of intense IIn-rmnl dissocial inn does not occur. first, this £0110"! ft“

the fact that amplification of the punping pulse was observed in the slave mode.

Secondly. on conversion of the amplifying stage to the lasing mode by installa—
tion of an additional resonator, a free-running pulse was recorded which lasts until

the end of the pumping current pulse, which also indicates the absence of intense
pyrolysis in the amplifying stage for the used pumping levels. With an increase in
the pumping level, the amplifying and lasing characteristics of the stage were
reproduced in the same form; therefore it is possible to assume that in the analysed
version the tenperature of the active mediu- is far from critical. By estimates, for
‘t - 100 K, the rate of the optical transitions exceeds by several orders the rate of
-'n.-rm| dissociation and, consequently, for investigation of driven amplifica-
tion, it is sufficient to limit ourselves to consideration of the processes (b)-(6).

The amplifying sedium can be represented in the form of a three-level system with
populations of the lower and upper laser states DI and N and the stats correspond-
ing to molecular iodine, N3. The hfs levels can be ignozed as a result of the
single-frequency spectrum of the input signal (line 1' - 3 to F - h with fast relaxa-
tion between its hali'levels [10]). The system of constitutive relations has the tom

3...“: u+<g.'g.n—SN.~, |l+(g,lg,)l+2]; I-N.-kN§N..

where A-N,—g,N./'g.; o is the amplification cross section; S is the quenching
rate constant of the excited atoms by iodine molecules; It is the rate constant of
the process (5); No is the concentration of particles M in ternary collisions.

Let us consider the variation of the inversion with time at a fixed point of the

amplifier, considering the intensity given in the form I - I exp (—t/r), which with
respect to the upper bound sufficiemly reflects ghe shape of the pulse
recorded experinentally. If we consider that after passage of the pulse front the

variation of the concentration N3 of molecular iodine in the tine interval where

:63 << N1 can be approximated by a linear function, assining f to be a constant para-
meter which is varied in the calculation, then under the given assumptions,
integration of the equation for the inversion gives

51

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l
A m u [ﬂiggm 1“)“ + 5.]?‘(1)’

where :(1) = clot || +1g,!g,)|(l-e'"‘)— ‘i,$[!'; x (I) - l —(N—2ﬂ)$t: N - N; + N, + 2N,.

The values of the parameters entering3 into6 the fornulas are as follows: 32/31 - 1/2;

01 - 105 to 107 sec :3 k - 9-(1-6) -103 an 6/sec [11]; S . 3. 61:10 11 en 3/sec [12];
° 18 “-3 1021 -3 -1 16 -3
No - 1.2 10 ; -1910 cu 'sec ; N - 3-10 -3-1017cn ; 1: - 5-25 micro-

seconds .

In the investigated time interval where N3 << N1. N, the function x(t) becomes nega-

tive, and the expression for the inversion seems the form of a sun of a constant
positive term and a negative tern increasing with tine, as a result of which for

sufficiently large f transition of the active medium to the absorbing state is
possible.

   

\\ Key: a. t,ni-
crons

Figure 6. Tine functions of the nagnit e of the
inversion for no - 0(1 + gf lg)“ 0103 - 6 19 aec'l and
0

f - 1019(1). °,(2) 3'eec (3); B -
1.4-106 sec 11 and f - 10 2° en‘s-sec1(6); 3 - 1o6
-1 21 -3

sec and f - 10 en 'sec (5).

The results are presented in Figure 6 from ﬁlculations of the time functions of the
inversion for an initial value of A0 - 3-101 for several values of 10 and f.

As was assumed. the functions have a sign-variable nature where the tine of existence

of the inversion decreases as the signal intensity increases (curves 2, 6 and 3, 5)

and the rate of formation of the 12 quencher nolecules increases (curves 1-3).
23/2

state reaches 10 to 10 cm in ~1 microsecond. as a result f - kleNO is 102

1021 -3 -l 20 21 “-3

cm 'sec (curves 2-5). For f - 10 to 10 ~see 1 and t - 10 slots-

15 16 GUI-3 6 5

seconds N3 2: 10 to 10 , which gives 8N3 a 10 to 10 sec-1, at the same tine

as the signal decreasing to the level of the input signal, can give 01 a 101° to 105

As a result of <1 imul .m-d transitions, the iodine ston concentration in the 2P
16 17-3

sec-1, that is, the Induced transition rate is compensated by quenching of the

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiOFFKJAl.USIZONLY

excited state. This fact explains the absence of absorption saturation by the

umlxaiuﬂ of a free-running pulse, and the presence of absorption for the existing
level of signal intensity gives grounds for assuming that SN3/OI > 1 for voL > 2.

The conclusion based on the determination of high efficiency of the process of re-
combination accumulation of molecular iodine is fully in accordance with the re-
sults of the experimental projects [7. 9] in which the formation of molecular iodine
at rates of ~10 0 cm'3'sec‘1 was recorded directly for the pyrolysis mechanism of
population of the state'zP 2 with a rate close to the rate of stimulated transi-
liona in the amplificatf‘n process. Thus, the deformation of a long laser pulse
in the iodine system during nonlinear driven amplification can be

explained within the framework of a model taking into account the interrelation of
the collision processes of quenching the excited state of the iodine atom and

recombination accumulation of molecular iodine.

Characteristic features of the amplification process in the investigated system per-
mit its use to shape microsecond and, with additional amplification, even shorter
radiation pulses. The possibility of further shortening of the pulse is easy to

demonstrate in the example of an input pulse in the shape I - Io exp (-t/T). Accord-
ing to [13]. the level l/e output pulse duration is

! =ie’°lon.
(1)."!

Key: 1. output
where 6 - OAOL, and n is the total number‘g; photons in the input pulse per unit area
of beam cross section. For on~l and 6~3-b the value of ‘r/Tout will be 20-50 and,

consequently, a pulse with a duration of ~10 microseconds easily shaped in a low-
power preamplification stage. can be converted to a nanosecond pulse during subse-
quent amplification.

An experiment in successive pulse amplication in a multistage system was run on the
previously used device after introducing an additional preamplifier into the system
with an active medium 25 cm long, identical to the laser stage with respect to the
remaining parameters. The final amplifier was a stage based on a cavity pumping tube.
A laser with ring cuvily and additional mirror [16] (reflection coefficient 61)
was used to suppress self-stress of the resonator mirror amplifiers of the laser.

In experiments with filling the stages to a pressure of 15-30 mm Hg. the pulse

puwvr at the output was 1-3 joules. It is possible to determine the peak emission
power by the burnup of a graphite calorimeter surface observed experimentally (under
defined conditions and without preamplifier) under the effect of an unfocused beam.
The power density required to form a flame on the graphite surface is .5 Hwatta/
cm2 [15]. Hence it can be concluded that for a total beam power of ~20 Hwatts/
cm2 (s - 5 cmz). the pulse obtained in the investigated system will have a length

of ~100 nanoseconds. This conclusion agrees with the results of direct measurements
of the pulse duration on a high-speed oscillograph: a halfheight pulse duration of
50-100 nanoseconds was recorded in individual experiments.

Thus. from the presented results it follows that the method of nonlinear amplifica-
tion of free—running iodine laser pulses permits powerful emission pulses with

53

[KllfﬂﬂﬂCJAl.USE(MVLY
FOR 051NC1AL UGEZCHVLY

sufficient intensity. for example. for amplication inn nonlinear Optical system and for
the study of the interaction of radistion with matter, to be obtained simply and
without additional modulators.

It is possible to formulate the basic results as follows:

1. An experimental study was made of the transmission of a free-running photodisso-

cistion laser emission pulse through a resonantly amplifying medium with synchronous
or lead pumping of the amplifying stages. A sharp reduction in length of the pulse
was demonstrated on transition to driven amplification.

2. It was shown that for driven amplification the laser pulse is choppedby non-
pyrolysis transition of the medium to the absorbing state. This is connected with
the presence of quvnrhing collisions with I molecules formed during recombina-
tion of atoms in the ground state. In this mods. even in the presence of pulse
front amplification, the omission power at the amplifier output can be less than
the input pulse power.

3. It is demonstrated that by optinizins the synchronization of the usages it is
possible to shape vmission pulses with intensity exceeding 1 Hwatt/cm from low-
power pulses emitted by a free-running photodiaaociation laser.

BI BLIOGRAPHY

l. E. P111, K. Hohla, G. T. Schappert, 3. Volt, APPL. PHYS. LETTS., No 29, 1976, p
805.

2. P. G. Kryukov, V. S. Letokhov, UFN (Progress in the Physical Sciences), No 99,
1969, p 1969.

3. I. M. Belousova, 8.0. Bobrov, V. H. Kiselev. V. N. Kurzenkov. KVANTOVAXA BLEKTRO-
NIKA (Quantum Electronics), No 1, 1974, p 1389.

a. B. V. Alekhin. B. V. Lazhintaev, V. A. Nor-Arevysn, N. N. Petrov, B. V. Sukhakov,
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, No 3, 1976. p 2369.

S. L. Ye. Golubev, V. s. Zuyev, V. A. Katulin, V. Yu. Nosach, 0. Yu. Nosach, KVARTO-
VAYA ELEKTRONIKA. No 6 (18), 1973, p 23.

6. L. I. Zykov, G. A. Kirillov, S. B. Kormer, S. H. Kulikov, V. A. Komsrevskiy, S. A.
Sukharev, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, No 2, 1975, p 123.

7. 0. B. Danilov, V. c. Korolenko. I. L. Yacbnev, PIS'HA V ZHTF (Letters to the Jour-
nal of Technical Physics). No 3, 1977, p 207.

8. V. Yu. Zalesskiy, ZHETP (Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics), No 62,
1971, p 892.

9. 1. H. Belousova, 0. B. Danilov, N. S. Kladovikova, I. L. Yachnev, PIS'HA V ZHTF,
No 40, 1970, p 1562.

10. Ye. A. Yukov, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRDNIKA, No 2 (16), 1973, p 53.

54

FOR¢0FFKJA1.USE‘0NLY
11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L. S. Yorshov,V. Yu. Zaleukiy, A. N. Kokmhkln, mmu VYSOKIKH ENERGIY
(lush-Energy Chemistry). No 8, 19710. p 225.

C. C. Davls, I. J. Pirkle, R. A. charlane, G. J. Volga. m: J., 03-12, 1976.
p 336.

L. Frantz, J. Nodvlk. J. APPL. PHYS., No 36, 1963. p 23“.
V. N. Kurzenkov, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, No 6. 1979, p 1705.

A. I. Barchukov. P. V. Bunkin, V. I. Kmav, N. N. Kmnw. G. P. Kuz'nin, G. A.
Hesyats, N. I. Chapliyev, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. No 3, 1976. p 1536.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'etvo "Radio 1 avyaz‘“, "Kvmtovaya elektronm", 1981

£0,845

C50:

1862 /220

55

FOR OFFICIAL {BE ONLY
POI OFHCIAL USE ONLY

1100 662. 6130-535. 339-0633. 601

CHARACTERISTICS OF EXPLOSION GAS DYNAMIC LASER UTILIZING ACETYLENE
(DEBUSTION PRODUCTS

Hoscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian V01 8, No 5 (107), May 81
(manuscript received 15 Aug 80) pp 1002-1011

[Article by A. 8. Britsn. V. A. Levin. s. A. Loaev, G. D. Smekhov, A. H. Starik and.

A. N. Khmelevskiy. Mechanics Institute of Hoscow State University imeni H. V.
Lemon os ov ]

[Teth Abstract:Astudyismmdeofthegainandspecific

stored energy of acetylene combustion-products after the
nulti-nozzle grid of an explosion gas-dynamic laser

(GDL). Nitrous oxide is used together with oxygen
of the air as the oxidizing agent. The calculated
gain is complared with the experimental data. An
analysis is made of the gain and specific stored
energy as functions of the composition of the mix-
ture and flow stagnation parameters.

At this time, the creation of a highly efficient GDL and optimization of it with
respect to all defining parameters are an urgent problem of laser engineering. An
important characteristic of a laser system is the gain , which is related to the
population of the laser levels. the inversion and, in the final analysis, dciines
the emission power generated by the laser. The results of comparing experimental
values of K with the calculated values permit determination of the possibilities
and reliability of the calculation procedures [1]. In these studies the experiments
in which the laser mixture is formed directly as a result of burning various fuels
are of the greatest interest. Measure-onto performed on a laboratory setup have
made it possible to obtain information under conditions approaching the conditions
in a real COL to the maximum, but the applicability of the results and the range of
parameters obtained in this way are linited by the choice of a specific type of fuel
[2-4].

Devices in which an additional energy source -— shock waves [5, 6] or pulse dis-
CJafge in a closed volume [7] - is used, have broader possibilities. The composi-
tion and parameters of the working mixture in such experiments vary within broad
limits. and this allows simulation of the flow conditions of the combustion products

of a large class of laser fuels [1]. When analyzing GDL characteristics and also
in experiments connected with more precise definition and checking of the calcula-

tion procedures, it appears expedient to combine several experimental setups of
different types within th¢ framework of one study. Gradual complication of the

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ROI1OFI1C1AL USE OhﬂLY

gas composition Inm Hn-smplcm suuxhrd mixes investigated in a shock tube to com-
plex multicomponent combustion products of real fuels allows significant expansion
of the range of investigation and discovery of the effect of individual components
on the characteristics of the 00L working nedia [8]. If a theoretical analysis is
performed on the basis of a united calculation procedure and with a fixed set of
constants. comparison of the calculation results with the experimental results per-
nits sufficiently reliable checking of the validity of the mathematical model of
the flow.

This paper is a continuation of previous shock tube studies [5, 8, 9], and it pre-
sents an analysis of inverse and energy characteristics of GDL utilizing acetylene-
air fuel combustion products where nitrous oxide was investigated along with air
oxygen as the oxidizing agent.

A GDL with multi-nozzle grid designed for limiting parameters p0 - 200 atm, T -
3000 K was used for the experiments. A general view of the gas dynamic modulg of
the unit is depicted in Figure l in the plane of symmetry of the multinozzle grid.
An explosion chamber 1 with blast cartridge 2 and connection 3 for connecting the
vacuum line a is located on the upper end of the module. Gas escapes through the
multi-nozzle grid 5 into a vacuum tank 6. The explosion chamber and nozzle grid
are mounted on the upper flange of the unit 7. The explosion chamber and vacuum
tank volumes are separated by a diaphragm 8. All of the connections between the
subassemblies and parts of the device are sealed and permit evacuation of the sys-
tem to less than 20 um he. The explosion and pre-nozzle chamber volumes are in
practice the same (~2 liters), and the vacuum tank 6 has a volume of 200 liters.
The flow areas of the diaphragm s1 and the holes in the upper flange 7 s2 are of
the same order (sllsz - 1.6), and they significantly exceed the flow area of the
multinozzle grid (szls* I 720).

The nozzle length and its supersonic section were calculated untdimensionally [10]
from the condition of maximum generated emission power for given mixture composi-
tion and stagnation parameters. The critical cross sectional height h* - 0.35 mm
was selected on the basis of calculating a two-dimensional flow, the parameters of
which corresponded to optimal [11]. The nozzle expansion ratio e - 160.

A standard system (see Figure l) with the LG-ZZ continuous electric discharge c02-
laser 9 equipped with :nI 1nterrupter 10 was used to measure the gain. A capaci-
tive filter in the electric circuit of the laser power pack made it possible to
lower the level of omission intensity fluctuations of the laser to less than 31.
The amplified emission was fed through an IR filter 11 to a "Svod" type photoresia-
tance 12.

Detonation of the mixture in the explosion chamber was initiated by detonating a
constantan wire with a resistance of about 100 ohna. Measuring the pressure in

the explosion chamber also permitted monitoring of the diaphragm rupture time and
satisfaction of the condition of constancy of the volume during combustion of the

mixture. This condition is necessary for reliable determination of the explosion
product composition and parameters.

The experimental values of the pressure in the explosion chamber and before the
entrance to the multi-nozzle grid measured at different initial pressures of the
mix Pinit are presented in Figure 2. The atagnating pressures obtained from the

57

FOR1OFFKJALI£ﬂEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       
     
   

V.’/}//// ////’/1 \
' eh“. ‘\\\\\\

ev.v' v

14:43:“
?=—.'Jgnuer
'-—_-

  

Figure 1. General view of the gas dynamic module
of a pulsed GDL and gain measurement system.

thermodynamic calculation (the solid lines) [12] lie above the experimental points.
Let us also note that the calculation overestimates the temperatures in the
explosion products. This is indicated by a comparison of the calculated values of
To (see the table) with the results of the temperature measurements performed in
[a]. Sinple estimates permit explanation of this difference by incompleteness of
combustion of the acetylene [13]. According to [6], for a mix containing 42 Czﬂz,
To - 1850 K.and for a mix containing 6.561 Czﬁz, To - 1500 K. From the calcu-

lation it follows that combustion of the indicated mixes leads to insignificant
variation (532) of the total number of moles in the gas; therefore it is possible

to calculate the increase in pressure in the products by using the experimental
values of To presented in [a]:

Mr.- T.u./(T.u..). (1)
(a) Cb)

Key: a. final h. initial

where u is the molecular weight of the mix, the subscripts "B" and "K" correspond
to the initial and final parameters of the mix. The values of Pfinal calculated in

this way are presented in Figure 2 (the dotted line), and they agree with the experi-
mental values within the limits of the experimental dispersion.

The range of investigated mix stagnation pressures characterizesthc results of
measuring the pressure ahead of the entrance to the multi-nozzle grid p (see
Figure 2). 'ﬂu'incrrnsc in voluse of the entire system at the time of gupture of
the diaphragm and filling the prenozzle chamber lead to a pressure drop; therefore
in the majority of experiments P0 - (0.5-0.7)Pf1nal, where P and P are the

final 0
maximum nmpliludc~ "I lhv signal from the pressure gage in the explosion cham-
ber and ahead of the multinozzle grid. respectively.
58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

a b a 12 [Imam-1(2) n 4 a 72‘ la phony” (2)
a

Figure 2. Pressure in the explosion products for different initial
pressures of a mix of 4: C232 with air (a) and 6.510% 62112 with air

(b); the gain was measured along a anti-nozzle grid (0. O) and in

a single nozzle (ATM . and the pressure was measured in the explo-

sion chamber (0. A) and before the entrance to the multinoazls grid
(0. a)

Key; 1. p. ate 2. , stn

”mi:

The thermodynamic calculation data (see the table) show that in addition to the
usual molecules for a COZ-GDL (N2. 0 , 320), the final products also include other
components -- CO, No. Hz, 0H. 0. ll. 2Even a ssall amount of such admixtures leads to
complication of the kinetics of the vibrational energy exchange by conparison with

the model of the coz-Nz-oz-HZO mixture flow proposed in [5]. In this case, in addi-

tion to the energy exchange investigated in [5] it is necessary to consider new
energy exchange channels [lb-l9]:

CO. (00- n+co== co. (000)+co (o- 1) V...
+ 'CO,(1|‘0)+C0(o-0) '|,|,g
C0g(00'0) C0 = \CO.(03‘0)+CO(o-0) 7...
C0 (0-: ”+510: CO (v-OH-NO (0-1) 7.,
CD (u-l)4-H,Os-CO (u-O)+H.0 (010) 7...
CO (v:- I)+Ma CO (o-OH-M 72‘.
NO (9" ”+0. (0-0): N0 (v-OH‘O, (0-1) V._,
59

POI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIJ

N0 1u= 11*.11: NO (0-0)+M 17:.
NO (14- |)+H,O (000):- NO (0-0)+H,0 (010) W“
H: (v:- l)+M= H, (v-OH-M W?”
H: (v-l)+N._.O (000): H: (”EOH'Hao (ml) w11.10
H,10-1)+01—1 10=01a= 1-1,(:.=0)+011 10-1) 17...“
OH (0- 0+ “:0 (000): CH (v-OH‘ H40 (100) V100
0H (0: l)+ H,O (000): DB (0-0)-!- H,0 (00!) Wu."
0H (0- ”+30: 0H (Us-OHM W?”
H,0 (001)+Ma= 11,0 (100)+M V?”
11,0 (1001+Mu PLO (020)-i-M 7:.
11,0 (OOIH-CO, (00.0): C0, (IO‘IH H,O (00‘0) V... 1.:
H,0 HOOP-CO, (00'0): C0, (IO'IH H,0 (00'0) V,_ 1.3
11.0 (con-H.142 11.010001-1-51 173',
11.0 (10111-1 M4: 11.1111101114 M V5,

 

(‘1) 04000 0.00 96 (311,—me

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 31.1 111.1 .10'14.5-3.2 1.00 0.1 0.10 0.05 0.12 1.00
0 51. 11.11 10. 0 3. 2 1.05 0.1 0.151 0.05 0.12 1.00
0 10. 11. 14. 0 3.1 1.51 0.01 0.140 0.04 0.11 1.00
10. 1.4 215012. 5; 1.45 00.3. 0.92 0.41 0.00 0.000 0.007 1.31
(d) C1400 4 96 Qﬂg—oouyx
4 3001215710. 21 4. 00110. ,99. .04.10 0920. 0. 01 0.31104 0 2.109 0.0
0 43.3 21510.21 4. 00110.99. 000 011‘ .001 0.9110-1 0.2110-4 0.10104 0.0
0 l51.1 2151 a. 22 4. 0011: 90.9. 04,0. 010.001 0.0410-1 0.2210» 0.15-10-0 0.0
10 12.1 2151 a. 21 4.01.10. 9l9. 05.0. 014 .011 0. 1510-0 0.1010-. 0.13.104 00
(e) c...“ 0.01% c.11.-aa.aa%m.o-0090 N.
1 12300010..404--...10.910400102| 0.41 0.3 — 1.30
2 24 2 301 0.95 4.13 19.1 1.4314. 40 0.92 0.31 0.22 — 1.04
4 49.1 1.33 4. 19.4 1.29 4.14 o.041| 0.244 0.11 — 1.34
0 13. 9 31011 03 4 19.01.19 3.00 0.11 0.2 0.14 — 1.31
10 124 i313: 1 92. 5 04 19.11. 3.59 0.11 0.10 0.11 — 1.31

 

Key: .3. end product composition, 1 d. 1111): of ... with air
b. Plnlt' atn e. nix of ...

c. P 1, am

[Ina

llere “p k is 1.111.- lnt-wmolecular energy exchange rate between 9 and It states of colli-
I
dlng molecules. and 1": q is the lntrmolecular exchange rate between the p and q
9
states on collision with "(M - C02, :12, CO, N0, 02, H20, “2’ 011, ll, 0 will be de-

noted by their numbers 1 = l, 2. .... 10, respectively); p, q, I1. can assume values
from 0 to 12. where p - 1—3 correspond to symmetric, deformation and eeynetrlc

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

types of vibrations of the C02 molecule. p - 4'7 correspond to vibrations of the N2.
c... No and 02 molecules, p - 8-10 correspond to deformation, ayuetric and ssynmet-
ric types of vibrations of the H2 molecule, p - ll, 12 correspond to vibrations of

the H and 0H molecules; the combination states of the 002 molecule 1110. 1001
correspond to q - 1, 2; l, 3. Isolating the exchange channels in the uzo-a -0fl sys-
tem for the investigated layout and using the results of [19-21], it is pos‘ible to
demonstrate that this system is described by three kinetic equations.

t-
Actually, inasmuch as the W process rates “10,9, 911.10, "11.12, "12.9. $111.10 are

approximately 10 to 100 times higher in the entire investigated temperature range of
‘l‘ - 200-3000 K than the process rates of V‘r-relaxation of the states 001 ("“0 0) and
D

100 (H: 0) of the H20 molecule, the vibrations of the H2 molecule (v - l. 11 0)
r 9 i
and the 0H molecule (v - l, “"2 0) [20. 21] and the intramolecular W'-emchange pro-
I

l
cess rate HI; 8' it is possible to consider that quasistationary distribution is
0

established between symetric and asymmetric types of vibrations of the H20 molecule
and also vibrations of H2 and 0!! molecules.

The calculations performed in [21] demonstrated that during the flow of the indicated

gases in a supersonic nozzle it is possible to set 1'9 - 1'10 - Tn - T12 for a broad

range of variation of the discharge conditions and parameters. Thus. all the vibration-
.nl quantum exchange processes in the BzO-Hz-OH mix can be described within the
framework of a two-temperature model (T8 and 19). Let us also assume that as a re-
sult of the low concentrations of H20, Hz and 0!! molecules in the mix (for the com-

positions investigated in this paper (u,<Cou<€u.oSé.06. C. is the mole frsct n of
the ith component in the mix). the variation of the population of the state 10 l of
the co molecule during nonresonant exchange with 1120 (001) and ii 0 (100) is

negligibly small by comparison with other processes leading to ulation variation
of this state.

A system of kinetic equations was written in a form analogous to [15] considering

the generally accepted assumptions regarding the presence of complete resonance
between the states (1000) and(02°0) of the co molecule. Joint integration of

the gas dynamics and vibrational kinetics equitions was performed in order to calcu-
late the distribution of the nonequilibrium parameters of the medium. Details of

the numerical integration and a description of the calculation procedure can be

found in [5]. Temperature functions for H were obtained on the basis of analysing
the results of [14. 17, 20-22]. 9“

A calculation was made in an approximation of a nonviscoua nonheat-conducting gas;
the f low was considered steady and linear. Studies performed in [9] show that this
approximation insures sufficient accuracy when calculating the inverse flow charac-

teristics after the tip of flat nozzles. the profile of which is shaped for attached
flow with a uniform parameter field in the output cross section.

It was assumed that equilibrium dissociation of the mixture takes place at the en-
trance to the nozzle, and in a supersonic flow all of the chemical reactions are
inhibited. For mixtures with Leo and LNG < 0.06 it was seemed that ‘l' - 1' and

’1'6 - T7 in the calculations. 5 ‘

61

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiDFFKJAl.US£(NVLY

The results of measuring p0 were given as the initial conditions ahead of the en-
trance to the nozzle, and the value of T was calculated according to (l) for
values of p measured by a pressure gage Qnstalled in the explosion chamber. It was

assumed the the combustion product coaposition corresponds to the calculated com-
position. and possible deviations from the calculated composition and uncontrolled

admixtures have little influence on the gain.

 

Figure 3. Gain as a function of stagnation pressure ahead of the
entrance to a multi-nozzle grid: 0 - results of measurements along
a multi-nozzle grid; A -- in a single nozzle; solid line -- calculated

values; 62 Czii2 with air mix (a, b) and 6.542 czuz with air mix (c,

d); measurements near the tip of a multinozzle grid (a, c) and down
stream from the tip (b, d).

Key: 1. atm

The investigated mathematical model of the flow was used to calculate the inverse
flow characteristics of acetylene combustion products. The calculated values of the
gain were compared with the measurement results after the tip of the multinozzle
grid which made it possible to check the applicability of the calculated model for
analysis and prediction of the energy characteristics of high-temperature GDL.

Two series of experiments were run which differed with respect to composition of the
acetylene—air mix. in each experiment the gain was recorded simultaneously near the
tip of the multinozzle grid and 60 mm downstream from the tip. In addition, KV was
measured for two positions of the grid with respect to the sounding plane. The
measurement scheme in the plane of symmetry of the multi-nozzle grid is depicted in
Figure 1. Measurements in a plane perpendicular to the plane of symmetry permitted
determination of the gain in a single nozzle formed by two nozzle vanes.

The results of the first series of experiments (62 C H2 with air) are presented in
Figure 3, a. b. Near the tip of the nozzle (Figure %. s) the experimental points
obtained for different positions of the nulti-nozzle grid agree with each other and

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the calculation results within the limits of error. The maximum values of Kv - 0.8

b

m ‘ were reached for p0 - 50 atm. In the stagnation pressure range tom 20 to 55
atm. K varied little. remaining within the limits of 0.7 to 0.8 m' . Close values
of lg 3 0.6-0.7 {1 were obtained in m for a u; of 5.5: c2“: with :1: (To - 1900

K) in the pressure range of p0 - 6-16 atm.

the nozzle demonstrated that with an increase in p , deactivation of the upper laser
level (0001) and the fast. almost resonant VV'-progeaa of the excited state (v - l)

of the N2 molecule, increases. At the same time, the deformation vibrations of the

602 molecule at po 3 30 atm are in practice in equilibrium with the translational

degrees of freedom (T2 = T). In the po - 30-60 atm range. a decrease in population

of the upper laser level is compensated by an increase in the total number of inverse
particles per unit volune (here the gain is maximal). With further rise in stagna-
tion pressure, along with a decrease in population, intense broadening of the spec-
tral line of the radiation begins as a result of more frequent molecular collisions,
and the gain decreases. For po < 30 atm, T2 > I. quasiststionary distribution be-

tween the asyInetric mode of 602 and vibration of N still cannot be established, as
occurs at higher values of p . Therefore with an increase in the stagnation pressure
from 6 to 30 atm, the lower gaser level begins to empty lore sharply, which along
with growth of the number of inverse particles per unit volume leads to growth of

Kv. in spite of a decrease in T and. consequently. the population of the upper laser
level. If the peak in the Kv(x) distribution at p > 30 atm is reached inside the
nozzle. then at po - 6 atm, Kv continues to increase in the flow after the tip, that
is. the maximum gain is not measured near the tip of the nozzle in either case.

Figure 3. b shows the results of measurements and calculation of - f(po) in
another measuring cross section which is located 60 ll downstream rom the nozzle
lip. It is obvious that the experimental points lie below the calculated points.
The maximum difference comes at pressures of p - 30-50 atm, and it reaches 201.
Let us note that values of Kv measured in a single nozzle lie below the correspond-
ing gain measured along the grid. The indicated divergence between theoretical and
experimental values obviously is explained by the peculiarities of the actual flow
structure connected with the presence of shock waves and wakes beyond the edges of
the nozzle vanes (the flow takeoff angle in the given grid 6 - ll“ is quite large).
The noted divergence of the experimental values of Kv obtained in a single nozzle

the buildup of the boundary layer and possible separation of the flow from the

parallel side walls of the channel by comparison with the effects caused by the final
takeoff angle of the flow.

in order to study the possibility of obtaining coherent radiation of a medium with
significantly greater vibrational energy reserve than in the preceding case, the
gain was measured in the combustion products of an acetylene—air mix with high
(6.54%) Czﬂz content. combustion of which insures To 3_2$00 K. The function Kv -

[(p?) obtained by calculation and experimentally ls presented in Figure 3, b.
It

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

the calculation results in the entire range of stagnation pressure variation p -
5-100 atm. in this case the maximum of the function K” - f(P ) is sharper thag

for a lower acetylene content in the mix. The maximum value 8f K” is reached when

p - 30 atm in this case. This fact is explained first of all by the fact that

tee combustion producaacontain more carbon dioxide and water vapor and somewhat less
nitrogen (see the table) and, secondly, by an increase in the gas temperature in
each cross section of the nozzle. 0n the one hand, the indicated factors lead to
greater deactivation of the vibrations of the CO and N molecules, and, on the
other hand. to a decrease in density and, consequently, the total number of particles
per unit volume by comparison with the preceding case. Therefore the maximum value
of KV is somewhat smaller and amounts to 0.65 m“1 (by comparison with 0.82 m'1 for
62 £le2 in the mix).

Just as in the preceding case, the experimental values obtained in the second meas-
uring cross section (Figure 3, d) are below the calculated ones. The maximum di-
vergence reaches 40% in this case for p - 20—40 arm. The increase in divergence
between the experimental and calculated values compared to the 61 C -air mix is
explained by acceleration of the relaxation processes behind the oblique shock wave
front with an increase in stagnation temperature.

Recently a great deal of attention has been given to combustion in gas dynamic lasers
using nitrout oxide as the oxidizing agent ll, 23, 24]. This interest arises from
the fact that the exothermal reaction of hydrocarbon combustion in an N 0 atmosphere
takes place with significantly greater release of energy than when burning hydro-
carbon-air mixtures. The high temperatures (To Z 3000 K) reached in these reactions
nuke it possible to obtain a medium with significant energy reserve in the vibratio-
nal degrees of freedom of the molecules of the mixture and to raise the specific
characteristics of the lasers.

in order to determine the possibility of raising the specific parameters of a com-
bustiun out, in this paper studies were made of the inverse characteristics of the
medium obtained on combustion of acetylene in an atmosphere of N20 and N2 (6.572
C2“2 with 33.31 N2
tion products of the given mix (see the table) contain almost half as much C0

as the combustion products of the mixture of 6.57% C2H with air.;«ﬂ Uﬁcvtm mah mohruhw
hydrogen and CO. A calculation study of the function Kv I f(p ) demonstrated that

in spite oi high stagnation temperatures (To = 3100 K) in such 2 mix significant

gains are reached (RV = 0.5 m'l) in a broad range of variation of the stagnation
pressure (po - 25-80 atm). It is interesting that by comparison with the combus-

tion produrts of sevtylene-air mixes. the deactivation of the vibrations of the

N molecules and the asymmetric mode of 602 takes place appreciably less sharply

than in the given case. This is caused first of all by the smaller proportions of

C02 and H20 and larger proportion of N2 in the mix and. secondly, a decrease in the

total number of particleSper unit volume with an increase in To.

0 and 602 N2). in the pressure range p0 - 5—100 atm. The combus-

lhese factors predominate over the increase in the relaxation process rate as a re-
sult of the increased temperature. Comparison of the theoretical results and the

measured values of the gain (Figure 4) demonstrated that the calculation procedure
gives a correct representation of the kinetics of the physical processes in the

given molecular system. The calculation results agree well with the experimental
data of p0 . 25 atm. Divergence of the experimental and calculated values of K0

54

FOR ()FFK'IAI. L'SE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAL USE ONLY

.11 p0 , '50 atm obviously is explained by the following causes. When using nitrous
oxide as the oxidizing agent, the processes of ignition and combustion of the work-
ing mixture take place more rapidly than combustion of mixes based on air. As a
result, the pressure in the explosion chamber builds up quickly, which complicates
the selection of the corresponding diaphragm. In the majority of experiments for
p in it > 5 arm the diaphragms ruptured appreciably before the Inaxianm pressure was

reached in the combustion products. This. in turn, led to indeterminacy in the
value of pi inal and in the combustion product composition. The possible presence of

unrescted N20 in the mixture can significantly increase the deacsivstion rate of the
upper laser level of the CO molecule ( 0l), inasmuch as the 00 1 state of the N20
molecule is energywise simiisr to the 00 1 state of co and (v - 1) “2 (energy
defects A}: = 178 and 152 K, respestively). The W‘-pr3cesa rates between these
states are quite large (40'13 cm /sec). and the relaxation processes in the N20
itself take place .u .m .uppret iably higher rate than in 602 [17. 23].

 

u————
:1 20 m w a,.rnm(a)

Figure 1.. Cain as a function of stagnation pressure before the

entrance to the multi-nozzle grid: mixture of 6.671 C H with 33.33%
N 0 and 602 N ' - measurements near the tip of chi anti-nozzle

9
grid; dotted fine -- calculation results.
Key: a. atm

.\ detailed study of (:01. based on acetylene combustion in an N 0 atmosphere requires
more careful development of the experimental procedure and meghods of calculating

the combustion products of the indicated mixes.
For comparison of var ious fuels by efficiency it is necessary to consider the condi-
tions which permit extraction of the energy stored in the 602 and “2 molecular vi-

brations at the exit from the multi-nozzle grid. In the general case the problem
consists in converting the maximum proportion of this energy to optical radiation
before collision deactivation leads to pulping of this energy into translational
and rotational degrees of freedom of the mixture molecules. Hithout giving specific
examples of a resonator, the specific emission power stored per unit mass of the
gas in the inverse transition can be determined by the expression [1, 10]

R . .
£3. - 76.... |8,;co'.;. m". _ l8; ko,+ 8. C~.]x._.|, (2)

where ‘2=’I!’I"“"9I)3 i=3. 4: r,_ is the multiplicity of degeneration of the jth mode;
cam is the radiation frequency, K; the term [35%.ngCNJKWO characterizes the

mean number of quanta in the asymetric C02 vibrations and the N2 vibrations for zero

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(At-a (.)
'W ‘\ 3
3:7.- .\ \‘
\ .
5;” r \I‘ \-
\ \

‘3 -' \\\ \

. \\\
Ia'r ‘

A
a 20 w 5.709.111»: (b)

Figure 5. Specific stored energy as a function of stagnation pressure:

1 -- mixture of 42 C232 and air, To - 1850 K; 2 - mixture of 6.562 Czﬂz

. 2590 K; 3 -- mixture of 6.671 Czﬂz. 33.332 N20 and 602

and air, 1‘
3900 K; ' -- calculation [25]; l - calculation [2].

N2. To us
Key: a. Joules/gram b. atmospheres

gain of the medium. The expression for 83—y§/(l-y§) is easily obtained by equating
the expression for the gain to zero [1, 10]. As a result, we have

y; uyiupmmw- 1) -B:wiU+1)l/T}onoo/Bm~ (3)
For calculation of 5l==yU(I-yb , we assuLe that ya - ya exp (-33/4/T)'

The results of the calculations of E“ for the three investigated mixtures are pre-
sented in Figure 5. It is obvious that for each of the investigated mixes the value
of E: decreases with an increase in the stagnation pressure. This is explained by
an increase in the relaxation rate of the energy stored in the vibrations of the gas
unlccules with an increase in p . The maximum values of the stored specific emis-
<|un puucr are reached for low pressures of the active medium (p0 ' 6-10 atm), and
for mixtures of 42 c Hz with air and 62 C H with air the maximum values are 35 and
70 joules/g. respectively, and for mixturZszbased on acetylene and nitrous oxide.
even 125 joules/g, which is not loss lhan the value of E“ for mixing lasers [23].
inasmuch as the efficiency of the resonators with optimal nparameters (transparency
and flow length) can be quite high (up - 0.7 to 0.75) when using the indicated mix-
tures it is possible to obtain record high values of the specific emission power.

With respect to efficiency of acetylene-air fuels it is necessary to note that for
small (~62) acetylene contents the efficiency of such fuels is quite close to the
efficiency of a benzene-air mixture. The calculated values of E: obtained in [2,
25] for a benzene-air mix are shown in Figure 5 by the dots. The stagnation
parameters and mixture compositions for the selected conditions compare.

Thus. the obtained results indicate the prospectiveness of using acetylene as
a fuel in combustion COL. obviously the most prospective is use of three-component
mixtures of Czhz-NZU—Nz. the combustion of which makes it possible to obtain an

active medium with high specific emission power (E: Z 120 joules/g) for gains of

N = 0.4—0.5 wk
66

FOR OFI-‘lClAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conclusion, the authors express their appreciation to H. S. Dzhidzhoyev for use-
ful discussions of the results of the .aper. V. V. Lugovskiy for assistance in
performing the experiments, and V. N. Hekarov and Yu. V. Tunik for performing cal-
culations when designing the nozzles.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
I. s. A. Losev, GASODINAMICH ESKIYE LAZERY (Gas Dynamic Lasers), Moscow. Nauka, 1977.
2. H. G. Ktalkherman. V. H. Nal'kov. ISSLEDOVANIYE RABOCHEGO PROTSESSA GAZODINAHI-

CHESKIKH LAZEROV (Study of the Working Process of Gas Dynamic Lasers). Edited by
V. K. Bayev, Novosibirsk, ITPH, 1979.

3. N. V. Yevtyukhin. A. P. Genich, G. B. Hanelis, PIZIKA GORZNIYA I VZRXVA (Combus-
tion and Explosion Physics), No 4, 1978, p 36.

4. v. N. Ivanov, “Candidates Dissertation,“ In-t problem mekhaniki AN SSSR, Moscow,
1978.

5. A. B. Britsn. A. M. Starik. ZH. PRIKL. HERE. I HEKHN. PIZ.,(Journa1 of Applied
Mechanics and Technical Physics), No b, 1980. p 27.

6. A. Yu. Volkov, A. I. nemin. et al., TRUDY PIAN (Horka of the Physics Institute
of the USSR Academy of Sciences). No 113. 1979. p 150.

7. A. I. Odintsov. A. I. Fedoseyev, D. G. Bakanov, PIS‘MA V ZETP (Letters to the
Journal of Technical Physics), No 2, 1976.

8. A. B. Britan, S. A. Losev. 0. P. Shatelov. KVANTOVAYA ELBKTRONIKA (Quantum
Electronics). No 1, 197b, p 2620.

9. A. B. Britan, R. I. Serikov, A. H. Starik. V. M. Khaylov, IZV. AN SSSR, SER.
MEREANIKA ZHIDKOSTEY I GAZOV (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Fluid and
Gas Mechanics Series), No l. 1980, p 203.

10. S. A. Losev. V. . . Maharov. KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA, No 3, 1976, p 960.

11. V. N. Hakarov, Yu. V. Tunik, 2n. PRIKL. HEKH. I HEKHN. PIZ.. No S, 1978, p 23.

12. c. D. Smekhov. V. A. Potiyev, 2H. VYCH. HATEM. N HAT. PIZ. (Journal of Computer
Mathematics and Mathematical Physics), No 18, 1978, p 1284.

13. A. l. El'natanov. 1. l. Srizhevskiy, 2H. P12. KHIHII (Physical Chemistry Journal),
No 152. 1968, p 1296.

14. A. P. Genich, N. V. Yevtyukhin. S. V. Kulikov, et al., 23. PRIKL. HIKE. I MEIER.
FIZ., No 1. l979. p 36.

15. A. s. Eiryukov. mum: mm. No 83. 1975. p 13.

16. V. V. Yegorov, V. N. Komarov, TRUDY TSAGI IN. N. YE. ZHUKOVSKOGO (Ubrks of the
Central Institute of Aerodynamics imeni N. Ye. Zhukovskiy), No 1959, 1975, p 35.

67

FOR OFTWCJAL.USE(NVLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yu. A. Kulagin, TRUDY HAN, No 107, 1979, p 110.

c. I. Kozlov, V. N. Ivanov. I. K. Seleznevn, mm GORDIIYA I VZRYVA (Co-bmr'on
and Explositon Physics), Vol 15, No 4, 1979. p 88.

v. A. Levin, A. u. Starik. 12v. AN sssx. sax. uzanNIxA zuznxosrzv 1 cazov, No 2,
1980, p 102.

J. A. Blauer, G. R. Nickel-son, AIAA Paper. 76-536, 1975.

V. A. Levin, A. M. Starik. NBRAVNOVESNYYE rmru CAZA S FIZIKO-KHDIICHESKIHI
PREVRASHCHENIYAHI (Nonequilibriun Gas Currents with Physical-Chemical Conver-
sions), Moscow. Izd-vo mu. 1980, p 25.

R. 15. Center. J. CHEM-PHYS” No 59, 1973, p 3523.

A. E. Cassady, A. L. Pindro, J. 1“. Newton, WAYATHHIKA I KDSWAVTIKA
(Rocket Engineering and Astronautics). Vol 17, No 8, 1979, p 59.

21.. J. Anderson, GAZODINAMICHESKIYE LAZERY. WBDENIYE (Cu Dynamic Lasers. Introduc-
tion), Hoscow, Mir, 1.979.

25. R. J. Hill, N. T. Jewell, A. T. Jones, WYA mm I KOSHONAVTIKA, V01 16,
No 3. 1978, p 119.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz‘", "Kvantovayn clektronika", 1981

10,845

C50: 1862/220

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 537.521.7
ATMOSPHERIC AIR BREAKDOWN BY NEODYHIUH LASER MSSION FOR LARGE FOCAL POINT DIAMETERS

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 5 (107), Hay 81
(manuscript received 4 Oct 80) pp 1122-1123

[Article by Ye. V. Zhuzhukalo, A. N. Kolomiyskiy, A. P. Nastoyashchiy and
1.. N. I'lyashkevich]

[Text] Abstract: Astudywasnadeofthethreshoidpower density

wﬂforlargefocalpointdiameters. Adecressein w1T
from 70 to 2 GH/cnz was detected with an increase
in d from 0.2 to 2.0 mm. which contradicts the
avalanche breakdown theory. according to which
for d > 100 microns wk should be independent of
d. Estimates are presented which indicate that
the reduction in w“ can be explained by the

effect of ion-molecular reactions.

1. Optical breakdown of air was investigated earlier in [l—S]. In the experiments
of [l], a study was made of the threshold density w of the emission power of a
neodymium laser as a function of the diffusion lengEh A at an air pressure of p -
8.15 atm. it was found that in the interval of A - 15 to 70 microns the threshold
varies approximately according to the law w” N A’3/2, in spite of the fact that for
A >> A t 5 microns the diffusion logses of the electrons are insignificant

and w“ theoretically [6] should not depend on A.

Efforts to explain this divergence with theory. for example. using the hypothesis
of "diffusion-similar" losses [1] were unsuccessful [6]. Nevertheless, there was
hope that for still larger values of A. in accordance with theory, the curve for w“
as a function of A would reach saturation. In order to check this proposition,
measurements of w" for large focal point dimensions were needed. The power of the
lasers used in experiments [1-5] for this purpose was insufficient.

He performed studies of w‘" on a powerful laser [7]. which under unimodal conditions

generated laser pulses 1 ~ 200 nanoseconds long (Figure 1). The radiation was
focused in the air by lvnhvs with focal lengths of f - 1.4 and 14.0 meters.
The focal point diameters were d - 0.2 and 2.0 m, respectively. Breakdown was
observed for a pulse puwor E Z_b.5 to 5 joules in the first case and E Z_12 to 15
joules in the second case; the thresholds were 70 and ch/cmz, respectively. A
photograph of the laser spark near the threshold is shown in Figure 2, a. “hen the

threshold was exceeded w >> w“. a long laser spark occurred consisting of individual

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

glowing centers (Figure 2, b), which resembled the spark observed by other authors
(see the references in [8]).

Thus, a further reduction in w“ is detected with an increase in the size of the
focal point to d - 2.0 mm. The law of variation of w“ is approximately the same as
in [l]. The electron losses as a result of diffusion were insignificant in our
experiments (with a "margin" of two or three orders); therefore it is natural to
assume that for large focal point dimensions the breakdown mechanism is different
than is proposed in avalanche theory.

Let us discuss the effect of ion-molecular reactions as one possible cause of di-
vergence with theory [9]. The following reactions can take place in the air [10]

N§—N,—.Nf+c.N§-‘-o,—. N,O,++c, and so on. (1)

The lifetime of the excited molecules depends on the optical thickness ofthe gas (for
example, in the case of Lorentian or doppler contour of the line. the lifetime of a
resonance photon Tgffw d [11]); therefore an increase in size of the focal point

should lead to a decrease in w“.

Let us present some estimates. Neglecting electron diffusion. the ion multi-
plication rate [9)

. . ,2 ,_| (2)
r~("o"l)' -‘/9‘%.)-
Key: a. eff

where v: is the molecule excitation frequency by electron impact; vi is the ioniza-

tion rate according to (1). (Let us note that in the expression for v* it is pos-
sible also to consider a correction for ionization of N by laser emission; for
coz-lasers [5] this ionization does not occur. but the effect of a reduction in w

u
with size of the focal point is retained.)
Setting the reaction cross section (1) 0* ~ 10.16 cm2 [10). we have v: ~ 108 sec-1
and, consequently. for breakdown it is sufficient to insure that v; ~ 109 sec, for
which. in general, smaller w are required than in the case of direct ionization by
electron impact. (Unfortunafely, the performance of detailed calculations is com-
plicated as a result of absence of reliable experimental cross sections). It is
appropriate to note that the effect of ion-molecular reactions can explain deviations

from Townsend's law at increased gas pressures [10] and high ionization in the glow
discharge in molecular nitrogen [12].

In [13], the reduction of w for large d was explained by the presence of aerosol

particles in the gas; unforgunately. this paper contains obvious errors (for example,
the proposition of the supposed reduction in inelastic losses with excitation of

resonance levels; see the criticism in [6]). Solid particlessuspended in the air

can produce a diffusion-like effect for long pulses I ~ 1 millisecond and relatively
high particle concentration [9]. For short laser pulses it is ununderstandable how
breakdown occurring. for example, near an aerosol particle, can encompass the entire

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFINC1AL USE(NVLY

laser beam cross section. for the known mechanisms of propagation of the front (slow
combustion. light detonation [6]) do not provide the required speed.

 

Figure 1. Shape of a laser pulse with Figure 2. Photograph of a laser spark

time (sine period 20 nanoseconds). in the air (f - 15.0 m) near breakdown
threshold (a) and on noticeably exceeding
the threshold w/v" = 3 (b).

The estimates made indicate that ion-molecular reactions can play an important role

in optical breakdown of atmospheric air. At the same time. air breakdown under
actual conditions. as follows from the accumulated facts. can have a highly complex

nJlurr. and it is impossible a priori to exclude the effect of other factors. in-
cluding. for example, the presence of atmospheric aerosols.
The authors express their appreciation to N. G. Kovsl‘skiy for his discussion.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. A. "at, R. N. Yerand. D. Smith, DEYSTVIYE LAZBRNOGO IZLUCMENIYA (Effect of Laser
Emission). Moscow. Mir. 1968. p 42.

2. R. Tomlison. Ye. Damon. G. Busher; DEYSTVIYE LAZERNOCO IZLUCHENIYA (Effect of
Laser Emission). Moscow, Mir. 1968. p 52.

3. S. Lcncloni. APPL. PNYS. LETTS.. 23. 12 (1973).

4. M. P. Vnnyukov. et nl.. PIS'TA V ZhETF (Letters to the Journal of Experimental
and Theuretical Physics). Vol 3. 1966. p 316.

5. D. C. Smith. APPL. PHYS. LETTS.. Vol 19. 1971. p 505.

6. Yu. P. Rayzer. LAZERNAYA ISKRA (Laser Spark). Moscow. Nauka. 197k.

7. V. V. Alexandrov. et a1.. NUCLEAR FUSION. SUPPL.. Vol 15. 1975. p 113.

8. V. A. I’nrfc-nov «L 91.. PIS'TA V ZhETF. V01 2. 1976. p 731.

9. A. F. Nustoynshchiy. KEANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA (Quantum Electronics). Vol 7. 1980, p 170.

I0. E. D. Luzanskiy. 0. 8. Firsov. TEORIYA 1$KRY (Spark Theory). Moscow. Nauka. 1975.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OETKIAI. USE ()Nl.\'

11. B. H. Suimov. FIZIKA SLABOIONIZOVANNOGO GAZA (Physics of a Hukly Ionized Gas).
Moscow. Nauka. 1978.

12. L. S. Smirnov, D. I. Slovecskiy. I. A. Sergeyev. TBPLOPIZ. W8. mom. (High-
Temperature Thermophysics). No 15, 1977. p 15.

13. D. S. Snub. J. APPL. PHYS., No 108. 1977. p 2217.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

10845
C80: 1862/220

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

IN MEMORY OF EDUARD SERCEYEVICH VORONIN

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, N0 5 (107), May 81 p 1152

[Article by S. A. Akhmanov. N. G. Basov, F. V. Bunkin, V. S. Zuyev, Yu. A. Il'inakiy,
I. N. MaLVeyev. V. V. Miguiin, A. L. Mikaelyan. A. .. Prokhorov, V. S. Solonatin,

N. F. Stcl'makh, A. P. Sukhorukov and V. S. Fursov]

[Text]

 

Soviet science suffered a severe loss on 12 March 1981, when a great acieatiat in the
field of quantum electronics and nonlinear optics, doctor of phyaical and mathemati-
cal sciences, USSR State Prize Laureate Eduard Sergeyevich Voronin died at the age

of 53.

L. S. Voronin devoted more than 30 years of his life to science, in particular,
radio physics and nonlinear optics. He performed a number of important studies in
the field of the physics of nonlinear oacillationa. including pulse synchronization

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of autooacillators. He obtained the brightest results in the field of coherent and
nonlinear optics when studying the processes of the conversion of infrared radiation
to the visible band using parametric interactions of light waves. Recently Eduard
Sergeyevich conducted intense studies in the field of nonlinear adaptive optics.

E. s. Voronin was awarded the USSR State Prize in 1975 for his work in applied op-
tics.

E. S. Voronin was an active member of the Board of Editors of the KVANTOVAYA BLEK-

TRONIKA (Quantum Electronics) Journal; he was on a number of scientific problem
and coordination councils. and he participated in the organization of all—union

conferences on quantum electronics and laser physics.

All of the scientific life of E. s. Voronin was continuously connected with Moscow
State University. He was for a long time a co-worksr with R. V. Khokhlov in the
physics department of Moscow State University. A talented scientist and teacher.
Eduard Sergeyevich educated many students.

E. S. Voronon, a member of the Communist Party. combined his scientific and pedago-
gical activity with a large amount of responsible social work.

Eduard Sergeyevich always distinguished himself by exceptional cheerfulness. warmth
and responsiveness in his relations to people.

The bright memory of Eduard Sergeyevich Voronin will remain in our hearts forever.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'“, “Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

10,865
CSO: 1862/220

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F1ﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂf1AI.USE(MNLY

UDC 621.378.33

CLOSED-CYCLE FAST-PLO” PULSED €02 LASER WITH CARBON DIOXIDE RECOVERY UNIT

Moscow KVANTONAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 5 (107). May 81
(manuscript received 26 Oct 80) pp 1134-1136

[Article by A. V. Artumunuv, A. C. Borkin, A. P. Drisyek, s. V. Drobyazko,
A. l. Lazurchenkov, A. A. Nekrasov and Yu. H. Senstorov]

[Text] Abstract: Thepossibilityofstabilisingtheradia-
t ion power and mixture composition in s repetitively
pulsed coz-laser by palladiumrcatslytic regene-
ration of carbon dioxide is demonstrated. The
small-signal gain was measured in working mix-
tures of various compositions, and it use demon-
strated that the decrease in gain with dissocia-
tion of CO2 is connected both with a decrease in
the CO concentration and with an increase in
the C0 and 02 concentrations.

1. 1n closed—cycle c0 -lasers, the decrease in radiation power is primarily connec-
ted with dissociation of the carbon dioxide [1-5]. In order to prevent a decrease
in power. the working medium of a C0 -Laser must be regenerated. One of the methods
of stabilizing the chemical composition of the working mixture of the laser and,
consequently. the output power of the emission is heterogeneous-catalytic oxidation
of carbon monoxide [l. 6].

In this paper a study is made of the possibility of stabilizing the emission pulse

power by palladium-catalytic regeneration of carbon dioxide, and the weak-signal
gain is measured in laser mixtures of various compositions.

2. The experiments were run on a repetitively pulsed fast-flow laboratory cog-1...:
with transverse pumping of the gas [7]. The total volume of the gas channel was 1.5
m3, the electrode gap volume was 0.8 liters. The gas was pumped by a ZDVN-lSOO
pump. All of the experiments were run on a mixture of 602: N2: Be - lo : 65 : 65
with a total pressure of 80 mm Hg. The energy input to the discharge gap was
175 joules/liter-atmosphere, and the pulse repetition frequency was 200 hertz. The
temperature of the gas and the catalyst was measured by chromel-copel thermocouples.
The gas flow rate through the reactor was determined using a Pirot-Prsndtl tube with
HRH-250—0.02 differential micromanometer. The gas mixture composition was analyzed
on the LKhﬂ-SMD chromatograph. The pulse radiation power was measured by the TPI-l
graphite calorimeter in the monopulse mode. The gain was measured by the transmis-
sion method by a stable coz-leser using the procedure outlined in [8]. Palladium

7S

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1AI.USE(MULY
um (um Ml. ml». own

black on u stainless steel carrier made in the form of grids with wire diameter of
0.25 m and mesh size of 0.5 m2 was used as the catalyst. The palladiun content
was 0.32 by weight. The total weight of the catalyst was 0.5 kg, and the service

life. more than 100 hours.

 

Figure 1. Variation of the grid temperature
with respect to reactor length for various heat-
ing element voltages (n — grid number).

Key: .1. heuting element 1). volts

 

Figure 2. Degree of dissociation a (a) and pulse
|"Ili'-‘-l-II poucr c ulse (b) as a function of time

without (in recovery (1) and with recovery at
V.If|nu:i unfulyst temperatures: ‘1' - 250 (2). 330
(J) and A00' C (lo).

Key: A. c , joules

pulse
8. t, minutes

76

I50“ 0|~'H('I.\I. (SF. UNI."
FOR OFHCIAL "SE ONLY

 

: ‘ m 29 :h.mnnnnn
‘———————‘_
5 3 m hsq.-sntn (b)

Figure 3. Gain at the peak as a function of €02
pressure (1) and CO (2) and 02 (3) additive pres-
sure at H - 105 Joules/(liter—atsosphere). p I
150 mm Hg, szﬂe - 1:1.

Key: a. relative unite
b. mm Hg

3. The catalytic reactor was a metal box with S kw adjustable-power

«'nil hr." ing (‘lt-mt-nl .u the om mm‘o. The reactor was installed in the gas
loop channel (after the discharge chamber) and covered part of its cross section.
The grids with palladium black were installed across the flow with a spacing of 2 II
between then. The pressure drop on the cold catalytic reactor did not exceed ~10
mm H20 for a gas velocity in the free channel of ~20 m/sec. The temperature varia-
tion of the catalyst grids with respect to reactor length (along the flow) is given
I" Figure I. The lvmpcraturc gradient is explained by radiant heating of the
first grids. It was discovered that the given catalyst is unstable at temperatures
above 500‘ C. This is probably connected with a sharp decrease in adhesion of the
palladium black to the metal substrate.

a. Figure 2 shows the degree of dissociation of the co2 (a) and the pulse emlssion
pnvvf as functions of time for a mixture of CO :N :Ee . 10:55:‘5. The curves 1
show the variation in the degree of dissociatiog aid pulse power without carbon
dioxide recovery. For a value of a z 101, the decrease in the pulse emission power
is ~27Z. Hith palladium-catalytic recovery of the 602. the degree of dissociation
decreases as its temperature rises (curves 2-4).

With a decrease in the degree of dissociation. the pulse power increases (curves 2-
4) and for u - 1: it differs by ~32 from the initial power. Inasmuch as the emis-
«ion power increases linearly as a function of the 002 content in the mixture only

for a proportion of C02 < 15%. the results and the conclusions presented in this
paper pertain to ternary mixtures with low 002 content [6].

When equilibrium is reached, the carbon monoxide formed as a result of €02 dissocia-
tion must be "burned" in the catalyst, that is.

ae'd ”0+0“: (1)

where “0 is the degree of dissociation of the C02 in a single pass of the gas
through the discharge chamber; an is the equilibrium degree of dissociation of CO 3
8 is the degree of conversion of carbon monoxide in the catalytic reactor; a is t

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAI. USE ONLY

proportion of the flow of gas through the catalytic reactor (considering the tem-
perature in the reactor [9]).

As a rule. on >> a , and it is possible to make the value of 8 equal to one, in-
creasing the amoung of catalyst and its temperature; therefore from (1)

a.-.“ ' (2)

Inasmuch as no - klncl. where k1 is the CO2 dissociation rate constant for electron

impact; ne is the electron concentration; 1 is the time the gases are in the dis-
charge zone in a <lvadv fast—flow laser or the pulse duration in a repetitively
pulsed C0,-laser. from (2) it follows that the equilibrium degree of dissociation
increases’with an increase in E/p and the specific energy input to the dis-
charge a For stabilization of a on the given level with an increase in a it is
necessary to increase the proportgon of the gas flow passing through the re overy
unit. The value of a in a continuous-emission CO -laser with average P0“?! 0‘ 5
kilowatts reaches «2- 0'3. In this case 202 of the gas flow must be passed through
the catalytic recovery unit with B . l to maintain an at a level of 12.

5. 0n dissociation of C0,. carbon monoxide and oxygen appear in the working gas
mixture. The carbon monoiide and oxygen are the components which. according to the
published data, have a negative influence on the radiation output power and gain
[10-14]. in order to estimate the influence of the individual components on the
decrease in pulse radiation power. the gainmax was measured in gas mixtures of
different chemical composition. The results presented in Figure 3 indicate that

a decrease in to concentration. just as an increase in the C0 and 0 concentrations
in the mixture, lead to a decrease in the gain. The primary contribution (-602) to
the decrease in gain is made by the change in carbon dioxide concentration, but when
solving the problem of stabilizing the radiation output power, the appearance of
carbon monoxide and oxygen cannot be neglected.

6. Thus. this paper allows the following conclusions to be drawn.
The application of a palladium catalyst permits stabilization of the chemical com—
position of the working medium and pulse radiation power of a closed-cycle €02-

laser.

ine decrease in gainmax with an increase in co and 02 concentrations requires caution

when using additives to stabilize the chemical composition (C0, 02, and so on), for
they can lead to a decrease in the radiation output power.

The equilibrium degree of dissociation of C02 is proportional to the specific energy
Inpul, it increases with an increase in Elp and is inversely proportional
to the proportion of the gas flux fully recovered in the recovery unit.

78

FOR OFFICIAL liSl‘. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIWRAPH!

l. A. C. Eckbreth, P. R. Blsszuk, AIM STH FLUID AND PLASMA DYNAMICS CON!”
Boaton, June 26-28, 1972.

2. S. S. Vorontsov, A. I. Ivsnchenko, R. I. Soloukhin. A. A. Shepelenko, PRIK. W.
I ma. P12. (Applied Hechsnics sud Technical Physics), No 3, 1977, p 6.

3. P. H. Pace, N. Lacombc, 1855 J. 05-16, 1978, p 263.

lo. V. I. Garashchuk. 1. A. Vssilets, KVANTOVAYA mourn (Quantum Electronics).
No 6, 1979, p 1783.

5. S. F. Balandin, V. A. Plssrinin, st s1., TBZISY now. 11 VSBSOYUZ. SENINARA
P0 FIZICNESKIN PROTSESSAH V GAZOVYKN 01“: (Topics of Reports. Second All-Union
Seminar on Physical Processes in Gas Lasers), Uzhsorod. 1978.

6. N. G. Basov, 1. K. Babayev, V. A. Danilychev, et 81.. KVANTOVAYA EIEKTRONIKA,
No 6, 1979, p 772.

7. A. A. Vedenov, S. V. Drobyazko, H. N. Korzinkin, KVANTOVAYA WRONIKA, No 7,
1960, p 1186.

S. R. R. Jacobs, REV. SCI. INSTR., No 66, 1973, p 11106.

9. G. N. Abramich, PRIKLADNKYA GAZOVAYA DINANIKA (Applied Gas Dynamics), Moscow,
Nauka, 1976.

10. Ye. N. Lotkova, V. N. Ochkin, N. N. Sobolev, 1m J. 03-7, 1971. p 396.

11. V. N. Ochkin. TRUDY FIAN (Works of the Physics Institute of the USSR Acadqu of
Sciences). No 78, 19710, p 3.

12. f. S. Alinpiyev, N. V. Ksrlov, Yu. 3. Konev, G. P.. an'nin. R. P. Petrov, RADIO-
.LFJCHNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA (Radio Engineering and Electronics), No 15, 1970, p 2361.

13. P. Bletzinger, D. A. La Borde, H. E. Bailey, W. N. Long, 1’. D. Tsnnen, A. Gsrs-
(‘mltIc-n. IEEE J. QE-ll, 1975, p 317.

16. A. L. S. Smith, '1‘. N. Bets, P. G. Browne, IEEE J. 0-11, 1975, p 335.
COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svysz'". "Kvsntovsys elektroniks“, 1981

10.845
(:90: 1862/220

79

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFH(1AI.I1$¥IONI.V

NUCLIAI PHYSICS

UDC 539.125.5.l72
DIFFRACTION METHODS IN NEUTRON PHYSICS

Moscow DIFRAKTSIONNYYE HETODY V NEYTRONNOY PIZIKE in Russian 1981 (signed to press
3 Jun 81) pp 2-4. 215-216

(Annotation. preface and table of contents of book “Diffraction Methods in Neutron
Physics“. by Yuriy Andreyevich Aleksandrov. Eduard Ivanovich Sharapov and Laslo
Cher. Energoizdat. 1400 copies. 216 pages]

[Text] The principal content is a description of methods of doing diffraction
experiments using both steady-state and pulsed neutron sources.

Intended primarily for experimental physicists who are not specialists on struc-
tural neutron diffraction studies. but require a text to acquaint themselves with
modern methods of neutron diffraction. Also of use to students in advanced courses
speicalizing in the field of neutron physics.

Tables 6. figures 137. references 284.
Preface

Recent years have witnessed considerable progress in methods and experimental equip-
ment in neutron diffraction studies. and also an expansion of the use of neutron
diffraction methods in the field of nuclear physics. solid state physics and bi-
ology. Therefore. in dealing with some problems that involve neutron physics.
researchers who are not specialists in the area of neutron diffraction studies

need to familiarize themselves with modern diffraction techniques. However. it

is not easy to find a suitable overview that will introduce the non-specialist

to the broad range of pertinent questions (an exception might be D. Bacon's well-
known monograph "Neutron Diffraction" [Russian translation published by Izdatel'stvo
inostrannoy literatury. Moscow. 1957]). This book is an attempt to fill the gap.

In addition to describing methods of doing diffraction experiments with steady-
state and pulsed neutron sources. the authors give consideration to problems of
exact determination of the integral intensity of diffraction reflection. and to
the introduction of various correCtions in experimental results.

The book deals mainly with problems relating to processes of elastic scattering
of unpolarized neutrons. since it is the authors' feeling that problems of the

dynamics of crystals. as well as problems relating to work with polarized neutrons.
should be covered in separate monographs.

80

INDR 0F1ﬂC1A|.lEﬂE(NNLV
“DI! (ll-TIP“! USE ON! \'

The book consists of eight chapters and an appendix. Chapter 1 contains minimum
information on crystallography necessary for an understanding of the material pre-
sented later in the book. Chapters 2 and 3 examine the principal questions of

the kinematic and dynamic theories of neutron diffraction. Currently there is
intense development of research on neutron-optics effects based on the dynamic
theory of neutron diffraction. The use of neutron-optics methods of research.

in particular neutron interferometery is of promise in the study of neutrons. and
also in solving some problems of nuclear and solid-state physics. Chapter 6 is
devoted tothe introduction of various correc'.ons in experimental results (for
extinction. absorption. diffuse scattering and the like). In doing research that
involves the determination of the intensity.of Bragg reflection of neutrons from
single crystals and powders. it is very important to account for such corrections.
Chapters 5-7 relate to techniques for doing diffraction experiments on steady-
state reactors. They give descriptions of different kinds of neutron diffractom-
eters (including existing facilities) and methods of working with them. examine
such characteristics of these facilities as luminosity and resolution. and some
other problems of neutron optics of diffraction systems. and give the latest ad-
vances in making and using crystal monochromators. Chapter 8 is devoted to a de-
tailed description of diffraction experiments with the use of pulsed neutron sources.
Work with pulsed neutron sources (pulsed reactors, accelerators with a target) has
its own peculiarities. The material of this chapter is based mainly on experience
accumulated in working with the [BR-30 pulsed reactor in Dubna. Recent years have
seen an expansion of the use of methods of neutron diffraction not only in physics.
but also in biology. Therefore we have considered it appropriate to give in the
appendix some examples of the investigation of biological objects by the methods
of neutron diffraction. To some extent these examples illustrate the use of the
methods that we have considered. Other examples can be found in the recently pub-
lished book "Strukturnaya neytronografiya" [Structural Neutronographyl by Yu. 2.
Nozik. R. P. Ozerov and K. Khennig. Moscow. Atomizdat. 1979.

The authors have assumed that the reader is familiar with the basics of techniques
of neutron experiments. and therefore problems involving methods of neutron regis-
tration have not been brought up to any extent in the book.

The book uses customary units of measurement (eV. X. b and so on). Their relation
Lu the corresponding: SI units is as follows: 1 3-10'” m. l eVI l.6~10"” J.
1 m “st-133.3 Pa. 1 b- 10'” m’. 1 fm- 10‘” m. law-101.325 Pa. 10.2-79.6 A/m.

Ne are sincerely grateful to R. P. 02erov. Yu. M. 0stanevich and A. B. Popov. who
examined the manuscript of the book and cade a number of important comments. and
also to i. Gladkikh and L. A. Podgorova for considerable assistance with prepara-

tion of the manuscript.

Yu. Aleksandrov.

E. Sharapov.

L. Cher.
Dubna. December 1980

Contents page
Preface 3
Chapter I: Basic information on Crystallography 5

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFWK1A1.US£10NLV

1. Elementary lattice theory

2. The reciprocal lattice

3. Description of diffraction by the reciprocal lattice

Chapter 2: Neutron Scattering by Nuclei. Atoms. Crystals

4. Interaction between slow neutrons and matter. Coherent and incoherent
scattering

5. Scattering of slow neutrons by a free nucleus. Interference of potential
and resonant scattering

6. Scattering by a bound nucleus. Fermi pseudopotential. Scattering cross
section

7. Bragg scattering. Structure factor

8. Debye-Hailer factor

9. Methods of studying neutron scattering by single crystals and powders

Chapter 3: Some Experimental Consequences of the Dynamic Theory of Neutron

Diffraction

10. Introduction to the dynamic theory of neutron diffraction

ll. Neutron reflection from perfect crystals. Two-crystal spectrometer

12. Effect of the pendulum solution

13. Experiments with neutron interferometers

Chapter 4: Corrections Introduced in Determining the Structure Factor

14. Extinction

15. Thermal diffuse scattering

16. Multiple Bragg scattering

l7. Absorption

18. Repeatibility factor

Chapter 5. Neutron Diffractometers

19. Reactor as neutron source and systems of neutron beam shaping

20. Crystal monochromators

2|. Biaxinl (two-crystal) diffractometers

22. Triaxial facilities

23. One-Crystal diffractometers

24. Neutron interferometer designs

Chapter 6: Neutron Optics of Diffraction Systems

25. Geometry of experiment. scanning methods

26. Inmdnosity and resolution

27. Focusing properties of crystals

28. nackscattering spectrometer

Chapter 7: Doing the Diffraction Experiment

29. Coniomcters. orientation and alignment of specimen

30. Setting angles

1|. Neutron counters. multidetector systems

32. Measuring integral intensity of refle.ted beams

Chapter 8: Diffrartion Experiments on Pulsed Neutron Sources

11. Time-of-flight method

14. Pulsed neutron sources

15. Spnrial method» of neutron heam modulation

lb. Moderators

17. Pulse shape

18. anknruund from fast neutrons and gamma quanta

l9. Neutron guides

40 . Spt-I' ﬁlm It on i i

41. Rerordlng uquipmvnt

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10
11

12
12
15

17
21
23
27

38
38
40
44
53
SS
55
59
62
66
69
70
70
77
81
86

94

97

97
100
107
112
114
114
117
119
124
126
126
128
134
148
151
153
155
157
163
“DI (WNQ‘IAL USE ONLY

42. Collimators. biological shielding, forward bean trap 169
43. Determining form of neutron spectrum 170
an. lnsrrn~enf resolution 171
45. Focusing 1! the method of diffraction by tine of flight 182
66. Contribution of incoherent scattering and inelastic processes 188
67. Diffraction at small angles 19!
48. Data processing 193
Appendix: Investigation of Biological Objects by Neutron Diffraction Methods 197
References 208

COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdat. 1981

66I0
CSO: 1862/28

83

FOI<Oﬁ1ﬂCJAL USIZCHULY
Hut OFFK'ML use uMJ.

OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

UDC 621.373.826
USE OF DEGENERATE PARAMETRIC PROCESSES FOR WAVE FRONT CORRECTION (SURVEY)

ﬂoscou KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 5 (107), May 81
(manuscript received 17 Dec 80) pp 917-935

[Article by u. S. Vurunin (deceased), V. M. Petnikova and V. V. Shuvalov,
Moscow State University imeni M. V. Lononosov)

[Text] Abstract; The results obtained by the authors
when studying wave front reversal in degenerate
parametric processes are reviewed. The problem of

radiation signal transmission along an optically
inhomogeneous path is investigated. A model of a
phase distortion compensation system with wave
front reversal in the parametric processes is
constructed. The mathematical apparatus of the
scattering coefficient was used to discover the
limiting possibilities of the method. It is
demonstrated that satisfactory compensation for
the distortions takes place when the radiationcon-
verter resolves the effective size of the inhomoge-

neities. The possibilities of practical imple-
mentation of such systems are discussed.

1. introduction

kcccntiy. significant interest has been manifested in the use of the methods of non-
linear optics to compensate phase wave front distortions arising when light passes

through an optically inhomogeneous medium [1-6]. The field complex-conjugate to the
distorted field required for this purpose can be obtained for various types of sti-

mulated scattering of light [2. 7, 8], and in degenerate parametric processes --
three-photon [J]

{Ito—urea) (1)
and four-photon piHCCbSUH ll. 4]

(u ids—0"“. (2)

Along with equality of the frequencies of the incident and reversed fields amplifi-
cation of the reflected signal is possible in the latter. it is this GSPOCE 0f the
:rntLt-r limi illlﬂfi'nln rv-‘t-nrrluers.

8h

I-OR OFFICIAL LSI". ONLY
HR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

First of all. it is necessary to discover the limiting possibilities of phase dis-
tortion compensation systems with wave front reversal (HFR) in degenerate parametric
processes. For this purpose it is necessary to discover the factors determining the
degree of nronslnriiml of the initial wave front and establish the criterion of
satisfactory compensation of the distortions for specific physical problems.

In the first papers on NPR, the reversal system itself was assumed to be ideal. This
meant that the reversed field was considered an exact complex-conjugate copy of the
scattered field. In reality. any nonlinear process used for "PR filters the spatial
signal radiation spectrum. Therefore for successful anxnstntrion of the initial wave
front it is necessary to impose defined restrictions on the parameters of the inhomo-
geneous medium causing the distortions and the parametric converter. At the present
time this approach is being used to study the possibilities of applying such systems
in solving one of the basic problems of adaptive optics -- transmission of time and
space-modulated signal radiation over an optically inhomogeneous path.

2. Calculation Procedure

Let a signal radiatiun plane wave with amplitude El traveling through an optic-
ally inhomogeneous medium located in the plane ~20 (Figure l), acquire a phase lead
6(0), where p is the transverse component of the radius vector in a polar coordin-
ate system. The radiation converter 1 will be considered to be a linear spatial
filter [9]. In the simplest case it can be described either by the transmission
coefficient K(x), where x is the transverse projection of the wave vector, or by the
scatteringfunctionf(ﬂ). Let us remember that K(x) and F(O) are related to each
other by a Fourier transformation [9].

 

Figure 1. Model of a phase distortion
compensation system

Using these values it is easy to define both the spectral and spatial field distri-
bution after passing ihrnunh the inhomogeneous medium a second time:

5= (9. ——z.p=E: Iexp {in (p)-iv(p)'} Pie-9') d9': (3)
E:(x. —z.)=5; ;K(x')o(x—u'w(—u')4u'. 0")

Here a. (X)=(2n)" jeprq‘ipp .;. ixp} a, is the Fourier ‘ransform of the function
“PIN (9)}-

Thc degree of distortion compensation can be characterized by the ratio of the spec-

tral amplitudes of the initial and nrmsmlnriOdfleldI. However, inasmuch as this
ratio depends on the efficiency of nonlinear interaction, normalization by the maxi-
mum value of the conversion factor K0 is required:

85

FOR 0F1WCJAI.US£(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1'1 '5: (0. ~1.)/K.El'6(x), (5)

we shall consider the distortion compensation satisfactory if the nxamtnxled plane
wave contains no less than 0.5 [Kolz of the energy of the initial wave. that is.

In I'>I/2. (6)

Tre degree of distortion compensation can also be characterized by the overlap in-
tegral [10]

’ ‘ ”‘5"?- —=e’5a<9- -z-Mol’/.i "5:0. —z.) I' an! IE: (.1. —:a I' do.

however. this value is not so descriptive as the Faﬂlﬂtnﬁtiul coefficient (5) [11.
12] and, what is especially important. experimental determination of it turns out to
be much more complicated.

The general exp"essions obtained (3)-(S) are valid both for three-photon and four-
photon parametric radiation converters. A detailed calculation is possible consi-
dering the explicit form of the transmission coefficient and specific definition of
the model of the distorting medium.

3. Models of 3 Thin Inhomogeneous Medium

1. Regular Phase Grating. Let us consider a model of a regular phase grating ¢(p)-
a cos yx. The parameter a characterizes the fluctuation amplitude of the optical
path. that is, the fluctuations of the index of refraction, the roughness of the
medium. and so n. The transverse dimension of the inhomogeneities is defined by
the value of y' . For this model

0(x;-6(x,) z i"'J,.,(a)6(m+l~,). (7)

where JIn is an nth—order Bessel function. The spectrum of a singly scattered field

is equidistant. With an increase in a, a greater and greater proportion of the
energy of the initial wave is pumped to the side peaks. It is obvious that
n~wnwh1rlu"- of the wave front takes place only when several peaks of the spatial
spectrum containing the main part of the scattered field energy fall in the radiation
converter band.

The compensation system can operate efficiently at a §_l and with a transverse
scale of the inhomogeneities y'1 2 Axo, where Axe is the width of the scatt‘fing

function of the radiation converter. Hith an increase in a restrictions must be
imposed on the effectiVe size of the inhomogeneities. which is determined by the
width of the spatial spectrum (7).

2. Random Phase Lu-J. the phase lead in an optically inhomogeneous medium is a
random iunction of the coordinates where the process Eeexp(pﬁp;; is homogeneous.
let is.

expliq-ipJ—im') |‘>-=B (p—p').
(8)

86

FOR OFFICIAL USP ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

here. averaging (a). we find
n=K3' IK(X')$(-X') def-K?! 3(9) N9)“.

Here S(K) is the spectral density of the process E. Hereafter, we shall consider

that B(p)=éxp (—p’ib‘) and S(ﬂ)=4nb" exp(—x'b'/4), where h characterizes the size
of the inhomogeneities of the distorting medium.

The nxvmstnxrlon effect is manifested more strongly the smaller the ratio of the
width AI<€ of the spatial spectrum of the process 6 to the pass band of the converter

Aeo' For AvamC l we obtain '1” .| $(¥)dx=-l. . and on satisfaction of the opposite

inequality distortion compensation does not occur.

it is easy to see that the preliminary qualitative conclusions obtained using the
two models are analogous.

6. Radiation Converter Models

1. Three—photon interaction. Degenerate three-photon interaction (1) has been
studied quite well. Its basic advantage is comparatively high quantum efficiency,
and its disadvantage is the presence of rigid conditions of phase synchrony, con-
stricting the angular aperture of the converter. Nevertheless, the process can he
used for NPR in cases where the distortions introduced by the inhomogeneous medium
are comparatively small.

For low-efficiency three-photon interaction the conversion factor and the scattering
function are well known [13, 14]:

K (x a)-K.’—.—"'“"’ elm—(pad): (9)

rtp.p)-{si—."'—r- 91M“- ”"WE'IT
“[Cimg'ﬁ‘ “TEE-17]

Here 5t2)=04'43)|z—22.—112in—H| characterizes the detuning from the optimal
focusing plane (that is, the plane in which 8 . 0), and the parameter a - Al/éln
cnaracterizes the width of the phase synchrony angle or the resolution of the con-
vcrter; A is the signal radiation wavelength; 1 is the nonlinear crystal length; n
is the index of refraction; -2k is the longitudinal coordinate of the initial point.

(10)

Using (4), (S), (7) (9), it is possible to determine the nxonstnxwion coefficient.
Thus. for a regular model of the distorting mediu-

" ‘ E ’1‘“) We» (ibm'y’). (11)

Figure 2 shows the h‘-m~|nwlhw1 coefficient (11) as a function of the transverse
dimension of the inhomogeneities and depth of fluctuations of the optical path for

6 - 0. For a random phase grid:
87

FOR OIIHCJAI.USEioNLV
FOR omnu. "SF. ONLY

2‘ (58
,1- .5. [steam + (12)

. . l b!+um-j-B)' _
Aha-9N um]-

I l for b?-.-4(ﬂ’-¢’)>02
“'1 o for haeupnmﬁKo.

5 w 13 In,»

Figure 2. Reconstruction coefficient
for a regular phase grating.

0

in practice, the phase distortion compensation system can be constructed as follows
[11]. It is necessary to find the position of the optimal focusing plane. that is.

the plane in which the scattering function (10) has the least width. In this plane
the procedure for the determination of which can be analogous to the procedure in
reference [16], the reversed field wave front is closest to the phase-conjugate
front of the scattered field. It is necessary to use a special optical system to
transfer the image from this plane to the plane 2 - 'ZO [11]. The inexactneas of
the image ls characterized in (9), (10) by the parameter 8 and leads to the appear—
ance of phase lead in the "wim~ln1lvd plane wave which depends on the direction of
propagation of the ane. Figure 3 shows the phase and modulus of the Itrnnstnrtinn
coefficient (12) as functions of the effective size of the inhomogeneities and the

nrameter 8.

Calculation by criterion (6) shows that the investigated compensation system can he
used for the following ratios of the parameters of an inhomogeneous medium and radi-

ation converter:

a) rcgular model 0&1 «73;. (13)
b) random model 3(a, bl? 6?].

The conditions (13) indicate that satisfactory distortion compensation is observed
when the radiation converter used in the system resolves the effective size of the

inhomogene i t ies .

Let us note that if the phase lead in (11), (12) is for any reason undesirable, more
rigid restrictions must be imposed on the detuning B.

88

FOR OFFICIAL L'SF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ardent-r. lien; I m

 

Figure 3. Rm‘onstnxtion coefficient for a random
phase grid.

2. Fourwphoton Interaction. The degenerate four-photon interaction (2) is in prac-
tice free of phase synchrony conditions [6]. In this case the resolution is deter-
mined by the aperture effects and can be much higher than for three-photon processes

(1).

For four-proton interaction of plane waves in a nonlinear layer which is unlimited
with respect to transverse coordinate, the reversed field can be written in the form

[’0]
E. (uh-4t: (a!) s; (a).
where g-(Sammnnﬁf‘; 1 is the cubic nonlinearity, $3 I. are the amplitudes of the
9

plane pumping waves. The scattering function or field of the converted image of a
point [9] is defined by the expression

1‘(o)-- ammo).

The converted image is always in the same plane as the initial object, and it is an
exact complex-conjugate copy. Total compensation for the phase distortions intro-
duced by an arbitrary inhomogeous medium is insured here.

In practice. the volume of the interaction is always limited. Let us assume that in
the plane 2 - 0 there is a gaussian diaphragm with transparency coefficient exp
(— —ozlpg ). Then the scattering function of the converter is not ideal. Moreover,

the presence of the diaphragm disturbs its homogeneity

r(9.9..-z,)-_,-El.‘b"..xp[_ #‘T .‘(9-9.)k

Here An - Zak/k0D defines the resolution; 9k is the transverse coordinate of the

initial point. It is obvious that the initial plane wave in this converter is con-
verted to a field having a continuous spectrum which in the absence of inhomogenei-
ties repeats the scattering spectrum at the input aperture.

The appearance of inhomogeneities on the path, for example, random inhomogeneities.
leads to variation of the spectral composition of the reversed wave

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

. 2 2 ' 2 2
(5.0:. —:.)>- —iapit¢(el)exp[-”f‘ (‘ +ﬂ'n')“"‘-°;r ' (u)

Uith a decrease in size of the inhomogeneities, the spectrum of the nxonstnxtcd
field (uni lel<3 its total energy decreases V:- §|(E. (s. -z.))|’ds and the
energy of the scattered wave increases up - H0 - H (H0 is the energy of the regene-

rated field in the absence of distortions). The mean amplitude of the scattered
field for a randomly inhomogsnegus medium is equal to zero. It is easy to see that
the ratio 72 - NIH - l + Ap lb permits determination of the degree of compensation
of the distortions. Using a criterion analogous to (6), we require that

1g>li2. (15)

Then it is possible to consider rumstm-tim of the wave front satisfactory if b/Apz
i. As before, the "FR scheme turns out to be effective when the radiation conver—
ter resolves the effective size of the inhomogeneities, which confirms equivalence
of the values of 11 and 12.

 

Figure 4. Collinear and perpendicular
interaction configurations.

The next significant factor limiting the resolution of the four-photon parametric
converter is angular divergence of the pumping beams. Here the scattering function
is also inhomogeneous. Let us find the transformed image of the central point in

the case of collinear and perpendicular interaction configurations (Figure 6). The
solution of this problem will be used to construct a model of the four-photon conver-
ter taking into account both the aperture effects and the pumping beam divergence.

Coilinear Nave interaction. in the case where the pumping waves are plane waves,
but it. + "I. f 0, the msmatcb of the wave vectors that occurs along the X and Y axes

is compensated by V” = r; + “a - <1 as a result of rotation of the vector k2. Along

the z-axis the mismatch A is nonzero, and the process of wave interaction can be
described by the rrdn rd equations:

dE,/d: - igE: exp (—i3 2):
dE;.'a‘: = :35: exp (iAz).

hereafter we shall limit ourselves to the case of a comparatively low conversion
efficiency gL «< i. For boundary conditions El (2 - O) i 0 and £2 (2 I l) - 0, we
obtain

E. m, —z.)=-:—iglexp (-ill’Zhincml/Z) Ef(u.-:-x.-—x,. —z.). (16)

90

Fill! OFFICIAL I'Sli ONLY
IN)R!0FFIC1AI.IISEZCHNLY

Inﬂuhﬁél
'5:

 

Figure 5. Modulus of the scattering function
of the converter considering divergence of the
pumping during collinear interaction.

The rotation of the vector k with respect to the direction -k causes a shift of the
image in the transverse direction. If pumping has a finite uidth of the angular
spectrum :1 5.x (i - 3, a), the initial target (point) blurs into a spot. the
dimensions of ugich can be estimated using geometric optics Ap - K s It. Houever,
even in the case where the image of the target is formed on the frgnt boundary of

the nonlinear layer (zk - 0), the radiation converter is already nonideal.

Let us consider two cases.

Let the pumping wave 4 be a plane wave. and wave 3 have a uniform finite angular
spectrum:

I (53/an, for u.<x.:
£301.) '1 o for "s>"03 (17)
5‘ (“0) ‘ 5:5 (N)-

Then from (16) it is easy to find the image of the point for an arbitrary plane
pumping wave 33(r ). Integration with respect to :3 gives the resultant scattering

function which in the paraxial approximation (slim, x./k(('|) is described by the
expression

1‘ (a) - { ‘1 (”WM _ °"")-"“"oAM' for KM. - bulk:
0 for p:>dpg. (18)

The modulus of the scattering function (18) is depicted in Figure 5.

Now let us propose that the pumping wave 3 is a plane wave, and the wave b has a
finite angular spectrum analogous to (17). Then the scattering function of the con-

verter
91

FOR‘OFHKJAI.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- I ‘(APol'PF- ”.3693 for KAh-lxu'k;
r = m (19)
(P) 0 for P>Ap..

its form is analogous to that shown in Figure 5.

Perpendicular Interaction of Haves. Let, just as in the preceding case. + kl. 9‘ 0.

As before the mismatch of the wave vectors with respect to the Z-axis is t compen-
sated. In order to define the scattering function let us use the same method. It

is easy to see that the divergence of the pumping waves in the planes I! and Y7. have
a different influence on the resolution. Thus, if

_‘ 5:..6 (“SJ-W2". for l":.ui<”¢3

E. ($5.)-
“ . [0 for Ixs.ul>ﬂo.

then “9) = —2igi ( [cost2x.i)-—-l IIi2x.i)‘—:si(2x.l)l2x.l Mp).

In the first approximation the divergence of the pumping wave in the Y2 plane is felt
only in the transformation efficiency. The resolution does not change, and the
...-............i.... coefficient remains equal to one.

if the pumping waves diverge in the XY plane, then then

Hm- -iel[Ei(-ixox)-Ei(T""’— " )]°‘”’ for|r|<Ax,-§£. (20)

[0 forIxI>Ax..

nere I-Zi (x) in the integral exponent. The form of the scattering function is analo-
gous to that presented in Figure 5.

Expressions (18)-(20) which were obtained permit the statement that both for colli-
near configuration and perpendicular configuration of the interaction, the resolu-
tion of the radiation converter in the plane of an inhomogeneOus medium can be esti-
mated as the sun

‘ Avo+Ap-x. (zo+!)lk- (21)

This approach also permits consideration of the influence of the aperture effects.
since for a thin nonlinear layer (AP. << 1) it is equivalent to the divergence of

the pumping beams, tht' spatial spectrum of which corresponds to the scattering spec-
trum on the wave aperture. Finally:

1' iP- 9.. - I.) - — is! [ﬁlT [3'7 (9- p.)]exp[i g. (p’-pi)]. (22)

Here 'i‘ is the effective spatial pumping wave spectrum. In the case of pussian beams
which is important in practice.

 

 

. \
E[(K) = 5“ expl ! )0 1:“3-40

nAx‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE f‘NLY
POI! (“TRIM l‘SD 0N! \

the scattering function has the form
. I e, , . t
No- m- -:.)= — uslmr-exp[—(9—m) :Ap’r Haw-93)].

where A9: 13-! V Ax§+ Am.

For the constructed model. the criterion of satisfactory distortion compensation (15)
is retained where Ap must be understood as the resolution (21). Let us note that

consideration of the divergence of the pumping beam for degenerate three-photon in-
teraction would lead to analogous results. However. this only leads to significant
broadening of the scattering function (10).

5. Models of an Extended Inhomogeneous Medium

The previously performed studies of the pracess of distortion compensation in volu-
wetric inhomogeneous media [15. 16] do not permit confirmation that the diffraction
of the scattered beam will succeed in developing at distances on the order of the
length of the distortinglnedlum itself. If such diffraction blurring is insignifi-
cant, as before it is possible to consider the distorting medium thin. In the gene-
ral case lhe relation of the fields at the input 2 (p) and output E'(p) of an inhomo-
geneous medium is defined by the Green function E'}p) - E (p')G(p, p')dp'. After
HFR by using the degenerate three-photon (10) or four-photon (22) transformation

and secondary passage through the inhomogeneous medium. the regenerated field has

the form

5.49): [G (0. Pi) r (01. 92) (”Pm 9:) Ei (PI) dPidpadﬂs- (23)

Although the distortion compensation system even in this case does not differ
theoretically from those investigated above (item 2.3) for arbitrary extended in-
homogeneities, the analysis is complicated by the necessity for defining the speci-
fic form of the Green function. This work was done for a cylindrical light guide
and optical amplifier with induced thermal 1en5[l7]-

The following simple model has a more general nature. Let us consider a system of
N thin phase grids ~ervd a distance of 2 from each other (Figure 6). Each
grill has a random transmission coefficient elp [i¢ (0)], and the correlation func-
tions of these coefficients 1

B..- (p. p ) =- up {- (9-9')°'bi] 6m

in a real physical medium the spacing between the plates is given by arbitrary
distribution of the inhomogeneities. Their transverse dimension is determined as

before by the value of b].

Let us propose that the NPR is realized by a four-photon radiation converter with
scattering function (22). Then the nxonsrnxlion coefficient

1" l + 2 @111." (2a)

[-1

uhere do is the resolution of the converter in the plane of the jth phase grid.
From (26 it follows that in the case of extended inhomogeneities the criterion (15)

93

I")! OFTHCJAL USEZCNHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6. Model of an extended
inhomogeneous medium.

Key: 8 . converter

imposes more rigid restrictions on the resolution:
*2
I}. (591/01):§I.
II

The mms: m1 ion coefficient (21.) has a maximum value for optimal focusing of the
scattered field:

V N
L -
20..“ = —: ﬁ/E bl 2. (25)
I-I I III
\'—I
where L,= \‘ 1‘

__ is the distance fro: the jth phase plate to the Nth phase plate.
In!

It is possible to demonstrate that the plane so opt corresponds to the point of con-

of the gaussian bean scattered by an inhomogeneous medium. It .is obvious
that if the radiation converter is placed in this plane, then actually the maxim
efficiency of the conversion and minimum broadening of the spectrun in the “FR
process will be insured. Let us note that in the simplest case of two phase
urids‘ the plate with finer inhomogeneities must be resolved better -— Ap [An -
(bl/b2)2. If the size of the longitudinal and transverse inhomogeneities is

I rm Iinn

.3 I
constanl. then z.,_,.,. . _+ \‘ ’1.

ﬁ -
l‘l

It is possible analogously to define the m'onﬁtnrtim coefficient also for other
mod r-l~'of extended inhomogeneities, for example, periodic structures. For an in-

homogeneous medium formed by two uniform phase gratings with transmission coefficients
cxp(iaicosij) (j - i, 2) at a distance I. from each other:

e: ~ 2; 1; (an 1:.- (a.) If. (a2) 12- (an ~,;

n.n' o.»'-.-.

> up .‘ — Jr Ia. (m —M') —'- «up — n'n‘}. (26)

Here uj - (1/2)Yiji; ij is the one-dimensional resolution of the converter in the
planes of arrangement of the gratings. Figure 7 shows the I'm oneunlt'li'ﬂ coefficient

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

0 J n ‘1',“

Figure 7. Itu-msrnrzion coefficient in different focusing
planes (a1 . a2 - 1.75; L - 16 cm; equivalent angular di-

vergence of the pumpings 0.3 mrad) for gratings with periods
of Y1 . 72 . 0.187 In (1); Y1 - 0.15 In, 12 I 0.225 III (2) and

71 = 0.125 mm. Y2 - 0.25 mm (3).

(26) as a function of the position of the focusing plane. The presented graphs con-
iirm the previously obtained conclusion (25). This comparison shows that the above
investigated model of random inhomogeneities not only is more convenient, but quite

completely reflects the general laws of the phenomenon. It permits analytical de-
termination of the ruwmsrntiicn coefficient considering both longitudinal and trans-

verse inhomogeneities that vary along the path. The obtained expressions are simple
and permit descriptive physical interpretation.

 

Figure 8. Diagram of the experimental setup.

in conclusion. let us present the results of experimental studies confirming con-
clusions from items 2-5. The studies were performed on a setup, the diagram of
which is presented in Figure 8. An yllrium -aluminua garnet laser 1 (A - 1.066 mi-
cron) which generates the basic transverse mode. was used as the radiation source.
For a radiation pulse duration of 10 nanoseconds the output power of the laser was

about 600 kilowatts.

The laser radiation with angular divergence of 0.7 mrad was divided into two beams
by the plate 2. Th-higher power beam was used as the pumping save, and the lower
powe' beam was used to siaulate the signal radiation. In order to improve the
resolution of the converter, the pumping beam was also collhmated by a telescopic
system 3 to an angular divergence of 0.2 mrad. The second pumping wave use formed
by a plane mirror 4, and it was polarized orthogonally to the first as a result of

the application of a quarter-wave plate 5.
95

FOR 051WCJAI.USEGM‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An inhomogeneous medium of finite thickness was simulated by a system of two identi-
cal phase gratings 6. The gratings were made bv the method of etching thin glass
substrates in hydrofluoric acid. Before etching, narrow strips of protecthe coating
were applied to the substrates. The measurements of the energy distribution in an
equidistant spectrum of radiation scattered by such a grating demonstrated the possi-
bilitylof its approximation with accuracy of 101 by a sinusoidal grating with period
of 71.2 - 0.25 mm and a phase modulation depth a1.2 - 1.75.

A beam scattered by the inhomogeneous medium was focused on the converter by a high-
speed objective 7. The parametric converter 8 based on a gallium arsenide single
crystal 0.55 cm thick generated a reverse wave polarised orthogonally to the inci-
dent wsve [18]. The isolation of the recmtructed mission was provided by a pola-
rization prism 9. The conversion efficiency reached 5 to 101. The system for re-

cording the rcumtna‘lul wave front included a rotating-inter 10. the 0530““. 11.
an iris diaphragm 12 placed in its focal plane and a co-axisl photoelement 13.

The procedure for measuring the ncaslnrtkm coefficient consisted in the following.
In the absence of phase gratings, the power of the generated radiation and conver-
sion efficiency were determined. In this case the iris diaphragm 12 was closed
to minimum size. still not irising the light beam. The introduction of phase grat-
ings installed cloﬂ'lp so that their images are constructed by the objective 7 in
the middle of the nonlinear crystal 3 into the system decreased the power of the

radiation by 25-301. This decrease in power was connected with losses
to reflection at the edges of the grating. Then this power 9(0) was considered to
correspond to the value of 12 - l. The gratings were moved apart so that their
images were at a distance L from each other symmetrically on both sides of the
crystal (20 - -L/2). This led to a decrease in power of the recorded radiation
P(L). The ratio T2(L) - P(L)/P(0) was taken as the nxcnstnrtion coefficient.

The measurement results are presented in Figure 9. The theoretical dependence of

12 on the spacing between the gratings (26) is illustrated in the same figure (curve
1). The grating periods were recalculated for the plane of the images. The equi-
valent angular divergence of the pumping radiation is 0.3 mrad. An analogous func-
tion was also obtained for the model of two random phasegrhk (26) (curve 2) with
effective size of the inhomogeneities of 36 microns. The approximation of the
scattered radiation spectrum by the gaussian spectrum gives a value on the order of
26 microns. Some difference in estimates of this value obviously can be explained
by the approximation error and deviation of the form of the gratings from sinusoidal.

The performed studies (items 2-5) demonstrate the possibility of simple estimation
of the optimal parameters of the "FR required for satisfactory nxonstnmtion of a
plane wave front distorted by a real inhomogeneous medium.

6- kiwnmlnrlhm of Space-Modulated Fields

During analysis of the process of nevnﬁ'ﬂ11‘n8 a space-modulated field it is
necessary to define such generally accepted quality parameters of the image as
resolution and contrast. In this section. this will be done by using the scatter-
ing function of a linear system made up of the inhomogeneous medium, parametric
converter that reverses the wave front. inhomogeneous medium.

The analysis is performed for a regular phase grating and parametric converter with
scattering function

96

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(M“LY
“‘02 0’1“!“ ‘3). “SI \

r (x) = V (d- £3)iu exp [— (o - £3) a]. (27)
1'2
do
a: ,
att________i________m________a_________i_____£_:4_
0 5 m 6 Id new

Figure 9. mxonslnanion coefficient as a function
of the thickness of an inhomogeneous medium.

The scattering function (27) approximates three (10) and four-photon (22)
radiation converters quite well. For this model it is possible to show that the
nxmnclnt1od image of the point - the scattering function of the entire system - is
defined by the expression

F(x‘)=VL;Vo,—m. i; i'-"J,.(a).l,(a)x

ll. 'o—O

. i _ _,_ z _ ..
xexp[—(6.—;A,)[z‘(m - P) ‘11'- (1'0": P')T‘P‘I}- (28)

where A,=Z/7'; dyad/$1; x.-yx;z‘=(z.—z.)y'lh. The form of the normalised mattering
function P(x1 - F(xl)/F(0) is shown in Figure 10 for different values of the para-

meters entering into (28). He shall determine the resolution of the system by the
halfuidth of the central peak of the image of the point, and the contrast will be
estimated by the energy included in the side peaks.

It is easy to see that the resolution is determined in practice by only one parame-
ter 6 -- the resolution of the radiation converter. The variation of the parameter
61 - the relation between 5 and the lattice period - leads to varieties of the
contrast of the nrmmlnx1u] image. For 61 5.1, the efficiency of the compensation
system drops sharply. The energy included in the aide peaks of the scattering func-
tion will become appreciably greater than in the central function.

The variation of 21 (Figure 10. c) has almost no influence on the halfuidth oi
the central peak. at the same time sharply changing the spatial location of the
side peaks. Therefore for 6 ~ 1 the regeneration can be considered satisfactory

either in direct proximity to the inhomogeneOus medium (s << 1) or at distances
corresponding to the far diffraction zone (a, >> 1). The interpretation of this

result is obvious if the field passing through the inhomogenous medium a second
limo is represented as a superposition of two components: the reuxstnxted one
which in practice repeats the form of the scattering function of the radiation
converter (27), and the inhusttnrtﬂl one which diffracte on the grating inhomoge-
neities. in the near diffraction zone the peaks of the unnxomnruued field

97

INJI.OIWNC1AL USE:(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

C

Figure 10. Scattering function of a system made up of tha inhomo-
geneous medium. radiation converter. inhomogeneous medium.

broaden the central peak of the scattering function. with an increase in 2 they
are removed from the center of the field of view and can go beyond its limits at a

defined distance. The energy efficiency of this system will drop sharply in this
C888.

Increasing the modulation depth of the optical path a leads to an increase in the
side peaks (Figure 10. h), inasmuch as it is equivslent to worsening of the ratio

between the resolution of the converter and the effective size of the inhomogeneity
which can be determined by the width of the spatial spectrum of a singly scattered
field. The phase of the scattering function also has a negative effect on the
contrast of the rnwnmlnhlullmage which is sharply distorted. It is obviously

possible to consider the condition A1/6 §_n the criterion of satisfactory
l't‘l'nl1\l rum Inn.

It is simpler to estimate the contrast of the rrcaslnrred image in terms of the
rﬂuvh:nwlhvl coefficient of the plane wave 11. For the model selected by us

not.) -—- E Ji(u)exp[-g-§T—:‘g‘ M] (29)
i- I

where r1 - x/y. The function 11(rl) (29) is shown in Figure 11. L decrease in 11

with an increase in y is caused by a decrease in the effective size of the inhomo-
geneities in the case of oblique incidence of the plane vaves.
1n the simplest case A - 0, which corresponds, for example. to a three-photon para-

metric conversion of the radiation 8 - 0; it is possible to characterize the contrast
of the ru-nwlnx1cd image of the point by the ratio

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6- 3' manual I mama.

 

Figure 11. Plane wave reconsiructim
coefficient.

where 1 (x) is the plane wave m-nnslnxrion coefficient in the absence of an inhomo-
geneous medium. For the models used

Cad/En AJL(¢)J§(a)exp[-(2$‘Ly . (30)

Figure 12 shows the contrast (30) an a function of the parametere 6 and a. The

value of C is smaller the worse the radiation converter resolves the effective eire
of the inhomogeneities.

 

Figure 12. Contraat of a mtmtcd image.

The reeulte obtained depend elightly on the choice of the model of the diatortins
medium and have a quite general nature. For example. they agree well with the re-
sults of reference [19] for a model of a random phaee grid. In both can the

ru‘tuslru‘lnl image of the point ie an almoet undietorted scattering function of the

converter and the Ihmr‘mnlnIH-d background. the peaks of which are located farther

from the center of the field of view. the farther the initial target is from the
inhomogeneous medium. 99

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (Wt‘li‘ltl INF “NI \

The experimental study of the process of nronstnxling a space-modulated field was
performed on a setup analogous to the one described in item 5. A metal slide was
used as the target. The resolution was determined by photometric measurement of
the edge of the image and. depending on the position of the objective 7. was from 30
to 8 lines/mm. here the parameter 5 varied from 4 to 1. With optimal position of
the objective. the image contrast was in practice ideal.

7. Possibilities for Utilizing Parametric Processes

The phase distortion compensation systems with parametric “FR have a number of
deficiencies which rrstrict the region of their possible use. First. they are two-
pass. The operating principle of the systems is based on "FR with subsequent
passage of the reversed wave along the same inhomogeneous path. Secondly. the
question of compensation of nonlinear distortions which can arise as a result of

the self—stress processes. Finally, thirdly. the use of degenerate four-photon in-
teraction in the NPR systems. in spite of high resolution, is not always possible

as a result of comparatively low quantum efficiency. The discussion of measures to
eliminate these diffiCulties is also a goal of this section.

1. Single-Pass Phase Distortion Compensation Systems. As before, we shall use a
degenerate four-photon interaction (2) in the system, but one of the plane pumping
wives E , just as the signal E (9). will be passed through a thin distorting medium
(Figure 13). The waves coming out of the homogeneous medium will have complex ampli-
tudes 5(9) -_-. E; Kelp liq (p)1andE’,(p)-= E. (p) exp lie (0)]. The second pumping wave El. remains

plane. If the distance from the distorting medium to the radiation converter and
thickness of the nonlinear layer are comparatively small, it is possible to neglect
the diffraction diffusion of the waves E'(p) and 55(0). As a result of parametric
interaction, a nnuustﬁriuluave will be produced E (9) ~ 8*(0) [20. 21]. An analo.
gous method of distortion compensation is used in holography for single passage of
both a signal and a reference wave through an inhomogeneous medium [9, 22]. It must
be noted that the restriction on thickness of the distorting medium is fundamental
In a thick inhomogeneous medium phase distortions as a result of diffraction will
become amplitude distortions. which cannot be compensated by the described method.

For the fornmtion of anes H. and E (p), it is possible to use one plane wave with
circular polarization. The diagram of the experimental setup for this case is
shown in Figure 14. The radiation of a YAG laser generating the basic transverse
mode with angular diVergencc of 0.55 mrad was divided by a plate 1 into two beans of
approximately the same power. Linear polarization of one of them using a quarter-
ane plate 2 was coHVerted to elliptic. One of the polarization components of

this beam played the role of pumping, and the other the signal. The plane wave E“
was Iormeu ny dielectric mlrrors 3. lo and the lens 5.

9M

 

Figure 13. Single—pass phase distortion compensation
system.

Kt-vz .1. chim'tivc

um

FOR OFl‘lf'IAI. USE ONLY
IN)! 0F11C1AL USEZCHULV

 

Figure lb. Diagram of the experimensl
setup.

As the phase distorting medium we used either a glsss plate with a layer of glass
melt applied to it having a negative effect on the divergence of the beams by more
than an order, or a plate made of gallium arsenide 5.5 mm thick in which self-stress

effects were observed. The image of the exu edge of the distorting medium was
formed by the objective 6 inside a cell 2 cm long filled with nitrobenzene 7. The

radiation generated in the converter. isolated by a light-dividing plate 8. paiaroid
9 and mirror 10, was recorded in the focal plane of the lens 11 on photographic film.
Photometry of the image made it possible to determine the divergence of the investi-

gated beam. The angular divergence of the 'runxntnrted wave was 0.7 mrad, which was
connected with complete identity of the amplitude profiles of one of the pumpings
and the signal.

The method used can he developed further for a broader class of problems. In
practice any modulation of at least one or the pumping waves - amplitude, phase.
time - permits controlled variation of the operation of complex conjugation of the
wave front. which in a number of problems of adaptive optics is not optimal. Let us
demonstrate this possibility in a simple example having an analytical solution.

2. Compensation of Nonlinear Phase Distortions in a Two-Pass HF! System. As is
known. the "PR method does not permit compensation for distortions of the wave

front caused by self-stress of the fields with unequal intensities of the signal and
reversed waves [23]. For total compensation of nonlinear distortions it is necessary
to form the “reversed“ wave front by varying the amplitude and phase profiles of the
pumping beam so that the front will reconstruct the form of the wave front of the
signal after secondary passage through the distorting nonlinear medium.

Let the signal radiation -- a gaussian beam with spherical wave front - be distor-
ted in a nonlinear medium I ('20— < a < 0):

9’). m
5-.mu% mh-‘mm 'qu. GD

1 are the initial beam;mm|1tudeand width; f1(s) is the dimensionless

beam width (fl (-2) -1). 91(z) is the phase lead on the axis. In medium II (0‘:
z < i). degeneratg four-photon interaction is realised. where the pumping waves are
also gaussian:

0
Here £1, a

EU” IA“? [“92/4§.o=§‘*0’/2R3.4].
101

INDR OFINCJAL USEZCMULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where R3 4 are the radii of curvature of the wave front of the pumping beans.

We shall neglect the diffraction on the nonlinear interaction lengths >> 1 and
use an approximation of the given fields. Then the reversed wave is .153 a gaussian
beam (31). Its parameters are subject to the boundary conditions:

m I I _ I I _
50 WW' 273I0I'2'T2+3.7’.I0I'

“M'-%M-T-’m- '-%+%%-

The value of n is determined by the conversion efficiency. Let us consider the
self-stress of a quite short signal pulse which does not encounter the returned
radiation pulse in medium I. He shall consider that all of the nonlinear processes
can be described by stationary equations. Then in the self-stress process the beam
width varies as follows:

.. I '
fl Dull -D|sv I‘ : I. 0;"; -D;"': . (32)

Here D.,-Im'i/2; D‘.,-(a,/£:)V_¢,.1e"|; vqimﬁ ¢-;.+¢.Iglt is the dielectric con-

stant of medium I, which depends on the radiation intensity. The phase lead ¢ (- z 0)
does not depend on p and does not influence the form of the tremetncted wave f ont.
The solution of equations (32) permits us to find the constriction and curvature of
the wavefront of the pumping beans insuring compensation of the nonlinear distor-
tions:

 

 

_L_;=°:'(L‘°"R°) (2'- '). (33)

 

Key: A. nonlinear

Analogous results can also be obtained by the process of degenerate three-photon in-
teraction. The proposed method of controlling the parameters of the reversed field
can be more convenient than the application of adaptive nirrors.

3. Use of Ring Cuvilivu. A significant increase in the quantum yield of systems
with parametric NPR can be obtained by using positive feedback. It is known that in
three-photon [25] and four-photon [25] parametric laeore the use of such

feedback leads to a significant reduction of the lasing threshold.

Let us consider the possibility of the application of a ring ravily (Figure 15)
to improve the efficiency of the MFR system with degenerate four-photon interaction.
The signal radiation is lvd Io Ihc cavity through a aemitranapsrent mirror
coupling 1 with reflection coefficient r1. The spherical mirrors 2, 3 take the
spatial field distribution from one end of the nonlinear medium a to the other.

insuring positive feedback both with respect to the signal wave and with respect to
the reversed wave.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 15. "PR system with
ring cavity.

Let linearly polarized plane waves interact in an isotropic, unlinited nonlinear
layer of thicknesa i. where 31||52133I|3¢ The process of generating a coupler-

conjugate wave front in the approximation of the given field with respect to pulping
without considering absorption and self-stress of waves 1. 2 is described by the
truncated equations [26]:

-dE./dz-lq,E.(|E.|'+2|£,|');
arm-ms. ( 1£.|*+2 IE. 1’):
dE|-'41“i¢l.£|( IE: I'+ [Es l’)-.-i24a5.5.5.‘.

- 4!: 3/41"40£a( IE. l‘+ IE. I’)+i24.£.£.£: - (3‘)
llere q.-q:+q,; q,=2.1m'1,/c‘k; q.=-4.10’x;/c'k; x” are the independent couponants of the
cubic susceptibility tensor. UM“? “'0 boundary conditions E,(0)-E:, 54030-
‘EgsE,(0). 5255.0) system (34) has the solution

E, (0) --‘€- 5?. cm, (35)
"he“ C-V (0/2)’+|a|"= 9=q.(£‘}'—E‘2'): III-20:653-

lntroduction of positive feedback (see Figure .15) changes the boundary conditions by

En(°)-V'—’15?+Vﬂ—’:En(‘)°"d 53(0) V r,r,=-E,(l)~ here the coefficient r describes
the losses in the resonator. The field generated by the are system has in amplitude

 

E, 11(l-r.)tc(:n£‘."
- _—.__'——¢N_E———_ .
C{-2V'I': 3—2109(-T)+‘ﬁlull)l'n’:OKP(-iOl)-l|+lr.r,exp(—400+l| l (36)

where ul-q,(£§'+£3'il is the phase lead of the reflected wave related to nonlinear
variation of the index of refraction. In Figure 16 we have the magnitude of the gain
in efficiency of the "FR systen by cc-parieon with the resonatorleaa case for differ-

ent pumping been intensities given by the parameter g1. and different losses in the
resonator r2 as a function of the reflection coefficient of the coupling nirror.

Curve 1 has a discontinuity which corresponds to the beginning of parametric
lasing. Fron the graphs (see Figure 16) constructed for nonlinearity of the Kerr

103

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
N)! OFFN‘IAL USE ONLY

type 2x1 - (1/3))(2. it follows that in order to obtain maximm gain it is necessary
to have the parameters :1. r2 and g9. match sufficiently exactly.

It is obvious that the greatest conversion efficiency is achieved for identical
intensities of the pumping waves ($2 - 0). In this case the power "gain of the
reflected wave as a h-sult of using the resonator

h- (l -r‘)’ / [1+ r,r,-2 V rlr, cos slices (1] (37)

can be several orders. In this case. the parametric lasingmode with sharply re-
duced threshold turns nut to be possible:

((—3 arclg t/(l ‘7 qr? / l2v r,r,1-3(l—r;r.)l. (33)

Setting r1 - l in (38). it is possible also to determine the maxim value of the
parameter $2 to obtain the lasing mode for given losses r2.

The obtained results are valid 1'. the interacting waves are monochromatic or their
spectrum coincides with the spectrum of the natural frequencies of the ring cavi-
1y. Otherwise a gain in efficiency of the m systems will be observed only in
individual spectral components of the signal radiation. For large values of the
parameter 32., the self-stress processes can lead to variation of the effective
length of the t‘nvily and its natural frequencies.

     

n: ma:

  

o 100.0 “n

Figure 16. Gain in efficiency of the HER system
by comparison with the resonatorless case.

Analogous arguments can be stated also for degenerate three-photon wave interaction.
in contrast to the systems with four-photon an, ordinary resonators are also
applicable.

Thus, we were able to constuct a mathematical model of the phase distortion compen-
sation system with parametric HR. The model satisfactorily describes the basic

laws of the process of m-cmuutim of the signal wave front, it permits determina-
tion of the maximum possibilities of the method and optimization of the system.

1010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lili€ﬂﬂﬂ€1A1.US£GﬂVLY

It is of interest that insignificant variations of the standard system theoretically
offer the possibility of nonlinear distortion compensation and a significant in-
crease in quantun yield of the systen.

1.

2.

k.

5.
6.

7.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

B. I. Stepsnov. Ye. V. lvakin. A. S. Rubanov. DAN SSSR (Rog-arts of the USSR
Academy of Sciences). No 196. 1971, p 567.

3. Ya. Zel'dovich, V. I. Popovichev. V. V. Ragnl'skiy. P. S. Payzullov. PIS'HA
V ZHETP (Letters to the Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics). No
15. 1972. p 160.

A. Yariv, omcs cams. Ho 21. 1977. p 1.9; n. u. Rellvarth. J. on. soc. m..
No 67. 1977, p 1.

OBRASHCHENIYE VOLNOVOGO PRONTA OPTICHESKOGO IZLUCHENIYA V NELINEYNYKH SRBDAKE
(Optical Radiation Have Front Reversal in Nonlinear Media), Edited by V. I.
Bespalov. Gor'kiy. IPF AN SSSR. 1979.

A. Yariv. IEEE J. QP-la, 1978. p 650.

N. S. Shiren. APPL. PHYS. LETTS.. No 33. 1978, p 299.

V. G. Sidorovich.ZﬂTF (Journal of Technical Physics). No #6, 1976. p 2168;
V. I. Bespalov. A. A. Betin, G. A. Pasaanik. PIS'HA V 281?. no 3. 1977. p 215.

G. V. Krivoshchekov. S. c. Struts. H. P. Stupak, PIS‘HA V ZHTP, No 6. 1980. p 628.

J. Goodman, VVEDENIYE V FUR'YE-OPTIKU (Introduction to Pourier Optics). Moscow.
Mir. 1970.

3. Ya. Zel'dovich. V. V. Shkunov. KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRDNIKA (Quantum Electronics).
No a. 1977. p 2353.

E. S. Voronin. V. V. lvakhnik. ". H. Petnikova, V. 8. Solonstin, V. V. Shuvslov.
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Ho 6. 1979. p 1304.

E. S. Voronin. V. V. Ivakhnik. V. M. Petnikova. V. S. Solonatin. V. V. Shuvslcv.
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. No 6. 1979. p 2009.

Yu. A. ll'inskiy, Yu. A. Yansyt. 12V. VUZOV. SEE. RADIOPIZIKA (News of the lnsti-
tutions of higher Learning. Radio Physics Series). No 13. 1970, p 37.

E. S. Voronin. M. 1. Divlekeyev. Yu. A. Il'inskiy. V. S. Solomatin, 0PT. I
SPEKTR. (Optics and Spectroscopy). No 30. 1971. p 1118.

0. Yu. Nosach. V. I. Popovichav. V. V. ngul'skiy. F. S. Psyzullov. ZHEIP. No 16.
1972. p 617.

s. C. Obulov. Ye. N. Sal'kovs. M. S. Soskim L. 8. Sukhovsrkhova. UKR. F12. ZHUR-
NAL (bkrainian Physics Journal), No 23, 1978, p 562.

105

FOI.OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
26.
25.

26.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. V. lvakhnik, V. M. Pernikova, V. S. Solmttn, V. V. Shuvalov. KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA. No 7, 1980, p 652.

B. Ya. Zel'dovich, V. V. Shlwnov, KVAN'IOVAYA RETRONIKA. No 6, 1979, p 629.
Va. A. Il'1nsk1y. V. H. Petnikova. KVANTOVAYA ELz-XTRONIKA. lo 7. 1980. p 639.
Ye. V. lvakln. I. P. Petrovichev. A. S. Rublnov. OHICHESKIYB HBTODY 0W
INPORHATSII (Optical Data Processing Methods), Minsk, Rank: 1 tekhnika, 1978.
p m.

V. V. lvakhnik. V. H. Petnikova, V. S. Solmtin, V. V. Shuvalav, KVANTOVAYA
ELEK'KRONIKA. No 7. 1980, p 898.

H. Goodman, H. M. Hundley. Ar. D. H. Sock“. Lek-In. APPL. PHYS. 1.3118, No 8,
1966. p 311.

D. H. Pepper, A. Yartv. OPTICS LETTS. No S. 1980. p 59.

R. Fisher, 1... A. Kulevskiy. KVAR‘DOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. No lo, 1977, p 245.

A. Yul-1v. D. H. Pepper, OPTICS LETTS, No 1, 1977, p 16.

3. Ya. Zel'dovlch, V. V. Shkunov, OBRASﬂCHENIYE VOLNOVOGO PROR‘IA OPTICHESKOGO

IZLUCHENIYA V NELINEYNYKH SREDAIQI (Optical Radiation Have Front Reversal 1n Non-
linear Media). Got'kty, 11’? AN SSSR, 1979, p 73.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radlo 1 svyaz‘". "Kvantovaya elektronﬂu", 1981

10,845

CSO:

1862/220

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.386:621.376

PULSED X-RAY TECPNOLOGY

Moscow IMPUL'SNAYA RENTGENOVSKAYA mm in Russian 1981 (signed to press
20 Mar 81) PP 2-5. 110-119

[Annotatiom preface. introduction. references and table of contents from book
"Pulsed x-Ray Technology". by Stanislav Platonovich Vavilov. lzdatel'stvo ”Energiya".
6000 copies, 120 pages]

[Text] The book describes physical principles of producing pulsed x-radiation
with duration of lO"-lO" 3. An investigation is also made of the design particu-
lars of equipment for producing bremsstrahl-mg developed in the Soviet Union and
elsewhere. Research results are given on the use of pulsed x—ray technology in
different areas of science and engineering: investigation of high-speed processes.
flaw detection. in medical research and so on.

For engineers and technicians engaged in the development of pulsed x-ray generators.
specialists who use pulsed sources of x-radiation.

Preface

The search for ways to make high-density energy sources has led developers to de-
ve10p powerful pulsed emitters with maximal intensities. Sources of this kind
are electron accelerators and gene2ators of x-ray emission. Their range of appli-
cation is extremely broad: research. industry. agriculture. medicine.

Problems of producing and using intense electron beans have been dealt with in
many surveys and individual papers. whereas questions relating to pulsed x-ray
technology have been less well covered.

The pulsed bremsstrahlung generators developed in the late thirties have undergone
considerable improvements toward a reduction in pulse duration and increased radis-

tion intensity .

The generation of x-ray pulses in the microsecond and nanosecond ranges is a quali-
tatively new problem whose solution requires knowledge of many special divisions
of high-voltage technology. radiation physics and doaimetry. vacutm: and gas elec-
tronics.

This book examines the physical principles of various methods of producing x-ray
pulses. The structural arrangements and design peculiarities of existing equipment

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are examined. A thoery is outlined for the discharge process in a vacuum two-

electrode pulsed x-ray tube. and a method is given for calculating the parameters
of such a tube.

The author will be grateful for any comments and suggestions by readers, which
should be addressed to 113114 Moscow, Shlyuzovaya nab.. 10. Energoizdet.

lntroduct ion

The problems considered in this book have begun to form a separate discipline only
within the last l0 or 15 years. The first x-ray pulses of short duration (10" s
or less) were produced in the late thirties. and since that time there has been in-
tense accumulation and processing of experimental material. However. the work

that has been done has been chiefly of an applied nature. The advances made in

the mid-sixties in the formation of intense pulsed electron beams have prepared

the ground for a comprehensive study of the physics and engineering of x-ray pulse
production. Since that time. many papers have been published dealing with the
investigation of different methods of getting x-ray pulses. making pulsed x-ray
tubes and their use in science and engineering [Ref. 1. 2]. .

The first research on pulsed x-ray equipment in the microsecond and nanosecond
ranges was done by Kingdon and Tanis [Ref. 3]. A paper by Steenbeck appeared at
almost the same time [Ref. 4]. This was followed by a burst of publications.

Vacuum pulsed x-ray tubes were developed in 1939 [Ref. 5. 6]. finding application
in the study of ballistic and explosive processes. Research started to develop
with greatest intensity in the United States. the Soviet Union and Germany. The
names of such researchers as V. A. Tsukerman (USSR). Schaafs (Germany) and Slack
(United States) became widely known.

Beginning in the late forties there was an expansion in the field of application
of x-ray pulses. and papers began to appear on the fine structure of materials

as revealed by pulse radiography. The working voltages of tubes rose from 100-150
kilovolts [Ref. 3. h] to 300-400 kV. and subsequently to 1 MV (Ref. 5].

A theory of field-emission pulsed x-ray tubes was successfully developed in the
early fifties. and thoroughgoing research started on the pulsed vacuum discharge
with the use of the most modern techniques and equipment (Ref. 6. 7].

The first miniature pulsed x-ray tubes and equipment were developed in the sixties
thanks to the work of Soviet scientists: V. A. Taukerman. N. I. Komyak, Ye. A.
Peliks. N. V. Belkin. N. C. Pavlovskaya. E. G.-V. Aleksandrovich, N. Zavada and
others lRef. l]. Intense brensstrahlung generators were developed and made in

the United States [Ref. 8]. The first papers appeared on nanosecond x-ray analysis
[Ref. 9] and on generation of coherent pulses “Ref. 10].

At present. many groups and investigators throughout the world are engaged in re-
search on pulsed x-ray technology and its applications.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

3.

4.

6O

7.

8.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

lb.

“W 00110.“. I“ GNP-V

REFERENCES

Tsukerman. V. A.. Tarasov. L. V.. Lobov. S. I.. "New X-lay Sources". USPEKEI
FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 103. 1971. pp 319-337.

Tamer. 6.. "x-Ray Pulse Technology" in: "Piziks hystroprotekayushchikh
protsessov" [Physics of High-Speed Processes], translated from English. edited
by M. A. Zlatin. Moscow. Mir. 1971. Vol 1, pp 336-381.

Kingdon. K. H.. Tania. M. 8.. "Experiments With a Condenser Discharge x-Ray
Tube". PHYS. REV.. Vol 53. 1958. pp 128-136.

Steenbeck. M.. "ﬁber ein Verfahren zur Erzeugung intensiver Rantgenlichtblitze",
VISS. VEROFF. SIEMENS-Uerke. Vol 17. 1938. PP 363-380.

Zelenskiy. K. P.. Pecherskiy. 0. P.. Tsukersan. V. A.. "Effects on the Anode
of a Pulsed X-Ray Tube Under the Action of Electron Inpact". ZEURNAL TEEENICHESKOY
FIZIKI. Vol 38. 1968. PP 1581-1587.

Dyke. H. P.. Trolan. J. K.. "Field Emission: Large Current Densities Space
Charge and Vacuum Arc". PHYS. REV., Vol 89. 1953. pp 789-808.

Yelinson. M. I.. Vasil'yev. C. V.. "Avtoelektronnaya enissiya" [Field Elission].
Moscow. Pizmatgiz. 1958. 272 pages.

Johnston. P. P.. "Flash Radiography in Explosive Research". VISUAL. Vol 8.
1970. PP 12-19.

Janet. P.. "Recording of x-Reys Diffraction Patterns Using Flash X-ans in
Connection With an Image Intensifier". JOUEN. SOC. MOT. PICTURE AND TELEV.
ENGo. v01 80’ l971| pp 900-901.

Kepros. J. 6., Eyring. E. M.. Cagle. P. H.. William. J.. "Experimental Evidence
of an X-Ray Laser". PROCEED. NAT. ACAD. 801.. Vol 69. 1972. pp 1764-1765.

Slivkov. I. M.. "Elektroizolyataiya i razryad v vakuume" [Electrical Insulation
and Vacuum Discharge]. Moscow. Atomizdat. 1972. 304 pages.

Mesyats. G. A.. Proskurovskiy. D. I.. "Current Rise in Spark With Pulsed Break-
down of Short Vacuum Gaps". IZVESTIYA VYSSEIIB UCEEENYKH ZAVEDENIY: PIZIKA.
No 1. 1968. pp 81-85.

Flynn. P. T. 6.. "The Discharge Mechanism in the High Vacuum Cold Cathode Pulse
X-Ray Tube". PROC. PHYS. soc.. 1956. Vol 869, pp Nos-762.

Vitkovakiy. I.. Bey. P.. Faust. U. et al.. "Exploding Hires as a Source of
x-Radiation”. in: "Elektricheskiy vzryv provodnikov" [Electric Explosion of

Conductors]. translated from English. edited by A. A. Rukhadzs and I. S.
Shpigcl'. Moscow. Izdatel'stvo inostrannoy literstury. 1965. pp 108-118.

109

FIIICMHNCJAL.USEINNLY
15.

16.

17.

[8.

I9.

20.

2|.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Stenerhag. 3.. Handel. S. K.. GUhle. 8., "Effect of Hire Parameters on the
Emission of Hard x-Rays From Exploding Hires". JOURN. APPL. PHYS., Vol. 42.
1971. pp 1876-1882.

Molchanov. A. 0.. "Lasers in the Vacuum Ultraviolet and x-Ray Regions of the
Spectrum". USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 106. 1972. PP 165-173.

Konyak. N. I.. Peliks. Ye. A.. "The Kvant. IRA-3 and RINA-lD Portable Pulsed
X-Ray Devices". ATOHNAYA ENERGIYA. Vol 32, 1972. pp 520-522.

Fursey. c. N.. Zhukov. V. H.. "Experimental Study of Mechanism of Explosive
Emission". ZHURNAL TEKRNICHESKOY PIZIKI. V01 66, 1976, pp 310-318.

Zelenskiy. K. F.. Troshkin. I. A.. Tsukerman. V. A.. "Portable Facilities
With Pulse Transformer for Producing Short X-Ray Bursts". PRIDORY I TEKHNIKA
EKSPERIHENTA. No 2. 1963. PP 140-166.

Dyer. P. E.. James. D. J.. Ramsden. S. A.. Skipper. H. A.. "X-Ray Emission
From a C0; Laser-Produced Plasma". APPL. PHYS. LBTT.. 1974. Vol za, pp 316-317.

Khmyrov. V. V.. Churilov. V. N.. "Pulsed Nanosecond Electron Accelerator With
High Operating Frequency" in: "Hoshchnyye nanosekundnyye impul'snyye istoch-
niki uskorennykh clektronov". edited by G. A. Hesysts. Novosibirsk. Nauka.
1974. pp 128-130.

Malozzi. P. J.. Epstein. H. M.. Jung. R. G. et al.. "Laser-Generated Plasmas
as a Source of X—Rays for Medical Applications". JOURN. APPL. PHYS.. Vol 45.
1974. PP 1891-1895.

Chakhlov. V. L.. Vavilov. S. P.. Pushin. V. 5.. "Characteristics of Injector
Hith Explosive Cathode". PRIEORY I TEKHHIKA EKSPERIHENTA. No 2. 1975. pp 23-25.

Beikin, N. V.. Avilov. E. A.. "Some Time Characteristics of a Vacuum Device
in the Case of Pulsed Voltage Appiication Hith Hanosecond Risetime". ZHURNAL
TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol ‘0. 1970. PP 1723-1724.

Anisimov. S. i.. imas. Ya. A.. Romanov. c. 8.. Khodyko. Yu. F.. "Deystviye
izlucheniya bol'shoy moshchnosti na metally" [Action of High-Power Radiation
on Metals], edited by A. H. Bonch-Bruyevich and H. A. Yel'yashkevich. Moscow.
Naukn. 1970. 272 pp.

Pittaway. L. 6.. Smith. J.. Nichols. B. H.. "Laser Induced Electron Emission
Using a Pulsed Argon Laser". PHYS. LETT.. Vol 26A. 1968. pp 300-302.

Knlpukov. A. V.. Galyamov. E. Sh.. Kuz'nin. R. N.. "Heterodyning of Radiation
in the X-Ray Wavelength Range". VESTNIK HOSKOVSKOCO GOSUDARSTVBNNOGO UNIVERSI-
TETA. SERIYA FITIKA. ASTRONOHIYA. Vol 14. 1973. PP 369-370.

Turasova. L. V.. Khudynkovn. L. N.. Loyko. T. V.. Tsukerman. V. A.. "Fast

Electrons and x-Radiation of Nanosecond Pulsed Discharges in Gases at Pressures
of 0.1-760 mm Hg". ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY PIZIKI. Vol 46. 1974. pp 564-568.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
29.

31.

32.

33.

36.

35.

36.

370

38.

39.

60.

61.

62.

63.

FOI10FFKJALIEIZONLY

Hesysts. c. A.. "Role of Explosive Electron Emission in Electric Discharges

in Gas" in: "Sil'notochnaya enissionnaya elektronika. Iezisy vtorogo
silpoziuaa“ [high-Current Elission Electronics. Abstracts of Papers at the
Second Syapoaiun]. Izdatel'stvo Tonakogo goaudarstvannogo universiteta. Toast.
1975. PP 63-66.

Gorbachev. V. I.. "Kaeroradiograficheakiy netod defektoskopii" [Xeroradio-
graphic Flaw Detection technique]. Moscow. Atoaiadat. 1973. 128 pp.

Kudelin. K. H.. '“rhernoluninescent Spectrometric Sensor of x-Ray and Chains
Radiation". PRIBORY I TEKENIKA EKSPBRIHENTA. No 2. 1969. pp 200-202.

Henkel. S.. Higland. V.. Sloan. T. at al.. "Observation of x-Raya Prom Spark
Discharges in a Spark Che-her". NUCL. INSTR. HETB.. Vol 66. 1966. PP 365-368.

Noggle. R. C.. Krider. E. P.. Hayland. J. R.. "A Search for x-Rays Prom Helium
and Air Discharges at Atmospheric Pressure", Jonah. APPL. PHYS.. Vol 39. 1968.
pp 6766-6768.

Bazhenov. G. D.. Mesyats. G. A.. Proakurovakiy. D. 1.. "Cathode Flares During
Pulse Breakdoun in Vacuum" in: "Proc. IV 15 on EID ". Waterloo. Canada. 1972.

Tarasova. L. V.. Khudyakova. L. N.. "X-Radiation Accompanying Pulse Discharges
in Air". ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 39. 1969. PP 1530-1533.

Schaafs. V.. "Die Erzeugung von Runtgenblitz-Unterferenzen an polykristallinen
Material". ZEITSCHR. NATURP.. Vol 5A. 1950. pp 631-632.

Kremnev. V. V.. Kurbatov. Yu. A.. "Investigation of X-Radiation Prom Gas Dia-
charge in High Electric Fields". ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 62. 1972.
pp 795-799.

Heeyats. G. A.. Bychkov. Yu. 1.. Kremnev. V. V.. "Nanosecond Pulsed Electric
Discharge in Gas". USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKB NAUK. Vol 107. 1972. pp 201-228.

Johnson. 0.. Mitchell. A. C.. Evans. L.. "X-Ray Diffraction Study of Single
Crystals Undergoing Shock-Have Conpression". APPL. PHYS. LETT.. Vol 21. 1972.
pp 29-30.

Babich. L. P.. "Brensstrahlung of Electrons in Media With External Electric
Field". ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY PIZIKI. Vol 62. 1972. pp 1617-1619.

Yegorov. L. Ye.. Lukashev. A. A.. Nitochkina. B. P.. Orekin. Yu. K.. PRIBORY
I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA. No 2. 1968. PP 200-203.

Johnson. Q., Hitchell. A. C.. "First x-Ray Diffraction Evidence for a Phase
Transition During Shock-Have Conpression". PHYS. REV. LETT.. Vol 29. 1972,

pp 1369-1371.

Andreyeva. H. A.. Zezin. S. 3.. Kolpakov. A. V.. Kua'nin. R. 8.. "Supernono-
chromatic Radiation in the X-Ray Wavelength Band" in: "Apparatura i aetody

111

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOIIOFVICIAI.USEINNLY

rentgenovskogo ansliza" [Equipment and Methods for X-Rsy Analysis]. Leningrad.
Mashinostroyeniye. I970. No 7. pp 80-87.

64. Johnson. "System for Recording Pulse Spectra Knitted by an x-Ray Plasma of
Nanosecond Duration“. PRIBORY NAUCHNYKH ISSLEDOVANIY. No 2. 1974. pp 47-52.

45. Slsbkiy. L. 1.. Odnovol, L. A.. Kozenko. V. P.. "x-Redistion Arising Upon
[upset of Metallic Bodies". DOKLADY AKADEMII NAUK SSSR. Vol 210. 1973.
pp 319-320.

46. Gorazdovskiy. T. Ya.. "Effect of Hard Radiation in Shearing Fracture of Solids".
PIS'MA V ZHURNAL EKSPERIHENTAL'NOY I TEORETICHBSKOY FIZIKI. V01 5. 1967.
pp 78-92.

67. Tsukerman. V. A.. Avdeyenko. A. 1.. "Taking X-Rsy Photos With Very Short 83-
posure Tine". ZMURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 12. 1962. pp [85-190.

48. Tanker-an. V. A.. Msnskova. M. A.. "Source of X-Rsy Slashes for Studying High-
Speed Processes". ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY ?IZIKI. Vol 27. [957. pp 391-603.

49. Schurling. 0.. "X-Rsy Flash Spectra of Se. Ni and Cu". ARK. FYS.. Vol 19.
1961. pp 47-67.

50. Baksht. R. 3., Yel'chaninov. A. 5.. "300 keV Source of Pulsed X-Rsys" in:

"Elektrofizicheskaya spparstura” [Electrophysical Apparatus], Moscow. Energiys.
I970. pp 336-339.

51. Barmnsov. V. A.. Makeyev, N. C.. Runyantsev. V. G. et al.. PIS'MA V ZHURNAL
EKSPERIMENTAL'NOY I TEORETICHESKOY FIZIKI. V01 2. 1976. PP 798-801.

52. Kvartskhavs. I. F.. Khautiyev. E. V.. Ninidze. M. L.. "Mechanism of Hard X-
Ray and Neutron Emissions of s Plssns Focus", FIZIKA PLAZMY. Vol 2. [976.
pp 60-63.

53. Mel'nik. V. 1.. Novikov. A. A.. "Gas-Discharge Electron Sources With Anode
Plasma. and Their Use in Electron—Beau Technology". ELEKIRONNAYA OBRABOTKA
MATERIALOV. No 1. 1973. pp 22-28.

Sh. Blokhin. M. A.. "Metody rentgeno-spektrsl'nykh issledovaniy" [X-Ray Spectral
Research Methods]. Moscow. Fizmstgiz. 1959. 386 pp.

55. Holzrichter. J. F.. Dozier. C. M.. McMahon. J. M.. "X-Rsy Point Source Reflec-
tion Photography With a Laser-Produced Plasma". APPL. PHYS. LETT. Vol 23.
I973. pp 687-689.

56. Key. M.. Eidnan. K.. Dora. C.. "Space Resolved X-Ray Measurenents on Laser
Produced Plasmas". PHYS. LETT.. Vol A78. 1966. pp 121-122.

57. Mcdvcdev. Yu. A.. Morozov. N. N.. Stepsnov. B. M.. Khokhlov. V. L., "Using
Microwave Methods in Dosimctry of Pulsed Ionizing Radiation Fluxes". ATOMNAYA
ENERGIYA. Vol 40. No l. 1976. pp 53-55.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
58.

S9.

60.

61.

62.

63.

66.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

7o.

71.

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢N¥LY

Elle. 0.. "Din Rantgenblitzrohr ait Kunetstoffisolierung und einer Doppelsnode".
ZEITSCHR. ANCEU. PHYS..V01 8. 1956. PP 81-85.

Baksht. R. 3.. Bugsyev. S. P.. Vavilov. s. P. et a1.. "Mechanism of Operation
of Pulsed x-Ray Tubes" in: "Sovrenennoye sostoyaniye i perspektivy vysoko-
skorostnoy fotografii i kinematografii bystroprotekayushchikh protaesaov"
[Current State and Outlook for nigh-Speed Still and Motion-Picture Photography
of Rapid Processes]. abstracts of the articles. Moscow. Isd. VIIIOPI. 1972.

p 174.

Vavilov. s. P.. "Experimental Study of Pulsed x-nays With Discharge in Vacuua".
author's abstract of dissertation for candidate of technical sciences. Isaak.
I973. Toast Polytechnical Institute.

Baksht. R. 3.. Vavilov. S. P.. Urbazayev. H. N.. "Duration of l—Badiation
Arising Upon Discharge in Vacuum". IZVBSTIYA VYSSEIKB UGHBDNYKH ZAVEDBNIY:
FIZIKA. No 2, 1973. PP 160-161.

Vavilov. S. P.. "Experimental Study of Pulsed l-Radiation". ZHURNAL TEKENICEBSKOY

Abramov. V. P.. Vavilov. S. P.. Gorbunov. V. I. et a1.. “Flash x-Rays Time
and Spectral Characteristics Under Conditions of Vacuua Discharge" in: "Proc.
VII IS on BID ". Novosibirsk. 1976. PP 391-394.

Hesyats. G. A.. "Generirovaniye aoshchnykh nanosekundnykh inpul'sov" [Genera-
tion of Powerful Nanosecond Pulses]. Moscow. Sovetskoye radio. 1973. 225 pp.

Freytag. J. P.. "Generateure a rayons X eclair. P. I. Tubes". REV. TECH“.
THOMPSON csr. Vol 1. 1969. pp 553-573.

Zelenskiy. K. P.. Zavad. N. I.. Troshkin. I. A.. Isukernan. V. A.. "Powerful
Puise Generator of Short X-Ray Bursts". PRIDORY I TERENIKA ZKSPBRIHENTA. No 6.
I969. pp 177-130.

Goldman. H.. Goldman. A.. "Sur la for-ation d 1'arc electrique dens 1e vide"
JOURN. PHYSIZUE. Vol 24, 1963. PP 303-306.

Krnenchugskiy. L. 5.. Strskovskaya. R. Ye.. "Using Pyroelectric Detector for
Pulsed Gaana Radiation Monitoring". AIOHMAXA ENERGIYA. Vol 61. 1976. pp 190-195.

Garnanov. L. V.. Konyak. N. 1.. Kotsarev. Ye. 1.. Pelika. Ye. A.. "IRA-b6/L
Three-Channel Pulsed X-Ray Unit". APPARAIURA I HETODY RENTGENOVSIDGO ANALIZA.
No 10. 1972. PP 188-191.

Gamanov. L. V.. Koayak. N. 1.. Kotaarev. Ye. 1.. Pelika. Ye. A.. "Pulse X-Ray
Unit With Three-Electrode Sharp-Focus Tube for 150 kV". APPAIAIURA I HBTODY
RENTGENOVSKOGO ANALIZA. No 9. 1971. pp 81-86.

Barlet. Pal'k. Khofer et a1.. "Charge Transfer and Surface Elission-Under
the Action of Photons“. TIIBR. Vol 62. No 9. 1976. pp 36-42.

113

FOR‘OFFKJAI.U8£(NULY
72.

73.

76.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

86.

85.

86.

FOR‘DFFNJAJ.USE(HNLY

Sleyzer. l. 2.. Dronova. L. P.. Zherlitsyn. A. G. et al.. "Tonus Hisl~Current
Electron Accelerator". PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA. No 3. 1976. PP 17-20.

SUndstrOn. 1.. Handel. S. K.. Persson. J. 3.. "Time Resolved Intenslty Distri-
bution in an FXR Discharge". ZEITSCHR. PHYS.. Vol 200. 1967. pp $99-$10.

Zyuzin. V. P.. Hanskovs. H. A.. Tsukernan. V. A.. "Sealed Sharp-Focus Pulse
X-Rsy Tubes". PRIIORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHEFTA. No l. 1958. pp 84-87.

Bychkova. L. 0.. Bychkov. Yu. 1.. Vavilov. s. P.. In:batov. Yu. A.. "Generator
of Long Pulses of 500 kv Anplitude and Nanosecond Risetiae" in: "Blektro-
fizicheskays apparatura i elektricheskays isolyatsiya" [Electrophysical Ap-
paratus and Electrical Insulation]. Moscow. Energiya. 1970. pp 92-96.

Komyak. N. 1.. Korobochko. Yu. 8.. "Optima Supply Parameters for Pulse x-Ray
Units". APPARATURA I “8100? BENTGBNOVSKOGO ANALIZA. No 4. 1969. PP 95-100.

Mesyats. C. A.. Bugayev. S. P.. Proskurovskiy. D. 1.. "Explosive Electron
Emisslon". USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 115. I975. PP 101-120.

Cracknell. A. 9.. Hall. T. P. P.. Tuidell. J. N.. Hhitrou. R. J.. "The Deter-
mination of the Photon Energy Spectrum of a Plssh X-Rsy Tube". RADIAIION EFFECT.
Vol 2. 1970. pp 233-242.

SUndstros. 1.. Handel. s. K.. Perason. J. 3.. "Tine Resolved Radiation Intensity
Distribution in an FXR Discharge". ZEITSCHR. PHYS.. Vol 200. 1967. PP A99—500.

Aleksandrovich. E. G.—V.. Belkin. N. V.. Dron'. N. A.. Sloyevs. G. N.. "Minia-
ture Pulsed X-Ray Tube". PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA. No S. 1974.
pp 189-190.

Alcksandrovich. E. G.-V.. Belkin, N. V.. Kanunov, H. A.. Resin. A. A.. "Minis-
curc Pulse X-Ray Tube With Self-Restoring Autocathode". PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA
EKSPERIMENTA. No No 6. 1972. PP 198-199.

Abramyan. Ye. A.. Vasserman. S. V.. Dolgushin. V. H. et sl.. "Generator of
Powerful Elecrron-Beam and X-Ray Pulses (RIOS-5)". PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERI-
naurn. No 3. I971. pp 223-224.

Grin. "Obtaining X-Rny Diffraction Patterns of Jets Formed by Blasting Shaped
Expluslvo Charges". PRIBORY NAUCHNYKH ISSLEDOVANIY. No 9. 1975. pp 121-125.

Yelinsnn. M. 1.. "Nenakalivayemyye katody" [Cold Cathodes]. Moscow. Sovetskoye
rndlo. I974. 336 pp.

Nbgberg. L.. Mnttsson. A.. Nillsson. N. R.. Svedberg. A.. "An X-Ray Flash
tube With Exchangeable Electrode System". PHYS. SCRIPTA. Vol 1. 1970. pp 197-199.

shall. R.. "Detonation Physics" in: "Fiziks vysokikh plotnostey energil"
[High Energy Density Physics]. translated from English. edited by 0. N.
Krokhin. Moscow. Mir. 1974. pp 258-274.

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
87.

89.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

ID].

FOR OIIWCJAI.IEHE(HNLY

Johnson. 0.. Mitchell. A.. Keeler. R. N.. L. Evans. "Nenoeecond x-Ray Diffrac-
tion Study of Solids Under Shock Compreaaion". TRANSACT. AMER. CRYSI. Assoc.,
Vol a. 1969. pp 133-140.

Bykovskiy. Yu. A.. Kantsyrev. V. L.. Kozyrev. Yu. P.. "Using Laser Plaama
as a Powerful Pulsed Point Source of Soft X-Rays" in: "Sovremennoye sosto-
yaniye i perspektivy razvitiya vysokoekoroatnoy fotografii i kinematografii
bystroprotekayushchikh proteeaaov". abstracts of the articles. Moscow. Izd.
VNIIOPI. 1978. p llO.

Killer. R.. Rays. Ye.. "New Experimental Methods in Shock Have Physics" in:
"Pizika vysokikh plotnostey energii". translated from English. edited by
0. N. Krokhin. Moscow. Mir. 1976. pp 158-170.

chenskiy. K. P.. Troshkin. I. A.. Tanker-an. V. A. et al.. "Portable Pulsed
X-Ray Apparatus". USSR Patent No 260868. BYULLETEN' IZOBRETBNIY. No 13. I969.

Kurbatov. V. M.. Peliks. Ye. A.. "IRA-SB Pulsed X-Ray Apparatus". APPARAIUIA
I HETODY RENTCENOVSKOGO ANALIZA. No 12. 1973. PP 73-75.

Konyak. N. 1.. Peliks. Ye. A.. "IRA-3 and IRA-5 Generatora of Nanoaecond
X—Rny Flashes". DEFEKTOSKOPIYA. No 3. 1971. PP 127-131.

Ravary. P.. Goldman. M.. "Etude our l'initiation de l'arc dans le vide per
l'analyse des temps de counutation" in: "Proc. IV 13 on BIDV". 1970. pp 272-275.

Hesyats. C. A.. "Nanosecond X-Ray Pulses". ZRURNAL TEKHNICHBSKOY PIZIKI. Vol ‘6.
1974. pp 1521-1527.

Condith. N. C.. Pellinen. D.. "Impedance and Spot-Size Measurements on an
Intense Relativistic Electron-Bean Device". PHYS. REV. l!TT.. Vol 29. 1972.
pp 263-265.

Tolchenov. Yu. H.. Chepek. A. V.. "Radiation Spectrum of Pulsed X-Ray Tube
Hlth Cold Cathode". PRIBOR! I TEKHNIKA BKSPBRIHENTA. No 4. 1972. pp 233-235.

Huhlenpfordt. J.. "Verfahren zur Brzeugung kurxeitiser Rantgenblitze". German
Patent No 748185. 1939.

Komyak. N. 1.. Pcliks. Ye. A.. "NINA-lb Pulsed Nanoaecond X-aay Apparatua
for Nondestructive Inspection of Materials Under Unsteady Conditions". DEPEK-
TOSKOPIYA. No 4. 1972. pp [27-131.

Bekeshko. N. A.. "Electron Delay Generator for Pulsed X-Radiography". PRIBORY
I TEKNNIKA EKSPERIHENTA. No 1. 1960. pp 67-68.

Tsukerman. V. A.. Zelenskiy. K. P.. Troshkin. I. A.. '1‘o-Electrode Pulsed
X-Rey Tube". USSR Patent No 21970“. BYULLBTBN' IZOBRETBNIY. No 19. 1968.

Voytenko. A. Ye.. Zherebnenko. V. 1.. "Explosive Hultigap Breaker". PRIBORY
I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA. No 4. 1976. PP 153-155.

115

FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
I02.

103.

I04.

I05.

‘06.

107.

I08.

109.

110.

III.

ll2.

II}.

I.4.

IIS.

II6.

FIMRIJFFICJAI.lﬂﬂE(MNLY

Fortov. V. Ye.. lvanov, Yu. V.. Drenin. A. N. et a1.. "Explosive Generator
of Nonidenl Plasma". DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 221. 1975- PP 1307-1309.

Bekturganov. K.. Kunanskiy. G. A.. "Pulsed X-Ray Tube With Hollow Cathode".
PRIBORY 1 mum“ mspnmm-A. No a. 1969. pp 183—181..

0ndell. F. A.. "The Application of Flash x-Ray Systela to Sports Hedicine
and Exercise Physiology". JOURN. SPORTS HEDIC.. V" 6. 1966. pp bS-Sh.

Zingcrman. A. 5.. Korsunskiy. H. 1.. Nekrasov. H. 8.. Byzenbet. A. A..
"Discharge Tube for Pulsed Voltage up to 2.7-106 V". ZHURNAL TEKHNICHBSKOY
FIZIKI, Vol 9. 1939. pp 883-889.

Morgovskiy. L. Ya.. Peliks. Ye. A.. "Investigation of Characteristics of
Pulsed X-Ray Sources With Plasma Cathode". APPARATURA I HETODY RENTGBNOVSKOGO
ANALIZA. No 13. I974. pp 235-238.

Ousterkampf. H. J.. "x-Ray Photography Hith Extremely short Exposure Time".
PHILLIPS TECH“. REV.. Vol 5. I960. pp 22-25.

Ukulov. B. V., cleyzer. I. 2.. Dronova. L. P.. ”Pulsed Hultie-itter Cold Cath-
ode". TRUDY NAUCHNO-ISSLEDOVAIEL'SKOGO INSTITUTA YADBRNOY FIZIKI PR1 TOHSKOH
POLITEKHNICHESKCH INSTITUTE. Moscow. Atomizdat. 1976. No 4. pp 22-26.

Bichenkov. Ye. 1.. Polyudov, V. V.. Rabinovich, R. L.. Titov. V. H.. "Pulse
Hard X-Ray Device". PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA. No 3. I974: PP 208-210.

Pikayev. A. K.. "Flash Radiolysis of Hater and Water Solutions". Nauka.
I955. 286 pp.

Al'hlkov, Z. A.. Voretinnikov. A. I.. Kozlov. 0. V.. "Detektory inpul'snogo
Ionizlruyushchego izlucheniya" [Detectors of Pulsed Ionizing Radiation].
Moscow. Atomlzdat. I978.

Schaffs. H.. "Rontgenblitzrohre zur Untersuchung von schnell ablaufenden Pro-
zcsscn". MESSTECHNIK. Vol 80. 1972. pp 267-251.

Zavudn. N. 1., Hanakova. H. A.. Tsukernan. V. A.. "Recording Interference
of Single Crystals and Polycrystals With Hicroeecond Exposures". PRIBORY I
TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA. No 2. I966. PP 165-168.

lvunnv. Yu. S.. Ryukkcrt. V. V.. Sklizkov. G. V.. Pedotov. S. 1.. "Source
nf X-Rudiatiuu for Trunsllluminating a Laser Plasma“. ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY
FIZIKI. Vol 42. I972. pp 1623-1628.

HIIIur. 8.. "x-Rnys Studied for Secure Stationkeeping", AVIATION WEEK.
Vol 84. 1966. Pp 7h-79.

Antononko. L. Ya.. Vedyushkina. V. V.. Koloeov, N. A. et a1.. "Flash X-Ray
Visualizer". PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHBNTA. No 1. 1972. pp I95-I98.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

126.

I25.

126.

127.

128.

129.

I30.

FIHICNWWC1AI.USE¢NVLY

Schaafs. 9.. Krehl. P.. "Rvntgenblitzuntersuchungen ﬁber die Bntstehung einer
Stossvelle sue einer dutch Stossuallenprozesse rur Bratarrung gehrachten
Fluseigkeit". ACUSTICA. Vol 23. 1970. pp 99-107.

Stepanov. Ye. Ye.. "Experimental Study of Tina and Energy Characteristics
of Semiconductor Detectors in Recording Pulsed x-Raya" in: "Voprosy atomnoy
neuki i tekhniki. Yadernoye priborostroyeniye" [Problems of Atomic Science
and Engineering. Nuclear Instrument Making]. Atonizdat. Moscow. 1976.

So 30-31. pp 105-110.

Heston. L. 0.. ed.. "Hound Ballistics". Office of the Surgeon General. Depart-
ment of the Army. Washington. D. C.. 1962. 883 pp.

Howieson. J. L.. Anderson. R. 8.. Byte. H. P.. Grundhauser. P. J.. "Uses of
Flash Radiography in Biodynanic Research". AEROSPACE HEDICINE. Vol 34. 1963.
pp 694-496.

Kholopin. A. 1.. Kol'tsov. G. 1.. Kireyev. P. 8.. "Pulse Characteristic of
Silicon Detector With p-i-n Structure". RADIOTBKHNIKA I ELEIIRONIKA. Vol 17.
1972. pp 132-137.

Zavada. N. 1.. Tsukernan. V. A.. "Simple Calorimeter for Measuring Dose of
Powerful Flesh X-Ray Units". PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA. No 1. 1976.
pp 205-206.

Pellinen. "Largest Combined X-Ray Calorimeters". PRIBORY NAUCHNYKB ISSLEDOVANIY.
No 8. 1972. PP 115-118.

Vavilov. s. 9.. "Using Flash X-Rays in Flaw Detection". TRUDY NAUCHNO-ISSLEDO-
VATEL'SKOGO INSTITUTA BLBKIRONNOY INTROSIOPII. Moscow. Atanizdat. No 1. 1978.
pp 19-26.

Geilring. J. H.. "High-Speed Radiographic and Optical Techniques Applied to
Hypervelocity Impact Studies". PRDC. V IC 38?. Washington. 1962. pp 188-195.

Frungel. F.. Alberti. H.. Thorwart. 0.. "nigh-Speed x-Ray Flash Cine-atography
of Small Objects" in: "Proc. V 10 on ESP". N. Y.. 1962. pp 170-172.

Brewer. w. 0.. Kassel. P. c.. "Flash X-Ray Technique for Investigating Abletive
Material Response to Simulated Reentry anironnenta". INT. JOURN. RONDBSTRUC-
TIVE TESTING. Vol 3. 1972. PP 375-390.

Thilo. E. R.. "Frankford Arsenal Experience with High-Speed Radiography".
AS‘l'H BULLETIN. No 150, 191.8. pp 69-72.

Zykov. I. K.. Baryushchenko. S. 5.. "Ioniziruyuahchiye izlucheniya v aviatai-
onnoy i koenicheskoy tekhnike” [Ionizing Radiation in Aerospace Technology].
Moscow. Atonizdnt. 1975. 128 pp.

Ireaashvili. D. V.. Osepaehvili. T. A.. "Source of Intense Soft Brenaatrahlung
Pulses". PRIBORY 1 TEKHNIKA EKSPBRIHENTA. No 1. 1975. PP 213-216.

117

FOIIOFFKJAI.U881NNLY
131.

132.

133.

134.

a35.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

lhl.

142.

1&3.

FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(NULY

PuvInvskaya. N. 6.. Tarasova. L. V.. El'yaah. S. L., "Soft x-Ray Nanoaecond
Pu15u Source". PRIBORY 1 TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHBNTA. no 5. 1976. pp 190-192.

Paasner. “Powerful Flash X-Ray Tube Hith Laaer Excitation of Electron Flux".
PRIBORY NAUCHNYKH ISSLEDOVANIY. No 11. 1972. pp 88-91.

Garnov. V. V.. Fedin. Y. 0.. "Stereoscopic x-Ray Plaah Photography of High-
Speed Processes". PHOTOGK. KORRESPORDENZ. Vol 106. 1968. PP 21-26.

Slack. C. H.. Ehrke. L. P., Dickaon. D. 0.. Zavalea. C. T.. "High-Speed Cine-
Radiography". NON.-DESTR. TEST.. Vol 7. 1969. pp 7-11.

Charters. A. C.. "High-Speed Impact". SCI. AMERICAN. Vol 203. 1960. pp 128-140.

Tolchenov. Yu. H., Chepek. A. V.. "Barking Conditions of Controlled X-Ray
Flash Tube With Cold Cathode". PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHINIA, No 3. 1973.
pp 218-219.

"X-Ray Equipment for Checking Airline Luggage". ELEKTEONIIA. No 20, 1972.
up 21-22.

Vallis. 0.. Zauer. K.. Zyunder. D.. "Injecting Intense Relativistic Electron
Beans Into Plasma and Gas". USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 113. 1976. pp 635-462.

Didenko. A. N.. Grigor'yev. V. P.. Uaov. Yu. P.. "Moshchnyye elektronnyye
puchki i ikh prineneniye" [Intense Electron Beans and Their Use]. Moscow.
Atomizdat. 1977.

Bakulin. Yu. 0.. Diyankov. V. S.. Kovalev. V. P. et a1.. PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA
EKSPERIHENTA, No 2. 1979. PP 34-37.

Janet. F.. Thomer. 6.. "Production d'inpulaiona de rayons X-tres courtea avec
tubes a discharge dans le vide due type diode" in: "Proc. VIII 10 on HSP".
I969. pp 259-261.

Horgovskiy. L. Ya.. Kurbatov. V. H.. "Particulars of Spectral Makeup of
Flash X-Ray Generator Emission". APPARATURA I HETODY RENTGENOVSKOGO ANALIZA.
No I5. 1975. Leningrad. Hashinostroyeniye. pp 175-179.

Ovcharuv. A. H.. Ronanovskiy. V. P.. Stepanov. E. H. et a1.. "RAPS-l X-Ray
Equipment With High-Frequency Electron Acceoerator". DEPEKTOSKOPIYA. No 9.
1980. pp 94-97.

Contents page

Preface

Introduction

Chapter I: Physical Principles of Producing X-Ray Pulses

Electron emission

Discharge in vacuum

Exploding wires 1

1.

1.

090059!

118

IMJR 0‘11C1AL USE§(NVLY
FOI10FFHJA1.USECINLY

4. Optical (laser) excitation
S. Gas-Discharge Excitation Methods
6. Other methods of getting X-ray flashes
Chapter 2: Equipment for Producing X—Rsy Pulses
7. Discharge loop
8. x-ray flash tubes
Tubes with heated cathode
Ionic mercury tubes
Vacuum tubes with cold cathode
FXR tube cathodes
FXR tube anodes
9. x-ray apparatus
Chapter 3: Calculation of Major Parameters of Flash x-Rsy Tubes Using the
Explosive Emission Effect
10. Calculation of discharge current and voltage in Elk tube
11. Duration of discharge and x-ray flash
12. X-ray intensity and dose
[3. Selecting optimum working conditions of FIR tube
Chapter 0: Registration of Pulsed X-Radistion
14. Measuring parameters of X-ray equipment
15. Ionization detectors
16. Radioluainescent detectors
[7. Other kinds of detectors
18. Spectral characteristics of X-ray pulses
l9. Visualizing pulsed radiation
Chapter 5: Application of Flash X-Bays
20. Studying ballistic processes
21. Studying processes of combustion. detonation and the effect of exploding
wires
22. Structural and spectral analysis
23. Biology and medicine
24. Flaw detection and quality control
25. notion picture photography and stereo x-radiogrsphy
26. Other fields of application
Chapter 6: Outlook for Developing and Using Flash x-Ray Equipment
References

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Energiya". 1981

6610
C80: 8144/0162

119

FOI‘OIIHCIAI.USE1ONIN
FOR 0F11C1AI.USE‘ONLY

UDC 621.378

STUDY OF HIDE-APERTPRE FLAT RESONATOR FIELDS

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 5 (107). May 81
(manuscript received 3 Sep 80) Pp 1037-1064

[Article by V. G. Marchenko]

[Text] Abstract: Hethodsofextractingseparatemonochromatic
self imaging fields in a wide-aperture resonator with

amplitude gratings and grating mirrors placed into
the cavity are subjected to theoretical and experi-
mental investigation (on a neodymium-doped glass
laser). It is shown that the application of the
amplitude gratings and grating mirrors in a flat

resonator is an effective means of increasing
spatial coherence and stable excitation of mono-
chromatic fields with various spatial character-
istics. It is noted that by using the gratings
it is possible to control the lasing frequency
tuning. obtain phase modulation and convert the
fields into each other on introducing an addi-
tional phase grating into the resonator.

The problem of obtaining coherent radiation from a large volume of active medium is
now solved primarily by using unstable resonators [1]. Nevertheless, the develop-
ment of new ways to solve this problem is of great interest on the theoretical and
practical levels. One nvw solulinn is considered to be the application of resona-
tors with grating mirrors or introduced gratings, the prospectiveness of which has
been discussed in a number of theoretical and experimental studies [2-6]. Formula-
tion of the problem in this way has much in cmmum with the problem of energy out-
put from a resonator through openings in mirrors. which also indicates the urgency

of the problem. This paper studies the fields of wide-aperture flat resonators
with amplitude gratings.

i. The application of thin wires to suppress undesirable types of oscillations in
microwave resonators is a well-known procedure. Analogous experiments have also
been performed in the early studies of open resonators [7, 8]. In spite of sin-
plicity and efficiency. this method of controlling fields has not been widely de-
veloped. However, it was recently revived [9, 10] in connection with work on phase
compensation of vmlhniuu leaving a stable resonator. Reference [11] presents an
experimental study of the influence of grating mirrors simulating metal mirrors with
holes for energy output on flat resonator fields. In reference [11] reconstruction

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the periodic structure of the field on a moth mirror and augmentation of the
spatial coherence of the omission were detected. The conclusion was drawn that

the grating plays a passive role in the resonator. In connection with the theore-
ticel work [2] experimental studies [3-5] appeared which directly consider the
effect of grating mirrors and resonator lengths on the excited fields. Instead of
grating mirrors, in [6] a bronze foil grating was used which was installed in direct
proximity to a total—reflecting mirror. A number of measures — a decrease in
aperture and area of the shading zones, recording the field from a side of a smooth
semitransparent mirror - permitted excitation of simple, easily intefpfeted “9165

in a resonator and study of their dependence on the resonator length. Square grat-

ings with intersecting shading bands were used in both [6] and other papers [3-5,
13]. Therefore we found it interesting to study fields excited in a plane resona-
tor with other types of gratings.

2. The theoretical argmnents, which do not claim to sufficient ssthsastical strict-
ness, but served as a guide in performing the experiments. consisted in the follow-
ing. As is demonstrated in [12], eelfimsging fields in free space and the fields

of flat resonators with unlimited ideal mirrors have a col-son nature. The fields

of wide-aperture resonators, the Fresnel numbers of which are many orders greater
than one will not differ significantly from the fields of an unlimited resonator.

In the scalar approximation monochromatic fields have the form

L .
Human-PW sin-:3 2 Yul-(uncles. (1)

where r, o. z are a cylindrical coordinate syst- with origin at one of the mirrors;
W2“ is the complex amplitude of an electric field which can be nonzero only for

x.-llt!’—(nlld)'l*«(D/24)k;h is the wave number; d is the resonator length; D is the
diameter of its aperture; L is the integral part of the fraction 2d/A; A is the

radiation wavelength; J“, is a Bessel function of the first kind. In the paraxial
approximation this formula includes fields of translational symtry:

*(P' ’0 ()-’('+‘|Io 1' o-Q'N‘WSOMX
x 2 V~exp ( _l.%_:)up (15",). (2)

D-O

where ‘mn'm‘l'9'n's3 bn'fph-i-qbg: 8.. a, and b1. b2 are the basis vectors of the field

grating and inverse grating, respectively; 0 is the radius vector in the plane XVI;

m, n, p, q are integers Ib I << k. Such fields are aelfimaging on satisfaction of
the following conditions:

2d/i-L;a;V'T;-qy1§; 2Yhs/ixm“-‘slﬂs
where L, h,. hz. gl. 82 are integers; a is the angle between s1 and a . Here the

r . 2
resonator length will be 4- (gtalagil)mlln'a.

In [12] it is demonstrated that the selfinsging period of fields of translational
symmetry can with accuracy to the constant phase be an integral number f times

shorter than the mud "rm-N I'u' t ion Pt'rlﬁd if the field is formed by a set hW
such that all Nuesw‘d-sﬁmﬂih-v'. °' “°‘ bps min " 0) "'u-nh: (sh-9’... NM}

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

W-Pmﬂsn)+lr’h (f—d...) have the number f as their greatest common divisor. It is
easy to see that expressions (1) and (2) include known modes of a flat resonator
[14].

The mechanism of the effect of an absolutely absorbing amplitude grating introduced
into a resonator on the fields can be traced in a mechanical analog - a wire fas-
tened at the ends (Figure i). Let us assume that at a distance 6 from one of the
fastenings, the wire rubs against an infinitely narrow rod. The frictional force is
proportional to the derivative of the amplitude with respect to time. Then the equa—
tion of motion has the form

-§1'-+ab(x-§)-$,L—c'-g--o.

The undisturbed problem (a - 0) has the solution
‘a‘ _
y. ' $‘n(T t+a.)sinﬁ"i.

where d is the length of the wire; n is an integer. Without solving the disturbed
problem. it is possible to state in advance that it will be satisfied by those yn ,
the index oi which is defined by the ratio £ld - sin, that is, the vibrations,

one of the nodes of which is located at the point 6. It is possible to see the
validity of what has been stated by direct substitution. The remaining types of
vibrations will be damping. If the ratio 6 to d turns out to be irrational, then
all of the vibrations will be damping.

Figure 1. Mechanical model.

The analyzed example provides a basis for assuming that when the grating is placed
in the resonator the selfimaging fields, by the topography of the nodes of which
the topography of the shading (scattering. absorbing) sections of the grating is
sci cted, remain slightly disturbed. However. in contrast to a one-dimensional wire.
thri'C-dimcnsioﬂal fields in the resonator. the dimensions of which are much greater
than the wavelength. and thePresnelnumbers are several orders greater than one,
can be considered fixed only with respect to one measurement (with respect to the
resonator axis) and free with respect to the other two. Therefore in the trans-
verse cross section of the resonator the fields will be simulated by a wire or dia-
phragm of unlimited dimensions. This means that a grating in a resonator will not
require exact installation with respect to the edges of the mirrors, and the
spatial harmonics will be phased so that standing waves will be set up in the

resonator. the nodes of which match with the shading sections of the grating. The
general expression for these standing waves has the form

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.
n (r, m, z, i) e e— nu 2 sin l;- ‘ (Ahcos me e 8,, sin mow. (W)-

l-o use—-

The width of the shading sections of the grating is in practice always finite. This
leads to the fact that superposition of different vibrations which, as a result of
interference, forms the field null (minimu) in the shading sections. will become
energy wise advantageous. however, the field will not become completely extinguished
because oscillations with a finite number of small K are excited in a resonator with
limited aperture. This determines the additional losses by comparison with resona-
tors without gratings.

3. The experimental setup -- a neodymium-doped glass laser used in the present
experiment - was described previously in [6]. For visual representation of the
grating f ield, the property of selfimaging of resonator fields at a
distance 2d was used, as follows from formula (1). Therefore the field was recorded

a distance d behind a semitransparent mirror, where the wave traveling along the z-
axis copied the field on the opaque mirror near which the gratings were placed.

Seven types of gratings and grating mirrors were used in the experiments: a one-
dimensional grating (parallel wires) with a period of 1 In and wire diameter of 0.1
mm; four types of square gratings with the same period: a wire grating with wire
diameter of 0.1 in. two of bronze foil with holes 0.5 X 0.5 In and circular holes

of 0.8 m in diameter. and a grating mirror with nonreflecting "islands” about 0.3
an in diameter; a hexagonal grating of steel foil with a period of 0.85 an and
width of the shading intervals of 0.25 ms and. finally, a mirror with nonreflecting
concentric circles. The grating mirrors were obtained by mechanically damaging a
multilayered dielectric coating. Radii r of the concentric circles in millimeters
were given by the equation Joann) - 0. ILl'he measurements demonstrated that they

were sustained with an accuracy to 10.06 mm. The nonreflecting rings were about

0.08 m wide. The deviation of the geometric parameters from the given values did
not exceed 0.05 an. The resonator length varied from 35 to 110 cm. The angular

spectrum of the emission was recorded in the focal plane of an objective with P -
100 cm. The experiments were performed in the free-running mode.

 

Figure 2. Far zones of laser emission Figure 3. Par emission eons of a

with one-dimensional (a) and two-dimen- laser as a function of the position

sional (b) gratings in the resonator of the grating in the resonator

indicating monocrhomatization of the with identical lasing power.
radiation.

Experiments were run with the one-dimensional grating which permitted visual compa-
rison of the resonator field with smooth and grating mirrors: the ratio of the

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

angular dimensions of each lobe of the radiation pattern along and across the grat-
ing can be taken as the degree of increase in coherence of the radiation. In our
experiments it was 5-7 (Figure 2. a). The fact of monochromatisation of the emission
was determined in experiments using a square grating with round holes; the far-sane
omission was localized on the rings of sPabry-Perot interfere-eta: (Figure 2, b)
inasmuch as a flat resonator is a Pabry-Perot etalon for the field itself.

A square wire grid was used to investigate the excited fields as a function of the
position of the grating in the resonator: first the grating was installed in direct
nroximiry to a totally reflecting mirror; in subsequent experiments the distance
was increased. The spatial lasing spectrua is presented in Figure 3 for distances
(from left to right) of 0.5, 10 and 27 cm. In these experiments the resonator length
was 61 cm, the lasing energy was sustained at one level with precision to 102, and
the pumping energy was twice the threshold energy. The results obtained permit the
following explanation. When the grating is located in direct proximity to the mirror,
a complex single-frequency field is excited in the resonator. the nodes of which are
located in the shading sections of the lattice. and the selfimaging period of such a
field is equal to a complete pass around the resonator 2d. "hen the grating is re-
moved from the mirror, the initial complex field can be excited to the point that
the depth of focus of the interference pattern formed permits it. With a further
increase in distance, the lasing threshold can be lower for fields "nonstnnted with s

ntervals. The topography of the arrangement
of the nodes of this field will not depend on s in the transverse cross section of

the resonator. As a result of this fact the losses of such a field on the grating
will not depend on the position of the grating in the resonator.

4. Experiments in exciting fields with different gratings were run for different
pumping levels and resonator lengths. The angular spectra of the excited fields
were distinguished by great variety. in particular when the resonator length was
close to the selfimaging halfperiod, and the area of the shading sections was equal
to or exceeded the area of the unshaded sections. This can be explained by several
causes. First, for this resonator length any set of harmonics described by expres-
sion (2) and having field minima in the shading sections is selfimsging. Since
there are many such fields having similar losses, the process of exciting them be~
comes uncontrolled. Secondly the scattering of the field on such gratings can lead
to the appearance of a number of additional spatial harmonics, the intensity of
which can in individual cases turn out to be comparable to the intensity of the
excited field harmonics. However, in the case of good matching of the grating with
the field (if necessary. with the application of additional measures such as varying
the resonator length or installing an additional grating), the angular lasing spec-
trum is greatly simplified. the harmonic amplitudes of the scattered field decrease
sharply. and the fields become stable in a wide range of pumping energy variation.
Images of such fields are presented in Figure 4, in which the used gratings and
grating mirrors are presented in column a. the fields on the gratings are presented
in column b, and the angular spectra of the fields are presented in columns c-e.

Furthermore, we can consider that the X-axis is directed along the rows. and the Y-
axis, along the columns.

126

FOI:0FFMJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 4. Form of gratings (a) placed in a flat resonator,
iii-Ids on :hv gratings (b) and the corresponding Fourier
spectra of the radiation (c — e).

Fields excited in a resonator with shading sections in the form of bands (in two-
dimensional gratings. in the form of intersecting hands), are subject to a common
law: with significant deviation of the resonator length from the selfimaging half-
period (from 106 to 80-35 cm) sign-variable fields are excited on the grating. This
is indicated by the absence of a central lobe in the far radiation zone (see 1, 3, S
in Figure a, c). The absence of an axial spatial harmonic in the given case is
explained by the fact that an integral number of halfwnves do not fit in the reson-
ator length. The condition of selfinaging in the paraxial approximation must in
P

this case be satisfied in the form (k - b ql2k)d - nlpq’ where lpq is an integer

which depends on p and q, at the sane tine as for the calculated resonator length
equal to half the selfinaging period, it breaks down into two equalities: kd - hi
and (bgq/Zk)d - nNPq. As the resonator length approaches the calculated length (80-

100 cm), fields can be excited which are sign-variable with respect to one coordin-
ate and cophasal with respect to the other. which is indicated by the presence in

the radiation pattern of lobes that deviate from the axis only with respect to one
coordinate (in Figure 4.2, d, the field is cophasal with respect tolhe Y-axis and
sign—variable with respect to the X-axia; in 3d, the opposite is true). when the
resonator length is close to the calculated length (3—51 deviation), cophasal fields
are excited (ld, 1e, 2e, 5d). A grating mirror withnonreflecting "islands" (be) has
one noteworthy characteristic consisting of the fact that for dimensions of the shad-
ing sections significantly less than the grating period, only cophaaal fields are
excited in a resonator with this mirror. No less than 801 of the emission

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

power1 is contained in the axial spatial harmonic. Cophesal fields were also ob-
served with a grating mirror with shading concentric circles (be), but with such a
sirror it is possible under suitable conditions to hope to obtain the simplest exi-

syneetric sign-variable selfineging field, the selfinsging period of which is un-
defined with accuracy to the phase. In such a field the intensity in the resonator
cross section has distribution with respect to s zero-order Bessel function. and
the far zone is a circle.

0n the whole, it is necessary to note that the lasing threshold with gratings was
above the lasing threshold without thee. and it depended both on the specific area
of the shading sections and the type of field excited in it.

5. It is possible to propose the following interpretiqnsof fields the spatial spec-
trs of which are shown in Figure lo. A field excited on a one-dinensional grating
and having a spatial spectrum in the fore of two equally intense points sy-netric
with respect to the projection of the resonator axis (lc) can be expressed on the
grating in the fore v - sin vy. where v I III. Cophasal fields are the first two
(id) and three (le) tgsns of the cosinusoidal Fourier series. In particular.

field with angular spectrun (1d) canbeintsrpreted as w - l - coe2vy - 2 sin .
the zeros of which are located on the wires. The foll g fields can be placed in
correspondence to fields excited in a resonator with square grating:

. -oosv(x+y) —oosv (E—y) - dnoisinvy.
‘3-ng ox—sin o(x+2y)—sin v (x—2y)-4 sin or sin' up.
$35 -—2 cos 20x—2cos 20mi 2» (x+y) + cos a; (r—y)-8 sin’ or sin’oy.
(c) Key: a. 2c h. 2d c. 2e

Fields. the far zones 3f which are pres ted in Figure lo, 3c and 3d, can beintcr-
prou-d as W3C - sinzvx vy and ¢3c - sin 3: sin3vy. the Fourier transform of which

 

coincides with the sentioned far zones of the emission. The case 3e obviously is
hybrid and is a superposition of fields 2e. 2d and the ease 2d. but rotated by 90':

t» -sin or sin vy (A sin ox-Z-B sin oy+C sin ox sin try).
(1) Key: 1. 3s

The Fourier spectra presented in Figure lo (lac and lad) correspond to the fields

w..-2+cos vx-é-cos 0y. “mil-no.6 v (x+y) - to; v (Jr—y).

(1) (2)

Key: 1. 4c 2. 6d

and the case loe also obviously can be interpreted as hybrid. The far zones of the

fields excited in a resonator with hexagonal grating are also presented in Figure 6
(Sc, 5d and Se). Analytical expressions for the fields on the grating corresponding
to the first two cases can be represented in the fore

1
These fields were first observed in [6] on another type of grating mirror which
obviously was similar to the one used here as a result of manufacturing technology.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFHJAL.USE(H§LV

tab-“inﬂux! J;— lﬁey)sin-}Wir-y).

- _sin27"? -_—sinv[V'7—y ) +sino(7"T-U).

{IS-icosﬁccs-g-(rﬁe-yrmi-(m'u—y)-

=1+cos2ﬁ+cos4ﬁ+§d +ooso(ﬂ’n—y).
Key: n. 5c b. 5d

In a resonator with a grating mirror 6s fields were excited which can be interpreted
as distorted by nonuniform pumping of a field of the type

We .1 \‘.-l,J.(xL-,)r). In particular, ‘Pu - l—Alo (”L-1’).
-

(A)
Key: s. wed

6. The experiments demonstrated that the application of gratings and grating
mirrors in resonators is an effective method of controlling the fields. In addition
to increasing the spatial coherence noted earlier. it was illustrated experimentally

that in a flat resonator with a grating monoclzrosstic fields with various spatial
characteristics that can be monitored and controlled. can be stably excited.

It is also necessary to note the existing possibility of frequency tuning of a
resonator with a grating by varying both its length and the grating period.

the approach developed in [12] and here to the problem of the fields of wide-aper-
ture flat resonators permitted not only explanation of all the peculiarities of

the excited fields, but also discovery of the excitation conditions of the most
characteristic of them. Thus. in particular, the type of grating mirror depicted

in Figure 4 (4a) was theoretically obtained from analysis of possible aelfimaging
fields. The experiments fully confirmed the conclusion that with this type of losses
fields are excited with high energy concentration in the central lobe of the radia-
tion pattern.

Good agreement between theory and experiment. which was demonstrated in this work,
offers the possibility of the statement ofotherpropositiona with respect to the
intraresonator methods of controlling fields. Thus, moving the gratings across

the resonator should lead to phase modulation of the fields inasmuch as the nodes
of the interference pattern sust follow the position of the shading zones. Only
such fields can have mini-u: losses in a resonator with moving grating and. conse-
quently, will have minimum excitation threshold. In addition, using a periodic
amplitude grating of defined porosity, it is possible to excite a selfisaging field
in the resonator which in some of the resonator cross sections (multiplication
planes) will have only phase periodicity, and the amplitude distribution will be

close to constant. By installing the corresponding phase grating in the indicated
cross section it is possible to achieve equalization of the wave front

127

lNlRiOIWﬂCIAl.ll§E§(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

leaving the resonator or conversion to another type of field which is aelfinaging
on passing around a segment of the resonator located behind the phase grating.

I express my sincere appreciation to L. A. Vaynahteyn for useful criticism, valuable
advice, great assistance and support in this experiment.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Yu. A. Anan'yev, OPTICHESKIYE RESONATORY I PROBLEHA RASKHODIHOSTI LAZERNOGO
IZLUCHENIYA (Optical Resonators and the Problem of Laser Radiation Divergence),
Moscow, Nauka, 1979.

2. V. K. Ablekov, V. S. Belyayev, ZHPS (Journal of Applied Spectroscopy), No 23,
1975. p 1110.

3. V. K. Ab1ekov, V. S. Belyayev, V. H. Harchenko, A. H. Prokhorov, DAN sssa (Re—
ports of the USSR Academy of Sciences), No 230, 1976. p 1066.

A. V. H. Mnrchenko, T. M. Makhviladze, A. h. Prokhorov, H. Ye. Sarychev, ZHETF
(Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics), No 74, 1978, p 872.

5. V. K. Ablekov, V. S. Belyayev, V. I. Vinogradov, V. G. Marchenko, V. H. Harchenko,
A. N. Prokhorov, OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA (Optics and Spectroscopy), No 64, 1978,
p 1208.

6. V. K. Ablekov, V. G. MarChth(n ZHPS, No 29, 1978, p 609.

7. H. W. Rigrod, APPL. PHYS. LETTS., No 2, 1963, p 51.

8. Akita Okaya, TRUDY IIER (works of the 118R Institute), No 52, 1966. p 1894.

9. L. w. Casperson, N, K. Kincheloe, 0. H. Stafsudd, OPTICS COHMS., No 21, 1977,
p 1.

10. A. V. Gnatovskiy, N. G. Zuhrilin, A. P. Loginov, UKR. F12. ZHURNAL (Ukrainian
Physics Journal). No 23, 1978, p 1961.

ll. Yu. A. Anan'yev, N. l. Grishnanova, N. A. Sventsitskaya ZHTP (Journal of Techni-
cal Physics), No 43, 1973, p 1530.

12. v. a. Narcnenko, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA (Quantum Electronics), No 8, 1981, p 1027.

1]. v. K. Ablekov, V. s. Belyayev, V. P. Vasil'yev, A. N. Golovistikov, V. H. Davy-
dnv, V. C. Savel'ycv, ZHPS, No 28, 1978, p 57.

14. L. A. Vaynshteyn, OKTRYTYYE RESONATORY I OTKRYTYYE VOLNOVODY (Open Resonators and
0pcn Have Guides), Moscow, Sov. radio, 1966.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

10845

C50: 1862/220
128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR 0FF1CIAL USII(H‘LY

UDC 53S.317:621.378
SELFIMACING FIELDS

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No S (107). Hay 81
(manuscript received 3 Sep 80) pp 1027-1036

[Article by V. C. Harchenko]

[Text] Abstract: Nonmonochromatic and monochromatic fields

which self image in space are investigated. In the
paraxial approximation. fields that are periodic

in the transverse cross section and have defined
relations between their geometric parameters
satisfy the aelfimaging condition. Some proper-
ties of such fields are investigated. It is
demonstrated that the fields of flat resonators
are special cases of the investigated selfimaging
fields and that in wide-aperture. optical-band
resonators the transverse wave numbers have a
continuous spectrum of values which has an upper
bound in the active resonator as a result of the
existence of an excitation threshold. An experi-
mental study was made of some of the characteris-
tic features of monochromatic selfimaging fields
and their behavior in the case of aperture re-
strictions and spatial filtration. that is, for
simulation in free space of resonator fields with
Fresnel number equal to 100.

The phenomenon of selfimaging fields, that is, obtaining equidistant images of ampli-
tude grids without using optical elements was observed for the first time by Talbot
[1] on vxpnsurc of a one-dimensional grid to a plane monochromatic wave. This
phenomenon is explained as follows. The field after the grid is a sum of plane
waves. If the grid has a defined configuration, the orientation of these waves

after it is such that the phase lead in some planes parallel to the grid plane -

the selfimsging planes -- becomes a multiple of 2! for all waves. Accordingly. the
field in the indicated planes repeats the field on the grid. The first theoreti-

cal interpretation of this phenomenon was given by Rayleigh [2]. Subsequently, self-

imaging fields were rediscovered many times [3, h], and there was renewed interest
in them [5-9].

Selfimaging fields are manifested not only in free space, but also in a space
bounded by guide planes. Thus. the focusing effect of a waveguide [10. 11]

129

IN)! 0F11C3A1.lﬂNE(MQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

famed by plane mtfaceg 1‘ c‘uged hy- thl! kind Of selfimeging of fields: l8 a
result of multiple reflections from mirror walls in the plane perpendicular to the
wave guide axis, a grid of coherent imaginary emission sources arises which is
reproduced after defined intervals along the wave guide axis. In the theoretical
paper [12], attention was given to the relation of the fields of open plane reson-
ators to the phenowenon of selfimaging of the fields.

This paper is devoted to a theoretical and experimental study of selfimaging
fields in free space and the discovery of the peculiarities of the field formation
in wide-aperture (Fresnel numbers N >> 1) flat resonators.

1. Let us consider an arbitrary electromagnetic field in free space. It can be
represented in the form of a superposition of plane waves which has the following

form in scalnrapproximstion

Moo-j rampant—«one. (1)

where Y(k) is the complex amplitude; w(k) - kc; c is the speed of light. dk is an
element of volume in the space of the wave vectors. Let us note that all future

calculations are easily generalized to the case of vector fields.

Let us require that the field in space be reproduced with a period z along the z-
axis of the carteainn coordinate system. Then the term k: can see only the values

2n1/20(1 - 0. ii, :2. ...). and instead of the integral (1) we have the expression

1.
exp [i (1:; e Iz,y — «.01 0.412,. (2)

w. y. 2. n= 3 exp( (Ben‘s; Me. 1..) x

I-—.

..1___,_______:
where «u,==c I k; —k; A (2nl'z.)' ,

The selfimaging period of the fields can be less than :0 if the series (2) turns

out to be incomplete. In the case, for example, where the field is formed by a single
(umpnnunl wilh index 1. it will be reproduced with a period of s It, and it

will not depend on x with accuracy to the phase. If in formula (2) only the terms
with values of 1 having the greatest common divisor f are nonzero. then the self-
inaging period will be zolf. If the series (2) only has i such that Ill 3 £0. the
field period (with accuracy to the phase) will also be f times shorter (here f is

the greatest common divisor of the numbers 2 - 20). Thus, if the field is repre-
sented by two terms 20 andll. the selfimaging period is equal to so/(l1 - £0) with
accuracy to the phase.

2. We obtain selfimsging monochromatic fields if we consider in expression (2) that

|k| - const must occur or, what anounts to the same thing. m - const. In this case
2 varies froa -L to +L. where L is the integral part of the fraction 30/). A is the

wavelength. and expression (2) assumes the form

L .
‘-(’.q.1.1).30 "0' 2 E V.,.,J,_(x,r)exp [1(mp + 3%)], (3)

I-—L n--.

130

I-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where r. ¢. 2 are the cylindrical coordinate system JI is e Bessel function of
the first kind;

"I - If 0V?" (51/20‘; (‘)

inasmuch as only values of Rx, ky such that k: + k; - x: are possible for a nono-

chrosatic wave in the plane kx' Ry.

3. Using identil in ul lht' type

S: exp and... (0') - exp W-

it is possible to show that expression (3) contains the simiest fields having
periodicity in transverse cross section, for emple:

\r =exp(—mi)exp(x?nlzlz.)cosk‘xoosh.y. (5)

However, in connection with the fact that it is impossible to select a series K1
which turns an arithmetic progression. expression (3) cannot define selfinaging
periodic (in the z - const cross section) fields of sore conplex structure.

What has been said pertains to exact selfinaging of fields. However. if the bass

vectors of the grid :11 and a are properly selected. periodic fields can be realised
which self image in the paraxial (parabolic) approxination. Let us consider a nono—
chronstic field

' lie-1.. E 1%expll(b..p+§~z)l.
s. c (6)

where p is a vector with the components :1. y, 0; b,,=pb,+qbci 0,. - V.'/c!_;!";

'bp,';|<om‘ p. q are integers; b1. b2 are base 2vectors of the inverse grid. If we
consider that Ibp qI << k and set BM - It - b: q/(2|t) (this includes the paraxial

approximation - Pue shall linit ourselves to9 Saves propagated at sssll angles to
the z—axis). then the field

No.1. 1)¢(p-aM.z. l)=exp[i(kz-un|: ‘l’nexp(—i:;‘_)l<

.- exp (Eb... p) (7)
(where am - eal +na2; a. n are integers) sill be selfinasin: for

i. are integers. This condition sill be satisfied for any p and q, including for
pPa q - 0. Therefore it is broken down into two condition:

In. - 2.1L; 533.1% - 2.1M... (9)

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where L. Npq are integers.

Thus. in the paraxiul approximation the fields having periodicity in the cross sec-
tlun of z - conat can in the general case be reproduced only for integral 10/ h

within the framework of this approximation the selfimaging effect is nanifested
after periodic transparencies on diffraction of plane monochromatic waves on them.

A theoretical analysis of this effect [5—9] is also based on the indicated approxi-
mation. 1

0n the basis of a unique relation between basis Vectors a1, a2 of the initial grid
and b b of the inverted grid [13]

l' 2
_ . | xv _' vxs = ax .
5: 2‘—’—.‘(...,, . ”a 23W. V 77%. ems-236.1. hl-Lz (10)
(61’ is the Kronecker symbol) free the second condition (9) it is possible to find

all the geometric parameters of the grids providing for reproduction. In reference
[5] it was demonstrated that the relations alh1 - azhz, 2h1h2 x cos a - h3 must be

satisfied. where all h are integers; a is the angle between a1 and a2. In a later
paper [9] it was established that the effect must be observed also for h equal to
a rational number. Let us show that the class of selfimaging grids is preciably

broader. For this purpose let us expand the second condition of (9) by the scalar
product rules:

. . . 4P? 9 b’
é; ipb. - ab,)- = T (p'—2 7-:- pqcosyak-é-q‘ ) =2nN... (11)

where Y is the angle between b1 and b2. Assuming that -2(b2/b1) cos Y - gzlgl and

bi/bi - h2/hl are Irreducible fractions (the angle Y is obtuse). and considering

that (10) implies bJ - 21I(ajsinn)'l and a - n - y. we obtain the following rela-

tions for the geometric grid parameters and the field aelfimaging period:

“IV-E ‘0: V73." 2}, h,‘h. C05“ = ‘1"!-

.__. . 12
zﬁdummVMﬁﬁWamu) ()
(here i is the greatest common divisor of all Muchh‘pH-gﬁ‘pq-i-g‘hwp Let us
note that for f - 1 both conditions of (9) are satisfied. and for f > i; only the
second; therefore reproduction is realized with accuracy to a phase. Considering
that the factor exp (ikz ) oscillates rapidly for snail variations of z , at the

same time as exp[i(-b§qzol2k)] varies slowly. for f > 1 it is also pose ble to

satisfy the sclfimaging condition in the forn of (8) with sufficient accuracy for

the paraxial a proximation if there is insignificant variation of 20 (within the
limits of {Azof j A/Z) or the wavelength (IAAI i A2/2zo).

*
)An analogous relation for the sides of a rectangular waveguide was noted in refer-
ence [16].

 

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DH-111M. USE ONLY

’0. Selfinaging fields which are periodic in the XY plans have a nuﬁer of renarkable
characteristic features: In the cross sections for which 21/: . alt is an irreduc-
ible fraction, with grid porosity (period to cell ratio) greater than t, the field
always forms a sharp grid with T-i’old increase in the order of cells per period.
here a shift of the reproduced image with respect to the original for certain o, ‘l’

is possible: the cells of the original are either matched with the cells of the
image or or they are shif ted along one or both axes such that the projection of the
original cells is between the image cells.

For investigation of these properties let us represent the series (7) in the fern

t- exp II'UU— «0017'- jxo-o') Mo’. 2M":

A“). I) = Eupli (but) -‘3Neo%)]- (13)

'.0

Inasmuch as qu;.-,4- '(up’kxpl—I‘bnp'WW- Here x(p) denotes the field distribution

with respect to area constructed on the basis vectors and a by uhich integration
is carried out, and the area of which is equal to A; db is an element of the area.
The second of the expressions in (9) is taken into account in the expression for A.

Fur Zz/z - 0/1 (including T - l) the expression for A can be converted. introducing
rcnorma‘fization of the indices: p - ut + j; q - VI 4- e. where u, v are integers;

j. s - o, 1, 2, 1 - 1. Then h,L-rh.,+h,,; oN,,/r-arN.,-F aN,,/t+ag.h,(oi+us)+

20g.(uih,—vshgl. The last tern of the second equality has no effect on the value of
the exponent in View of its evenness. If the next to the last tern of this equality
is even, then in the expression for A emulation with respect to u. v and j, s is
separated:

A 'o. “— ’ ' - CVupm-mN ammo...»
‘ t ?) fa ' (1‘)

whet e . _ .

C: 2 up[i(_n%N,,)]exp(nbhp).

I, 3-0

Thus. the appearance of a sharp grid image in the cross sections 1 I as [21' is the
result of evenness of the product of the integers 0g h , and the mltipeicstion
phenomenon, that is. I-fold nultiplicstion of the n r of eleaents per period of
the initial grid. is a rvsull of the nev spatial frequency thuv.

For calculation of the shift effect. the sun (16) is reduced to s grid-forning func-

tion -- the two—dimensional sun of d-functions of the type EMF-”J This is

possible, for the first co-factor under the emulation sign 1.; represented in the
form

exp(—mo1N.,l=expl—ing,or(3;uh.3; ”hell-“Pl—Muﬁtrﬁtifﬁs) '-

where l-‘1 - 0 for even and 1/2 for odd atglhi; e1 - £1113 and an; conhination of signs
is adsissiblc. The validity of this notibn follous fioe evenness of 0g2h1.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INF! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1hJ - 2nd“ and independence of the value of eaplitnn’ﬂ with respect

to a for integral n > 0 and n. Introducing the notation po - 115‘]. 1 Fzsz. let us
transforn equality- (110) to the for-

the equality a

o - c 2 exp (in... (p— m)! - C -:r :1 6 (9—Po-¢(.)o

where eh - tel + me2. Substituting this expression in (13) and performing the inte-

gration. we finally obtain

v(p. {—5‘. {1- exp[i(k—Z--?--M)]£ Chm-arena.
LII

where

(—I

C,” ‘?"’:o“Pi{-7a'[°Nh-2('i+ ms)+2(F,i+ F5)“.
.I-

Pros the formula obtained it follows that the nuaber of cells in the image per period

of the initial grid increases by t tiles. the size and distribution of the field with

respect to the cell exactly correspond to the original. and the phase is determined

by the coefficient ch. For odd 31‘" the image is shifted so that the original calls

are projected between the image cells with respect to the basis vector for which h is
odd. Let us note that the shift vector 29 is defined with accuracy to signs. and

therefore it only detenines the mutual rangenent of the grid cells of the original
and image.

5. Selfinaging fields permit descriptive geometric interpretation. Thus, fro- the
requirement that the field (1) selfimage with a period r0 in space:

V(t.!)-'P(t+nr.. f). n is an integer,

we obtain the condition which the wave vectors of the selfilnaging fields nust satisfy:

kt,—2nl. I is an integer. (15)

in the space of the wave vectors this equation gives a family of equidistant planes
(It-planes) perpendicular to ro (Figure l. a) "MC" are a hodograph of the vectors
1: of the fields that self inage with a period r in space. Equation (15) is vec-
tor nutat ion for one fornula of the Fabry-Perot etslon. the distance between the
mirrors in which is equal to the selfinaging halfperiod.

The hodograph of the wave vectors of selfimaging nonochronatic fields is obtained by
supplementing expression (15) by the equation of a sphere Iltl - conat. It is a
family of circles (Figure l, b) in the k-planea with radii :2. These circles appear
in the interferogran of the rotary-Perot etalon on excitation of it by external
diffuse monochromatic radiation.

6. The fields of the natural vibrations in a flat resonator with unlimited airrors
are a special case of selfimaging fields (2). tor proof of this let us represent
the general solution of the wave equation for fields in a resonator in the form of

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure l. hodographa of wave vectors of nonnono-
chronstic (a) and nonochromstic (b) selfi-aging fields.

superposition of two systems of waves (1) transforming into each other on reflection:
Hr.!)=-1;',-§{Y(k)¢xpli(kr-M)l+

+ \I” (Ir')exp1i (lr’r - om} dlr.’ (16)

Considering the mirrors to be ideally reflecting W II 0 for s - 0 and d). we arrive
at the following conditions:

V(h)-—‘PI(*5). k‘ak.., ﬁrst} k'-—h.-n”d'

where d is the length of the resonator. From the last condition it follows directly
that the components It and k' of the wave vectors ensue the same discrete values

which they sssuu in the casg of aslfimaging fields with aelfimaging period equal to
twice the resonator length. The boundary conditions lead to the appearance of stand-

ing waves along the resonator axis -- expression (16) assumes the form

’93 y' 2' 0- : “0%II‘I" (km Mexpli (erJ-k'y—g‘ 0] X

[-0
><dlz,,¢ih,,I

at the sane time as the terns kx’ l:y remain arbitrary.

(17)

Monochromatic fields (3) and (5) also form standing waves with respect to the l-sxis
under appropriate cumlit ions with respect to the remaining measurements:

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wsexM-iut)sin(nlz-'d)l_(x,r)coans:
v-exp(—-iot)sin(nI:/d)cosk,cosh,y.

corresponding to the natural vibrations in a flat resonator with circular and rec-
tangular mirrors [15].

occurs for this frequency. In strict resonator theory [15] it ie deIonstrated that
such reflection will be observed for entirely defined saves if the diaphragm have
a sharp boundary. Obviously this fact is realized in the nicrovave band. In the
optical band. as a rule. no special requirelsents are ilposed on the aperture dia-
phragm; therefore in practice the boundary has roughness exceeding hundreds of
wavelengths. In addition, the lateral surface of the active nediu usually'does
not correspond to the require-ants imposed on optical surfaces. and frequently it is
deliberately frosted or etched, and it is also placed in an inersion oil (for
example, in the case of neodynitn-doped glass lasers). These facts lead to the

assume that in optical resonators, if special measures are not taken. the fields are
free in the transverse cross section. that is. k . k saw-e continuous values.
However. Lhe values I: , k have an upper bound 1% :51 active resonator of finite
aperture. This is chlaiXed by the fact that as a result of dependence of the
losses on the angle of inclination of the waves to the resonator axis. vaves with
larger kx' ky do not reach the lasing threshold.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where D is the aperture diameter, are nonzero. This means that there no essentially
distorted waves in the system. Therefore it is possible to propose that in
resonators the geometric dimensions of which are many orders greater than the wsVe-
length, and the Fresnel numbers exceed one by several orders. far from the open
edges of the system (distortions are compensated at the edges), the fields will not
differ significantly from the fields described by formula (17). Here it is possible
to consider that W2(kx, ky) are nonzero only for the values of k‘, ky which satisfy

the inequality (18). Of course, the aperture and transverse wave number restrictions
are related to each other. but on excitation of man vibrations the angular diver-

gence of the emis~ no is determined by the ratio x + ky /k at the same time as
the angular directionalily of each vibration is defined by the ratio AID.

7. An experimental study of the properties of selfimaging fields was performed on
monochromatic fields nl lransLnionﬂ symmetry in the XY plane. Such fields were
formed during diffraction of a plane monochromatic wave on periodic amplitude
transparencies (gratings) of three types: square. rectangular and hexagonal. The
purpose of the experiments was to check the theoretical conclusions with respect to
the properties of seliimaging fields in the planes of the expansion of the elements
and a qualitative study of the behavior of the fields with limited aperture of the
transparency simulating resonator fields with N I 100.

in the experiments an LC—SS. basic-mode ﬂe-Ne laser (L) and a beam diverger based on
the ART-400 telescope (Figure 2, a) were used. An amplitude transparency was placed
in a collimated beam. A recording of the fields directly on photographic film we
placed behind the transparency. The light diameter was about 20 an. -

        

1 .~ " I z.

'1' r J
Figure 3. Properties of selfimaging fields of translational symmetry
in intermediate cross sections: a - in the element multiplication
planes (1 -— initial fields, 2. 3 - reconstructed for t I 2 and 3,
respectively); b - in the shift planes of the reconstructed fields
with respect to the initial fields (1 - fragment of the grid with
local defect. 2 -- reconstructed image with shift (central lobe of

an isolated element of the grid is projected between image elements;
a = 1 - l); 3 -— image without shift (a I 2. t I 1)).

0n a square grid (a1 = a2 = a, h I h I 1, g I 1. g I 0, f I 1, z I 2a2/A) with
period 1 mm and porosity 20 the formuia for the posit on of the multgplication planes
was checked which, in the given case (cg h1 I 0, that is even) assume the form 2 I
020/2! = ua2/AI. The even grid images in which the number of elements in the initial
period reached 12 were recorded. These values of 2 were realized with high

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
    

.VOI‘IIO
onto-too

000000.00
000000.00
0.00 a...
.00 O 00.
.0. 00..
000000000
00.00....

 

OOOIvO...
goeoooeese

    
 

Figure A. Field ﬁxrmxlnrlhm behind square, rectangular and hexagonal
amplitude transparencies: 1-12 —- successive images of fields behind
a square transparency with porosity b at distances 2 - 010/21, where
0/7 - 1/6, 1/3, 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 1, 5/4, 6/3, 3/2, 5/3, 7/4 and 2.
respectively (images 2, 6 and 10 have shifts); 13-15 - field behind
a rectangular transparency; l3 -- fragment of a transparency with
local defect, 16 -- field at a distance 2 - 30/2 (for 0 - T - l) is
shifted horizontally, 15 - field at a distance 2 (o - 2, T . 1),
shift absence, 16—18 -— field behind a hexagonal ransparency; 16 —-
fragment of transparency with local defect, 17 —— field for o - T -
1, image not formed, 18 - field for o - 2, T - 1, image formed and
not shifted.

precision. Preservation of the shape of the cells for T I 2 and 3 was checked on
transparencies of the same type (square grids having porosity 2 and 4 and square
cells). Considering the limited aperture and nonuniformity of exposure oi the
transparency, nannxhwnEUNI turned out to be satisfactory (Figure 3, a).

In order to check the shift of the reconstructed image with respect to the original,

transparencies with local defects were used. These defects were obtained by isola—
tion of one of the grid elements by increasing its diameter or shading out adjacent

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5. Limited—aperture field reconstruction; s - initial fields;
I), c —— fields at distances 2 /2 (b) and z (c); upper row — fields
behind a transparency without spatial filtgation, lover row — with
additional spatial filtration.

1-1
n-b a ”-8 a"

Figure 6. Limited aperture field reconstruction at distances of nae/2
(n is indicated): a —- behind a transparency without spatial fil-
tration; b —— with spatial filtration; initial fields presented above.

 
 
 

 

 

I"!
11-7

 

ones or by both methods simultaneously. This made it possible to have the mark of
the position of the original cell (the origin of the coordinates) in the reconstmcr
tion planes. For a square grid the shift vector acquires the form po- fL‘ﬁ. +122),

where el and c2 are mod equal and orthogonal to each other. If the product 01' is

odd, the reconstructed image will be shifted by e/Z in both directions, and the
elements of the original in the projection turn out to be between the image elements
(2 in Figure 3, b). For a - 2. T - l, the shift is absent (3 in Figure 3. b). The
image shift was also checked on a square grid with porosity Io. In this case the

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(Nﬂﬂ(1Al.U§E10NLN

shift was observed for o - 1, 3. S, 7 and t I l, 3 (Figure 6). The dependence of
the shift on the parameters h was checked in the experiments with rectangular grid
(h1 - l and h2 - b). In this case only the tern F1 was nonzero for or odd; there-

fore the shift vector assumed the form on I tyl‘l and the shifts could be expected

only with respect to e1. Accordingly, for a - I - l the shift with respect to the

indicated direction was recorded experimentally; it was absent for o - 2, t - 1
(see Figure 5).

Another conclusion was checked indicating that the image is forsed only in the case
where ogzh1 is even. For a hexagonal transparency (a1 - a2 - a, h1 - h2 - 1, g1 -

gz - l. f - l) the value coincides with a. Figure 6 shows a fragment of a hexagonal
transparency with local defect (16). the field for o - t - 1. where the grid image
is not formed (17), and for a - 2. t - 1. when it is forned (18). Inasnuch as the

isages are observed for even a. they are never shifted.

Simulation of the resonator fields with Fresnel number equal to 100 was carried out
both by irising the transparency to dimensions of 10 X 10 elensnts and by successive
spatial filtration by the scheme depicted in Figure 2. b. As a result of this fil-
tration only the low-frequency spatial harmonics (snall k . k ) participated in the
formation of the image. The experinents denonstrsted that atydiatances 2 << ball the
reconstruclvd fields satisfactorily repeat the initial ones (Figure 5). As the
spacing increases, the spatial harmonics diverge. and the inage is destroyed (Figure
6). 1n the first case (without spatial filtration) this takes place for ssaller z,
for the high-frequency spatial harnonics leave the region of formation of the image
faster.

In conclusion. the author considers it his duty to express sincere appreciation to

L. A. Vaynshteyn for invaluable support, great assistance and valuable suggestions.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. H. F.Ia1bot. PHIL. HAG.. No 9. 1836. p 401.

2. Lord Rayleigh , PulL HAG.. No 11, 1881. p 196.

3. J. M. Cowley. A. F. Hoodie. PROC. PHYS. SOC. (LONDON. B70, 1957, pp 486, 697, 505.

4. V. V. Munladze. N. H. Kamishvili, V. V. Chsvchsnidze, SOOBSBCHENIYA AN 0888 (Re-
ports of the Georgian SSR Acadeny of Sciences), No 58, 1970, p 537.

S. J. T. Winthrop. C. R. Worthington, J. OFT. SOC. AMBR., No 55, 1965. p 373.
6. R. F. Edgar, OPTICA ACTA. No 16. 1969. p 281.
7. U. D. Montgomery, J. 0PT. SOC. AHER., No 57, 1967, p 772.

8. Yu. M. Denisyuk. N. H. Ranishvili, V. V. Chavchanidae, 0PT. l SPEKIR. (Optics
and Spectroscopy). No 30, 1971, p 1130.

9. A. P. Snitnov, 0PT. I SPEKTR., No 43, 1977, p 755.
140

FOR OFIHC]AI.IE§E(NVLV
10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

FINRCHﬂWCJAl.lEﬂE(MNLY

L. A. Rivlin. V. s. Shil‘dynycv. 12V. VYZOV. SER. RADIOPIZIKA (News of the
Institutions of Higher Learning. Radiophynico Series). No 11, 1968, p 572.

Ye. Ye. Grigor‘yev, A. T. Seuenov. KVANTOVAYA ZLBKIIONIKA (Quantum Electronics).
No S, 1978, p 1877.

V. K. Ablekov. V. S. Belyayev, ZHPS (Journal of Applied Spoctroocopy). lo 23.
1975. p 1110.

G. Ya.Lyubarskiy, TEDRIYA 630?? I Y!!! PBIHENENIYB V FIZIKB (Group Theory and
Its Application in Physics), Hoocow, Piznntsiz. 1958.

A. T. Semenov. V. S. Shil'dyayev, KVANTOVAYA ELEKIRONIKA. No 3, 1971. p 62.

L. A. Vaynshteyn. OTKRYTYYE REZONATORY I OTKBXTYYE VOLNOVODY (Open Rooonltora
and Open Have Guides). Moscow, Sov. radio. 1966.

COPYRIGUT: Izdatei'stvo "Radio 1 ovyaz'". "Kwontovaya olekttonika". 1981

10,845

CSO:

1862/220

161

FOR'OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
F0R40FFKJAI.USE¢MVLY

PLASMA PHYSICS

UDC 533.9.082
HIGH-TEMPERATURE PLASMA DIAGNOSIS METHODS

Moscow HETODY DIAGNOSTIKI VYSOKOTEHPBRATUINOY PLAZHY in kussian 1980 (signed to
press 26 Sep 80) pp 2-5. 200

(Annotation. preface and table of contents from book "High-Temperature Plasma Diag—
nosis Methods". by Bdgard Ivanovich Kuznetsov and Daholinsrd Andreyevich Shcheglov.
Atomizdat. 1550 copies. 200 pages]

[Text] Some questions associated with non-contact methods of plasma diagnosis

are considered. Problems of measuring the main parameters of a high-temperature
plasma are analyzed from the standpoint of choosing optimum arrangements of an
experiment. Particular emphasis is given to questions of getting the spatial dis-
tributions of plasma parameters from integral measurements and measurements of
local characteristics. Methods are outlined for studying electric and magnetic
fields in plasma. The material and energy balance of plasma is investigated, as
well as the influence of impurities and wall processes on plasma behavior (first
edition published in 1974). This edition also examines methods of diagnosis used
in present-day fusion facilities. including systems for automating diagnostic mea-
surements e

For specialists engaged in the study of high~tampareture plasma physics and develop-
ment of methods for diagnosing high-temperature plasma. as well as those working

in related fields. May be used by undergraduate and graduate stuents in physics

and engineering physics departments.

Tables 2. Figures 54. references 381.
Preface

Among numerous scientific and engineering problems. one of the most important is

the job of achieving controlled nuclear fusion. getting at the enormous reserves

of surplus energy stored in the nuclei of light elements that are widely distributed
in nature. The paths being taken toward solution of this problem are so intimately
related to the main directions of development of plasma physics that research in
this field is practically inseparable from the problem of utilisaing the new nuclear
fuel--high-temperatute plasma of light elements. Present-day experimental fusion
facilities have already given us plasma with parameters close to those necessary

for power utilization of the thermonuclear reactions that occur in highetamparature
plasma. This means that the researcher must deal with plasma heated to tens of

1‘2

ROIIOFFHJAI.USIIHULY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

millions of degrees. It is quite natural that there has been an increase in the

role of non-contact methods of diagnosis in studies of hot plasma. and that contrari-
wise some classical methods. such as probe methods. have lost their former signifi-
cance. Under such conditions many methods of diagnosis that had formerly been

of only procedural importance have become basic in measurement of high—temperature
plasma parameters. Besides. previously known methods are being perfected. and
measurement methods are being borrowed from related branches of physics such as
astrophysics and nuclear physics. Finally. new areas are springing up in diagnosis
of hot plasma such as the use of laser scattering.

In preparing the new edition of the book. materials were selected and analyzed
that supplemented the previOusly appearing Russian translations of widely known
monographs on plasma diagnosis [Ref. 68. 105]. Various procedural problems of
high-temperature plasma diagnosis. ideas and suggestions for developing new diag-
noses. physical principles of promising but inadequately used methods of measure-
ments--it was with this approximate class of problmes that the reader could become
acquainted when the first edition of this book was published in 1975.

The last decade has been a period of intense development of fusion research. There
has been an expansion of the range of physical problems with which the experimenter
must deal. a considerable rise in the cost of physical facilities. an increase

in requirements for accuracy and reliability of measurement results. as well as

for the volume of information obtained in a single working cycle. An important
place goes to research on designing and building larger. and of course more expensive
facilities of the next generation. Designs of such facilities are being developed
on the basis of the goals of planned experiments. and in this connection certain
requirements arise with respect to the configuration of fittings. placement of
equipment. the lines necessary for operation of the diagnosis and so on. From

this example alone we can see that the circle of specialists directly or indirectly
involved in the problem of high-temperature plasma diagnosis has widened consider-
ably. This is due not only to an increase in the number of methods used. but also
to the involvement of specialists in electronics. automation of data gathering

and processing. designers. specialists in vacuum technology. in the effects of
radiation on structural elements of devices and so on.

in connection with what we have just said. the necessity has arisen for a rather
radical change in the structure and thrust of the book. while retaining a certain
part of the actual material contained in the first edition. Although this is neither
a textbook nor a manual. the authors have decided to include in the first (introduc-
tory) chapter a brief overview of diagnostic methods used for measuring the main
parameters of high-temperature plasma. with an indication of the parts of the book

in which consideration is given to questions relating to the use of specific diagr
nostic techniques and interpretation of resultant data.

Another distinguishing feature of the book is that the authors have tried to make
the presentation of the physical principles of the investigated methods less compli-
cated but more graphic than in the first edition. Considerable attention has been
given to the practical consequences stemming from the physical peculiarities of
specific diagnoses. and especially to the requirements for placement and interfacing
of equipment with the facility. for the design of the facility itself. for factors
that dictate restrictions in the use of a given diagnosis and so on.

143

FOIIOFFKJAL.USI(MNLY
FOIiOFFNJAI.USE(NNLY

And finally. a basic feature of the earlier edition, examination of new trends
in the development of high-temperature plasma diagnosis and procedural methods.
has to a certain extent found reflection in the selection of materials for the
second edition. Distribution of materials by chapters has been altered; a brief
explanation of the content of individual chapters and the logical relation among
them will be found in the first chapter.

Although plasma diagnosis has developed quite rapidly. and surveys at the time

of their publication reflect the state of the art several years previously. the
authors hope that the book will be of use to those directly involved in studying
the physics of high-temperature plasma, or who want to get an idea of the typical
problems being solved by methods of hot plasma diagnosis.

Contents page
Preface 3
Chpnter I: Principal Methods of Measuring Parameters of nigh-Temperature
Plasma. Classification and Brief Overview 6

1.1. Introduction 6
1.2. Measurement of plasma current and the derivative of current 9
1.]. Voltage measurements 10
1.5. Electrical conductivity of plasma 12
1.5. Measurement of beta 13
1.6. Position and configuration of plasma formations 14
1.7. Measurement of plasma radiation losses 19
1.8. Electron temperature measurements 21
1.9. [on Temperature 29
1.10. Measurement of electron density 38
1.11. Measurements of concentration of particles of working gas and impurities

in the plasma 50
1.12. Effective charge of plasma ions 2e: 55
1.13. Measurements of magnetic fields in the plasma 79
l.lh. Measurement of electric fields in a plasma 79
1.15. Oscillations. waves. turbulence 88
Chapter 2: Local Non-Contact Methods of Plasma Diagnosis 95
2.1. Introduction 95
2.2. Measurement of plasma parameters by laser scattering method 98
2.3 Resonant fluorescence 140
2.4. Using particle beams for local measurements 148
2.5 Determining local electron temperatures from cyclotron radiation

intensity 161
Chapter 3: Determining Spatial Characteristics of Plasma From Integral

Relations 166
i.l. Principal arrangement of measurements 166
3.2. Scheme of computations in abelianizing 169
3.3. Ahelinnization as a case of solving the incorrectly formulated problem 179
3.6. Absence of cylindrical swmmetry 183
References 188
COPYRIGHT: Atomizdat. 1980
6610
C30: 1862/27
144

FOR OFFKJAl.USE1NNLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MMTICS

UDC 681.015.25

METHOD OF COLLECTIVE RECOGNITION

Moscow moo KOLLEK‘I‘IVNOGO RASPOZIIAVIANIYA in Russian 1981 (signed to presr
4 Jun 81) pp 2-3. 67-71. 79

[Annotatiom preface. conclusion and table of contents from book "Hethod of Collec-
tive Recognition". by Leonard Andreyevich Rastrigin and Roean Khononovich Bren-
shteyn. Bnergoizdat. 8500 copies. 80 pages]

[Text] The book examines questions of constructing hierarchical recognition sys-
tems. A qualitatively new approach is proposed that yields a whole class of algo-
rithm simulating the process of decision tasking by a collective. Consideration

is given to processes of instructing such a collective. and synthesizing the optima
collective of linear recognition slgoritlua. Sosa nodal problens are solved. The
proposed approach is realized for synthesizing the decision of a collective of

experts.

For specialists in automatic control theory dealing with problems of pattern recog-
nition as well as undergraduate and graduate students in appropriate fields.

Preface

The enticement (and chars) of the problen of pattern recognition is in its siapli-
city. Upon first acquaintance with this probln. the researcher is readily drawn
into using fssiliar resources for handling the solution. and sonatines gets a satis-
factory result. but more often is in for unpleasant surprises. And only after

he has thoroughly analyzed his own specific problee can he manage to solve it.

As a rule. the problem of recognition requires an infernal approach for solution.

that methods have not been used for solving the recognition problenl Probabilistic
sethods of regressions! and correlationsl analysis. a variety of approxisational
approaches involving construction of a hypersurface that separates patterns. a
nunber of set-theory techniques utilizing the apparatus of logic algebra. topologi-
cal approaches and the like. There is no need to continue this list of the nuaero
ous methods of solving the recognition problem. especially as the authors of this
book have taken another tack. Rather than inventing a new approach. they have
only suggested a method of using approaches that are already known. A wide appeal
has been made to analogy with aethods of collective decision so effectively used

in society. As a reSult. the authors have. willingly or not. cone up with a new
method of classification that noves the decision-asking problea a level up. i. e.

a method is indicated that will be used to decide whether a given situation belongs

1‘5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to a class. However. the methods themselves are given a priori. and they for-
a collective whose effectiveness is practically always considerably higher than
any of its members.

The collective concept presented in this book can be used in other problems as
well. but the recognition problem for which it was originally proposed is the
clearest subject for its application.

The authors will be grateful for any comments or suggestions relating to the book.

The authors thank Professor N. A. Andreyev and A. F. Ab for discussing material
presented in chapters 4 and 3 respectively.

The authors express sincere gratitude to N. G. Zagoruyko. V. I. Vasil'yev. Ya. A.
Gel'fandheyn. Sh. Yu. Raudis. V. Ye. Calender and B. Y. lavalerchuk for attentively
reading the manuscript and making a number of useful comments that were taken into
consideration in the final book. and reviewer V. N. Vapnik. whose advice the authors
have done their best to follow. The authors are deeply grateful to E. H. Braverman.
now deceased. who suggested writing this book.

The authors

Cone I usinn

The algorithm that has been considered in this book is an effective pattern recog-
nition algorithm. and therefore it shOuld be correlated with other known methods
of recognition. Let us consider how this and other recognition algorithms fit
into the general scheme of collective decision making.

Let us begin with such widely used algorithms as those based on the theory of sta-
tistical solutions [Ref. [5. 77]. local methods [Ref. 15. 53]. correlation methods
lRef. Al. 42. 53] and so on. These methods are traditional. and are based on using
some sequence of situations (teaching sequence) to find a resolving rule that does
not change in the process of arrival of control situations. In the proposed scheme.
shown in the figure. a situation of this kind corresponds to the lowest level.
where the collective is degenerate. i. e. it consists of only one member. and the
weight of this single member of the collective is fixed as a result of teaching.

The next rluss of algorithms is those in which the weights of the resolving rules--
members ol the collective--arc also fixed. but the number of rules in the collective
is greater than unity. Percoptrun recognition algorithms (Ref. 3. b7. 55] belong
chicilv tn this class. Teaching of the simplest perceptron involves adjustment

of the Heights of A—elements. Each A-element is easily interpreted as an indepen-
dent resolving rulc--collective member. The distinguishing feature of this rule

is that it works in some s-bspace of the initial space of descriptions. The nature
of this subspace (its component features) is determined by the relations between
elements of the meshwnrk and the inputs of the given A-element. The decision that
we get at the output of the perceptron can be interpreted in turn as the weighted
mean decision of a collective consisting of A-elements. The method of potential
functions [Ref. 3] is also close to algorithms of perceptron type.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m —. f

Montana—I071 '

can nanomet-
aocn namm

L'naooaaeru-
man--

mt’cl.) .

V n‘ I
(6) ﬂ ”anal

- ”III.
m 'MOIIOO

(9)
(18)

KEY:

l--Collective of pattern
recognition algorithna

2—Vot ing with conpetence
weight. by the L' moat
conpetent algorithms
(L' < L)

y-Ueights of algorithms
depend on the object
I! . ul(X) I van L>l

hwoecieion made by aoat con-
petent algoritha R, [Ref.
59-68]. uﬂX) 'InxuzOt)

SuPerceptron algorithms "Ref.
1.7. 55]

6--Potent ial function method
(Ref. 3]

7--Voting by arbitrary algo-
rithms [Ref. 1.5. 70]

 

 

(19) ' (20)
W“ m

Diagram of generalization of pattern recognition algoritha

8--equa1 18-Statiatical
9-we1ghted pattern recog-
lO-weight of algoritiua nition nethoda
fixed and independent i9--I.oca1 pattern
of object. u - conat. L>l recognition
ll-Conjunct on aorting lethoda nethoda
lZn"Cortex" [Ref. 9. 16] 20--Corre1ationa1
l3-ozatiaate calculation aethod pattern recog-
[Raf. 34] nition nethoda
ih-obirected teaching method
[Rah 38]
lS--conceptual approach [Rah
88]

l6-Conetructing a tree of
decieiona (Ref. 21. 85]

l7--‘i‘raditiona1 pattern recog-
nition algorithu

1‘7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
liliiOFiﬂCIAL USEZCMNLY

Attempts have been made to combine several recognition algorithms (Ref. 45. 70].

In this research. like in the perceptron. the solution has been formulated as the
weighted mean value of decisions of the algorithms being combined. It should only
be noted that in this case the algorithms being combined may also differ in princi-
ple. and not just in the type of subspace. as occurs in the perceptron.

In the sense of combining algorithms of the same type. but functioning in different
subspaces. still closer to the perceptron is the approach considered by Bongard
lRef. 9]. This approach has engendered a variety of algorithms distinguished es-
sentially by methods of sorting conjunctions [Ref. 9. l4. 2!. 25. 32-34. 38. 81.
88]. but fitting approximately into the same scheme. Analysis of this class of
algorithms should start from the "Cortex" algorithm [Ref. 9. 14]. H. H. Bongard
suggested the concept that solution of the problem of pattern recognition should be
sought among possible logic functions of the characteristics of description of
objects. it can be easily noted that the perceptron also realizes this idea: each
A-element is a certain logic function of variables that are connected to the inputs
of this A-element. The "cortex" algorithm is based on search for each class of
features that are possessed by objects of one class and are not possessed by a
single object of another class (or are possessed by a sufficiently small number

of objects of this class). The features of the class are conjunctions made up

of characteristics of the initial description. In recognition. the number of con—
junctions is eomputed--the features of each class that take on a unit value on

a control object. The object is put into the class for which this number is the
largest.

Thus. in this algorithm as well we encounter an averaging or voting procedure.

Each conjunction can be easily interpreted as an independent resolving rule. and
therefore the algorithm fits into the general scheme of the collective of resolving
algorithms depicted in Fig. 2 of Chapter I. The weights of the resolving rules--
conjunctions--may be unitary; then we have equal voting. Or they may be determined
by a variety of procedures [Ref. 9. 25]. in which case we have weighted voting.
However. in either event the weights of the conjunctions--resolving rules-~are
fixed and cannot be changed from one control situation to the next.

Among the various modifications of the method of sorting conjunctions. particular
notice should be taken of so-called estimate calculation methods proposed by

Yu. I. Zhurnvlev. In these methods. an attempt is made to truncate complete sort-
ing lRef. 34]. He will show that this method as well can be put into the class

of collective resolving rules.

Go the entire set of features. reference or voting sets are assigned (Ref. 341--
tlu- projections onto subsets selected in a certain way. These projections can

be interpreted as individual resolving rules. The control object is projected
onto each reference set and is compared with the projections of objects of the
teaching sequence. Then the number of coincident projections is computed for both
classes to he recognized in each of the reference sets. The number of votes is
added. andthe object is put into the class that gets the greatest author of votes.
The weight of each reference set can be considered as well. in which event the
voting becomes weighted.

The directed teaching method proposed by P. Ye. Kunin [Ref. 38] is close to the
methods of estimate calculation lRef. 34] and the "Cortex" algorithm (Ref. 9. 14].

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this algorithm. the resolving rule is induced by the control object. This means
that the resolving rule is directionally generated relative to each new object.

The only relationships considered are those between the features that are there

in the control object. If a conjunction sorting method is used. only those conjunc-
tions that take on unitary values on the control object are sought as the features
of each class. Then the decision is likewise made by voting.

The last group of methods that can be put into collective decision-making procedures
includes methods of concept formation. These techniques are extensively used in
recognition [Ref. 2|. 85. 88]. In essence. both the "Cortex" algoritlm and the
methods of estimate calculation can be put into this class. A survey of methods

of concept formation is given in Ref. 21. Special algorithms of concept formation
are V. V. chavchanidzc's conceptual method [Ref. 88]. and methods based on construct-
ing a tree of decisions [Ref. 21. 88]. In these methods. each control object has
its own corresponding path on the tree of decisions. This path is induced by the
presence or absence of some feature in the given object. It terminates at a certain
vertex that is put into correspondence with the index of one of the classes to

be recognized. A path on the tree of decisions can also be readily interpreted

as some conjunctiOn of variables and their negations. In the "Cortex" algorithm,
the decision is determined in the process of voting between conjunctions. whereas

in this approach the decision is completely determined by one conjunction. the
weight as a resolving rule being fixed a priori. In the conceptual approach. the
decision is determined by the object having some concept that is defined as an
aggregate of features. which may be both qualitative and quantitative in the general
case. In the latter two methods. the collective decision is determined by the
resolution of one of the rules—conjunction or concept--a1though the choice is

made only with respect to values of a feature in the control object. and not by

the qualitative characteristics of the rule that is chosen. This completes analysis
of the second level of the diagram.

In considering methods based on the ideas of the perceptron and methods of conjunc-
tion sorting. it has already been pointed out that in this case the member of a
collective is a rule defined either as an A-element connected with a number of
features. or as a conjunction of several features. In other words. the nature

of the rules themselves does not change; it is only the subspace in which these
rules operate that changes. It turns out that if the approach proposed in this
book is applied to rules of this kind. we can get efficient and fairly simple recog-
nition systems.

In the diagram. a place on the upper level is given to the approach proposed in
our book. This is the case where the weights of the algorithmsumembers of the
collective-wary depending on the specific control situation. and are interpreted
as coefficients of competence of the algorithms. On this level. we can consider
two cases: The simplest case where the decision of the collective is determined
by the decision of the rule with maximum competence coefficient for the given ob-
ject. and the general case where the rules vote with competence weights for decision
making. In such voting. all the resolving rules--members of the collective—may
take part. or only the first L' most competent rules. In the second case. we can
define some most competent coalition. specifically one that is made up of only

a single rule.

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The approach considered in this book applies not only to the problem of pattern
recognition. Actually. in typical problems of behavioral synthesis. choice of
an optimum solution. designation of the best plan and so forth. the difficulty
as a rule is in selecting the algorithm for solution of the problem that is best
in some sense among the available choice of algorithms. The invention of a new
algorithm in this situation is inadvisable. and in any case is not economical.

living organisms have learned to handle this job effectively. and in standard situa-
tions they construct behavior by combining algorithms already known to them.

Let us consider the following quite prevalent situation. Let there be some (finite
or inlinite) set oi problems of the same type {X1}. 1- l. 2...., I. These problems
are coded by n parameters x], x;,.... xn so that each problem in space 9“ is repre-

sented by point X,- (x). x;...., X"). and the entire set of problems forms region
5 X1 rt. l= l. 2....

Let there also be a finite set of algorithms {MI (3;. R2...” R1,) for solution
of problems X1€;E. Each of these algorithms R1, is 1, 2,..., L. does or does not
salvo problem X1. The effectiveness of the solution is defined by some given cri-
terion 0 that puts X1 andR; into correspondence with the number

q=Q(x1! R2)! (1)
rharactcriaing the workability of algorithm R1 in solving problem X1.

Let us give examples of problems of this type: 1) the problem of pattern recognition
alreadv discussed: x is the specific recognition problem. {R} is the set of recogni-
tion algorithms. such as Bayes methods. potential functions, perceptron, etc..

q is the criterion of recognition efficiency; 2) the problem of determining a r00t,
where x is the specific function whose root is to be determined. {R} is a set of
algorithms for determining the root. such as methods of tangents, chords, dichotomy
and so iorth, and q is the number of iterations necessary for reaching the c-neigh-
borhvod of the root; 3) the problem of search optimization. where X is the situation
that arises in the process of optimzation. {R} is a set of search algorithms such

as the methods of the gradient. random search. etc.. and q is the average increment
in the function to he optimized or the number of unsuccessful steps; 4) the problem
of forecasting or extrapolation. where x is the situation whose future state is

to he predicted. ‘Rl is a set of algorithms for prediction or extrapolation. includ-
ing formal and informal techniques (methods of expert estimates), and q is the
relative error of prediction.

The selection of the optimum algorithm for solution of problem X thus reduces to
solution of the cxtrcmum problem

Q(X1. R,) > extr ‘81..

Z- l..... L

(2)

whore R1, is the host c: the available algorithms for solving problem X1.

Tho Algorithms proposed in this book in slightly modified form can be used to solve
(ht‘sv diverse problems. The modification of the algorithm depends on the type
of problem to he solvod. The given approach enables solution of problem (2),

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bypassing complete sorting of algorithms. Since the solution of optimization prob-
lem (2) involves s once-through solution of problem X1. the choice of optimum algo-
rithm in the case of complete sorting becomes meaningless as the problem has already
been solved.

As already stated. living organisms handle problem (2) fairly well. Therefore

the given approach can be used as a model for understainding processes of beha-
vioral selection of organisms in standard situations. In this case. the course

of study is obvious: it is necessary to describe the space of problems a“ to be
solved by the organism. to distinguish a set of problems 3 and a set of algorithms
of behavior {R}. and then by observing behavior in different situations. 1. e.

in the solution of problems of set E. to isolate the region of competence of each
behavioral algorithm R1. If these regions do not intersect. there is every reason
to assume thqt the living organism realizes the algorithm described above in se-

lecting behavior.

To go one step farther. the idea of a collective of algorithms in the social world
long ago found application in the concept of division of labor. There is no doubt
as to the optimality of this kind of organization. The authors hope that they
have successfully defended the idea of the collective in the non-social world as
well. and specifically in handling pattern recognition problems.

Contents page
Preface 3
Introduction 6
1.1. The concept of pattern recognition (a brief review) 6
1.2. Hierarchical recognition systems 10
Chapter 1: Collective of Resolving Rules in the Recognition Problem 13
1.1. General scheme of the collective 13
1.2. Algorithms for distinguishing regions of competence of resolving rules 16
1.3. Method of a priori assignment of regions of competence 25
1.6. Experiments with the collective on model problems 27
Chapter 2: Synthesizing the Optimum Collective of Resolving Rules 32
2.1. Problem of optimizing the collective decision 32
2.2. Heuristic selection algorithm 35
2.3. Experiments on model problems 39
2.4. Analysis of approximation properties of collective work 43
Chapter 3: Collective recognition of regions of static stability 65
3.1. Formulating the problem of predicting disruptions of static aperiodic

stability of working conditions of an energy system 65
3.2. Experiments 50
Chapter 4: Recognition by a Collective of Experts 58
4.1. Collective decision problem 58
4.2. Analysis of electrocardiograms by a collective of experts 61
4.3. Short-term forecast problem. and solution by s collective of experts 65
Conclusion 67
References 72
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. 198!
6610
cso: 1862/22 - gun -

151

IN)! OIWﬂC1A1.lﬂSI2(HULY