APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00880R000100020020-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8281

16 February 19 79

TRANSUITIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 10/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020026-0
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained .

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGRT HHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUC’ RERBIN REQUIRE TRAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION IE RESTRICTED POROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
. A I. llrlmu N". J. In mum's Atrr nI-n 3.x.
mater - ~

l. u u- .ml \ «II r . Rep-on .ur

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - PHYSICAL 16 February 1979
SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY , (FOUO 10/79)

0. Palm-mg Omani/mun Name and Address

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glebe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

 

    

0- truer-Inna Oman-lance lisp.
a O.

   

   
      
   
   
 

   

l0. Paoiert/Tuk/Iolh Can No.

 
     

ll. (some! lava-u No.

   

l2. Sponsoring Organisation Stone and Address I). Typr oi Report In Pernod

Coveted

As above

l6. Aha-urn-

The report contains information on aeronautics; astronomy and astrophysics;
atmeayheric sciences; chemistry; earth sciences and oceanography; electronics
and electrical engineering; energy conversion; materials; anthematicai
sciences; cybernetics. computers; mechanical. industrial. civil, and marine
engineering; methods and equipment; missile technology: navigation,
communications. detection,nnd countermeasures. nuclear science and technology;
ordnance; physics; propulsion and fuels; space technology; and scientists

and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

7. Key Words and lions-est Aulysu. o. Descriptors

USSR Electronics Missile Technology
Aeronautics Electrical Engineering Navigation and
Astronomy Energy Conversion Communications
Astrophysics Materials Detection and
Atmospheric Sciences Hatheaatics Countermeasures
Chemistry Mechanical Engineering Nuclear Science and
Computers civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetics Industrial Engineering Ordnance

Earth Sciences Marine Engineering Physics
Oceanography Methods Propulsion and Fuels

UL l-ieslilieulOpen-Eadtd Tel-s Equipment sp‘ce Technology

'N‘COOAT'FEUARWW 01.03.04.07.08.09,10.11.12,13.16.16.17.18,l9.20,21.22
IS. Avavlalulny Stare-ear l9. Seaway Class (The
Men . . 1 12
For Official Use Only. Limited ‘ ‘ '

umber of Copies Available From JPRS 'ﬁiﬁt‘r’ “1‘“ "" m
.- .

some uns- us «new. n-ul uncover-o: won-mu

THIS FORM MAY BE REPRODUCED
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8281
16 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(9000 10/79)

Cou'rems PAGE.

CYBBRNE‘I‘ICS, C(HPU'IBRS AND wm‘nou newcomer

Description of Mill’s, 'Kuntsevo,‘ 'L'vov.‘ ‘Sirona-I'
and 'Pribor'

(V. I. Koatyuk; OSNOVY POSTROYENIYA AV'I'GMTIZIRO-
VANNYIO! SISTBl UPMVLENIYA. 1977)........................ 1

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERIM

ﬂicroveve Radiometry Methods and the Problems of Forest and
Peat Fires

(L. P. Borodin, at 81.; MDIOTEKIINIKA I BLBK'I'RONIKA.
m 10. 1978)....0'...’0......OI.O...OCOOOOOOOIOOOOOCOOOOO 12

GEOPHYSICS. ASTRONMY AND SPACE

Soyuz Vehicle's Parachu to Braking System Described
(Serge Berg: AIR 5 0081108. 11 Nov 78).................... 28

Breakthrough in Readaptstion of Commute to Gravity
Discussed
(Albert Ducrocq; AIR 5 COSMOS, 11 Nov 78)................ 32

PIIYSICS

Numerical Analysis of Characteristica of a Gas Dynamical

Laser Hith Selective Thar-a1 Excitation and Mixing in
the Supersonic Flow

(0. V. Achesov. at 81.; KVAN‘I'OVAYA BLEKTRONINA, No 11.

I978).................................................... 38

Investigation of the Generation hoperties of Phosphate
classes in the Pulse Repetition Pumping Mode

(N. Ye. Alekseyev, et a1.; KVAN‘DOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA-,~
No 11, 1978)............................................. 1-5

- a - [III - USSR - 23 S G 1’ F000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

oomms (Continued)

A Cooperative Investigation of Pulsed II? and nr-coz
Chemical been
(V. Yo. “rookie. et cl.; KVANTOVAIA mm.

m 11. 1978)..oooooooooooooeoeoeooooooooooeeeeooeeooo-o

Method for Mowing the Geomtric Para-etc” of Moi-
gnuuion lace: lens
(D. V. Vluov. et 31.; KVMTOVAYA umonm. No 11.

1978).o-eoolootoeooooooooooo.900oooooeoollooooooooooooo

Sone Results of Optinizing the (Io-position of Active Hedi.
and the Operating Pore-etc" of a Geo-Duchnrse Go-Lneer
(0. ll. Grigor'yan, ct nl.; KVAN'NVAYA mum,

no 11' 1978)....0000000.0.000...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

I'Naluation of the Accuracy of the Laser noppler Velocity
Heter
(I. P. Latin: om I SPEKTRWKOPIYA, Jun 78).........

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC muons
Scientific Research Seninon on Aeronechnnica and Gee

Dyna-ice (Director Academician c. I. Petrav)
('88!le MW umnsmm SDI. mmrm

WI“. “0 6’ 1978)....0.to.0.0.00.0...noncoooooeooono

PUBLICATIMS

Honipulating Robots. Dynamics and Algorithe
(HAMMYATSIOMIB Roam. 0mm I mm,

1978)..................................................

Sinulation of Discrete Systm on Coup .er Discussed
(mounovm swzmmm 015m 8151'!!! NA
INN mz'r'rmo momma. 1978)........................

Recording and Gathering Printy Intonation [or ASUP'e
(REGISMTSIYA I SIOR MICE”! W131! V
m. 1978)ooeooooeoeonone0.0.0.0..nooooeoeeoooooonoooo
Samar on Statistical ﬁydrooconetics

(TRUDY VOS'IIOY VSBSOYUZIIOI SEKOLI-SEHIMM P0
STATISTICBESKOI CIDIOAKBS'I'IKE, 1977).............. .... .

-5-

M OHICIAI. I152 ONLY

52

72

77

80

83

86

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NTS (Continued)

Institute of Physics Book on Pulsed Neutron Research
(TRUDY ORDENA LENINA PIZICRBSKOGO INSTITUTA

INENI P. R. LEBEDEVA mmu “MK 8858:
IMPUL'SNYYE NBYTRONNYYE ISSLEDOVANIYA. 1977). ... u. ..

Construction Machinery Auto-st ad Control System

(AVTOHATIZIROVANNHE SISTM UPMVLBNIYA
STROITEL'NYHI murmur. 1977).......................

Volunc Devoted To Work of Hsthensticisn Lyspunov
(PROBLEM KIBERNBTIKI, 17 Oct 77)....................

New Book Reviews Process of Asu Design, Evaluation
(TEORBTICHBSKIYE OSNOVY POSTROYENIYA AWTIZIR-
OVANNYKH 515ml UPMVLBNIYA. 1978)...................

Gaussian Light Beans
(GAUSSOVY PUCHKI SVBTA, 1977)

Principles of Construction of Automated Control System

(OSNOW POSTROYENIYA AVTGIATIZIROVANNYlOl szsm
"PMVLmIYA, 1977).II0.0QI..CIIOOOOOOOOODIOOOOOOOO.I.

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYBERNHTICS, COMPUTERS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

DESCRIPTION OF ASU's WNTSEVO,‘ 'VVOV,’ 'SlRENA-l' All) HIBG'

Moscow OSNOVY POS‘DIOYENIYA AVTGMTIZIROVANNYKH $15184 UPRAVLBNIYA in Russian
1977 signed to press 16 Sep 77 pp 279-288

[Chapter 8 by V. I. Kustyuk from the book by V. I. Kostyuk, Yu. P. Zaychen-
ko, N. G. hytsev, N. l. Kirilyuk and R. V. Lebedinekiy; edited by V. l.
Kostyuk. Itdatei'stvo Sovetakoye radio, 305 pp, 37,000 copies]

[Text] 8.1. ‘lhe ASUP ”Kuntsevo"

The "iOantsevo" systen was developed by the Moscow radio equipent plant
jointly with the institute of Cybernetics of the USSR Acaduy of Sciences
as a typical auto-ated Ianegenent systen for enterprises with discrete pro-
duction [37] (which include a large portion of industrial enterprises, for
axe-pie. the instalment-asking or machine-building -seetors of industry).
The system is intended for enterprises with mas. large-series or seali-
series production.

The developent of functional subsystems for the technical preparation of
production, the scheduling of production, the supplying of production with
Iaterials, technical—econc-ic planning and bookkeeping are along the toner.

The organization of effective functioning of the A80? "Kuntsevo" is based
on the following servicing subsystems: informational servicing [69], tech-
nical servicing [60]. software [50] and organizational servicing [37].

in the A512 "Kuntseva" provision is made for the developent of the necessary
program and organizational loans of construction of information-reference and
intonation retrieval system. The latter are intended nainly for retrieVsl
of design technological infatuation. in the information-reference systen a
language is used in which questions and answers are :formlated, one similar
to that ordinarily used by the production specialists. In addition, a syste-
has been adopted for information coding by loans of coding guides that have
considerable advantages over classification system because of ease of recall
and siniicity of Iastering. The intonation-reference syste- is intended
for gradual transition to control fro- regulated presentation to plant control 7
services of data in a previously standardised form to obtain any kind of
infomtion (with any depth and in any profile) in the process of develop-
lent and adoption of decisions.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Used in solving probl-s of optima planning and control are .ethods of
modeling production with different degrees of detail and on different levels,
and also .ethoda of forecasting production and evaluating the alternative
planning solutions. Envlsaged in the software is the possibility of solvim

proglu of lath-stical prograllng, .athelatical statistics, queuing theory
and linear algebra.

There is a possibility of continuous .odification and planning of plan tasks
for production sections. shops, procuruent services and the naterial and
equipent supply section. included in shift tasks are lists of produced
parts, of operations co.pleted, with an indication of the tile required for

their execution, of the equlpent used to perfor. the operations and of the
workers engaged in the performnce of those operations.

Deviations of production fro. the schedule and forecasts of possible vio-
lotions of production plans, with an indication of their causes, are regu-
larly reported to the production control services at the enterprise.

0n the basis of .ethods of decoIposition (solution of a syste. of linear
equations) provision is node for the solution of probie.s in the preparation
of m-ary design docuentatlon with respect to local solutions and ilprove-

.ents. it is interesting that in the process of preparing documentation for
new production the doculentation on solutions borrowed fro. other production

can be prepared without the participation of Ian. Provisions are being node

to develop by loans of couputers a technology for individual types of tech-
nological operations.

Data processing is entrusted minly to the enterprises, where all the account-
ing and standards data are concentrated. 1hrough the lifts all the dew-
tation of an economic-planning and technological-design type is being done;

it bears responsibility for providing all services with reliable, ti.ely and
coIplete information.

he worker obtains fr:- the lVTs shift tasks with the fore-all's signature
and also st-ary data on the indicators of his work. into the iV‘l‘s fro. the

worker cone reports (with the approval of the depart-ant of technical con-
trol) on the results of execution of the technological operations and work.

SlIultaneousiy with the increase or receipt of naterial values the warehouse-
.an reports to the iV’l's that the operation has been colpleted. The card file
on the presence, arrival and expenditure is kept in the IVTs, fro. which the
necessary intonation on all positions on the state and dynamics of .ovenent
of stocks in the warehouse goes to the warehouse-en, and the prescription
for the issuance of values is formed. 'lhe foreman regularly obtains fro.

the lV‘l's st-ary doculentatlon reflecting the shift tasks and the smary
indicators on the work of his sections, the expenditure of wages and incen-

tives in the section; upon request he can obtain a schedule graph and work
indicators for a definite period (shift, lO-day period, .onth, etc). The
shop chief has the some possibilities with respect to data on the shop.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Calculations of wages, material expenditures, the movement of product in the
process of production. coats, depreciation deductions and others are made in
the “is. Only isolated umechnnized operations in accounting are performed
by the bookkeeper. Every day (or upon request) the bookkeeper can obtain
from the lifts Intonation about the state of the records and input-output
items and also the accounting balance on the state for the date preceding
the inquiry.

‘ihe personnel card file is also kept in the lifts, and all changes regarding
the workers are recorded by an electronic computer from reports of the per-
sonnel section.

The enterprise management can upon request obtain by means of the reference-
information system information of interest to it regarding the state and
trends in the developeent of production (statistical forecasts, production
schedules, etc).

The economic and planning services of the enterprise calculate the plan and
analytical indicators through the iVTs in the preparation of given planning
solutions and analysis of the program of production, marketing and sales of

Wmte

In the lV'i's all the report information required by the higher authorities is
prepared, and statistics are also kept of the fulfilment of their obligations
by suppliers. users and other organizations.

Periodically at the prescribed time the lifts of the enterprise transmits to
the GV'l's OASU [main computer center of the automated control system for the
sector of industry] (over a cc-sunication channel or in the form of record-
ings on a data carrier) report data on the production and economic activity
of the enterprise. At the request of the GVTs any information contained in
the “automated card files“ can be transmitted in systematiaed or unsystema-
tired form. Data of a directive character arriving from the GV‘l‘s and WT:
are reduced to informtion of the enterprise management and the decisions
made by management are reported to the “In.

‘ The technical servicing of the ASUP "Kuntsevo" envisages a two-stage structure
of the hardware complex, consisting of an iV'rs and group peripherals connected
to the iV'i‘s through data transmission equipment.

The “IT: is equipped with s "Minsk-32“ electronic computer, a device for coup-
ling the computer with "Minsk-1560" co-unlcation channels and various service
equipaent: a Bil-50 unit for perforated tape preparation and control; mow/as
and ”1-80 punched card decoding machines; on RIM-600 Krotary electrogrsphic

‘ machine for the reproduction of forms issued by the computer; a UPB [ustroy-
stvo, podayushcheye bumsguupaper feeding device] serving to form break lines
on paper by punching a row of holes; a BRP-ZM paper-cutting machine and a
BShP-é stapler; sm-so voltage stabilizers and air-conditiming installations.
Parallel operation of tee electronic computers is assured. with direct data

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exchange between the working storeges, where one machine works on a real
tile scale and is used for the collection and processing of date arriving
directly fro- the place of its [oration and also for the solution of lore
urgent pobiels, end the second machine is loaded with non-urgent poblus
end provides redmdancy of the first coupnter.

in the first ASUP line the peripheral points are equipped with production
registers, 1-63 roller teletypes end PTA-P2 phototeiegrephic units. in the
second ASW line, RP-li, RP-Sl end lP-lOl poduotion registers are installed

at the peripheral points. Auto-atic [JP-iii production registers are also
used, end eiectron-beel displays.

'lhrea levels of planning were used in the AS"? "Kuntsevo":

-- the dovelopent of standard design solutions suitable for lost enter-
prises of the branch;

-- the creation of standard designs of ASUP for basic enterprises on the
basis of standard solutions of the A812 "Kuntsevo";

-- the creation of designs for the coupling of basic ASUP.

Aeong the standard design solutions are standard hardware for data collection,
trans-lesion, processing and storage, stanadard eethods of data processing,

standard circuits and progress for the solution of problels of control,
standard programs of system sottmre, and standard orunizational principles
of the developent and introduction of ASIIP.

Standard design solutions of A8“? are being developed at eight basic enter-
prises. Being primarily developed are the structures of a technical couples
and an information system, the functional and organisational structure, the
standard structure of on operational systu, standard data tables for the
solution of probiels and standard network nodes for the development and
introduction of A509. Expenditures on the creation of standard desigis can
secunt to several Iiilion rubies, and the work can take 3-5 years.

Coupling designs are individual, since they take into account specific dif-
ferences of a given enterprise from the basic enterprise. They deter-inc
the specific Ioditications of a standard plan and msures to bring close
together the production and the functional, the organizational and the in-
forlationai structure of a given enterprise to the corresponding structures
of the basic enterprise. in that case the developent times and the expendi-
tures on planning are reduced by one-half or two-thirds.

beading institutes on control systens for coordination of work on the crea-
tion of A80? have been created in each branch. They have to study the level
of rechenization and automation of control work, determine the basic enter-

prises, develop standard design solutions and lead work on the creation of
standard designs of ASUP.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8.2. The ASUP "L'vov"

The ASUP ”L'vov." functioning at the L'vov television plant. is intended to
increase the effectiveness of production by improving operating production
planning, calculation 0: the optimm regime ot the enterprise and synchroni-
zation of the course or production through the rational distribution of
available resources, and also the solution or problems 0! accounting, the
provision of production with materials and equipent and technical-economic
planning. The system includes the following subsystems [103]:

-- operating control o: the main production;

-- technical-economic planning;

-- control 0! the supply of materials and equipent;
-- control of marketing;

-- accounting;

-- personnel managmaent.

‘Iha following devices are a part of the hardware complex of the first line .
of the ASUP "L'vov":

-- two "Minsk-22" electronic computers, supplemented by a system of program
interruption, mater-y protectors and supplemental co-ends;

-- device for data input from telegraph equipment into computer and output
to telegraph lines of ccamunication, assuring slmltaneous operation of
30 telegraph units;

-- device for data output on lurinous display;

-- current time generator for synchronization of control and accounting
with the course of the production process;

-- device for coupling computer with data transmission equipment over tele-
phone lines of coeammication;

-- electronic conutator working according to a prescribed program, intended
for the connection or additional par lphorols to the computer.

The counters of the quantity of output have nornlly closed contacts which
are connected to the stamps of the technical control department. During the
marking of finished goods the contacts 0! the sensor close and a signal is
sent to the computer. In the sensors of the state of the equipent there are
normally open contacts which are periodically closed during movement of the
assembly shop conveyer and other equipment. Intermediate counting devices
and controls (at the control panel) and data transmission equipent are
situated at the dispatcher points of the shops. A luminous table, register-
ing devices and some of the dispatching equipment are installed in the main
dispatcher point of the plant. Devices of the type of the URI-lo are installed
in the warehouses.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

in the first stage of introduction of the AS"? software systoa a colpiox of
pron-o. Iii-boring over 50.000 co-ands ulsinoluded. in the software of the
A51! 'L'vov" it is possible to distinguish program for the solution of
econolic tasks and systol program [i06]. The task of the auto-scion of
prograling is romicodh to the construction of an algorithm for the couple):
processing of data in the ASIE which satisfies such requirements as the
syotutic nature of the approach, flexibility and optimality of tho solut-
tion, dependilu on UK specific conditions.

‘iho introduction of tho first lino of the AS“? ”L'vov" is ciuroctorized by
tho following indicators:

1) thoroduction of non-productive dountines and ilprovolent of tho rhytbico
ity of uork of tho onterpriso, increase of tho value of production by
6.6 percent on the sale production areas and reduction of usetago;

2) improve-em of the cupiotenoss of ass-bly and reduction of the general
level of stores through tho organization of daily recording at tho uaro-
houses of operating analysis of tho Iovuent of material values and con-

' trol of tho Foouronont process.

“has, in 1.5 years of operation of the systea the noon level of stocks has
boon reduced by 15-20%, and this per-itted the release of about 300,000
rubies of "froson" assets. In addition, tho period of repsernt of circu-
lating capital was reduced by 6 percent. The annual saving use 668,000
rubles at o repay-eat period of the system of 2.5 years.

8.3. Mtaated Systems for Transport

.As ems-pies of the owl ication of auto-ted systeas for transport we will
mine a systn of airplane seat reservation and a syste- of planning and
control of notor—vohicio transport.

The auto-ated systal "Siren-l" is intended for the servicing of airplane
passengers flying from Moscow airports and passengers in transit handlod by
then. It assures the porforaance of tho following functions [28]:

-- tho sale of air tickets for i100 flights a day;

-- tho taking of orders for seat reservation and tho preliainary sale of
tickets (for 30 days);

-- the restoration in tho couputer lenory of infatuation about airplane
seats and the issuance of intonation about tho presence of free seats
on non-stop and one-stop routes;

-- the occtmiation of statistical data on passenger transportation;

-- tho reproduction on displays of data on the presence of seats on flights
departing fro. Moscow airports in the next 5 days;

-- the issuance of intonation to various services of Aeroflot.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

Characteristic ul.’ an airplane neat ruservntiun system is considerable
irregularity in the arrival of requenlu for service in different periods of
the year, month and day. 'ihe average number of inquiries is up to 15,000
per hour, and the coefficient at irregularity of the mean number of inquir-
ies per hour in the course of the your is about 7. The waiting time for an
answer to an inquiry must not exceed 3 seconds.

An enormous Volume of information must be preserved in the system. in that
case the requirements as regards the frequency of access time to different
flies are substantially different. Actually. the volume of information
needed to service the flow of requests in a real time scale (information
about seats, rates, distances. cost of tickets, etc) is 2 x 106 bytes. Since
a considerable portion of that information changes continuoualy, it is ad.
visable to put it in the main memory with a short access time. information
about pas engers in transit and preliminary reservation of seats in a volume
of 5 x 10 bytes changes more rarely and therefore is put on magnetic drums
and disks. Finally, for the recording of statistical information on con-

ducted operations in a volume of over 30 x l0° bytes per day. magnetic stores
are used.

Ihe hardware complex of the "Sirens-i" automated system consists of the fol-
lowing equipeent:

-- two "-3000 universal digital computers in a maximally expanded modifi-
cation (the total capacity of the main memory is 3.6 x lo5 bytesnsix
main memary modules and tour read-only modules, constituting the basis
of the computer complexes):

-- external storage units;
-- input-output units;

-- d i str ibut ion-convers ion dev ices;

-- complex of data transmission devices;
.. terminal complexes.

The data processing system is so constructed that it assures high reliability
and survival of the system and also adequate reliability of the results of
calculations. The mean time to failure in the systma reaches 5 years. and
not more than 1 incorrect ticket is issued per 100,000 sold. The data trans-
mission equipent serves to connect the electronic computer with the terminal
complexes through standard telephone and telegraph channels and physical lines
of comic-Hon. In addition, a special device in the data transmission

equipsnt permits increasing the rel iebillty of the transmitted information
to lO' . Under normal conditions the distribution-conversion device assures

connection with more than 500 users..

The terminal complexes include panels, reference-information displays and
telegraph equipeent. The panels are installed in agencies, airports and

7

' FOR OFFICIAL USE 0i".Y
FOR OVPICIM. USI’. ONLY

ticket sales points in Moscow and also Aeroflot agencies in other cities.
They provide a set or messages in accordance with the requirements of tho
user, visual control of tho message on the panel screen, the transmission
of messages to the line, obtaining and monitoring the reply, and also auto-
matic printing of airplane tickets on blanks of a special form.

in proportion to the accmlation of esperience in operating the ”sirens-I“
system the range of tasks solved with its help will be substantially eu-
pended.

The principles of organisation of the "Sirena-l" system and the structure
of its hardware complex can also be successfully used in other queueing
systema with seat reservation. for example. in rail transport, in hotels,
etc.

8.4. Example at on Automated Control System for a Sector of industry (OASU)

The OASU represents a costination of administrative and economical mathe-
matical methods. means of caputer technology and co-unlcations which
permit agencies of control of ministries and departments to accaepllsh
control of a sector.

The creation of an OASU is dictated by profound qualitative and quantitative
changes that have occurred in inchnstry during the transition to the sector
principle of control.

The OAS" list assure the selection of the most correct. econoeicelly sub-
stantiated processes in relation to both problems of the long-range develop-
ﬂent of the sectorand the operational solution of problems arising in the '
course of fulfilment of the established plan.

it most ministries and departments the most important tasks solved within

the framework of the OAS!) are tasks of practical accounting and control, of
material and equipment supply, bookkeeping and analysis of economic activity
and tasks of technical and economic planning. One of the principal problems
in the development of the OASU consists in the accomplishment of optimal

tasks in planning on the basis of methods of mathematical programing. Requirm
is the development of economic-mathematical models of the functioning of the
sector as a whole. assuring optimisation of plans for the developent of
sectors of the national econuy. Needed is the developent of an optional
system of technical and economic indicators, which will create the prerequi-

sites tor work in the area of standardization and unification of documenta-
tion.

As an example we will amine the sector automated system of the Ministry
of lnstruent-lisking, Automation Equipent and Control Systems, "ASU-Prlbor"

[Avtoaatlsirowanmya sistema upravleniya otrasl'yu priborostroyenlya»
Automated Management System for the instrument-Making Sector] [6].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main tasks of "ASU-Pribor" are tasks of long-range and annual technical
and economic planning under the conditions of the new system of planning
and economic stimlation. The ”ASU-Pribor" system was constructed with con-
sideration of the existing structure and specialization of functional and
production administrations and embraces over 280 tasks of planning, account-
ing and analysis, distributed over 10 subsystem of the first line: long-
range planning, the development of the sector, technical and economic plan-
ning, operational control, control of material and equipent supply, control
of procurements, control of marketing, control of financial activity and
bookkeeping, planning, acoountng and analysis of labor and wages, and plan-
ning and personnel records.

Tasks in the improvement of control of capital construction, scientific

research work, quality of product, the technical servicing of production.
etc, are also solved in the second line of the system.

he subsystem "Long-range planning of the development of the sector" solves
four tasks: determination of the long-range requirements for production by
consolidated groups; the formation of alternativas of the development of
enterprises of the subsector; optimisation calculations of alternative long-
range plans of suhsectors; economic-mathematical analysis of calculations
and the working up of recoasaendations.

The subsystem "Technical and economic planning" includes four tasks of pro-
duction planning: determination of the optimi- production plans of the enter-
prises; determination of the production capacity of the enterprises; deter-
minat ion of the khozraschet indicators; calculation of the principal techni-
cal and economic indicators of the enterprises, which are solved twice a

year during the compilation of plans and the approval of plans for the fol-
lowing year.

The largest number of tasks is solved in the subsystem ”Operational control":
monthly analysis of fulfilment of the plans for profit, labor productivity,
capital construction, very important work on new technology, the production
of consumer goods and the number of personnel. The level of rhytiuicity of
sales of production is analysed every l0 days, and the fulfilment of the
plan for sales of finished producto-daily and on the basis of the results
for each month.

A comizination of the long-range and accountilu technical and economic indi-
cators of production serves as the informational base of the system. In the
subsystem of provision of information, methods have been worked out for the
organisation of data files and their storage and control, which assure an
interconnected solution of an entire group of tasks. 1his eliminates paral-
lelism and duplication of information in the f lies. The total volume of
information processed in the 1m ”ASU-Pribor" in the course of a year amounts
to about in million bits, and that issued by the administrative organization

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Oll OI'I'lCIM. U38 ONLY

of the linistryuto almost 336 million bits. The input data arrives from
enterprises and organisations of the sector on dost-ants of 9!. ferns.
Standardised operational aessages are translittcd by enterprises to the
scepter center over co—Iniceticn lines. 'ihe development of new documen-
tary fohs has been acceapanied by the exclusion of excessive intonation.
has the acownting and statistical reporting has been reduced by about
13.000 indicators in a year. and the ai-ary quotas for the expenditure of
asteriais and set-asking parts are now given in docuents in two for-s in-
stead of 38. in the systea S7 classifiers are used, including 30 local.

2 sector, 3 all-union and 20 intended for the ASUP.

Envisaged is the connection and interaction of the ”ASH-Pribor" with enter-

prise Ianagelent systels on s nor-ative base, data flows and tasks to be
solved.

A hardware couplex assures acccuplishlent of the collection. trans-lesion.
processing, storage, issuance and depiction of data in the sector Ianag-ent
eyste- and the connection of the "ASU-Pribor" with enterprises and organi-
cations of the sector.

”ﬂinch-22," BEN-I. and "lrai-ila" electronic captors were used in the first
line of ”ASH-Pribor." me use of third-generation cupiters in the second
line of the A80 per-its creating for the M80 mitiprocessor systels real-
ising, along with batch data processing, the autuatic input and output of
data in a line of co-inication. in that case one of the processors (or
group of processors) list be oriented toward batch data processing, and the
other toward the perfornnce of functions requiring work in a real tile scale.

A network of interconnected and informational points of ca-inication,
equipped with users' telegraphic installations. has been created for the
translission of operatilu inferntion to sector enterprises.

ADD-Ali teleaechanicai cquipent per-its data transmission over telephone

lines to a 31314-6 ccuputer fro. a user who records the data on perforated

tape. The trans-issicn is eccoqzolished by a 7-eielent code at a rate of
6004200 beads and with a reliability of transmission not worse than 10“.

The coupling equip-ant per-its feeding data to the capiter frua a cos-stator
of telephone co-inication channels (up to 66 channels) and frets data trans-
aission equipent over telephone channels (up to i6 channels) and the issu-
ance of data free: a ccnputer to those devices. During work with external
channels :11ng of progral interruption and turn off are used in the capiter.

Standard-reference intonation is sent to the GAS!) by enterprises by Iain
in the fora of f lies of perforated cards (sorted and checked) together with
lists of all the perforated cards printed on a tabulator. The annual volume

of input data of the subsysteia of technical and ohmic planning and analysis
of economic activity alone is equal to 0.16 3 l01 bits.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For visual depiction of intonation. portablo panels of the ”Ekran" type
are installed in the equipment of the ministry. they par-it workers of
tho organization to obtain from the ooqauter upon request information on
the screens of olootron-beal lnatruuonta.

The software of the ”ASU-Pribor“ represents a couple): of program for rogu-
lar too. For epocial aoftvaro it ia noceasary not only to develop program
for the solution of specific problems but also to assure the creation of
integrated data processing systems. in tho dovelopaent of an OASU the
designer needs neans of prone-ins: aovoral algorithlic languages and trans-
lators fro. thu, standard program of standard proceseins procedures and
cospillns system. The volt-o of aoftuare of tho firet line of tho ”ASU-
Pribor" ia 2l0,000 oosaaando. 'ihereforo in tho dovelopent of the GAS” auto-
notion of tho proxraaing not be used. The latter is envisaged in three
directions: the creation of libraries of standard progress of .standard data
proceasing procedures. the introduction of universal alsorithnic languages
and the development of standard planning solutions.

am the introduction of the ”ASU-Pribor” in the Hlnpribor, optilized plane
of ontorprisea. aubaectors and the sector as o uholo are being calculated.

Co-putor-created alternatives of drafts of production plane for l03 instru-
Ient-Iaking enterprises have confined the possibility of incneoaing the
output of production by 25 niilion rublea and the profit pier. by 9 Iillion
rubles. with additional capital investments totaling only 371.,‘000 rubles.

commrr: lzdatcl'stvo "Sovetekoyc radio", 1977

2171.
C80: 1870

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! ORIGIN. USE ONLY

umtcs AND ELECTRICAL ENGINBBRING

UDC 621.37/39.029.66.004:634
HICRWAVB RADIOHBTRY HERIODS AND THE "1031.91 01' ”REST AND FEAT FIRES

Moscow MIMI“ l mimonm in Russian No 10. 1978 pp 2120-2131
aanuscript received 29 Pier 78

[Article by lul’. Borodin. LN. Velendik and ms. Hironov]

[Text] A su-ary is given of the results of studies involving the use of
Iicrowave rsdionetry in solving problem of the fire protection of forests
and pest bogs. Inforlation is given on the nicrowave radiation of forest
fires. By scans of airborne nicrowave redioeeters it is possible to single
out clearly the key tactical sections of a fire under conditions of heavy
snake. Bxperiesntally obtained spectru- curvee are presented for the absorp-
tion coefficient and radiating power of pest. An estiaste is given of the
sicrowsve radiation spectre of peat piles with latent hazardous heat sources.
A deconstrstion is given of the fundanentel possibility of estineting the
fire hazard level of areas covered with forests and pest bogs by spectral
neasuranents of their radiating power.

Introduction

'orest and pest fires cone under the heading of hydrousteorologicsl phenouna
vhich are especially hazardous for the national econony. which has predetermined
the urgency of the objective of finding efficient nethods of detecting end
lapping fires under coqlex weather conditions with the existence of the lashing
effect of snake. Under the heading of problem of first-level isportence lust
certainly cone the problem of estimating the fire hazard of forest areas in
good tin and reliably, us well as the deteninntien of sections of peat bogs
and pest piles having deep spaces with critical heating.

Hodern eerospace end nubile rediophysicel equipnent sets it possible to use
for the purpose of solving the nbove-nenticned problems lethods based on the
reception of the self-radiation and reflected radiation of natural fornntions
in the sicrowsve [1-2. 11-13, 19]. In [6-6. 9-10] and optical [3] bands.

Of course. the varying conditions of irrediance of subjects of study have

practically no influence on the results of aerospace neasurenents in the

nicrvwave band. Iadiowsves in the S!!! and our hands have coaparatively good
12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

penetrating power through clouds. aerosols (smoke) and ground covers. At
the same time definite difficulties are encountered in making measurements
in the microwave band with high angular resolution. as well as in obtaining
"microwave photographs" of large areas with a good degree of detail. Let us
point out that quite serious is the problem of efficient documentation and
analysis of microwave, IR and optical images of the underlying surface. as
well as matching them with sketch measurements and a map.

Research by microwave radiometric methods on burning forests and pest bogs.
from on board an aircraft laboratory. was begun in the outskirts of Moscow
in the summer of 1972, during the time of the outbreak of large-scale forest
and pest fires.

5mm 1)
H
M
O DI
mum ‘)
m
W

 

Figure l. Radioluminancs Temperature Profiles with an 0.8 cm Have.
Obtained in Flights: a--ovsr a series of burning piles;
bo-over a burning peat bog; c--over a forest fire in peat
bogs. The lSO'K levels are the gauge levels (obtained in
flying over a water surface).

Key:'
1. Ty; - luminance temperature

In fig 1 are shown rsdioluminance temperature profiles for burning piles of
peat. a peat bog and a section of a forest in a pest bog, obtained from on
board an lL-lb aircraft laboratory in the area of Shstura in 1972. by means
of an 0.8-cm-band radiometer. The increase in the radioluminsnee temperature
in the first case was 100 to ZOO'K. in the second 100 to 300'K and in the
third 30 to 70°K [1-2].

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results gotten in 1972 stimulated theoretical and experimental studies
aiaed at revealing the radiophyaical essence and microwave characteristics
of sources of forest and pest fires, at studying the radiophysical charac-
teristics of peat and the soil cover. at studying the screening properties
of treetops and smoke, and at developing remote methods of revealing sections
of peat bogs having deep spaces with critic. heating. as well as methods of
making a non-contact estimate of the moisture content of the soil cover under
a forest coverandin open areas. as one of the most important characteristics
of the fire hazard of forest and peat bog areas ll-2.ll-lb.l9l.

0n the applied level this research has proven useful, first for precisely
defining the place of radiophysicsl aethods in the problem of protecting
forests and peat from fire, and second for developing recommendations on

the future furnishing of forest patrol aircraft with radiophysieal equipment
for the purpose of determining the location and key characteristics of fires
under conditions of heavy smoke and screening by the forest, as well as for
the purpose of making an objective estimate of the fire hazard of individual
sections of large areas.

1. Microwave Radiation of Forest Fires

In the absence of fire. the radioluminsnce temperature of a dense forest is
close to the thermodynamic temperature of the air at the level of the treetops,
and its radiating power equals 0.92 to 0.99 [7.8.20], i.e., differs but slightly
from the radiating power of an absolutely black body.

Above a burning forest the intensity of microwave radiation increases, and

the mechanism for formation of the radiation, just as the amount of the increase
in radioluminance, depends on many factors. and. primarily, on the kind of fire
(low-level, high-level and underground (‘1).

In a fleeting low-level fire increases in the radioluminance temperature over
the burning area are not too high, since the underlying surface does not get
to burn, and the screening influence of the treetops for microwave radiation
is considerable. Radioluminance contrast increases in sparsely wooded areas
and in open areas where grass and windfallen trees are burning.

A change in the fire from a fleeting low-level one to a steady one. and even
more so to an underground one. is accompanied by a rise in the luminance tem-
perature as a consequence of a growth in the role of the radiation of the heated
soil and of the burning topsoil cover. as well as of the flames' radiation.

The radioluminance temperatures of sections of high—level fires rise consider-
ably. which is related to the high burning intensity. a drastic reduction in
the screening cover of the forest and smoke. and also the presence in the
convection colunn above the fire of a considerable number of particles which
continue to burn (pieces of charcoal. twigs, pine needles. and the like).

Taking into account the features of the propagation of SR? and BHF rndiowaves
in different media (depth of penetration of electromagnetic energy into the

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ground, influence of solid carbon particles on the flame's radiation spectrum).
it is possible to expect an increase in radioluminsnce contrast of fires above
the surrounding non—burning background as the wavelength is shortened in the
0.8 to 2 cm range. which has been confirmed by model estimates and experimental
resu ts.

In [12] calculations were made of the radiation spectrum of the source of a
fire screened by a layer of smoke and treetops. The basic results were gotten
on the supposition that the flame.smokeand treetops represent distinctly
separate homogeneous layers filled with particles which are small as compared
with the wavelength. with known temperature and dielectric constant. In parti-
cular. the complex dielectric constant of the particles filling the "treetop“
layer was selected as close to the dielectric constant of fresh water.

An analysis of this model, taking the results of [8] into account, has shown
that the radiating power of the flame in tho microwave bend increases with

an increase in the size and concentration of the particles and the height of
the flame. and also with a shortening of the wavelength at which measurements
are made. The screening effect of the smoke trail increases as the thickness
of the smoke layer and the size and concentration of the smoke particles in-
crease, and as the wavelength is shortened. Finally, the weakening effect of
the forest on the microwave radiation of the flames grows intensely with short-
ening of the wavelength and an increase in the degree of intertwining among
treetops.

Numerical estimates made while taking into account the above limitations have
shown that "flame - snoke - treetop" (low-level fire) and "flame-smoke" (high-
level fire) models lead to identical results in the sense of the existence of
a radiating power maximum in the 0.8 to 1.5 cm range. Furthermore, the value
of the radiating power (with an extreme wavelength) varies in the first case
within the range of 0.6 to 0.2. and in the second within the range of 0.95

to 0.6. It should be mentioned that with smoke particle dimensions smaller
than 10 microns their influence on flame radiation in the microwave band is
negligibly slight.

The screening influence of treetops was estimated on the assumption of small
(as compared with the wavelength) sizes of “filling particles." Taking into
account the dissipation of radiation for a nedium filled with long thin cylin-
ders (needles of coniferous trees) results in a 10 to 30 percent adjustment

in the attenuation factor. -

In fig 2 are given examples of brightness temperature profiles for one and
the same fire source. obtained by means of an airborne 1.35-cn-band radiometer.

The pattern in fig 2a refers to the case of flying over the source of the
fire at an altitude of 150 m in the direction of spreading of the smoke trail.
Here three areas of the source are clearly delineated: the rest. the burnt-
out section and the front of the fire. The front of the fire establishes the
area with the greatest increase in brightness temperature (60 to 70’K). Then

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cones an area in which the increase in brightness telperature is reduced to
10 to lS’K; this is the burnt-out section. The increase in brightness tempera-
ture ever the rear of the fire is 20 to SO'K.

In fig 2b are given the results of en-route aessureaents of brightness teapers-
ture free the sane altitude of 150 a, but while flying over the fire in the
direction perpendicular to the snake trail. llere are clearly delineated in
addition two other tactical sections of the fire-its left and right flanks.
The increases in brightness teaperature of these two burning areas are approxi-
aately equal to one another and mount to a value on the order of 60'K. The
burntout section has the sac characteristics as in the case in fig 2a.

M) J‘rL/n
has ”can ”run loud
gnu on»:
201

a) b)

Figure 2. Profiles of Rise in Brightness Teqacrature with a 1.35 ea
Have. Gotten Hhile Flying Over the Source of a Low-Level
Fire: amslong snolre trail; b—scross snake trail

Key: -
1. Rear 3. Right flank
2 . Front 6 . Left flank

The brightness teeperature profiles shown in fig 2 are characteristic of steady
low-level fires. which are described by the follwing key traits.

The width of the intensely burning edge of the fire around its outline varies
within the range of l to 3 n.

The rate of spreading of the front edge of the fire equals 1 to 2 n/ain. of the
flanks 0.6 to 1 I/ein, and. finally, the rate of advance of the rear edge of
the fire is within the range of 0.2 to 0.6 Islam.

The anxiet- height of the flales at the front edge of the fire reaches 1 to 2 a,
and 0.3 to 0.6 a on the flanks and in the rear.

The rise in the flues' themdynaaic temperature at the fire's edge equals
800 to 900'K. At the sale tine the rise in the theraodynaaic temperature of

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

the topsoil cover and the soil's surface layer at the fire's burntout section
equals '10 to 80 nnd 10 to 25‘K. respectively.

Fires with these characteristics originate. for exasple, in areas covered with
dried-up standing dark conifer forest tisber with nosaic interspereing of
leafed and dark conifer sections of the forest. These sections are character-
ized by the following supplies of combustible materials: topsoil cover dry
mgr-4.5 to 0.9 kg/IZ; deadwood trees end dead standing wood—100 to 150

I: ha.

     

in W 2.15 1.0: 3,.

Figure 3. Averaged Spectral Characteristics of Tactical Sections of
a Fire: l--front; 2—left flank: 3--right flank; durear;
5—burnout section

In fig 3 are given spectral characteristics. averaged for a series of approaches,’

of rises in the rsdioluainance temperatures of the front, flanks, rear and
burntout section of a fire. These results were gotten by averaging the next-
aua values of rsdioluninance rises recorded in flying over different sections
of the sane source with different courses. The total error in neesuring the
redioluninsnce contrast of the averaged data does not exceed Z‘K.

In fig 3 attention is drawn by the presence of a mrlted maximal in the radia-
tion spectrum of the fire's rear with a wave close to 1.3 en in length.

An analysis of the dimensions of experimentally obtained profiles of the type
shown in fig 2 has shown that in many cases the size of the response fron the
front, flanks and rear of the fire at the level of the underlying surface and

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe ORIGIN. 088 0.1.7

at the level of 0.5 iron the anti- considerably exceeds the dimensions of
the antenna spot at the 0.5 level. This fact testifies to the fact that the
intensely burning edge of the fire, 2 to 3 a wide. is far has the sole factor
deternining the intensity of the aim radiation of the source of the fire.
Judging fro- the uperinental data. a considerable (if not the min) contribu-
tion to radiation characteristics nut be do by the burning topsoil cover and
the heated soil.

0a the basis of the data obtained the conclusion cm be drawn that it is
possible to use the nicrowave nethod for the purpose of delineatm the out-
lines of forest fires ad estinating the intensity with which they are burning
by ears of shuttle flights over fires [ll]. The use of airborne aicrowave

and n seaming equip-ant will nke it possible to solve the prohlen of charting
large forest fires concealed by thick snake with Iininl expuditures of tine.

The inert-lee of developing effective nethods for codpating forest fires
dictates the need to nabs fnoa on board an airplane eoaplex reaote neasureaents
of the characteristics of fires being nonitored lid to aware their results with
synchronous quantitative ground observations of the thernodynaaic and other para-
aeters of sources.

2. Microwave Self-ladiation of Peat Structures

The problen of detecting and preventing a peat fire is closely related to the
ability to estinte the teqerature ad noisture content profile of peat struc-
turea. The solution to this probl- by aicrowave radio-attic aethods as applied
to different types of soil and subsoil has been discussed in a nuier of papers
(cf.. e.g., [7,8,16,171).

Of course, for the purpose of esti-ting the teqerature and aoisture content
characteristics of a nediu it is necessary first of all to how its radiating
power, r0) , ad absorption coefficient. 10) .

The radiating power of peat, as of other types of soil and subsoil, is a func-
tion of the dielectric properties of the nediun and the roughness of the sur-
face. In turn, the dielectric properties of the nediu depend on the noisture
content, density, and granule-uric and nineralogical mition.

The absorption coefficient is also deternined by the dielectric properties of
the aediun. The radiating power and absorption coefficient depend on the wave-
length, viewing angle and polarization of the detected radiation.

A deteraination was node of the radiating power of peat in the A - 0.8 to

60 ca wavelength range by neasuring the radioluainance temperature of an
evenly aoistened and evenly heated peat pile whose dinensiona were considerably
greater than the dinensions of the ”spot" of the main lobe of the antenna.

The moisture content and thernodynanic characteristics of the peat pile were
aonitored by contact nethods [19]. The results of processing the erperinental
data are given in fig lo. It follows froa these curves that the radiating power

18

FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of peat with a noisture content of 60 to 80 percent has a minim in the 10

to 20 cu range. rurthermore. this nininum is more extreme the greater the
moisture content.

 

Figure ‘. Spectral Characteristics of the deiating Power of Pent with

Moisture Content by "eight of: 1—65 percent; 2-56 percent;
3—67 percent; 6-08 percent

‘ annoy/n 1)
50

  

uo- 9.93

7 '0 20 30 ‘01,!"

Figure 5. Spectral Characteristics of Absorption Coefficient in Peat
with Itoieture Content by "eight of: 1-400 percent; 2-53
percent; 3--63 percent; 6—70 percent; 5--73 percent

Key:
1. y. nepera/m

Let us note that the presence of a minimum in the rsdioluminnnce temperature
spectrum of peat structures was confirmed during the course of measure-ems

of the microwave self-radiation of peat boss from an Jib-18 aircraft laboratory
[13].

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In fig 5 are shown curves characterizing the behavior of the absorption co-
efficient of peat in the 7 to 60 cm wavelength range [13,19]. These curves
were obtained by measuring the relative level of thermal radioemission of a
layer of peat laid onto a thin sheet of radiotransmissive material placed above
an antenna aimed into the sky. The absorption coefficient was computed on the
basis of experimental data, utilizing the equations for the radiating power of
a laminar medium in [15].

An analysis of the experimental spectra of the absorption coefficient in peat
has shown that, as in soil and subsoil, it increases with an increase in the
moisture content of peat and with shortening of the wavelength. The inverse
value of the absorption coefficient characterizes the depth of penetration of
an electromagnetic wave into pest, and, consequently, the ability to indicate
a change in temperature within the pile. For example, it follows from the
curves in fig 5 that with a fixed moisture content of w I 60 percent the
depth of penetration of the wave increases approximately fivefold as the wave-
length changes from 7 to 60 cm. A 40 to 73 percent increase in the moisture
content of pest is accompanied by an approximately 2.5- to threefold reduction
in the depth of penetration.

One of the promising trends in seeking an explanation of the experimentally
established fact of a reduction in the radiating power of peat in the 10 to

20 cm wavelength range is the trend involving the theory of dissipation of
electromagnetic radiation in internal inhomogeneities of a medium with high
hygroscopicity. Furthermore, of interest are studies of the problem of the
dissipation of electromagnetic radiation caused both by the structural inhomo-
geneity of pest (lumps, fibers, etc.) and by spatial fluctuations in its dielec-

tric constant.

Let us assume that a pest medium represents a laminar structure, and the di-
electric constant of each layer differs but slightly from the mean value.
Let us assume also that fluctuations in the dielectric constant are of a
random nature and are characterized by a correlation function of the form:

B(h) -0’ exp [—h/II.
(1)

where o2 is the variance of the dielectric constant and i is the correla-
tion interval.

~

With these assumptions, based on the results of [21], it is possible to find
an equation for estimating the radiating power of an isothermal medium:

 

 

1—r
xI- .__m.:::::::;::::::=
1'l[1-'.(1mnl)]
(2)
20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hare r is the Fresnel reflection coefficient with the mean value of the
dielectric constant: 7 in the component of the absorption coefficient
cnused by heat losses: l in the wavelength in free space: and n is the
eenn value of the mediun‘s refractive index.

 

i0 20 30 40 30 k,“

Figure 6. Spectral Curves for Radiating Power of a Peat Pile with
Moisture Content by Height of; l--45 percent; circles--
experimental data; 2--53 percent: triangles-~experiaental
data: J--78 percent: squares--experinental data

 

5. 0' a,"

Figure 7. Tenperature and noisture Content Profiles of Cold (1) and
heated (2) Sections of a Peat Pile

Having specified the aoisture content and mean value of the dielectric constant
of peat. as veil as the values of the absorption and refraction coefficients
corresponding to then (fig 5). it is possible. by salpling values of l and

o2 , to reach the point where the shape of spectral curve (2) agrees vith the
experimental data on the radiating power of peat. In fig 6 the results of these
calculations are given for three values of the noisture content of peat.

Here it turned out that the value of o2 (l) grows with an increase in the mean
value of the dielectric constant. which. in turn, increases as the moisture con-
tent increasea. At the same time, the value of paraneter l is lowered with

an increase in loisture content, which is physically explicable (bonds between
peat particles result. when veakened. in reduction of sizes of their associations.)

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR thlCllh USE ONLY

The relatively great difference in the calculated and experimental curVea
in fig 6 in the shortwave region can be explained by the dependence. not
taken into account. of the dielectric constant on wavelength.

further experimental and theoretical research aimed at explaining the anomaly
discovered in the self-radiation spectrum of peat bogs has been quite promising
from the viewpoint of refining mmiern views on the mechanism for the formation

of radiothermml emission in fibrous. porous and spongy media whicharenon-uniform
in terms of depth. including heterogeneous media with high hygroscopicity.

J. Indication of Deep Sources of Self-heating in Peat Piles

The eaintence of changes in the thermodynamic temperature of a medium can be
estimated from the spectrum of variations in brightness temperature. As a
first approximation. the brightness temperature. T (l) , at the wavelength,
A . is determined by the equation in llbl: ya

 

7: MM 7-"
a” , . ____ _._ _ + +I l .
am “Mr ‘ 1.4M [' 350.) mm 'H}

(3)

C
where To . T' and T" are the values of the thermodynamic temperature pro-
file and of iYs first 2nd second derivatives at the surface; yofl) and 76(l)
are the values of the absorption coefficient and its derivative at the sur-
face: and J1(l) is the remainder.

Equation (3) way arrived at as the result of very simple transforms of the
energy transport integral (threefold integration by parts) [l&,l9l.

From equation (1) a calculation was made of the radioluminance temperature
spectra for self-radiation of a pile for two different lava of variation of

the temperature and moisture content of peat with depth (cf. fig 7). Values

of the radiating power and absorption coefficient were found from the curves

in figs 5 and 5. The results of calculations of T are given in fig 8
(curves l and 2). Here also are given the experimexfal values of radiolum‘nanre
temperatures. as well as the limits of the measurement error and systematic
errors (Vertical segments). The maximum difference in radiolualnance tempera-
tures between the cold and heated sections of a pile. on the order of ZO'K.

is observed in the UN? wavehand.

Analysis of the data obtained shows that the microwave self-radiation spectrum
of peat depends essentially on the distribution by depth of the poet's tempera-

ture and moisture content.

This fact can serve as the basis for developing non—contact methods of indi-
cating the temperature and moisture content characteriatics of peat piles.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

5,1
2
m

“0

220
UlﬂNJOWIOA.“

figure 8. Spectral Curves of Mdiolusinance “operators of Cold (1)
and ﬂoated (2) Sections of a Pile: solid curves-calculation
results; vertical ssrka-enperisental data

unfortunately. the solution to this prohlea has encountered a number of diffi-
culties. associated with the existence of masking phenomena and effects.
Primarily. let us note that. according to visual observations and the data of
contact measurements. the structure of the top layer of past in piles up to

a depth of at least 50 ca is rather varied. here is observed the alternation
of interlayera of dry and wet peat. whose thickness varies free one section

of the pile to another. Furthermore. the process of self-heating is accom-
panied in asny instances by an increase in the noiature content of peat before
the cone of the self-heating source. which is related to the condensation of
water vapors diffused from the noxious heating sons (the source "expels" the
Ioisture). cf. fig 7. This fact. on one hand, results in equalization of the
Ioieture content of interlayera of past in the surface layer (intensification
of the aoisture transport process). and on the other causes a reduction in
radiating power at the longwave end of the spectrum for those sections of pest
piles in which depthvise changes in teaperature are observed.

Pinslly. let us note that the existence of a ainilun in pest's radiation
spectral also complicates the solution to the problem of indicating depthwise
te-perature anomalies in past piles.

i. Fire Iiatard Level

The fire hazard of forest areas is determined by the moisture content of the
topsoil and vegetation cover. with a critical moisture content (less than

25 percent) of dead vegetation. mosses. lichens and other conductors of con-
bustion [22.23]. favorable conditions are created for the origin and spreading
of a low-level fire. At the same tine. uith a treetop aoisture content of less
than 80 percent. the serious threat arises of the low-level fire‘s becoming a
high-level one. which represents the greatest hazard. both free the viewpoint
of the rate of the fire‘s spreading. and also from the viewpoint of the de-
struction of forest flora and fauna.

23

ron OFFICIAL US! ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

figure 9. Spectral Characteristics of Burnt Clearinga (Dot and Dash
Line). Peat (Solid Curves) and Sphagnua (Dotted Line) Dogs
in the Process of Drying Out and Being Hettad by Pre-
cipitation: l-during rain; 2-after heavy rain; J—two
26-hour periods after rain

for the purpose of estinating the fire hazard (eatilating the Ioiature content
of colbustion conductors). at the present tine indirect lethods are elployed.
involving the analysis of weather station data. in particular. on precipitation
for a specific period of tine [28.26-272. T..f;.-:-.::.:.::.37, the use of all these
lethoda for the purpose of estiaating the fire hazard in the practice of forest
conservation does not lead to perceptible results. In the Ileanwhile, no funds-
lental difficulties have been encountered in directly estianting the misture
content of "open" forest areas of the glade and bog type. etc., by neasuring
the Iicrowave self-radiation spectrum free on board an airplane. For exmle.
in fig 9 are shown curves illustrating the changes in the spectral character-
istics of bogs and glades (burnt clearings) in the process of drying out and
being vetted by precipitation. These data. obtained in 1977 frols on board an
IL-la airborne laboratory. testify to the feasibility of employing microwave
radio-etrie Iethods for the purpose of estiuting the noisture content of the
topsoil cover and the moisture supply of bogs (ground water level). Let us
pay attention to the presence of a brightness telpernture ninimn in the
radiation spectrun of a peat bog with lo to 20 ca waves and of a minimum at the
shortwave end of the radiation spectrun of a sphagnun bog.

26

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dependence of these spectra on weather conditions is clearly traced in
fig 9.

Finally. let us stress that the detection of overly moistened sections of
forest areas. as well as knowledge of the ground water level in bogs. are
decisive both in estimating the fire hazard of svanpy forests. and in evalua-
ting factors hindering the spread of local forest fires to large areas [28.29].

For the purpose of obtaining quantitative relationships objectively estimating
the fire hazard of typical forest sections. intensification of experimental
and theoretical research is needed. Useful here are the lethods and results
described in [7.11.13.16.17].

Bibliography

1. Artenov. V.T.. Basharinov. A.Ye.. Borodin. L.P.. Bulatnikov. V.L.. Yegorov,
8.1. and hishenev. V.P. "Radioluninance Characteristics of Various Natural
Formations" in ”XXIV Hezhdunarodnyy Astronavticheskiy Kongress. Teeisy"
[24th international Astronautical Conu:ess. Theses], VINITI. 1973.

2. Artenov. V.T.. Baaharlnov. A.Ye.. Borodin. L.F.. Bulatnikov. V.L.. Yegorov.
8.1. and hishencv. V.P. "Measure-eat of Microwave Radiation of Ground
Covers From on Board on Airplane in Areas of Burning of Forest Stands and
Peat Bogs" in "Issledovaniye prirodnoy sredy kossicheskiai sredstvasi”
[Investigation of the Natural Environment by Space Facilities]. VINITI. 1.
1974.

3. linseruan. 8.". "Forest Fire Protection." Hashington, 1969.

6. Artsybashev. Ye.s. "Lesnyye pozhary i bor’ba s nini" [Forest Fires and
Fighting Then]. Izdatel'stvo Lasnaya proayshlennost'. 1976.

S. Artsybashev. Ye.s.. Hel'nikov, V.P. and Shilin. B.V. "Infrared Photography
of Forest Fires Fro. High-Altitude Aircraft and Artificial Barth Satellites."
LBSNOYE KNOZYAYSTVO. No S. 1971.

6. Artsyboshev. re.s.. Kuz'ain. V.D.. Orlov. 0.K.. Poluarshinov. V.A..
Safronov, Yu.P.. Stershinov. 3.8.. rel'nykh. v.1. and Yakovlav. A.I.
"Investigation of Infrared Radiation of Models of Forest Fires." LESNOYB
KHOZYAYSTVO. No 10. 1976.

7. Basharinov, A.Ye.. Curvich. A.s. and Yegorov. S.T. "Radioizlucheniye
Zelli kak planety" [Radioesission of Earth as a Planet]. lsdatel'stvo
Nauka. 1976.

B. Baaharinov. A.Ye.. Tuchkov. L.T.. Polyakov. v.a. and Ananov. N.l. “Iz-

Icreniyc radioteplovykh i plazlennykh izlucheniy" [heasurenent of Radio-
ther-al and Plasma Radiation]. Izdatal'stvo Sovetskoye Eadie. 1968.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lo.

11.

1.. O

13.

1‘.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20 .

21.

22.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

linenlw. V.I.. D'yaehenko, I..ﬂ.. Kondrot'yev. K.Yo. and Chernenko. A.P.
"Detection of Sources: oi Conhustion oi Snail Size by [it Photography
“Rhoda." mm 000. Gidmmteoiuint, 80 275. 1.972.

Binenko. V.1.. D'yochenko, I..N., Kondrnt'yev. K.Yo. and Cherneako, ILP.
”Infrared Charting of Large Yorest Fires." TRUDY coo. Gidrooeteoizdst.
lb 275. 1972.

Borodin, LJ. and Hitnilt. In". ”Ruote Indication of Forest Fires by
Ricrovave Mdiomtry Nethodo," 1.3590“ KIIOZYAYSTVO, No 6, 1977.

Borodin. L.P.. Kirdynohev. K.P.. StskanIdn. YMJ’. and Chukhinntsev. ILA.
MDIOTEKIIIIM 1 mm, Vol 21. No 9. 1976. p 1945.

Borodin. L.P.. Vaiendik. Bah. Venelov. A.P.. Gorshkov. V.V.. Kironov. ms.
and Stoknnltin. Yud’. 0010.. M SSSR. Vol 238, No 3. 1978.

Borodin. L.P.. xii-0v. V.V. nnd Staknnkin, Yu.P. "$er Canonical Repre-
sentutiono of lladionetric Problem" in "Terisy VII Vsesoyuznogo silpoziuus
po probie-e izbytochnosti v infomtsionnykh sistmkh" [Theses of the
Seventh Ail-Union Sylposio- on the Noble-I of Redundancy in Information

System]. 1977. pp 6-8.

Brekhovskikh, LJI. "Volny v nIoistykh sredslth" [Haven in Laminar Media].
Izdatel'ntvo Nnuka, 1973.

Kondrot'yev. K.Ia.. Helent'yev. V.V.. Rabinovich. YuJ. et a1. 0010.. AN
8583. Vol 208. No 2. 1973. p 362.

Kondrot'yev. K.Is.. Shui'gina. Yeah, Pokrovskiy, 0.". et :11. ”Capabilities
for Remote Sounding of Soil in the Slli‘ Band," TRUDY GOO, Gidroneteoizdat.

No 295, 1973. pp 86-97.

Nedzhitov, RM. “Neteorologichesltiye polmuteii gorinosti ieaa on terri-
torii Belorussii" lﬂeteoroiogiesl Indicators of the Forest Fire Hazard in
the Territory of Belorussie]. Gidroncteoizdat. 1969.

Hitnik. LIL, Borodin. L.P., Hironov, A.S. and Stnkankin, Yu.P. "Study
of Thu-o1 Conditions of Pest Piles and Peat Boga by the Microwave Radio-
Ietry nethod," NEWMAYA PRMSWST', h'o b, 1977.

Stnelin, 0.“. PROS. IBBE. Vol 57, No lo, 1969.

Teens, L. and Kong. J.A. RAD. SCIENCE. V01 10. No 12, 1975. p 1025.

Kurhntskiy. 11.“. "Determination of Fire Hazard Level in Forests."
LESNOYH KIIOZYAYSTVO. No 7. 1957.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kurbatskiy. ILN. "Investigation of the Quantity and Properties of
Codmstibla Forest Heterisls" in "Voprosy lesnoy pirologii" [Questions
of Forest Fyrolosyl. Krasnoysrsk. 1970. pp 5-57.

Nesterov. v.c. "Gorinost' less i notody yeyo opredeleniys" [Forest Fire

"nerd and Methods of Deter-lining It]. Goslesbunizdst. Hoscow and Leningrad.
1949.

Zhdanlto. V.A. "Fundamentals of Determining Fire llszsrd in the Forest
as a Function of Heather." LBSNOYF KHOZYAYSTVO, No 6. 1960.

Dandre. B.L. "Experiment in Constructing a Fire ﬂszard Scale and a New
Type of Fire unzard Classes." LESNOYE KHOZYAYSTVO. No 11. 1953.

Ksshin. K.I. "Forest Fire Hazard Level." HETEOROLOGIYA I GIOROLOOIYA.
No l. 1951.

Furyayev, V.V. ”Influence of the Ground water Level on the Fire Matura-
tion of Swampy and Boggy Foresta in the Ket'-Chulynskiy Interfluve" in
“Voprosy lesnoy pirologii." Kresnoyersk, 1920.

"llllans. 0.3. FOREST. CHRONICLE. Vol 30, No 4, 1956. p 15.

COPYRIGRT: Izdatel'stvo Neuka, RADIOTEKRNIKA I BLEKTRONIKA. 1978

8831
680:

8166/0656

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS. ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

SOYUZ VENICLR'S PARACNUTB BRAKING SYSTEM DESCRIBED
Paris AIR 8 COSMOS in French ll Nov 78 pp 51. 56
[Article by Serge Berg)

[Text] The parachute braking system oftheSoyuz vehicle and its operation
are described for the first time in AVIATZIA I KOSHONAVTIKA, monthly pub-
lication of the military air forces of the USSR (September issue). The
article was written by the very one who designed the system. N. Lobanov,
doctor of technical sciences. and laureate ofthedenin Prize and other state
prizes.

The function of the parachute braking system is to reduce the speed of the
Soyuz from 260 meters per second (866 kilometers per hours). at about 12
kilometers altitude. to some 6 meters per second (29 [sic--21.6] kilometers
per hour) near the ground when the Soyuz puts down on the earth; Lobsnov
resinds his readers that the vehicle can also put down at sea.

If everything proceeds normally the braking sequence is as follows: The
braking parachute (with area of only 14 square meters) deploys at about
11.000 to 9,000 meters altitude by virtue of small extracting parachutes
which are themselves deployed after ejection of the parachute container lid
(controlled by a barometric device). when the descent velocity of the Soyuz
cabin is not more than 90 netersper second (324 kilometers per hour) the
braking parachute extracts, from the container. the main parachute which
progressively unfolds. The braking parachute detaches itself from the main
parachute. In 6 seconds the speed is reduced to 35 meters per second (126
kilometers per hour) and the main parachute is then fully deployed.

The area of the sain parachute is 1,000 square meters; it is folded inside
a container of 0.3 cubic meters. The maximum load to which the main para-
clmte is subjected does not exceed 13 tons. "hen the main parachute is

fully deployed explosive bolts eject the thermal shield which protects the
lower portion of the cabin exposed to the thermal flux of reentry; this

shield. incidentally, covers the nozzles of the retro-rockets which provide
final braking of the cabin in order to assure soft contact with the ground.

FOR OFgﬁCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After ejection of the thermal shield there occurs a rebalsncing of the cabin
upon two symmetrical suspension lines; the cabin than assumes a vertical
position instead of the inclined one it previously assumed. At about 1.5
meters from the ground the motors of the cabin retro-rockets are automatical-
ly ignited. Finally, the cosmonauts cause one of the parachute suspension
lines to be Jettisoned so that the parachute cannot fill with wind like a
sail and drag the cabin if there is considerable wind on the ground.

In the event of accident emergency procedures are provided.

If the main parachute container lid does not open at the planned altitude.
Lobanov explains. an automatic control causes the container of the reserve
parachute to open and it fully deploys in 6 seconds; its area is 574 square
meters (container volume 0.2 meter). As the reserve parachute will open

at a lower altitude when the relative speed of the cabin will be lower it is
not necessary to utilize a braking parachute. however, since the area of
the reserve parachute is half that of the main parachute the cabin's land-
ing speed before ignition of the retro-rockets will be greater-~8 to 11

meters per second (29 to 40 kilometers per hour). The lending is therefore
rougher but not dangerous. Lebanov states.

It might also happen that the braking parachute does not cause emergence and
deployment of the main parachute; for example. because of damage to the
braking parachute, or blocking of the main parachute as the result of de-
formation of the container due to abrupt change in pressure when the con-
tainer lid is ejected. when that occurs the interior pressure of the con-
tainer equslyzes with that of the surrounding atmosphere and the walls of
the container are subjected to a load of 10 to 11 tons per square meter.
Depending upon the altitude at which the lid is ejected the pressure drop
can cause a load of S to 6 tons per square meter. In such case, 24 seconds
after the beginning of the sequence. the braking parachute is going to be
separated from the main parachute, then enabling the reserve parachute to
be deployed.

Provision has also been made for the possibility of incomplete deployment
of the main parachute although that eventuality is extremely remote. In
such event a device enables the main parachute to be detached from the cabin,
enabling the reserve parachute to be extracted and deployed.

Finally. if there is a breakdown of the landing retro-rockets. the cabin
would then touch the ground at a speed of 6 meters per second if there is
no wind. or 6 meters per second if there are ascending currents. or 8 to 9
meters per second if the currents are descending. ho emergency device has
been provided for this case. The shock will be more or less rough (depend-
ing upon the nature of the ground) but will be in part compensated by the
shock absorbers attached to the cosmonauts' seats.

lobanov also reminds his readers that the Soyuz vehicle has a rescue system
(SAS) for the crew in the event of malfunction of the rocket at take-off.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The SAS actors then separate the vehicle fro. the rocket and project it to
the sideurather high-4n order that the two extraction parachutes (which
are of different areas), and then the eain parachute can be deployed.

 

Diagram of operation of parachute braking systee of the
Soyuz vehicle. l--Descent nodule of the Soyuz, 2--Para-
chute container lid ejection, 3--Large area extraction
parachute. Ions-all area extraction parachute, Suaraking
parachute. 6--Separation of braking parachute and emergency
of aain parachute, 7--Hain parachute begins to fill.

8--Depioynant ofmin parachute, 9--Ejection of thermal shield,
lO--llebalsncing of capsule on synetrical suspension lines and
co-enceeent of transmission by the radio locator beacon (at-
tached to suspension lines), ll-oisnition of retro-rockets for
soft landing, lZnUnt’astening of half the straps of the main
parachute.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS. ASTRONOMY AND SPACE USSR

P'BAKTNROUGH IN RBADAPTATION OF COSHONAUTS T0 GRAVITY DISCUSSED
Paris AIR & COSHOS in Preach ll Nov 78 pp 54-55
[Article by Albert Ducrocq]

[Text] For the first time since the beginning of the space age the Soviets
have announced in advance the termination date of a flight in which only
their own cosmonauts were involved.

This confirms our opinion that they now have their equipaent--that of the
station as well as that of the Soyuz-very well under control.

It was a rather new Soyuz which was at the disposition of Kovalenok and
Ivanchenkov. the Soyuz 31 in this case. which Bykovskiy and Jahn left for
then. And it is a Soyuz which Kovalenok and Ivanchcnkov had the opportunity
of testing on 7 September on the occasion of the asneuver whose result was
to transfer the vehicle free the rear docking port to the forward docking
port. Not only do the Soviet space cabins now appear to have attained the
degree of reliability of the Americans but obviously the Soviets have in

no way relaxed their safety standards.

Undoubtedly this situation inspires an observation. There are insistent
ruaora of the forthcoeing utilization by the Soviets of a more spacious
vehicle than the Soyuz. having from three to six places, and able to return
in gliding flight, a vehicle which would be rather siailar in its design
and utilization to the one now under study by two French companies with a
view toward eventual piloted flights which will one day cone about with an
evolved version of the Arianc [Ariadne]. Certainly the Soviets are readying
a new piloted vehicle but we would be surprised if for all that they were
to abandon. in the near future. the Soyuz which they have taken so such
trouble to develop. and whose foraula, consisting of lodging a crew in
nininun space inside a cabin whose coepactness assures its mechanical
integrity, one say assuee in any event will be retained.

32

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hell Prepared Return

The return of Soyuz 31 appears not only to have been effected under excel-
lent conditions but also to have been remarkably precise. A course cor-
rection had been made in due time. by using the Proprens I: as a locowtive.
in order to give the trace of the orbit the optimum situation. This preci-
sion of the return was necessary for obvious medical reasons: the experts
wanted to be able. as quickly as possible. to examine the cosmonauts after
they had regained the earth's gravity. And in any event Kovalenok and
lvanchenkov had been Instructed above all not to move on their own initia-
tive after they landed. They wereto wait until they were found and could
be helped to come out from the Soyuz. The cabin door beiny, located in the
upper portion there is no question that in order to reach it they would have
to raise themselves up within the cabin.

It was at llOS hours, Universal Time. on 2 November, after a flight of 139
days. ll. hours, and 69 minutes. that Kovalenok and Ivanehenko put down on
the steppes of Kazakh. 180 kilomters southeast of Djezkazgan. And lune-diste-
ly. examination of them reassured the experts. or course. the two men were
terribly tired. Regaining gravity was for them a terrible ordeal; if they
had their way they would have walked on all tours. in addition. they had
changed physically: their skin color. their silhouettes. and their features
were no longer what they had been when they took off for space: extreme
eaaciation of their bodies, especially of their lower nembero, constrasted

with the swelling and flattening of their faces.

To Remain in Bed

But that condition was fully in keeping with what the space physicians had
predicted. And the first diagnosis was categorical: it is only a matter of
a few weeks until the major after-effects of the [light would disappear

and the cosmonauts would again begin living as earthlings, from which came
the substance of the com-unique published by TASS at l210 hours, only 75
minutes after the landing (which was announced at 1150 hours); it provided
reassurance as to the health of the two men after the medical team had
diagnosed that no irreversible difficulty was to be feared.

Kovalenok and lvanchenkov are going to recover rapidly because a very strict
procedure for their resdaptatlon is being followed.

This must be emphasized. Something new in this flight is the great atten-
tion being paid to preparation of the cosmonauts for returning to terrestrial
conditions. in the era of space cabins such preparation was non-existant;

it would have been impossible to embark the equivalent of a Tchibis suit

in a cockpit of minimum size. In retrospect we must admire the courage of
the Americans. Level and Barman. rel-mining: for 1/. days aboard their Gemini 7
cabin. Already the observation of the latter of these astronauts has ap-
peared significant. As a matter of fact Barman said, "On the whole one

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

becomes well accustomed to weightleasness; the problems occur when one re-
turns to earth." He must also admire the courage of the Sovietsgﬂikolayev
and Sevast'yenov, who remained for nearly 18 days aboard the Soyuz 9; upon
their return to earth they walked "bent like monkeys," Popovich told us.

In tlut era of cabins preparation for returning commenced at the time of
the return.

Things have indeed changed. Hith the facilities a station offers the prepa-
ration begins up in space. During the 96-day flight of Romanenko and Grechko
preparation for the return while in orbit was spread over 5 days. This time
it was extended to 10 days in space and 15 days after the return to earth.
After being transported to Baykonur the cosmonauts were required to remain
in bed and get up only gradually.

Why the choice of the reclined position? Very simply because gravity exerts
minimum influence upon circulation of the blood when the body is horizontal.
Thus, although not duplicated. the conditions of weightlessness are approached.
In the epoch of the early space cabins the solution, after all. that imposed
itself was to provide for the cosmonauts a position as close as possible to
lying down; it was a matter of their systems enduring passage from 1 g to 6 g
and more. when one returns to earth from space, passage from 0 g to 1 g must
be endured; it is basically the some problem.

The cosmonauts' physician, Dr Robert Dyakonov would have liked Kovalenok and
Ivanchenko to resume the standing position only after 6 to 7 days. But on
6 November the cosmonauts expressed their impatience. They asked that they
be allowed to take their first walk in the park at their residence near
Leinsk. In consideration of the rapidity of their recuperation their re-
quest in the end was satisfied.

Anti-g Suit

It will be remembered that for the re-adaptation of their cosmonauts the
Russians developed trousers strangely reminiscent of the old "anti-g"

suit designed in aeronautics to help pilots endure greater than normal
gravity. During long sojourns in space there is in fact a redistribution

of the blood, the system having become accustomed to no longer causing the
valvules of the veins which provide for ascension of the blood from the lower
members to function. Thus, after returning to earth, the problem is to avoid
an accumulation of blood in the lower part of the body, as when greater than
normal gravity is imposed.

By virtue of these considerations some observations are recalled to mind.
In the heroic days of pre-astronautics--we mean the 1965-1957 period-
lengthy discussions on the adaptation of man to a gravity different from
his own took place.

But already, on the basis of experiments which had been performed in centri-
fuges. the experts concluded that the individual would undoubtedly adapt

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

easily to lower than normal gravity. but only with great difficulty to high-
er than normal gravity. especially for a long duration. the situation of the
higher beings. in this respect. being completely different from that of the
fly which endures. tllemoutlunbly inthe world. 000g. The opinion was that for
an indefinite duration. the higherheings could not even endure a gravity of
1.4 g or only 1.3 g. which ruled out a priori man's sojourn upon the planets
of the solar system where the gravity in greater than our own. especially
on the surface of Jupiter; the problem at least arose at a time when it

was still believed that there existed a solid ground on Jupiter. 0n the
other side of the coin. the problems that might urine after a long sojourn
upon the noon or Mars were cited-~ou returning to the earth's gravity.

Since that time the conclusions have changed hardly at all. Today space
physicians are in agree-eat in recognizing that a reduced gravity is incom-
parably lens troublesome than no gravity at all. Returning to earth after
6 or 5 months spent in weightlessnens ls. when all is said and one. perhaps
as difficult as returning after a sojourn oi a year or two on Mars. having
gone there aboard a cosmic vehicle which would have a generator of an arti-
ficial gravity of 0.3g. this value being generally considered the minimum
required to avoid the organic ill effects of weightlessnear.

The Bot t leueclt

The Russians, with their operations aboard the Salyut 6. have achieved a
two-fold breakthroughnboth technical and medical.

that it he assumed that they are going to be able to accelerate their pro-
gran of long flights and that the 10-month mission about which we were talk-
ing not very long ago may take place sooner than foreseen?

it is not certain.

As a matter of fact it will be remembered that this year's flights were
thoroughly prepared. thanks to research of various kinds. which combined
theoretical studies with sojourns of long duration in the isolation chanhers
of the institute of Space Biology in Moscow. Moreover. the Soviets were
able to profit greatly from the lessons learned during the American flight
of ill. days which ended in February 1971.. in 1975 the Russian physicians
;ave the green light for a 3-month flight of consonants, a flight which
could not take place--it was: achieved only in l978--not for medical reasons.
but esrential ly for technical reasons. namely, deficiencies in the equipment
which did not have all the advantages provided this year by the Salyut 6.

In other words. in the medical chronology. it will be remeabered. there has
been an advance in the space of 3 years from 3 maths to 4-1/2 months.

however. from all available evidence it appears that the Run-Jinn do not in-
tend to proceed with the 5-month flight. Their statement alludes to the

preparation for a 6-month flight. which could represent the next step. but
no one can say when it will be accomplished.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It must he remembered that today the bottleneck in lengthening the duration
of flight is no longer at the technical level--with the Salyut 6 and the
Progress vehicles which supply it nothing should naterinlly prevent the Rus-
sians from leaving their cosmonauts in space for 1 year but nedical con-
siderations. And for this reason the date at which the Russians will be
able to undertake accomplishment of this 6-month flight about which they

are already dreaming will be indicative of the rate at which it can be

hoped that both the problem of adapting the human system to weightlessnesa

for a long duration and that of subsequent rendaptation to the earth's grav-
ity will be resolved.

Planetary Voyages

An observation by Leonov certainly nerits attention. The first man to walk
in space. who has become a general-~of whose recent promotion at the City of
the Stars we have learned: he is now its deputy director-~states that the
euploit of Kovalenok and Ivanchenkov opens the way to planetary flights.

For some 20 years we have become used to hearing the Soviets declare that
everything preanges everything and we know that in their terminology the
world "soon” can have a highly elastic meaning. It seems to us. neverthe-
less, that considering Leonov's new functions his words cannot be taken
lightly.

Achievement of piloted flights in the solar system in fact requires solution

of two very distainct categories of problems. some technical and the others
"medical-human."

but even though unresolved at the present time the first category can be
very quickly resolved, especially if a simple voyage in an equitemporal
orbit is contemplated (a trip in a solar orbit permitting return to earth
at a time planned in advance); some modes appear not to be costly in energy.
0n the other hand, it is the "medical-human" problems which are complex.
these problems including not only the feasibility of men remaining in space
for a certain time but the obligation to remain there until the end of the
mission.

Kovalenok and Ivanchenkov. in the course of their flight. traveled some
92.803.000 kilometers which indeed is equivalent to a potential small trip

in the solar system. But they had the option of returning at any moment:

the flight was open. Departing with the knowledge that one must obligatorily
travel 92,803,000 kilometers before having the right to return is quite

another matter. It requires that there be. on the subject of medical-human

problems. a mastery of the situation comparable to that now possessed at
the technical level, and that is far away.

Nevertheless all things let it be believed that the Soviets are going to con-
tinue to devote maximum effort and that the objective may be attained in a
reasonable time: Piloted flight to "are before the year 2000 appears to

us to be a prospect which today must be taken more seriously than ever.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Photo caption] Tho tvo new space record holders. Vladiuir Kovalenko (left)
and Aleksandr lvnnchcnho (right) returned to earth safe and sound on 2 No-
vesber 1978 after a flight of 160 days. which is the longest space flight
seen-pushed up to nov by human beings.

COPYRIGHT: AIR 6 COSIQS. Paris. 1970

11706
680: 3100

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSICS

UDC 621.375.82

“UNBEICAL ANALYSIS OF CHARACTERISTICS OF A GAS DYNAMICAL LASER HIT“ SELECTIVE
THERMAL EXCITATION AND MIXING IN THE SUPERSONIC 7L0"

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELBKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 5 No ll. 1978 pp 2337-2341
manuscript received 10 Oct 77

[Article by 0.V. Achesov. R.l. Soloukhin and N.A. Femin, Belorussian SSR
Academy of Sciences Institute of heat and Haas Exchange imeni A.V. Lykov.
Minsk

[Text] Based on a simple mathematical model, a numerical analysis is made of
the characteristics of a gas dynamical laser (09L) with selective excitation
end mixing in the supersonic flow. An analysis is made of the dependence of
characteristics of this not (gain and power output) on different parameters.
The calculated dependence obtained for the gain on temperature agrees with
experimental data with a degree of accuracy which is not too bad for prelinin-
ary estimates. The results of estimates of the unit power output in a GDL
employing mixing make it possible to explain the experimentally observed ten-
dency toward an increase in the optimal braking temperature with an increase
in the concentration of helium in the injected mixture.

In spite of the large number of estimates for gas dynamical lasers (CDL's)
operating in the mode of cooling of a preblended mixture of molecular gases.
at the present time there are practically no calculations modeling the opera-
tion of a son with selective excitation and mixing in the supersonic flow.

At the same time GDL's with mixing have record power output ratings and have
considerably higher efficiency in converting heat energy into coherent radia-

tion energy.

Numerical estimates in [1] show that the chilling efficiency of vibrational
energy in a nozzle with mixing is approximately 1.5 times higher than in an
ordinary nozzle. A number of additional advantages of GDL's utilizing a mixing
system, as well as detailed results of experimental research on GDL's of

this type. are given in [2]. The lack of estimates mentioned is explained

by the considerable complication of the task of numerically modeling the
characteristics of a cot when going to a system with selective excitation and
mixing in the supersonic flow. This complication involves the need to solve

a system of relaxation equations in a two-dimensional field of variation of

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPlClAL USE ONLY

gas dynamical parameters. and the determination of these parameters while
taking into account the actual processes originating in the superaoaic mixing
zone (shock waves. rarefaction waves. regions of boundary layer separation.
etc.) involves serious difficulties even for the simplest mixing systems.
Furthermore. the output characteristics of a not with selective excitation and
mixing will be goVerned by a collection of many parameters: the pressure and
braking temperature of the nitrogen. the pressure and composition of the in-
jected mixture. the mixing point. the geometry of the nozzle in front of and
behind the injection plane. the parameters of the cavity, etc. In this paper
an attempt is made to estimate (for the present. without optimizing) the charac-
teristics of the inverse medium of a not with selective thermal excitation and
mixing. with the following simplifying assumptions.

1. The mixing is regarded as instantaneous and takes place in the plane of
injection of a flow of C0 -he without distortion of the gas dynamical pattern
of the main stream (i.c..'shork waves and the like do not originate in the
flow). Furthermore. all changes in gas dynamical parameters concentrated in
the injection plane are calculated from the mass. impulse and enthalpy balance
of the main and secondary flows. in case of a nonlinear dependence of the
enthalpy on the temperature of the gas. the system of mass. impulse and en-
thalpy conservation equations does not have an analytical solution and reduces
to a transcendental equation. which has been solved numerically.

2. Nut considered in this paper are losses of vibrational energy during the
relaxation of pure nitrogen in front of the point where the COZ-ﬂc mixture
is blended. This simplification makes it possible to eliminate integration
of the system of differential equations when crossing a particular point in
the vicinity of the nozzle's critical cross section.

Check calculations made by the ascertainment method have shown that losses

of vibrational energy on account of relaxation during cooling of the pure
nitrogen in the supersonic nozzle (model of a harmonic oscillator) do not
exceed one to three percent of the stored vibrational energy. More precise
estimates taking into account the anharmonicity of vibrations of nitrogen.
made in [3]. showed that these losses can be somewhat higher. but in this
case they do not exceed four to seven percent for the entire range of charac-
teristic values of parameters of cat's with selective excitation and mixing.

3. The efficiency of the cavity in this study was considered constant and
was assumed to equal 0.8. This value is the maximum experimental value of
the cavity's efficiency (from the data of survey Iii).

4. The system of vibrational relaxation equations for a C0 -s ~He mixture.
as well as the key equations needed to estimate the gain. were taken from
[5.6]. Calculations were made (or the nozzle geometry and mixing unit used
in the experiments in [2.7] ("rapidly" expanding nozzle with a knife edge in
the critical cross section).

The distributions shown in fig 1 for the translational and vibrational tempe-
ratures along the nozzle for typical conditions of a GDL with selective

)9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

excitation and mixing illustrate the numerical solution system described
above. As is obvious tron this figure. during injection of a mixture with
a high helium content. at the injection plane is observed considerable addi-
tional cooling. caused by the redistribution of enthalpies between the hot
nitrogen and the cold injected gas. for the conditions shown in fig la the
intensity of additional cooling reaches BOO‘K.

Figure l.

 

         

” .
0"...‘~'.-..'!’
1

.'

!

2

Distribution of Translational and Vibrational Teqeratures

and Gain Along the Nozzle. Temperature and Pressure in
Precha-bar 3 Id! and 10 ate: s) injected mixture of to We.
injection pressure 9 atn, conposition of gas after lining:
0.055 to + 0.652 N + 0.693 He; b) injected nixture of 002+He.
1”:qu pressure 5 atn. cowosition of gas after Iixing:
0.227 c02 + 0.546 "2 + 0.227 he.

In the course of further expansion, subsequent gas cooling takes place. with

an etfective adiabat figure appropriate to the resulting gas mixture. Con-
siderably less cooling can be expected when injecting a gas with e relatively
moderate concentration of heliun in the nixture (fig 1b). Cooling in the course
of further expansion in this case also occurs more slowly because of lowering
of the nixture's adiabat figure. Therefore. the final temperature of the gas
at the cavity's inlet with a degree of expansion of AIM - 30 (fig lb) turns

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

out to be fairly high (approximately higher than SOO'K). which results both in
considerable settlement 0! the ground laser level and in high losses of frozen
vibrational energy at the higher laser level.

As calculations have shown. when injecting pure carbon dioxide into the super-
sonic flow. at the injection plane there occurs a rise in the translational
temperature of the gas as the result of predominance of the temperature re-
storation effect during braking of the flow. In this case inverse population
density and positive gain should be expected only uith relatively moderate
braking temperatures (approximately less than 2 RR) or vith considerable de-
grees of expansion of the gas.

It is obvious from fig 1 that. in the flow beyond the injection plane. as the
result of rapid resonance transmission of excitation from N (v - l) to the 001
level of the C0 molecule. there occurs a rapid rise in the temperature of
asymmetric viertions. T . of molecules of carbon dioxide. The temperature of
symmetric vibrations (it is assumed that (iexural and symmetric vibrations of
molecules of co have a common temperature: T - T2 - 'l’1 ) first also rises
to values corresponding to the translational temperature,’3nd then "freezes”

at values higher than the value of T by a factor of 1.2 to 1.5. As demon-
strated by an analysis of calculation results. the approximately constant value
of temperature T1 in this region is caused by equalizing of the velocities
of two processes: ’gy a reduction in T because of VT-relaxation, and by

an increase in Tl.2 because of exchange of energy with the asymmetric vibra-
tion mode.

 

Figure 2. Experimental Values from [7] and Calculated Dependence: of
Gain on braking Temperature with treasure in the Forcchamber
Equal to 10 atm: l.2--lnjection conditions same as in fig la;
J.4-—injected mixture of coz+uc. injection pressure 5 atm (J)
and 1 atm (a)

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ OFFICIAL "Sb: ONLY

Dcpendences of the gain formed in the flow on the braking temperature are
shoun in fig 2. Plotted on the same figure are experimental data on the
dependence of the gain on the temperature in a GDL with selective thermal
excitation and mixing in the supersonic flow [7]. As is obvious from fig 2,
when T § 2 xx there is good agreement between the experimental and calculated
dependences, and when T g 2.5 kx the difference between seasured and calculated
values of the gain is about 20 percent. which is totally acceptable for pre-
liminary estimates. since the accuracy of kinetic calculations because of the
indeterminacy of relaxation constants alone [8] is 30 percent. But it must

be sentioned that the influence of the indeterminacy of kinetic calculations

in a GDL employing mixing is substantially less. since vibrational relaxation
processes are concentrated in this case in the low-temperature half of the
nozzle (the supersonic flow). and the data on vibrational relaxation constants
when T g 1 RR are more complete.

an”

 

m 20 so [can

Figure 3. Dependence of Gain (a) and Losses of Vibrational Energy in
the Plow Beyond the Mixing Point (b) on the Percentage Content
of Carbon Dioxide in the Resulting Mixture: Temperature in
Porechanber 2 RR, injected mixture €02+ﬂe, injection pressure
1 to 7 atm: nitrogen pressure in forechsmber 10 (l). 20 (2)
and SO (3) atm; the dotted line indicates the dependence without

taking vibrational relaxation into account.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in nddition. analysis of the data given in fig 2 shows that the optimal rom-
positlou of the injected nixture depends heavily on the temperature: in low-
temperature GDL's employing aixing (T w 2 RR), high gain is achieved when
injecting a mixture with a relatively moderate helium content, whereas with a
rise in tesperature it is necessary to increase the helium content. It was
noted above that here there is an increase in the intensity of cooling at the
injection plane, as well as in the nixture's resulting adiabat figure. This
trend is qualitatively in good agreement with the results of experimental in-
vestigations of the characteristics of GDL's with selective thermal excitation
and sixing with different ratios of 602 and helium in the injected mixture [7].

V/O‘JIA l)

   

_l___J_._l—_
a: #0 LIN

Pigure 4. Dependence of Unit Power Output in a cut with Selective 8:-
citation and Mixing on Nitrogen Braking Temperature Taking
into Account the Vibrational Energy of All (1) and of Only
the Ground (2) Vibrational Levels; Conditions Same as in
fig in

Key:
1. u/c. Jlg

The data given in fig 3 make it possible to select the optimal content of
carbon dioxide in the resulting mixture for a specific unit. With an increase
in the content of C0 the GDL's gain increases (fig 3a). but here there is an
increase in losses of vibrational energy in the flow beyond the mixing plane
(fig 3b) (losses refer to the total supply of frozen vibrational energy. taking
the quantum yield into account). Therefore, the optimal concentration of 602
will be different for units with different crass dimensions: Hith not too
great a length of the optical path the total gain per operation will he not

too great and can prove to be co-parable with losses in reflecting surfaces

and because of resonance absorption in the flow. Here it is necessary to

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increase the concentration of CO for the purpose of increasing the gain,
in spite of the increase in viertional energy losses.

The data given in fig 4 illustrate the dependence of calculated values of

power output in e GDL employing mixing on the braking temperature of nitrogen.
Earlier in [2] there was observed an increase in the thermodynamic efficiency
of the conversion of thermal energy into coherent radiation energy with a

rise in temperature. As demonstrated by the results of calculations shown in
fig 5, with a rise in the braking temperature of nitrogen from 2 to 3 RR. the
unit power ouput in a uni with selective thermal excitation and mixing is in-
creased more than twofold and reaches a value of about 200 J/g. Taking into
account the energy of Just the ground vibrational level of a molecule of nitro-
gen. this figure is lowered approximately twofold.

In summary. let us say that in this paper, based on a simple computation system.
a numerical analysis has been made of dependences of the characteristics of a
GDL with selective thermal excitation and mixing in the supersonic flow, on
various parameters. Furthermore. the calculated dependence of the gain on
temperature agrees with the experimental data with a degree of accuracy which
is not too bad for preliminary estimates.

Bibliography

1. Breyev. V.V.. Kukharenko. A.T., Napartovich, A.P. and sharkov, V.F.
TBPLOPIZIKA VYSOKIKH TEMPERATUR, lg. 1325 (197d).

2. Kroshko. V.N.. Soloukhin. 3.1. and Pomin. N.A. In “Gazovyye lazery"
[Gas Lasers], Moscow, Nauke. 1977. p 59.

3. Vandyshava, N.H. VBSTNIK LOU. lg. 57 (1976).
4. Konyukhov, V.K. KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRDNIKA, ﬂ, 1016 (1977).

5. Losev, s.A., Hekarov. V.N.. Pavlov, V.A. and shetelov, 0.P. PIZIKA
GORENIYA I VZRYVA, g, 463 (1973).

6. Volkow, A.Yu., Demin. A.1.. Logunov. A.N., Kudryavtsev, Ye.H. and Sobolev,
H.N. FIAN Preprint, Moscow. 1977, No b.

7. Krauklis. A.V.. Kroshko. V.N.. Soloukhin, 8.1. and fomin, N.A. ?IZIKA
OORBNIYA I VZRYVA, 12, 792 (1976); "Tezisy doklsdov V Veesoyuz. seminars
po goreniyu i vzryv;w [Theses of Papers at the Fifth All-Union Seminar on
Combustion and Explosion], 1977.

8. Anderson. D. RAKETNAYA TBKHNIKA I KOSHDNAVTIKA. lg. No 12. 105 (197$).

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Sovetskoye Radio. KVANTOVAXA BLEKTRONIKA. 1978

8831

080: 8145
{0726 4‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PINS [CS

000 621.375.9635

INVESTIGATION 01' Till! GENERATION PROPERTIES OF PNOSPIlATE GLASSES IN THE PULSE
REPETITION PUMPING WDE

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEK'I'RONIKA in Russian Vol 5 No ll, 1978 pp 2356-2357
nanuscript received 21 Oct 77

[Article by N.Ye. Alekseyev. V.V. Gruzdev, A.A. Izyneyev, Yu.l.. Kopylov, v.3.
Kravchenlto, Yu.s. Hilyavskiy. Yu.N. Hikhaylov. S.P. Rosean and A.h. Fisher,
"8811 Acadeey of Sciences Institute of Radioelectronics. Moscow]

[Text] A study is nade of the influence of a thereal lens originating in the
glass active elenent on the operation of a laser in the pulse repetition node.

It is denonstrated that the generation power and the strength of the thereal lens
vary in a similar sanner with a change in temperature. Low thermal lens
strengths are achieved in glasses with low values of them-optical constants

P and Q . The taperature dependence of the strength of the ther-al lens

is reduced with a reduction in the derivative of the value of P in tens of
teeperature. It is denonstrated that with not too high pulping pulse repeti-
tion rates glass lasers can have power characteristics close to the character-
istics of yttrium-altruism garnet crystal lasers.

The purpose of this paper was to cake a study of the properties of certain
phosphate glasses in the pulse repetition node with a high seas punping power.
of course. in the operation of a solid-state laser in the pulse repetition or
continuous node. with cooling of the side surface in the active elesent (Al-2)

a thernal lens originates. whose strength depends in the beat approxination on
the them-optical characteristics of the glass, P and Q [l], and on the
temperature drop in the AE. i.e.. on the lean pulping power (cf.. e.g.. [2]).
The appearance of a theml lens results in distortion of the cavity. which

is especially strongly pronounced in the operation of pulsed lasers with opti-
cal-nechanical 0 switching. with an increase in pulping power the efficiency
usually first increases. and then is lowered as a result of an increase in the
optical strength of the thermal lens.

The efficiency of silicate glass lasers is 0.025 to 0.5 percent, the pulse
energy is 0.001 to 2.5 J. and the repetition rate is l to 85 Hz [1-6]. For

phosphate glasses. which have better them-optical properties, the efficiency
in the free generation node for a cylindrical AE equals 0.03 [7] and 1 [8|

‘5

NOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

percent with respective rates of 50 and 5 Hz. and in the 0 switching made. for
a rectangular AB. approximately 0.2 percent [9] with a rate of 2 to 5 "a.
Glass lasers thus have relatively not too high efficiency.

The formation of a thernsl lens in an as made of silicate glass is the key
factor limiting the generation power in the pulse repetition mode: With a
certain strength of the thermal lens the cavity leaves the stability region.
and generation is cut off prior to reaching of the Aﬁ's thermal breakdown
threshold [10.11].

Hith the parabolic teaperature distribution established in a "long" cylindrical
an under conditions of uniform heat release and intense cooling of the side
surface. the difference in the optical path betveen the center of the AB and
any point for rays with radial (r) and tangential (o) polarization in the best
approximation is given by the equation [2):

AP” (0) — AP”. (r)-L [Pth (QI2)|AT (r’lc’).

where r is the instantaneous radius: c is the radius of the AB; AT is
the temperature drop between the center and edge of the AB; and I. is the
length of the AZ. This equation does not take into account the temperature
dependence of theme-optical characteristics 1’ and Q and is. generally
speaking. inaccurate. since it permits total compensation of the thermal lens
for one polarization with any value of the temperature drop in the case when
P 3,0 2 - 0 .

Actually. the theno-optical properties of glass vary rather strongly with
temperature [12.13]. Taking this dependence partially into account gives
this expression for the difference in the optical path [11.]:

APMO) -. an. (r) ., LAT {[9, :2: —§1+e(‘r+ 2m] {-Imear-gﬂ.

Here the values of P0 and Q are taken at a specific temperature of ‘1‘ s
1' is the temperature of the s9de surface of the A8 read from 1' ; 9 - dgld'l‘
is the temperature derivative of thermo-optical characteristic 9 . The
analogous temperature derivative for Q is an order of magnitude lower than
0 [13] and in deriving this equation was taken as equal to zero.

It is obvious from this equation that the magnitude of optical distortions in
the AB depends substantially on the temperature drop and them-optical con-
stants at a given temperature and on their temperature dependence. The differ-
ence between glasses with different thermo-optical properties should be more
distinctly manifest with greater temperature gradients. In recent years
glasses have been developed with low values of P and Q , in particular.
phosphate glasses. Their disadvantage is relativgly low t ermostability.

For example. cylindrical Ali's measuring 10 X 130 an made of abs-22 glass en-
dure a pumping power in the pulse repetition mode of only up to 300 H [8].

1.6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Methods of hardening Aﬂ's developed in recent tines have node it possible to
raise the ultiante endurance of ar'a node of phosphate glasses two- to three-
fold. with regard to pumping power [8.15]. We have made studies with Ali's
Iessuring 8 X 100 I- made of phosphate glasses, which endured a pulping power
of 250 and 500 w. A nonoblock light source was used. node of quartz glass with
circulation cooling. the pumping rate equaled 5 to 15 llmin. and the cooling
fluid absorbed UV pumping radiation shorter than 610 as. For 0 switching was
employed an optical-mechanical shutter with a rotational velocity of (21.5
to 520403 r.p.m. The temperature of the AR was measured with reference to
its elongation with a known ther-al expansion coefficient. as well as by means
of a thin thermocouple inserted into the center of the AB. In fig 1 is shown
the dependence of the tewerature drop on pumping power for Ali's made of phos-
phate glasses 013-22 and LGS-I and the alkali phosphate glass LGS-H. In table
1 are given them-optical characteristics P and Q of these glasses. where
it was assumed that the tapernturc coefficient of P equals the temperature
coefficient of them-optical characteristic H [13.14]. The values of P .
. and 0 for GLS-l (silicate) and 61.8-22 gloss were taken from [110]. thg
i duced radiation cross sections. a . for these glasses from [16], and the
values for Lcs-I and LBS-H glass were measured by us.

 

Table 1.

Key:
1. Brand of glass lo. Les-1
2. GLS-l 5. LGS-H
3. (ms-22

In fig 2 is shown the dependence of free generation power on the pumping
pulse rate (the energy in a single pulse is fixed and equals 100 J). It is
obvious that above a certain boundary pumping power a rise in the laser's
output power is slowed down. The value of this boundary pumping power de-
pends on them-optical characteristics 1’ and Q . and the slope of the

H khm ) [output power (pumping power)! curve depends also on the temperature
dependeace of them-optical characteristics.

In fig 3 is shown the experimentally determined change in focal length of the
thermal lens formed near the center of the active element. and in fig lo the

change in generating power with telpersture for a pumping power of 500 V.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All!

33883

 

Pigure 1. Dependence of Temperature Drop in an AB on Pumping Power
for LGs-I (1). Les-u (2) and ens-22 (3) Glass

 

Figure 2. Dependence of Generation Energy in a Pulse on Repetition
Rate for 158-1 (1) and nos-a (2) Glass (n - 50 percent)

Key:

1. 2. f, Re

kah. H

It is obvious that the strength of the theml lens and the generation power
vary similarly for phosphate glasses with low values of P and Q9 . Pur-
thernore. the lower the value of e , the more gently slopgng are t e curves
for the dependence of the strength of the thermal lens and of the generation
power on temperature. A quantitative discussion of this dependence is diffi-
cult now. since it is necessary to take into account a nutter of secondary
phenomena. such as the niaadjustnent of the cavity because of the difference

in the theraal expansion coefficients of the AB and cavity eleaents, additional
stresses in the AB because of the change in the security of the mounting with
temperature, etc. Let us state only that Les-H glass has advantages over the
other glasses from the viewpoint of operation over a wide temperature range.

In the free generation node, for example, an AB measuring 8 n- in diaaeter by
100 III made of LGS-I glass, without optiaization of the systea (selecting mirrors
and the ratio of diameters of the AB and pumping tube, etc.), produces l J of
power when .punping with a 70 J , 10 Hz pulse.

108.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8!! ONLY

 

Figure 3. Change. with Temperature. of Focal Length of a Thermal Lena

Near the Center of the A2 for Radial (Solid Line) and Tangential

(Dotted Line) Polarization in GLS-l (l). GLS-ZZ (2). Les-1 (J)
and Lcs-n (6) Glass

Key:
1. Fraction of percentage

l4 «anti
1) "I
I
3.
3 7

1m -n 0 0 7:7:

Figure 4. Change in Generation Power in a Pulse Versus Temperature for
Les-n (1) and GLS-22 (2) Glass

Key:
1. uvykh’ relative units

In {in S is shown the generation power at room runpcrntnre in the
Q uultching node for GLS-l and Lcs~1 glass. The output generation power

equals, respectively. 3.5 H when pulping at 500 H for Les-1 glass and 0.8 H
when pumping at 420 w for ans-1 glean, i.e., Les-1 glass in the ease system

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

makes possible several times greater generation power. Optimization of the
systen's elements has made it possible to obtain in the Q switching mode. with
f I lo "2. when using an AB made of Los-I glass. a pulse power of 0.6 J with
40 J pumping. The amount of angular divergence in terns of the 0.8 level

iron the total power has equaled 22‘. These results speak for the sufficiently
high efficiency of phosphate glasses with elevated pulse repetition rates and
for the pronise of their application in pulse repetition losers.

 

40 60 00%,)!!!

Figure 5. Generation Power in the Q Switching Mode for LGS-I (l) and
CLS-l (2) Glssa with Repetition Rates of 10 and 5 Hz. Re-
spectively (R . 63 percent)

1. "Wu" J 2. H“, J

Bibliography

1. ﬂak, A.A.. Hit'kin. V.H.. Sou. I...N.. Stepanov, A.I. and Shchavelev, 0.8.
OPTIKO-HBICHANICRESKAYA PROHYSHLENNOST'. No 9, 1971, p 62.

2. Melt, A.A.. Sou. L.N.. Stepanov, A.I. and Sudakov. A.B. OP'I‘IKA I SPEKTRO-
SKOPIYA, .33, 1081 (1971).

3. Konogawa, 1.. Kotera, II. and lieynni. Ii. JAPAN. J. APPL. ms.. 2. 1.1.9 (1966).
lo. Segre, J. SPACE AGE N398. 1_2_, 22 (1969).

s. Caponov. s.v., Carin, m. and Parsoonov, x..v. mam-mu BLEKTRONIKA.
g. 1551. (1975).

6. Ryabov. 8.6.. Toropkin. G.N. and Usol'teev. LP. "Pribory kventavoy elek-
troniki" [Quantum Electronic Instruments], Moscow, Sov. radio. 1976.

7. Denkcr, 8.1.. Kil'pio. A.V., Haksioovs. G.V.. Halyutin, A.A., Oaiko, V.V.,
Pashinin. P.P.. Prokhorov, Am. and Shchcrbskov. I.A. KVAM‘OVAYA BLBKTRONIKA.
g, 688 (1977).

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8.

9.

IO.
11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

Huh. A.A.. Mt'kin. 9.11.. Yolukhin. V.N.. Stepanov. A.1. and Shchavc1cv.
0.8. KVANTOVAYA maximum. _2_. 350 (1975).

Davydov, 3.)... Hurntov. V.R.. Sou. L.N., Stepnnov. A.I. and Stupnihov.
V.K. KVANTOVAYA REKTRONIKA. l. 2518 (1971).

Zholtov. 6.1.. Ruhanov, A.s. and Chaley. A.V. zaps. 11, 226 (1971).
thltov, 0.1., Hamnov. 5.x. and Rubanov. A.s. ans. 5;. 928 (1975).

Gromv, A.K.. Izyneyev. A.A.. Kopylov, Yu.l.. and Kravchcnko. v.3.
"‘l'czisy don. III Vaeooyuz. 913p. po optlchcakln 1 apektru1'nyn ovoyatvan
ntehol" [Theses of Papers at the Thu-d All-Union Smoaiun on the Optical
and Spectral Propertlco of Glass). Leningrad; 1971.. p 25.

shclmvelev. 0.8., ch'kln, V.M.. Buhkine, V.A.. Bunkinn, ILN. and
Stepanov. 11.1. OPTIKO-HBKIIANICIIBSKAYA PROHYSIILENNOST', No 1, 30 (1975).

Vnkhaynnln. K.P.. Halt. A.I\., Hit'kln, V.H.. Popovn. I..c., Rabn, I.V.,
Sons. Lo". and Stepnnov, NI. KVAN‘I'OVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. g, 196 (1976).

Alekacycv. N.Ye., Gnvrilov. 0.5.. Gruzdev. V.V., Izyneyev, A.A.. Kopylov.
Yu.L., Krnvchenko, V.B.. Hilynvskiy. Yu.S., Mikhnylov. Yu.N.. Roman.
S.P.. Sverchkov. Ye.I. and Fisher. Am. "Teziay dokl. I Vseaoyuz. konf.
'Opuka 1nzcrov'" [Theses of Papers at the First All-Union Laser Optics
Cnnfcrcnce]. Leningrad. 1976, p 36.

Dianov, Ye.M.. Karnaik, A.Ya.. Kut'ycnkov, A.A., Neustruycv. v.3. and
Shcherbakov, LA. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, ;, 168 (1976).

COPYRIGHT: Izdotcl'atvo Sovetskoye Radio. KVAN'DOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, 1978

8831

CSO:

81bb/0725

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR orrtc ML USE ONLY

PlIYS 108

unc 621.378.33
A WAM‘HVE INVESTIGATION OF PULSE!) Ill’ AND ”-002 CHEMICAL LASERS

Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLDiTRONDiA in Russian Vol 5, No 11, 1978 pp 2&36—24“

[Article by V. Ya. Agroskin, 0. K. Vasil'yav, V. I. Kir'yanov and V. L.
Tsl'rose, institute of Chemical Physics, USSR Academy of Sciences, sub-
mitted to the editorial board 27 November l977]

[Text] An experimental study was made of the basic char-
acteristics of pulsed, photoinitiated ll? and DIP-(92 la-
sers using a single equipment set-up in a wide range of
variation of the initial conditions: pressure, initia-
tion, temperature and mixture composition. A comparison
was made of the characteristics found and the possibility
of technical optimization of the functioning of these la-
sers was analyzed.

Lasers based on a reaction between fluorine and hydrogen or deuterium occupy
a distinctive position among pulsed, photoinitieted chemical lasers because
they have the highest specific energy densities. The working molecules in
them are either the innediate products of the reaction-oil! or D? molecules
(HF and DP lasers), or molecules of 00 to which oscillation excitation
energy is transferred from or molecules (DP-(X) laser). The study of these
lasers has been the subject of many experimental and theoretical works (see
[1-5], for example), both monographic and review-type. There is, at the
same time, a lack of studies in which the characteristics of HP and [JP-002
lasers were compared under the same experimental conditions.

The main purpose of the present work was the comparative investigation of
these lasers using one and the same set-up while varying the initial con-
ditions and mixture composition around the optimum. Additionally, with the
aim of revealing the connection between the characteristics of laser action
and the kinetics of the chemical reaction we investigated the photoinitia-
ted reaction by the method of optical probing [6] of the fluorine molecule
concentration in the mixture. Finally, we thought it necessary to offer
amenber of characteristics of the lasers which the literature hasn't cov-
ered, as far as we know. We would like to point out that we have charac-
terized initiation by the level of dissociation of the fluorine molecules.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Nil OVPICIAL USE ONLY

The Procedure

The equip-ent for the experiment was the same as that described in [7, 8].
A pulsed gas-discharge lamp of up to 20 k.) electrical energy was used for
initiation of the chemical reaction. The reactor was either a quartz tube
3 cm in disaster and some 90 cm long with an external coaxial lamp, or a
stainless steel tube 0.5 cm in diameter and 70 cm long with a tubular or
coaxial lamp inside it. Mixing of the gases was done during their admis-
sion into the reactor in special mixers at room temperature. The achission
rate was 0.4-0.8 snolels with dosing accuracy of mixture components at~101..

The laser resonator was made up of a flat metal mirror and a semitranspar-
ent plate out of Al 0 or ilaii’2 (lii’ laser) and Kits-6 (TlCi-Tiiir) or ZnSe
(DP-CO laser). Th3 level of dissociation of the F molecules throughout
the in tiation impulse was determined with an accuracy of ~30! by two
methods [3] independently for each reactor. The shape of the initiating
pulse was recorded by a photomultiplier, and the laser action pulse by a
detector using a p-gennanims crystal operating at room temperature [9].
The time resolution of these instruments was not worse than 0.1 ps. The

laser act ion spectrum was recorded by a Perkin-Elmer Company monochromator
with a slit spectral width of 0.7 cm'l.

To probe the concentration oi fluorine in the mixture at a wavelength of
331. m we used a high pressure mercury vapor lamp, monochromator and photo-
multiplier. in the experiments we varied the initial composition of

the mixture, the level of dissociation of F2 molecules during the initiating
pulse as 0-57., the overall initial pressure of the mixture p°-0~2 atm and
the initial temperature Ton-200.450 K. The initial pressure and temperature
were established with an accuracy not worse than 21 and 47., respectively.
The energy of laser action was measured by calorimeter to within lO-lS'I.

accuracy. The purity of the gases used was: “2-99.51, [Dz-99.57., F229“,
02-99.“, 002-997., lie-99.87..

Experimental Results and Discussion

As was demonstrated earlier [3, 10], the photoinitiated reaction of "2(02)
with F2 proceeds either with a cessation at low intensities of chemical
conversion, or to total burn-up (explosive condition), with the transition
from one condition to the other bearing-a critical character, i.e., it hap-
pens with a small variation of any parameter (c1, p , mixture composition).
The investigations showed that laser action in a DB-OOZ laser takes place
only under the explosive chasical reaction condition.

Figure la and lb illustrate the position of the lasing pulse of a [JP-002
laser and the kinetics of consumption of F2 mlecules relative to the
photoinitiation pulse for a mixture of 510 ~lO'I.E‘2-25’I.002-0.5102-S9.5’I.lle
at pod atm, Toss 300 K, (1-0.1057. in a reacgor 50 cm long. The relative
sensitivity of the method for recording the concentration of fluorine

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR Ol-‘l’lClM. "Sit ONLY

sunleculeu A [V21Il'l’2'lu nnwuuiecl in ulunlu, '57. which in terms or lli’ molecule
concentration, gives a Value of 2.5'10 cm'3oatm‘1.

a 1' al
THE" 177W ) n mm).
where A.) is the minimum signal change distinguishable against the noise

background of the probing beam, the photomultipl ier. and the thickness of
the osciliograph trace.

 

Figure 1. Oscillograms of initiation (1) and laser action (2) pulses,
and the kinetics of fluorine molecule consumption (3) in a
DF-002 laser (a, b; time base 2.5 usldivision), and also
the duration (vertical segments) and position of the laser
action pulse relative to start of initiation and the "in-
duction period" of the chemical reaction (0) in relation

to the overall level of fluorine molecule dissociation
in the mixture (c).

It is seen from Figure lb that the reaction has an "induction period"¢3
[10], delimited by the sensitivity of the procedure, and laser action de-
fined by the period 1:: (at a level of 0.1 of maximum amplitude) with lag
11 takes place for the given value of c at a relatively low intensity of
mixture burn-up and correspondingly low warm-up (AT<100 k). The quantity
Jo corresponds to the amplitude of the probe light in the absence of i-‘z; J1
and .1 correspond to the amplitudes at onset of and during chemical reaction.

Figure 1c (see also Figure 2c) shows the relationships of «'1, it and 1:3 to

a fora mixture of SIDZ-ISﬂz-ZS'LCOZ-lwz-Sla lie in a reactor 9 cm long at
pol-1 atm, 13-300 K. it is seen that in the case of a weak initiation

(as 0.77.) the main part of the lasing energy is given off at an earlier
stage of the chemical reaction, i.e., at a relatively moderate temperature,
not exceeding 400-650 K. As we know (see [11], for example), in an RF laser,
in the same «range, laser action continues up to substantially higher inten-
sities of mixture burn-up and, consequently, higher temperatures (~1000 K).
It is to be. noted that in a DF-COZ laser, when initiation is powerful enough,
the fluorine consulption observed on longer time bases (RIO ps/division) in
the course of the chemical reaction exceeds the initial deuterium concentra-
tion in the mixture; evidently, this is connected with supplemental F2 consump-
tion in photochemical reaction with 002 [12]. Investigations have shown
that supplemental fluorine consisnption accelerates with initiation build-up.

54
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[5 "m
Mr!
“W

3

_L_IN:I
e

93"??? S

C

Figure 2. Shape and relative position of pulses of initiation (a)
and laser action of n inf-(202 laser in mixtures of 51.02-
”Hf-CO ~0-lle, containing 107.602 and 110 (b). 257.002
and “102.“ 79.41002 and 0.6102(6), wit varied in---2
itiation; oscillogralss of the sptzzctrum (e) (or mixture
(c) at QED-31(‘V3 pa delay of triggering; intensity

scale is shown on right side). Tine base is everywhere
[2 ps; ponl atn; T°~ 300 K.

Figure 2b-d shows the shape and position of the laser action pulse of the
DIP-(1)2 laser relative to the initiating pulse (Figure 2a) (or various con-
centrations of 002 molecules in the mixture at po .1 atm, TORI INJOO K and

eta-0.267.. Variation of the initial 002 concentration in0 the mixture
was compensated by a corresponding variation of the lie concentration. it
can be seen from Figure 2 (see also Figure 1c) that as arises the periods
1'1 and 1:2 diminish, whereby the lasing condition becomes quasistable.

Spectral investigations of the nr-coz laser have shown that there is in

the emission spectrum only the P-phase of rotation transitions of the
0001-1001 oscillation band. The R-phase was not detected even with an in-
crease in sensitivity to 105 times relative to the P-phase. As can be
seen from the spectrun oscillograms in Figure 2e, lasing starts first at
transitions P110, P16, 918 and P20 with P22 and P26 included later on in
the lasing process. The table which follows shows the fractions of the
laser action energy on all observed lines in the range ct -0.2-1.07..

 

 

 

Energy Energy
Transition Fraction, 1 Transition Fraction, 7.
Pllo 0 - 1 P20 70 - 90
P16 lo - 12 P22 2 - 3
918 6 - 12 P26 0 - l

 

it is to be noted that in the case of initiation close to the threshold
(0.00.152) the fraction of transition ['20 may vary over a wide range (10 -
901). As can be seen from the data obtained, lasing takes place mainly

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN“! (WI’ICIM. lL‘H—I ONLY

(rem rotational levels J-IS, 17, 19, the population of which, with balanced
rotational distribution, is maximal at temperatures of 300-400 K. This is
in good agreement with the results obtained during concomitant investigation
of the processes of laser action and chemical kinetics (see Figure 1). We
want to point out that in [13], under heavy helium dilution of the mixture
and at low pressure, laser action likewise occurred primarily at the P16,
P18 and 1’20 transitions. In contract to the DF-OOZ laser, the “F laser
spectrum is known [11, 14] to exhibit several dozen lines.

E, mil/Cm“

  

l
M 11 404“" 1 HI»?-

Figure 3. Relationships of specific energy yield to initiation for
an ill’ laser using mixtures 3.7ﬂi2-11.17.F2-2.2102-83'Dle (1),
and 14.5m2-43.51F2-8.5102-33.5'Ale (2), and for a once;
laser using a mixture of 57.0 , 151F and lie, plus $7.00 and
1.5102 (3); 101002 and 17.0 (6); 25 2 end 1102 (S); 57.
002 and 0.810 (6); 79.1. 2 and 0.6702 (7); and also, using
a mixture of {Mg-301F2-591002-1702 (8).

“at. U U !I¢.$

M
JO
(0
II

 

c, owl/awn3

o onxunaami

Figure lo. Relationship of energy yield of a DIP-002 laser to (:02 con-
centration in a mixture of 57. D2 - 15% F2 - 002 - 02 - He
in the case of unchanging chemical reaction conditions.

Simultaneously with the shape of the laser action pulses of the DF-COZ ls-
ser, we investigated the relationship of the specific energy yield to ini-
tiation for mixtures with a varied (:02 content at poul am, 1'0 :3 300 Ii.

From the results, which are shown in Figure 3, it can be seen that all the
relationships have a threshold and, for mixtures with helium, a tendency

toward saturation as well. An analogous relationship was found for a di-
luted mitture at p°-0.3 atm, for example, in [15]. Without helium in the

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mixture there is no saturation of energy density even up to ausS'L. The max-
im chemical efficiency achievad hereby is 57.. Particular attention shculd
be paid to the nature of the 5 (a) relationship for the mixture 107. Dz-JO'I.
P2491. 002-17. 02 for which, after an intermediate plateau in the interval
(1-1-21, the energy density begins to rise again with further increase ofd.
linximm energy density for thls mixture was 0.07 .llcm3 (3.51 chemical effi-
ciency), which is close to what was reported in [5] for n DP-CO laser
generating on a mixture of 97. Dz - 97. P2 - 367. (1)2 - 0.51 02 - 5.57. lie.

For purposes of comparison, Figure 3 includes 8(a) relationships for an
Ili‘ laser (see also [3]) obtained for two different mixtures at po-l atm and
TopJOO K. it can be seen that, in the case of the "l" laser, the £0!)
thresholds lie at relatively low a, and the relationships show no tendency
to saturation in the a. range in question; but the maximum energy doesn't
exceed 0.015 chm3 and maximum chemical efficiency is Just 1.5%.

Figure lo shows the relationship of energy density of a DF-coz laser to the
content of (:02 in the mixture. The relationship was plotted for the case
of invariant chemical reaction conditions [3, 10], i.e., the initial reac-
tion rate and the rate of circuit breaking were maintained constant. This
was achieved by specific modification of the initial concentration of oxy-
gen and the initiation energy (see Figure 1.). It can be seen that the
energy density rises steadily with increasing 00; concentration up to about
207. but doesn't vary further even up to total replacement of lie by CO .
From a comparison of these data with known results (cf [10, 15], for example)
it follows that the observed (in [10, 15]) drop of specific energy with in-
crease in (:02 concentration above l07. (constant electric energy of initia-
tion) was due to a reduction of the reaction rate caused by a rise in the
rate of circuit breaking at the 002 molecules and an increase in the specif-
ic heat of the mixture.

e, J/n'malc J/(cnr’qbs) ‘, il/mmois

    

Figure 5. Relationships e(u., p0) (graphs. .1 and c), and “nop(l’o)
(graph h [subscript "nop" - threshold) (or a DF-CO
laser at p s 0.25 atm (I). 0.5 ntm (2), 1.0 atm (3 ,
1.5 atm (lo , 2.0 atm (S); and ((a, po) for an ill? laser
(dotted curves 6, 7).

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The relationships of energy density to overall pressure of the mixture
have already been investigated. llowever, the investigations were carried
out only for acne single fixed value of the initiation energy [1a, 15, 18].
it was therefore of interest to obtain a set of 801, p0) relationships for
a wide range of variation of uand p0. It can be seen from Figure 5a that
the curves have a threshold which, as Figure 5b shows, is preport ienal to
the pressure; the energy density for all po increases steadily with a. dis-
playing a tendency toward saturation at large a. Figure 5b illustrates the
experimental fact noted above, that laser action in a 13sz laser takes
place only at the explosiVe state of the chemical reaction. The solid line
in Figure Sb shows the unop(p°) relationship for lasing derived from Fig-
ure 5a, and the broken line shows the relationship of the mixture explosion
thresholds to pressure as obtained from data in [10], taking into account
additional circuit breaking in the process D + no [16] (the explosion
threshold which we found experimentally is identified by the marker). it
can be seen that, as p0 rises, the thresholds for initiation of explosion
and lasing come closer together. The relative position of explos ion and
lasing thresholds in an lll’ laser (p0 . 1 atm) were discussed in [3]; in
particular, with the initiating-pulse durations which were used there, the
thresholds of explosion and laser action just about coincided. with short-

er initiation laser action is possible in the pro-explosion region also [17].

The e(p ) relationships for fixed values of «were derived from Figure 5a
and included in Figure So. It can be seen that as Po rises the molar ener-
gy yield drops (especially sharply in the case of weak initiation). This
is due mainly to the ascending role of circuit breaking processes in triple
collisions (and, accordingly, to the relative reduction of the overall
chemical reaction rate) as compared with the bimolecular processes of cir-
cuit perpetuation, energy transfer and relaxation. At low pressures

(p 50.1 am) in the «30.1 - 27. range, all the curves tend toward 2 w y
s .2 Jlsnole with a corresponding chemical efficiency of (0.57., whereas at
p0 - 1 at. the maxi-in efficiency amounts to 3.57..

6. d/nmele

Figure 6. Relationship of energy densi- it ‘
ty of a DF-OOZ laser to the

initial temperature of the at 0 0
mixture. 0
ea
0

mmmmrnr

By simple estimates, the limit value of laser energy for the given mixture
in the absence of any relaxation processes is ~ l0.5 Jlssaole. Therefore,

the energy shortage occurring at pS0.1 atm is caused mainly by relaxation
processes.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Going back to Figure Sc. two £(p ) relationships are shown for an “F laser
using a mixture of 3.71ll2 - 11.1 F: - 2.21. 02 - 031. lie (see also [3]).

it can be noted that these relationships bear the same character as in the
case of the or-oo laser. llowever, at different values of a they tend to-
ward different values of em in the low pressure region. As can be
judged from the Figure. t.” ~‘VT. This also follow from a simple model
of the HF laser in which the principal cause of disrupted laser action is
the square law-as regards liF molecule concentration--process of HF relax-

ation to "F (see [3], for example). The chemical efficiency corresponding
to maximum energy density at q- 21. is ~31.

To the best of our knowledge, the literature does not provide complete re-
lationships between laser action energy and initial temperatures for the
lasers in question. Figure 6 shows that relationship for a DF-COz laser
using a mixture of 57. Oz - 151 F2 - 257. 002 - 17.02 - 5107. lie at 90 I 1 atln
and spill. It is significant that cooling of the mixture from 300 down to
about 200 it leads a 20-307. increase in the molar energy yield, but heating
results in a sharp yield reduction. lit To“ (010 K the mixture exploded

spontaneously, but cooling below 200 K resulted in intensive condensation
of (1)2 molecules.

These relationships were not investigated for "F lasers. llowcver, it is
known [19] that cooling of a stoichiometricnlly composed mixture, not di-

luted with helium, to 213 K at po - 0.15 atm did not result in a noteworthy
increase in the energy yield.

 

Figure 7. The relationship of «*(a) and 8 ,V' (b) to initiation for
"F and DF-CO lasers using mixtures of 3.77. Hz - 11.11 F -
2.22 02 - 83 a. (1), 14.51" - 1.3.57. r2 - 8.57.0 - 3337
lie (2), 57. o - lS'LF - 25750 - 17.0 - 51.7.". 3), and
57. n2 - 157. f2 - 79.4% 002 . o. z 02 (:3.

in conclusion, we will compare the quantum yields of both lasers and their
energy efficiencies at various initiation energies. The quantum yield was
deiined an the ratio of the number of laser action photons to the number of
photons of the light absorbed by fluorine molecules to termination of lasing.
Energy efficiency was defined as the ratio of total laser action energy to
the energy of the light absorbed by fluorine molecules during the entire

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flash. The comparison was made for lasers operating at p0 - 1 atm, To :5
R300 K and ci- 0 - 5%. Figure 7a shows the levels of fluorine molecule
dissociation to end of lasing (a!) needed for calculation, relative to the
total initiation energy. It can be seen that the initiation energy used

in lasing «*(determined to about 507. accuracy) tends toward saturation as
arises in the case of both Ill? and DIP-002 lasers, whereby 1* is substantial-
ly less for the Iii" laser than for the 09-002 laser. It is therefore to be
expected that shortening of the duration of the initiating pulse will lead
to a relatively faster increase in the efficiency of utilization of the
initiating light in the case of the “F laser [3].

The experimentally derived values for the quantum yield v*and energy ef-
ficiency at relative to the total initiation energy are shown in Figure 7b.
Comparing the obtained characteristics, one is able to note the following.
in the case of both lasers,» *as well as x , with arising, increase rapid-
right up to ”0.57., where’s has a clearly expressed maxisam and «Horac-
tically reaches its limit. It is seen, moreover, that for the DF-Wz laser
the limit characteristics shown are several times higher than for the ll? 1a-
ser. This is, however, valid only for the mixture compositions and length
of initiation investigated by us. For example, in [11] they found oi .
-o.oas1. and cm ~0.019 .1]ch for an Ill" laser using a mixture of 18m -
6“ F2 - 9.77. 8; - 8.31. Ar at p 50.75 stm, «0.77. with an analogous shape
of the initiating pulse, which is not much different from our findings;

but they found v‘mx -70, which is some four times higher than our finding.
A gain in w'm by about 1.5 - 2 times is due to the fact that the chemical
length of the circuit in [11'] is some 1.5 - 2 times greater than for Our
mixtures (we note that mixture preparation in a long circuit entails def i-
nite technical difficulties). A further gain by about a factor of 2 ap-
parently has to do with the fact that, firstly, the absolute concentration
of atoms entering into the chemical reaction was higher (and the reaction
rate along with it) and, secondly, the pressure was closer to optimua (see
[3], for example).

As was demonstrated in [20, 21], increasing the rate of rotation relaxation
in an Ill“ laser by introducing suitable relaxants leads to a 2-3-fold en-
hancement of its energy characteristics. Hence, the ll? laser characteris-
tics which we have reported can be upgraded, i.e., under conditions of the
initiation we used, their values will approximate the corresponding values
for a l>l-‘-(:02 laser.

It is important to note that there is is at present no satisfactory model
for a DF-CO laser which would explain, on the one hand, the existence of
energy density saturation with rising initiation energy in helium-diluted
mixtures and, on the other hand, the absence of saturation in mixtures, not
diluted with helium,having a high 002 content. It is thus difficult to
come up with hard and fast reconmendations on optimum mixture composition
for the DF-OOZ laser. it follows from the results obtained that, with
relatively weak initiation (a 5 1%), the most expedient is a mixture of
57. 02 - 157. F2 - 251. (:02 - 11. 02 - 56% He which, while providing high
energy characteristics, is sufficiently stable and therefore easy to

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI'FICIAI. USE ONLY

prepare. In the case of strong initiation, however, a mixture with a higher
content of 002 and F2 should be used.

1.

3.

’9.

5.

7.

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.
1‘.

MDLIOGRM’IIY

Arnold, 3. J., and Rojeske, 11. mm. orncs Vol 12, 1973 p 169;
Nisvall, c. 8.; Amen, D. P.; and Nenne, 'l‘. J. 1553 J. 03-9, 1973 p 181.

Orayevokiy, A. N. KNINIYA VYSOKIKN ENERGIY Vol 8, 1971. p 3;

Beshkin, A. 8.; Igoshin, V. 1.; Nikitin, A. 1.; and Orsyevskiy, A. N.
"Khi-icheskiye lazery. Itogi neuki l tekhniki. Ser. deiotokhniks"
[Chemical Lasers. Results of Science and Engineering. Radio Engineer-
ing Series], Vol 8, Moscow, VINITI AN 888R, 1975 p 5.

Agrookin, V. Ye.; Vaeil'yev, 0. K.; Kir'yanov, V. 1.; and Tal'roze, V. 1..
KVANTOVAYA nmmonm Vol 3, 1976 p 1932.

Kulokov, L. V.; Nikitin, A. 1.; and Oreyevskiy, A. N. KVAN'DOVAYA ELI-IK-
TRONIKA Vol 3, 1976 p 1677.

Baeov, N. 0.; Boshkln, A. 8.; Grisor'yev, P. 0.; Oreyevskiy, A. N.; and
Porodnikov, 0. Ye. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA Vol 3, 1976 p 2067.

Norrish, R. 0. V.; Porter, 0; and Thrush, B. A. PROC. ROY. soc. A216,
1953 p 165; A277, 1955 p 1023.

Parker, J. V., and Hess, L. D. 1835 International Electron Devices
Meeting, Neshington, 1973 (1588, New York, 1973).

Nichols, D. 3.; llall, R. 0.; and NcClure, J. D. J.APPL. PHYS. Vol (07,
1976 p 6026.

Dnnlshevskiy, A. N.; Kastel'skiy, A. A.; Ryvkin, S. H.; and Yaroshets-
hi], I. D. znm Vol 58, 1970 p 546.

Vasil'yev, 0. K.; Vizhin, V. V.; Nekarov, Ye. F.; chernyshev, Yu. A.;
and Tsl'roze, V. L. KllniIYA VYSOKI'KN ENERGIY Vol 9, 1975 p 156;
Vosil'yev, 0. K.; Hekarov, Ye. F.; and Chernyahev, Yu. A. FIZIKA
WRENIYA I VZRYVA Vol 12, 1976 p 896.

Orelner, N. ll. IEEE J. 08-9, 1973 p 1123.

Jubert, A. u.; Sicre, J. 3.; and Sehunncher, n. .1. z. PHYSIK. mama,
usus row: Vol 67, 1969 p 138.

Sucherd, S. N. IEEE J. 05-10, 1976 p 87.

Dolsov-Sovel'yev, G. 6.; Zharov, V. F.; Neganov, Yu. 8.; and Chunk,
G. H. ZIIETF Vol 61 1971 p 66.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

15. l’ochlcr, '1'. 0.; l’lrklo, J. C.; and Walker, ll. E. 13158 J. 08-9, 1973 p 83.

16. Vutl'yev, G. K.; Mokarov, ‘10. F.; and Chernyahev, Yu A. KINETDCA I
WALIZV0116, 1975 p 320.

17. noon, V. D. J. CHEM. Pars. Vol 55, 1971 p 2466.
18. Cross, 3. u. r. J. cum. ms. (cams) Vol 50, 1969 p 1889.
19. Creiner, N. R. 1331-: J. QE-B, 1972 p 872.

20. Vasil'yov, c. K.; Makarov, Ye. F.; Ryabenko, A. 6.; and Tal'roze, V. L.
mvu 71, 1976 p 1320.

21.. Vuil'yov, G. K.; Gur'yev, V. 1.; and Tal'roze, V. L. ZIIBTP Vol 72,
1977 p 963.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'otvo "Sovetakoyo radio", '«vantovaya elektronika", 1978

5656
680: 8146 I0 723

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSICS

UDC 535.36
METHOD FOR MEASURING TUB GWETRIO PARAMETERS 0P QUASIGAUSSIAN LASER BEANS

Noucow KVAN'I’OVAYA BLMRONIKA in Russian Vol 5 No ll. 1978, received 1 March
1978 pp 2457-2659

[Article by D. V. Vinsov. V. V. Korobkin. R. V. Serov. Physics Institute
imeni P. N. Lehedev of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow]

[Text] Laser beans with quasigauasian intensity distribution are frequently
used to perform experiments in various areas of quantum electronics. For
precise processing of the Icasurenent results it is necessary to know the
geosetric parameters of such beans with good accuracy: the diffraction di-
vergence radius 2 - kwélz - w [A (w is the peak radius of the beans;

k - all is the wave masher) an the constriction position of the been 2 .
In practice all of the existing methods of measuring the configuration of

a bean are based on direct or indirect photosetric seasurenenta of the
intensity distribution of it [1-6]. The characteristic error for such
neasurements is rarely less than 10 percent.

In this paper two methods are proposed for measuring the parameters of
quasigaussian beams. They are quite silple fro. the point of view of
calculations and do not require either direct (that is, the construction of
a blackening curve) or indirect (for example, the use of filters with
known optical densities)photometry. and they also provide useful informa-
tion about the structure and aberrations of the phase front of the beam.

1. Uniform Phase Distribution

The investigated bean is incident inclined to a plane-parallel transparent
plate. the thickness of which is significantly less than the radius of the
diffraction divergence of the beam (t << so). On reflection, two beams
arise of approximately equal intensity, the axes of which are parallel and
are shifted by the distance xo - t sin ZiHa' - ain’l. where i is the angle
of incidence. n is the index of refraction of the plate material.

The interference pattern occurring in the z-plane for so > we is a system
of bands (Figure l). the spacing between which is

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Amine m |Ir.. (H

where 8(a) is the radius of curvature of the wave front of the beam in the

a cross section. For 2 - I: >> to. the radius of curvature of the phase
front is in practice equal to the distance to the bean constriction. and

by two or sevaral measurements (which must be performed on both sides of the
constriction) it is possible to find the constriction position of the beam
with high accuracy. Then. measuring R(z) near the constriction we find

the radius of the diffraction divergence of the been so - Jlsl-zn)(Re1)-z +z,)
and the peak radius of the bean respectively at the constriction no - sol/n
and the angle of diffraction divergence 0 - wo/zo - Al(nw°). Let us note

that for beans with a parabolic phase front (in particular, for gaussian
beams) the bands must be strictly rectilinear.

Generally speaking. it is necessary to consider that the formula (1) is of

an approximate nature inasluch as the bands are not purely sinusoidal. In the
interference pattern the sinusoidal bands are superposed on the superposition
of two gsussisn distributions. The synthetic error occurring in this case
dwo/wo is equal with respect to order of magnitude toe'yxo/(bwo), where Y is
the relative error in measuring the band width. Therefore, when using formu-a
(l) to calculate the beam parameters. the total error can reach several per-
centages. The above indicated systematic error can be excluded by comparing
the position of the peaks and the ninima of the interference pattern and the
corresponding values calculated by computer using the formula

In. a) -- Ac' ’""'[ith 3.?- + cod-L?- + «)1.
1
Here it is expedient to consider the restrictions connected with nonparallel-
ness of the feces of the plate and the optical relay of one of the inter—
fering beams in the plate laterial. Let the nonparallelness of the plate
faces be a. then the reduced difference in optical paths of the interfering
beam mama/WT. the restriction on the angle between the reflecting

faces of the plate assumes the form 2nn<<Alwo. and the restriction on the
plate thickness is L << :0.

It is easy to see that the first condition does not create theoretical limi-
tations for measuring real beams. In practice. in order to check the suit-
ability of the plate. it is necessary to make several exposures of the inter-
ference pattern, rotating the plate around the normal to the reflecting sur-
face. If we cannot record the variation in the interference pattern. then
the plate is totally suitable for measuring the parameters of the test bean.
The second condition. generally speaking, imposes quite rigid restrictions
on the parameters of the measured beam. Thus, in accordance with the second
condition for beans with 30'“ 20 an it is difficult to find an appropriate
plate inasmuch as it is technologically complicated to manufacture a high-
quality, plane-parallel plate less than a millimeter thick.

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Distribution of the intensity Figure 2. Interference pattern
of beans.reflected from a plane—parallel at the exit of a Michelson

plate. interferometer.

At the top is the characteristic inter-
ference pattern: the intensity distribution
in the constriction region appears below.

It is possible to attenuate the above—presented restrictions significantly
by using another, more complex system for splitting the test beam. For ex-
ample. in order to measure the parameters of strictly focused beans (with
snail z ) it is expedient to use the double beanrrefracting plane-parallel
plate 0? Iceland spar with a polarizer installed behind it. In this case
the interference pattern is created by ordinary and extraordinary beams, the
intensities of which can always be made equal by appropriate setting of the
polarizer. The beam parameters with 20 on the order of several millimeters
can be measured in this system.

2. Two Dimensional Phase Distribution

The studies of the perturbations and aberrations of the phase front of beams
using the Michelson interferometer have been performed many times [5, 6].

in contrast to the above-enumerated paper, in the method that we propose a
zero-order interference pattern is used, that is, for beams with a plane
front. interference rings (or bands) are absent. The investigated bean is
passed through the Michelson interferometer. It is possible to obtain two
beans at the exit. the axes of which exactly coincide. but the constrictions
are shifted by A - zn - z11 equal to the difference of the optical paths

of two arms of the interferometer. By observing the system of interference
rings (Figure 2) in the plane 3 - A/Z, that is, between constrictions, we
obtain 100 percent modulation of the intensity distribution with respect to
the entire field of view. The radii of the rings pm(z) are uniquely related
to R(z) by the expression

pl". ‘0.- IR IU2.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in this method the systematic error is absent. and the accuracy of the
measurement is determined by the random adjustment errors and measurement
of the ring radii. The remaining been parameters are calculated by the
measured value of the beam radius and A (just as in the first method).

The above-described methods were used by the authors for a number of years
to measure the geoaetric parameters of e neodynium glass laser emission
with modulated Q-factor and also the emission of the helium-neon laser.

The method of one-dimensional phase distribution is easily used here to de-
tact and measure the spherical aberration of the phase front of the beam

on the order of A110 [7] and. correspondingly, with respect to the two-
dimensional phase dietribution--estigmatism (in particular, for the beam

in figure 2 Ruin/Rmax - 0.89).

As an example of such measurements let us present a description of one of
the experiments in measuring the geometric parameters of the been free a
pulsed unimodal neodynium laser with Q-factor modulation. The beam was
focused by an objective with a focal length of 50 cm. For the measurements
by the method of one-dimensional phase distribution, a plate 1.02 mm thick
was used which was installed directly after the objective at an angle close
to 45‘. The distribution of the intensity of the interference pattern of
the reflected beams was recorded on a photographic plate. After each pulse,
the plate was shifted along the z-axis a distance of 3 cm near the constric-
tion and 10 cm-farther. Thus. 20 points were obtained. A straight line,

the intersection of which with the z-exis corresponded to the beam constric-
tion was drawn through the four edge points 8(2) by the least squares method.
By the six points located directly next to the constriction, the value of

to - 25.5 13:- was obtained and wo - 92.7 i 6 microns and 8 - 3.6 5; 2.5 mrads,
respectively.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. G. ﬂlrd, IZHBRENIYE LAZERNYKH PARAMBTROV [Heasurement of Laser Parameters],
Moscow. Mir. 1970.

2. I. H. “leer, APPL. OPTICS, Vol 5, 1966, p 1437.

3. QUANTUM ELECTRONICS VOL 1, NONLINEAR OPTICS, Part A. Edited by N. Rabin,
c. L. Teng., Acad. Press. N.Y., 1975.

4. Pearson. et al., J. 0PT. SOC. AMER., Vol 59. 1969. p 1460.

5. L. l. Zykov. G. A. Kirillov. S. B. Kormer, s. N. Kulikov, V. A.
Komarevskiy. s. A. Sukharev, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA [Quantum Electronics],
No 2, 1975, p 123.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIM. USE ONLY

6. V. s. Zuycv, K. .. Korol'kov. V. N. Note-1n. 0. Yu. Nosnch. Yo. P.
Orlov, KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA. V01 3. 1976. p 2436

7. 1.V . Chore-likin. T. K. chekhlova. OPTIKA I SPZKTROSKOPIYA [Optics
and Spectroscopy], No 32. 1972. p 102.

COPYRIGHT: tad-tel'atvo "Sovetakoyo Radio." "Kvnntovoyn Blcktronikn."
1978

10845
080: 8166/0721

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRYS ICS

000 621.373.8.038.823

SOME RESULTS OF OPTIMIZING THE COMPOSITION OF ACTIVE MEDIA AND WE OPERATING
PARAMETERS OF A GAS-DISMGE CO-LASBII

Hoscow KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 5 No 11 1978 Received 1 March
1978 pp 2459-2661

[Article by G. H. Grigor'yan, B. H. Dymshits. G. V. Ivanov. Ya. P.
Koretskiy. I. V. Kochetov. V. H. Lamonov, V. c. Pevgov. V. F. Sharkov]

(Text) The optimization of the compositions of the working mix and the
operating conditions of a fast-flow When with longitudinal discharge
(9. - 2m) was carried out on the experimental setup described in reference
[1]. The purpose of optimization was to obtain maximal efficiencies and
specific power output. The composition and flow rate of the gas. the pres-
sure in the discharge tube, and the energy contribution per unit volume of
discharge were varied during the experiments.

numerical calculations were first perforeed [2, 3], on the basis of which

the range of variation of the operating parameters. which was of interest.
was determined. The reliability of the calculations was confirmed [In] by
comparison with the experiments studying the spectral composition of the radia-
tion and the amplification coefficient of the weak signal.

Some of the results obtained at the present time are presented in the table.
The continuous operating time of the laser under the conditions presented
in the table was units to tens of minutes depending on the gas flow rate.
and it was limited by the pressure buildup in the vacuum tank into which it
was exhausted.

One of the basic causes leading to improvement of the output parameters

by comparison with the ones published in [l], in our opinion, is more care-
ful drying of the working gases. The drying was done by passing the com-
ponents of the gas mixture through vessels filled with alumogel and installed
in a high-pressure region (”100 kg/en2 ) in front of the reducers. The ex-
periments were performed for a dew point of the working mix of no more than
-so’c. The moisture was controlled by the condensation and coulometric
methods.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Note: The presented values contain three-four significant figures and were
obtained when using the computer for automatic gathering and processing of
the test stand data. The sensor error when measuring the output power of
the radiation was 6 percent, current and voltage 1.5 percent, component flow
rates 2-5 percent (depending on the magnitude of the flow rate).

Key: (1) laser characteristics and parameters
(2) experiments
(3) efficiency, 1
(4) specific energycontributlon, joules/gram
(5) laser output power. watts 3
(6) specific power input. joules/cm
(7) pressure in the discharge tube, mm Hg
(8) total discharge current, milliamps
(9) flow rate of the mixture components. n liters/sec:
(10) Parameter (BIN) x 1017 averaged along the length of the tube.
B x cm

In addition to moisture, the impurities in the initial gas also have important
influence. Thus. for example. when using carbon monoxide containing 2.7 per-
cent ll2 and 0.6 percent cu“. the radiation power turned out to be more than
two times below that when using carbon monoxide containing 0.1 percent H2

and 0.1 percent CH . The qualitative explanation of this fact can be ob-
tained from comparing the relaxation constants. Thus, the VT—relaxation
constancafor coma and co-nzo at a temperature of 300°K exceed the analogous
constants for CO-ﬁe by 1.5 and 3.5 orders respectively. At lower tempera-
ture. the excess is still more [3].

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition. the,increase in output power. specific power output-and de-
ficiency unconditionally was promoted by an increase in the length of the
discharge zone'which made it possible to increase the specific energy con-
tribution. As a result. the resonator which was used with 50 percent trans-
mission of the output mirror began to operate more efficiently.

The results presented in the table were obtained when using an external
resonator; the ends of the discharge tube were covered with Ca? -windowa
fastened at the Brewster angle. In order to estimate the effec 'of the
losses connected with the presence of windows. a special series of tests
were run on the efficiency of the laser.

An adjustable unit with an internal "blind" mirror was installed'in place

of one optical window in the discharge tube. The other end of the tube,

was as before covered with a Ca? window. Between this window and the plane
seeitransparent germanium mirror with 50 percent transmission another Ca?
plate was installed at the Brewster angle. The output power of the laser
was measured in the presence of this additional plate (P ) and in the ab-
sence of it (P ). As a result of processing the experimental data from 15
experiments, cﬁc ratio P Irz - 0.862:0.0l5 was obtained (the fiduciel inter-
val was determined for probability of 0.95). It must be noted-that the

role of the intraresonator losses connected with the presence of optical
windows of Ca? at the ends of the discharge tube still depends on the
operating conditions of the laser. Nevertheless, on the basis of the ex-
periments that were performed it is possible to propose that the replace-
ment of the external resonator by an internal one leads to a noticeable in-
crease in output power and efficiency of the laser by comparison with the
table data.

The authors express their appreciation for the important assistnnce given
them by R. c. Avarbe. B. A. Tikhonov and Ye. P. Velikhov in the statement
of the work; they also are extremely grateful to A. N. Starostin and A. P.
Napartovlch for useful discussion of the results.

BIBLIOGRAPKY
l. c. V. Abrosimov, B. H. Dymshits, G. V. lvanov. Ya. P. Koretskiy. V. H.
Lamonov, V. F. Sharkov, ZHTF [Journal of Technical Physics], No 47,
1977, p 235.

2. Yu. B. Konev, I. V. Kochetov, V. S. Herehenko, V. G. Pevgov. V. F.
Sharkov, NUCLEAR POHBR INSTITUTE PRBPRINT, No 2810, 1977.

3. Yu. B. Konev. I. V. Kochetov, V. c. Pevgov, V. F. Sherkov. NUCLEAR POHER
INSTITUTE PREPRINT, No 2821, 1977.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘
l

4. v. r. Shntkov, a. u. Dyuhiu. c. u. armr'yui, c. v. Ivunov.
Ya. P. Mutiny. I. V. Kochotov. V. H. Lmnov. V. c. Pemv.
KVAN‘I‘OVIYA WM!“ [Qunntu- noc'troniclh No ‘. 1977. p 1826.

COPYRIGIIT: lzdntel'stvo "Sovctalwye radlo.“ "Kvnntovay. olektronﬂul."
1978
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSICS

UDC: 621.373:535
EVALUATION OF THE ACCURACY OF Th3 LASER DOPPLER VELOCITY METER

Leningrad OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKDPIYA in Russian. Vol 64, No 6, Jun 78.
pp 1153-1156

[Article by I. P. [Akin]

[Text] A study is performed of the perturbing effect of atmospheric
turbulence on the operation of a laser Doppler velocity meter.
An analytic expression is obtained, relating the error in mea-
surement of velocity to the parameters characterizing the geom-
etry of the meter and the conditions of turbulence. The ques-
tion of methods of decreasing the aeasurement error is discussed.

In recent years, laser Doppler velocity meters (LDVH's) have become wide-
spread [1]. These devices use the Doppler frequency shift of a signal
reflected from a loving object to determine the velocity of the object.
These systems are particularly useful for studies of atmospheric turbu-
lence by means of the scattering of light on aerosol particles (natural

or artificially introduced) in the atmosphere. The primary advantage of
LDVH's include: capacity for remote measurement. noncontact measurement,
linearity with respect to velocity. as well as their broad range of mea-
surement and practically unlimited maximum measurable velocities. The
problem of estimating the accuracy of such instruments has formed the sub-
ject of a number of works [1-3]. in which various reasons for spreading of
the Doppler signal have been analyzed: the influence of physical process-
es occurring in the air stream; the influence of certain factors in the
optical portion of the system. however. since the mutual coherence of

the sources is significant in such systems, and since it is the coherent
properties of the radiation which are most highly distorted during propa-
gation through a turbulent atmosphere, the question arises of the error

of velocity measurement introduced by turbulence. The study of this ques-
tion. particularly the relationship of this error to the error introduced
by fluctuations in the velocity of scattering objects, is the subject of
the present report.

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. For definition, let us analyze the following measureaent systea: two
mutually coherent point sources are located at points (0. -p0) and (O. 90).

respectively. and u receiver ls located at point (0. p"). The receiver is
a square-law detector. reacting to the power of the incident radiation:

my"! (9.: I). (1)

where a is the effectiveness factor of the receiver. “9,: t) is the instan-
taneous value of intensity of the reflected radiation at the point where the
detector is located.

Suppose the object froa which the laser radiation is reflected consists of a
cloud of chaotically distributed scattered bodies, the dinensions of which
are such that the fields created by the sources are locally plane. coherent
waves within the limits of the clouds of bodies. we will also assume that
the distance between the scattering objects is rather great and that the
attenuation of the field due to scattering is slight; therefore. the field,
reflected once, can be su-ed as to intensity [6]:

I
"|:‘- I ;‘.
O ) §|l('s) (2)

where

I: (n: 0- (It. 'c’i“ "-"=°- h= "{c’w- "v' “v": "+ NM“ "d“ " +

+ 2 co: [m - (rival: .0)” u

m: 0-910. -e.: L. 9: 044m. 9.: B. t: t).
w: t': 0-10: I’: dwelt: t’: t).

x(r; r'; t). s(r; r'; t) are fluctuations in the logarithm of amplitude and
phase. arising upon propagation from point r to point r' at moment in time
t; N is the number of scattering objects; 00 is the initial amplitude of the

field at the source; 5!. is the amplitude function of scattering of the ith

member of the set; It - 2H4”. A is the wave length of the radiation in free
space: L is the distance from the sources to the scattering voluae; V01. is
the velocity of the lth scattering object.

Let us analyze the case in which the velocities of the scattering objects
are steady, random processes. the statistical properties of which are iden-
tical for all scattering objects (701 - ‘70 is the mean velocity, 0‘2". - 0‘2,

is the dispersion of velocity fluctuations.
73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to measure the speed of movement of an object. the recorded cur-
rent is subjected to correlation analysis. and the position of the maximum
of the spectrum is determined. If there are no fluctuations, the spectrum
of current consists of a set of delta functions. i.o.. the system allows

precise estimation of the speed of movement of an object. However. fluc-
tuations in the radiation. caused by passage through a turbulent atmos-

phere and fluctuations in the speeds of scattering objects. lead to errors

in velocity measurement. The relative error of measurement is related to
the expansion of the spectru-

%- a: “loamy-I.

where M is the half-width of the current spectrum. We know [5] that At 8

1:09, where 1’" is the correlation time of the photocurrent. The namel-
ized self-correlation function of photocurrent is

mo-num'm. (3)

where

W
run-7131': 3 [a (0-qu (He-WM.
O

r u
f I) — 11,3 H m) 43-3-1135“ 2 s; [."x‘l'i‘h" + {mm-Ml];
Id

Bx(p) is the correlation function of the fluctuations in the logarithm of

amplitude [6]. while the wavy overline represents averaging with respect to
fluctuations in the velocities of scattering objects.

Since the fluctuations in the complex phase Mr; r'; t) in the area of ap-
plicability of the method of smooth perturbations are distributed normally

[7], while all the_scattering objects are statistically equally probable,
if 1' << 1’0 - 20030 1

  

moat-up - mm‘d. L ‘)' (6)

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I
son o'vrcm. use ONLY
\

where 1‘“
ﬂows):

0(9) - 0.27 0:131. 5/3 is the structural\ function of the couple: phase of

a spherical wave; cg is the structural parameter of turbulence. V is
the value of wind speed on the track.

| |
“('0 "-(‘g' Sasha—0|”)
.

If we also presune that the fluctuations in velocities of scattering ob-
jects are distributed non-ally. we can then derive the final expression
for the normalized correlation function

h M a: up [_[?|(T:-IV_) ” _ £222. 9} PJ'- ,) .

°°' T (5)
2. It is not difficult to see that the error in ueasure-ent of velocity
will be
u q. ,
‘ 8 VIEW-(m T
is. [I I d:|sf.—'|'“] W— 0(VT) > d.
NV» ')-T.~ °

2%.:3' o (yr-E) < a.

"he" d = [V2 p. y/HF‘ o,o;']"‘.

As would be expected. the error results from fluctuations in the velocity
of the object, and fro. the turbulence of the atmosphere. If the fluctua-
tions in velocity of the object and caused by fluctuations in wind speed,
the error will not be great. since in the atnospheric layer near the

1

ground of; = 0.1 [6]. If 90 g ilk-I, the error introduced by turbu-
lence will be significant (in comparison to the error resulting fro. fluc-
tuations in the velocities of the scattering objects), even with slight
turbulence. If the turbulence is strong or if the radiation path is long,

the main contribution to the error in measurement of velocity will always
be that of turbulent distortions.

When the primry contribution to the measurement error is that of turbu-

lence. the error increases with increasing intensity of the turbulence

(c:)3/5. He can see that the relative error of velocity Ieasurelent if

proportional to 1.3,5 and k1”. A decrease in the error resulting from tur-
bulence is possible by increasing the distance between the sources and wave

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure. 1.2 - Spherical wave; J
1'. 2' - plane waves; 1. l' -

7° MV;2.2'-VOHV. z

1 \‘~\

00.: an I a ,5
5.

lengths. The nomlised error 6 - B (30. “8-1:“, 3) depends essentially

on the ratio of mean wind speeds and speeds of scattering objects. as well
as their mutual orientation (see figure). The difference between curves 1
and 2 is explained by the fact that the sp_e_ed of transfer of turbulent het-

erogeneities acting on the radiation is 3 vo-V, and in mininl where 70 H v
and aaximal where V H V. The limiting value of error 60°, V) is

o
VIED%(V1-€)(z"r"

3. A sinilar analysis can be performed for the other initial distribu-
tion of radiation at sources, for example, for plane waves propagating at
and to each other. The variation in the nor-a1 error of velocity measure-
ment as a function of the ratio of mean velocities of the wind and the re-
flecting objects is shown in the figure. He note that the maxim. value of
error as IVOI + w is

No. v) ~lm' nn(v)l"ID'(VFFT)l"--

where Dp(p) - g No) is a structural function of the fluctuations in the

complex phase of the plane wave.

1:. we note in conclusion that the error introduced by turbulence is in-
significant in laboratory measurements and over short path lengths (L i

10 In). but becone significant during propagation in the lowest layer of the
atmosphere over long distances (L ‘= 100 m—l kn). Therefore. in these cases,
it is necessary to consider the influence of atmospheric turbulence along
with other distorting factors.

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“WES

B. s. Rinkevlchus, Ucp. 11:. nouk. 111. 305, 1973.

B. s. Rinkevichus. V. 1. Sllrnov. Kvnntovsyo Slektrontks [Quantu-
BlcctronLcs] No 2, 86, 1973.

c. A. nnr111. V. S. Sobolev. delotekhn. 1 Eloktron.. 19. 1981. 1976.
0. van de “ulst. Nasseysnlyc Svcts “sly-1 Chnstltssst [Scattering of
Light by Snell Particles] Foreign Literature Press. Moscow, 1961.

H. Born. 8. Vol'f. Osnovy Optikl [Principles of Optics] ﬂanks Press.
Moscow, 1973.

V. I. Thtnrskly, Rnsprostrsncnlye Voln v Turbulentnoy Atnosfere
[Propagation of Waves in a Turbulent Atmosphere] Nsukn Press, Moscow.
1967.

H. Ye. Crochevo. A. 8. Gurv1ch. 5. 0. Lonndse. V. V. Pokssov, A. s.
Khruptn. Itv. Vuzov. detofizikn. 17. 105. 1974.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATBL'STVO "NAUKA", "OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA". 1978

6508

080: 8154/0650

76's

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
V. A. Polyanskiy. I. L. Punkrat'yevn, “Theory of Cooled
Electrical Probes."

H. H. Colonozor, "Study of Spatial Currents Eros. Departing
Shockwaves . "

S. Ye. Gertsenshteyn. Ye. B. Rodichev. V. H. Shmidt. "Inter-
action of Three Dimensional Waves and the Occurrence of
Turbulence in the Presence of e Convective Instability."

V. V. Tyurcv, "Thin Surface in an Ideal Liquid Flow."
V. Kolesov, "Convective Instability in a System with Rotation."
A. D. Khanzayev, "Calculation of Potential Plow over Hing."

8. Ya. Gertsenshteyn. A. V. Latyshev, Yu. M. Shtenler,
"Nonlinear Haves in Boundary Layer Flows and Their Stability."

V. P. Hyesnikov. "Description of the Hovenent of in Liquid
in Disperse Systems."

A. I. Tsurin. Yu. S. Teplitskiy (Minsk), "Investigation of
the Motion of Gas Bubbles in a Nonuniforln Pseudoliquefied
Layer."

A. 1‘. Fedorchenko. "Calculations of Two Dimensional Nonststion-
sry Flaws of a Viscous Compressible Ces."

A. H. Sizov (Leningrad), "Gas Dynamics of Jets Escaping Iron a
Group of Nozzles."

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
L. N. Maurin (Ivanovo), "Reduction of a Systen of Nonlinear
Partial Differential Equations to One Equation."

N. N. Nartynyuk. ”Phase Explosion Mechanism with the Destruc-
tion of Netala on Interactionvitha Powerful Energy Source."

N. A. Yermakov. “First Integral of the Navier-Stokea Equations
for the Structure of a Shockvave."

Ye. c. Kolesnichenko. "Derivation of Hydrodynaaic Equations
for Hultiatomic Chemically Reacting Cases."

6. s. Golitsyn. "Convection of a Viscous Liquid: Power
Engineering, Similarity. Self-Similarity."

N. Ye. Afonina. "Numerical Investigation of hypersonic Flow
of a Viscous Gas Around Blunt Bodies."

A. S. Kutsayev. "Movement of Large Deformable Bodies in the
Ataosphere."

A. N. Ganzhelo. "Calculation of Two-Phase Flows in Channels
of Variable Cross-Section."

B. L. Dubinakiy (Novosibirsk), "Experiaentsl Investigation of
the Magnus Effect on Solids of Rotation of Great Elongation."

V. V. Lunev. C. N. Zalogin, Yu. A. Plastinin, "Nonuniforn
Ionization and the Radiation of Air after Powerful Shock-
waves."

V. A. Fotiycv, G. L. Saekhov, "Plasma-Dynamic Lasers with
Thermal Pumping."

c. A. Atanov (Donetsk), "Internal Ballistics of the Hydraulic
Can of Impulse Hater Jet."

V. A. Kachclap, Yu. A. Kukibnyy, I. A. Izaaylov, S. I. Pekar
(Kiev). "Intensification of Light in the Reconbination
Reactions Induced by a Shockuave."

V. I. Kholyavko (Khar'kov). "Aerodynamics of an Elongated
Body in Bounded Flows."

T. V. Kondranin. "Some Results of the Numerical Investigation
of Radiant-Convective Heat Exchange in a Hypersonic Shock
Layer during the Flight of Blunt Bodies in Planetary
Atmospheres."
FOR OPFlCTAL USE ONLY

V. I. Hyahcnkov, "Numerical Investigation of a Separated
Flow in Front of a Racoaa."

V. P. Myaunikov, “Theory of Mixing in a Bolling Layer."
A. T. Fedorchenko, "Some Nonatationary Flows in Short Channels."

V. A. Yclyukhin (Chelyabinsk), "Nonlinear Parabolic Equation
of a Banding Have in Nonconaervative Systems."

V. A. Algarin (Novosibirsk). "Nonlinear Problem of the
Arbitrary Movement of a Finite-Span Hing.”

V. 6. Baahtovoy, "Stability of the Film and Film Flows on
Magnetizing Liquids."

H. D. Spaktor (Novosibirak). "Super Critical Convection in
the Presence of a Free Surface."
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WILIGATIG‘S

008 519.95
HANIPUMTIN ROMS , DYNAMICS AND Al-OORITIIHS

Roscow HANIPULYATSIONNYYE 808017. DINAHIKA I ALGORITHY in Russian 1978
signed to press 6 Apr 78 pp 4-7

[Annotation and Table of Contents of book by Ye. P. Popov, A.P. Vereshchagin
and S.L. Zenkevich. lzdatel'stvo "Hanks", 6,900 copies, 400 pages]

[Annotation]

[Text] The book sets forth methods of studying the complete spatial dynamics

of the manipulating systems of robots as complex, multi-link mechanical objects
with an arbltrary kinematic configuration and with any number of degrees of

nobility. These methods make it possible to automate. in a convenient form.
the process of simulating on digital computers and analog-to-digital con-
verters the spatial dynamics of the manipulator with an actuating control
system from the initial data without writing out equations.

Algorithms for automated planning of the robot's controlled movement, as well
as several algorithms for data processing in robot control systems and the
principles of constructing control systems are formulated. A general classi-
fication of robots is preposed. according to the control principles. which
encompasses the perspectives for their further development and use in the
national economy, in studying and exploring the ocean. underground regions.
etc.

The book's main content pertains to the results of the authors' own studies,
with partial inclusion of other studies. The presentation of the material
is easily understandable for a broad range of engineers. scientific associ-
ates. graduate students and students in senior courses.

80

FOR OFPiCIAL USE ONLY
Table of Contents

Foreword . . . . . . . . . . .

FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

Isaaovosaasoooasoon

Part I. GENERAL CLASSIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION OF HANIPULATING
ROBOTS O I O O O I O 0 D O C O O O I O O O D O I 0 O I I 0

Introduction . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 1.
Sect.
Sect.

Chapter 2.
Sent.

Sect.
Sect.

aaasooasaassoosos

Definitions and Classifications . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Concept of Robots . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Classification of Manipulating Robots . . . .

1.1.
1.2.

Purpose and Structure of Manipulating Robots . . . . ..
Purpose and Spheres of Application of

Manipulating Robots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Actuating Mechanisms of Manipulating Robots . . .
Drive Units of Manipulators . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1.

2.2.
2.3.

Part 2. DYNAMICS AND MOVEMENT CONTROL OF ACTUATING MECHANISMS
OF HANIPULATING ROBOTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 3.
Sect.
Sect.

Chapter 6.

Sect.
Sect.
Sect.
Sect.

Chapter 5.

Sect.
Sect.
Sect.
Sect.
Sect.

Sect.

Uniform coordinates and Conversions . . . . . . . . . .
Uniform Coordinates . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.1.
3.2.

Projection Conversions . . . .

erases-ass

Gauss Principle of least Constraint in the Dynamics

of the Actuating Hechanisas of the Robots . . . . .
Gauss Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Active Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Inertia of the Links of the Mechanism . . . .

o
o

» b.b a
.

DUNH
.

a...
a...

Gauss Principle for Mechanisms With Kinematic
Pairs of the Fifth class . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mechanics of the Actuating Organs of Manipulating

Robots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
' Special Systems of Coordinates . . . . . . . . . .

Generalized Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.1.
5.2.

U‘V‘U
U‘hu

gs
.
3‘

Dynamics of a Simple Kinematic Circuit . . . . .
Dynamics of Manipulators and Dynamic Programming

Method of Conjugate Control Systems and Simulation

on an Electronic Computer . . . . . . . . . . . .

Dynamics and Control . . . . .

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tooonsoooc

ll
11

13
13
19

24

24
31
40

#5
AS

60
61
69

77
79
82
87

93

103
104
111
120
128

137
166
Sect.

Sect.
Chapter 6.

Sect.

Sect.
Sect.

Chapter 7.
Sect.
Sect.

Part 3. AlﬁORITﬂHS FOR ANALYZING VISUAL INFORMATION AND THEIR USE
TO CONTROL MANIPUIATING ROBOTS . .

5. 7.

5.8.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Closed Form of Controls of Movement of
Actuating Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Precise Algorithms of Dynamic and Force
Analysis of Aetuating Mechanism . . . . . . . .

Algorithm for Rove-eat Control . . . . . . . . . . .

6.1.

6.2.
6.3.

Planning the Trajectories of the Robot and

the Nonlinear Control Algorithms . . . . . . . .
Linear Control Algorithms at the Tactical Level
Planning the Trajectories in Space of the
Generalized Coordinates on the Basis of the
Method of Dynamic Programming . . . . . . . . .

Robots with Artificial Intelligence . . . . . . . . .

7.l.
7.2.

introduction . .

Chapter 8.

Scot.
Sect.

Sect.
Sect.

Sect.
Sect.

Chapter 9.

Sort.
Sort.

Sect.
Sort .

Sect.

Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

COPYRIGHT:

1215!
C80: 1870

Approaches to Artificial Intelligence . . . . .
The Control hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . .

toooooooolooloooooootoneo

Methods of Preliminary Simplification of Input
Freecataiion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8.1.
8.2.

one:
.
§U
.

one:
am

Machine Presentation of Visual Information . . .
Statements of Differentiation and Smoothing

oi the illumination Function . . . . . . . . . .
Assigning the Circuit Points . . . . . . . . . .
Approximation of the Circuit. Aligning the
Circuit Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Methods of Describing the Circuit Diagram . . .
Organizing the Program to Assign the Circuit . .

Analysis of the Scene Presented by the Circuit
Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9.1.
9.2.

Geometry of the Assemblies and Their Layout . .
Obtaining a Noncontradictory Interpretation

of the Scene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Breakdown Into Substances . . . . . . . . . .
Recognition and Determination of Space
Arrangements of Objects Making Up the Scene . .
Relating the Program for Analyzing Visual
Information With the Control Program . . . . . .

Clavonya redaktsiya fiziko-matematichcskoy literatury
izdatei'stvu “Nauka”. 1978

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nose-noon...

174
I76
I97

203
230
251
267
271
284
291
291
297
298

302
309

317

326
328

332
332

338
348

358
383
389
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 62.001.57:681.3-523.8
SIMULATION OF DISCRETE SYSTEMS 0N COMPUTER DISCUSSED

Moscow MODELIROVANIYE SLOZHNYKR DISKRETNYKH SISTEM NA EVN TRET'YEGO
POKOLENIYA (OPYT PRIMBNENIYA 6988) [Simulation of Complex Discrete Systems
on a Third Generation Electronic Computer] in Russian 1978 signed to press
23 Jun 78 pp 2, 5-6. 161

[Annotation. excerpts from foreword and table of contents from book by
0. V. Golovanov. S. c. Duvanov and V. N. Smirnov, Energiya. 15,000 copies,
161 pages]

[Text] The book presents a brief description of the system of statistical
simulation of the General Purpose Simulation System/360. There is a dis-
cussion of the use of the language of simulation in a number of specific
problems involved in data processes. industrial processes. breahdown of
instruments. etc. The book may be of assistance in setting up the system
discussed of simulation on a unified system of an electronic computer.

The book may serve as a manual for this language of simulation and be use-
ful to engineers and researchers studying problems of simulation on computers.

Foreword

[Excerpts] This book is devoted to a discussion of the potentials of using
GPSS [general purpose simulation system] for simulating the most varied
systems (henceforth the abbreviated Russian name for the GPSS language will
be given: 0TsSH--general purpose simulation system).

This language has been included in the software of machines of the IBM firm
since 1962 and is now one of the most popular languages for simulation
modeling (along with such languages as SIMSKRIPT, SIMULA and CSL). It is
partICulnrly well adapted for studying queueing problems. Standard com-
ponents of actual systems. such as units. storages and switches were inserted
as elements of this language. An adequate set of such components and the
programmed execution of the algorithms for their functioning make it pOssible
to construct complex models. while retaining the writing customary for the
planners.

83

J
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhe material in the hook is set forth In the following order.

Chapter 1 gives a brief description of the simulation system.

duapter 2 illustrates the possibilities of using the simulation system in
solving queueing problems.

The results of the simulation are compared with the results obtained by the
analytic method.

()mpter 3 discusses the use of the simulation language in a number of more
complex problems involving instrument hrenkdoums. transmission and processing
of information and also industrial processes.

For one of the problems. in addition to the program in the simulating lan-
guage. a variant of the program is given using ALGOL. The reader may com--
pare the various potentials for simulation and the results obtained with
this.

The appendix presents a method for evaluating the selection of the step of
disereteness and the necessary number of tests when simulating incoming
[luvs and intervals of duty of the instruments in queueing systems.

Since tlm machines of the Unified System of Electronic Computers are com-
patible with the machines of the loo/system. on one of which the authors
have carried out digital simulation, the experiment presented in the book
of this simulation may prove to be quite useful in setting up analogous
work on machines of the Unified Series of Electronic Computer series.

The authors consider it their pleasant duty to thank N. P. Buslcnko. corre-
spondinu member of the USSR Academy of Sciences. and B. A. Shchukin. candidate

or technical sciences. for the valuable comments that they expressed during
the reading of the manuscript for the hook.

The authors do not feel that the work on the material set forth in this

hook is completed, and therefore they will be grateful to readers who send
their consents and wishes to the address: 113111., Moscow. M-lllo. Shlyuzovuys
denkment. iO. Izdatel'stvo Energiys.

Table of Contents

l-orevord 3

Chapter I. A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF SIMULATION [ANGUAGE . . . . . . . . . 7

I. General Information on the Simlation System . . . . . . . . . 7
2. Equipment-oriented Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
'5. Transaction-oriented Units . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
lo. Computed Objects and Units Ensuring Output of Statistics . . 30
5.SpecialTypesoonits.................. 100
6.ControICards........................ 50

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ILLUSTRATING THE POTENTIALS 0F OTsSN [GPSS] USING

EXAMPLES FROM THE QUEUBING THEORY . . . .. . . . . . . . .
7. Simulating Random Variables Hith Different

Distribution Laws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Unilinear Queueing Systems . . . . . . . . . . .

9. Multilinear Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
10. Servicing the Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ll. Multiphase Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 3.

Appen

Bibliography . . . . . .

[2.
13.

lb.
15.

16. 1he Problem of Determining the Number of Processors
Needed To Solve a Certain Class of Problems . . . . . .

dix . .

COPYRIGHT:

l2151
650:

1870

USING OTsSM To SOLVE PROBLEMS 0? ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS

OF COMPLEX SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ...
Estimating the Reliability of Technical Systems . . . . . .
Simulating the Direction of Communication in the ASU

0..-

Data Exchange System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Simulating on Automated Information-Reference System . . .
Model of a Production Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

as ...... one...

0000......

lzdatel'stvo "Energiya", 1978

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

saoooosoaaacoaoo

o
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 658.012.011.56:681.3
RECORDING AND GA'I'IIBRIN PRIMARY INFORMATION FOR ASUP'S

Moscow REGISTRATSIYA I SBOR PBRVICHNOY INFORMATSII V ASUP in Russian 1978
signed to press 2 Feb 78 pp 2-10, 88

IAnnotntion. foreword and table of contents of book by A. P. Ivanov and
S. B. Abramov. Energiya. 11.000 copies, 88 pages]

[Annotation]

[Text] This book discusses a number of methodological problems of substan-
tinting the type and calculating the amount of peripheral equipment in A50?

and the problem of the compatible operation of the EVH [Electronic computer].
and gives a survey and brief technical description of the domestic equip-

ment for recording and gathering the primary information. as well as the
tendencies in their development and examples of usage.

The hook is designed for engineers and technicians engaged in working out
the software [or ASUI‘. workers at computation centers and also students at
VUZ's with the corresponding specialties.

Po rewo rd

The rise in productivity of the EVM increases the gap between the potentials
of the machines and the personnel engaged in preparing the information and
problems to be solved on the M. These preparatory stages are characterized
by a considerable proportion of manual. low-productive labor, and hold back
efficient use of the Elm. For example. _for one hour of work on an EVH with
average productivity. 70-100 hours of manual labor are required to prepare
the machine information carriers, and for more highly productive BVH, one
minute of the operational process requires one day of preparatory work.

Correlation of the time for preparing data and the time for processing them
on an RV" can today no longer he ensured through a simple increase in the

number of corresponding personnel at the computation center. There must be
maximum automation of the process of preparing and feeding the intonation
to the EV". In accordance with these principles, data processing in an ASU
requires the use of a ramified network of peripheral devices, which ensure

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

the recording and gathering of the primary information on the state and
dynamics of the production processes with the ncCessary speed. accuracy and
reliability. Consequently. the efficiency of using the BVH is closely
related to organizing the work of the set of hardware of the ASU as a whole,
important units of which are the external devices of the EVH (VnU) and the
peripheral equipment of the ASU (Prfo).

0n the one hand. the composition and parts schedule of the VnU and Prfo,
which determine the configuration of the computation system. depend on the
EU“. and on the other-the selected EVH has a decisive influence on the
substantiation and composition of the set of hardware of the A80? and the
organization of the computation process as a whole. Because of this. the
substantiated selection of the Prfo is a fully independent and no less
important stage than the selection of the BVH. To this it remains to be
added that the proportion of the cost of the PrfO in modern A50? is quite
sizeahlc and constitutes an the average 30-60 percent of the capital expendi-
tures to set up the systems.

There is a considerable expansion of the role of Prfo in reorganizing the
industrial process for processing the data. based on the concepts of a data
bank. One of the basic concepts is the equipment and program division of
the functions of recording and gathering the initial data. on the one hand,
and the conversion of the ordered arrays when solving specific problems, on
the other. This essentially means that the input of primary information
ultimately joins into the aggregate of organized arrays (base of the data)
and the promptness and reliability of the calculations depend to a con-
siderable extent on the initial stages of processing-recording and gather-
ing the primary information. in accordance with these principles, in the
modern systems the stage of punching the data is gradually eliminated as
very labor-intensive and characterized by a large number of errors, and
preparing the machine carriers and filling out the primary documents coin-
cides in time and with respect to equipment.

Among the means of recording and gathering information for the A88? are
included devices. units and systems which make it possible to gather the
primary data, prepare them for input to the BVH and monitor the correctness
of the input at the same time that the forms of the primary documents are
filled out. In this case. recording means recording the data onto the
machine carrier and (or) the document. gsthering--obtaining the data through
some device from a number of sources, and transmission--supp1ying the car-
riers (by some specific method. including the use of communication lines)
for processing at the computation center.

This book is devoted to methodological questions of selecting the type and
calculating the amount or peripheral equipment for an A30 for enterprises
with a series type of production. Problems of substantiating the external
devices of the EV" are paid much less attention. This is because the latter
are usually solved in the substantiation of the configuration of the computa-
tion systems and have been quite fully dealt with in domestic literature.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVlCiM. USE ONLY

The. basic purpose of the hook is to serve as a practical and reference hand-
book in solving a number of problems of ASU hardware. With a view to this,
there is a detailed description of the characteristics of machine information
carriers. standards and codes for entering the data on the carriers. since
the data carrier in the connecting link between the devices for recording
the data and the devices for processing them. The hook devotes considerable
attention to problems of using modern peripheral equipment in ASU. For this
purpose. brief technical-operational descriptions are given of the domestic
i’riO and external devices of the unified series EVM. which expand the poten-
tials of the BVH in data processing systems. Particular attention is paid
to the compatible. coordinated work of individual units and basic models of
domestic avn. The book is illustrated with methods of using the peripheral

equipment in ASlll’ (efficient count of the production and counting of
materials at the warehouse).

Prohlems of the reliability of the initial information are of primary
importance In the practical work of A50. The limited volume of the book
made. it impossible for the authors to deal with this problem fully and.
furthermore. there are sufficient works on this subject in domestic litera-
ture. For these reasons the authors restricted themselves to discussing
only the methods and means of monitoring that are used in domestic PriO.

Chapters i and 2 of the hook were written by A. P. Ivanov (foreword. sec-
tions l. S, 7). S. B. Ahramov (sections 2-4) and the remaining sections—
joiutly. Chapter ‘3 was written by S. B. Abra-0v with the assistance of
Ye. A. Khrutskiy.

The authors consider it their pleasant duty to express deep gratitude to

V. A. Corbatov. doctor of technical sciences. and V. F. Dem'yanov. candidate
of technical sciences. for discussing the contents, becoming thoroughly
familiar with and working on the manuscript. which contributed to a con-
siderable improvement in it. The authors are also grateful to Yu. M. liepyev.
candidate of technical sciences. for his constructive comments and wishes.
during the reviewing of the manuscript.

Tab 10 of Contents

Foreword.................................3

Chapter I. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCESSES 0F RECORDING
PRIMRYINFORNATIONFORASUP............... 5
I. Evolution of the Devices and Methods of Data Processing
on:\SUl’.......................... 5
2. Description of Machine information Carriers . . . . . . . . . 13
'1. Methods of Organizing information on Machine Carriers
andluputofoatatoEVti.. .. .. ... .. . .. . 23
10. Methods of Linking the EVH and PrfO . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

88

FOR OFFICIAL baF. OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. HE‘I'IIODOMOICAL PROBLEMS OF SELECTING PERIPRBRAL
EQUIPMENT FOR ASUP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5. Requirements for Peripheral Equipment . . . . . . . . . .

6. State and Tendencies of Develop-cot of Peripheral
Equipment for ASUP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7. Set of Peripheral Units for Unified System of EUR . . . .
8. Substantiatlon of the Type of Peripheral Equipment . . .
9. Determining the Amount of Peripheral Equipment for ASUP .

Chapter 3. TECHNICAL VARIANTS OF DATA PROCESSING 0N ASUP USING
PERIPHERALEQUIPHENT.................
10. Methods of Using Peripheral Equipment . . . . . . . . ..
11. Efficient Accounting of Production . . . . . . . . . . .
12. Counting Materials or the Warehouse of an Enterprise . .
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Bnergiye", 1978

12151
680: 1870

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00880R000100020020-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

SEMINAR ON STATISTICAL IIYDROACOUSTICS

Novosibirsk 'i‘liUDY VOS'HOY VSBSOYUZNOY SliKOLY-SEHINAM P0 STATISTICHBSKOY
GlDROAKUS‘I‘lKB (Proceedings of the Eighth All-Union School-Seminar on Sta-

tiut ical iiydroacoustics) in Russian I977 signed to press [4 Dec 77 pp 3,
l92-l9l.

ﬂanotntion and table of contents from book edited by N. c. Zagoruyko.
v. V. 01'shevskiy. S. V. Pasechnyy, Institute of Mathematics of the Siberian
Depart-eat of the USSR Academy of Sciences. 600 copies. I94 pageg/

ffexj The collection contains the materials of the Eighth All-Union
School-Seminar on Statistical iiydroacoustics. which was organized by the
Council for liydrophysics attached to the Presidium of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. the Institute of Acoustics of the USSR Academy of Sciences, the
'l’aganrog Institute of Radio Engineering. the lnteroblast Board of the

Scientific and Technical Society imeni Academician Ii. N. Krylov. the Insti-
tute of Mathematics of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of
Sciences and the Kiev Polytechnic Institute.

The classes of the school-seminar were held at the base of the Tagsnrog In-
stitute of Radio Engineering in the city of Taganrog from 8 through 16 Sep-
tember l976.

The theme of the collection includes question»l cf the study of the charac-
teristics of the aqueous medium and its boundaries. direct hydroacoustic
signals. reverberation and echo signals; questions of statistical measure-
ments and modeling; questions of signal processing against a background of
interference.

The materials of the proceedings are of interest for scientists and special-
ist in the area of hydrophysical research and data processing, graduate
students. engineers and students of the upper grades.

billioriu collegiual: V. V. Ol'shevskiy (editor in chief), h'. C. Catkin.
.‘i. G. Zaroruykn, S. V. Pasechnyy, 1.. Ya. Tsradanov (academic secretary).

90

FOR 0F?ICI:\I. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSI-I 0Nl.Y

Contents Page

Ye. P. Mnnterov. S. F. Cherepantsev. S. P. Shorokhovn. The Con-
nectinn of the Levels of Low Frequency Noises of the Sea With the
Hydrometeorologlcnl Conditions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . b

P. P. Drnhich. R. F. Fedorlv. The Velocity Meter of Sound in 0
Liquid- 0 I O O O O 0 O I I O l O I I O t O I O I I O O O O O O U 0 8

V. A. Lekunchenko. A. A. Shatalov. The Orthagonal Representation
(“Splice-TIMSIanID...o................... 9

n. C. Marchenko. L. N. Shcherhak. 0n the Connection of the Charac-
teristirn of Harmonized and Linear Random Processes in the Descrip-
tion of hydroacoustic Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

V. M. Kudryauhchov. For a Calculation of the Correlation Function of
a Sturhnntie Sound Field in a waveguide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

V. A. Rozhkov. Yu. A. Trapeznikov. A Method of Evaluating a Two-
Dimensional Spectrum According to the Data of the Synchronous Record-
ing of the Sea at Several Points of the Have Field. . . . . . . . . 17

L. A. Bespalov. A. M. Derzhavin, O. L. Sokodov, M. L. Turbovich. The
Study of the Method of Determining the Anisotropy of a Sound Field. 19

V. V. Karavayev, V. V. Sazonov. Correlational Analysis of the Fields
of incoherent Sources in the Fresnel Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

Ya. P. Dragon, 1. N. Yavorskiy. The Capacity of a Hydroacoustic
Communications Channel in the Presence of Scattering on the Sea
Surface.............................. 22

V. S. Nesterov. For the Detersination of the Capacity of a Hydro-
ncunstic Communications Channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

A. L. Conupni'skiy, Ra. l. Gronskiy. T. V. Polyanskaya. 0n the
rhuhu:uion of Signals Reflected From an Oscillating Surface . . . . 25

V. M. Frnlnv. Fluctuations of the Angle of Arrival of a Beam in
Refiectiun From a Statistically Irregular Surface . . . . . . . . . 27

G. Yn. Nnrodnitskiy. Distribution of the Amplitude of Signals
ScatteredIy;uhiuhuﬂuulﬂater Surface During Local Radiation . . . . 29

U. D. Piiln. Models of Echo Signals Fros Objects of Complex
Winn During Pulse Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

9]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSi-Z "NIX

'l'. N. Serneyeva. V. ll. Teuler. Mathematical Expectations and Vari-
ances of an Envelope and the Square of no aneiope of an iicho Signal
Pros the Accumulation of Discrete Seatterers. . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ye. ii. Libenson. On Some Characteristics of Echo Location Signals

ofmltﬂ..o.............oo.............

V. i. Klyaehhin. On One Reverse Problem in the Theory of Nave
Scattering on Random Discontinuities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

V. N. (:oncharav. V. V. Ol'shevskiy. 0n the Question of 'Ivaluating
the l’over Ana—alien ol’ Reverberation Pros Sound-Scattering Layers . .

V. V. Krlklmnovskty. S. V. i’asechnyy. The Space-Tine Correlation of
the i'leld of Neverberation interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

T. A. llama. I.. N. Chlhosova. 0n the Spatial Correlation of Reverbera-

lion When Taking Acrouut the Diagram of the Direction of Acoustic

Antennas...............................

ii. A. lieknlo. V. i'. Nyzhov, K. V. Filatov. Experimental Study of the
Spectral Density oi the liispersion of an Instantaneous Frequency of
Neverberatlon............................

N. N. Colubev. V. A. Koptyayev. A. V. Kotkin. Evaluation of the
losses of Noise Stability of Some Schemes of intercorrelation Pro-

(mailing...................-.oo...c....

A. V. Kliaenov. V. 0. Markov. V. i. Rogachev. 0n the Processing of
Signals at Great Length by Devices on Acoustic waveguides . . . . . .

s. N. Zelenskiy. s. V. Pasechnyy. 0n the Noise Stability of on An-
tenna Consisting of Pressure and Velocity liydraphones . . . . . . . .

A. N. Shruslev. 0n the Calculation of the Aposteriori Characteristics
at ﬂuctuating Signals From the Likelihood Ratio. . . . . . . . . . .

Ye. A. Daniiova. N. A. Drozdova. V. V. Ol'shevskiy. The Noise Stabil-
ity ur the Simple and Optimal: lntercorrelatian Receivers. . . . . . .

S. N. Zelenskly. S. V. Paserhnyy. 0n the Question of the Processing
of a Held of .1 Signal in a Random Heterogeneous Hediun . . . . . . .

(2. Ya. Vulcmhin, Ye. A. ill-veils, A. A. Spivak. The Determination of
itl'l'eetlvv Boundaries of the 00min of the lialting of Sequential Tests
cum-n the Known Law: of the Distribution of Competing hypotheses. . .

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0

o

36

39

1.6

50

61

63

67

71

72

78

79

9S
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

S. V. Bukharin, Ya. N. Bernshteyn. The Signal/Noise Ratio at the Out-
put of the Modulation Filter of a System of Nydroucouatic Data Pro-

ccsa‘nSesoaooeecaeeeeteaaaoseeeeeeeesee97

A. K. Senatorov. A. P. Trifonov. The Influence of Sea Reverberation
on the Characteristics of the Discrimination of Signals. . . . . . . . 99

Yu. Ye. Sidorov. The Application of the Principle of Invariance in
Sonar Detection Problems With Apriori Uncertainty. . . . . . . . . . . 101

L. G. Krasnyy, V. P. Peshkov. Adaptive Detection of Noise Signals. . . 113

N. G. Gatkin. L. N. Kovalenko, L. C. Krasnyy. S. V. Pasechnyy. The '
Secondary Processing of Nultibeam Signals Under the Conditions of In-
complete Apriori Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118

A. c. Colubev. The Adaptive Detection of Signals in a Multibean
Channel Given a Rough Prediction of Its Parameters . . . . . . . . . . 123

A. P. Serykh, P. P. Tarasenko. On the Precision of the Nonparametric
Evaluation of Punctionals According to Stationary Samples. . . . . . . 125

K. T. Protasov. A Nonparametric Algorithm of the Discrimination of
Hydrnncoustic Signals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129

U. S. Shatland. On One Problem of Optimum Nonlinear Echo Translation
for Random Fields. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131

Yu. Ye. Sidorov. An Unbiased Rule of the Classification of the Condi-
tions of n Sonar Detection Object Given Parametric Apriori Uncer-
tainty O 0 I 0 O I I I O O O O l O O D O I I 0 O I O I O O O I b O D O 133

Yu. P. Podgayskiy, A. N. Yakubovskiy. An Adaptive Receiver With the
Digital Space-Time Processing of Noise Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . 137

V. V. Ol'shevskiy. Imitation Machine Experiments in Statistical Hydro-
acoustics: Models, Algorithms, Measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139

V. B. Galnnenko. S. N. Naystrenko. On the Errors of the Measurement of
the Envelope of a Spatial Correlation Function of s Quasiharmonic Ran-
dom Field. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [56

S. A. Dachllo. V. B. Vasil'yev, C. H. Hskhonin. The Processing of
Hydroncoustie Signals Using the Analytical Properties of the Estimates
of Their Instantaneous Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [58

A. K. Novikev. Modulation Characteristics of Nonstandard Random
Pulse Processes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. l. Chaykovskiy. The influence of the Cutting Off of 0 Comparison
Signal on the Noise Stability of Optimum Detection. . . . . . . . . . 170

N. F. Norozov. A. M. Nurntov. Questions of the Determination of the
Error and the Choice of the Pace of Quantitation in the Probability
Analysis of Stationary Processes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172

K. P. L'vov. 0n the Influence or the Doppler Effect on the Response
of a Discrete Hatched Filter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176

n. G. Narchenko, N. A. Shutko. An Algorithm and Program for the Pro-
cessing of Statistical Data Using Linear Splaynov . . . . . . . . . 177

N. l. Pakhomkln. K. V. Pilatov. On One Algorithm of the Processing
of Ninary Quantlzed Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178

K. h. Krukuvskly-Sinevich. V. V. Hikhaylovskly. A high-Speed Method
of Realizing the Correlation Processing of Signals Using Computers. . 180

V. V. Critsyk. B. R. Zlatogurakly. V. V. Koshevoy, V. N. Mikhaylov-
skiy. S. A. Sorokn. 0n the Question of the Digital Processing of
Spatial Acoustic Signals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [82

v. V. Critsyk. A. Yu. Lutsyk, V. N. Nikhaylovskiy, C. T. Cherchyk.
‘nne Processing of One Class of Nydroncoustic Images on a Real Time
Scale...o....o........-..............l85

A. N. Veselkov. N. A. Davydovskaya, A. l. Cheremlsln. S. F. Cherepan-
tsev. A Statistical Model for Calculating the Thermodynamic and

Acoustic Parameters of Water. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186

N. N. Vishnyakova, V. A. Ceranin, A. N. Prodeus, C. D. Simonova. The
Spectral Correlation Structure of Nonstationary Models of Nydroacoustic
Random Processes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188

V. A. Yermai'chev. A Nydroacoustlc Neasurer of the Density of Ac-
cumulations of Sea and Ocean Fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . l9l

COPYRIGHT: Notice Not Available

780/
(:50: RIM/07 I9

9%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 539.125.5
INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS 500K 0N PULSED NEUTRON RESEARCH

Moscow TRUDY ORDENA LENINA FIZICNBSKOGO INSTITUTA IHBNI P.N. LBBEDEVA
AKADHHII NAUK SSSR: IMPUL'SNYYE NEYTRONNYYS ISSLEDOVANIYA ("Pulsed Neutron
Research") in Russian Vol 94. 1977 pp 1-2. 202

[Annotation and Table of Contents from the book edited by neademician
N. c. hnsov, Izdatel'stvo "Naukn", 1,150 copies. 10b pages]

[Text] In the experimental and theoretical papers presented in this collec-
tion, the processes studied are primarily those in which a "neutron gas".
located either in a vacuum or in matter, manifests the collective properties
of a statistical set of Fermi particles.

For a number of substances. changes in the neutron physics constants are
studied for the case of phase transitions of the first kind.

The collection is intended for physicists engaged in neutron research of
solids, studying the properties of ultracold neutrons and working on the de-
sign of nuclear and thermonuclear reactors.

Table of Contents

A.l. lsnkov. Some Specific Features of the State of the Art in
Neutron Physics Relating to the Design of New, High Power Sources

of Pulsed Neutrons 3
Ye.C. Gamaliy. S.Yu. Gus'kov. N.H. Soboievskiy. Neutron Diagnosis
of a Dense Thermonuclear Plasma 10

[.V. Volobuyev, D.N. Gorbunov, v.3. Granatkin, A.I. Isakov.
Detectors for Neutrons from a Short-lived Plasma 21

Ye.G. Gamaliy, A.I. Gromov, A.I. Isakov, L.A. Krupinina, Yu.S. Leonov,
9.1. Hatveyeva. Yu.A. Nerkul'yev, A.I. Nikitenko, Ye.R. Rychkova,
G.V. Sklizkov. Laser Thermonuclear Targets 29

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A.V. Antonov, A.I. Isakov, v.1. Kulikov, 0.A. hanger. Yu.A. Hcrkul'ycv

A.I. Nikitenko. Nonstandy-stntc Neutron Transfer in Systems with
large Sphcrlcnl Cavities 61

A.V. Anionov. A.i. lankov, V.N. Kovyl'nlkuv, N.V. Lin'kovn, V.I. Hikcrov,

S.A. Startscv. A.D. Pcrckrcstcnko, A.A. 1ikhouirov. Experiments with
Ultracold Neutrons 73

COPYRIGHT: Izdntcl'scvo "Nnukn". 1977

8225
CSO:1870

96
FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

CONSTRUCTION MACHINERY AUTOMATED CONTROL SYSTEMS

Leningrad AVTCMATIZIROVANNYYB SISTEMY UPRAVLBNIYA STROITBL'NYMI MASHINAMI
(Construction Machinery Automated Control Systems) in Russian 1977 signed to
press 26 Oct 1977 pp 2, 223-22b

[Annotation and Table of Contents from book by A. A. Yerofeyev,
Mashinostroyeniye, 5,000 copies, 22h pages]

[Text] This book is the first to synthesize data on development and prac-
tical adoption of automatic and automated control systems (A80) for the
production processes of the principal types of construction machinery. The
author examines an aggregate of questions pertaining to control of con-
struction machinery continuous-discrete production processes. The author
describes the principles of design and features of construction machinery
ASU structures; the book contains diagrams and models of automatic systems.
their static and dynamic characteristics, and presents methods and theoreti-
cal principles for designing these systems.

This book is intended for engineers and technicians engaged in the develop-
ment, design and operation of automatic and automated control systems. It

can also be utilized by students at higher educational institutions in the

corresponding areas of specialization.

CONTENTS Page
Preface 3
List of Abbreviations 5
Chapter 1. Control of Construction Machinery Production Processes 7

1. Classification and Description of Construction Machinery .
2. Control of Construction Machinery Processes 10
3. Principles of Design and Features of Control System Structures 15

Chapter 2. Construction-Production Machinery Automatic and Automated
Control Systems 27

1. General Problems of Development of Production Process ASU

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Construction-Production Machinery as Control Objects

3. Automatic Sheet. Molding Machine Parameters Stabilization
Systems

6. Automatic Sheet Molding Machine Rate Control System

5. Tube Forming Machine Production Conditions Control
(Stabilization) Systems

6. Asbestos Cement Products Production Process ASU

Chapter 3. Automatic and Automated Road Construction Equipment
Control Systems

1. General Problems or Control System Development

2. Road Construction Equipaent as Control Objects

3. Operating Elements Automatic Position Stabilization Systems
10. Mltiple-boop Speed Control Systems

5. Extreme Control Systems

6. Road Construction Equipment Production Process ASU

Chapter 4. Methods of Engineering Local Electromechanical 1n-
formntion-Control Systems

1. Mathematical Investigation of Systems Hith Thyristor
Inverters

2. Methods of Calculating Operating Conditions of Asynchronous
Cate Systems

3.

Chapter 5. local Information-Controlling Electrohydrauiic Systems

1. New Principles of Designing Electrohydrnulic System Control
Mechanisms

2. Electrohydraulic Systems with Electrostatic Control
3. Blectrohydraulic Systems With Electroacoustic Control

Chapter 6. Production Process ASU Equipment Controlling Local
System Devices

1. Multistotion Sets of Production Process ASU Devices
2. Technical Devices of Local Electromechanical Information-
Controlling Systems

3. Technical Devices of Local hydraulic (Pneumatic) and
Electrohydraulic (Electropneunatic) Systems
Bibi i ograplny
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye". 1977

3024
(ISO: 1870

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

31

47
65

72
75
79

81
83
96
121
127

128

132
179

186
203

208

210

218
220
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PUBLICATIONS

VOLUME DBVOTED TO HORK 0P MATHEMATICIAN LYAPUNOV
Moscow PROBLEHY KIBERNETIKI in Russian 1977 No 32, 17 Oct 77 p 7

[Table of contents of book "Problemy Kibernetiki" (Problems of Cyber-
gzgics) edited by S. V. Yeblonskiy, "Neuks" Publishers, 3,700 copies,
page:

[Text] Table of Contents Page
"Aleksey Andreyevich Lyepuhov" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

Arsenin, V. Ye.. and Kozlove, Z. 1., "Survey of the Work of
A. A. Lyepunov on Descriptive Set Theory" . . . . . . . . 15

Podlovchenko. R. 1., “A. A. Lynpunov's Scientific Contribution
in the Field of Progremming Theory" . . . . . . . . . . . 65

Kulegine, 0. 5., "A. A. Lyapunov'e Role in the Development of
Work on Machine Translation in the USSR" . . . . . . . . 59

Buslenko, N. P., and Osetinskiy, N. 1., "Dynamic Systems and
Categories" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71

Deyev, V. V., Frolov, G. 0., end Prolove, B. A., "One Method
of Recognizing Acoustic Signals" . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91

Yershov, A. P., and Pokrovskiy, S. 3., "Standardizing Algo-
rithmic Languages" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95

Kitov, A. 1., and Nsumann, P., "Development of an Algorithm
and Programs for Indexing Scientific Communications" . . 119

Kozlova, z. 1., end Filippov, V. P., "Construction of Classes
of Projective Sets" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137

Krinitskiy, N. A., "Broad Formal Definition of the Algorithm" 161

Logofet. D. 0., and Svirezhev. Yu. M., "Stability in Models
of Interacting Populations" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Halinovskiy. A. A., "The Role of Peedbacks in System Changes
in the Development of Autistic Thinking in Schizophrenics
and Schizoids“ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203

Svirezhev, Yu. H., "Syste-s Analysis of the Biosphere:
Current Status of the Ideas of the Russian Classical School" 225

Yanov. Yu. 1., "Conputations in One Class of Programs" . . . . 237
Abstracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2‘6

COPYRIGHT: Glavnaya redsktsiya fiziko-Iatelaticheskoy literatury
izdstel'stva "Nauka". 1977

11,176
CSO: 1870

100

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PUBLICATIONS

NEW BOOK REVIEWS PROCESS OF ASU DESIGN, EVALUATION

Moscow TEORETICHBSKIYB OSNOVY POSTROYENIYA ANTOMATIZIROVANNYKH SISTEH
UPRAVLBNIYA (RAZRABOTKA TEKHNICHBSKOGO PROYEKTA) in Russian 1978 signed

to press 6 Jan 78 pp 2, 293-29b

[Annotation and table of contents of book "Teoreticheskiye Osnovy
Postroyeniya Avtomatizirovannykh Sistem Upravleniya (Razrabotka
.Tekhnicheskogo Proyekta)" [Theoretical Foundations of Constructing
Automated Control Systems (Development of the Contract Design)I by
A. A. Voronov, G. A. Kondrat'yev, and Yu. V. Chistyakov,
lsdatel'atvo Nauka, 4,000 copies, 295 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book is devoted to a systematic presentation of the questions of
developing the contract design of an automated control system (ASU).

It considers formalized description of statements and solution algo-
rithms. Questions of the economic substantiation for selection of
design decisions in various states of preparation of the contract de-
sign are worked out. The book offers recommendations on designing the
information support, software, and hardware and on modifying the struc-
ture of the system to insure the maximum guaranteed expectation of
economic efficiency achievable under conditions of natural limitations
on the resources of the developer organization.

The book is intended for a broad range of specialists interested in
the issues of system design, ASU developers in various national economic
sectors. and students in the corresponding specializations at higher

educational institutions. There are 13 illustrations, 282 bibliographic
entries, and 31 tables.

Table of Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I. Development of the Functional Part

Chapter 1. Pormalized Description of Statements and Solution
Algorithms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

accuses-sop

101
FOR OFFICIAL us; om»!
chapter 2.

Chapter 3.

Chapter 4.

Chapter 5.

Chapter 6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
General Propositions . . . . . .
Description of a Subsystem . . .

Description of a Set of Problems
Description of Problems (Jobs) .

HHI—HHH
OU&UNH

Description of the System as a "hole

The Use of Standard Design Decisions

a o

can...
sauce-

I
s
s
as.
s
0

Calculation of Expenditures for Development and
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1 Calculation of Expenditures for Making the Detail

ca...-

Designs of Sets of Problems . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Calculation of Expenditures for Introduction of
Individual Sets of Problems . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 General and Residual Expenditures for Development

of Individual Sets of Problems

Calculation of Expenditures for Data Processing .
3.1 Allocation of Direct-Access Memory among Parti-

cular Programs . . .
3.2 Determination of Time Needed to Imp
cular Programs of a Package . .

lament Parti-

oocooos

3.3 Determination of the Time Needed and Cost of Im-

plementing Particular Data Processing Operations
3.6 Determination of the Time Needed and Cost of Imple-

menting Particular Data Processing Operations

3.5 Determination of the Time Needed and Cost of Imple-

menting the Problems (Jobs) of a System . . .

3.6 Determination of the Time Needed and Cost of Imple-

o

aoaosoosaooo

meeting the Sets of Problems of a System . . . .
3.7 Determination of Expenditures to Implement the
Subsystems and the System as a Whole . . . .

3.8 Evaluating Standard Design Decision

Calculation of Losses from Errors in Output Documents

8.....

4.1 The Probability and Magnitude of Error in Output

Documents . . . . . . . . . . .
Expenditures to Correct Errors .
Losses from Errors . . . . . . . .

§£~§
o o
#00”

II. Development of the Support Part

Information Support . . . . . . . .
5.1 Designing Nomenclatures and Codes

6

seasons.

Evaluating Standard Design Decisions . . . . .

5.2 Designing Documents and Primary Machine Media
5.3 Designing Machine Media for Internal Data . .

Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1 Mathematical and Logical Techniques
6.2 Software Systems . . . . . . ..
6.3 Methodology of Constructing Sets of

A80 Problems . . . . . . . . .

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0
osteoa-
a
a

o a o o o o o
s o o a a v
o o o e a a o

Programs for

11
13
29
39
57
59
59
85
90
92
92
92
111
119
129
139

141
141

164

144
161
164
166

168
168
175
183

194
194
203

216
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 7. Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.1 Equipment Used in ASU's . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.2 Primary Indexes of the Quality of Work of Equip-

ment in the ASU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.3 Statement of the Problem of Selecting Hardware .
7.4 Sequence of Selection of hardware . . . . . . .

III. Calculation of Economic Efficiency

Chapter 8. Determination of the Amount of Savings and Expendi-

Cureso....o......-...........u..

8.1 The Savings Expected from a Set of Problems . .

8.2 Expenditures Necessary for Development and Intro-
duction of a Set of Problems . . . . . . . . .

8.3 Annual Economic Impact of a Set of Problems . .

chapter 9. Refining the Functional Structure of the ASU . . .
9.1 Statement of the Problem of Refining the Func-

tional Structure of the ASU . . . . . . . . .

9.2 General Approach to the Problem of Refining the

Functional Structure of the ASU . . . . . . .

9.3 Approximate Algorithm for Solving the Problem of

Refining the Functional Structure of the ASU .

Chapter 10. The Expected Economic Efficiency of the ASU . . .
10.1 Primary Technical-Economic Indexes of the ASU .
10.2 The Economic Efficiency of the ASU . . . . . . .
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'atvo "Nauka", 1978

11,176
CSO: 1870

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

220
220

229

236
238

247
247

259
263

265
265
269
274
278
278
280

281
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

1100 535.3
GMISSIM LIMIT BPMS

Minsk (MUSSOVY PUCIIKI SVETA in Russian 1977 signed to press 20 Jan 77.
pp 1-10, Hal-142

anotntion, table of contents and introduction from the book by AJi.
Concllarenko, Nauka i Tekhnika Publishers, l,800 copies, 1“ pages]

[Text] Gaussian light beams are good descriptions of actual narrow light
beams, in part icuiar, laser radiation, the resonant nodes of open resonators
and opt icai light guides. The properties of Gaussian beans in isotropic
and anisotropic chia are treated in the monograph. Both circular and el-
liptical beans are studied. The first take the for: of resonant nodes of
resonators with spherical reflectors having an isotropic filler, while the
second take the fon- of the nodes of astigmatic laser resonators or reson-
ators filled with an anisotropic medium, as well as astigsatic light guides.
The propagation of light beans in inhomogeneous, lentieular nedin is studied,
taking into account aspliiication and absorption. The influence of the an-
isotropy of the dielectric permittivity of the sediun on the spatial Eon.
phase surface a..-" divergence of light beams is ascertained.

The nonograph is intended for students in the senior courses of physics
depart-eats. teachers. engineers and scientific associates working in the
field of optical and quantum electronics.

I Table; 29 illustrations; 66 bibliographic citations.

Table of Contents
introduction 3

Chapter One
The Propagation of Gaussian Bea-s in lionegeneous Isotropic Hod la 5

I. Howell's equations. i’lane waves
2. Have and parabolic equations
3. Circular gaussian beans

00“

104
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. The transformation of gaussian beams 20
S. Elliptical nauasinn beams 2b
6. Elliptical rotating beams 38
Chapter Two
The Theory of Laser Resonators 53
7. The theory of spherical resonators Sb
8. Properties of astigmatic resonators 59

Chapter Three

Gaussian Beams in Inhomogeneous Media 68
9. The propagation of gaussian beams in transparent lenticular
media 68
10. Gaussian beams in lenticular, longitudinally inhomogeneous
media 75
ll. Light beams in media with nonuniform absorption or amplifi-
cation 83

Chapter Four

Gaussian Light Beams in Crystals 9b
12. Some specific features of light propagation in crystals 96
13. Light beams in homogeneous crystals 99
lb. The properties of anisotropic laser resonators 110
15. The propagation of cylindrical gaussian beams in inhomogen-
eous crystals 116
16. Three-dimensional gaussiaa beams in inhomogeneous crystals 122
Conclusion 136
Bibliography 138
Introduction

Plane electromagnetic waves as the simplest form of waves are usually employed
in the initial analysis or description of the majority of optical phenomena.
The concept of a plane wave includes spatial and timewise invariance of the
shape of the phase (planar) surface and amplitude. however, actual light
beams are always limited, primarily in transverse directions. The diffraction
of such a beam leads to a constant change in the space of the amplitude and

to distortion of the phase surface. These specific features of a beam must

be taken into account when describing the propagation of narrow light beams.
for example. the radiation of lasers (0K0).

The coherent radiation which is generated by lasers and masers, takes the
form of narrow beams, the transverse dimensions of which, however. are many

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tines greater than the wavelength. For this reason, the diffraction diver-
gence of such beans is comparatively small. while their anplitnde varies
slowly with the longitudinal coordinate. Such light heaas are well described
by gaussian beams, in which the asplitude in the transverse plane varies in
accordance with a Gaussian-Hernitlan law, while the phase surface is distorted
in step with the propagation of the bean. it has now been denonstrated and
generally accepted that gaussian heals asst sisply and completely describe

the properties of laser light beams and the resonant nodes of the open reso-
nators of lasers. Admittedly, gaussian beans are also an approximation, but
are a sufficiently good one.

The area of applications of laser beams is extremely large at the present
tile, and extends fron purely scientific fields such as nonlinear and integral
optics to the machine construction inductry. in this case, it is necessary
to consider the specific features of the propagation and the properties of
laser beams in the most diverse media: transparent and opaque, homogeneous

and inhomogeneous, isotropic and anisotropic, etc. In this regard, it is
desirable to cake a detailed study of the properties of gaussian (laser) light
beans in the nest diverse media. This is precisely the goal which this mono~
graph pursues. The methods of wave optics are employed in it. although one
can also use geonetrie optics (see. for example, [1]) to describe gnussian
beans. The results of the work of Soviet and foreign authors, as well as the
research of the author and coworkers, performed in the last 10 years, are
reflected in the monograph.

The propagation of gansslan beans in nonlinear and gyrotropic media. as well
as the reflection, refraction and diffraction of gaussian beans are not treat-
ed in the book. it seens to us that these questions are as yet inadequately
worked out, although they are of interest in quantun electronics and integral
optics.

The author would like to express his sincere gratitude to B.\. Bokut', P.A.
Apananevich, B.A. Sotskiy and A.G. Khatkevich for their valuable advice and
renarks, as well as to L.A. Belousovaya, E.N. Boyko and N.A. Solonovich for
assisting in the preparation of the manuscript.

COPYRIGHT: Izdaiel'stvo "Nauka l tekhnika", 1977

8225
630:1870

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 62-53(75)

PRINCIPLE 01’ CONSTRUCTION OF AUTWTED CONTROL SYSTDIS

Moscow OSNOVY POSTROYENiYA AWTIZIROVANW slsrai UPRAVLENIYA in Russian
l977 signed to press 16 Sep 77 pp 2, 30l-302

[Annotation and table of contents from tho book by V. i. Kostyuk, Yu. P.
laychonko, N. G. Znytsev, N. i, Kirilyuk and R. V. chcdinskiy; edited by
V. i. Kostyuk, Izdstel‘stvo Sovstskoys Radio. 306 PP. 37.000 copies]

[Text] Annota t ion

The textbook gives a complex concept of basic questions in tho planning and
construction of an automated control system [A50]: systams analysis of A50,
the principles of construction servicing subsystems of AS”, Operations
control, material and oquipent supply, toohnical-sconomic planning, etc.
Also examined are questions of the construction of cmplex A80 hardware and
software, the organization of designing, and also ergonomic and engineering-
psychologicol problems of A80.

The textbook is intended for students and scientific and technical workers
engaged in the designing and introduction of A81.

CONTENTS
Foreword 3
Introduction 6
Chapter 1. Basic concepts and definitions 6
1.1. Systems, control syst-s, automated control systcms and

their classification 6
l.2. ASU structure and its analysis 17
1.3. informational analysis of ASU 31
Chapter 2. Informational servicing of A51) 68
2.l. Bus ic concepts and definitions 68
2.2. Economic information, its distinctive features and properties 69

Classification of economic information SI.

The economic indicator, its distinctive features, structure

and classification 56
Chapter 3. Classification and coding of economic information in

an as!) 60

Basic concepts and definitions 60

Characterisation of principal systems for coding economic

information 63

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Principal requlrmnts for coding systems 67
Examples of some ail-union classifiers 68
Selection of intenediary languages for information exchange
between interacting ASU 69
2.6. The Intonation base of A80 72
Basic concepts and definitions 72
The reflecting conponent and its structure 76
‘Ihe structure of informational objects (data) 76
The structure and types of files 80
General scheme of interaction of files in the infonatlonal
servicing of A80 86
2.5. Forution and management of the intonation base 91
Supplementing and change of the intonation base 91
Procedure for introducing changes into the files 9!.
list! data banks 96
Gtapter 3. Nnctlonai subsystems of A50 102
3.1. The subsystem of operational planning and control of the
main production 102
Typical list of tasks of tha subsystem 102
General characterization of different subsystem of operational
planning and control of product ion 103
Functional structure of a subsystem of operational control
of the min production 106
lnfonationai model of a subsystem of operational control
of the Min production l09
Econouic-Iathuuticel models and algorithms for the solution
of typical subsystem problems 116
3.2. The subsystem of material and equipent supply (m0) 125
lypical list of problems of an mo subsystem l23
Distinctive features of the functioning of an M10 subsystem
under the conditions of an A50 126
Functional structure of an 1110 subsystem 128
informational model of the subsystem l32
Algorithms for the solution of some typical problems l33
3.3. The subsystem of technical and econaaic planning (TSP) 139
List of typical problems of a To) subsystem 139
Informational model of a TSP subsystem 141.
Algorithm for the solution of problems of a TIP subsystem 165
3.1.. The bookkeeping subsystem 154
General characterisation of the bookkeeping organisation
that has formed 151
Classification of bookkeeping tasks in an ASU i52
informational model of a bookkeeping subsystem 156
Organization of data processing in bookkeeping 162
Chapter 1.. 111a hardware complex (K‘I'S) (kompieks tekhnlcheskikh sredstvl66
6.1. Requirements for the hardware complex 166
6.2. The structure of hardware in an AS!) 168
Evolution of various methods of deteninlng the K13 structure 168
Sample of the K18 structure for an ASU on the branch level 172

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4.3. Modeling and selection of the structure of the hardware complex
of an AS!)
Formulation of the problem of selecting a rational structure
of the hardware complexes of systems
Heans of modeling discrete systems
Construction of a nodal and algorithms for the selection of
of a rational structure of a system for the gathering and
transmission of data
Construction of a model of the functioning of electronic
computers in ASU

4.6. Calculation of the need for computer equipment
Classification of the problems
Preliminary calculation of the composition and quantity of
couputer equ ipaant
Calculation of the quantity of terminals and data transmission
lines

Chapter 5. Software

5.1. Purpose, composition and structure of the software

5.2. Composition and functions of software components

5.3. General systemic software

3.1:. Example of an operational systen

Chapter 6. Principles of A50 design and introduction

6.l. Principles of industrial methods of A511 development and
introduc t ion

6.2. Stages in the automation of typical ASU design

6.3. The pre-pienning stage in the creation of an ASU

6e“. ASU d.s‘8n

6.5. ASU introduction

Chapter 7. Ergonomic and social aspects of the A511

7.1. Man in a control system

7.2. Interaction of man and hardware in an A811

7.3. Basic types of A50 and the role of the human operator

7.14. Consideration of ergonomic and sec iel factors in the
development and introduction of ASU's

Chapter 8. Examples of ASU's

8.1. The automated production control system (ASUP) "Kuntsevo"

8.2. The automated production control system (ASUP) ”L'vov"

8.3 Automated systems for transport

8.6. Example of an automated control system fora sector of industry

List of very frequently used abbreviations

Bibliography
Subject index

CG’YRICHT: izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1977

2171.

C80: 1870 END

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

~

17!.

176
I76

178

I86
189
189

193

l96
207
207
210
2l9
225
230

230
237
265
2510
239
265
265
267
270

2 7!.
2 79
2 79
282
286
285
291
293
298