FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10379

11 March 1982

USSR Report

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS
[FOUO 2/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item» or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was

processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSBIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
Puvsncs mo MATHEMATICS

(P000 2/82)

Con-ems

ASTROPHYSICS AND cosmos!

Conbustion and Explosion in Outer Space and on the Earth......... ..
CRYSTALS AND SHICONDUCTORS

Electronic Processes in Island Metal Pilas.........................
FLUID DYNAMICS

Nonlinear Detonation Haves........................................

Nuaarical Ibdelins of Gaedynanic Processes Occurring “hen Laser

mission With Moderate Plux Density Acts on Hetallic

050m1¢ in AtreoaseaoasaosseoeaaeaesseCessna...eoseosoassessooos

LASERS AND HASBRS

Hechanin of Pulsed Lssing in nigh-Pressure Electric Discharge

Ar-xe-u‘eresoeooeooeseassoaoseoooseoesaeaaosasssaaeseeososooo-ea

Catalytic Recovery of Gas Mixture of. Closed-Cycle Electron
3.“ Premmd coz MOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOIOOOI'OOOOOCOOOOOOIOOOOOO

Characteristic Features of Porning Radietion Pattern of Laser
Emission in Resonators With Retroreflectin; Mirrors. .. . . .. . . . . . ..

Deternining turbulence Paranatars by Laser Bean Probing of the

Amspmesoeseooooseseaeaossssoas.seaesooosaoaessossaooaasossaaa

Laser Heasureaent System”........................................

Abstracts of Articles in Collection on Quantum Blectronics.........

10

13

20

31

51

53
71
77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HAGNB‘IMYDRODYNAHICS

Science Session on Thernophysicsl end Bleetrophysicsl
Problm of m her” com“.un thOOO.QOOOOQIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

Properties of Resonators With Hirrors Porned by Set of Inverting

Blmntﬂoo......oo....o.o...........oo.o-..........oo.........o..

OPTOELBCTRON ICS

Electroluminescent Inge Converter Vith Menory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

PLASMA PHYSICS

Plans nesting in Mute-Angled usgnetic Trap Uithout Use of

InjectianooooesOseesooosoeosssseooeesesoet'osssssseoo'sssoeeoosee

STRESS, STRAIN AND DEPOBHATION

Precursors of Mechanical Destruction of Large Specimens............

THEORETICAL PHYSICS

Absolute end Convective Instability in Plea-s and Solids...........

-b- 4

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

81

83

89

95

99

103
MWMUSEONLY

ASTROPHYSICS AND oosmwcr

CMUSTION AND EXPLOSIW IN OUTER ”ACE AND OK In EARTH

Moscow coma: I VZRYV V [(091058 I “A W in Russian 1980 (signed to press
15 Jan 80) PP 2. 152-155

[Annotation. table of contents and abstracts fron collection of articles "Combus-
tion and Bxplosion in Outer Space and on the Earth". edited by B. I. Andrianltin.

doctor of physical and nathenatical sciences. Vsesoyuanoye astronono-geodesicheskoye
obshchestvo pri Akedeaii nauk $531!, 1000 copies, 156 pages]

[Text] The collection contains articles that outline the results of theoretical
and experinental research in the field of mechanics of a continuous nediun as
applied to prohlens of conbuetion physics. An examination is made of probleas
of the singular state of the universe. expansion of the netsgalaxy. questions
of radiation in a shock wave in inert gases. of the nechanien and limiting condi-
tions of ignition of nixtures. shock waves in the presence of aagnetic fields.

and also analytical neth of studying equations that describe the corresponding
processes.

The collection is intended for specialists in the field of astrophysics. cosnology,
physics of explosion. shock wave physics. plasna physics and so on.

Contents page

Krechet. V. 0.. Nikolayenko. V. H. and Shikin. G. “as "Sons Corollariea of
the Theory of Interacting Fields in Cosnology and Astrophysics" 3

Stanyukovich. K. P. and Hel'nilaov. V. 8.. "Energetics and Mass Spectra: of "
Planckaon and Gravitational Vacuu" ' 20

Kiselev. Yu. N.. "Total Output of Radiation Pros: Shock Have Front in Inert
Gases" 36

Kononenko. M. -H.. "Bleetrothernal Analog of Detonation" 56

Ivanov. V. 6.. Ivanov. G. V. and Kuznetsov. V. P.. "Investigation of Mechanism
and Limiting Conditions of Ignition of Fuel Mixtures With Iodic Acid
Anhydride" 61

Ssrukhanov. G. 1.. ”Analytical Studies of Equations of Unsteady Nonadiahatic

One-Dimensional Flows of Continuous Hedit- Hodeled by Viscous Thermally
Conductive Perfect Gas" 76

i-‘OIOFIIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ageyev, A. N. and Andriankin. 8. 1.. "Double Explosion in Hater at Low
Energy Densities" 109

Dolgov. A. A.. "Sole Classes of Solutions of the )‘bnge-Anpere Equation for
an Inhomogeneous Median" 125

Ivanov. H. Yu.. "Rarefaction Have in Mediu- Hith Equation of State Including
Section With Negative Pressure" 131

Andriankin. B. I. and Kononenko. H. PL. "Notion af-Fluid in Magnetic Field
with Clapping of Two Plates" M o H, . 138

Andriankin. B. 1. and Halkin. A. 1.. "Theory of Nonlinear Have Propagation" 168
unc 530.12:531.51
sour COROLLARIES OF THE THEORY OF INTERACTING FIELDS IN 008ml.” AND ASTROPHYSICS
[Abstract of article by Krechet. V. 0.. Nikolayenko. v. H. and Shikin. G. N.]
[Text] An examination is made of the influence that tents of interaction of clas-
sical fields have on the singular initial state and isotropizstion of the process
of evolution of the universe. The problem of the cosmological background of nuan-

tun field theory and the mass of the Niggs boson is discussed. References 2].

UDC 530.12:53l.$l
ENERGETlCS AND MASS SPEC“!!! OF MCKEON AND GRAVITAIIONAL VACUUM
[Abstract of article by Stanyukovich. K. P. md Nel'nikov. V. N.]

[Text] ‘No fundamental relations, the Mach relation and Dirac's equation. are
derived from a model of a vacuul based on two hypotheses: a) dense packing of
planckeons; b) density of de-excited energy coincides with the energy density
of the field of the netagalsxy. References 12.

BBC 535.894'53531
TOTAL OUTPUT O? RADIATION FROM snocx HAVE FRONT IN HER? GASES

[Abstract of article by Kiselev. Yu. N.]

[Text] The article describes a method of leasuring spectrslly integrated radiation
fluxes from a shock wave front using quick-response pyroelectric radiation re-
ceivers. and gives the results of measurement of radiation fluxes from a shock
wave front in xenon and argon. and also brightness temperatures of the front in
the red and violet regions of the spectrum.

It is shown that in xenon at velocities of 5.5-1] Inn/s, despite considerable screen- -

ing in the red region of the spectrum, the total radiation output is close to
the calculation from the shock adiabat. ' Nith further increase in shock wave

roe OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

velocity. radiation fluxes do not exceed 1.80107 H/cm'. In argon at velocities
of 6.8-15 km/s. the shock wave radiation is close to that of an ideal black body.
The total radiation output is close to calculation up to 20 km/s. At velocities
of 20-37 km/s. considerable excess of radiation temperatures over brightness ten-
peraturee is observed. The radiation fluxes registered from the wave front in
argon are up to 1.2010' w/cm’. The experimental results are used to estimate

the spectral average absorption coefficients of shock-heated xenon and argon.
which are much lower than the absorption coefficients in the visible region of
the spectrum. References 8.

UDC 536.222.2:539.63
ELECTROTHERHAL ANALOG OP DETONAIION

[Abstract of article by Kononenko. H. M.]

[Text] Supply of energy from outside sources to a shock wave front with some
conductivity leads to an effect similar to detonation. Joule heat release on

the front gives rise to the detonation mode. It is shown that the "shock adiabat"
in such a mode coincides with that of a substance absorbing intense luminous flux.
References 5.

000 536.66

INVESTIGATION OF MECHANISM AND LIMITING CONDITIONS OF IGNITION 0P FUEL MIXTURES
WITH IODIC ACID ANHYDRIDE

[Abstract of article by Ivanov, V. 6.. Ivanov, G. V. and Kuznetsov. V. P.]

[Text] The nechanism and processes that limit spontaneous combustion of mixtures
of inorganic fuels (metals and nonqmstals) with 120; are studied by thermal dif-
ferential analysis. It is shown that in contrast to conventional mixtures, the
mechanism of spontaneous combustion of the investigated mixtures is determined
by the formation and properties of iodides of the fuels. The authors establish
the lower limits of ignition of the mixtures as a function of their relative den-
sity and fuel content. References 12.

UDC 532.5-1/-9:532:Oll.ll

ANALYTICAL STUDIES OF EQUATIONS 0P UNSTEADY NON-ADIABATIC ONE-DIMENSIONAL FLOWS
OF CONTINUOUS MEDIUM MODELED BY VISOOUS THERMALLY CONDUCTIVE PERFECT GAS

[Abstract of article by Sarukhanov. G. 1.]

[Text] An investigation is made of equations of unsteady non-adiabatic flows

of a continuous medium modeled by a viscous thermally conductive perfect gas.
Solutions of the equation of motion are obtained in the class of solutions of

a continued system of equations by reducing the differential corollary of the
initial equation to a Darboux equation. The resultant solutions enable evaluation
of the way that temperature. heat flux and static pressure depend on time and
mass coordinate. and can be used in studying some patterns of explosive processes:
combustion, explosion, detonation. References 12.

3

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢HVLY
l-‘OIOMCMLUSEONLY

UDC 539.1
DOUBLE EXPLOSION IN HATER AT 1.0V ENERGY DENSITIES

[Abstract of article by Ageyev, A. N. and Andrianlrin. E. 1.]

[Text] At low energy densities. a spherical explosion in water is described by
an approximation that differs fron the solution of the corresponding problel for
an incompressible liquid only in the accounting for delay tine. The problem
' of double explosion in water is solved in such an approximation. An analysis

is made of the dynamics of the cavity formed as a result of double explosion.

It is shown that the principal characteristics of pulsations of the cavity as
well as the npitude and shape of the pressure pulse propagating in water can

be varied over a wide range by controlling the paraeters of the double explosion.
References 7.

UDC 532.ll+53lo.222.2
SOME CLASSES OE SOLUTIONS OF THE ROUGE-WERE EQUATION FOR AN WEREOUS MEDIUM

[Abstract of article by Dolgov, A. A.]

[Text] An examination is made of one-dimensional plane aovenenta of an ideal
fluid with variable initial density and speed of sound. Exact solutions of the

ﬂange-Ampere equation are found for some distributions of these parameters.
References 3.

UDC S33.l:533.2

RAREFACTION HAVE IN MEDIUM WITH EQUATION OF STATE INCLUDING SECTION WITH NEGATIVE
PRESSURE

[Abstract of article by Ivanov, M. Tu.)

[Text] An investigation is made of qualitative peculiarities of rarefaction
waves in a udiun with an equation of state that includes a section with negative
pressure. Assming that the results of rarefaction processes may lead to breakup
of the medial into individual particles. the author evaluates the mass of such

a particle. References 5.

000 537.84:S39.63
MOTION 0F FLUID IN MAGNETIC FIELD UITH CLAPPING 01’ T90 PLATES
[Abstract of article by Andrianltin. B. I. and Kononenko, n. 11.]
[Text] The flow of a conductive fluid in a aagnetic field resulting from conver-
gence of channel walls may be of interest for getting strong currents in Hill) oper-
ation. This paper gives an exact solution of such an unsteady two-dimensional
problem for a slit channel at low nagnetic Reynolds number. vhen plates clap togeth-

er in accordance with a special law. The solution depends on three constants
that can be used for approximations. References 2.

I.

MOMMUSEONLY
FDICMﬂﬂC1A1.USl1MNLY

“00 539.9
THEORY OF NOﬂLINBAR WAVE PROPAGATION

[Abstract of article by Andriankin. B. I. and Helkin.'A. 1.]

[Text] A method is proposed for studying nonlinear waves in weakly dispersing
media. The evolution of initial perturbation reduces to propagation of a certain

number of nodes. In the first order of the method. nodea interact with near phaae
velocities. References 6.

COPYRIGHT: Unknown

6610
C80: 1862/79

FOI‘OFIICIII.USE10NLY
I’MWUSIONLY

CRYSTALS All) SMOOﬂDUCTORS

UDC 539.216.535.33.S37.533
ELECTRONIC PROCESSES IN ISLAND HB'I‘AL FILES

Kiev ELMONNYYB PRUISESSY V OSII'ROVKOVYKH mmlcnssmn 1mm in Bastien
1980 (signed to press 17 Nov 80) pp 5-8

(Annotation. preface and table of contents from book "Electronic Processes in
Island lietal Films". by Petr Grigor'yevich Borzyak and Yuriy Aleksandrovich
Kulyupin, Institute of Physics. UkSSR Academy of Sciences. Isdatel'etvo "Naukove
dunks". 1200 copies. 2&0 pages]

[Text] The book examines new problems in the physics of island metal files:
"cold" electron emission and "cold" lusinescence. the relation between these ef-
fects end conduction current. and between luinescence resulting from conduction
current and a new kind of luinescence when metals'are bombarded by electrons.

An investigation is made of thenature of conductivity of island files. the rela-
tion between their characteristics end structure determined by the conditions

of growth. Also examined are problems of the physics of small metal island parti-
cles that are new with respect to their solution.

The book is intended for scientific workers. specialists in the field of elec-
tronic technology end electron microscopy. end also for graduate students and
upperclsssmen majoring in physics and physical engineering.

Figures 127. tables 2. references 355.
Preface

Our attention was first drawn to island metal films and snail particles during
research on the nature of silver-oxygen-cesiue photocethodes. A study of the
very interesting optical and photoelectric properties of silver island files.
especially when coated with cesim and its oxide. enabled us to explain the ep-
preciable influence of small silver particles on the properties of these photo-
cathodes.' Later we were to observe completely new effects occurring in gold films.
In studying the emission .of hot electrons fronsilicon p-n junctions. we had to
apply a gold film on the end face of the junction. At a certain voltage across
the junctions. electron emission was observed that seemed to enanete free the
gold filn. Numerous control experiments with fiips of different thicknesses on
different dielectric backings confirmed the effect of electron emission from gold
films upon application of sufficient voltage and with passage of current. The
emission was only from island filns. and only cold. i. a. not associated with

MWWONLV
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

heating of the film by the transmitted current. Moreover. we learned that cold
electron emission is accompanied by cold luminescence of the films. 1. e. by lumi-
neacence of film islands that are not incandescent. It is not surprising that
these striking and completely unexpected effects have long riveted our attention
on island metal films and small particles.

The desire to explain the nature of observed new effects. and the mutual relation
between these effects and conduction current has led to many experiments and theo-
retical studies. The very effect of conductivity of films consisting of individual
metal island particles on dielectric substrates is of independent interest. and

it has been necessary to give attention to the mechanism of this conductivity

as well. Some interesting properties of island films have also been observed

in the study of conductivity. Some of these properties have been associated with
peculiarities of film structure. which has necessitated a study of the problem

of growth of islands and the structure of the films. In studying the properties
of island films. we cannot avoid dealing with the properties of the separate is-
lands themselves, which are microparticles of the metallic substance. And since
physical arguments tell us that the properties of such particles with sufficiently
small dimensions must differ from those of massive metals, their investigation

is of considerable physical interest.

In studying the nature of luinescence. island metal films were subjected to elec-
tron bombardment. In doing this, unknown luminescence was observed. It was found
that bombarding continuous films and massive metal with the same kind of electrons
produces the same kind of luminescence. It was necessary to study the nature

of this effect. the moreso as it promises important applications.

Generalization of these studies has been the content of this book. But if the
work delineates research in the given area. it does so on an initial stage. The
physics of fine solid particles and island films is still far from complete study.
and our main goal has been to call attention to this interesting field. The wider
the class of people who are involved in the area. the greater the depth and the
faster the pace of investigation will be in studying these interesting objects.
and the more intense will be the generation of new physical and practical ideas
and the acceleration of their realization. If the publication of this book is

in any way conducive to the attainment of this goal, the authors will feel that
their labor has been rewarded.

Contents page
Preface 7
List of Symbols 9
Chapter I: INTRODUCTION TO PHYSICS 0P ISLAND FILMS ll
1. Thin Films. Classification and Description ll
2. Basic Information on Mechanism of Film Growth 20
3. Specifics of Electronic Processes in Island Films 31

3.1. Physical model of island film (31). 3.2. Properties of fine metal
particles (33). 3.3. Electrical conductivity of films. Emission and
optical phenomena (38). 3.6. Specifics of experimental studies of physi-
cal phenomena in island films (bl)

Chapter 2: ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES OF FINE METAL PARTICLES 44
l. Quantizing Spectrum of Single-Particle States 46
7

.FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE(HVLY
FINIC“ﬂﬂC1AI.US£IDNLY

1.1. Quantum size effect and electric conductivity of continuous films

(66). 1.2. Film potential. carrier scattering mechanism. and calculation

of the way that bismuth film conductivity depends on thickness and tem-
perature (66). 1.3. Structure and electric conductivity of bismuth films.
Quasi-size effect (50). 1.6. Quantization of single-particle electron

states in islands with few atoms (55).

Collective State of Electrons in Metal Islands 57
2.1. Frequency of collective vibrations in massive metals and fine

particles (57). 2.2. Electron-photon radiation by island silver films (66).
Dynamic Polarizability of Fine Mstal Particles 70
3.1. Theoretical concepts of size dependence of dynamic polarizability of

fine particles (70). 3.2. Methods of determining polarizability of fine
particles (76). 3.3. Dimensional and frequency dependences of polariza-
bility of fine silver particles (79)

Average Internal Potential of Fine Metal Particles 85
6.1. Relation between index of refraction of electron waves and average
internal potential of metal (85). 6.2. Principal equation of interference
microscopy. Direct and inverse problems (89). 6.3. Internal potential of
bismuth and silver particles (95). 6.6. Internal potential of fine metal
particles (102). 6.5. Nature of size dependences of properties of fine
particles (106).

-hspter 3: ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES OF ISLAND FILMS 106

Electric Conductivity of Island Films. Case of Week Fields and Low

’owers of Conduction Current 106

1.1. Principal problems of theoretical and experimental investigation of
electric conductivity (106). 1.2. Distribution of electric field and
potential in island films (109). 1.3. Electric conductivity of island

films with statistically homogeneous structure (117). 1.6. Electric con-
ductivity of films with statistically inhomogeneous structure (125)

Electric Conductivity at Large Inserted Powers and Hot Electron Emission 136
2.1. Electron heating in film. Electric conductivity at large inserted

power (136). 2.2. Electron emission from island films (137). 2.3. Electron
emission current as a function of voltage across the film and inserted power
(163). 2.6. Estimating magnitude of electric field in the vicinity of the
emission center (151). 2.5. Electron emission from island films in micro-
wave field (155). 2.6. Electron temperature in emission center (159)

Island Metal Films as Unheated Electron Emitters 166
3.1. Cold cathodes (166). 3.2. Equipotentiality of cathode and electron
energy distribution (166). 3.3. Plate characteristics of emission current
(165). 3.6. Time stability of emission characteristics (168). 3.5. Inter-
ference immunity and temperature stability (171). 3.6. Cathode efficiency

and economy. Break-in time (172). 3.7. Effect of vacuum conditions (173).

3.8. Rays to improve emission characteristics of cathodes (173). 3.9. Island
films as sensors of physical quantities and microelectronics components (175)
Current-Excited Light Emission by Island Films 178
6.1. General information on current-excited emission (178). 6.2. Spectra of
light emission by films of different metals (181). 6.3. Power of luminous
radiation from individual center (185). 6.6. Dependence of intensity and
spectral makeup of emission on power input to the film (186). 6.5. Fluc-
tuations of characteristics of light emission (188). 6.6. Influence of
substrate temperature on emission characteristics (191). 6.7. Relation
between emission of light and electron emission (196). 6.8. Mechanism of
current-stimulated emission of light (196)

8

FOI10FIICIAI.IEIECHNLY
F0!iOFFIC1Al.lEﬂE¢MVLY

5. Electron-Photon Emission of Light Prc- Thin natal Films and Massive
Metals

203
5.1. Characteristics of electron-photon emission (203). 5. 2. Mechanic: of.
electron-photon enission of light from metals (209). 5.3. Relation
between current-stimulated and electron-photon enission (218)
References 221
Subject Index

'- 238
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nsukova dunks". 1980

6610
650: 1862/73

INHICIHWCIAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FLUID DYNAMICS

UN 350 . 145 . 6
NONI. 1m DENMTION WAVES

Moscow NELINBYNYYE VOLNY DEPORHATSII in Russian 1981 (signed to press lo Mar 81)
pp 2-4. 256 '

[Annotatiom preface and table of contents from book "Nonlinear Deformation waves",
by Yuriy Kustavich Engel'brekht and Uno Karlovich Nigul. USSR Academy of Sciences.
BSSR Academy of Sciences, Institute of Cybernetics, Isdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1700
copies. 256 pages]

[*ext] 0n the basis of general equations of the mechanics of continuous media.

by introducing appropriate supplaentary postulates. nonlinear mathematical models
are constructed for describing wave processes of deformation of thermoviscoelastic.
thermoelastic. viscoelasticand elastic solids and ideal compressible liquid. An
examination is made of the construction of solutions of wave problems by sequential
integration of simplified quasilinear equations (systems) derived by the ray meth-
od. Some specific examples are given.

In contrast to the conventional approach of nonlinear acoustics, where sine-wave
pulses are considered as a rule, this book examines finite pulses of arbitrary
shape. '

The publication is intended for scientific workers, graduate students and upper-
claasmen interested in the theory of nonlinear waves.

Tables 11, figures No, references 161.
Preface I

Mathematical modeling of nonlinear new processes has lately become more and more
topical-in mechanics, acoustics. plasma physics. alectrodynamics, oceanology.
seismology. astronomy and other areas of science and engimering. This can be
attributed to the fact that an in-depth understanding of physical phenomena that
take place in wave propagation, as sell as their use in various technical applica-
tions in many cases are beyond the capacity -of the linear theory of wave propaga-
tion. Although nonlinear wave processes have. their own specific futures in the
different areas of science. it should be noted that systems of equations used

to model the wave process. as well as efficient methods of constructing solutions.
are in many cases analogous or even identical from the mathematical standpoint.

10

”MEMORY
' FOR omcw. use ONLY

Therefore the nonlinear theory of wave propagation has now begun to take shape
as a discipline developing at the confluence of several sciences.

This book is an attempt to treat a certain class of problems in the nonlinear
theory of detonation wave propagation from a mified standpoint. Its content
is divided into two parts.

The first part (chapters 1 and 2) deals with problems of construction of mathe-
matical models (systems of equations) to describe the mechanics of nonlinear wave
processes of deformation of thermoviscoslastic. thermoelastic, viscoelastic and
elastic solids and ideal compressible liquid within the framework of classical
(newtonian. nonrelativistic) mechanics.

The second part (chapters 3-5) examines methods of reducing the initial problems
to sequential integration of simplified equations, as well as methods and results
of construction of solutions of these sinplified equations in the case of actions
by finite pulses of arbitrary shape. In choosing material for the second part

of the monograph. the authors took into consideration that U. K. Nigul's monograph
"Echo Signals From Elastic Objects" (Tallin: Valgus. 1976, Vol 1) contains a
detailed description of a method of sequential integration of linear equations

of hyperbolic type, which has been used to solve many direct and inverse problems
of propagation of one-dimensional pulses in laminar media. Therefore. to avoid
repetition. this book has focused its main attention (chapters 3-5) on a different
asymptotic approach known as the ray method, reducing the initial problem to se-
quential integration of simplified nonlinear equations. 0f the two asymptotic
approaches mentioned here, the former is more simply realized, but is suitable
only in the region of minor nonlinear distortions of the pulse. while the latter.
which is more complicated. enables description of the principal part of a nonlinear
solution on any stage of pulse propagation.

Let us note that other important aspects of nonlinear wave theory have been exam-
ined recently in monographs by 0. V. Rudenho and S. I.'Soluyan “theoretical Prin-
ciples of Nonlinear Acoustics" (Moscow. Nauka. 1975). and [Dzh.-Uizem] "Linear
and Nonlinear Haves". Moscow, Mir, 1977.

Chapter 1 was written by U. K. Nigul. chapters 2-S--by Yu. K. Bngel'hrekht.

Contents ”88
Preface - 3
Introduction 5
PART I: NONLINEAR MATHMTICAL MODELS OF CONTINUOUS MEDIUM
Introduction 7
Chapter 1. Elements of Classical Mechanics of a ContinuOus Media 9
1. Initial aasuaptions. Description of motion and deformation 9
2. Velocity, acceleration and stress 35-
3. Principal laws (postulates) A7
References 60
Chapter 2. Specific Mathematical Models of a Continuous Median 61
lo. Theory of nonlinear dissipative medium without memory 62
5. Mathematical models of solids in specific coordinates 72
ll

FOROl-TIGALUSEONLY
FOIIHHWC1A1.USE(MNLY

6. Mathematical model of liquid in lengrangian coordinate system
7. Integral form of equations of stats
References

PART II: NONLINEAR DEPORHATION "AVE THEORY

Introduction

Chapter 3. Ray Method in Nonlinear Nave Theory

8. Principal equations and conditions of asymptotic approximations

9. Construction of transport equations

10. Properties of transport equations
References

Chapter 4. Multiple-Have Problems

11. Ray method for interacting waves

12. Interaction of counter unves

13. Waves in a layer

16. Influence of reflected Have interaction

15. Interaction in inhomogeneous median
References

Chapter 5. Analysis of Have Processes

16. Nonlinear elastic medium

17. Nonlinear viscoelastic medium

18. Nonlinear thermoelastic medium

[9. Nonlinear dispersing median

20. Nonlinear inhomogeneous medium

21. Accounting for diffraction divergence
References

Appendix

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1981

6610
C80: 1862/61
M OFFER“. (58 ONLY

NUMERICAL mum 0! WC “(£38838 occmmc m LASER ”18810! wrra
mm FLUX m1?! ACTS W METALLIC comm-nu All .

Novooibirok PIZIIA MBA I WA in Bunion 3701 17, No 5. low-Pee 81 (Danu-
ocript received 3 Oct 80) pp 77-82 . -

[Article by a. s. amnovand ruJ. Stonkovich. mam

face of a natal targot that ia located in air and shoorbo intense loser uiooion
have been both eaperiaantally and theoretically investigated in a War of .paporo.
Ref. 1-8 aroaoot thorough and definite iron the otandpoint of tying in ooasureaont
data to laser pulse paranetero (alooth neodyniu laser puloa with duration of

~1 ua). 'l'hooo papero cover experimental and (in the cue of tho phase of one-‘

nechaniaaa that successively replace one another so radiation flux density in'-

creaooox ouhoonic radiation wave. light detonation wave and ouporoonic radiation
wave. _ . - .

In view of the fact that tine-profiled radiation pulaeo aro‘ generally realized

in expel-innate. while calculations are done for constant density 0! the radiation
flux. export-ant and theory are compared in thooeyorka for certain selected paral-
etero of the proceoo ouch at maximal pressure on the target. maxi-m rate of. dia-
peroal of the plaona layer and certain otharo in tine inter-vale t ~- talc, limited
by the condition of one-dinenoional dioperoal (r. is tho radiuo o? the irradiated
area on tho target, c is tho characteriotic opeed of oound in. the plane layer.

c‘ ~ IDs-10‘ col/o). ' comparison shoved satisfactory qualitative agree-ant.

and with roopoct to tho aorioo of para-etera named above. quantitative agreement
ao wall between theoretical concepts and obaorvod phone-one.

consider the problem of direct nuaerical modeling of the aggregate of ohoerved
phenomena haaod on a gaodynanic conputationel model [Rah 9-13] that accounts

for one-dimensional and two-dimensional novonont of plasma and of the albiont
medium under the action of radiation puloea with the intensity diatrihutions over
the bean crooo section and in tine that are realized in an expedient. Such a
couputationol model and coopariaon of the data that it yieldo on the dynamic char-
acteristics of phenomena with the quite complete reoulto of Ileaeuronento given

in Ref. 7 are conoidered in this article. In accordance with the data of 'Ref. 7

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we study below the gasdynamic processes that take place at the surface of a his-
muth target irradiated by bell-exhaped monopulse laser radiation (with duration
at half power level of WHOM-0.5 us) with wavelength X- 1.06 um in the range
of maximum radiation flux densities qm- 5-200 W/cm2 (so-called "moderate" flux

densities) in which the subsonic radiation wave and light detonation wave con-
ditions are realized.

1. The computational technique that is used here was described in Ref. 9-13 where
it was used to model processes of formation and dynamics of the light detonation
wave and supersonic radiation wave at the surface of an aluminum target in air.
The method includes solution of the unsteady axisymmetric problem of heat conduc-
tion on heating and vaporization of an obstacle under the action of absorbed laser
radiation on a circular spot of radius r.. and solution of the unsteady axisymmet-
ric gasdynsmic problem of movement of vapor and the displaced ambient gas (air).
We will briefly describe the procedure as applied to the given problem.

It was assmed in accordance with Ref. 7 that radiation traveling toward the sur-
face of the target has intensity (1. -qo(t) that is constant within the limits
of the cross section of a cylinder with radius of 0.5 and 0.2 cm, and has a time
dependence that is tabulated (Pig. 1). The quantity qm and the total energy
density E on the target are related by the expression 3'0-53‘Imax- and the total

‘ ' energy E. for a target with rg-OJo cm
is defined by the relation 2.) I0.27 x
(1“,. Here q.“ is expressed in
m/cn’. sum J/cm’. and sonm J.
Surface reflectivity Rwas determined
by surface temperature To in accor-
dance with data of Ref. lb. 1. e.
the vapor and the air heated by the

  

  
 
   
   

5' vapo:-generated shock wave partly
“.45 or totally absorbed both the incident
400 ‘ ' radiation and that reflected from
J“ k the surface. The obstacle was heated
“‘0" ‘lk and vaporized in region r<r. under
”\‘aw, “v.7 the action of incident radiation with
I, “"\\‘.e?“ - _ flux density (3.01!)— q.(¢)[i—R(T.)lx
/ -\ us xexp[—Ix,(r,s)dr] (here an is the co-
0 1 ’ .
Fig. 1. Time dependence of laser emission efficient of absorption of radiation
intensity and pressure in the center of by vapor and air, z is read out along
exposure spot on target surface: q." the normal to the surface). Heat
_ [MU/m2] 1--200; 2—150; 3-40; 5—65; transfer was disregarded in the tar-
5--25; 6-16; 7--10; 8--7; 9--5 get in the radial direction. heating

into the target (2(0) was determined
by the magnitude of the energy flux qa(r. t) delivered to the surface. The boon-
dary parameters for vapor at the surface were assigned in accordance'with Ref. 15
with consideration of ambient counterpressure; in accordance with this. vapor
motion started upon heating of the surface above the boiling point. equal to
Tb:- 1830 K for bismuth [Ref. 16].

ll.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To describe the movement of vapor and air in an eulerian coordinate system. the
finite difference method of "coarse particles" was used lief. 17]. generalized

to the case of accounting for absorption of incident and reflected radiation by
the vapor-air plane. In contrast to Ref. 12. 13. re-rsdietion of energy by the
plasma was disregarded due to a lack of data on the group coefficients of absorp-
tion of bismuth vapor. Motion of the contact boundary between vapor and air was
followed by using markers-apassive particles having a velocity equal to the lo-
calized' velocity of motion of the medias. The equation of state and coefficients
of absorption were tabulated in the form of dependences p-p(o.t) and rv-rv(p.c).
where p is pressure. p is density. c is the internal energy of a unit of mass

of the medium. for air in accordance with the tables of Ref. 18. and for binuth
vapor in accordance with data of Ref. 19. ' '

The computational grid for solving the problem_[had] up to 34 cells along the
r-coordinate (over the surface) and up to 60 cells along the s-coordinate (normal
to the surface). providing satisfactory spatial resolution of .flow parameters.

As the gasdynamic perturbations approached one of the boundaries of the compu-
tational region. the dimensions of the computational cells in this direction were
doubled. and as a result development of flow of the media use traced over a fairly
long time interval. In the given case motion was nearly one-dimensional over

a considerable part of the emission pulse (up to t-1 us). appreciably improving
the detail'of notion description at the beginning of the process through intro-
duction of cells Motor.

2. Calculations are done for versions with w- 5. 7. 10. 12. 16. 25. b6. 70.
11.0 and zoo m/cn’. We begin examination of the results with Fig 2. giving the

, distributions -of par-asters in a plea-a
jet forned by an emission pulse with
qw- zoo HH/cm’ acting on a bismuth car-
get with 5-0.2 cn. Time t- 1.3 as
corresponds to nearly total cessation
of energy release. ' The given example
is of interest in particular in the re-
spect that here in the process of energy
release there is a change in the condi-
tions of propagation of the plasma front
contrary to the radiation: the mode of
the subsonic radiation wave is replaced
by that of the light detonation wave when
the radiation flux density on the target
reaches qa - 130 W/cn' on the leading edge
of the pulse (at t=0.5 us). The distri-

 

Fig. 2. Distribution of tempera- bution of density in the ct shows a pro-
ture 1‘ and density p in plasma jet nounced minimum of ~5-10" g/cIIa (air
at time t- 1.3 us. T. eV: 1--5.6; density outside of the jet 9-1.29‘10”

2--3.2; 3--2.s; 6-4.8; S—-l.6; 6-- g/cn’) in the middle part in a region

1.4; 7-4.3; 8—1; 9—0.4; 10-0.022. at a distance of from 2 to 5 us from the
9-10’, g/cm : 1--10; 2--3.2; 3--l. : surface. Schlieren photographs for the
6-4.3; 5--0.6; 6—0.5; 7-43; 8--0.3; same kind of conditions given in Ref. 6. 7
9--0.25 for an aluminum target (as calculations

15

MOWIISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

show. the latter circumstance does not alter matters since the vapor is situated
much nearer the surface than the indicated region when alminum and bismuth tar-
gets are used) clearly show a more transparent disk-shaped region at distances
of ~3-S Ill that can be identified with the above-mentioned density minimal. The
general shape. as well as the dimensions of the jet in the axial and transverse
directions as measured from the schlieren pattern from Ref. 6. 7 and also with
respect to Fig. 2 are likewise similar to one another. Even this implies that
the given calculation satisfactorily transmits the dynaeics of the phenomenon
over the entire duration of the emission pulse.

Let us examine in more detail the space-time dependencee of parameters for two
typical versions of calculations. The distributions of parameters in the s direc-
tion at r- 0 for different instants within the duration of the emission pulse are
shown in Fig. 3 and lo for qu- 65 and 140 Mil/cs:2 respectively. Under these

   

.0. .ilﬁllllW‘lm
{ft-‘9 _ :‘e'i'é‘ﬂl-
immut-

Pig. 2. Distribution along Fig. lo. Distribution along
the z-axis for pressure I) (—) the z-axis for pressure p (—)
and absorption coefficient "v and absorption coefficient xv
(--) at qua-65 Mil/cm2 at (—--) at qua-1&0 Mil/cm: at
times t. us: l--0. 5; 2-0. 63; times t, us: l-0. A; 2—0. 5;
3--0.79S; 4—0.9; 5-4.0; 6- 3--0.63; 4—0.795; 5-0.9
1.26

 

0

conditions the pattern of motion in the persxial region of the jet is still close
to one-dimensional although its lateral distribution along the surface of the
target say influence the integral characteristics (recoil momentum. etc.). It
can be seen that the optical thickness of the vapor is great for both versions
at t > 0. 6-0. 8 us. but formation of light detonation wave is possible only at suf-
ficisnt magnitude of q: for the second version at t- ~.0 6 us. when or 130 Dill/en2 .
The intensity of the shock wave generated by the vapor in air is here sufficient
for the shock-compressed layer to begin to completely absorb radiation in the
vicinity of the wave front. and to form a light-detonation complex.

Both versions of calculation are characterized by considerable vapor teqerature '
—-up to 5-7 Ev. These temperatures, calculated without consideration of processes

16

FOR OFFICIAL- USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of radiative cooling of vapor. are apparently overstated by about 302. which as
noted in Ref . S is implied by the estimate of equality of the radiative and out-
wardly incident enission fluxes. The air temperature between the contact boundary
and the shock wave front is considerably lower: in the first version it is less
than I eV; in the second version by time ~0.6 us and later it begins to exceed

1 eV. which is sufficient to change absorption from vapor to air [Ref . 20).

Transition from the subsonic radiation wave to the light detonation wave in the
given case takes place under the action of gasdynamic forces:' the piston action
of vapor on air is decisive in the. process of increasing its tenperature to the
point of initiation of absorption Tg~l.2-l.5 eV [Ref. 20]. However. estimates

of the rate of propagation of a subsonic radiation wave according to Ref. 20 show
that under the given conditions the difference between the propagation velocity
and the mass velocity of the media: in the vicinity of the contact boundary is '
still small. 1. e. actually the motion of the plasma front is determined by gas-
dynamic processes. Supplementary to this. let us mention the nearly complete
coincidence of measurements in Ref. 7 and the calculated maximum velocities of
dispersal “nax of the plasma front from the surface both in the region of existence
of subsonic radiation wave conditions and in the region of values qmax> 130 PIN/cl2
that ensure transition to the light detonation wave conditions in the process of
action: at qu- 50, 11.0. 200 Iii/cm” these velocities were “max' I». 8. ll km/a
respectively. The measured and calculatedhodographs of the jet front also coin-
cide. .

Let us consider the time dependences of pressure in the center of the target for
versions of calculations with different values of a.“ (see Fig. 1). Here. just
as in the experiments of Ref. 1, 7,~ two pronounced pressure maxima can be observed:
the first corresponding to vaporization of the target. and the second corresponding
to arrival of perturbations from the absorption spike on the vapor—air interface
at the surface. In the calculations the time of onset. of the second maxim- is
somewhat less than in the experiment of Ref. 7. and its value pm; at has) 100
Mil/cuta is somewhat greater. It must be borne in mind here that pressure averaged
over the surface of the sensor (and target) was recorded in the experiment. If

the calculated pressure were averaged over the target. the value of Peax would

be reduced (due to two-dimensional vapor movement); these differences continue

to decrease with increasing averaging surface. although some discrepancy remains.
This can be attributed to the peculiarities of the registration system in Ref. 7
(some time lag of the pressure sensor, some arbitrariness in combining the emission
pulse and pressure oscillograme and so on), as well as to incomplete reproduction
of the emission pulse parameters in the calculation (for example the nonuniformity
of distribution of radiation intensity over the spot that was unaccounted for

in the calculations was estimated in Ref. 7 by a value of 2202). At the same

time. just as in Ref. 7. p.“ falls off somewhat beginning at qm~ 130 m/cmz.

A quantity of definite interest is the specific recoil momentun n: the ratio

of the recoil momentum I acting on the target to the energy Bo delivered to the
target (n- 1/30). The quantity n_by time t- 20 us from the start of the emission
pulse is plotted as a function of qm on Fig. 5. from which we see that the dis-
crepancy between calculation and experiment does not exceed the spread of measure-
ment results. The nature of the dependence of n on ow is also reproduced-"the

17

POROFI'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 5. Specific recoil no-
nentm as a function of naximn

flux density of laser emission:
l--ca1cu1ation; Z—Ref. 7

 

rise in n up to qnax' 10 iii/cl:a due to increase in vapor mass and reduction in
losses to thermal conduction in the target. the relatively smooth fall-off in

the region ‘hax‘ 100 “Ii/cal2 due to. absorption of emission in the vapor and re-
duction of energy losses on vapor heating. and finally the steeper drop at ﬂux)
100 Mlvl/cln2 due to formation of the light detonation wave and more rapid departure
of the absorption front from the surface as well as to the considerable influence
of two-dimensionality.

Thus. the aggregate of the cited colputational data and their comparison with the
experiment of Ref. 6. 7 show that the described computational model properly in-
parts the behavior of gasdynanic processes at the surface of a target in the one-
dimensional and two-dimensional phases of development.

“FENCES

_l. Kozlova. N. IL, Petrukhin, A. 1., et al., PIZIKA GORKNIYA l VZRYVA. Vol 11.
No b. 1975. p 650.

2. Kozlova. N. N.. Harkovicb, I. 3., et al.. KVAM'OVAYA mm. Vol 2. No 9.

3. Petrukhin. A. 1.. Nuchinov. V. A.. Rybakov. V. A.. PIS'HA V ZEUINAL m1-
CHBSKOY FIZIKI. V01 3, No 4. 1977. P 158.

A. Nuchmov, v. A.. Orlova. ‘r. 1.. turn rum, Vol 6. No 1.. 1973. p 969.

5. Neuchinov. V. A., Polozova,_l. A.. KVANTOVAYA uni-scum, Vol 6, No 6. 1979.
- p 1223.

6. Nemchinov. V. A.. Petrukhin. A. 1.. et 31.. mm AKADB‘II NAUK SSSR.
Vol-2‘10. No 6. 1979. p 877.

7. Harkovich, I. 2.. Petrukhin. A. 1.. et al.. PIZIKA GORKNIYA I VZRYVA. Vol 15.
No 4, 1979. p 30.

8. narkovich. 138.. Neuchinov. V. A.. et al.. FIZIRA GOREMYA I VZRYVA. Vol 15.
No lo. 1979, p 37. .

18

maomcurusromv
10.

ll.

12.

13.

11..

15.

l6.

l7.

l8.

19.

20.

21.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rmnov. G. 8.. Stankevich. Yu. A.. DOKLADY maul NAUK BELORUSSKOY 5811.
Vol 21. No 6. 1977, p 503.

Ronanov. G. 5.. Stankavich. Yu. A.. in: "Dinmika sploshnoy- sredy" [Malice
of Continuous Medial]. No 9. Novosibirsk. 1979.

Romanov. G. 5.. Stankevich, Yu. A.. "'rezisy dokladov 'I‘ret'yey Vsesoyuznoy
konferentsii po dinnike izluchayushchego gaze" [Abstracts of Rsports‘to the
Third All-Union Conference on Dynamics of a "Radiating Gas]. Hoscov. 1977.

Bonch-Bruyevich. A. H.. Zinchanko. V. I. et a1.. "rezisy dokladov Chetvertogo
Vsesoyuznogo soveshchaniya po nerezonansnomvzainodeystviyu 0Pt1Ch00k080
izlucheniya s veshchestvon" [Abstracts of Reports to the Fourth All-Union
Convention on Nonresonant Interaction of Optical Radiation With Matter].
Leningrad. 1978.

Yel'yashevich. M. A.. Romanov, G. 8.. Stankevich, Yu. A.. ‘Tezisy dokladov
Chetvertogo Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po dinanike izluchayushchego gaze" [Ah-
strncts of Reports to the Fourth All-Union Conference on Dynamics of a Rs-
diating Gas]. Moscow, 1980.

Colub'. A. P.. Harkovich. I. 3.. et al.. Article deposited in the All -"nion
Institute of Scientific and Technical Intonation. No 3300-79, 1979.

Anisinov. s. 1.. Imas. Is. A. et al.. 'meyetviye izluchaniya bol'shoy
noshchnosti na natally" [Action of High-Power Radiation on Metals]. Noncou.
Neuks. 1970. ‘

Slavinskiy. H. P.. "Fiziko-khimicheskiye svoystva elenenttw" [Physicochenical
Properties of Elements], hoscow. Hetellurgizdat. I952.

Belotserkovskiy. 0. PL. Davydov. Yu. H.. 211mm. VYCHISLIM'NOY HAMTIKI
I MAMTICHSKOY PIZIKI. Vol II, No l. 1971. p 182.

Kuznetsov. N. $1.. "Ternodinanicheskiye funktsii i udarnyye adiabaty vozdukha
pri vysokikh tenperaturakh" [Thermodynamic Functions and Shock Adiabets of
Air at High Temperatures]. Moscow. Hashinostroyeniye. 1965.

Yel'yashevich, H. A., Borovik. P. N. et al.. "Terisy dokladov Chetvertogo
Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii p0 dinaaike izluchayushchago gaza" [Abstracts of
Reports to the Fourth All-Union Conference on Dynanics of a Radiating Gas].
Moscow. 1980.

Rayzer. Yu. P.. "Lazernaya iskra i rasproatraneniye razryadov" [Laser Spark
and Propagation of Discharges]. Moscow. Neuka. I976.

Bergel'ston. V. I.. Loseva. G. V.,Nsmchinov. V. A.. ZHURNAL PRIKLADNOY
“m1!“ I TWICﬂBSKOY FIZIKI, No 6, 1976. p 12.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pizika goreniya i vzryva". 1981
6610

C80:

1862/85

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LASERSAND M5335

UDC 621.373
HBQMNISH 0F PULSE!) USING IN HIGH-Pm8m_ ELECTRIC DISCHARGE Arie-LASER

Moscow KVANTOVAYA EWRONIKA in Russian Vol 8,110 11(113). Nov 81 (nenmcript
received 13 Feb 81) pp 2625-2632

[Article by v. N. Lisitsyn and A. a. Sorokin, Thernophysice Institute of the
Siberian Depertnent, USSR Acedeey of Sciences. Novosibirsk]

[Text] On the basis of studying the characteristic behavior of spontaneous
and induced emission during pulsed electric discharge in'a Iixture
of Ar and Xe, an analysis was node of the populatial processes of
the stone laser levels of xenon, and the efficiency of excitation
transfer fron argon to xenon econ was estimated. A conclusion was
drawn regarding the excitation of laser levels by direct electron
iqact from the ground state. Iwroveunt of the energy char-
acteristics of the laser and variation of the spectral cowosi-
tion of the enission with an increase in xenon pressure and the
addition of argon are connected with significant variation of
the electron distribution function with respect to energies. It
is possible to neglect the excitation trmsfer froa argon to
xenon stone in the electric discharge. The letter is ilportant

for creating electron been preionised 'and electric discharge XUV
lasers utilizing Xe; diners.

This paper is devoted .to the study of the processes of exciting xenon levels in
the working mixture of a high-pressure Ar-Xe laser.

It is known In] that in low-pressure lasers utilizing IR transitions of inert
atom, the output power of the emission does not exceeds few tens of watts with
an efficiency of 2.10'5 Increasing the heavy inert gas content in nixtures with
helium made it possible significantly to increase the radiation power (-10 5watts)
and efficiencv (-10'3) [2,3]. The replace-ant of heliun by arm in an ehctron
bean preimisedArbXe-laser led to further increase in efficiency (10'2) [4].

The use of discharge through a dielectric having increased stability expanded

the operating range of the Ar-Xe-laser to 7 ate [5]. The transition to high

pressures was accompanied by variation of the spectral conceition of the
emission.

The level population processes in an Ar-Xe mixture were investigated in an elec-
tric discharge with small (5 0.12) [6] xenon content and in an electron been pre-
ionized laser with large (0.7%) [4] canon content. The excitation transfer fro.

20

l-‘OIOWICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

argon molecules to xenon atom on excitation by an electrm bean and with a

xenon content PXezo'3PAr was investigated in [7]. In an electric discharge laser
with optinal xenon content (-1.5!) such studies were not perfomd.

The discovery of population channels of atomic levels in an Ar-Xe mixture is
important not only for the Ar-Xe-laser, but on the whole for high-pressure lasers
in which, as a rule. inert gases are used, in particular, to create electron
bean preionized [8] and electric discharge [5] lasers utilizing Arz, Xez dimers.

The purpose of this experiment was to determine the basic nechanism participating
in the excitation of laser levels of the electric discharge Ar-Xe-laser and
estimation of the efficiency of the excitation transfer fron argon to xenon atoms
based on studying the characteristic behavior of spontaneom and induced emissions
of a gas discharge plasma under variom conditions.

Experimental Results and Discussion

1. Experimental Setup. No discharge cell designs were used in the experiments:
for investigation of lasing, a cell with double transverse discharge [2] 60H.”
0.6 cm (electrode spacing 1.5 cm); to study spontaneous emission, a cell with
exposure through a cathode grid 4x0.9*0.5 cm. The exposure discharge was realized
between an auxiliary electrode coated with glass and the grid. For attenuation
of the radiation reabsorption. the observations were made across the cell so that
the thickness of the plasma column focused on the "DR-2 monochromator was 0.5 on.

"W (1)

’__.___.—.——.——.
’q-n

    

II

an at a: do an (2)

Figure l. Spontaneous enission power on the 0.67 micron line
for the first (1") and second (9') glow components as a function
of the pressures of Ar-Xe and lie-Xe mixtures (the subscripts
on 5°); ”Xe-0'01 ate; the current was kept constant.
Key:
1. relative units
2. atmospheres

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l D II (6)

Figure 2. ' Oscillograae of the current (1-) and spontaneous

emission at X-OJW (a) and 0.98 microns (b) in mixtures of

. lie-Xe (2) and Ar-Xe (3) for p-0.S atn. ”30.01 atn.

Key: .
A. microseconds
B. nanoseconds

A table energy storage element counted by a gas-filled discharger throng: a
transmitting cable line to the cell was used to excite the discharge. The ratio
of the naxinln voltage on the cell to the closest secondary peak was 60 the
discharge current duration was $7 nanoseconds with respect to the base. The
electronegnetic planning wave reflected from the cell was again incident on the
cell after 100 nanoseconds.

A high-speed recording systea including the "Dnepr" and ELU-F'Klﬁ photodetectors
and also the 51-75 oscillograph node it possible to take the assure-ants with
tine resolution of 10 nanoseconds.

2. Spontaneous Emission. In reference [6] it was denonstrated that with a snail
xenon content (<0.12) in the Arms mixture, the glow of the Xe lines on the trans-
itions 6p', 7p-6s belonging to the spectral region of 0.55-0.5 micron is appreci-
ably nore intense than with pure Xe. The growth of the intensity is caused by
radiation cascades from 9d level which, in turn, are populated as a result of
resonance excitation transfer from the 4s' [1/211 level of argon. The correspond-
ing resonance defect -100 cm'l. It was of interest to discover that this emission
behaves in accordance with the optimal conditions for lasing with tine with large
xenon concentration.

The emission in the spectral range of 0.45 to 0.5 micron is observed in the for:
of two components. The first coaponent lasting 7 nanoseconds coincided in time
with the pming pulse. the second comment was observed in the discharge
afterglow. The 1-0. 67 nicron line (7p[5/2] 23-6sl3/2] ) which is not intense

in the afterglow was selected for the investigations2

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 1 shows the spontaneous emission power for both couponents .i" and 3“
as a function of the pressure of the Arms and the lie-Xe mixtures, and the
arrow indicates the intensity of the y’k-line in pure Xe.

{and (a)

(A! 45 (I a m (b)

Figure 3. Spontaneous esdssion power 51v st A-0.98 (1) and
0.9 micron (2. 3) as a function of the pressure of Ar-Xe (1,3)
and He-Xe (2) mixtures. The arrows indicate the radiation
intensities in pure xenon; ph-0.01 atmosphere, the current
wu kept constant
Key:
a. Relative units
b. atmospheres
”In” (a) ,

   
 
 

7
w ’ a" m‘ u" an..." (9
Figure lo. Spontaneous enission power ‘9' on X-Ou’ﬂ (1, 2) and
0.98 micron (3.10) in xenon (1,4) and in an Ar-Xe mixture (2,3)
as a function of the xenon pressure; 5 - also in an Ar-Xe
mixture are the 0.91 micron line of argon (lop[1/2]1-bs[3/2]g.
In the mixture pAr-OJo stat, the current was kept constant.
Key:
a. Relative units
b. atmospheres

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

{\'u'"""' (A)

a 42 do gm

Figure 5. using oscillograns et 1-2.65 microns in an Ar-Xe
mixture for p-0.1 ate and diffeer xenon contents (a) and
also current (1) end lasing oscillograns for p-0.5 etn,
p '5-10‘3 arm in Ar-Xe mixtures (2.10.5) end lie-Xe Iixtures
(B (b)
Key:

A. atmospheres

B. microseconds

C. microns

Figure 2, a shove spontaneous slow oscillograu on the 9.67 micron line. It is
obvious that the origin of the corponents Qua-x: and 95...)“ is different.

In the former case the troughs in the glow fron-the duping pulping oscillations
indicate the recodaination nature of the population [9]. es should occur for the
ﬂe-Xe-laser [10]. In the second case the afterglow pulse is naturally related
to the excitation transfer fron argon.

Let us note that the absence or smell magnitude of the recoﬁination flux on the
7p level indicates either "capture" of it at higaer levels by argon or the
presence of other reconbinstion channels; we did not study this question.

The first glow conponent theoreticall can also be connected with transfer fro-
srgon. The transfer constant 16510" on [see [6]. For pn-lO’2 at. equaliza-
tion of the 9d level populations of won and be of argon lust take place in
the tile ~l nanosecond. However, for p :10-5 to 10". ate this tine is
sufficiently large to note 'a delay ‘1: oPthe madam spontmeoue glow of the
first component after completion of the exciting pulse mder the condition that
the 7p level population of Xe predominates as a result of transfer from Art

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This delay was absent on all of the investigated lines 6p', 6p, 7p-6e, including
the IR transition lines. In addition, the glow of the first cowonent 0-0.6?
micron) decreases with anincrease in the argon content, and the glow of the

second component increases, that is, the Inchanisns of their excitation are
different.

Thus, the first colpcnent of the glow must be connected with electron excitation.
Let us note that measurements in a mixture of Arr-Kr where resonance transfer from

the argon is absent demstrated [6] that the basic nthod of populatingthe Kr
levels is also electron excitation.

The study of the IR transitions 6p-6s is of special interest. The mat powerful
laser lines end on the 6p levels, and lasing is observed from the 6p {1/211 level.
Spontaneous emission on the 6p-6s transition also consisted of two couponents,

but the afterglow pulse was so small that it was hardly distinguishable against
the detector background noise. In contrast to the emission ﬁst—x. from the higher
levels 7p and 6p', the spontaneom glow, for example, of the transition 6p[l/2]1-
6s[3/2]g 0-0.98 micron) increased on addition'of argon and increasing the
pressure of the Ar-Xe aixture (Figure 3). -

Figure 2,b shows the radiation oscillogram on the 0.98 micron line. The maximum
glow was reached during pumping. The upper level of this line is located

above the resonance level 6s' [1/2] by a total of 84 cm‘l. In the case of
Boltzmann distribution the populat one of these levels at kT~300 cm”1 are related
by the expression [6p[l/2]1]-0.75[6s'{1/211}. The reaction constant

mom/2|.) + std» Xe(69lll2h) +Xe<'8.)—AE . ' '

k-6.65-10'n cn3/sec [11]. For pure xenon when ”(e-0.01 atm the characteristic
excitation transfer time ~60 nanoseconds. However, even in pure xenon at this
pressure t '0. This indicates satisfaction of the inequality for the populations
[6p[l/2]1]§O.75[6s'[1/211] so that inversion possibly occurs on this transition.

For the XUV laser utilizing Xez diners, higher xenon concentrations in the argon
are used than those investigated above. Excitation of the Ar-Xe mixture by an
electron beam with xenon content pxg20.3 p“ demonstrated the high efficiency of
population of the Xe levels as a result of excitation energy transfer from argon
molecules [7]. During electron beam pulping where the electrons have an energy
of hmdreds of kiloelectmn volts, the argon excitation efficiency is maintained
for the xenon content.

In an electric discharge as a result of a relative decrease in efficiency of
interaction of the electrons with the argon with an increase in the Xe content in
the mixture, the influence of the argon on the Xe level population processes is
reduced [see Figure 4). Thus,” the intensity of the spontaneous emission on all
of the investigated transitions Xe in a mixture Ar:Xe-2:l (pile-0‘2 atn) becomes
the same as in pure Xe.

Thm, from the nature of the behavior of spontaneous glow of xenon on the
transition 7p, 6p'-6s and 6p-6s in an Ar-Xe mixture it is possible to conclude
that the first couponent J" is related to the electron excitation, and the
second component 39' is related to the excitation transfer from the argon. With

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ISB ONLY

a high xenon content in the mixture (p 20.5 p”) it is possible to neglect the
influence of the argon on the Xe popul ion processes. With an increase in '
argon pressure, the number of fast electrons in the discharge decreases with a
simultaneous increase in the mater of electrons which belong energywise to the
zone of effective excitation of the low xenon levels.

3. Laser Emission. Lasing of an Ar-Xe-laser was observed in the fan of one
or two comments.

With a small zenon content (px,~10'5 to 10"“ atm) when the population of the

Xe levels by electrons is small [6] lasing was observed'only on the 2.65 micron
line in the afterglow (Figure S,a). Its duration was reduced with an

increase in both the Xe content and the total pressure of the mixture. In con-
trast to the lie-Xe laser, the adulation of the radiation from puwing oscilla-
tions in the case of the Ar-Xe laser was absent (Figure 5, b). Under optiml
conditions for the total output power, the contribution of the 2.65 micron-line
to the emission did not exceed 52 (see the table).

Increasing the xenon pressure led to the appearance of the first coqonent both
on the 2.65 micron line (see Figure 5) and on all remaining lines (see the table).
The emission of the first component for the self-limited trmsition 6p-6s ended
simultaneously with the current pulse, and for the Sd-6p transitions it con-

tinued also in the discharge afterglow (see Figure 5, b).

Thus, almst all of the eudssion of an Ar-Xe-laser is concentrated in the first
coaponent, the excitation of which is realized in the pulping process. The lasing
duration is determined in this case by the ratio of the lifetim of the upper and
lower laser levels. In the investigated case 6s levels are ntsstable, and the
5d lifetimes are greater than 6p. '

Comaring the presented lasing characteristics with the behavior of spontaneous
emission, it is possible to conclude that the first cowonent is related to
excitation by electrons, and the second, to energy transfer from argon.

The laser levels can be populated by electrons either from the ground state or
in steps through the lower 6s-levels.

For explanation of the high efficiency of an electron beam preionized Ar-Xe

laser utilizing 5d-6p transitions, in reference [6] the mechanism of stepped excita-
tion was used. In this laser a: electron beam and discharge in the initial phase
when BIN is large creates high concentration of ntastable man. Then when BIN
decreases by an order, during the course of about 7 microseconds the laser operates
as a result of excitation and ionization of the atom in the 6s-staus by rela-

tively slow electrons.

In reference [6] it was demonstrated that the mechanism of step excitation of
the upper laser levels is not basic in the initial-discharge phase when BIN is
large. In addition, in [4] approximately 751 of the emitted power fell to the
1.73 micron line, and lasing on the 2.03 micron line which was more powerful in
our case wm observed only during operation of the electron beam (see the table).

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Laser Transitions in XeI

g) 6 PW sum-madam-
(1) (2) s (5) sat-means.- sexes ' new... (6)
3 7 um .
g nepeson. [In-cane " .
i l L

g! o e ; lie-x0. Ar-Xa. Ar—Xe. M-Xe.

a 3 ~ .. l lmladil l syn-(5| 1"- [SI 1 In [H
-31 05 X I
0.02 comm—6mm: 9 _ <o.osd — — —
0.9. ”luau—mam: 5 — <0.05 <0.00 <0.os -
1.13 WWW—6015M, 9 0.001 <0.05 0.4 — 0.15
2.03 54l3!2|?—6pl3:2|, 00 0.23 05 04 0.25 0.00b
m mums—0015 21,. m _ - <0.00 — —
2m Ml5:'2I:—OPISI2I= so — — 0.1 0.3 0.15
2.65 54l:/¢I‘.'--60II-'2Io 50 0040 0.15 0.05 on 0.005
3.11 5d!5/2|§—69I3.'2|, 204 0.005 — .<0.0s - -
3.37 54l5l2]',’-—60l3:2|, :00 0.000 — '—, 0.35 c
3.43 7p|5l2l3—73l312|? 9 — 0.01 — . - —
3.55 much—1mm; 5 0.0l3 0.29 — — --
5J3 1] Islam—54' [3/2]? 0 — <o.0s'¢l — -— —
5.50 Ml?l2|:—6p[5l2]3 540 0.190 — <0.0_s — -

l. Wavelength, 1. microns

2. Transition, [le-bond

3. Oscillator strength, relative units [14]
4. Radiation distribution by lines

5. Electric discharge laser

6. Electron been preionized laer
a -- the only lines presented are those on which lasing is observed also at high

pressures; b - lasing is observed only fron an electron been at low Ar-Xe
pressure: c - weak lasing is observed only with a diffraction grating;
d - lasing is observed only at increased pressures

Thus, the first cowonent of the lasing to which the major part of the enitted
power fell is most probably connected with direct electron excitation fron the '
ground state.

There are sufficient experinental data to explain a nutter of peculiarities in

the variation of the spectral cosposition of the stimulated emission in different
cases. In pure lovaressure xenon only 00 laser transitions are known [12], part
of which are presented in the table. The addition of a buffer gas and transition
to increased pressures greatly ispoverishes thelspectral oonposition of the laser

emission which also depends on the grade of the buffer gas.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The absence of lasing from 7p and higher levels with the addition of argon is
connected with a decrease in the population rate of the higher xenon levels

under these conditions (see Figure 1). Decreasing the nulber of fast electrons
with an increase in the argon pressure0 also leads to a decrease in the proportion
of the laser emission from the SdI3/2]1 level from 0.85 (p-l atm) to 0.35 (p-‘l ate,
see the table). At the same time, growth of the ntﬂer of Electrons belonging to
the zone of effective excitation of the lower level 5d[5/2] leads correspondingly
to an increase in the proportion of the laser emission from 0.1 (p-l atm) to

0.65 (13-? atm). Let no pay attention to the fact that emission free this level
leads to a population of the same levels as lasing from the 5d[3/2]1 level.

The probabilitie of transitions for the 1.73 and 2.03 micron lines beginning
with the 5d[3/2] level differ by an order, but in pure Xe the lasing intensities
on them are distinguished by only two times, which indicates more efficient popu-
lation of the lower laser level 6p(3/2]1 by comparison with 6p[5/2]2.

0n addition of He the population of the 6p[S/2]2 level increases, and on addition .
of Ar it remains invariant (see Figure 2). As a result, lasing on X-l. 73 microns
in an lie-Xe mixture becomes weaker, and in an Ar-Xe mixture at atmospheric pres-
sure, conparsble with the lasing on 2.03 microns (see the table).

lo. Analysis of the Xe Level Population Processes. The characteristic features
of population of atomic levels by electrons alder different conditions are
determined by the nature of the dependence of the level excitation cross sections
on the electron energy and the electron energy distribution function (EDP). In
turn, the EDP is given by the value of BIN in the discharge.

Increasing the pressure leads to an increase in the frequency of the electron
collisions with stone. Consequently, the absolute nusber of acts of ionization
and, consequently, ne, increases. However, for this reason the electron drift
rate decreases. The first process leads to reduction of the electric field B,

and the latter process, to an increase in the electric field B. As a rennin!
increases with pressure, but the value of BIN decreases in our cpses approxinetely
proportionately to p'0 ’, and for p-l atm it is 2-3 10"16 volt-cn‘ .

Reduction of 8/11 with an increase in xenon pressure leads to a relative decrease
in the nunber of fast electrons in 'the discharge. This, in turn, leads to the
fact that the role of the lower levels having relatively large electron excita-
tion cross sections near the excitation threshold increases in the absorbed energy
balance. The growing efficiency of the excitation of these levels determines the
spectral composition of the laser emission on addition of the buffer gas.

The energy distribution with respect to different levels of atoms is only sensitive
the value of EIN. For example, the maximum excitation cross section of the

2 level of helium is S tiles less than the resonance 2 P (these levels are

0.27 ev from each other). However, there is a region of -6 ev wherein. the cros
ction 23F exceeds the cross section 21P. Therefore for E/Ndo 10

2 state must be excited mre efficiently than 21? [13].

the

28

m OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Addition of a buffer gas leads to an increase in the elastic scattering of the
electrons and an additional increase in energy losses of the fast electrons to
inelastic collisions with the buffer gas. A consequence of this is additional
increase in the intensity 3 and an increase in the amber of electrons belonging

to the zone where the working levelsare located. As a result, are favorable
conditions are created for excitation of lower xenon levels.

The presented qualitative explanation of the xenon level population processes
agrees with the experimental results described in item 2 and 3.

Conclusion

The basic conclusion of this work is that the determining mechanism of the
excitation of the upper laser levels of xenon in an electric discharge Ar-Xe-laser
is direct electron ispact from the ground state. The inrovelnnt of the energy
characteristics of the laser and variation of the spectral cowosition of the
emission with an increase in xenon pressure and the additim of argon are
connected with significant alteration of the BDP mder these conditions.

For optimal xenon content for lasing of an IR laser utilizing Xe transitions and
higher xenon content the excitation energy transfer from argon to the Xe atom .
can be neglected. This conclusion is important for electron beam preionired and
electric discharge XUV lasers utilizing Xez dimers.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Linford, c. J. 1338 J., 09-8. 1972. p 1.77.
2. Pahlen, T. 8.; Targ., R. Int: J.. (28-9, 1973. p 609.
3. Sorokin, A. R. ZhTP [Journal of Technical Physics], No 69, 1979, p 1673.

lo. Lawton. s. A.; Richards. J. 3.; Nun-an, L. A.; Specht, L.; De Teqle, r. A.
J. APP]... PllYS., No 50, 1979. p 3888.

S. Lisitsyn, V. IL; Sorokin, A. R. PIS'NA V 231'? [Letters of the Journal of
Technical Physics]. No 5. 1979. p 876.

6. Cedanken. A.; Jorther, .J.; Rae, 3.; Szoke, A. GEM. PHYS., No 57. 1972,
p 3456.

7. Danilychev, V. A.; Kerimov, 0. 11.; Kovsh, I. B. TRUDY PIAN [Works of the
Physics Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences], No 85, 1976, p 69.

8. Basov, N. 6.; Danilychev, V." A.; Dolgikh, V. A.; Kerimv, 0. 14.;
Lobanov, A. IL; Podsosonnyy, A. 8.; Suchkov, A. P. KVANTOVAYA MIRA
[Quantum Electronics]. No 2, 1975, p 28.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

9. Oudzcnko, L. 1.; Yakovlenko, S. I. FLAME!!! LAZERY [Plum Lasers],
Moscow, Atodzdet, 1978.

10. Sluicer, R.; Sz‘bke, A.; zmr, 3.; Bimr, Y. PHYS. REV" No A11, 1975, p 1187.
11. Sadeghi, IL; Sabbaau, J. P818. RBV., No A16, 1977, p 2336.

12. SPRAVOQINIK P0 LAZBRAH [laser Handbook], edited by A. H. Prokhorov, macaw,
Sov. radio, 1978.

13. Bannov, V. Yu.; Bodaov, V. 11.; Vysikaylo, P. 1.; uqukhin, Yu. 3.;
Kochetov. I. V.; Namtov, s. 6.; Pavlov, V. 6.; Pis'lennyy, V. 1).:
Stepanov, Yu. Yu.; Khriatoforov, 0. B. PREPRINT 1A3 [Preprint of the
Nuclear Power Institute], Moscow, No mo. 1979.

14. Faun, H. I..; McFarlane, R. 'A. J. APPL. PHYS., No 35, 1964, p 2010.

15. Chapovaky, P. L.; Liaiteyn, V. IL; Sorokin, A. R. OPTICS 00“., No 16.
1976, p 33.

(DPYRIGH‘: Izdatel'scvo "Radio 1 svyez'", "Kvenmvaya elektronika", 1981

108105
050: 1862/75

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.375. 826

CATALYTIC RECOVERY 01' GAS MIXTURE 0P CIDSBD-CYCLB ELECTED“ BEAM PREIONIZED
002 LASER .

Moscow KVAII'I’OVAYA 2mm in Msian Vol 8, No 11(113). Nov 81 (manuscript
recein 13 Feb 80) pp 2613-2624

[Article by z. I. Ashurly. I. r. Babayev, A. r. Daiayak. v. n. Romerov,
s. Ye. Kupriyanov (deceased), A. I. Laxurchenkov, V. K. Orlov. A. A. Perov,

V. V. Ssvel'yev and N. V. Cheburkin. Scientific-Research Physical mlemistry
Institute ineni 1.. Ya. Karpov, Moscow]

[Text] We investigated the possibility of using a catalytic regenerstor
to recover the gas mixture in a continuom-vsve 002-1.“. The
regeneraoor permits stdailisation of the characteristics 0f l
closed-cycle electron beam preionised mz-Iuer without replacing
the gm mixture.

The electric discharge time cheracteriatics of the laser are pre-
sented. A mass-spectrometric analysis was made of the variation
. of the gas mixttn'e composition during operation of the laser.-

A procedure is described for calculating the parnsters of the
gas mixture regenerstor. '

1. At the present time the problem of creating electric discharge-pned carbon
dioxide gas lasers is an urgent problem. The high power and efficiency of such
lasers will permit successful application of them in many branches of science

and engineering. In psrticuler, self-maintained discharged-pumped lasers are used
to uork materials [1. 2]. Lasers in vhich electron beam preionization is used to
excite the gas mixture are prospective [3]. They have found application at the
present time in engineering [6, 5]. '

Past (to 100 m/sec) puping of the gas mixture through the discharge gap is used
in laser systems. The gas mixture is either discharged to the atmosphere (open
cycle) or after cooling in sheet exchanger it is returned to the input of the
discharge chaﬁer (closed cycle). Operation of the laser in the open cycle
permits higher power inputs to the gas mixture [6]. but when solving problems
requiring prolonged continuom operation. a closed-cycle laser is preferable.

31

MWWONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. During closed-cycle operation of a laser, products of decomposition of the
gas mixture accuulate in its gas dynamic circuit (CDC). In references [8. 9]
basic reactions that take place in an electric discharge and lead to variation

of the initial cowosition of the gas mixttm'e containing coz, N2 and lie are
presented:

co,-:-2 » co+o+a <1)
o+o+.\\ - o,+M. (2)
s,-+o . NO+N. (3)

xo+o » N0, (1.)

Thus, oxygen, carbon monoxide aid nitrogen oxides accumlate in the CDC. These
materials even in small quantities can sipificsntly alter the electrical and the
lasing characteristics of the laser. For example, in the presence of electro-

negative molecules 021 N0, R02 the following reactions take place intensely (vith
rates of 10'12 to 10' 0 a3/sec):

0:+'¢ -> O+O-. . (s)
.\'O+E » N+O‘. ‘ (5)
NO,+E - NO+O‘. (7)
N0,+?+M . N0;+.-\L (s)

mese processes lead to a decrease in conductivity of the plasma and developnent
of discharge instability [7-10].

 

Figure l. Diagrams of a closed-cycle laser with regenerator:
l -- discharge chalber; 2 — regenerator; 3 -- heat exchanger;
4 -- fan: the direction of circulation'of the gas flow is
illustrated by the arrows

The optimal gas composition can be maintained in two ways. its first method pre-
supposes continuous renewal of some part of the gas mixture. Thus, in [2. 11]

the gas mixture of initial cosposition was added in the amount of up to 12 of
the mix pulped through the discharge gap and, correspondingly, the same amount

32

MOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of gas mixture was pulped out of the laser. An industrial laser with self-maintain-
ed discharge requires renewal of up to 101 of the gas lixture-for stable operation
[12]. It is easy to see that this method is unacceptable for industrial lasers:

in the case of mass flow of the gas mixture in the laser of about 1 kg/sec for

5 hours of continuum operation, about 100 kg of helium will be consumed. This
leads to a significant increase in Operating expenditures. The secmd procedure
presupposes the presence in the laser of a recovery system in which the initial
composition of the gas nixture is restored using the following reactions:

2co+o, . 2co,. (9)
2N0+2C0 . N.+2oo,.
' (11)

The catalytic method of mintaining the optimal coQosition of the working gas
mixture is the most convenient. The application of a catalytic regenerator in a
closed-cycle (Dz-laser is known [6]. The catalyst was copper oxide 600 and

d'nroniun oxide Cr203 applied to aluminum oxide granules. Catalytic reactions
took place at a tenperature of 6001!.

3. Two versions of a closed-cycle laser with regenerator are possible (Fig 1).

In the first, "by-pass" version (Figure 1, a) only part of the total flow reaches
the regeneretor at the sane time as in the second, "direct-flow” version (Fig l. b).
the entire gas flow passes through the regenerator.

Let us consider continuous Operation of lasers of these types. The equation

describing the variatim of the carbon dioxide concentration in the CDC c, noles/
liter, has the form

V i - - ucV,“ -:- mm. (c. —-c),

" d! (12)

where t is the operating tin, sec: V k' are the volumes of the discharge
zone and the CDC, respectively, liters: u is the probability of decoaposition of
the carbon dioxide, sec'lz co is the initial concentration of 002 molecules.
moles/liter; ”k is the volunetric flow rate of the gas mixture in the CDC,
liters/sec; wk is the volumetric flow rate of the gas mixture throuyl the

regenerator, l/sec (in the second version of connection of the regenerator to the
CDC otl);

x=(c.—c )/(c.—€) (13)

is the degree of recovery of carbon dioxide in the regenerator; ck is the carbon
dioxide gas concentration after the regenerator, moles/liter.

Let us note that equation (12) is valid mder the condition of smallness of
decowosition of the carbon dioxide during passage of the gas flow through the
discharge zone V k/wk' In addition. if oxidation of the carbon monoxide is

described by a ﬁrst-order equation with respect to the carbon monoxide concen-

tration, then the degree of recovery does not depend on the magnitude of this
concentration.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Thus, at the the t the carbon dioxide concentration with constant at

c=-(c,luV,.+x non){uV,. exp l—(uV,K+x an“) V;'ll+x am}. (1,.)

In the tine t>>Vk/(uvpk+nuok) steady-state concentration of the carbon dioxide
is established

c.,=-c,rau,.l(uV”+xau“). - (15)

Analogously. it is possible to deter-ins the concentrations of the different
products formed in the discharge.

Let us introduce the tine t in which no noticeable change hasyet taken place in
the characteristics of s closed-cycle laser without a regenerator (the plans

conductivity. gain, lasing power). This tine is characterised by the carbon
dioxide concentration

c'-c.exp l—uVuVI'rl. (l6)

Equating cct iron (15) and c' free (16), it is possible to deternine the
necessary paraneters of the regeneration system: ‘

xa-r..r;"[cxp(—ﬂ;')—l|—'- .(17)

_ —I
where ‘n” V.“ '37s“ V. (“VDI - For rp>>r, which in practice is always present

m=r“r-‘. (18)

Thus, the value of an characterizing the required degree of regeneration is
determined by the 'laser systen parameters Tk and 1’.

Under the condition of a first-lower reaction with respect to carbon nonoxide the
use of the catalyst can be determined by the formula

”-1“. In (l-xWK. (19)

where K is the experimntally determined reaction rate constant of oxidation of
carbon monoxide per unit mass of catalyst, which depends on the gas telperature
and characterizes the activity of the catalyst. A specific calculation of the
optinal diagram of a laser with regenerator nust be perforsed considering the
temperature dependence of the properties of the catalyst, the kinetic equations
of the reaction and the gas dynanic resistance of the regenerator. The "by-pass"
version (o<l) leads to snsller expenditures of energy on heating the gas mixture
in the regenerator. The "direct-flow" version (o-l) is convenient in the case

- where catalytic reactions take place efficiently for a gm mixture tenperature
at the output iron the discharge cheater (usually about 170°C), and additional
heating is required.

34

- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. A study was mule of the continuous operation of an electron beam preionized
closed-cycle coz-laser schemticaliy depicted in Figure 2. A centrifugal fan 6
was med to pump the gas mixture through the discharge cluster 2 (resmator 3),
and the mixture was cooled in a water heat earth-Igor 5. Part of the gas flow

was tapped after the discharge chaﬁer to the regenerator 6 containing the cata-
lyst and heating element. Self-maintained discharge was kept alive by an electron
been from a gun I. The fan puns the gas mixture with volumetric flow rate to

9 m3/sec. The tewerature of the gas mixture in the resonator reached 600’6,

the volume of the gas dynamic circuit was 3 m3. and the discharge zone, 20 liters.

 

Figure 2. Diagram of an electron beam preionized laser
with gas analysis system

The variation in composition of the gas mixture was analyzed by two methods:
first, the gas mixture was pumped by means of a vacuum pump 7 through the glass
anpules 8 and then analyzed on a use spectronter with hidu resolution; secondly,
the continuous gas corpoaition monitoring system was built, the diagram of which
is also presented in Figure 2. The gas mixture was continuously removed from

the circuit by the pun) 7 through the gas line 9, and the mixture was pumed out
of the gas line by a diffusion pump 10 and fed to the measuring head of the mass
spectrometer ll.

5. Experi nts were performed with self-maintained discharge current densities to
20 means] (which corresponded to an electron concentration to 6°101° en's).

for ratios of the electric current density to the gas mixture density up to
1.7.10'16 watts-cur2 and electron current densities of the gun up to 6 uma/cmz.
A gas mixture with a total pressure of 50 u- Hg contained 2-6! carbon dioxide,
642 nitrogen, 32! helium and no mre than 0.11 oxygen.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The power of the laser with the regenerator switched off dropped by several

tines with tie. The discharge current decreased, the probability of conversion
of volumetric self-maintained discharge to are discharge increased, and the naxinun
power contributions decreased. All of these phenonena can be explained by
changes .in cowosition of the gas mixture. Figure 3, a shows how the discharge
current varies as a fmction of the operating tins of the device for the sane
value of the potential gradient of the discharge electric field 3. With tins
and especially during arc formations, the maxim self-maintained discharge power
decreases, which is illmtreted by Figure 3,b where curve 5 corresponds to the
initial electric power as a fmction of voltage, md curve 6, the sane function
after 5 minutes of operation with two are foraations.

, .(1)
c.a.l,.a~u'. ﬁgs-eta)

 

-. !
I /

. . I

d" 0' I 1573'

’ ‘ 3"”(3) “’ s ""
Figure 3. Discharge current Jpn), carbon dioxide concentration
c in the gas mixture in a laser with regenerator (2) and without
regenerator (3), oxygen concentration co in a laser without
regenerator (A) as a function of operating tine (a) and self-
naintained discharge power Pd in the initial 602912 meme -

- l:30:16:0.5 as a function of voltage (b, see the text).

A. J , relative units
B. P81, relative units
C. t, minutes

D. U, kv

‘lhe nass spectrometric analysis of the gas mixture fron the -a|mules demonstrated
a decrease in (1)2 concentration by approximately 202 of the initial concentra-
tion and also the appearance of co and excess 02. The 02 and so formed were
sometimes not in a stoichionetric ratio. This obviously is explained by the
processes on the inside surfaces of the CDC elements and release of vapor and
gas from then during heating. For exauple, the presence of water vapor in the
amount of 0.12 can have a siyxificant influence on the gas mixture mitim
as a result of the reaction [13]

CO+OH e CO,+H.' -- (20)

If the CDC elements were degassed as a result of prolonged operation of the laser,
then the products of deconposition of the (:02 nolecules forned would be in a
stoichionetric ratio. '

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure Io. Activity of the catalyst K a a function of
concentration (:y and pressure p, of carbon nonoztida

1. liters/ (sec-kg)
2 . nolos/ liter
3. - ﬁg

Continuous monitoring of the gas mpositim demonstrated that after 15-20 ninutos
of operation 151 of the 002 decowoses, 82 of the excess 02 form, and then the
gas cowooiticn stabilizes (see Figure 3. a). A cogerison of the curves in
ngro.3, a shows that a decrease in conductivity correlates with changes in the
geo mixture cotposition. Considering tho sensitivity of tho noes spectre-tor,

it is possible to state that the nitrogen oxide concentration in the given case
did not exceed 0,12.

6. Pro- what has been stated it is clear that for stable Operation of a closed-
cycle laser it is necessary to regenerate (:02 iron CO and 02. The regeneration
of the gas mixture is best realised by a catalyst on the surface of the active
aediun; here the materials of the CDC elements and tho regeneratim syste- nut
not disturb the stoichioaetric ratio of the deconposition products. A "by-pass"
systen for connecting the regenerator to the (EC parallel to the cooler in the
discharge chaﬁer, that is. the elements linking the basic contribution to the
total resistance of the one, was realized in the loser. This nde it possible to
insure calculated value of n -0.1 without using additional punping devices.

Measurement of the velocity and'telperature profile of the gu flow after the
regenerator using Pitot ttbes and thermocouples domnstrated that the mass flow
rate of the gas through'the regenerator with connected heating element reaches
102 of the total flow rate to the CDC. -

If ve set 1-60 seconds. which corresponds to the ties of decreasing conductivity
of self-maintained discharge by 52. then for tit-0.6 second and «0.1, the required
degree of recovery 1-0.067. By formula (15) it is then possible to deter-inc

the steady-state concentration of the carbon dioxide. If daconposi'tion of the

00 takes place as a result of reaction (1), then for a value of the rate -
coastant of this reaction K-lO'12 cn3/aec under our discharge conditions a (:02
concentration on the level of 981 of the initial value must be established.

37

' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. Initially a study was made of the possibility of using indmtrial catalysts
ShPK-Z and ShPK-0.5 to recover the gas nixture in the COT-laser. These cata-
lysts are 7 aluminum oadde granules on which platinum or palladium has been
deposited. In spite of the fact that these catalysts are characterized by quite
high catalytic activity, they have a number of significant disadvantages: in
particular. they absorb carbon dioxide from the gas mixture and have high heat
capacity. The latter leads to the necessity for prolonged heating of them when
reaching operating conditions. In addition. on loss of seal of the CDC these
catalysts absorb water vapor and atmspheric air intensely, which creates an
inconvenience in maintaining the laser. During operation the granulated catalyst
in the regenerator becomes packed as a result of vibrations, which leads to varia-

tion of the linear flow rates throudt a cross section of the catalyst layer and
requires additional filling of the regenerator with catalyst.

Therefore a catalyst free of the noted deficiencies was specially developed and
. manufactured. It is a metal base on which palladium is applied. The catalyst
has quite higi activity, it does not form dust on vibration, it does not absorb
carbon dioxide and water vapor, it has low gas dynamic resistance and other
advantages. The characteristics of the catalytic activity for the metal-bead
catalysts are presented in Figure lo. The activity X does not depend on the

co pressure, which indicates the first order of the reaction with respect to
carbon monoxide (for 0 order with reaction with respect to carbon monoxide (for
0 order with respect to oxygen) in the corresponding pressure range.

Mass spectrometric analysis demnstrated that operation of the laser with a
regenerator containing a Intal catalyst at a temerature of ”0°C and pulping of
the gas mixture whidi amomts to 102 of the total flow rate in the circulating
loop leads to decowosition of 22 of the carbon dioxide (see Figure 3, a). The
catalyst tewerature was estimated by the telperature of the gas passing through
the regenerator.

Thus, the measured value of the steady-state 002 concentration in the gas mixture
agrees with the calculated value.

As the experiments demonstrated (see Figure 3, a). the decolposition of carbon
dioxide in the CDC is described by the linear dependence on time only in the
initial section. Then even without the regenerator, the decoaposition rate slows
sharply. This indicates the presence of the processes of recovering 002 from C0
and 02 which can take place either in the discharge or on the surfaces (for
example, the heat exchanger having branched surface, coated with copper oxides).

The application of a catalytic regenerator in a coz-laser with circulation of the
working mixture made it possible to obtain stable operation of the laser for
several hours. Figure 3, b illustrates the stability of the volt-watt character,
istic of independent discharge when using a catalytic regenerator (curve 7, t-lS'
minutes).' As is known, the oxygen content in the initial components of the gas
mixture has a negative effect on the characteristics of a 002-14.“: [12]. In

the presence of a regenerator and on addition of C0 to the gas mixture, there is
no necessity for using high-purity gases.

38

ionéindhtussdh‘tv
8. Thus. the "by-pass" gas mixture regeneration system with catalytic re; emu r
is optimal for use in lasers of the selected type. The regenerator cataly. t mus
have high catalytic activity at temperatures of loo-300% end large voluutric
flow rates of the gas flow; stability of the catalytic activity; low gas dynamic
resistance and heat capacity; absence of gas and vqor absorption.

As a result of using a catalytic regenerator in an electron bell preionired
closed-cycle (Dz-laser it was possible to stabilize the sea mixture coqosition
in the laser: the degree of decoaposition of the carbon dioxide was decreased
by sleost an order in this case. This permits mintenance of the discharge ad
generation characteristics of the laser on the required level for a long period

of tire and avoidance of replace-ant of the gas mixture in the laser.
1n concluicn. the authors express their sincere appreciation to G. G. Dolpv-
Savel'yev for useful discussion of the obtained results and also 0. P. .8aprykine
and Ye. G. Isayeva for the Ianufacture of a new type of catalyst.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Lock. 3. V. PROC. SPIE, No 2, 1976, p 86.

2. Kosarev. P. L; Kosereva, N. P.; Lunev, Ye. 1. AVTONASHI-KAYA SVARKA
[Automatic Welding], No 9, 1976, p 72.

3. Basov, N. 8.; Belenov, B. H.-; Danilychev. V. A.; Keri-0v. 0. 11.;
Kovsh, 1. 8.; Suchkov, A. P. . PIS'MA V 2381'? [Letters to the Journal of
Experimental and Theoretical Physics], No 16, 1971, p 621.
6. Boas, 8.; Pease, IL; Staal, J. J. ZAR. APPL. OPTICS. No 13, 1976, p 1959.
S. Basov. N. 0.; Babeyev, 1. IL; Denidychev, V. A.; Hikhaylov. N. 1).;
Orlov, V.K.; Savel'yev, V. V.; Son, V. 6.; Chelmrkin, I. V. KVAN‘DOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA [Quantum Electronics], No 6, 1979, p 772.

6. Eckbreth, A. C.; Blazuk. P. R. "A.1.A.A. 5th Fluid and Plea-a urnalics
Conference," Boston, June (1972); A.1.A.A. Paper, No 72-723.

7. Clotov, Ye. P.; Danilychev, V. A.; 2vorykin. V. D.; Leonov, Yu. 8.;
Soroka. A. FL; Cheburkin, N. V. KVAN'IOVAYA BLEK‘I‘RONIKA, No 7, 19m, p 630.

8. Nighan, H. L.; Higand, H. J. PHYS. R2V., No A10, 1976, p 922.
9. Sheildo, IL; Smith, A. L. 3.; Noria, B. J. PHYS. 1)., No 9, 1976, p 1587.

10. Nopartovich, A. P.; Stsrostin, A. N. FIZIKA PLAZHY [Plasma Physics], No 2,
1976, p 863. ' .

ll. Belomestnov, P. 1.; Ivanchenkov. A. 1.; Soloukhin, R. 1.; Yakobi, D. A.

ZHURN. PRIKL. m. I HEKHN. F12. [Journal of Applied Mechanic and Technical
Physics], No 1, 1976, p 6. ' '

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

12. Lancashire, R. B. PROC. SPIB, No 86, 1976. p 11.

13. Ochkin. V. 1.; Shubin, N. A. KHIHIYA VYSOKIKB ENERGIY [lug-Energy Clue-13:17],
No 6, 1972‘ p 26. . .

COPYRIGiT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

3- 10816
cso: 1862/75

50

if)! Oman us}: (my
MWWONLV

one 535.417.:

CHARACIERISTIC FEATURES OF FORMING BADIATIG‘ PM .0? LASER
9115810! In nascanoss "1'13 WWO HIRED”

Moscow xvmmwm mmm in main Vol 8. n. 11(113), 1m 81 (mi-cup:
received 12 Feb BDpp.2397-2407

[Article by 2. Vs. Bagchsarov. Ya. z. Virnik, 8. P. Vorotilin. V. B. Gerasimv,
V. H. Zsika. H. V. Zahharov, V. H. Kasanskiy. Yu. A. Kalinin, V. K.'Orlov,

.A. K. Pisltmov. A. Ya. Sagalovich, A. 1'. Suchkov, II. D. Ustinov. Physics Institute
ineni P. N. Debedev of the USSR Ac'adeny of Sciences. ﬂoaoow]

[Text] A study is node of the characteristic features of shaping the
radiation pattern of last enission in resonators with retro-

. reflecting nirrors. The characteristics of exchange lasing
and anthods of suppressing it are investigated. 'lhe dynamic
and static optical inhonogsneities of a nediu and optical
channel are cowenssted with five to ten-fold reduction of been
divergence. Intracavity bean steering and the forution of
cowlex radiation patterns of given configuration have been
inlensnted, and radiation honing on a Iirror target with
angular dimensions of '3!) mad has been realised.

In recent years simificant attention has been given to the study of a new physi-
cal phenomenon - wave front reversal MR) of optical radiation (ass, for
exaqale, [1]).

The use of m is connected with solving such problem as reduction of laser

been divergence, transmission of optical radiation through nonuniform Isdia, opti-
cal focusing of radiation on a target in laser fusion devices. Along with m

by the methods of nonlinear optics [1], it appears useful in practice [13, S] to
create devices that use classical optical elenents such as corner reflectors.
triple prism. rectangular prisms and Dove prism, lenses and mirrors to solve
analogous problem. This arises from the fact that devices based on the enunerated

optical elensnta are less critical with respect to radiation wavelength. width of
the radiation spectrum, polarization and power.

In 1970 A. -P. Suchkov proposed the study of a mosaic of corner reflectors
(triple prism) and a raster of telescopes with unit power to reduce 'laser bean
divergence for the first tic. Then the first experiments were run by

V. H. Katanskiy, However, a systematic approach to this type of systen was

61

hl-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

started in 1977 after the creation of the first multielement triple-prism mosaic
mirrors called, by analogy with [2], retroreflecting mirrors (RH).

were published in [3]. In references [4. S] which appeared somewhat later, the
possibility of transmitting an image through an optically inhomgeneous medium
[lo] and coupensation of optical inhomogeneities in a laser cavity [5] by plastic
retroreflecting "gratings" with reflector sizes of 150 microns [6] and 2.5 In [5]
was demnstrated experimtally. Let us note that in contrast to the authors of
[6, 5] we have not med a grating with cowaratively small "spacing," but RM.
that is, a set of many (from 7 to 500) quite large (from 5 to 35 m).

triple prisms inasmuch as we have stated the goal of obtaining a beam with small
divergence. The precision of the angle at the apex of the prism was no less
than 1-2"; for the large prism it use even higher.

The RH used in this experiment are sets of identical total internally reflecting
(TIR) triple prism asselbled into a single module vithout glueing using a special
frame.

1. Characteristic Features of Contasation of Dynamic and Static Optical
Inhomogeneities of the Active lbdium in a Resonator with RH

As is known, the beam divergence of lasers with open resonators, as a rule, is
determined by the magnitude of the spatial inhomogeneity of the real part of

the dielectric constant of the active medium. If yithin the limits of the lasing
region the real part of the dielectric constant varies with respect to the
transverse coordinate by I6c'l, then the angle of divergence of the emission in a
flat cavity [6]

Usually 0 is much greater than the diffraction limit. Accordingly, a simificant
amount of attention has been given to finding static and dynamic methods of com-
pensation of optical inhomogeneities. In this section we shall consider the
method of partial compensation of quite smooth nonsteady optical inhomogeneities
based on using RM.

In cases-where 6c'(x) has a regular nature and does not depend on tin. static
compensation of the optical inhomogeneities is possible. Actually, if, for example,
6t'(x) is equivalent to a negative lens (6t'(x)~ux2), the laser beam divergence
can be estimated by formula (1) quite precisely. However, it is known that in
this case the lasing wave front has a shape close to spherical [7]. Ihe spheri-
calness of the wave front in such a slidttly unstable resonator can easily be
cowensated by a positive lens located outside the resonator so that after this
compensation the beam divergence can become close to diffraction. In the
majority of cases, however, optical inhomogeneities are not subject to monitoring
and vary during the lasing pulse tine. Static comensation of wave front deforma-
tions turns out to have little effect.

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY

The problem of dynanic emanation arieee in connection vith which the m
phenonenon ie of great intereet.

Let in ooneider a laaer in which the exit mirror in flat and the blind nirror ia '
revereing. A plane wave fron the exit mirror. paeaing throng: a optically
inhonogeneoue active ndiu. ia dcforned. 0n reflection tron the revereing
nirror the wave front retaina the epatial ahepe of the incident wave. but the
direction of propagation changee to the oppoeite.

0n the return path thread: the active ndiu the wave frat detonation will,
conaequently, be command. Thee. the phenonenon of m theo'retically‘peruita
the creation of laaera with been divergence deternined by the light diffraction
in the laaer aperture and not the optical quality of the active nediun. In a
umber of ones for dynalic emanation of wave front defer-etione nd~iwrove-
nent of the bean divergence, RH can be med. Being Rh, it ie poeaible aharply
to inrove the radiation pattern if the inhongeneidea of the real part of

the dielectric conatmt are coqaretively large with reepect to abeolue negni-
tude and very quite enoothly in the direction x trneveree to the optical aria
of the laeer. - ~ '

Let no note firet of all that formla (1) includes the variation of dc'_ in the .
entire lacing region. Therefore if we eonehow break down the laeing region into
a nuiaer of extregiona between which there ie no radiation exchmge and within
the liuite of which the optical inhomogeneitiea vary nonotonically. the diver-
gence of cad: ouch enell. oecillator dininiehee.

Actually. with a decreaee in the trneveree dinenaione of the laeing region Ax
for emoth variation of 6c'(x) the abeolute variation of Idt'(x)l aleo dininiehea
within the linite of each enall laeing region; therefore the overall divergence
of the laeer bean dininiehea. For are specific definition let ue conaider the
cane where the inhomogeneity 6c‘(x_) variea by an exponential la .

oe'(x)~s;, exp (—ax) (2)

with a broad active region Andie. The eituation clone to (2) can be realized.
for temple. in a laser with optical pulping when the pulping enieaion danpa by
an exponential law on being prepegeted into the active nediun [8].

Betinating the redietion divergence 01 for a loner with laeing region Osaul/n

by formula (1), we obtain
0|~2V|80L . (3)

Now let no break down the lasing region into n anal]. regiona 6: no that

dx-Ax/nz llan.

63

MWWONLY
FOR OWIGAL USE ONLY

The inhomogeneity 6t’(x) in a snail laser with Iii-Int owns") with accuracy to
term of second order of snaliness '

6:; (x)=e&upt¥(m +‘/.)6x| I : —ar+(ax)'/2]. (a)

and the man divergence
o,<2Vleola5x. (s)

The linear part of the inhomogeneity 6e'.(x) can be commented if we use a
corner reflector which is a set of three nutually perpendicular mirrors instead
of the blind mirror in a small laser. After triple reflection the light been

dmanges direction of propagation to the reverse. A glass pyramid with ridlt
angles at the apexes (a triple prise) can be med as the corner reflector. In
order to avoid mnecessary losses the base of the prion nust be made in the for-
of one of the centrally syuetric figures: a hexagon, square, rectangle.

A small laser, the resonator of which is formed by a blind mirror trade as a
comer reflector will be insensitive to inho-ogeneities 6e' of the wedge type.

Dropping the linear tern in (6), for the divergence of such a laser 03 free (1)
and (‘0) we obtain

0. -: 2 VI eel («xv/2 - MM? 10)- . (6)

Of course, formula (6) is valid if eyed, where 9d is the diffraction divergence
determined by the corner reflector aperture. Considering the diffraction diver-

gence, the total divergence of the emission of a large laser in. the first approa-
ination '

0.z0,-HJGX. (7)

It is easy to see that if appropriate neaaures are not taken, exchange lasing
between any two corner reflectors occurs in the proposed resonator. Exchange

lasing will proceed througt a section of the e:d.t 'ni‘rror, projecting these reflet.h
tors on each (ther. Exchange lasing will exit at angles of

o:— in8ﬂ2L. (s)

where L is the resonator length.

:3

J
7-: 3

0 I

Figure l. Diagran of the experimental setup for studying
exchange lasing

610

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to suppress exchange lasing small lasers can be separated by partitions
that scatter the emission. For this purpose we have built a sectional active
neodymium glass element consisting of 19 thin rods with frosted lateral surface
transparent to puamin‘g emission. Rods 1) cm long and 1 cm in diameter were used.

The resonator was formed by a flat semitransparent mirror R-501 and l9-element RH
with 70 em spacing between the mirrors. The sectioning of the active element made
it possible to prevent exchange lasing. However, this type of sectioning of the
active medium is provided in far from all types of laser active media. Therefore
we have given significant attention to investigating the characteristic features
of the suppression of exchange lasing by ming angle selection of the elussion.

l. 1. Exchange Lasing Conditions. The experimental study of the peculiarities of
the formation of the radiation pattern in resonators with an was carried out on a
tun-pumped iodine laser. A cylindrical quarts cell so on long and 3.7 cm in
diameter had openings fixed at the Brewster angle. . Pour IPP-ZOOOO ttbes with
aluminum foil reflector were used to pull) the working mediu n-CaFyl. The capaci-
tance of the capacitor bank was lo millifarads. Here, the puming pulse duration
(measured with‘ respect to a level of 102 of the maximum current) was 800 micro-

seconds. Depending on the operating mode of the laser, the energy in the lasing
pulse varied from 2 to 9 joules.

The exchange lasing conditions were observed on a device, the optical diagram of
which is shown in Figure l. The resonator was formed by the RM 1 and a semi-
transparent flat mirror 3 with reflection coefficient R-ZOZ. Using an optical
wedge lo part of the emissionwas tapped to the calorimeter S to measure the energy
in the pulse and to the lens 6 with focal length F-Z meters, in the focal plane
of which a screen 7 or photographic film was installed to record the angular
distribution of the emission. Adjustment of the resonator was as simple as
possible and consisted in setting the semi-transparent mirror normal to the

axis of the laser cell by eye.

The pressure of the working medium in the cell 2 was varied from 12 to 80 III Hg
and the resonator length 1., from 100 to 250 on during the experiment. Figure 2
shows the evolution of the angular distribution of the output emission during
exchange lasing with an increase in the pressure of the working mix for a resona-
tor length of 1 meter. (In the experiments to study the characteristics of
exchange lasi‘g a seven-element RH made of triple prisms with base 'in the form

of a regular .‘exagon 10 mm high was used for greater descriptiveness' of the ob-
tained angular distribution pattern of the emission.) .

For small pressures of the working medius of 12-20 am Hg, which corresponded to
small optical inhomogeneities, the characteristic pattern of exchange lasing was
observed (Figure 2a [not reproducedl) with 19 channels (as follows from the
corresponding'theoretical analysis) and with maxim intensity in the main lasing
channel directed normally to a semi-transparent mirror.

65

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As the pressure of the working medium increased from 20 to so III Hg (Figure 2.b-d
[not reproduced]) and with a corresponding increase in inhomogeneities of the
radium, the characteristic spot size in different lasing channels grows. and the
brightness of the spots on the screen decreases. Figure 2, c, d [not reproduced]
shows the angular distributions of the emission corresponding to an ordinary flat
cavity of the sane length (1 meter) as the resonator with an with reflection
coefficients of the mirrors R1398: and 112-202 and the same pressure of the work-
ing radium, at the top for cowarison. ‘

As a result of significant inhomogeneities of the working radium, for a flat
resonator the spot (see Figure 2, d [not reproduced]) has the form of a ring
which indicates absence of axial emission. At the same time in a resonator with

RH the sandman radiation intensity falls on the axis, which indicates compensation
of the optical inhomogeneities occurring even under exchange lasing conditions.

In a resonator with RM under exchange lasing conditions. in addition to a decrease
in the bean divergence, a 25-1): increase in pulse energy was observed by compari-
son with a flat cavity with the same base.

Let us note that no special measures (such as selecting the working nix, me of
high-quality optical system, high-precision adjustnent and prevention of mis-
alignment of the flat cavity during the operating process) were taken to achieve
snail divergence in the laser with flat cavity. The nature of the inhomogeneities
of the working mediun of the luer was also not specially investigated. There-
fore we shall not coware the obtained results with the results of other authors
dealing with bean divergence of an iodine laser with flat cavity. In order to
determine the angular scale (see Figure 2 [not reproducadl), it is possible to

use the fact that the angular spacing between the central spot and the nearest
spot corresponding to the inclined lasing channel is 5 mrad.

Figure 3 [not reproduced] shows the evolution of the angular distribution of out-
put eaission during exchange lasing with an increase in resonator length. For
comparatively short resonator lengths (1 meter, Figure 3, a [not reproduced])
the main part of the radiation is included in the axial lasing channel: the
angular spacing between adjacent channels which, just as above, can serve as the
angular scale, is d/2L, where d is the height of the base of the triple prism

of the RH, L is the resonator length. As the resonator length increases, the
angular spacing between adjacent channels 9k decreases in accordance with the
formula Ok-d/ZL, and the intensity distribution by channels becomes more uniform
(L-Z m. Figure 3, d [not reproduced]). Obviously. the latter fact arises from a
decrease in losses to vignetting for tilted lasinchannels with an increase in
the resonator length.

Let us note that with an increase in the length of a resonator with RH from

1 to 2 n (in contrast to a flat cavity). no decrease in pulse energy was observed,
which also indicates partial conpensation of the optical inhomogeneities in a
resonator with R14 under exdunge lasing conditions.

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4.4%ii’r

Figure lo. Summation of exdlange lasing by a telescope

For a nuber of applications, energ concentration in one axial lasing channel is
of interest. As applied to a resonator with as. this iqlies the necessity for
suppressing exchange lasing. For this purpose we introduced a Keplerian tele-
scope into the resonator (see Figure lo). It is known (see, for angle [7]),
that putting a Keplerian telescope with mpification #1 _in the resonator leads
to a decrease in equivalent length of the resonator I.. to

65" "to“ ' ' (9)
Key: 1. e-equivalent; 2. resonator

where is the actual resonator length equal to the distance between the flat
airror d the RM; 214 is twice the telescope length. Selecting the telescope'
length such that he is appreciﬁly less than the cell length with active median

‘19 it is possible‘3 to empress the lasing of the off-axis channels. Actually,
on satisfaction of the condition d/L eMID/ht where D is the cell dianter, the

lasing of the tilted channels will be iqoossible a a lnesult of incidence of the
emission on the side walls of the cell.

Figure 5 [not reproduced] shows the behavior of exdnhngs lasing with a decrease
in 1.. free 2 nsters (Figure 5, a) to 0 (Pigure S. c, [not reproduced”. As 1..
decreases, the nder of lasing daannels decreases and the spacing between then
increases (Figure 5, b [not reproduced]); for a defined value of Le one axial
channel retains (see Figure 5, c [not reproduced]). However, decreasing the
equivalent length of the resonator, elininating the exchange lasing, simultane-
ously increases the bean divergence in the axial channel (see Figure 5., c)

(The angular scale of Figure 5 is euily detarIined from the ratio (1/21.,| (where'
d-l cl). which is equal to the spacing between the central and adjacent spots.)

Re have also investigated another possibility of suppression of exchange lasing
as a result of introducing an angle selector into the resonator.

1.2. Resonator with RH and Angle Selector. In the diagram in Figure 4 an iris
with apertures such that the axis of angle selector is normal to the semi-trans-
parent uirror was placedin the focal plane of the telescope. Below, the m
with base height of the triple prisms of 0.5 all was used in all the described
experimts.

The angle selector foresd a light been with divergence equal to the pass band
of the selector ec-d ll?c fron spontaneous noise, where clc is the iris aperture

disaster; Fe is the focal length of the telescope lens. cl‘he greater part of
the emission was coupled out through a seni-trmsparsmt Irirror, 11-202, and the
smaller part returned to the active medium. Here it was amplified in two puses

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with reflection from the RH, which permitted exact "fitting" to the hole in the
selector iris even in the presence of significant optical inhomogeneities of the
active medium. Selecting the pass band of the angle selector sea/21... we were
able to suppress the exchange lasing without energy losses in the pulse. Here
the divergence of the stimulated endssion is almost equal to Be. With a decrease

in 6c, the divergence of the stimulated emission decreased oorrespondinlly, mud
the output power did not decrease.

It was possible to decrease 0c in the system shown in Figure 6 with a lens tele-
scope with brightened opticalc system only to a defined limit em“ for which com-
peting lasing occurred as a result of reflection from the surfaces of a telescope
lens installed between the cell and the iris. Here the lasing was multichannel.
which was observed by the nature of the burn on the angle selector iris. Thus,
for example, with a pressure of the working medium of 20 I- ug 6c “1°12 mrad. The
measurements were performed by the 0.5 intensity level.

Discovering that introduction of a lens angle selector into the resonator with
RH increases the probability of occurrence of spurious lasing as a result of the
blocking optical system of the selector, we replaced the lens telescope in the
system shown in Figure 6 by a mirror telescope. In this case spurious luing did
not occur.

In this system limiting values of 6““ were determined by the following factors.
The emission formed by the angle selector with divergence Be on enlification in
an active medium in two passes with reflection from the RM has divergence at the
input to the selector equal to the sum east. comp where 01 00 is the divergence
caused by inaccuracy of compensation of the wave front distortions which includes
inprecision in making the angles of the RM elements, the diffraction divergence,
inaccuracy of compensation of the optical inhomogeneities of the active medium
and elements of the optical channel. Therefore the decrease in 9c was not felt
in the output power of the iodine laser (according to the system in Figure 4) if

°c>°i.comp'

We were able to 'weaken this conditiau by using the system shown in Figure 6
(compare [6]). In this system a semi-transparent mirror was made in the form of
a meniscus, one of the spherical surfaces of which had a mirror coating R-ZOI.
The radii of curvatun’e of the meniscus surfaces were selected so that for the
emission passing through the meniscus it will be equivalent to a plane-parallel
plate with a high degree of accuracy. The angle selector was formed by a blind
spherical mirror with focal length P5100 cm, a diaphragm with aperture and the
spherical mirror surface of the meniscus with P5100 cm. We increased the size
of the iris aperture with an increase in the pressure of the working medium; its
minimum value was 0.02 cm at a pressure to 2!) In Hg.

The output emission was wealed out not through the angle selector, but through

the meniscus. Therefore c n could be made appreciably smaller than 91.

and the large losses occurring in this case in the angle selector were

o‘Iﬂensated by the high gain of the iodine laser. For pressures up to 30 Ila Hg,
:0. 2 mrad. It is easy to see that the sytem in Figure 6 is equivalent in

some sense to the system made up of a two-pass mlifier plus a master oscillator

where the role of the master oscillator is played by the angle selector. In the

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system in Figure 6 we were able to obtain mission with divergence deternined only

by inaccuracy of dynastic colpensation of the optical inhomogeneities and nonideal-
ness of the RH.

Figure 7 shows the behavior of the focal points (F5200 cn) characterizing the
divergence. for laser euission of the system in Figure 6 (b) and emission of a
laser with flat cavity (L-lOO can. a) with an increase in pressure of the working
ediun from 12 to so I- Hg. (The output powers were identical for fixed pressures.)

The brightness of the emission when using RH in the resonator is appreciably
higher than in the case of a flat cavity. With an increase in pressure, the size
of the spot increases (although it is appreciably less than for a flat cavity),
which indicates partial coupensation of the optical inhomgeneities wing the RH.
As the angular scale of Figure 7 [not reproduced] it is possible to me the core
of the angular distribution depicted in the first picture in Figure 7.b-[not
reproduced] having angular values 0.5 nrad and corresponding to a pressure of

12 I- Hg. The bean divergence was nsnured with respect to the 0.5 intensity
level: for a pressure of 12 - 113 this value was 0.5 nrad for a resonator with
RM, and for a flat cavity, 2.5 urad; with a pressure of so in ﬁg these values
were 2 and 20 nrad. respectively (the last pictures in Figure 7).

E V7}
Figure 6. Diagran of an iodine laser with mirror mgle selector

Use of the RH in the systen shown in Figure 6 made it possible to decrease the
bean divergence of the investigated laser by 5 to 10 times as compared to the flat
cavity. In addition to the bright core, there is a halo present in the angular
distribution of the laser (according to the diagram in Figure 6) obviously caused
by diffraction on the RH elements and scattering on the inhomogeneities of the
working nediun occurring during lasing of the iodine laser and, as is known.
having a significant value when working with a material without buffer additives
(see, for example [9]). . -

Let us note that in the systen depicted in Figure 6 using the RM exact aiming of
the beam at the hole in the angle selector with angular dimensions of 0.2 and
was realized. Here the edge of the hole of a steel iris was ulted.

2. 'Intraresonator Bean Steering and Forming a Radiation Pattern of Given
Configuration

The possibility opened up by the um device for intraresonator shaping of emission

with given font of the radiation pattern appears to be highly interesting for a
number of applications.

149

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here use is made of the fact that a resonator with m mirror in practice loses
selectivity and, placing an angular spectrum shaper in it, it is possible to
stimulate emission with a shape of the angular spectrum (or radiation pattern)

given by the shaper. As applied to the m device based on a admitted
Handelstam-Brillouin scattering mirror, intraresonator shaping of the radiation

pattern was demnstrated for the first time by S.A. Lesnilt, H.G. Reznikov,
“.5. Soskin and A.I. Khizhnyak (see, for example, [1]).

In this section we present results fr:- investigating the intraresonator shaping
of the radiation pattern in a resonator with RM.

The diagrmn of the experimental setup is presented in Figure 8. Here an angular
spectrum shaper formed by a meniscus with semi-transparent mirror costing

(R-201 and F-lOO cm) and a system of reflectors placed in the focal plane of the
spherical mirror surface of the meniscus was used as a second mirror in the
resonator. The pressure of the working medium was 20 In Hg.

i-j‘7 3f.

Figure 8. Diagram of a laser with intraresonator radiation
pattern shaping

The operating principle of the system consists in the following. Spontaneous
noise emission with divergence enois ZDIL (where D is the cell diameter. 1. is
the distance between the meniscus and the RH equal to 100 cm) is focmed by the
meniscus. and a light spot “3321’s 01 e in diameter is formed in its focal
plane, where P is the focal ength of the meniscus. If a system of spatially
separated reflectors is placed in the focal plane of the meniscus within the
limits of the liynt spot, then the fluxes, the propagation of which and divergence
are determined by the location of the corresponding reflector and its size, is
reflected back into the active Indium. Thus, for sample, a reflector with trans-
verse dimnsions d1 placed at a point in the focal plane of the meniscus with
coordinates x1. y1, shapes the reflected beam entering the medium at an angle
{xi/F; y1/P} with divergence d1/P. After amlification in die medium (generally
speaking, optically inhomogeneous) and reflection from the RH, the system of
fluxes is coupled out through a semi-transparent meniscus having a direction of
propagation and divergence given by the shaper.

Placing one reflector in the focal plane and shifting it within the limits of the
luninescent spot, it is possible to realize precise control of the light beam.
Placing a system of reflectors in the focal plane. it is possible to realize
lasing with given configuration of the radiation pattern.

Figure 9 [not reproduced] shows a photograph of focal points illustrating the
possibility of beam steering and guidance of it to the given angular point by
shifting the reflector in the focal plane of the miscus. The reflector used in

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the system had transverse dimensions of d1-0.2 cm; as the angular scale it is
possible to take the angular size of the core of the spots presented in Figure 9
equal to ~2 nrad. For eno s 260 mrad, accurate beaan steering was observed with
compensation of the optics inhomogeneities of the medium without noticeably
decreasing the pulse power within the limits of the angle of 10 mrad.

Figure 10 [not reproduced] shows photographs of focal points corresponding to
stimulated emission with complex patterns of given configuration obtained when

placing two, three, four, five and six identical reflectors, respectively. with
d1-0.2 cm in the focal plane. ‘

Let us note that the resonator formed by RH and the angle selector (meniscus plus
reflector in the focal plane of the meniscnn) is not critical with respect to

the accuracy of the setting of the reflector within the limits of the focal'point
of the luminescence, which greatly simplifies the process of aligning the resona-
tor. To demonstrate this we place the reflector on a disc turning at high speed.
If the reflector did not go outside the boundaries of the luminescent spot during
rotation, the stimulated emission was not interrupted, and the pulse power was
equal to the power in the pulse for a system with stationary reﬂector.

As the angular spectrum shaper we also used a mirror target of small angular
dimension which performed the functions of a second resonator Inirror.

In the experiment RH were used with base height of the triple prism of 0.5 cm

and working sedium with a pressure of 20 In Hg. In order to increase the Q-factor
of the resonator we installed a mirror telescope with magnification nn-1o after

the laser cell. In this case lasing was realized by a bean converging on the
target (from the aperture of the large telescope mirror). me target was exposed
to the natural lnnninescent noise of the active radius of the iodine laser, and

if the target was within the limits of the luminescent spot. lasing was stable.

He were able to realize lasing in a converging beam on a target with angular
dimensions of 30 urad (determined by the ratio of the target dianeter to the dis-
tance from the telescope to the target) and reflection coefficient of the enission
in the laser aperture (determined by the large telescope mirror) of about 12.

Here the energy in the pulse from the cell output was the same as for a flat
cavity 100 cm long with reflection coefficient of the semi-transparent mirror
R=201 (2.5 joules). The energy at the target was 0.5 joule.

Conclusions

The results obtained demonstrated that resonators with RH have to a defined
degree new properties that distinguish them from traditional optical resonators.
They are characterized by weak selectivity with respect to the field structure
in the resonator, which, along with compensation of optical inhomgeneities of

the active medium, permits shaping of the radiation pattern within conparatively
broad limits.

A study was made of the exchange lasing conditions, the optical inhomogeneities
of the active medium of the iodine laser were cannpensated, intraresanator stimu-

lated beam steering, shaping of complex radiation patterns, and irradiation of
a target with angular dinensions of IX) urad by a converging beam were all
realized.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600040025-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In conclusion the authors express their sincere appreciation to Ye. M. Kostikov,
s. K. Krivov, L. A. Sinonov, H. Yu. 'rurskiy and H. V. Palansrchuk who made a

large contribution to the development of RM, and 0. Yu. Nosach for useful dis-
cussion of the results of the experiment and constructive critical remarks.

PHUN CAPTIONS

Figure 2. Evolution of the exchange lasing pattern with an increase in
pressure of the working nix.

Figure 3. Evolution of exchange lasing pattern with an increase in resonator
length.

Figure 5. Evolution of the multichannel lasing pattern with a decrease in Le.

Figure 7. Evolution of focal points with an increase in pressure of the
working mixture for a flat cavity (a) and a cavity with EH (1:).

Figure 9. Intraresonator beam steering.
Figure 10. Shaping a radiation pattern of given configuration.
IBIBLIOGRAPHY

l. OBRASHCRENIYE VOINOVOGO PRONTA OPTICEESKOGO IZLUCEENIYA V NELINEYW SREDAKH
[Optical Emission Have Front Reversal in Nonlinear Media], Gor' kiy,
1?? AN SSSR,1979.

2. USA Patent No 3712706, kl. 350-103.

3. Orlov, V. K.; Virnik, Ya. 2.; Vorotilin, S. P.; Gerasimov, V. 3.;

‘ Kalinin, Yu. A.; Sagalovich, A. Ya. KVANTOVAYA mmom [Quantum

Electronics], No S, 1978, p 1389.

lo. Barrett, E. 11.; Jacobs, 8. P. OPTICS LETTS, No I», 1979, p 190.

5. Hathieu, P.; Belanger, P. A. APPL. OPTICS, No 19, 19%- p 2262.'

6. Kirillov, c. 0.; Kormer, S. 3.; KoChemsov, G. 0.; Kulikov, s. FL;
Hurugov, V. IL; Nikolayev, V. D.; Sukharev, S. A.; Urlin, V. D.
KVAN‘mVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, No 2, 1975, p 666.

7. Anan' yev, Yu. A. OPTICEESKIYE REZQIATORY I PROBLEM RASIGIODDDSTI LAZERNOG)
IZLUCHENIYA [Optical Resonators and the Problem of Laser Bean Divergence],
Moscow, Nauka, 1979.

s. Borovich, n. L.; Zuyev, v. s.; Katulin, v. A.; Nosach, v. m; Nosach, 0. Yu.;
Startsev, A. V.; Stoylov, Yu. Yu. KVANTOVAYA WWI“, No 2, 1975, p 1282.

9. Golubev, 1.. Ye.; Zuyev, V. 8.; Katulin, V. A.; Nosach, V. Yu.; Nosach, 0. Yu.
KVAN'POVAYA ELEKTMNIIA, No 6(18), 1973, p 23.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovsya elektronika", 1981

10865
CSO: 1862/75
- 52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY

_ UDC 621.371:538.566:551.511.6
DETERMINING MEN-RICE PM 3! LASER BEAM ROBIN 0? m AWSPHERB

Novosibirsk MSPROSTBANENIYB 1428311000 PUCEKA V mamas AMSPm in Russian
1981 (signed to press 18 Feb 81) pp 201-226 '

[Chapter 8 from book "Laser Beam Propagation in Turbulent Atmosphere". by Valeriy
Leonidovich Hironov. Institute of Optics of the Atmosphere. Siberian Departnent.
USSR Academy of Sciences. Iadatel'atvo "Nauka". 1750 copies. 248 pages] _

One of the major optical parameters of atmospheric turbulence is the structure
characteristic C5. This quantity has an effect on practically all statistical
characteristics of the field of a laser bean in the atnosphere. Host extensively
used have been optical netth of Ref. 83. 51. ll. 48, 99. 182. 7. 8, .203. 206.
361 and 251 for determining c; on the basis of distortions of spatial coherence.
A method convenient for practical applications (Ref. 11, 68. 99. 182. 360] uses
measurement of the half-width of the average diffraction pattern in the focal
plane of the reception lens. The initial expression for this nethod that relates
c3 to half-width, as derived in the case of reception of a plane wave, whereas

this method to the case where the reception lens is illuinatad by a laser been
that has arbitrary diffraction parameters. The resultant relations for deteninins

This represents a serious barrier to use of these nethoda on oblique paths. Paths
situated in mountainous terrain are an exception (Ref. 99, 186. 186]. Measurements

53

MWWONLY
FINICHWWCJA1.USI1(NULY

of distortions of spatial coherence of the field of a laser beam scattered by
particles of atmospheric aerosol to determine altitude dependences of the structure
characteristic cﬁ(h) were first suggested in Ref. 39. This method does not require
the use of lifting devices.

The requirement for spatial stabilization of receiver and emitter raised to dif-
ferent altitudes is considerably relaxed if fluctuations of laser beam intensity
are used to determine altitude dependences C§(h). For example. Ref. 356 suggested
using measurements of fluctuations of intensity of a laser beam reflected from

a mirror sphere raised by a weather balloon. However. the initial relation for
determining Cﬁ(h) in this case was written on the basis of results found for one-
trip beam travel. Besides, this paper did not discuss errors of reconstructing
C§(h) due to incorrectness of the solution of an integral equation of the first
kind. Based on solution of the physical problem of reflection of an optical wave.
the author obtained an equation [Ref. 31] for determining altitude profiles C§(h)
in this experimental arrangement, and proposed stable algorithms for processing
experimental data. Subsequently, a similar method was used [Ref. 102] for mea-
surements of c§(h) underprairie conditions.

The internal turbulence scale was first determined by an optical method in a model
turbulent medium in Ref. 72. These measurements were later repeated in the atmos-
phere [Ref. 330]. The authors of Ref. 317. 229, 78. 341. 183 found the internal
scale from measurements of spatial correlation functions Llef. 317]. time spectra
[Ref. 229, 78] and relative dispersion [Ref. 341] of fluctuations of the logarithm
of intensity of laser beams on short paths. Estimates of the internal scale are
also possible [Ref. 11] with respect to the form of the spectrum of the function
of spatial coherence of an optical wave field. All methods considered above for
measuring lo (excepting Ref. 11) have been based on measurements of intensity
fluctuations. Ref. 226. 238 suggested finding the internal scale from measure-
ments of dispersions of phase difference in laser beams on two bases of different
sizes. Measurements of the structure function of fluctuations of the phase of
laser beams have also been found to be usable for reconstructing the spatial spec-
trum of fluctuations of the index of refraction in an energy interval. In the
region of dissipation of kinetic energy the turbulence spectrum has been recon-
structed [Ref. 55] from measurements of the time spectrun of fluctuations of the
logarithm of amplitude. Subsequently. phase fluctuations measured simultaneously
with intensity fluctuations were used [Ref. 57] for determining the spectrum of
fluctuations of the index of refraction over a wide range of wave numbers.

The possibility of determining spectra of fluctuations of the index of refraction
from measurements of fluctuations of the center of gravity of optical beams was
first pointed out in Ref. 165. Subsequently, parameters of a turbulence spectrum
model of form (1.1.39) were determined from measurements of time spectra of dis-
placements [Ref. 89].

In this chapter we examine questions of measuring the parameters of atmospheric
turbulence by using laser beams.

$8.1. DETERMINING PARAMETER CE AND INTERNAL SCALE FROM THE DISTRIBUTION OF INTEN-
SITY OF THE IMAGE OF A LASER SOURCE

8.1.1. Determination of ca on Horizontal Path

First let us consider determination of the parameter c: in the case of statisti-
cally homogeneous paths (C3(x')I-const). Formula (4.1.19) derived for these

54

_IIN1(NHH(1AI.[EIE(H'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions in the case of known diffraction parameters of the laser beam incident
on the lens (9 and LIP), fixed diameter and focal length of the reception lens.
allow us to determine po. and hence the structure characteristic 0% from the
measured half-width of the distribution of energy intensity of the image yp.

Upon reception of a collimated laser beam (LIV-IO) under conditions of strong
turbulence intensity on the path (q>>l) with reception aperture satisfying the
condition po<<at<<leo.. the solution of equation (6.1.19) is written in the
simple form

W <0 '

Parameter u in equation (1) takes the values11-1. 25” and 35/‘forconditions
of a planar wave (n>>q). narrow collimated beam (9' <<0<<q) and spherical wave
(Q<<q 1) respectively.

He can see from a comparison of formula (1) with the expression derived for c;
in Ref. 11. 99 for plane wave conditions that using a square-law approximation
for the coherence function of form (6.1.6) underatetes the value of cﬁ by 9.62.
Calculations like those of Ref. 83. 11 in the case of spherical wave incidence
on the reception lens. using rigorous expression (6.1.2) as the coherence func-
tion. lead to a formula of type (1) with uI-Z. 94. Hence. in case of a spherical
wave the relative error of determining C“ using relation (4.1.19) reaches 151.
Finally. using the results of numerical calculation of the distribution of average
intensity in the focal plane of the reception lens as shown in Fig. 16 for the
conditions of a narrow collimated bean (q <<0<<q). we can get a formula of type
(1) in which the coefficient u- a. 22. Thus under conditions of reception of a
narrow collimated beam. the error of formula (6.1.19) in finding Cu is naximum.
and amounts to 241. The estimates faund above for the error of formula (6. 1.19)
lie within the limits of errors of measurements of parameter 6% according to re-
cordings of the distributions of average intensity of Ref.-lo. 11.

The inequality n>>q implies that under conditions of strong turbulence intensity
on the path (q>>l), plane wave conditions necessitate satisfaction of the require-
ment that the size of the radiating aperture must be not only greater_than the
radius of the first Fresnel zone. but must exceed the diffraction scale L/kpo.
which for q>>l is itself much greater than JE7E. thimates show that in the case
of extended paths (of the order of tens of kilometers or more) near the ground.
the condition n>>q is not met even for the largest apertures in pra tical use
(a: 20-30 cm). For exawle at L- 10 km. k- 10 m'l. Cn- 10'” cts‘2 3. condition
Q>>q becomes a>>50 cm. Thus when measuring the structure characteristic C“ in
atmosphere with respect to the half-width of the laser source image in the focal
plane of the reception lens. we most frequently must deal with intermediate con-
ditions. In doing this. determination of On necessitates using general relation
(6.1.19). The values of Cn found from the formula corresponding to plane wave
conditions are understated by a factor of 2" as compared with the true value

in reception of a narrow collimated beam.

An experiment [Ref. 262] has been done to check approximate formula (4.1.19).
A similar experinent had been done previously in Ref. 11 in verifying a relation

55

90! OFFICIAl.lliE(ﬂ‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of type (I) for a plane_weve. llere simultaneously with recordings of the dis-
tribution of intensity 1(y). the values of C}, were determined with respect to

the gradients of mean temperature end wind speed using formla (1.1.66). and then
the values of c}. found from optical and meteorological measurements were compared.
In our case. there was the possibility of determining a; from parallel optical
experiments. To do this, recordings were simultaneously made of the average in-
tensity in the focal planes of two identical reception lenses as the latter were
illulinated by laser beams with different diffraction parneters. The two values
of y; obtained in this way were used to determine the values of of, from calibration
curves plotted according to formula (4.1.19). The values found for c}. were then
compared with each other.

The measurements were done on s 1.8 km path passing ever even terrain under prai-
rie conditions. Dispersion of the rays in the horizontal plane was equal to l m.
The reception lenses were simultaneously illuninated by the following sources: -
l) single-mode wide collimated (L/F- 0. £2- 90) end diverging (angle of divergence
equal to 2.5') beans; 2) single-mode focused (L/F- 1. 9- 90) and diverging beams;
3) single-mode wide collimated (LIP-0, {2- 90) and narrow collimated (LIP-0,

9- l) beans. 1.6-75 lasers 0-0.63 um) were used as trenaittare. A spherical
mirror with diameter of 1.0 cm was used to shape the wide collimated and focused

cw. M ' atom-r»

 

Fig. 61. Comparison of values of Ca found
at different diffraction parameters of the
laser beam illuminating the reception lens:
l--measurements made with wide collimated
(cal) and divergent (0,31) beams; 2-wee-
surelnents with diverging (ﬁg) and focused
(C(12) beams; 3 and lo--straight lines

cnl ' ct'n 8"" cnz' cnz

 

Fig. 62. Values of ca found with
simultaneous measurements in wide
(CD3) and narrow (0‘13) collimated
beams: l~processing by formula

beams. The divergent beam was radiation (6.1.19); 2—processing by formula

from the laser output. The distributions _ . __
<I(y)> were recorded by scanning with a ver- liners! :éE’ 3 and 1' straight
ticsl slit. Reception systems had the fol- n3 n3

lowing parameters: lens diameter d- 15 cm. focal length P- 1.6 m. slit width

20 um. scanning rate v-0.ll3 III/min.

56

FORMING“!
MWUSEONLY

The results of the experiment in the form of values of the parameter cu as found
from formula (6.1.19) from simltaneous measurements of yy with different beams
illuminating the reception lens are shown in Fig. 61. 62._ It is clear from the
figures that the simultaneously determined values of ca agree satisfactorily with
each other. In addition, Fig. 62 shows the values of cn and 053 calculated
from a formula of type (1) for a plane wave (Ref. 10, ll . The systematic error
in determination of ca that arises in such processing exceeds the scatter of ex-
perimental data. and changes as Cu is varied.

Thus as a result of this experiment it has been demonstrated that in determining
the structure characteristic of fluctuations of the index of refraction in the
atmosphere from measurements of the half-width of the diffraction pattern in the
focal plane of the reception lens. it is necessary to account for diffraction
parameters of the laser beam that illuminates the lens. The relations derived
above for finding C}, applied to a statistically uniform path (Cn(x')-conat), and
did not take consideration of the influence of the normal scale of turbulence.
Now let us determine the possibility of finding Cﬁ(x') and the internal scale
for oblique probing of the atmosphere.

8.1.2. Determining Integrated Values of the Structure Characteristic and Internal
Scale on Oblique Paths

Let us find the average intensity in the focal plane of a reception lens illusi-
nated by a spherical wave. using formulas (10.1.16). (6.1.22). (2.1.7) and expres-
sion (6.4.2) that approximates the structure function of phase fluctuations

(6. b. 1), corresponding to a'spectrua of permittivity fluctuations of type (1.1.22)
and (1.1.33) at ”(r/re): = 1. Let us consider the case where the: focal length

of the reception lens 1’: and its dineter d satisfy relations kd z/lol.‘ l. ﬁll-«l.
D5 (d)>>l. Then the distribution of the average luminous flux passing through a
narrow slit (compared with the width of the average diffraction pattern) norma-
lized to the value at the maxim-s. is written in the form

' .
(1 (ab/(l (0)) . Sch] exp [— %(nr+ mitocanmlx

x°“(xﬂ)/j (in orp[— 1.0]! + Dmb‘. -1))‘m] (2)
where y is the coordinate of the slit; p,(,‘- I)_ 291“.»er ;
” x-§( —)”‘ (y/P.)VT‘.—k 1122/.“ ,- (a)

a: = 1.23(8/3)c:,.k”'1."",

and parameters C}, 3 and x, are determined from formulas (6.4.3), (6.6.1.) in which

distance (,1. should be reckoned from the reception lens. The quantity

<I(y)>/<I(0)>. as a function of the dimensionless coordinate of the slit 7:,

was calculated previously in Ref. 11 at values of the parameter Ds(r;‘)- -0 and
x31) -1. It was also suggested there for the case of a homogeneous path

(22(x')- -Cn-const. ru(x' )- "u' const) that the values of C2 and r“ be found

by ncomparing measured functions <l(y)>/<l(0)> with a family nof theoretical curves.

57

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Formula (2) enables us to generalize this technique in the following way for find-
ing equivalent paranetera 050:?) and 88 or co, and :3.

Bxperinental data for the distribution of average intensity 1(y) are nornalized
to the value at the naximn 1(y.)- In. and the quantity y? is determined that

is equal to the half-width of the curve of intensity distribution on level I(y)-k.
Then the graph of function lg[I(y) /I(y.)] plotted as a function of argment
lg[(y- “My? ] is compared with the family of curves <I(r)>/<I(0)> shown in Fig.
63. The parameter 050:; ) is found from the best coincidence of experi-ental
points with one of the curves of this family. The calculated data shown in Fig.
63 enable us to find the value of It? corresponding to level <I(y)>/<I(0)>-k for
each value of °s('<§1)~ The values found in this way are sunlarized in Table lo.

TABLE!»

    

Fig. 63. Distribution of average
intensity in focal plane of recep-
tion lens; ° * ° — experiment

  

lﬂdﬁb/dmb]

d.

Then using Table lo and formula (3). we can get the value of the equivalent par-a-
eter Bo:

'l‘ TV) 1
93"" '( s) m 7,7." (to)

Fran the known values of Bo and D (r; 1) we can readily2 find the equivalent internal
scale I, and the equivalent strucgure characteristic 0n 9.

The given measurement technique has been used (Ref. 10$. 187] for determining
values of internal scale L, on an oblique path 30 in long. The conditions under
which the experiment was done are described in 56.4. The reception lens was
placed at the lower end of the path and was illuminated by a single-node collineted
laser beam (9- 0.7. X-0.63 we). The parameters of the device for neasuring the
distribution of average luninOus flux tranaitted through the slit are described
in subsection 8.1.1 of this section. The distribution I(y) was recorded by a
digital voltneter over tine intervals At- 3.5 s. In order of nagnitude. the quan-
tity 1(y) ranged from 10’-3- 10’ all at the center to 1 all at the edges of the dis-
tribution curve. Total scanning time averaged S ninutes. An ample of one re-
cording is shown in Fig. 63.

Let us note that the influence of interference caused by scattering on atmospheric
aerosol could have led to distortion of the shape of the My) curve in region

58

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I(y)<<I‘.. Estimates of the aerosol background were made by formulas (Ref. 97]

for the atmospheric haze (Ref. 95] observed under the conditions of the experiment.
The encunt of the interference was found to be 1.40"; which is also confirmed by
the lack of change in slope of the experimental curve l(y) in the region of values

The technique outlined above was used to process results of measurements for the
purpose of determining parameters 8% and K 1. Let us note that the narrow colli-
mated been as a source of illmination of the reception lens. according to results
feund in subsection 8.1.1 could have led to some understatement of 83 (no more
than 151). At the same time, measureaents were made Ref. 187] of the paraseter
It“: by the method of Ref. 341 on homogeneous paths near the ground with length
L- 600 m situated near the reception lens. The results of measurements of K"
and x? are shown in Fig. 64. The coefficient of mutual correlation between unit
.. values of It's" and r;‘ is 0.9. and the line of re-
s...“ - greesion has the fore xg‘ -0.83n;‘. Inequality
r;‘<x;‘ is in complete ayeenent with fall-off
of the rate of dissipation ‘k with altitude (51.1).
The results of this experiment confirm the feasiv
bility of determining the equivalent internal scale
on oblique paths fron measurements of average in—
tensity in the focal plane of the reception lens.
In the given method of determining the structure
characteristic c?“ it is necessary to place the
Pig. 64. Comparison of the optical receiver and laser source at different
results of measurements of .ends of the path. In measurement' an oblique paths
internal scale by different such a nethod becones difficult to realise because
optical methods: luregres- of the need for rigid spatial stabilization of
sion line eg‘ -0.83u<;‘ both source and receiver. The next section will
present a method of determining c}. that is based
on scattering of light by atmospheric aerosol, and is free of the above mentioned
disadvantage. ‘

 

58.2. LASER m0 0? DETERMINING smut Cg BAS- ON LIGHT SCATTERING BY mos-
PHERIC AEROSOL

This technique differs from that described in 58.1 in that the information on
parameter Cu is extracted from the average width of the image of an aerosol-filled

scattering volume.

As we know “let. 95]. light scattering by an aggregate of a large number of' sta-
tistically independent particles takes place incoherently. Setting the radius
of coherence of the field of the initial source in formula (15.1.19) equal to zero
(pk-0), we get the following expression for the half-width of the image of the
scattering volue in the focal plane of the reception lens:

a '1' 6,’ . .1 Jr’s" '
""F"2(T)‘[;:+77+7;+.-,j-]. - (a)

where Za‘, is the transverse dimension of the scattering volume. We will assume
that the scattering takes place free the region of focusing of the laser beam
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

that illuminates the aerosol particles. Then in accordance with expression (4.1.5)
the transverse size of the scattering voluae is defined as

' ZL' ‘ e‘)“ '
- 2 - i -— , . (1)
Substituting equality (2) in formula (1). we get
pi ' 8 1' i "‘f - '
”.I=‘02(T) [ﬁ+:{+:§‘+—7L ]. (3:

Expression (3) enables us to determine the coherence radius of a spherical wave
pcs" 59. from the measured half-width of the image yp. Hence for a statistically
uniforn path (03,- const) we can readily find the quantity ' .

c: - (3""1.46k'Lp:9)"".

In the case of oblique paths when the structure characteristic varies with alti-
tude. we find by referring to expressions (6.1.22), (2.1.33) that the quantity

Dcs is written as
-m

mm)-[4.461eia¢c:.m(t-’-—3)"']' . (‘4)

In deriving equality (4), it was assuned that the laser beam illminating the
scattering value propagates vertically upward fron below. The upper linit of

the integral in (6) is equal to the excess of the scattering volue over the radi-
ating aperture. Equation (’0) is a Volterra integral equation of the first kind
and enables determination of p??? qg>rofiles of the structure characteristic 0%

froe values of Zion-mew measured for different altitudes.

Fig._65. Reconstruction of the
altitude dependences of the struc-
ture characteristic 0:01): 1 and
6—initis1 altitude dependences
6301) of form (5) at 41-0 and
(1-2/3 respectively; 2. 3. 6.

S and 7. 8, 9—sltitude depen-
dences of integrated values of
c§(n) corresponding to fornulas
(5) at o-2/3 and 0-4/3; 2. 7—

u - 9/3; 3-u- 10/3; lo. 8--u- 11/3:
5. 9—u- 13/3; lO-results of re-
construction by algoritha (6.2.6)-(6.2.6)

 

Fig. 65 shows ratios ”’(n)/((c:°3/8). vhere of" is the value of the structure
characteristic at the over point of the path. these ratios being calculated for
altitude dependences

cm) -c: (h)(1+-E;)'°: a - 0. '3'. ‘3 h. 915-. ' (5)

60

mammouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that correspond to typical conditions of the atmosphere (see 51.2). It can be
seen from Pig. 65 that measurement of the quantity €301) ensures sensitivity suf-
ficient for resolving variations of profiles 03(1)).

Inversion of integral equation (6) can be accomplished by reducing it to e syste-
of linear algebraic equations and solving this system by the l'ikhonov regulatin-
tion sethod as was done in 56.2. knples of dependences 0:01) reconstructed

in this way in the case of distortion of initial data with relative error of 302
are shown in Fig. 65. An estinate of the errors of reconstruction of functions
83h) due to deviation of the index of refraction in the expression for the spec-
trul 043'. x) -0.083 03(37):” from the values u - 11/3 was nade by nuserical calcula-
tions in which the function can). was reconstructed at u- 11/3 from values of
63.01) deternined at uf 11/3 (see Fig. 65). The calculations showed that as u is
varied over a range of u- 10/3-(11.2)/3 corresponding to the data of Ref. 330.
the error of reconstruction does not exceed 8-102.

formula (3) was obtained without consideration of aerosol scattering on the path
of propagation of the wave from the scattering object to the reception lens.
Bstinates of the relative contribution of this background to the registered signal
in the one-time scattering approximation with the use of the results of Ref. 97
have shown that at 1-0.63 ml. particle sizes of 0.05-5 um. angle of the cone

of radiation of the scattering volume equal to 1/2. angle of view of the receiver
p- 10‘“. path length L- 5 In. and meteorological range of visibility sH-zo he.-
this contribution does not exceed 0.12.

The lidar equation of Ref. 96 is used to estimate the energy characteristics of
the ranging signal. Calculations have shown that with a receiver sire of d- 70 cm.
length of scattering volume 2-10 m and backseattaring coefficient “a“ 3.5.10" n-1
as experimentally determined in Ref. 196. the admissible probing-distance with use
of a standard LG-38 laser 0-0.6328 um) is 1011:. If laser power is increased
to-a few dosen watts. the. probing distance can be extended to a kilometer or more.
Let us note that the resultant relations for determining of, can be used with re-
flsction fra rough surfaces as well.

In the next section we will consider determination of the altitude dependence

of the structure characteristic from measurenents of dispersions of weak intensity
fluctuations when receiver. source or reflector are situated at different alti-
tudes. In this case. the requirements for spatial stabilisation of receiver and
source are not so significant if diverging laser beams are used and the receiver
systems have a wide field of view. -

38.3. DB‘I‘ERIIINATIW OP ALTITUDE DBPENDBNCBS 0F PARAMETER 0,2, FROM FLIXI‘I'UATIONS
01’ m LASER BEAM FIELD AMPLITUDE

In this method. the altitude dependence of Cf, is found by using the expression

for dispersion a; of fluctuations of the logarithn of the laser beam field ampli-
tude on an oblique transmission path. For defined diffraction parameters of a
diverging laser beam. fluctuations of the logarittn of amplitude can be calculated
as shown in 55.1 by the formulas derived for a spherical wave. Passing in formula
(5.1.16) to the limiting case of a spherical wave. we write the dispersion

o§(n)-Bx(x(n). 0. 0) in the fore

61

. POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIWUSEONLY

. ﬂ . . .
o:(u-o.sok'"um"'"o(wo Seaman. t). (u
g .

where 0(1). t)-l‘"(i-—t/n)"'; n-H-ho is the difference between the altitudes of
the upper and lower points of the oblique path: 6(n)is the angle of elevation

of the path. If we measure the amplitude fluctuations of the wave reflected from
a point reflector. then in accordance with the results of 55.6 the right Isl-her
of equation (I) lust be sultiplied by 6. We will treat expression (1) as an inte-
gral equation for detersining the structure characteristic 03,00 fro- measured
values of function oz(h). This equation is valid [Ref. 165] in the region of
weak intensity fluctuations loo§$0.8 and in the Fraunhofer diffraction zone rela-
tive to the internal scale of turbulence (An/sin§(n)>>li). In deriving (l). we
have also assuaed laminar hoaogenaity of the structure characteristic cam in
the atosphere. - .

If the reception aperture has finite diameter d. the measured values of fluctua-
tions of the logarithm of the received luminous flux o§(n) must he recalculated
by the foreuia '

0:0!) -= G: 00/6 (6/2 V [ll/sin «7 1'0). (2)

where 6(d/2nn7sinoln5) is an averaging function that can he deter-ined from the
data of .Ref. 126 in the case of direct transillunination. and from the results
of 55.10 in the case of ranging transilluaination of the atnosphere.

Initial equation (1) is a Volterra integral equation of the first kind. Let us
represent this expression in a fora that is invariant relative to the horizontal
couponents of the length of the path:

a; (n) - Eaton“ (1 -‘ 1m)“. (3)
0

Here o},(n)-o}'(n)lin""9(n)12.24k"‘c:. is the altitude dependence of dispersion
normalized to known parueters; C(n)-C§(n)/C§. is the altitude profile of the
structure characteristic. Breaking interval (0. n) into segnents nj- 1A (1- l. 2.
.... n), we reduce integral equation (3) to a system of algebraic equations of
the for:

a} - kg 011% l (‘1
where a}— at (YA). ”c. am - 1/2) A):
. C
0 _ Am. «2 m '_ m
u q) “A: u (1_ t) .

Ref. 31 proved sensitivity of the quantity 0x301) to variations of the function
((n) that are observed in the atnosphera as sufficient for actual neasureaents. _
here an. investigation was also nade of manifestation of the incorrectness of
equation (3). estimates were made of the errors of reconstruction of function
(01) in the case of finite errors of quantity 0,300.), and a de-onstration was

62

mahmdnusam'v
me omwu. use ONLY

given of use of the regularization method proposed in Ref. 232 for solving system
of equations (lo). In addition. a simpler stable method of solving equation (3)
was proposed. based on a distinguishing feature of this equation. namely the fact
that dependence on the upper limit of integration appears in the kernel as the
ratio t/n. He will consider this method in more detail.

Consider an equation of the form

was) - Samoa/z). 0<y<a (5)
0

Taking functions 0(x) and f(y) as analytic, we approximate them in accordance
with the Weierstrass theorem [Ref. 137] by the polynomials

z
m- )5 w". 100- 21.1». (6)
an M
Substituting expansions (6) in equation (5). we get

a l ‘ .
g M- 31.1.1.2“. (7)
where

A. - jam» 9'“. (s)

In order for relation (7) to be satisfied for all points of sealant [0. x]. it

is necessary to require equality of coefficients f.-Q.../)... k- 0, i. .... p- -l
in accordance with Ref. 70. As a result. the for-a1 solution of equation (5)

is written in the form
0-!

t(z)-2—;:.—‘£ ‘ 19)

Let us estimate the accuracy of reconstructing function f(x) by using equality (9)
if in place of the exact function 90:) we assign its approximate values ¢(x)

Representing function 3(x) as the polynomial 9(3)- $0.9. we write the dispersion
I

of random deviations Aq>(z-)-q>(x)-';(x) in accordance with Ref. 137 in the form

V D '
0 (139(8)) - 2:“ng Pqu moo“ (Am) z‘“.

where 91k and Man) are the correlation coefficient and dispersion of random
deviations 691" 0k - ok. The accuracy of reconstruction of function f(x) by using

equality (9) is determined by the quantity

0-!) -l

D(A/(z»=- 2‘. 2‘. lPuD' (Ammo' (Am)? 'I/M.‘ “9)

f...“

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINRI)FFIC1AI.[EHE(H§L¥

Since coefficients Ag in accordance with definition (8) decrease with increasing

k. the rms error 0%(Af(x)) expressed by equality (10) increases without limit

as the order of the approximating polynomial increases. Herein lies the incorrect-
ness of the solution of integral equation of the first kind (5).

The simplest regulariser [Ref. 231. 233] can be used to get stable solutions

From the set of functions ﬁsh-2 “Ti—:g'as‘, which are the solution of equation
"1 '2‘
53 «.2- 21.1.2“ +a 2. be“. t (u)
a-n h-e k-O

by varying the regularization parameter a we select the function f”(x) that mini-
mites functional

ems»; Sa[~i‘, w.z'- Eamon/:3] $12)

I-I

as the solution of integral equation (5). As demonstrated in Ref. 31. algoritl-
(ll). (12) ensures reconstruction of function ;(h) with relative accuracy close

to that of the initial data for oxn(n). This algorithm was used to reconstruct
[Ref. 31] the altitude dependences Cn(h) from measurements [Ref. 356] of the dis-
persion of fluctuations of the logarithm of the amplitude of a laser been reflected
from a mirror sphere which was placed at different altitudes.

The given method of determining cz(h) was put through a trial run [nef. 182. 102]
in measurements of cn(h) under prairie conditions in the vicinity of the town

of Tsimlyansk. where extensive statistical material had been obtained previously
(Ref. 108] for values of Cu near the ground. The laser scurce (A- -0. 63 um) was
raised to a height ho- 1.2 m at a distance of 260 m from the base of a meteoro-
logical tower. The radiation was intensity-modulated on a frequency of f- 10 has.
split into five beans, and sent at different angles to photocells at heights of
11-4. 7.5. 15. 37.5 and 72.5 m on the tower. .Diameter of the input diaphragms
was d- 1 mm. Initial diameter and angle of divergence of the beams were 2 mm

and 1' respectively.

Fluctuations of the logarithm of field amplitude on the axis of such a beam are
equivalent [Ref. 165] to fluctuations of a spherical wave. In accordance with
the results of Ref. 126. the averaging action of the reception apertures was negli-
gible. Therefore equation (3) with the substitution 02(n)-oin1(n)/b made in
the left member was used to determine altitude dependences Cn(h) from measured
values of dispersion of the logarithm of intensity “in 1' From the form of the
kernel of equation (3) we can readily see that perturbations of the turbulent
flux at the point of location of the laser emitter and receivers have almost no
effect on the measured quantity. The greatest contribution to the value of o §(n)
is from layers situated in the middle of the path. The solution of a system of
equations of type (4) found with a nonuniform step corresponding to placement

of the receivers showed that with a relative error of initial data of bSZ. alti-
tude dependences of the type ((n) can be reconstructed with accuracy of no worse
than 252. The values of 51 determined from solution of system (S) corresponded
to heights of 2. 6, 4. 5. 10. 29 and 57. 5 m.

64

FOI¢0FFKJA1.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

n":.2545m123450 0.051234
vd.ma{*

Fig. 66. Histograns of values of of. obtained in the period
from 1:00 to 19:00 hours: a—nicropulsation measurements
(h- lo n, 11-260); b, c-optical measure-ants (IV-220) at 'h-
2.6 I (b) and h-29 n (c)

Measurements of °in1(“j)' j- l, 2, 3, lo, 5 were done sinulteneously with a five-
channel dispersioneter. The frequency passband of each channel was 2.5 Idle. The
averaging tine was taken as equal to 100 s. The lower limit of neasurenent of
0&1 was 0.003 at an instrunent error of 102. The values of cg at the point of

t receiver of the lower pathwere determined free telperature nicropulsations
sinultaneously with the optical neasureeents. The experiment was done in August
1976.

Histograms of the probability density function of values of 0% according to data
of nicropulsations and optical measurements for deytine conditions are shown on

Fig. 66.. These results agree satisfactorily with a histogran produced by any
years of gradient measurements Ref. 108] of the quantitycé in the given locale.
Curves for snpled average values of C}; as a function of altitude are shown in
Fig. 67. Also shown here for comparison are the results of neasurenenta of the

' czar“

r—s—s-rm—‘f—F'Fi—l'l-rn—
: 4 6 n 30. ‘0 HM

Fig. 67. Altitude dependences 0,2101) reconstructed from the
results of optical measurements (Tainlyansk): 1—11-15 h (40
values); 2—7-1; h (35 values); 3—16—19 h (60 values); 4-

18 h to 19 h 30 sin (6 values); S—altitude dependence 03(h)
obtained in Ref. 292 (Australia) at noontine hours of cloudleaa
aumer days; 6—one of the averaged altitude profiles c.2101)
obtained in Ref. 98 (Podnoskov'ye) under conditions of developed
convection

65

ms omcw. use on“
3 son omcm. us: ONLY

structuie characteristic made by micropulsation thermometers suspended on the
cable 0 a tethered balloon [Ref 292] and fastened to a meteorological tower

[Ref. 98]. These data are in satisfactory agreement with our results in absolute
magnitude and the behavior of altitude dependence. Fig. 68 compares altitude
dependences Cn(h) obtained by various methods at different geographic points.

 

r-‘I‘rl—r—I—HTTI'IT
3 4 6' U 20 0 ”MM

Fig. 68. Comparison of normalized altitude dependences
C§(h)/Cno: l, 2--result of optical measurements given as
; curv7s1,2 on £13. 67; 3-dats of Ref. 292 min-1.2 10'“
- cm , ho-Z m); 4—results of micropulaatio measurements
..[Ref 1.4] (Podmoskov ye, cg.-l.. 35.10'” cm .h.-2 m)

but under conditions close to unstable temperature stratification of the atmos-
phere. All results are normalized to the value of the structure characteristic

at the lower measurement point Cno- A distinguishing feature of the given empiri-
cal dependences Cn(h) (which had been previously noted only in Ref. 44) is a "break"
at altitude h- -30 I, re the quantity cn begins to decrease in accordance with

a power law Cn(h)~ ~'“h ’ typical of conditions of developed convection (see 51.1).
In the lower layer (h< 30 m), the quantity C“ decreases with altitude much more
slowly. Thus the resultant altitude dependences of the structure characteristic
of fluctuations of the index of refraction are confirmed by the results of direct
meteorological measurements. In addition to the structure characteristic of re-
fractive index fluctuations, optical methods enable determination of internal
turbulence scale. Possibilities for measuring the internal scale by using phase
fluctuations of a laser beam field will be considered in the next section.

§8.lo. PHASE OPTICAL MEASUREMENTS OF INTERNAL TURBULENCB SCALE

This method is based on measuring the fluctuations of phase difference of optical
beams on two bases of different length. The structure functions of phase fluc-
tuations that are necessary for determining the internal scale can be feund in

the smooth perturbation approximation as was done in 55.1. or by using formula
(4.4.2) and expression (5.3.11) for diffraction rays. As a result of calculations.
the structure function for the near diffraction zone (9>>l) of a collimated beam
is written in the form

0, (z, 3) - 2.91am. [(p' + u:’)"' — saw]. (1)

The spectrum of fluctuations of the index of refraction (1.1.22), (1.1.33) was
used in deriving formula (1). Distance 9 is measured between the centers of the
beams or within the limits of a single beam near its center when p<<a.v If the

66

INHR¢IHHK1AJ.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

condition p,<x;',p,>x;' is met for receiver separations p; and 02. (1) implies
a simple relation between internal scale 10-2.28/r" and the measured ratio
D.(p.)/Da(p.)-P:"/9:”=". In the general case, graduation curves D.(pg)/D.(p.)-!(pa/ps.
3.9.) should be plotted as a function of argment Km], by using formula (1) as
the parameter 92/91 is varied to determine internal scale. .

The method was given a trial run on a 95 m path elevated to a height h- 1.6 In

over a section of even terrain. Structure functions D5031) and 05(92) were de-
termined by a heterodyne phase meter [Ref. 106]. Hinimu measurable phase difference
was 0.1 rad. Single-mode collimated beams were used with radius a-2 cm. The

values of the separations 91 and 92 were varied over a range of l n<p1< 12 III.
02 - 67 and 180 In.

The minimum and maximum measured values of K? were 1 and 10 mm. The most probable
value of K? was 6-5 us. For the purpose of direct verification of the proposed
optical method of measurements of internal scale, simultaneous measurements were
made of the average values of temperature and wind speed at altitudes of 0.5 and

2 In. These weather data were used to calculate the Kolmogorov turbulence scale

nk. The rate of dissipation of kinetic energy necessary for the calculation was
determined in accordance with Ref. 175. 96 from the formula

sonata: 35-31-17. . (2)

where u* is flowrate. g is acceleration due to gravity, E is vertical heat flux,
dv/dz is the gradient of average wind speed. T is average temperature in kelvina.
C1) and p are the specific heat and density of air respectively. The calculations
used the following tabular values: cp-o.2t. cal/godeg. 9- 1.3-10" g/cn’. v- -
1.32-10'1 cmzls. The values of u* and I! were determined from nomograms [Ref. 9’0]
on data of measurements of the average wind speed and temperature.

Fig. 69 shows the results of simultaneous measure-
ments of the quantities lo and'nk. The correlation
coefficient calculated from theae.datja was 0.8.

and the regression coefficient evaluated by the
method of least squares was a- Kg‘lrk- 3.5: 0.81..

By using formula (1.1.37) we can readily find the
relation between the internal scale of model (1.1.33)
and the Kolmogorov turbulence scale:

7“,»:

 

lo - 8mg. (8)

0 4 6 1:,“

Fig. 69. Correspondence of Thus the conducted experiment proves the applica-

data of meteorological and bility of the proposed method of determining the

optical measurements of in- internal scale of turbulence from measurements of

ternal scale: l-line of dispersion of the phase difference of laser heals

regression “k' r;‘/3.S to evaluation of the spectrum of fluctuations of
the index of refraction in the region of the ex-
ternal scale of turbulence.

58.5. DETERMINATION OF TURBULBNCE SPECTRUM IN GROUND LAYER OP AWSPHERB FROM
MEASUREMENTS 0? PHASE FLUCTUATIONS 01’ THE FIELD OF OPTICAL BEAMS

If the atmosphere is probed by two parallel laser beams of form (2.1.39) and phase
fluctuations are measured in the centers of these beams, than the mutual

67

MOFFICIALUSEONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

correlation function of phase fluctuations can be written in the form

a. (r. 3) .- 2uk’L I:M.'(x) sap (623). ' (a)

Formula (1) has been obtained in the smooth perturbation approximation in the
same way as expression (5.1.11). seeming that the condition p>>/l_f is satisfied
and taking the path as statistically uniform. An analogous result follows from
using formula (4.6.2) and expression (4.3.11) for diffraction rays.

Eben the observation points are spaced along one of the components of the vector
p- (y. z}. e. g. along the y-exis. the correlation function Bs(x. y) seems the
form

mm}.- Zuk'bfdmfdn‘m(ukmdoxww) ' .12)

we can see from equality (3) that the two-dimensional spectrum of fluctuations
of the index of refraction

no.1.) #- ! dx.°.(x..xu) - (3)

differs from the one-dimensional spatial spectra: of phase fluctuations V3(K2)
by a constant quantity 21131.. Thus the two-dimensional spectrun of fluctuations
of the index of refraction (3) can be determined by Fourier transformation from
neasured values of the correlation function Bs(x. y).

As a first stage in evaluating the applicability of models of spectra 030:) of

the form (1.1.10). (1.1.38) and (1.1.100). (1.1.39). let us calculate the spatial
phase correlation coefficients bs(x. y) -Bs(x. y)/Bs(x, 0) and compare them with
measurements of this quantity. Expressions obtained with the aid of (2) for cor-
relation coefficients corresponding to models (1.1.38) and (1.1.39) take the form

bs(:.v)-‘1;’ﬂ(¥)"' In". (w). _ (4)

. a ' ’x.’ .18 " .
ag(x.v)-.n(— 3}. “(i-7) Pram/>17) : ‘5’
We use the experimental data obtained in Ref. 166 for bs(x. y). The experiment
was done on a horizontal path of length L- 110 m. The height of the path above
the even underlying surface was 1.5 m. hission of an 15-36 helium-neon laser
0-0.63 um) was split into two identical single-sods collinated bells having
output dineter 2a- 2 cm. The beans were spaced in the horizontal direction

with step 6-5 cm up to a value of hp 1.1 m. Fluctuations of the phase difference
between the .centers of the beamsnre recorded in the reception plane by a digital
optical phase meter. Realizations of duration T- 50 a (ample volt-e 4000 read-
ings) were used to evaluate the structure function D30), which is the dispersion
of the observed process. Measurement results normalized to their value at maximua
spacing are shown in Fig. 70. It is clear from this figure that the resultant
structure functions are saturated. Hereafter. we will use the expressions

53m -_- 1 — D.'(u)/D.ty.). ‘ u < v...
82w) - o. . y g y. , (a)

as an estimate of the correlation coefficient of phase fluctuations.
68

roamussonur'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 70. Normalised phase structure
functions: 1, 3-calculation by
formula (I. (lung-6.5 a". 3--

K. - 3.2 m’ ); 2. Ion-calculation

by formula (5) (Z—ee-ZGJ a“.
b—ee- 11.8 a"); S—function ay’h.
where a is selected from best coinci-
dence with experi-ental data; 6-
calculation by formula Us) at x. -
6.3 a"; FIG—experimental values:
‘1st (ya) - 350 ; 8—1180“) - 1070; 9-
030.) - 380; 10—030,.) - 230

 

0 .10 ' w y.“

Fig. 70 compares correlation coefficients calculated by formulas (lo) and (5) with
neaaured values. Parameters x. and x. for the calculated curves were selected
to ensure best coincidence of the nornalized structure functions with the quantity
1- b3(x. y) in the ,aturation region (curves 1. 2) and on the section of power-law
increase (1)s(y)~ys ’) (curves 3. lo). This comparison shows that Iodels (1.1.38).
(1.1.39) do not give satisfactory coincidence of calculation with experiaent over
_ the whole range of spacing of observation points. Now let us calculate the one-
dimensional spatial phase spectrum fron the experinentel correlation functions.
and colpare it with the two-dimensional spectra. of fluctuations of the index '
of refraction (3) that correspond to models (1.1.38). (1.1.39).

According to Ref. 82. we will calculate the Fourier transform of experimental
correlation functions (6) by the formulas

N-r
‘5s(%‘)=.--:-[1+2.§lbs(lln)fv(m)°“wu]. . (7)
1 —8(u/M)’+6(|u|/M)'. . I“|<Ml2:
.w(u)-{2(i.—|u|IM)’. M/2<|u|<M; ,

'0. lul>’M. ' . . '

where y.-kA,5.(x.)’- V.(x.)/a} is the normalized spectrum; o§ is the dispersion
of phase fluctuations. He make our estinate of spectra (7) for window width
11- 1.1 n. Then the confidence interval for 930:3) at probability 0.8 is equal
to (0.5.50.2), “30:2”. and the width of the spectral window (sz- 1.86/10 is
1.7 III- .

The finiteness of the width of the spectral window leads to displacement of the
spectral. To evaluate the magnitude of the possible displacement. we calculate
the spectrua by formula (7) with step 6-5 on, substituting values of correlation
coefficient (6). The spectrun corresponding to correlation coefficient (A) is

Wm)_'x‘gc/a)r;1/:)u‘.’.,(1 +2%).an ' (8)

He calculate the estimate of the spectrus by formula (7) at no - S In“. Pros: the
results of the calculation, shown in Fig. 71, we see that possible displacenents
of the estimate of the spectrum on seysent 0.05 n‘1<ocz< 10 I" do not exceed 22
for width of the spectral window “I 1.7 m". '

69

MWUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0

a:

    

0
0.“ 0.5 5 1 n '3' M“

I}, a“

Fig. 71. Influence of spec- Fig. 72. One-dimensional spa-
trsl window width on estimate tial spectrum of phase fluctu-

of phase spectral: 1-exact ations: 1. 2-mode1 spectrum
spectra (8) at an 5 n”; (8) and power-law asymptote

2. 3--estimates of the spec- (r/ro>>l) of model spectrum
trum by formula (7): 2—11-22; (8) at m- 10.3 a"; symbols
H- 15 for points correspond to Pig. 70

Fig. 72 shows spectra vs(xz) calculated by using formulae (6). (7) from the ex-
perimental data shown on Fig. 70. The vertical line segment shows the confidence
interval. This'same figure shows the model spectrum (8). The external scale

of the model spectrum (Ito. 10.3 n") was chosen from coincidence with experimental
values at the point of maximum frequency (:2 -50 m"). The normalized structure
function corresponding to this spectrum is shown on Fig. 70. As can be seen from
a comparison of experimental structure functions and spatial spectra of phase
fluctuations with nodels (1.1.38). (1.1.39). the nodels cannot describe the spec-
.trun equally well et all space frequencies. The measured spectra. deviates from
power-law dependence corresponding to a Kolmogorov-Obukhov 2/3 law at lower space
frequencies, and hence for larger spatial scales than given by models (1.1.38).
(1.1.39). The external scale determined from relation 1..)- KI‘OZs- 1.56 m coin-
cides with the height of the beam over the underlying surface.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1981.

6610
C80: 1862/71

70

FOIOFHGALIBEONLY
“MUSEONLY

UPC 621.375.826:681.3
LASER W “87918

Hoscou LAMB mm'm 81m in. Russian 1981 (signed to press 21 Aug 01)
pp 2-6. 655-656

[Annotatiom preface and table of contents from book "Laser usasurenent Systeea".
by Anatoliy Semenovich Batrskov. liikhail Mikhaylovich Butusov. Grigoriy Petrovich,
Grechka, Anatoliy Adanovich lorniyenko. Dmitriy Pavlovich Luk'yanov (editor).

Andrey Vladinirovich Hochalovand Yuriy Vladinirovich Filatov. Isdatel's'tvo
"Radio 1 svyaz'”. 8000 copies, 656 pages]

[Text] The book presents the physical fundamentals and principles of design of
laser neasureeent systems used to do a variety of Jobs in lidar, precision regis-
tration of linear and angular displacements. velocities and accelerations. Con-
siderable attention is given to the accuracy characteristics of such systole.
inproving the working efficiency by adapting coherent optical fields to turbulent
distortions. Engineering nethods are considered for calculating and optimizing
the characteristics of laser neasurenant systens, and unconventional modes of
operation are described for promising components of laser equipnsnt.

The book is intended for radio engineers. optics specialists, workers in metrology.
and also for graduate students and upperclssansn majoring in electronics. optics
and instrument making. '

Preface

The unique properties of coherent optical radiation have been responsible for -
the rapid pace of development and practical application of laser methods and facili-
ties in the nest diverse areas of the national economy. The capability of getting
high power densities by focusing laser emission into a spot of quite small size

has been the basis for technical facilities and development of s new sector-

laser technology. Considerable advances have been made in this field. Production
has been organized in the Soviet Union and elsewhere for output of industrial
equipment for welding, cutting and machining materials, naking assenbling and
aligning components and subassenblies of electronic devices. Therefore it is

no wonder that Soviet and non-Soviet publications have reflected fairly complete
coverage of an extensive class of problems in laser technology. '

Theoretical results of significance as well as inportant practical advances have
been achieved as well in the field of data transmission over coherent optics

71

“WINCH!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comunication channels that enable us to send exceptionally large volumes of in-
formation on a single optical carrier. have high directionality of emission that
increases interference immunity, economy and electromagnetic compatibility of
data transmission systems. “any papers have also been published on the theory
of optical co-unications that have dealt with the state of the art and outlook
for this field.

In addition, lasers are being successfully used in lidar systems. laser geology
and navigation. metrology and geoprospecting. and in scientific experiments.

A common feature of such systems is the measurement of certain parameters of ob-
jects, the coordinates of bodies in a four-dimensional space-time manifold. char-
acteristics of physical fields that are reflected in the change of informative
parameters of coherent optical fields after they have interacted with material
objects. In the aggregate. such systems can be called laser measurement systems.

We readily notice that laser measurement systems are fundamentally different from
optical data transmission systems that use lasers. In optical communications
systems. the source of information precedes the transmitter, and the signal ac-
quires specific information before entering the communication line. On the other
hand. in most laser measurement systems the signal radiated by the transmitter
does not carry measurement information, but is rather an a priori known periodic
or pseudorandom function of time. as occurs for example in lidar, laser spectros-
copy and Doppler ranging. Therefore. the fairly well developed methodology of
using lasers in communications systems cannot always be directly transferred to
laser measurement systems.

Today, considerable progress has been made in the area of practical use of laser
measurement systems thanks to advances in fundamental research. technological
improvements and the organization of mass production of eubassemblies and compo-
nents of laser systems. At the same time. it should be noted that it is becoming
more and more difficult for the specialist to find his way through the constantly
increasing stream of publications on laser measurement systems that have not as
yet found sufficiently complete and systematized reflection in scientific and '
technical reference works and monographs. It is only in isolated areas such as
laser gyroscopy and applied holography that we see an examination of theoretical
questions and problems of practical use of lasers for handling specific measurement
jobs. Therefore in this book the authors have made it their goal to gather and
generalize the extensive information on the theoretical foundations and principles
of designing laser measurement systems that register the parameters of a light
wave field varying as a result of interaction with objects of investigation of
various kinds (artificial satellites. streams of liquid or gas. acoustic wave
forms, gravitational fields and so on).

The considerable diversity of laser measurement systems. their principles of de-
sign and methods of analysis have faced the authors with the problem of selecting
material and principles for systematiaing this material. The investigation of
accuracy characteristics occupies a central place in the theory of laser measure-
ment systems. of important significance for laser measurement systems on the
current stage of their development is analysis of potential and real accuracy.
determination of factors that limit their ultimate accuracy characteristics under
actual operating conditions. and finding effective methods for optimizing these
characteristics. In this connection. it has been deemed advisable in this book

72

FOI‘OFIICIAl.lEﬂ!(lVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to deal primarily with problems of improving the working efficiency of laser mea-
surement systems that can be solved both by optimum selection of their parueters.
and by adapting the structure and parameters to characteristics of randomly inhomo-
geneous media that in many cases separate the measurement part and the object

of research.

--lidars, Doppler velocity metersnconcentrating attention on problems of choosing
their block diagrams and on methods of evaluating accuracy characteristics in
which the particulars of coherent optical fields show up most completely. and

on the other hand-~to demonstrate unconventional measurement methods and facilities
that at times have no corresponding analogs in other wave bands. In this connec-
tion, the analysis has included laser accelerometers. precision instruments for
measuring angular displacements and velocities based on gas ring lasers. holo-
graphic interferometers for studying strains and vibrations. and also parametric
frequency converters that are of promise for measurement systems.

It is quite natural that not all the annotated laser measurement systems have
today been developed in equal measure. For example, while the area of lidar.
optical range finding and laser goniometry has seen development not only of the
principles of construction of appropriate instruments but also an element base
resultingin production and successful operation of precision range finders and
dynamic angle-measuring instruaents. at the same time today's laser accelerometers
are so far the object.of laboratory studies. however, even on this level they
have convincingly shown the promise of different versions of laser accelerometers.
and the accuracy characteristics already achieved in laser gravimeters are of
undoubted interest to a wide range of specialists. finally. the choice of material
has been influenced to some extent by the authors' own scientific interests as
well. and some chapters have been written on their research.

The contents of the book could be conditionally divided into three parts. The
first part (chapters 1. 2) covers principles of design and possible strategies

for using laser measurement systems with consideration of statistical space-time
characteristics of perturbing fields of the atmosphere. and methods of adapting

an optical signal to turbulent distortions. The second part (chapters 3-9) deals
with description of specific types of laser measurement systems and analysis of
their accuracy characteristics. The third part (chapters 10, H) examines problems
of improving the element base of laser measurement systems.

Laser measurement systems are undergoing a developmental stage, and have already
gained a strong position in some of the most important areas of science and tech-
nology. And this process shows a pronounced tendency to develop further. Under
these conditions. the authors have not set themselves the task of considering

all existing types of measurement systems. and at the same time they realize that
in such a rapidly developing field as laser measurement technology it is difficult
to single out and present just those aspects that will not be seriously revised
in the near future.

The book has been written by a collective of authors. Chapter 1 was written joint-
1y by A. A. Korniyenko and D. P. Luk'yanov. chapter 2 was written by

73

MWWWY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. A. Korniyenko, chapter 3-by A. s. Batrakov with inclusion of material furnished
by A. I. Bekalyar. chapter 6-by A. s. Datrakov. chapters 5. 7. 10. ll--by D. P.
Luk'yanov. chapter 6--by M. M. Butusov, chapter 8 was written by G. P. Grechka,

D. P. Luk'yanov and A. V. Mochalov. and chapter 9-by D. P. Luk'yanov. A. V.
Mochalov and Yu. V. Pilatov.

The authors thank Professor A. C. Sheremet'yev for useful remarks in preparing
the draft of the manuscript, and also Professor V. P. Vasil'yev and Doctor of
Technical Sciences G. I. Vasilenko for reviewing the book and making critical
comments which the authors gratefully took into consideration in revising the
manuscript.

All comments and suggestions on the content of the book may be addressed to:
Moscow. 101000, Glavpochtamt, a/ya 693.

Contents page

Preface 3

Chapter 1: Particulars of Operation of Laser Measurement Systems in Channels
With Random Parameters

1.1. Formulation of the problem 7
1.2. Mathematical model of a complex of spatially separated laser measurement
systems 9
1.3. Models of fields of ordinary inhomogeneities and probabilistic character-
istics of a measurement_session 13
1.6. Analysis of efficiency in using a complex of laser measurement systems
under conditions of cloud fields 20
Chapter 2: Adaptive Methods in Coherent Optical Systems
2.1. Theoretical principles of adaptive methods 26

2.2. Effectiveness of systems of adaptive compensation of phase distortions 63
2.3. Principles of designing adaptive ranging systems

2.6. Basic components of adaptive systems 52
2.5. Results of experimental research and simulation of adaptive systems 66
Chapter 3: Principles of Lidar

3.1. Principles of design and fields of application of lidar systems 73
3.2. Laser emission sources 83
3.3. Optimizing the operation of pulsed laser emission source 91
3.6. Conditions of maximum efficiency of cw gas laser 96
3.5. Laser radiation receivers 100
3.6. Reflection of laser radiation by objects 106
3.7. Optimum methods of signal reception in lidar systems 111
Chapter 6: Major Areas of Improvement and Optimization of Laser Ranging ' °

systems

6.1. General principles of optimizing laser systems 119
6.2. Ways to improve accuracy of pulsed range-finding systems 122
6.3. Energy characteristics of lidar systems 128
6.6. Pulsed laser tracking and ranging systems 131
6.5. Major areas of improvement of laser range finders with cw radiation 162

Chapter 5: Laser Velocity Meters

5.1. Application of relativistic electrodynamics to analysis of Doppler
measurement systems 151

5.2. Analysis of laser Doppler local velocity meters 153

76

llﬂltlﬂﬂCIAl.USE(lﬂlY
”OFFICIALUSEONLY

5.3. Fourier analysis of optical schemes of laser Doppler local velocity
meters

5.6. Accuracy characteristics of laser Doppler local velocity meters

5.5. Practical velocity meter designs

5.6. Particulars of measuring components of flowrate vector

5.7. Particulars of multiple-frequency laser Doppler local velocity neters

5.8. Measurement of flow velocity by ring lasers

Chapter 6. Holographic Interferometers for Studying Strain and Vibrations

6.1. Principles of holographic interferometry

6. 2. Influence of scattered nave field structure on process of interference
pattern formation -

6.3. Producing holographic’interference patterns

6.6. Decoding holographic interference patterns

Chapter 7: Laser Accelerometers

7.1. General principles of acceleration measurement

7.2. Physical principles of laser accelerometry

7.3. Photoelasticity effect

7.6. Principles of constructing accelerometers that use the photoelasticity
effect

7.5. Laser accelerometers of frequency type

7.6. Polarisation characteristics of one-component accelerometers

7.7. Design particulars of one-component accelerometers of frequency type

7.8. Laser gravimeter

chapter 8: Laser Gyrocapassing

8.1. Physical principles of laser gyroscopy

8.2. Methods of determining direction of true meridian

8.3. Principal equation of static laser gyrocompaes

8. «‘0. Analysis of major errors of static laser gyrocompass

. Speed estimation

. Particulars of instrumental errors

. Selection of ring gas laser for sensing component of static laser

gyrocompass

8. Order of determining major requirements for laser gyrocompass in design

9. Dynamic method of laser gyrocompassing

pter 9: Registration of Angular Displacements and Velocities

Information in brief on methods of recording angular displacements

Polarization two-frequency method of angle measurement

Principle of measuring angles by ring gas lasers

Potential accuracy of ring gas laser in angle measurements

Output characteristics of ring gas lasers

Angle measurement errors due to technical fluctuations of ring gas

laser parameters

.7. Experimental investigation of error of angle measurement by ring gas

laser

.8. Error of angle deternination system

9. Production and certification of discrete angle data transmitters by

using ring gas lasers

9.10. Ring gas lasers in rpm stabilization systems

9.11. Particulars of recording angular velocity in inertial space

9.12. Laser angular velocity meter with initial mechanical balancing dis-
placement

“OM

be
Is
2.
e3e
4e
5e
6e

8
8
8
8
8
C
9.
9.
9
9
9
9
9
9
9

7S

MWUSEONLY

161
163
169
173
177
181

184

196
207
215

218
218
226

229
233
238
263

256
259
260
265
269
272

277
279
282

292
295

303
305

311

314
317

323
329
334

339
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY

Chapter 10: Mods-Locked Operation of king Gas Laser

10.1. Particulars of operation of ring gas lasers with emission of several
transverse modes

10.2. Methods of longitudinal mode locking

10.3. Physical principles of longitudinal mode locking in ring gas lasers

10.4. Equations of nultinode emission of ring gas lasers in mode-locked
operation

10.5. Selection of modulator parameters

10.6. Particulars of placement of modulator in ring laser cavity

10.7. Technique for experimental investigation of ring gas laser in longi-
tudinal lode-locking

Chapter 11: Parametric Frequency Converters

11.1. Optics of electrically controlled media excited by circular field

11.2. Associated waves in anisotropic media

11.3. Frequency conversion modes

11.4. Requirements for the tensor components of electro-optical constants
of crystals for parametric frequency conversion

11.5. Classification of crystals used in frequency converters

11.6. Particulars of excitation of circular controlling fields, and results
of experimental studies

Appendix: General Solution of System of Differential Equations That

Describe the Process of Parametric Frequency Conversion
References
Subject Index

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". 1981

6610
C80: 1862/62

76

FIHl13FFIChAL UEHBCHUIJV

363
368
351

355
360
366

367
376
382
396

406
£09

417
628

636
652
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ABSTRACTS 0? ARTICLES IN MLECTION as QUANTUM ELECTRONICS

Kiev KVANTOVAYA nmm: WM” BMW ssoamx in Russian
No 20. 1981 (signed to press 19 May 81) pp 111-112

[Abstracts of articles from collection ”Quentin Electronics". edited by L. N.
Pan'shina, Institute of Seniconductors. UkSSR Acade of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo
"Nauhova duke". 1000 copies. 112 pages]

unc 621.373.8
RING LASER WITH ACTIVE AMPLITUDE GATE
[Abstract of article by Kravchenko. V. 1.. Milovakiy. II. D. and Popava. L. I..]

[Text] An experimental and theoretical study is done on the characteristics

of a traveling-wave ring laser that includes an alplitude gate consisting of split
and return airrors with an additional active substance placed between then. The
authors deteraine the threshold gain. ratio of intensities of opposed waves. and
the way that these characteristics depend on the parameters of the active nediul
and the optical cavity. It is shown that the additional active substance lakes
little contribution to the overall energy behavior of the laser. However. the
presence of an additional amplifying nediun in the uplitude gate considerably
reduces the tile of establishment of single-node lasing. end is conducive to at-
tainnent of uximn coherently enitted power at the highest value of the coeffi-
cient of suppression of the caunter vave. Figures" 8, references 11.

{Inc 621.373.8
OPTIMUM WING WHIONS O? RING LASER "1TH AMPLITUDE GATE
[Abstract of article by Milovskiy, N. D. and Popova, L. I..]

[Text] A new technique is developed for calculating the characteristics of lasers
with coupled cavities. The method is used for calculating threshold pulping and
the ratio of intensities of opposed waves in a ring laser with amplitude gate

and a scattering inhomogeneity inside the resonant cavity. Two sets of values

of cavity paraaeters are determined at which the ring laser is characterized either
by ainimss threshold pusping or by nariaun coefficient of suppression of the counter
wave. Figures 3, references 10.. '

77

summon“
MOMMUSEONLY

UDC 621.378.325
CALCULATING OPTIHIM PARAMETERS 0P SODIUM VAPOR WWI: LASER

[Abstract of article by Bogacheva. s. P., Borisov. l. 1., Kubsychuk. V. P. and
Reysig. V. A.)

[Text] A numerical study is done on discharge of argon plasma with a stall addi-
tive (1 mass percent) of sodius fron a flat nozzle into a channel of rectangular
cross section for the purpose of determining stagnation parameters at which naxilnn
output characteristics of a plasnodynamic laser are attained. The calculations
were done over a wide range of initial temperatures (2500-6000 K) and pressures
(1-20 arm). It is shown that at a stagnation teapsrature above a certain value
the output radiation power is weakly dependent on pressure. Thanks to the non-
monotonic dependence of electron teeperature on pressure. it turned out to be
possible to optimize the lasing characteristics of the medium. The paper gives
maximum values of inversion, gain and lasing power. and also the stagnation param-
eters of the plasma strean at which they are attained. Figures 10. references 12.

UN 621.373.853.08
OPTICALLY PUMPED SUBMILLIMETER PULSE LASERS 0F OSCILLATOR-AMPLIFIER TYPE

[Abstract of article by Hanite. 0. 1%]

[Text] The paper describes designs of subnillimeter lasers that operate in the
pulsed node with linear transverse pumping. The author gives the results of in-
vestigation of the energy and tine characteristics of these systems. An exanina-
tion is made of different lasing conditions as deternined by the pressure of the
active median, pumping level, cavity parameters and so on. Optimum conditions
are found for maximizing lasing energy. Figures 8. references 10.

BBC 621.3784

SOME PRINCIPLES OF INTRACAVITY STIMILATED MISSION OF SECOND OPTICAL mm

[Abstract of article by Belyy, M. 1).. Korniyenko, N. Ye., Okhrimenko. B. A..
Petrenko, R. A.. Strizhevskiy. V. I... Sharspa. A. l. and sthchuk. V. P.]

[Text] Based on seniclassical equations for an active medium and truncated equa-
tions of nonlinear optics for a nonlinear crystal, an examination is made of
intracavity lasing of the second harmonic. A detailed analysis is nade of the
influence that dissipative and Fresnel losses in a nonlinear crystal have on the
efficiency of intrscavity lasing of the second harnonic. A scheme of intracavity
lasing of the second hsmnic with intereediste feedback is proposed for weakening
the influence that losses in the nonlinear crystal have on laser emission. In
particular, an examination is made of standing-wave and traveling-wave lasers

in cases of homogeneous and inhomogeneous broadening of luainescence lines of

the active medium with consideration of interference of opposed waves and inertnes:
of the nonradiative transition. Analytical expressions are obtained close to

the lasing threshold in all investigated cases. An experimental investigation

is made of two schemes of intracavity lasing of the second harmonic and a scheae
with intermediate feedback. Results agree well with theory. Figures 8. refer-

ences 28.
78

POIOFFICIALUSONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UH: 621.375.82

MATERIALS OF QUANTUM ELECTRONICS BASED ON COMPLEX SMICONDUCTOR CGIPWNDS. ANKAR-
DONICITY 0F LATTICE VIBRATIONS IN CRYSTALS DURING PHASE TRANSITIONS

[Abstract of article by Slivka. V. Yu.. Vysochanskiy. Yu. H. and Chepur. D. V.]

[Text] The paper systematizes research data on vibrational spectra of crystals

in the vicinity of phase transitions that give information on the nature of phonon-
phonon interactions and the part they play in the lattice instability effect.

It is noted that different experimental methods must be used to get the soot con-
plete representation of the nature of the phase transition. An examination is
made of the methods of determining the significance of anharuonic processes and
explaining their specific mechanisms. The authors give the results of a study

of the lattice dynanics of the new ferroelectric semiconductor Sn2P28¢, which

is a model object for determining the role of phonon-phonon interactions, studying
external influences on the soft mode. and establishing the relation between this
mode and a variety of physical properties of the crystal. Figures 6, table 1.
references 84.

L100 621.375.82

MATERIALS OF QUANTUM ELECTRONICS BASED ON COMPLEX SDIICONDUCTOR COMPOUNDS. PEYSI-
CAL PROPERTIES

[Abstract of article by Slivka, V. Yu., Voroshilov. Yu. V. and Chepur, D. V.]

[Text] Data are systematized on the nonlinear, acousto~optica1, electro-optical
and optical active crystals that are based on complex chalcogenides'and chalcogen-
halides. Data are presented on birefringence. region of transparency, angles

of phase synchronise, acousto-optical quality. nonlinear susceptibility. specific
rotation of the plane of light polarization and other parameters that determine
the working efficiency of laser devices. Figures 10. tables 7, references 96.

000 621.375.82

PRODUCTION AND PROPERTIES OF CGIPLEX SNICON'DUCTOR MATERIALS WITH PROMISE POE
QUANTUM ELECTRONICS AND OPTOELECTRONICS

[Abstract of article by Golovey, H. 1.. Peresh, Ye. Yu. and Seared, Ye. Ye.]

[Text] Data are given from results of growing and studying 'the physicochenical,
electrophysical and optical properties of semiconductors AgGaSg. AgGaSez. cacazs.”
chazs... LilnSz. InPS... GaSe, T1 3PSet. TlgAaSs and T13AsSeg. as well as their pos-
sible areas of application. References 46.

0'00 621.372.826:621.315.6l

SYNTHESIZING ASYHMEI. [C PLANE INKJHOGENEOUS DIELECTRIC HAVEGUIDES. TECHNIQUE AND
NETRODS OF CALCULATION

[Abstract of article by Andrushko. L. 14.]

[Text] A technique is described for synthesizing asymmetric waveguides in the
case of sharply differing parameters of the media surrounding the waveguiding

79
FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '

layer. The paper gives normalized distributions of permittivity in the cross
section of inhomogeneous waveguides with cutoff frequencies of the zeroth and

first modes shifted in comparison to honogeneous waveguides. The new types of
waveguides have larger transverse dimensions in single-mode operation. An investi-
gation is made of the way that the cutoff frequency is influenced by the finite
value of the parameter a characterizing asymetry of parameters of external media.
Figures 4. references 3.

“DC 621.373.8z62l.376.2
USING RESONANT PROPERTIES OF A DISCHARGE IN SYSTEMS FOR STABILIsz HISSION POWER
[Abstract of article by Baran. V. H. and Kononchuk. G. 1...]

[Text] The paper describes two systems of stabilization of the variable component
of power of stimulated emission from gas-discharge lasers. The variable power
component is obtained by modulation of the discharge current of the tube; negative
feedback with respect to radiation and the resonant properties of the discharge
are used for stabilization. In the first system, the modulation frequency is
automatically tuned to a value corresponding to the given level of the variable
power component. and in the second system the resonant frequency of the discharge
is controlled. The working frequency in either case is chosen on the left slope
of the resonance characteristic curve. Figures 3, references 2. ‘

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova duke". 1981

6610
cso: 1862/65

80

F0! OFHC' USE ONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

WWWAHICS

SCIENCE SESSION ON WSICAI. AND ELECTROMSICAL mums 0P MED ENERGY om-
VERSION METHOD

Moscow TEPLOFIZIKA WWII}! manam in Russian Vol 19, No 5. Sap-Oct 81
pp [115-1116

[Text] In accordance with a Decree of the General Assenbly of the USSR Academy

of Sciences dated 16 March_l981 on further development of fundamental research

to ensure acceleration of scientific and technical progress and to improve ef-
ficiency of social production. a Science Session was held in Hoscow. 18-19 May
1981. by science councils of the USSR Acaduy of Sciences on couple: problems

of "Methods of Direct Conversion of Thermal to Electrical Energy", 'Thernophysics"
and "Scientific Principles of Bleetrophysics and Electric Power.".

Participating in the work were members of the USSR Academy of Sciences: acade-
micians B. P. Zhukov. V. A. Kirillin. V. I. Popkov. A. Ye. Sheyndlin. associate
members of the USSR Academy of Sciences 1.. H. Biberman. K. s. Denirchyan. V. H.
Iyevlev, B. s. Petukhov. I. s. Khlopltin. Academician of the URSSR Acadely of Sci-
ences I. T. Shvets. eminent scientists of our nation.

In attendance were more than 250 specialists fro- research, planning and opera-
tional organizations of Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev, Vilnius. Khar'kov. Krasnodarsk.
Sverdlovslt and elsewhere engaged in research and development aimed at realization
of Mill) facilities of various types and purposes.

During the two days of work of the session, three meetings were held at which
20 reports were heard and a working discussional group was organized.

The eain program of the session was devoted to solving thermophysical and electro-

physical problems involved in developing the first industrial unit of the scans-500
mm electric plant; development of pulsed m generators for geophysical purposes;

research in the field of coal-fired HID electric plants; investigation of processes
in mm generators using nonideal and nonequilibriun plasma.

The reports presented at the session show the significant scientific and practical
advances that have been made by different organizations in solving the formulated
problems. These advances include in particular:

«development of methods of calculating flows in high-power HID generators;

-creation of a teclmique for calculating radiative and convective heat exchange
in industrial MID electric plants;

81

mmussomv
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

--development of effective methods for heat protection of the walls of Hill) gener-
ators;

«development of mu) generator substitution circuits;

--creation of pulsed mo facilities and carrying out experiments on electromag-
netic depth probing.

At the same time, it was pointed out at the session that the approximate methods
now being used for calculations of in!) processes do not account for certain real
effects that are important for planning and development of HE!) power units; work
has been inadequate on electrical engineering aspects involving the development
of conversion systems for HID electric plants; there has been a lag in development
and realization of superconductive magnet systems for “ED generators; not enough
attention is being given to joint research on the problem of making a solid-fuel
mu) electric plant; further work is needed on problems of using nonequilibriun
and nonideal plasma as a working fluid for the sun generator.

The session placed particular aphasia on the need for increasing reliability
(service life) of MED generators used for power industry requirements.

Four major areas of development in research on magnetihydrodynamics were dis-
tinguished at the session that require particular attention and concentration
of efforts in the inediate future:

--creation of the first industrial 1am power wait in the world with capacity of
500 NH [muss-500] at Ryazan State Regional Electric Plant; solution of a complex
of thermophysical and electrophyaical problems associated with development of
equipment for the moss-500 plant;

—development of research on a broad front aimed at creation of promising coal-
fired MID electric plants; joint research by different organizations on this topic
to solve the problem as rapidly as possible;

«creation and national economic use of pulsed MED facilities for predicting ear'th-
quakes and for mineral prospecting; .

--studying processes in MED generators on nonideal and nonequilibriua plasma,
including a T-layer M!!!) generator; development of new and promising arrangements
using mp devices.

Work of the session showed that all major areas of MED research have yielded some
important results that are of great significance for the solution of standing
problems.

It was strongly urged at the session that all organizations and science councils
of the USSR Academy of Sciences taking part in the work give consideration to
the reconnendations, critical col-ants and suggestions offered in papers. ques-
tions and discussions.

Academician A. Ye. Sheyndlin gave a survey report entitled "The Most Important
Thermophysical and Electrophysical Problems Involved in Developing an Industrial
mm Power Facility". The paper was received with considerable interest and fol-
lowed by a lively discussion. Reports were then heard dealing with more specific
thermophysical and electrophysical problems of HE!) energy conversion.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'stvo ”Nauka". "Teplofizika vysokikh temperetur", 1981

6610
cso: 1862 I63 32

M OFFICIAL [BB ONLY
MWWONLY

OHICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

UDC 621. 378.325
PROPERTIES OF RBSORATORS WITH P033038 F0318!) BY SET OF WING um'rs

Moscow KVANTOVAYA mm in Rueisn Vol 8, no 11013), Nov 81 (nsnuscript
received 15 Jan 81) PP 2345-2369

[Article by I. H.‘ Bel'dyuginl

[Text] The problen of finding the” field asplitudss of the oscillation
nodes of a resonator forasd by Iirrore consisting of a set of
inverting elensnts of the triple prisn, corner reflector or -.
other type is analyzed. A disemsion is presented of the prob-

' lens of the influence of optical inhomgeneities of the nediun

and dephesing of the nirror eleasnts on the behavior of the
resonator mde fields.

At the present tin devices have been developed which provide partial conpenee-
tion of phase distortions of enission [1, 2] and which are used to solve the sac
problens as are solved by the phenonenon of wave front reversal. in nonlinear
India. These devices are cowosite reflecting ntrices for-ed by a set of invert-

ing slennts. The properties of such matrices that are useful for applications
arise from the fact that each elensnt of then has within sols limits the property
of converting the field of radiation incident on it by the lsw

Uout(ra)=-U|n(—ri)o (1)

where ”in, ”war" the field alplitudss of the incident and reflected waves.

respect vely; e origin of the coordinates is considered to be at the center of
the elemnt. and the zesxis coincides with its axis.

Let us demnstrste that optical elemnts which are cosponsnt elensnts of the
natrices such as reflectors of the "cat's eye" type, corner reflectors. triple
prism and also elements of cut replicas realize conversion (Do Actually,
each of the enmrated elements is a retroreflector element. that is. it has

the property of reﬂecting beam incident on it strictly in the opposite diree-
tion. The transfer matrix of such an elenent is

_'| - B\' _ (2)

T=0_

83

MOMMUSIONLY
where B is a parameter which has the dimnsionality of length and depends on the
position of the reference plane. For fields interacting with a real retroreflector

element which are of interest for applications, using (2), it is possible to
write

Undx) - ( + 3-78.)": E: Unmexv [-15- n (1 +y)']dy. (3)

where 23 is the size of the element along the transverse coordinate x; A is the
radiation wavelength. Now if we select the reference plane so that 3-0, then
from (3) considering the fact diet in this case the product of the exponent times
the factor in front of the integral is a 6-function, (1) follows directly.

For applications it is of interest to study the properties of the devices contain-
ing inverting elements as component elemnts. This paper is devoted to a study
of the properties of resonators with mirrors in the form of matrices consisting of
a set of identical inverting elements that generate a periodic structure.

Let us first consider the problem of transformation by such mirrors of plane waves
incident on then. Considering that a plane wave of length A is incident on the
matrix at an angle 6 «1, and using (1), it is easy to find the angular distribu-
tion of the reflected wave in the plane of incidence

no); smI—zx’LZm—oo] ' unl%—7x(2~+lm+oo] ' (a)
ulna—o.) sin 112(e+o.)] '

where 284-1 is the outer of inverting elements in the nirror in the corresponding
transverse direction. From (4») it follows mat for N>>l. the angular spectrum
of the reflected emission is' a series of sharply expressed (6-shaped) peaks at

a distance of X/Zi from each other mdulated by the first oofactor. The
characteristic angular dimension of this cofactor U23, and its primary peak
coincide with the retroreflector direction 61. It is also necessary .to note that.
one of the 6-shaped peaks for which the second cofactor in (la) is responsible,
coincides with the direction of nirrtr reflection (41) of the incident wave.

let us consider two uniting cases: aim/21 and 81>>A/23.

In the first case from the above-described picture of the intensity distribution
in the angular spectrum of a reflected wave it follows directly that the matrix
reflects the wave incident on it as a; plane nirror. This result canhe mden-
stood, for emmle, from constructing wave fronts by the Huygens principle.
Having the d aensions of the inverting elements approach zero. that is, satisfy-
ing the condition Ova/21. it is possible to neglect the characteristic features
of wave propagation from individual elements and construct the wave front as on
reflection fron a smooth plane surface. This result also indicates that the
resonator formed by the mirrors in the fora of the investigated matrices has a
set of nodes analogous to the modes of a planereaonator of the same dimnsiona.

86

FOR OFFIOAL US! ONLY
POIOFHCIALIBEONLY

Here, obviously, the nmer of such mdes must not exceed the wiser of airror
elemts. the angular divergence of their radiation must be less than 1/23.
and they lust be unstable with respect to disturbances leading to a change in
direction of the esdssion by an aunt greater than 1/2].

In the second case from (6). it follows that the matrix reflects the radiation in
a retroreflector direction 91 with indeterainacy with respect to the angle 4/21.
which coincides with the results of [2]. The problen of resonator nodes, the

diversities of the radiation of which OZXIZi requires special investigation in
this case.

we shall consider that the resonator of interest to us is for-ed by a reflecting
matrix and an infinite plane nirror. For detersinacy we shall consider the natrix
apertures and the inverting elennts rectangular. 'lhen, inasmuch n the variables
with respect to orthogonal directions are separated, it is sufficient to consider
only the one-dinnsionsl integral relations. If we consider inhomgeneities of
the resonator nediun to be slowly varying and concentrated near the reﬂecting
anti-ix, then, liniting ourselves to the linear tern in the expansion of the dis-
persion of the radiation phase front in the aperture of each ale-ant and using

(1) in the Huygens-Fresnel approximation for field amplitudes of the oscilla-
tion nodes at the nstrix airror of the resonator we obtain the integral relation

yum—V2 NS“ .' U(2na—y)expl-i-1(x-y-2M)’+ 12m 49. (5)

na- —N. —l

where s-i/(Ll)1/ 2; L is the resonator length; ’n'kelﬁ k is the wave nutter;
En is the aberration assured at the point x-2 na. ’

In order to find solutions to equation (5) corresponding to nodes with radiation
divergence ezl/Zh. let us consider the fact that any pair of individually taken
inverting elesents for. a resonator. the field of which is almat cowhtely
localized within the aperture of the elements with the exception of the low-
intensity"'tails".going beyond the limits of this aperture, incident on adjacent
elenents and forning a coupling between the fields of these monsters. This
permits the use of a idea malogous to the idea of the strong bond aethod in
solid-state physics [3]. and it makes it possible to find a field on the entire
surface of a reflecting Iatrix in the form of a linear codyination of fields

localized on individual inverting elements considering the influence of fields
of only adjacent elenents on each other.

Considering what has been stated dwve, let us write the expressions for the
resonator node field amplitudes:

N.—l
U (f "(1) = X N CL? 2U, (x — 20m) exp [Mala (x - 2m” :h
:t 05.3, 2U, (x— 2ma — 2(a) exp [— Mala (x — 2ma — 21a)], (6‘)
U: (1‘) - 3‘, C2. ,U. (x -- 2am) (6b)
In- -N1
85

me omcw. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' for #0 and l-O, respectively. Here the index L-0,l,.... N +1! corresponds to
fluctuations in an elementary resonator formed by k and k+ (£-NP...,N2)
elements; the function 09(3) is a solution of the integral equation

vU m= V? jU(—y)expl-m(x-y)'ldy. (7)

which is the equation for the field mlitudes of a resonator formed by two invert-
ing elements which are located at a distance of 21. opposite to each other. Here
the solutions of (7) actually coincide with the well-investigated (see. for
example [4]) solutions of the equation for a flat cavity.

Substituting (6a), (6b) in (S), lultiplying (S) by U (ha-ﬂew [-ilo‘llaxh-Znan
and u (ZmZia-xhxp [ilmla (rZM-Zian and integraging both sides of (5) in
the igterval (-a, a), considering (7) we obtain
pl .5}; ' -i' B,(exp |i8nla3| C'..‘..’i,'. .-- expl— i8nla’IC‘.*._3i,',)]-
= 3; bexpl —i4nl’a’lIDLTL"exPlt‘2¢1+.l+BplD}-u*3i.‘sx
x (exp Ham“.-. + 8ula’)l +€XP “(291+n-8“’°‘)I)+ (Ba)
+ foﬁifdexp [i (201+..+u -8nla')l +939 Ii(2¢t+n+W)l)lli
. VIDif’o' ' + 8. (exp l— lﬂnla’l DEF—3i}. +exp li8nla’l 03.1%.“!-
= : y,exp I -i4nl'a’l [€3.95 ‘exp lawn! +
+ s.[ .2 f, (exp [1(2o.._u— sale“)! + exp ii (2% +881a’)|)+
+C,‘..*+'i.‘. (exp Ii (20” u + ”lag” + e"P Ii (2‘95- ”(0')”1" -
(3))
where 8,: 3' U.(—X) Us (1+0) d“ 7' is the eigenvalue corresponding to the
u... ' ' ,

solution Up(x) of equation (7). Equations (8a), (Sb) must be solved vith the
boundary conditions

.1
d—tgzil, p -"-' C‘Ntkl‘—l.p= DLtﬁlt-l,p '3 DST-)fl—L l-o'

(9)

Let to consider two limiting cases. In the first case we shall consider that the
optical inhomogeneities of the medium vary little or, rare precisely,

lexp {I2 w.)—exp{f2 «~lele (10)
for all possible values of indexes m and k and for all values of the index I
9.39:

Then. considering that IBPI<<1, it is possible to set:

DL?)“- ..?l"+e.‘..*.’.". lesz' ‘IC‘..?}' ‘I< I (11)
and
v-dzv.expl_i(4ul’a’_2¢)l+A;*)-',|A;*h!/y,|< .. . (12)
86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOWIJSEMY

Considering (9) and (11), (12) from (8) we find
‘5» ‘= d: v. exp l -i(4ul’a’-2¢)I cos (“Mew (mm— 3::

1m, A‘*" l. m «NI-W" +I) -
02.3}. sin "l7—N—JT‘I'H- ‘+ _ (13)

6‘ 2). lc(' t). I (”$8", up ‘_ ‘(‘u3.3 _ ”)I X
C‘— *’i .‘ J” «9 (- 6816') + C‘.*+"..".“’ an (M

 
   
 

(2:.Mh_

     

where k—l. 2.-.... N.+N‘+l—l; 11“" " m are arbitrary couple: constants._

Thus, in this case the fields on the individual elessnts of a mtrix nirror are
related to each other according to expressions (13) as a result of partial over-
flow of radiation to adjacent elemts. The situation and the relations (13)

are essentially analogous to the situation and corresponding relations occurring

in solid-state physics in the cue of powerful valence electron bonds in
etc. [3]. -

In the latter case when the inequality (10) has the opposite value it is possible
to neglect the overflow of radiation from elenent to eleunt:
713). ‘= :7, exp I —l(4nl’ ’— var-9.4.1”.

C‘... "’ exp ((9...) = 023' ‘GXP (Wu H) - ALT," ‘.

where 433' are arbitrary constants.

Thus. in this case. which corresponds to strongly varying inhomogeneities of the
nediun or, what anomts to the same thing. powerful dephasing of the natrix
elemnts, the fields on individual pairs of inverting elements of the matrix are
formed independently of each other.

The estimate of to what degree the phase distortions of the airror consisting of
a set of inverting elenents are caspensated, is also of interest for application.
Let us consider. for era-pie. a lens I) in diaseter with a focal length f as a
source of optical distortions. 0n transmission of a well-collinatad been through
this lens, the bean acquires angular divergence

8,-0.0. - (14)

If we use a airror consisting of a set of inverting eleunts. for exuple. of
the" cat' s eye“ type to compensate the phase distortions introduced into the
been by the lens. than the resultant divergence of the bean considering the wave
properties of the radiation

9~2dl m +114.
(15)

where d is the transverse dinension of the element.

87

POIOI'FICMLUSBONLY
NROFFICIALUSEONLY

From (15) it follows that the lininn attainable divergence with this method of
coupensation of the phase distortions

o...-2 vmm us)
is realized for

do” =VXIIW~ - (17)

Let u assune for eatination 0-2 a, {-102 on, 1-1 micron, 01.20 milliradians.

Then from (16), (17) Gun-2.8 and, don-0'7 II.

Let us note that the diffraction liuit of the divergence in this case OD-X/D-OJS
nrad.

The author expresses his appreciation to S. P. Vorotilin for assistance in
individual phase of this vork.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Orlov, V. IL; Vimik. Ya. 2.: Vorotilin, S. P.; Geruinov, V. 3.:
Kalinin, Yu. A.; Sagalovich. A. Ye. KVAN‘I‘OVAYA um [Quantum
Electronics], No 5, 1978, p 1389.
2. Ban‘ett. ll. 8.; Jacobs, S. P. 0PT. am... No 6, 1979, p 190.
3. Davydov. A. s. KVAN‘IDVAYA mum [Quantum mommies]. Moscow, Nanka. 1973.

lo. Vaynshteyn, L. A. 0mm: mmronr I 01mm: VOLMVODY [Open Resona-
tors and Open Waveguides], Hoacou. Sov. radio. 1966.

comment: Izddtel'stvo "Radio 1 avyaz'", ”Kvan'tovaye elektronika". 1981

10845
(:80: 1862/ 75

8B

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l8! ONLY

WWI“

Junc 621.38
nmmwnmucm m coumm m m

15111-1 ”WM. “WAIA' mm I “MAYA OP'IIKA in'luaaion
1900 (aignod to proaa 12 Sap 80). pp 30-63. “2-16.?

[Article by u. I. )rodaali. I; L. Kortaoen. c. D. Konatentinov and l. A. Polyen._
and table of contanta iron book "Optoelectronica. Quanta Bloctronica and Applied
0ptica".-oditod_ by ah. ah. Gvetua. Inatituto of Cybernetica. 0888 unduly of Sci-
encee. Indatal'atvo 'htaniyorabe". 1000 copiea. I“ pegoa]

[Text] Referencoa 1 end 2 were the iirat to duonatrete tho iaeaibility oi infre-
radoto-viaibla inege convortara beaed on aeniconductoro with width of the forbidden
bend A8- 1.2 oV and zinc aulfide olectrophoaphora up). In contraat to pravioualy
known photoconductor-olactrophoaphor ayatana. tho propoaod inane convertera had
nanory linited by the tine of ahielding of the electric field in tho aeliconductor
aa a coneequence of hoot generation. Therefore in the widoaproed ceae of innge
, convortare beaod on ailicon (p a 10‘ noon). the atorege tine at 'r- 300 K woo no
longer than N" o, ' ‘

It wee reported in let. 3 that inego convertera beaad on p- or n-8i with concen-
tration of ionized dopant III 1013-10" co" and Zn8(Cu) olectrophoaphor have ouch
longer n-ory. A leyor of Sim: 10" on no applied by the plea-ochanicol depo-
aition netho‘d to-both aidee [6] on Si alicoa of thickneaa Lna 10" co. The re-
aultent 081) atructurea after renoval of a voltage 'pulao hed atrong polariaetion
[5. 6]. A layer of Zns'ICu) in a binder (vs-530 lacquer) wea applied to.one aide
of the 080 to thickneaa Len' 10" co. the alactrodea were aenitranaperant leyara
of ailvar. The HSDSBpH atructuroe were eupplied with voltage 0(t) -Uo ain Zuft

at {Io-10’ V. f- [Oz-10‘ Hz. The requirenanta for working conditiona and geooetry
of the ioege convertera take the for.

5.11. (6
4 aqua _
where B". Un(t). w. n" are penittivity, voltege. length of 'tho depleted region

end ateedy-eteto concentration of ionized dopent for the aeniconductor at the
given U(t). - .

 

w-( )""->L..: Law... a)

The infrared inege (la-10'~ on) with expoaure time of 0.1-10 I went to the input
of the image converter end weajtored on the Zn8(Cu) phoephoroecing background
ea e negetive or poaitive. Storage tine with continuoua readout wee 102 a.’ and
increaeod if readout woa done in nine-wove voltage burata with low duty foctor.

89

”WWMY
momanussontv‘

In our research. additional experiments were done to explain such long memory
of the inage converter. To be certain that electronic processes in the Zns(Cu)
had no effect on the current characteristics of the structures as measured by
the technique of Ref. 5. 6, the neasurements done on the MDSDBpH were repeated
on asymmetric specimens of unsm. Results were analogous.

l. A constant voltage pulse Uni 100-300 V with duration of 1-10 s was applied
to the HDSDBpH. After removing Un. voltage U(t)- 0. sin wt was switched on. and
a transient process was observed with duration tn”: 10-100 s during which there
was a strong change in the background lminescence brightness of the electrophos-
phor B¢(t) and current I(t) through the specimen. Upon completion of t p. the
quantities 8‘, and I took on steady-state values 33"" and Ic.,(t). Dependﬁg on
the polarity of U". the background either was quenched or increased in brightness
during time tnep' Oscillograns of currents 11(0) and 12(0) for these cases taken
at time t- 0 of activation of U(t) are shown on Fig. 1a, b. Comparison of 11(0)

Fig. 1. Oscillograns of
current through 1408pr
structure: a-11(0); b--
13(0); c—Ic,(t) with screen-
ing interval t,

 

(B°<<B$T) with the behavior of 1c1.(t) (Fig. 1c) shows that when 3. is quenched.

the time interval of field screening inthe semiconductor is longer than the steady
value t3. and corresponds to lower capacitive current amplitude. Reverse effects
hold for 12(0) in case 3°»ng -

 

 

.. . L n .
As we know [Ref. 5], under conditions of screening lU(0l< UM.) - q 2' current
I-CU.ocosel. where C:- :"1‘2: is the total capacitance of the dielectrics
".1 I

(CA: 0,") and space char e (Cons).- which is concentrated at the surface of the
semiconductor when |U(t)f<0,. can, is determined by the depth of nonequilibrium

depletion w:

 

 

.. a m
”"5.“ {[“r .5...'*”<°+""] ~'}- 0)

where so is the permittivity of vacuul. Cu is capacitance of the dielectric, q
is elementary charge.

The voltage of flat zones (3) depends on the contact potential difference ‘k and
the sun Q of the charges in the dielectric and on the surface states. Because
of the smallness of C113 CM. the contribution of (3) and (2) is most noticeable
in 'the case of the semiconductor-dielectric-electrophosphor interface where in
addition there nay be an appreciable charge built into the two-layer dielectric.

90

POIOFHCIALUSEMY
IND!‘0F11(1AI.IISE£(HVLY

Under the influence of U", charge Q may change both in amplitude and in sign,
which has an effect on prn), U and C. As can be seen from (2)-(3). the relation
MQ) shows up well at small U(t). which occurs under screening conditions, Then
W<<Lm Co", is close to c3," and we can get an idea of the reduction or increase

in C(Q) from comparing I;(0), 11(0) respectively with Ic1.(t) in interval t3 over
time tn”.

If the quantities IU(t)+Vp(Un)| and u have increased after the action of U”.
the percentage of Mt) on the electrolminescent layer during time tn” will become
less than the steady-state value, which leads to quenching of the background.

Reverse polarity of U“ will give the opposite effect.

2. Bursts of sine-wave voltage at) with duration of l s were applied across the
HDSDBpH structures. As in the case of D“ (Fig. 2a). after cessation of Mt) the

‘T

Fig. 2. Photoresponse (9) after

cessation of On (a) and U(t) b
(b—in darkness; c-under illu-
ninetion) ‘?
c

9

specimens showed a photoresponse to the probing light pulse, indicating formation
of a polarization field. The action of illumination G on the input of the image

converter during ﬁ(t) intensified the photoreaponse. i. e. the polarization (Fig.
2c). Consequently. when an alternating voltage is switched on there is a constant
component of the electric field present in the specimen that depends on the level
of G. This conclusion is confirmed by the corresponding behavior of the second

harmonic of current I.

Cessation of pulse G with exposure of 0.1-10 s in mode U(t) -Uo sin ut caused a
transient process (tnepa 10-100 s), during which quenching or intensification

of Ed, was observed depending on the conductivity of the specimen and the initial
sign of Q. which can be attributed to the relation established between G and pola-
rization processes. Image converters that operated at B¢<<3 1' after cessation

of C were switched by a pulse U" of given polarity in time 0 1-10 s to the state
B¢>>B$T and vice versa as a consequence of a change in sign of Q.

Comparison of the results given in section 2 with section 1 shows that illumina-
tion 6 influences‘Q and VP(G) analogously to U". Both factors are equivalent in
the sense of changes in Q. IU(t)+Vp(Un. G)I and brightness 30'

91

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. when an infrared image appears at the input of the image converter. 1! decreases
in proportion to the level of photoanission. which produces a corresponding in-
crease in the voltage across the electrophosphor layer. Therefore. the converted
image at the output of the image converter is always positive. After cessation

of the infrared signal. the processes described in section 3 ensure storage of
both a positive and a negative (Fig. 3 [photo not reproduced]). Because of this.
a recorded light pattern can be added to or subtracted from a subsequent one.

The sensitivity of the image converter is determined by the coefficient of capaci-
tance coverage with respect to light K'clig t/cdark'wdark/"light' and allows

for some shift due to dependence of H on Vp U“, G). The maximum value of 1-K.”-
Lnil.3n is determined by the geometry of the structure. The contrast at the output
of the image converter can be controlled by regulating the background through
variation of Du and 6.

Storage of the image converter is determined by the relaxation time 1:31 of the
charge induced in the dielectric and the surface states by the action of the field
and the light. Therefore. realization of long-term memories with parallel process-
ing of optical data necessitates structures of the semiconductor-dielectric-imaging
medium type with maximum 1,21.

The authors thank R. H. Akopyan for useful discussions.
REFERENCES

l. Brodzeli. H. 1.. Kovtonyuk. N. F.. Polyan. R. A.. Sikharulidze. D. 0..
Chavchanidze. V. V.. USSR Author's Certificate No 506243 with priority from
13 Jul 73.

2. Brodzeli. h. 1.. Kovtonyuk. N. F.. Polysn. R. A.. Sikharulidze. D. 6..
Chavchanidze, V. v.. "Report to Seminar on Display Techniques". Kiev. June
1974. Published in collection "Tekhnika indikatsii" [Display Techniques].
Kiev. "Naukova dunks”. 1976.

3. Drodzeli. H. 1., Kertsman. E. 1... Konstantinov. G. D.. Polyan. R. A.. "VIII
Vsesoyuznaya nauchno-tekhnicheskaya konferentsiya po mikroelektronike" [Eighth
All-Union Scientific and Technical Conference on Hicroelectronics]. report
No 7.53D. Moscow. NET. 1978.

lo. Kovtonyuk. N. P.. "Blektronnyye elementy na osnove struktur poluprovodnik-
dielektrik" [Electronic Components Based on Semiconductor-Dielectric Structures].
Hoscou. "Energiya". 1976.

S. Akopyan. R. 11.. Drodzeli. H. 1.. Konstantinov. G. D.. Polyan. R. A.. F121“
I TEKHNIKA POLUPROVODNIKOV. Vol 12. No 7. 1978. p 1256.

6. Akopyan. R. 14.. Brodzeli. M. 1.. Konstantinov, G. 1)., Polyan. R. A.. FIZIKA
I TMIKA POLUPROVODNIKOV. Vol 12. No 7. 1978. p 1624.

Contents page
Introduction 5
Dolidze. G. F.. Yakashvili. D. V.. Dogolyubova. Ye. 1.. "Vaporization Kinetics
and Synthesis of Alloy Films" 7
92

FOROW‘ICIALUSEONLY
3.

“a

50

9.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

Is.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kukharakaya. s. K.. Bidzhamov. A. A.. "Investigation of Temperature De-

pendences of Dynamic and Static Parameters in Orthoferrites and
Ferrite-Garnets" 11

Rukharskaya, s. K., "technique for Studying Dynamics of Domain Walls in
Orthoferrites and Perrite-Garnets" 20

Dakradze. 0. I., Yakashvili. D. V.. Dzhobava. N. IL. Dzhordzhiahvili. G. 1..
"Recording Information on Amorphous Films of Ternary Alloy GdPeDi" 28

Dolidze. G. P., Herkulova. G. I.. Bukhnikashvili, R. N” "Using the
Peculiarities of Faraday Rotation Close to the Compensation Point
for Thermomagnetic Data Recording" 32

Brodzeli. H. I.. Ksrtsman, 8. l... Konstantinov. G. D., Polymn. R. A..
"Electroluninescent Image Converter With Memory" 38

Aronishidzs. S. N.. Sikharulidze. D. G.. Rhoahtariya. D. G.. Chilaya. G. 8..
"Hatrix-Adressable Transparency With Memory Based on Liquid Crystal
With Cholesteric-Nenatic Transition Effect" 46

Berozaahvili, Yu. 8.. Gogolin, 0. V.. Lordkipanidze, D. Sh., Tsitsishvili.
Ye. G., "Electra-Optical Characteristics of'Cubic Crystals Without
Center of Inversion. Considering Spatial Dispersion". 53

Tsotskhaliahvili, N. V.. Mikaberidle, A. A., Nantelishvili, H. 1..
Pataridze, D. V.. 'rsereteli. G. 8.. "Optical Properties of Photochromic
Single Crystals of the Sodalite hype Crown by Hydrothermal Crystalliza-
tion Method" 58

Gachechiladze, N. G.. Grigor'yev. S. 1.. Direktovich, I. G.. Zguladze.
H. 6.. Hestvirishvili. A. 11.. Hosidze. L. 11.. "Space-Time Character-
istics of Radiation Passing Through Polymer Fiber" 76

Blagidze. Yu. H.. Gvatua, N. 1., Zguladze, H. 6.. Todadze. A. A., Chagulov.
V. 8.. "Investigation of Absorption and. Scattering of Light in Polymer
Light Guides" 78.

Goykhman. I. 2., "Method of Improving Geometric Matching of Polymer Fiber
Light Guides With Optron Circuit Components" 83

Hestvirishvili. A. N.. Perel'man. H. Ye., Rubinahteyn. G. M” Chagulov. V. 8.,
"Mechanisms of Energy Losses in Light Guides" 91

Areshidze, H. G.. Aliashvili. E. H., Dadeshidze. V. V.. Iremashvili. 1's. 6..
Saraydarov'a. 1's. it. "Polymer Protective Coatings for Polarization

Film" - 97
Dadeshidze, V. V.. Dzhmukhadze. V. 17.. Dzhorbenadze, Ye. H.. "Polariza-
tion Compass" . _ 105
93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI<HHNCJAL.USIZ(MVLY

l7. Kvezereli. A. N.. Lontsdze. 0. 0., Hachavsrisni. G. A.. Tsulayn. R. P.,
Cbikhladze, T. H., "Photoaeter for Measuring Intensity of Spectral
Lines" 111

18. Akopov. E. 8.. Kapansdze. V. 1.. Karasev, V. Ye.. Kukharskiy. R. N..
Chagulov. V. 8.. Chubinidze, U. A.. "Spectral Characteristics and Lumi-
neacence Attenuation Time of Ru Chelstes" 116

19. Kurssbediani. A. 1.. Munlsdze, V. V.. "Propagation of Intense Polarized
Light Fluxes Through Nonlinearly Absorbing Organic Dye Solutions" 122

20. Khvingiya. V. 1.. Karakozov, K. 6.. Akhobadze, V. 3.. Helkadze. V. 1..
Gogrichiani. 8. 1.. Gundishvili. N. 6., Kongolidi. A. K.. Gsbuniya.
M. N..'Inns-Arrsy Optical Helory Model" 129

21. Ayazysn. A. A.. Hanuliya. L. 1.. "Problems of Designing Hulticouponent
Carrier Hstrix for Reversible Address Recording of Optical Data Files" 138

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Hetsniyereba". 1980

6610
C80: 1862/69

94

FOI¢0FFKJA1.USI(NILY
MWMWONLY

PLASMA PHYSICS

PLASMA HEATING Ill ACUTE-ANGLED “(83110 TIA? wrmou'r USE OF INJECTIGI

HOICOV PIS'HA V 2m}. MERWAL'W I mm1m0Y YIZIKI in R0001“ Vol 34,
No 11, 5 Dec 81 (manuscript received 6 Oct 81) pp 596-597

[Article by H. s. Ioffe, B. I. Kanayev, V. P. Pestukhov, V. V. Piterskiy and Ye. Ye.
Yushnanov]

[Text] A specific high-vacuun discharge enabling ohmic heating
of plasma was produced in an- acute-angled «'1qu trap with e-
lectrostatic blocking of the apertures.

A magnetoelectrostatic trap (NET) is an acute-angled magnetic systel in which leak-
age through the peak is blocked by electrostatic barriers set up by using narrow
(order of Debye radius) apertures with grounded walls and negative blocking elec-
trodes ("reflectors") behind them. The most convenient method for heating plasma
in an NET is by electron bean injection from the region of the reflector [13; 'an-
other usable methOd is Sill? heating [2]. The typical magnitude of electron and ion
taperatures obtained in the experiments mounts to 50-100 eV at a density of

anon-1012 «(3 [3].

A new mechanism for introducing energy into plasma, a mechanism without analogy
amongst other methods used for heating in an NET or other type of trap was demon-
strated on the ATOLL apparatus. A diagres of the arrangement is shown in Figure 1
and some details of the magnetic aperture are shown in Figure 2. The electron gun
lo is a heated «sitter which replaces a small part of one of the reflectors. The
supplemental electrodes 3 (Figure 2) serve for blocking secondary emission from the
reflectors and the gun's emission. Under "ordinary" conditions, hydrogen plasma is
produced and sustained by the gun's electron stre- and, largely, by the street: of
secondary emission electrons knocked out of the reflectors by the ions striking
them and then sucked into the trap under the effect of the reflectors' potential
which is usually about 2 W. The plasma in the trap takes on a negative potential
of about ‘1 kV. Feeding to the supplemental electrodes a negative potential greater
than that on the reflectors stops the injection of electrons and leads to collapse
of the plasma. However, with a sufficiently intense magnetic field (over 15 We in
the small apertures) it proves possible for there to exist a state when a plasma

with ordinary parameters (”1012.63, Tea 30 .v, 1'19 50-100 eV, Pu 10'6tor) is
self sustaining in the trap without any supply of electrons from outside. This

95

”WNWLY
Figure 1. Diagram of the ATOLL Trap: l-magnetic field coils; 2-clampe;
3-reflectors; lo-electron gun; 5-plasma. Dimensions are in
centimeters.

state represents an unusual high-vacuu discharge (between reflectors and ground)
with a current of 10 A or more, in which electrode processes do not participate and
the source of plasma heating is the currents flowing within the plasma between re-
gions of different potential. The plasma's material balance holds due to ioniza-
tion of neutral hydrogen.

what mechanisms lead to the establishment of this state? The specific nature of
them is governed by the gemtry of the HST. The escape of electrons from the trap
down the osmotic field is blocked by the electrostatic barriers between the aper-
tures and reflectors, but a rather intensive transfer of electrons takes place
across the magnetic field to the walls of the apertures (we will put aside the na-
ture of this transfer). These losses have to be balanced by similar losses of ions.
The latter can not escape to the walls as the electrons do since, relative to than,
they are in a deep potential well, but than do escape freely down the magnetic field
to the reflectors. The intensity of these ion losses runs below the losses of elec-
trons due to the aagnitude of the plasma potential. If the potential were zero the
ions would escape freely through the entire breadth of the magnetic aperture and
that escape would exceed the escape of electrons. In order to lower it, the plasma
gets the above-mention negative potential, with the result that there raains for
the ions' escape only a narrow .corridor in the center of the aperture (Figure 2);

in other parts of the aperture their escape is blocked by the electrostatic barrier
created by the field of the aperture's grounded walls.

That is the source of the development of the plasma's negative potential. Direct
observations have shown that, in the crosswise direction, its absolute magnitude

96

mommiusconur
NROFHGALIJSEONLY

    
   
 

  
 
      

 

.

7% ._

/ e
/' g,

M

Figure 2. Diegrm of the Hegnetic Aperture: 1-coil body which forms
the aperture; 2-reflector; 3-supplenental electrode; lo-force
line restricting the trep's volune; 5-cnetrel region of plas-
Ie with the greatest negative potential; 6-eecepe corridor
for ions; 7-streen of escaping ions.

    

’82

decreases noticeably towerd the periphery yet within the trep's confines, end that
there exists within the plesue a substantial electric field of 50 Vlcel. This field
then is the principal factor in the "self heating" process: the outward—diffusing
electrons, subjected to the difference of potentials, take on energy, pert of which
is passed on by way of reverse thermal conductivity into the central regions of the
trap, covering the losses to ioniretion, radiation end the like, i.e.. providing
sustainnent of the plants. The ions get their energy beceuse of this same electric
field whose acceleration effect surpasses the rolloup effect of the relatively weak
negnetic field (about 300 Cs at the edge of the plasma). As a result, an ion born
on the periphery "slides down" to the bottoe of the potential well, i.e., to the
center of the plesee formation, and goes on to execute periodic cycloid-type notion.
Coulomb collisions pley no pert in the process since the times 1 ii end 1’“ fer
exceed the lifetimes of the ions in the trap. '

Such are the mechanisms operating in the mu. in conditions of plasma self-sustain-
Isent. With some conditionelity one cen define the described heating es “transverse
ohmic", thereby implying that the hosting is done by currents flowing in the trans-
verse electric fields. One of the conditions for the existence of self-sustairnent
is, as was noted. e rather strong magnetic field. Its role here is evidently con-
ected with the fact that as 3 increases, the intensity of transverse transfer of
electrons decreeses end, hence, the escape of ions must also decrease, which in-
volves the plesme's increasing its negative potential._ This increase of potential,
in turn, intensifies ohnic heating, asking self-sustaiment possible. Another con-
dition is the purity of the hydrogen: with admixtures of about 57. (e.g.,- N2), the
described discherge begins to go out. This is evidently caused by the circumstance
that the mixtures, first, increase radiation losses and, second, lower the negative
potential of the plasma since the heavier ions leave the trap at e lower speed end
the corridor in the aperture must then be wider.

97

POIOIHCIALMONLY
FOI.0ITT(JAL USEZCNVLY

 

Figure 3. Conditions With Injection and Without Injection at B)»15 st.
Time base 8 msec. Arrowshowsunment of injection blocking:
1-radiointerferometer signal; 2-stream of ions to reflectors;
3-noise signal from probe; 4-electron stream to an electrode
beyond the plasma edge.

The virtue of injectionless heating is its obvious technical simplicity which might
even be terend "ideal" since the heating requires nothing more than that combina-
tion of electric and magnetic fields which makes up the very trap. Another advan-
tage lies in physical character and consists in the fact that with such heating,
the electron bunches that usually give rise to instabilities in the plasma are

not in evidence. Thus, one can expect better confinement in this instance, which
is qualitatively c0nfirmed by the AIOLL experiments. It can be seen in Figure 3
that while the density of the plasma in the trap is practically unchanging during
transition to the injectionless mode, ion losses decrease. It can also be seen

that the noise level and intensity of electron transfer across the magnetic field
are reduced.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Azovekiy, Yu. 8., Karpukhin, V. 1., Lavrent'yev, 0. A. et al., FIZIRA PLAZHY,
Vol 6, 1980, p256. -

2. Zaleeskiy, Yu. 6., Komarov, A. D., Lavrent'yev, 0. A. et a1., Ibid., Vol 5,
1979, p 954. p
3. Gormersno, C., NUCL. FUS., Vol 19, 1979, p 1094.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo'"Nauka", Pis'ma v ZKETF, 1981

5454
050: 1862/81 93

FOR OFFTCLRLIJSEiﬂﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

813388. stun AND DWI!“

UDC 539.2.219

PRBCURSORS 01' MECHANICAL DBSTRUC‘I‘IW 0? LARGE srscmms

Hoacow mm mum NA“! 8883 in Russian Vol 260. No 3. 1981 (nanescript
received 2 Apr 8i) pp 616-619

[Article by A. A. Semerchen. G. A. Sobolev. B. G. Salov. V. N. Badsnov. V. A.
Budnikov. A. V. Kol'tsov. V. P. Los'. I. H. Nesimov. A. V. Ponomarev. I. R.
Stakhovakiy and V. A. Terent'yev. .Institute of Physics of the Berth imeni 0. Yu.
Shaidt. ussn Academy of Sciences. Moscow] '

[Text] The construction of high due. nuclear electric plants and other large
structures in recent years. frequently situated in territories subject to earth-
quakes. has brOught to the fore the question of predicting damage to large-scale
objects under the action of prolonged mechanical stresses. This problen is
closely associated with prediction of the destruction of a rock nsssif by earth-
quakes. rockalides and so on [Ref. 1].

The nodal of avalanche-unstable crack fornation developed in the Soviet Union
states that the process of preparation for fracture of an inhomogeneous median

is qualitatively repeated on different scale levels (Ref. 2]. The patterns of
this process can be studied therefore on models of materials in different stressed
states. However. in the case of a seen-sired specimen we cannot avoid the in-
fluence of the boundaries and the loading device. and no detailed investigation
can be made of the spatiotemporal patterns of the different physical fields that
reflect the internal state of the aaterial under strain. Transfer of these results

to full-scale conditions necessitates a quantitative study of the scale factor
as well. - '

The unique 50.000 netric ton press at the Institute of nigh-Pressure Physics.
USSR Academy of Sciences. has given us the capability of studying-the destruction
process on large speciaens. Some results in this direction have been obtained

on concrete (Ref. 3].

This paper is the first to make a detailed investigation of the process of prepa-
ration for fracture by simultaneous registration of six mechanical. acoustic and
electric par-stern. A sis aficmt feature of the experisent was the use of any
pickups placed in different a ctions of the specimen. enabling determination of
the spatial structure of the investigated fields. and the change in this structure
as the instant of fracture approaches.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The experiments utilized two granite specimens with measurements of 50x 50: 70
and 70x 70: 70 cm that had been previously studied petrographically and also by

irradiation with respect to area by elastic waves. and by mapping the electric
potential of the surface.

Each specimen underwent several uniaxial loading cycles with an increase in the
maximal load on each succeeding cycle. 0n the initial stage of a cycle. the load
was applied at a rate of (2-8)-10 Pa per hour. and then increased more slowly

at a rate of 6-10‘ Pa per hour. The experiment was terminated upon appearance

of nacrocrscks comensurate in length with the dimensions of the specimen.

The strain field was studied by strain gages cemented on two faces of the specimen.
There were 84-106 sensors on each face. measuring displacements of the surface

in the direction of application of the load uy. in the perpendicular direction
ux. and at an angle of 55' to these directions. Thus. all components of the two-
dinensional strain tensor were studied for elenents of area measuring 5: 5 and
3x 3 cm covering the. entire surface of the faces. Measurement accuracy was
6.10”. In contrast to results found on small specimens. where deformation is
an effective characteristic of the entire specimen. it was faund in the given
case that the surface is divided up into elements with different behavior. Side-
by-side with elements undergoing nainly compression are neighboring expanding
sections on individual stages of loading. The differences that show up on early
loading stages are firnly retained and amplified as the instant of fracture ap-
proaches. Fig. 1 (curves 1. 2) shows the change in the quantity aux/swam»
that characterizes the reduction or increase in area of two neighboring elements
as the load 1..- increased. It can be seen that the rates of change in area for
the elements are appreciably different. Macrocracks had a tendency to arise at
boundaries between zones of compression and expansion.

 

I 0 I0 I: I,
a,” Pa

Pig. 1. Change in area of adjacent elemems of the surface

of a specimen (1, 2) and the velocities of longitudinal elastic

waves over neighboring paths (3. ’0) as a function of the me-
chanical stress applied to the specimen

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the course of the experiment. the specimen was periodically exposed to elastic
waves on frequency of 70 kHz. The location of the transmitting and receiving
sensors enabled determination of zones of reduced or elevated velocities of
elastic waves in the body of the specimen within 0.42. as well as tracking the
evolution of these zones with the approach of fracture. It was found that such
zones measuring several centimeters arise and disappear as strain increases.
Regions with elevated velocities may form around a zone with reduced velocities
and vice versa. This effect is apprently due to a fall-off in stresses within
such a "soft" zone. while at the same time the stresses increase in adjacent sec-
tions. Pig. 1 (curves 3. 6) shows an example of origination of anomaly of veloci-
ties on two neighboring paths.

Ultrasonic emission from cracks arising in the specimen was registered in an ex-
periment with the participation of U. s. specialists B. Spetzler and c. Sender-
held. using the Nicol-2090 apparatus. Simultaneous recording of these signals

at eight points enabled determination of crack location. Host of the registered
signals had a frequency in the range of 50-150 the. corresponding to an emitting
crack length of the order of 1 cm. Development of such crack systems was confirmed
by visual inspection of the specimen after the experiment.

Investigation of the space-time distribution of ultrasonic emission showed that
localized actively emitting regions of enhanced crack formation arise that are
separated by "silent" tones. Higrsrion of the active regions through the volume,
of the specimen is observed; an increase in activity in one region leads to a
simultaneous reduction of activity in other regions. 0n the last loading stage.
ultrasonic emission from all regions fades. and then increases abrputly just before
macrocracks appear.

Electric resistance of the specimen was measured with accuracy of 51 by a four-
electrode method on direct current with switching of polarity. One supply elec-
torde was placed on each of the four lateral faces of the specimen. and the 20
reception electrodes were distributed over the surface of two faces. It was found
in the'experiment that when an active region of acoustic emission appeared at

a distance commensurate with the spacing of the reception electrodes (10 cm).

it was also registered by the change in resistance. A typical characteristic

was anisotropic anomaly of electric resistance such that upon an increase in one
direction. a drop was observed in the perpendicular direction. Fig. 2 shows an

if/f. %

Pig. 2. Change of electric re-

sistance (l, 2) and electric

surface potential (3. 4) of speci-

men in the region of development
of microcreck formation

 

FOR(Hﬂﬂ(]Al.USE1DNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

example of an anomaly calculated from the readings of two mutually perpendicular
pairs of electrodes (curves 1. 2). The source of the anomaly in this case was
located in the depth of the specimen 15 cm from the reception electrodes. and
coincided with the zone of intense crack formation revealed by ultrasonic emission.
The anisotropy of anmlies of electric resistance is apparently associated with
the presence of preferential orientation of the cracks that arise in the specimen.

Use of unpolarized silver chloride electrodes enabled observation of variations
of the electric surface potential of the specimen with accuracy to 1 mV. The
initial state of the specimen is characterized by a smoothly changing field with
deviations of the potential on the surface of about 5 mV. The regions of crack
formation distinguished by ultrasonic emission and by electric resistance are
also revealed by an increase in density of isolines of potential with maximum
values up to 30 mV. The lifetime of electric potential anomalies is determined
by the intensity of the strain process (crack formation) and electric relaxation
phenomena. and is of the order of tens of minutes to hours for granite specimens
of the given dimensions.

Fig. 2 (curves 3. lo) shows an staple of the change in potential difference AV
between the far (zero) electrode and two others installed 15-20 am from the s-e
zone of crack formation that was revealed by changes of electric resistance a.
The nature of the variations of electric potential is apparently associated with
the ion transport mechanism.

Generation of rf electromagnetic radiation that may arise during crack formation
(Ref. lo] was monitored by a frame tuned to 157 or 775 kHz. At sensitivity of
the reception equipment of 1.8 Who on the lav frequency and 0.26 mV/m on the
high frequency, no correlation was observed between the recorded electric pulses
and acoustic -ission of cracks.

These experiments done on large specimens brought us to the following conclusions.
Regions of active strain and microstresses with mechanical. electrical and acoustic
properties that differ sharply from the mabient media appear in the material

long before macrofracture. Comprehensive observation of the evolution of these
regions by measuring the strain field. elastic vave velocities. acoustic emission.
electrical resistance and electric potential enables us to keep track of the state
of the specimen. and to determine the place and time of development of macroeracks.

REFERENCES
l. Sadovskiy. H. A” VESTNIK MADDIII MIX $888. No II. 1971.

2. Hyachkin. V. I. et al.. IZVESTIYA mam: NAIR SSSE: PIZIKA MI. No 10.
1974.

Semerchan. A. A. et a]... m AKADEMII “AU! 8883. Vol 251. No 2. 1980.

4. Deryagin. B. V.. Krotova. N. A.. Smigla. V. 6.. "Adgesiya tverdykh tel" [Adhe-
sion of Solids]. Moscow. 1973.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'otvo 'Yauka". "Doklady Aksdemii nauk sssn", 1981

6610

C80: 1862/92 102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFFIGALUSIONLY

THEORETICAL PHYSICS

UDC 533.9
ABSOLUTE AND cosvwrm INSTABILITY IN PLASMA AND SOLIDS

Moscow ABSOLYUTIAYA I WMA mmcarvosr' V m 1 mm mm
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 15 Kay 81) pp 2-6

[Annotatiom preface and table of contents fron book "Absolute and Convective
Instability in Plasma and Solids". by Adol'f Hikhaylovich Pedorchenko and
Nikolay Yakovlevich Kotsarenko. Itdatel'stvo "Rania". 3000 copies. 176 pages]

[Text] The problen of instability is closely related to the lost inportant prob-
las of nodern physics: the problee of stabilizing processes in fusion devices.

as well as the problan of developing up-to-date nethods for generating and upli-
fying electromagnetic and acoustic waves.

This book is the first monograph is world literature on the theory of absolute

and convective instability in plasna and solids. Criteria are derived for con-
vective and absolute instability. spatial asplification. and are used as a basis
for analyzing specific systens encountered in electrodynanics of nicrawaves. optics.
acoustics. gas please and plans of solids.

The boat is intended for a broad class of specialists working in the field of
microwave electronics. the theory of wave processes and plea-a physics. It will
also be useful to graduate students and upperclessnen of the corresponding
specialties. Figures 34. table 1. references 67.

Pref ace

The problen of instability of physical systems described by partial differential
equations first case up in the solution of hydrodynanic problems.

The theory of hydrodynanic instability has been dealt with in a nunber ofdetalied
nonographs by both Soviet and non-Soviet authors. However. in the fifties in
connection with fusion research the prohlen of instability. was once sore on the
agenda. but with such broader scope. Research on the theory of plaana instability
in turn stimulated research in other areas of physics. and particularly in solid
state physics. The sale problen was closely associated with the problem of gener-
ating. amplifying and converting wave processes over a wide range of frequencies
end wave nodes. The need has arisen for sound criteria of absolute and convec-
tive instability. as well as spatial anplification. It was also necessary to
develop practical nethods of analysing the dispersion equation that is the basis
of the theory of instability of physical systens with distributed paranetere.

103

POI'OHICIALISIONLY
FOI'0FFK]A1.USE(MULY

At present. such work is basically complete, but all results are scattered through
separate journal articles with the exception of a short survey by A. I. Akhiyezer,
R. V. Polovin published in 1972 in USPBKHI PIZICHBSKIKB NAUX. In the Soviet liter-
ature there is no complete and systematic exposition of questions associated with
the theory of instability of systems with distributed parameters. Therefore the
time has arrived for writing a monograph that would fill this breach. if only

in part. The authors hope that this book will serve the purpose.

the nature of instability of physical systems of various types that are described
by partial differential equations. These methods are groundedin the theory of
wave processes in linear systems since the development of an instability on the
initial stage may be described by the concept of snall perturbations of the investi-
gated state. It has turned out that it is sufficient to know only the'dispersion
equation that relates the wave vector to the frequency of the given wave process

in order to establish the threshold of the instability and its nature. This has
made it possible to develop a unified approach to investigation of instabilities

in different systems regardless of their nature and frequency band.

The first part of the book is devoted to introducing basic concepts and substan-
tiating criteria of instability and spatial amplification. This part also points
out the simplest methods of analyzing the dispersion equation. and in particular
a rigorous presentation is given of the widely used method of weakly associated
waves. Understanding of the first part of the book assures that the reader is
acquainted with certain concepts from the theory of functions of a complex varia-
ble. The theorems used in the book from the theory of functions of a complex
variable are presented without proof at the end of the book in the form of an
Appendix.

The second part of the book contains a detailed examination and analysis of exam~
plea of unstable systems from various fields of physics: lasers and masers. acou-
stic amplifiers and oscillators, Gunn diodes, systems of the THT and backward-wave
THT type. two-beam amplifiers and so on.

The bibliography on the given topic is enormous, and therefore only those mono-
graphs and papers'are listed at the end of the book to which citations are made
in the text.

Host of the book is an exposition of results that have already been published
in the literature. but that have been presented here from a unified standpoint.
A considerable portion of the material is based on lectures given by one of the
authors at Kiev University starting in 1970.

The authors thank the reviewer of this book. Doctor of Physical and Mathematical
Sciences P. Ye. Zil'berman for constructive comments. and also Professor V. L.
Bonch-Bruyevich of Moscow University upon whose initiative the book has been
written '

A. H. redorchenko
N. Ya. Kotsarsnko

106

FKIICHHHCIAI.USE(MVLY
MOWWEONLY

Contents page
Preface ' 6
Chapter 1: CRIMIA 01' SPATIAL AMPLIHCATION. WV! All) ABSOLUTE
INSTABILITY 7

1. Introduction 7
2. Criterion of absolute and convective instability 13
3. Criterion of spatial amplification 23
6. Applying Laplace transformation with respect to two variables to the

problem of spatial amplification 32
5. Analysis 'of dispersion equations for two and three associated waves 38
6. Transition of absolute to convective instability. Influence of

boundaries on nature of instability 69
7. Absolute and convective instability and maplification in systems with

paranetrically interacting waves 63
Chapter 2: AHALYSIS 0P DIPSERSION EQUATIONS OF SOME PHYSICAL SZBIIHS 71
8. Cyclotron waves in moving cold plasna ' 71
9. AcOustic instability in piezoelectric semiconductors _ 77
10. Analysis of dispersion equation of laser . 83
11. Instability in nedium with negative differential conduction 9b
12. Recombination instability in semiconductors 107
13. Corkscrew instability in semiconductors 118
16. Analysis of dispersion equation for two colliding beams 128
15. Interaction of curvilinear electron fluxes with fast electromagnetic

waves A 136
16. Paraaetric instability of electromagnetic waves in electron fluxes 156
17. R-f instability in electron-hole plane 152
18. Three-wave parametric instability 157
Mathematical supplement - 165
References 176

COPYRICBT: Irdetel'atvo "ﬂanks". Glavnaya redaktsiya firiko-matenaticheskoy
literatury. 1981

6610 ,
cso: 1862/93 - m -

105

MMWONLY