FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10212
'23 December 1981

Translation

OPTICAL CAVITIES AND THE PROBLEM
OF DIVERGENCE OF LASER EMISSION
By

Yuriy Alekseyevich Anan'yev

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[1 are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques—
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
OPTICAL CAVITIES AND THE PROBLEH

0F DIVERGENCE 0F LASER EMISS

ION

Moscow OPTICHESKIYE RBZONATORY I PROBLEHA RASKHODIMOSTI LAZERNOGO
IZLUCHBNIYA in Russian 1979 (signed to press 29 Oct 79) pp 2-320

[Book by Yuriy Alekseyevich Anan'yev, Indetel'stvo, 4,000 copies,
328 pages, UDC 539.1]

(

Coureurs
Annotation
Preface 2
Introduction. Development of Concepts of the Optical Cavity as a Device
for Producing narrowly Directional Emission 5
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL INPORHAIION 12

5 1.1. Laws of Propagation of Light Beans and Angular Divergence of

5 1.2.

5 1.3.

5 1.4.

Radiation

12

The Huygens-Fresnel Principle (12). Distribution in the Far
Zone (14). The Ideal Emitter (26). Arbitrary Monochromatic

Emitter (I9). Nonmonochromatic Emitter (25).
Measurement of Divergence (26).
Optical Cavities and Classification of Them.

Some Conclusions.
28

Initial Information. A Little History (28). Passage of Light Beams

Through Optical Systems. The Beam Matrix (30).

Classification of

Resonators by the Properties of Their Beam Matrices (35). Candi-

tions of Resonator Equivalence (40).

Modes of an Empty Ideal Resonator and Their Use for Describing the

Laser Situation

#2

Classification of Natural Oscillations (62). Integral Equation and
Natural Oscillations of an Arbitrary Empty Resonator (k6). Resonator
With Active Layer (68). Suitability of the Standard hodel of an Open

Optical Cavity for Describing Real Lasers (50).

Efficiency of Excitation Energy Conversion in Laser Resonators 52
Efficiency of Energy Conversion in an Element of Values of the Medium
(53). Accounting for Nonuniformity of the Distribution of Laser
Radiation Lengthwiae of the Cavity (56). General Excitation Energy

and Stimulated Emission Balance (58). The Meaning and Possibilities

of Applying the Derived Relations (61).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[1 - USSR - L P000]
CHAPTER
5 2.1.

6 2.2.

52.3.

52.4.

5 2.5.

9 2.6.

CHAPTER
5 3.1.
‘ 3.2.

‘ 3.3.

i 3.4.

FOI.OI1WCLAL|1§E13NLV

2. RADIATION nivmwcs or LASERS um! srAsLs AND PLAT curries 64
Modes of Oscillations of Empty Stable Resonators 64
Eigenfunctions and Frequencies of a Stable Resonator with Infinite
Mirrors (64). Spatial Structure of Natural Oscillations (67).

Stable Resonators with Mirrors of Finite Dimensions (71)

Edge Diff’sction and Modes of Oscillations of an Empty Plat Optical
Cavity 7!.
Auxiliary Diffraction Problem (74). Reflection From the Open Edge of

a Waveguide. Natural Oscillations of s Resonator Made up of Strip or
Rectangular Mirrors (78). l"lat Cavity Made of Circular Mirrors (82).
Polarization of Radiation of Natural Modes (85). '

Some Experimental Research Results 87
Early Observations of Stimulated Emission of Solid-State Lasers (88).
Divergence of Radiation of Solid-State Lasers (90).

Multimode Lasing in Ideal Optical Cavities 92
Mechanism of Multimode Lasing (92). Procedure and Some Results of
Calculations of the Multimode Easing Regine (96). Competition of
Transverse Modes in Lasers with Plat Cavities (99). Deficiencies of

the Model and the Possibilities of Improving It. (101).

Influence of Resonator Deformations on Field Configuration of

Individual Modes 103
Some General Remarks. Perturbation Theory (103). Flat Cavities

with Minor Aberrations (105). Plat Cavities with Aberrations of
Significant Magnitude (109). .

Methods of Angle Selection of Emission 112
Attempts to Solve the Problem of Divergence on the Basis of

Resonators with Small Diffraction Losses (112). Lasers with Plat
Cavities and Angle Selectors (115). Angle Selection of Emission of
Lasers with Plat Cavities by Reducing the Number of Fresnel Zones

(119). Plat Cavities of Large Effective Length (121). Multistage
Lasers (124).

3. ELEMENTS OF THE THEORY OF UNSTABLE RESONAIORS 127
Some Initial Information 127
Brief Historical Survey (127). Elementary Examination of the Ideal
Unstable Resonator (128). Properties of Convergent Waves (133).
Resonators with Slightly Inhomogeneous Medium 137
Simplest Method of Accounting for Inhomogeneities of the Medium

(137). Aberrational Coefficients (139). Some Comments on the
Possibilities of the Geometric Optics Approximation (142).

Edge Effects and Spectrum of natural Oscillations 145
Equivalence of Unstable Resonators and Interrelation of the Solutions

for Different Types (145). Unstable Cavities with Completely

"Smoothed" Edge (147). Unstable Resonators with Sharp Edge (150).
Specifics of Edge Effects Under Real Conditions (154).

Unstable Resonators with Central Coupling Aperture 160
Initial Premises. Oscillations of a Two-Dimensional Resonator that

Have a Caustic (160). Two-Dimensional Resonator with Central Aperture
(163). Three—Dimension Resonator with Coupling Aperture. Discussion

of Results (166).

Ilﬂl(lﬂWC1Al.USI(IVLY
‘ 3.5.

I 3.6.

CHAPTER
5 4.1.

i b.2.

S 6.3.

CHAPTER

5 5.1.

5 5.2.

5 5.3.

tsIICUJWCLAL.USE(MﬁLY

Some Problems of Multiple-Mirror and Prism Unstable Resonators 170
Problem of Monodirectional basing Mode (170). Stabilizing the

Direction of Radiation in Prism Resonators (175).

Unstable Resonators with Field Reversal 179
Operation of Cross Section Reversal and Polarization Characteristics

of Radiation (179). Aberration Characteristics of Unstable

Resonators with Field Reversal (182). Resonators with Compact Output
Aperture (185).

a. APPLICATIONS OF UMSTABLB RESONATORS 189
Unstable Resonators in Pulsed Free-Running Lasers 189
Selection of the Type and Parameters of the Resonator (189).

Results of Experiments with Neodymium Class Lasers (195).

Gas Pulsed Lasers with Unstable Resonators. Problem of Steadying
Oscillations (201).

Unstable Resonators in Continuous Lasers 206
Survey of Experimental Hork (206). Methods of Calculating the
Efficiency of Flow Lasers (206). Simplest Model of a Gas Dynamic

Laser Medium (210). Problem of Forming Uniform Field Distribution

Over the Cavity of s Plow-Through Laser (215).

Unsteady Resonators in Leavers with Controlled Spectral-Temporal
Emission Characteristics 218
Simplest Types of Lasers with Control Elements (218). Lasers with
Three-Mirror Optical Cavity (221). External Signal-Controlled

Lasers (224). Multipase Amplifiers (226).

5. OPTICAL INHOMOGENBITY OF ACTIVE MEDIA AND METHODS OF

CORRECTING "AME PROHTS 230
Thermal Deformations of Solid-State Laser Cavities 231
Origin and Magnitude of Thermal Aberrations in the Case of Circular
Active Rods (231). Consequences of Aberrations and Attenpts to
Correct Them (235). Various Methods of Reducing Cavity Deformations
(238). Lasers Using Active Elements with Elongated Rectangular
Cross Section (2&1).
Phase Correction of Wave Fronts. Dynamic Holography and Stimulated
Scattering 245
Optical-Mechanical Correction Systems (265). Holographic Correction
Principles (267). Conditions of Realizing the Process of Holographic
"Transfer" and its Energy Efficiency. "Transfer" on Thermal Gratings
(250). Relation of the Idea of Dynamic Holography to the Phenomena
of Stimulated Scattering. Lasers Based on Various Forms of Stimulated
Scattering (255).
Method of Have Front Reversal 258
The Idea and Theoretical Possibilities of the Method (258).
"Reversal" in Stimulated Backscattering (261). "Reversal" by Methods
of Classical Optics and Holography (26A). "Reversal" in Parametric
Amplification of Light (267).

BIBLIOGRAPHY 269

I‘ll(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USllﬂﬂlY
MWJJSEONLY

UDC 539.1
OPTICAL CAVITIBS AND THE PROBLEM 0? 0113163803 0? LASER EMISSION

Moscow OPTICHESKIYE RBZONATORY I PROM UASKBODMSTI WOO IZLUCHBIIYA in
Russian 1979 (signed to press 29 Oct 79) pp 2-328

[Book by Yuriy Alekseyevich Ansn'yev, Isdstel'stvo. 6000 copies, 328 pages]

[Text] The book gives the hsaics of the theory of optical cavities, and mninee
the factors that determine divergence of laser emission. Hejor emphssis is given
to the problem of producing nsrrovly directed radiation; various methods are
outlined for reducing angular divergence. The properties of lasers with so-cslled
unsteble optical cavities are considered in greatest detail. Methods of calcu-
lating end optimizing them ere outlined, end the psrticulare of designs “wed in

e variety of lsser devices are discussed. The book also gives some informetion on
fectors giving rise to opticel inhomogeneities in en sctive medius. the neture of

Ruth inhomogeneities, end methods by which their influence cen be reduced. Figures:
112, tsbles 3. references 343.

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
MOWUSEONLY

PREFACE

The work of Nobel Prize winners N. c. hasov. A. H. Prokhorov and c. Towndsﬂmited
States) has led to the creation of coherent light generators -- lasers. Operating
lasers appeared in 1960. Anong the astonishing characteristics that attracted
general attention, first of all it is necessary to nention divergence of the
emission — the degree of directionality of a coherent light bean is theoretically
lisited only by diffraction at the exit aperture of the laser, and easy people have
held the opinion that there is no obstacle to achieving this maxim:- directionality.
The literature of that tine was full of optinistic predictions with respect to the
possibilities for using laaers in super-long comnication lines (including space).
for long-distance power transmission, and so on. All of these predictions were. as
a rule, based on ainple nanipulations with the known formula for the diffraction
linit of divergence of enission do - 1.2 All), where A is the anission wavelength
and D is the coherent light bean dianster. Actually. for ruby lasers (A - 0.696
nicron) which appeared first, the value of d is 10-10”5 radian or 8 angular seconds
for an easily attainable crystal diameter! ever. the first observations of
stinulatad enission of such lasers, the active nedia of which were 6 to 10 - in
die-eter, deeonstrated that the angular divergence of their emission was appreciably
greater than expected (usually by one or two orders).

in the required direction turned out to be far free a sinple nutter. Countless
experiments. the develop-ant of the theory of real resonators with active medium
which, to a great extent. is based on the theory of ideal enpty resonators developed
in 1961-1966. and so on were required for this purpose. All of this spilled into
the overall area of quantum electronics coatining a great variety of netth of
controlling the spatial characteristics of laser emission. Many of these nethods
are of great theoretical interest; as for practical inportance of work ained at de-
creasing the angular divergence of emission. it can hardly be over-estintod.
Therefore it is no surprise that an enornous number of publications are devoted to
the problas of divergence. However. up to the present tine there has been no serious
effort to discuss the fundamental concepts of the given problen as a whole. In all
of the books on laser theory and laser engineering. in the best case the results of
the theory of ideal resonators with optically homogeneous active nadiun (or enpty
resonators) are presented. The several surveys which have investigated individual
spacial prohlsan have not filled the gap. The present book would appear to be
useful in this respect, and to what degree it has served this purpose can he beat

determined by its readers. whose suggestions will be appreciated and receive
inediate attention.

“WWW!”
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

We have presented only the most general infatuation from the theory of empty ideal
resonators which is needed to understand the following material. A somewhat more
detailed study has been made of the problem of the divergence of emission Qt
resonators with small diffraction losses. primarily in the most Videspteld resonator
with flat mirrors. The discussion of this problem does not claim to be especially
complete: a laser with a flat cavity is in essence a highly complicated oscilla-
tory system with an enormous number of resonance frequencies subjected to the power-
ful influence of the moat minute disturbance. Therefore the problem of the emission
divergence of lasers with flat cavities. which is closely related to a still more
complicated and general problem of their kinetics is truly inexhaustible. The book
contains only information which suffices to explain the general situation and

which is needed to read specialized literature.

Lasers with so-called unstable resonators are then discussed. The building of these
lasers is the result of an area of research, representatives of which have tried not
so much to provide an exhaustive description of systems with an enormous number of

degrees of freedom as to limit the number of degrees of freedom. Although
not everyone has become accustomed to lasers with unstable resonators, they are. in

essence. much simpler than traditional lasers with flat cavities. They do not have
such an abundance of Q-similsr modes and sensitivity to the most minute disturbances.

Therefore the theory of lasers with unstable resonators has already advanced farther
than the theory of other types of lasers that appeared much earlier. The results of

this theory will be discussed in considerable detail: attention has also been given
to the most important experimental papers.

In conclusion, there is a brief study of the problem of optical inhomogeneity of
active media, and some efforts to solve this problem are discussed.

The author is deeply indebted to N. A. Sventsitskaya, V. Ye. Sheretovitov, 0. A.
Shorokhov, N. I. Grishmanov. V. P. Kalinin. L. V. Koval‘chuk and other of his
colleagues for their participation in joint work with the author, the discussion of
the results of which constitutes a significant part of this monograph,and for their
assistance in preparing the manuscript for publication. There were useful discus-
sions of individual topics with V. V. Lyubimov, M. S. Soskin. The author is also
indebted to P. V. Zarubin and Ye. N. Suhharev, whose suggestions led to many
editorial corrections.

The author found the constant attention and active support of Rem Viktorovich
Khokhlov in the writing of this monograph especially meaningful. The monograph is
dedicated to the memory of Rem Viktorovich Khokhlov.

Leningrad, August 1977 Yu. Anan‘yev

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”OFFICIALISEONLY

INTRODUCTION

Developnent of Concepts of the Optical Cavity as a device for Producing Narrowly
Directional Emission

The first papers on the feasibility of making resonators in the optical band for
stimulated emission of coherent radiation were published by Prokhorov, and also
by Shawlou and Townes in 1958. These papers to a great extent predetermined the
course of research that led to the developnent of lasers.

Asve know, laser action is based on the capacity of certain media under certain
conditions to amplify luminous radiation passing through then. Therefore there is
no doubt that a major role is played by the properties of the active medium itself
and the method of stimulating it; however, the properties of the resonant cavity in
which this medium is located also have an enormous influence on many characteristics
of stimulated emission. Taking a central place snong such characteristics is the
angular divergence of emission. Here the resonator plays a truly decisive role:
without a resonator, the active nediua in itself as a rule is capable of enlifying

the radiation passing through it to equal advantage no matter what the direction
of propagation.

Optical oscillators made their appearance much later than rf and microwave oscilla-
tors. Therefore the concepta and terminology borrowed from these related fields
are extensively used in describing optical oscillators. and we will continue this
practice.

To convert an oscillator to an mlifier, it is necessary,in the language of elec-
tronics, to close the output of the anplifisr to its input, to set up a feedback
circuit (Figure 1, a). The essence of the feedback circuit is that part of the
amplified radiation goes back into the systsn, is amplified again and so on, in
this way naintaining a continuous signal — oscillation. Oscillators in the opti-
cal bsnd amplify a light been rather than an electric signal. In this connection,
the feedback circuit must nest new require-ants: after transmission through the
feedback circuit the beam nustretsin its original direction of propagation and
structure. The simplest analog of Figure l, a that meets these requirements is
the optical resonance shown in Figure 3., b. Actually, such resonators, called

' ring cavities, have found some application. However, the first resonator in optics
was a canventional Fahry-Perot interferometer made up of two flat nirrors (Figure
l, c). One mirror is partly transparent, and the stimulated snission is coupled
out through it. The principal difference of this resonator free the ring cavity
is that the feedback circuit passes through the same active medium, and the emission
is repeatedly amplified.

FOIOFI'IGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Useful

was! pm
I .. .

L...

AI-Ik

 

°’ -
medium

 

Figure l. Diagrams of oscillators: a) oscillator

in electronics; b) oscillator in optics; c) has:
with flat optical cavity.

The Pabry-Perot interferometer has been such a successful resonator system that

even today it is the most widely used type of laser cavity. Such popularity is

due not only to extreme simplicity, but also to the capability of attaining high
energy characteristics of output emission (the reasons for this will be taken up

in section 1.6). However, the situation with regard to divergence of emission
stimulated in flat-mirror cavities use trivial. The origin of comparatively '
large divergence is explained to a great extent by theoretical analysis of the
properties of the flat optical cavity, which can be done by methods developed pre-
viously for resonant cavities in the microwave band. Such analysis shows that
transmission through the feedback circuit in a flat cavity reproduces not just any
been directed along the axis and nearly parallel with it. but only a beam with
strictly defined distribution of the mlitude :.nd phase of the wave front. This
beam is called the fundamental wave form (node) of the cavity. What is more remark-
able however, is that there are also beams (modes) that are reproduced with somewhat
greater attenuation in which emission propagates at sasll but nonetheless noticeable
angles to the axis of the cavity. These beams form a discrete set; the angle of
inclination to the axis for nodes that are neighbors in classification differs by
approximately half the diffraction angle.

Thus, a flat cavity in some sense (and. of course, within certain limits) is indif-
ferent to the direction of eniasion propagating through it. The roots of such
indifference are in the fact that upon passage through the feedback circuit the
oblique beams. like the axial beam, retain their original directions of propagation;
they are prevented from "walking off" by edge diffraction. The mechanism of such
diffraction will be taken up in section 2.2.

Because of differences in attenuation, the different off-axis nodes have somewhat
different thresholds of excitation; however, because of nonlinearity of the

medium, these modes can be present simultaneously in the stimulated emission (Chap-
ter 2), which should lead to a large angular divergence of the beam. For this
reason, flat cavities with large aperture cannot give small beam divergence even
when the mediun is highly homogeneous.

FORWUSBONLY
Such is the situation in the idealized'case of an optically homogeneous medium. An
even greater disadvantage of the flat cavity from the standpoint of the direction-
ality of radiation is the extremely sharp dependence of the field distribution in
the cavity on slight distortions of shape (deformation). This can be explained by
the simple example of a misaligned cavity. Nonparsllelism of the mirrors is equi-
vslent to insertion of an optical wedge is the feedback circuit that changes the
bean direction by an angle 6 that is twice the angle of misalignment. If we send a
parallel beam into such a cavity. it will be turned through an angle 6 after the
first pass, through 26 after the second and so on. Its displacement in the trans-
verse direction will increase even faster, and a considerable part of the radiation
will begin to leave the system, missing the mirrors. After a certain number of
passes (a fairly large number for small 6). the beam shape is distorted so much that
it becomes impossible to analyse the process of further propagation without consi-
derstion of diffraction effects. Therefore it is no simple matter to represent the
steady—state field distribution in graphic fora. In essence this distribution is
the result of equilibrium between processes of diffraction and beam rotation. we
emphasize that this equilibrium is reached after a process of accumulation of aber-
rations over a number of passes. It is also noteworthy. as shown by analysis (sec-
tion 2.5), that there is a rapid rise in the number of passes over which aberrations
accumulate with an increase in the cross sectional dimensions of the optical cavity.
Therefore flat cavities with mirrors of large dimensions are particularly sensitive
to slight aberrations.

The situation is similar, but even more complicated in the case of irregular deforn
nations of the cavity. In general, the sources of such deformations are extremely
varied: they include errors of manufacture and alignment of mirrors. initial opti-
cal inhomogeneity of the active medium, inhomogeneity induced during pumping due to
nonuniform excitation and heating of the medium, scattering of light by microscopic
inclusions, mechanical vibrations of the active element, turbulence of gas flow.
and the list could be extended. It is no wonder that a great many papers have
dealt with the problem of a nonideal flat resonator, most of them published in 1965-
1969. The results of research dealing with the moat coupon principles of behavior
of lasers with nonideal optical cavities will be given in section 2.5. Of course,
none of this research could eliminate the fundamental flaws of the flat optical
cavity, but it has been very useful for an understanding of the processes that take
place in a real cavity.

In these same years. as much research was done to find some neu solution of the laser
beam divergence problem. Two areas of such research can be distinguished.

Representatives of one of these areas tried without giving up the flat cavity to
put into the feedback circuit so—cslled angle selectors: filters that transmit
radiation only in a narrow range of angles. Such filters can be made by different
methods: on the basis of total internal reflection, by additional Psbry-Perot
stalons, by a combination of lenses and irises. All these methods were tried;
however, subsequently because of considerable complications and a number of funda-
mental difficulties that will be taken up in section 2.6. they found only a few
special applications.

Proponents of the other area of research have attempted to solve the problem of

divergence (or at least singlermode lasing) by altering the shape of the mirrors

rather than by complications in the design of the optical cavity. In particular,
there has been a thoroughinvestigetion of lasers with so-called stable resonators,

6
FOR‘OFIICIAI.USIICﬂVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(HVLY

in which one or both mirrors are slightly curved (the equivalent of placement of a
weak positive lens in the feedback circuit). Obviously in such a system a steady-
stste beam with approximately uniformly distributed amplitude and phase and a front
close to planar should have such a small cross section that the focusing effect of
the mirrors is compensated by the defocusing of the beam due to diffraction. This
is the source of the main disadvantage of stable resonators: they are capable of
single-mode lasing only with very small volumes of the active medium. And it is

in lasers with small volumes of the working medium that stable resonators are still
being used; an example is the ordinary heliumrneon laser. If the volume of the
medium is large, wide beams are produced in stable resonators with a complicated
been structure corresponding to an angular divergence larger than in flat cavities
under the same conditions (sections 2.3 and 2.5).

Some other forms of optical cavities with small diffraction losses have also been
investigated (section 2.6). but these were also failures.

This situation led to the general opinion that the problem of directionality of
radiation could not be solved by improving the optical cavity, and that the only
possible way was to make multistage systems of a master laser and amplifiers (since
amplifiers are not troubled with the effect of multiple accumulation of aberrations,
like the flat cavity). A way out of this dilemma was suggested by Siegman's re-
search with a simplified analysis of an "unstable resonator (in the accepted clas-
aification; section 1.2), which is formed by two convex mirrors. This analysis
showed that in such a resonator, just as in the ideal flat optical cavity, there is
a solution in the geometric approximation, only diverging rather than parallel beams
propagate in both directions along the cavity, and part of the radiation passes

the mirrors (section 3.1). At first Siegman‘s paper did not stir up any particular
interest: some researchers were already working with unstable resonators, and were
getting only undesirable side effects rather than encouraging results (see the
beginning of section 3.1). And Siegman himself even switched his attention to the
unusual features of edge effects in unstable resonators, devoting some years to the
study of this problem. which is interesting, but as we will show below is far from
decisive. From the standpoint of directionality of radiation, the most interesting
peculiarities of unstable resonators were discovered any with analysis of the in-
fluence of aberrations on steady-state field distribution. It was as a result of
such an analysis that it became clear that the resonator considered by Siegmsn was
only the first of an extensive class of cavities in which feedback conforns to a
totally new algorithm that has a number of fundamental advantages.

 

Figure 2. Diagram of a laser
with unstable resonator.

7
FOR OITHCJAJ.USE(NVLY
[OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The essence of this new algorithm is clarified by Figure 2. In the flat cavity,
part of the radiation from the entire cross section of the output been Isa introduced
into the feedback loop (see Eigure l, b). In the unstable resonator as a rule all
the radiation is fed back, but only from pert of the cross section. For reproduci-
bility of the process, the feedback circuit obviously has to be made in such a way
that the bean is widened. In Figure 2, the wave front is planar and the beam is
expanded by a telescopic systen, but quite different versions are possible. In
particular, the dimensions of the cross section of a parallel beam are also altered
when it is reflected iron a diffraction grating, and when it passes obliqua‘y
through the interfaces of media with different indices of refraction. Th... lenses
and spherical sirrors are not at all obligatory equipnent for an unstable resonator.

ﬂow let us examine what advantages could be realized by what would seem to be such
a minor change in the algorithm. As in the case of a flat cavity, let an optical

A 7:4 ’54
art.- ‘H"
'. T E '
73 '
m #4 I 5/“! ”‘4
ceF-h +0—9- *ﬁ'
1, = 7E ., a
b) I _ .
m .34 {a 7/“

err

s NglE—Fta

Figure 3. Accumulation of wave aberrations in
an unstable resonator when an optical wedge is
inserted.

wedge be inserted within the system, leading to rotaton of the bean, and let this
rotation correspond to a magnitude of wave aberrations A (Figure 3.a). Part of the
bean goes to the feedback loop; in the case shows in the figure. its transverse
dimension is half the size of the entire bean. On this part of the cross section,
the magnitude of the wave aberrations in of course equal to 1/2 A. when the cross
section of the beam is stretched out by the methods enumerated above, the nagnitude
of the wave aberrations does not change; therefore by the beginning of the next
cycle a beam arrives at the input of the systa with aberration of 1/2 A, rather
than A as in the case of a flat cavity. Upon passage through the systan, another A
is added (see Figure 3,b) and by the end of the second cycle the magnitude of the
wave aberrations becomes 3/2 A. By the beginning of the third cycle it is 3/4 A,
by the end -- 7/4 A (Figure 3,c) and so on. It can be seen that this quantity at
the limit approaches 2A. Thus, the wave aberrations in the steady state are found
to be only twice the level in a single pass. In this situation, shifting of the
bean in the transverse direction does not generally play any particular part: it

8
FOR OI-TICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

leads only to slight redistribution of the fractions of the bean passing to differ-
ent sides of the output mirror, but the feedback. loop remains completely filled.

In the case of arbitrarily distributed sources of aberrations, of course there are
changes in the quantitative factors, but the qualitative patterns remain the same:
the accumulation of wave aberrations of the beam takes place over tin calculated
masher of passes (see section 3. 2). As the fraction of the beam cross section
directed into the feedback loop decreases, this number approaches unity, a quantity
typical of singlev-stage amplifiers.

he can also conclude from the example given in Figure 3 that in the unstable reso—
nator there is only one form of wave front that is retained after the beam passes
through the feedback loop. Actually the direction of the light been admitted to

the optical cavity rapidly approaches the unique equilibrium direction (which in

the case of Figure 3 corresponds to steady-state wave aberrations 2A). Thus in con-
traat to the flat optical cavity, the unstable resonator displays rigorous selectiv-
ity with respect to the direction of emission; it would seem that here the effects
of multimode lasing should have no influence on the magnitude of angular divergence.

These encouraging deliberations concerning the properties of unstable resonators,
implied by the simplest geometric approximation, are confirmed as well by more
thorough analysis in the diffraction approximation (section 3.3). Moreover, de-
tailed acquaintance with the properties of unstable resonators allows us to formu—
late the following statement: if the operation of a laser in which a large volume
of comparatively homogeneous active medium has been used is strongly influenced by
diffraction, this means that errors have been made in its creation. At first
glance this statement seems to be paradoxical: in all previously used optical cavi—
ties the beam structure has been determined in the final analysis by diffraction.
However, this statement has a fire logical basis. The final goal is to produce a
laser with minimum angular beam divergence; this goal is fully attainable in a
homogeneous medium. Beans with minimua divergence are those for which the wave
front is flat or spherical; it is well known that the propagation of such beams to
short distances is beautifully described by the geometric approximtion, without
resorting to the concept of diffraction.

This covers the conceptual aspect, and we turn now to practice.

The scheme with two convex mirrors considered in Siegman's first paper was never
used in that form, remaining a favorite subject of research for theoreticians in
view of its symetry. But then, a number of specialised schemes enabling solu-
tion of some problem in laser technology by much simpler means than before became
popular. '

Among these problems, of course, is the very problem of constructing simple laser
emitters with high efficiency and low angular divergence of radiation. In most
cases of practical importance. the so-called telescopic cavity (section 6.1) is
suitable for solving this problem, being an say-atric confocal system mde up of a
convex and a concave mirror. In this system the path of the rays differs from that
of Figure 2 only in the spatial congruence of two oppositely directed beams, that
is, in L 3 same way that the scheme of Figure l,c differs from that of Figure l,b.
Also of interest is the ring version of the telescopic cavity, wherein conditions
are readily brought about such that the radiation flux propagating along the ring

FOIOWICIALIBEONLY
FOB‘DFHKJAI.USE(NVLY

to one side, without the use of nonreciprocal devices, should be many times greater
than the flux following in the reverse direction (section 3.5).

There are a number of new possibilities associated with the idea of utilizing the
particular role that is associated with the paraxial region in the unstable reso~
nator. This idea is as follows. If we trace the path of the rays in an unstable
resonator over several cycles, we can see that radiation “spreads out" over the en-
tire cross section from a small area that is contiguous with the line that is the
axis of the resonator. By introducing emission into the region with predetermined
temporal and spectral characteristics, we can obviously accomplish effective control
of the radiation of the entire laser. when the "seed" radiation is taken from an
external source and coupled in through an aperture in the mirror on the axis of the
optical cavity, our device becomes simply a multipass amplifier with very high-gain
(section 4.3). As the emission intensifies, the cross section of the beam expands,
which facilitates attainment of the limiting possible energy characteristics. Con-
trol of radiation properties on the basis of this principle can also be realised by
making single lasers that have the valuable property that the cross sections of the
control elements that are used in them (shutters, spectral selectors) are many times
less than the cross sections of the output apertures.

Some special problems can be successfully solved by a slight modification of the
feedback algorithm. As an example, we can cite the problem of stabilizing the
direction of radiation; this problem arises in the widely encountered case where
there is an optical wedge inside the resonator with a size that changes during.
the lasing pulse (that is,because of mechanical vibrations of the active element).
To strongly attenuate the influence of the wedge, it is sufficient to construct a
feedback loop such that the beam is reversed in addition to the expansion of the
cross section. If this change is made in the version shown in Figure 3, by the
beginning of the second cycle the magnitude of wave aberrations is equal to -0.5A,
by the end of the cycle it is —0.5A + A; by the beginning of the third cycle it is
'0.25A, and by the end it is +0.7SA and so on. In the final analysis a front is set
up at the output of the system with aberration of 0.67A, that is, one-third of the
value in the case of Figure 3. Let us note that both figure 3 and the example now
being considered are essentially different types of telescopic ring cavities. In
the case of non-ring systens where the beam in following the feedback loop passes
through the same wedge, designs can be developed with even better stability of the
direction of the output beam (section 3.5).

Finally, we must not fail to mention problems that arise with the appearance of a
number of new types of lasers. For example in the so-cslled fast-flow lasers the
active medium passes through the optical cavity in the transverse direction. often
with excitation beforehand rather than in the cavity. This leads to radiation
field distribution patterns that are totally different from those of previously
existing lasers; in particular. when flat mirrors are used, lasing can be localized

in a narrow zone close to the edge of the cavity where the active medi1m enters.
The densitv of the stimulated emission there is naturally extremely high. A com-

pletelyanalogousaituation occurs in the transversely pumped Raman lasers. Diffi-
culties of this kind are easily overcome by using unstable resonators: a kind of
self-balanced mode arises. and the radiation flux is distributed more or less
uniformly over the cross section of the cavity (section 4.2).

All these possibilities were quite quickly realized in specific devices (see Chapter
4). Thus within only a few years after the publication of the first report on
experimental observation of angle selection in an unstable resonator it became

10
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

completely clear that this use the optical cavity that is optimm for the most
diverse forms of lasers with narrouebeam emission.

All the aspects mentioned above, as well as some other facets of the problem of
divergence will be dealt with more rigorously and consistently later. Before we go
into this, let us note one interesting feature of the history of this problem.
We have just spoken of the extent to which solution of the problem of divergence is
obstructed by appreciable inhomogeneities of the active medium. The results of
considerable research in the early sixties (section 2.3) shoved that difficulties
also pile up rapidly with increasing diameters of the lasing beams: the diffraction
limit of divergence is difficult to attain only in the case where the diameter of
the active element is large, and the limit is correspondingly small. If bean diame-
ter is reduced (that is, by irising the cavity) to seize 011‘ the order of 1 III or
smaller, the beam divergence as a rule ison the diffracuon level Well when no Wed-81

steps are taken.

The first gas lasers, typified by the prev-eminent helium-neon laser, operated on an
active medium confined in a rather slender discharge tube, and produced a light
beam of small diameter. The mixture itself was quite rarefied, and a negligible
amount of power (by present—day standards of laser technology) was expended on
excitation; therefore the active mediua was nearly ideally homogeneous. Due to
this confluence of circumstances, the developers of gas lasers did not come up
against the problem of divergence in earnest for many years. It might seem to the
superficial observer that this problem is specific in general to solid-state lasers,
and arose primarily because of the imperfectness of solid active media. However,
in recent years the intense development of gas Laser physics has led to new types
of lasers such as chemical, gasdynamic and other types, with power many orders of
uagnitude greater than that of the familiar helium-neon lasers. The rise in radia-
tion power is being achieved by an increase in the pressure of the working medium,
the dimensions of the space that it occupies, and specific energy inputs on excita-
tion. All this entails considerable optical inhomogeneities of the medium. Thus,
the problem of beam divergence has turned out to be a problem of all lasers with
high emission power, not just solid-state lasers. The developers of high-power
gas lasers are now coming up against just about the same difficulties as were
previously encountered by the developers of the solid-state laser, and they are
using just about the same methods of solving them. For this reason, research in the
field of gas lasers has not added much nev information on netth of angle selection.
Most of the research that has played a large part in solution of the problem of
divergence. and that will be used in this book, has been on solidostate lasers.

1].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOITOFIICLAL Uiﬂitﬂﬂly

CHAPTER 1. GENERAL INFORMATION
5 1.1. Laws of Propagation of Light Beams and Angular Divergence of Radiation

Huygens-Fresnel Principle. He shall use the scalar theory of diffraction to study
the propagation laws of laser-generated coherent light beams. The essence of this
approximation consists in the fact that the different transverse conponents of an
electric or magnetic field are considered to be independent of each other, and
they are considered separately.

The conditions of applicability of the scalar theory of diffraction are discussed

in detail in [6]. In the previously investigated situations where the transverse
dimensions of light beams and the paths traveled by them are many tines (frequently

even several orders) greater than the wavelength, these conditions are automatically
satisfied.

The most important expression of scalar diffraction theory. which is one of the
possible mathematical formulations of the Huygens-Fresnel principle. follows:

um. y.) -§1H‘%ﬂn +...(., mama. woman. (1)

Here. x1. y1. x2, y2 are the transverse coordinates of points in the source plane

and the observation plane parallel to it (Figure 1.1). r 2 is the radius vector
joining these points, n is the common normal to the planga. k ' 2ﬂll; finally. the
function of the transverse coordinates u(x, y) which varies slightly at distances
of ~l is the complex field amplitude.

Expression (1) allows calculation of the field u(x2, yz) in the second plane by the
given field distribution in the first plane u(x1. y ); the nedium is considered to

be homogeneous. the source is considered to be str tly monochromatic with time-
dependence of the type exp(-iut) such that u(x. y, t) I u(x, y)exp(-iut). and the
actual value of the field intensity is equal to ne[u(x, y)exp(-imt)]. Let us note
that the conversion from the field intensity u(x. y, t) to the emissign intensity
I(x, y) will be made hereafter by the formula I(x, y) - <Iu(x, y, t)I >, where the
angular brackets denote aversg over an infinite time interval. For a monochro-
matic source I(x, y) - Iu(x, y)[ .

The transverse dimensions of the region in which the field is nonzero will almost

always be considered limited and not too large. In cases where an opaque screen
with a hole in it is located in the first plane, and the field sources themselves

12

FOR1OIIIC1A1.USEINNLN
POI man. I“ ONLY

 

Figure 1.1. Huygens-Fresnel principle.

are located to the left of this screen, we shall adhere to Kirchhoff 's principle.

According to Kirchhoff's principle, when calculating the field in the second plane.
integration in (1) must be performed only over the area of the hole. It is aswmed

that the presence of the screen has no influence on the field distribution in the Hole
vicinity (which is valid when the hole dimensions are significantly greater than

A).

As a rule. in the theory of optical resonators it is necessary to consider so-called
paraxial beams, the angles of inclination of which to the system axis are small.
This allows replacement of cos (n. r12) in expression (1) by one.

Then. in the overwhelming majority of cases of practical importance. it is possible
to replace the exact value of r,,..,/,I +(:._;l)i+(y,_ I"); in the exponent by the

approximate value m- 1+ (za—zIPIZx-l- (”1- y.)’/23. and it is possible to replace
r12 in the denominator of the expression under the integral sign simply by the

spacing between the planes 2. Thus.

I: (1.. y.) = ##ﬁuqu +' WEN] u(z.. yawn. (2)

Formula (2) is usually called the Fresnel approximation. A detailed investigation
of its limits of applicability appears in many optics handbooks (see. for example,
[7]). we shall discuss only one important item here.

Although the asausption of limited transverse dimensions of the source was used in

deriving (2), formulas of this type will sometimes be used hereafter for infinite
integration limits. In order to understand how these formulas apply in this case.

let us use (2) to derive the propagation laws of an infinite plane wave. Let this
wave be directed along the z-axis so that the plane xy is its equiphasal surface:
u(x1, yl) - C - const. Then (2) acquires the form

MOMMUSEONLY
FOI10FFﬂﬂM1.USE(NHLY

Maw.) =°—°§‘#‘1_j:iup{tk[(’—‘;ﬂ'+" j” '1 (than.

The inproper interval in the form in which it appears in the right-hand side, does
not converge in general. Actually, we shall break down the integration surface into
so-called Fresnel zones. inside the first of which the phase of the expression under
the integral sign varies free 0 to u, and inside the second, from n to 2!, the
third. from n to 3!. and so on. As is easy to see. the Fresnel zone boundaries
fore a system of concentric circles with the center at the point 0 located opposite
the observation point (see Figure 1.1). Their radii rn are defined in the given -
case by the relations (kIZz)rn - an or rn - Inks. Representing our surface integral

in the for. of a sum 2 of all integrals over individual Fresnel zones and perform-
ing the integration (for which it is sore convenient to convert froe carteaian co-
ordinates to polar coordinates with the center at the point 0), in the final analy-
sis we obtain the following expression: 2 - (2i/n) (s1 - s2 - s4 + ...), where s1.

s2. a3, ... are areas of the corresponding Fresnel zones. Inasmuch as s1 I s2 I ...

- tie, the sum of this series does not approach a linit; hence. we have the corre-
sponding statement with respect to the initial integral.

In order to overcome this difficulty. it is sufficient to consider that formula (1).
which is sore exact than (2), contains a factor in its expression under the integral

sign which decreases slowly as the direction of the emission diverges from the
nornal to the source plane. Therefore in reality. in increasing order the terns

of the series lust decrease slowly, but regularly. In this case the sun of the
series approaches a defined limit which does not in practicedepend on the lawby which
the terms of the series decrease. and is equal to the half of the first of them
(see. for example, [6), 5 8, 2). Thus. 2 - islln. In the final analysis we obtain
the correct result: u(x2. ’2) - C exp(iks).

The presented arguments indicate that the operation of intermediate integration in
infinite limits is entirely regular. This operation is necessary. for example, if
the field in the plane of the source depends on only one of the cartesian coordi-
nates. Then integration over the other coordinate leads to the following analog
of formula (2) for the two-dimensional problem:

exp (in) , (8 " )'
u(r,) 1:: 717—1 spriI. 41.341411) 4’1- (2a)

Distribution in the Far Zone. Now let us proceed to the primary topic of this sec-
tion -- the problem ofanguler divergence of emission. Using (2), let us investigate
the field distribution at large distances from the source 2 such that the inequality

name)... (3,

is satisfied. Then it is possible to neglect the terns with xi and gi in the ex-

pression under the integral sign. Also taking the terns with xi, y out to the
cannon phase factor in front of the integral, we obtain

16

FIHICHHNC1A1.USE(NVLY
FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(MULY

u (1.. y.) _ esp a: (a + :sz + 13/21) x SSoxp [—-‘-:- (as, + yum] u (2,. y.) and“. (b)

Finally, if we characterize the position of the observation point not by its carte-
sian coordinates but by the slope angles ax - x2/s, oy - yzla and the distance of z

from the source, we obtain the especially descriptive formulas:
u (ax. any. x) - up [an (1 + «4/2 + a:/2)] x

' .
x mHopr-tk(a.=. +a.v.)lu(z.. yawn. (5)

1 (“av “V0 ‘) - 1“- ’(am GU)-
! ’ (6)
"' (am an) " I TI; ”9 l— l" (“:31 + “W1” u (’1: VI) dandy; 0

From these formulas it follows that the forms of emission distribution in the planes
at different distances sufficiently removed from the source coincide. except the
distribution scale increases proportionally to the distance r, and the density
varies, correspondingly,°°i[ﬂ. Here, according to (5), the angular amplitude distri-
bution is the Fourier transform of the amplitude distribution over the source cross
section calculated for spatial frequencies f‘ - a‘lk, fy - ay/A with accuracy to

the factor in front of the integral (for more details see [7]). The value of P(ax,
ay) introduced in (6) is none other than the radiation flux per unit solid angle.

In classical photometry, this value was usually called the luminous intensity in the
given direction; adhering to the presently more popular terminology, we shall
call the function P(a , a the angular distribution of the radiation intensity

(or the intensity disfrib tion in the far zone), and we shall keep the term axial
luminous intensity only for F(0, 0). we shall use the sane notation for the angu-
lar distribution of the emission and nonmonochromatic sources. although formulas
(5), (6) cease to be applicable here. ‘

The intensity distribution width in the far zone is also the angular divergence of
_the light beam. Host frequently, when discussing divergence. we mean the so—called
"divergence with respect to the 0.5 intensity level"; this is the width of the range
of angles in which the intensity is no less than 0.5 of the maximum value. However.
real emitters frequently have broad distribution “wings," for which a significant
part of the power is required. Therefore the magnitude of the divergence with re-
spect to the 0.5 intensity level. that is. in essence, the width of the central
distribution maximum, is not very indicative unless the fraction of the total power
contained in this maximum is known. The value usually called the divergence with
respect to the 0.5 energy level has greater practical significance; this is the

angular diameter of a circle in the far zone which encompasses half of the total
radiation flux.

before we proceed with analysis of specific examples, let us note the following

characteristic features of the angular distribution of a monochromatic emitter which
are a consequence of the Fourier transformation characteristics:

1) if the field distribution over the emitter aperture u(x . y ) can be represented
in the form u (s )u (y ). then the expression for the angular istrihution breaks

down into tha‘pr u t f two cofsctors
15

FOI‘OFFKJA1.U§E(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

P(¢~ as) - ’4‘) '4‘): (7)

2) if one of the emitter dimensions is increased by K times while maintaining the
form of the distribution over the aperture. the divergence of the emission in this

direction decreases by 1 times.

Now let us proceed with the investigation of some important cases which will be
encountered in the following sections.

The Ideal Emitter. we shall consider the emitter ideal if its complex‘field
amplitude is constant in the exit cross section (aperture). It is possible to
use only a hole in an opaque screen lighted by a point light source arranged so
that the beam in the vicinity of the hole will be sufficiently uniform with re-
spect to density and have plane wave front. as the optical system of such an emit-
ter. Therefore, previously we talked about diffraction at the corresponding hole
instead of an emitter of one form or another. blow the semitransparent end of a
laser rod frequently plays the role of the ideal emitter.

It is easy to see that the maximum angular intensity distribution for an ideal emit-
ter is always in the axial direction. An extraordinarily simple formula for the
axial luminous intensity followa directly from (6):

1-10. 0) - lHSwm I' #393

where uo is the field amplitude at the exit aperture of she edtter. S is the aper-
ture (hole) area. If we consider that the value of u s is none other than the
radiation flux through the entire exit aperture or the emitter power P, then

F(0, 0) -- PS/l‘. - (8)

Thus. for given power of the ideal emitter, its axial luminous intensity is directly
proportional to the area of the exit aperture, and it does not depend
on the shapr of tln- exit aperture.

For emitters hevin;-. identical power and aperture shape. but different transverse
dimensions. l:he proportionality 1-‘(0, 0) of the area is trivial, and it follows
directly from the already noted decrease in divergence with increase in transverse
dimensions. Although the form of the emitter does not count in (8). it is possible
to. use (8) to develop the critierion for estimating the form of the emitter begin-
ning with requirements imposed on the emitter when combining it with an external
emission shaping system [8]. The fact is that in all cases where it is necessary
to obtain maximum range (light ranging and detection, distance measurement, and so
on), the basic element of the shaping system is the telescope turned with its eye-
piece in the direction of the emitter (Figure 1.2). The telescope enlarges the
transverse dimensions of a narrowly directional light beam by K - f If times.
where f and f2 are the focal lengths of the objective and the eyep ec , K is the
power of the telescope; the form of the complex amplitude distribution of the field
in the first approximation is maintained. As was pointed out above, with this
procedure the divergence of the emission decreases by K times. The axial luminous

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI!0FF“3AI.USE(NHLY

intensity increases by K2 times, respectively; in the case of the ideal emitter.

even after the telescope, the luminous intensity continues to be defined by expres-
sion (8) (the emission wave front remains plane). except now S acquires significance ~
of the beam cross sectional area at the exit from the telescope.

 

Figure 1.2. Galileo telescope.

If the objective dimensions are given and the vignetting losses are not permitted,
the maximum axial luminous intensity is reached for the telescope power where the
light beam cross section is exactly “inscribed" in the objective cross section.

which is usually a circle. This situation is illustrated by Figure 1.3 where the
cross sections of two emitters (a, b) and light beams at the telescope exit (c. d)
are depicted on the same scale. Let us note that the forms of the emitters presented
in the figure correspond to the same laser with different resonator systems (see

§ 4.2). From the figure it is clear that the axial luminous intensity in such
devices is independent of the dimensions of :he ideal emitter and can be defined by
the formula

no, 0)=;"-Py, (9)

where So is the area of the telescopic objective, P is as before the emitter power
(after subtracting the losses in the telescope), Y is the filling factor which de-
pends only on the form of the emitter and is equal to the ratio of the emitter area
to the area of the described circle (this circle is none other than the required
cross section of the telescope eyepiece). When comparing ideal emitters of equal
power, preference must be given to the emitters having larger Y (in our case. the
emitter depicted in Figure 1.3,b). Sometimes for the sake of increasing axiel

a) b) c) d)

Figure 1.3. Influence of the forn of the ideal emitter on the axial
luminous intensity in the presence of an external shaping system: a).
b) ideal emitters of identical area but different form; c). d) light
beam cross sections at the exit of the shaping system; e) selection
of shaping systen for an emitter of irregular shape.

 

l7

FtIICNﬂﬂCIAI.lliE(HVLY
”WUSBONLY

luminous intensity, it is even possible to relinquish part of the radiation power

if Y can be increased significantly as a result. Thus. in the case illustrated in
Figure 1.3,e. it is expedient to use only that part of the bean cross section lo-

cated inside the dotted curve. -

Let us conclude the investigation of ideal emitters by presenting data on the emis-
sion divergence with the simplest aperture shapes -— rectangle, circle, ring. In
the case of e 2e x 2h rectangle, performing the integration in (6) within the corre-
sponding linits (-a j x _<_ a. -b _< y i b), we obtain

Pg: .n ) a [ain(ksa)

TaT Tri-J'IWJ‘

Thus. in accordance with (7), the expression for the intensity distribution in the
far zone breaks down into the product of two cofectors here. Each of then depends
on only one angular coordinate, and it is the distribution for a source in the for-
of an infinite strip (slot) of width h, equal to 2a or 2b, renpectiyely; the form
of this distribution is presented in Figure 1.6. This figure does not require

special comment; let us only note that the width of the maxi-um with respect to the
0.5 intensity level is -0.9 A/h.

For a circularaperture the distribution in the far zone is naturally axiswlsetric,
and it is described by the formula

where a - in; + a; is the angle between the observation direction and the axial

direction. a is the radius of a circle. J1 is the Bessel function. The form of the
distribution is presented in Figure 1.5 (curve I). The angular dimensions of the
far-field pattern, as always. are inversely proportional to the emitter dimensions.
The pattern itself consists of a central light spot surrounded by a aysten of con-
centric light circles (distribution peaks) with dark intervals (minima) separating
then. The intensity of the light circles diminishes rapidly with an increase in
radius (in order to reproduce two more peaks, except the central peak. it is neces-
sary to increase the scale on the pattern. beginning with o - A/Za, by tenfold).

In contrast to the case of a rectangle. the marina and minima are not equidistant;
on going away from the center. the spacing between adjacent rings asymptotically
approaches the value of A/2a. The angular radius of the first peak is 1.22A/2a;
thus, the central spot occupies a region with angular width of 2.66A/2a. This
region requires 8&2 of the total power of the circular emitter, the first ring

(more precisely, the region between the first and second minima) requires 72, and
the second. 31.

In the case of an enitter in the form of a ring with the same outside radius a and
inside radius as

No) i I (ha) I (the) '
m=(W[-lm_-a g a ]’

18
IKHICHWHCIAI.IEHE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The distribution graphs for two such ring emitters with ring width a(l - t) differ-
ing by a factor of two, are presented in the same Figure 1.5 (curve 11, e - 0.6.

and curve 111, e - 0.8). For convenience of comparison, all the curves are shown on
the same scale, the powers of all three emitters are identical; the axial luminous
intensity of the first (circular) emitter is taken as the unit luminous intensity.

.551 zone (a) turf.)

(N

  

l.

    

'ir- -————-

 

~‘J
. ﬂ ,
Figure 1.0. Intensity distribution Figure 1.5. Intensity distribution in
in the far zone for a source in the the fer zone for ideal emitters with
fare of an infinite strip with con- exit cross eectiou in the form of s
stant amplitude. circle (I) and rings with ratios of the

inside diameters to outside diameters of
0.6 (II) and 0.8 (111).

Key: a. 1. relative unite

In accordance with (8), the axial luminous intensity of ring enitters decreases with
the area occupied by them, and in the adopted units it is equal to l 9 :2, which is
0.64 for the second enitter and 0.36 for the third. Thus, the height of the central
peak drops significantly; the width of this peak also is somewhat less than for a
circular emitter (it can be shown that the width of this peak is determined by the
average distance between different sections of the emitting surface which is greater
for the ring than for the circle). Therefore the fraction of the total power re-
quired for the central peak drops sharply. amounting to 371 for the second emitter
and only 172 for the third emitter. The radiation intensity at large angles to the

axis increases correspondingly: in the second emitter 35 and 151 of the total power
is required for the first two distribution rings in the far zone (instead of 7 and

3% for the first emitter). and for the third emitter, 20 and 181 of the total power
are required.

It is worth while to note the following: for our three emitters the angular diver-
gence measured with respect to the 0.5 intensity level is 1.03 A/Zs. 0.87 XIZa and
0.79 A/Za, respectively; with respect to 0.5 power level (see above) the angular
divergence is 1.06 A/Za. 2.9 A/Za and 5.25 X/Ze. With this instructive example,
we conclude our analysis of the emission divergence of systems with a plane wave
front and uniform intensity distribution over the exit aperture.

Arbitrary Monochromatic Emitter. The axial luminous intensity of an arbitrary mono-
chromatic emitter is, in accordance with (6) equal to NO 0)- ‘ITIIM’I' murmur.
19
IND! 0i11(141.lﬂﬂ2(ﬂﬂly
ms ormu I'Sb‘ ONIN

Introducing the total emitter power P-SSluM. th' «lady. and the area of the exit
aperture 5, we can represent this expression as follow": F (0, 0"is 1’. where

y, =ln/S) u(:.. u.)ds.du.l' _ I‘l’. (10)
um |'(8.vml"*."z [31‘
As is known. for an arbitrary complex function u, the relation |3|2/|u|2 j l is
valid. Equality is achieved only when u - const. hence, it follows directly that
out of all possible emitters having identical powers and areas of exit aperture, the

one in which the comlex field amplitude at the exit cross section is constant, that

is, the ideal emitter, has the greatest axial lumin0ue intensity (this is why we
call it the ideal emitter). This is, perhaps. the only general conclusion of in-

terest to us which can be formulated with respect to the properties of the angular
distribution for erhitrey emitters (not considering the above-mentioned still more
general law that the distribution in the far zone is a Fourier transform of the
distribution with respect to the exit aperture or in the near zone). Therefore let
us proceed with investigation of the most important special cases.

The emitters in which only the intensity distribution in the near zone is nonuniform
and the phase is constant (the wave front is plane) differ little from ideal emitters
with respect to their properties. For the mentioned nonideal emitters u(x.. yl) -

emoMxl, y ). where A is not a complex coordinate function, but a real, nonnegstive
coordinate unction. From (6) it is easy to see that in this case, just as for
ideal emitters, the maximum of the intensity distribution in the far zone is in the
axial direction. The dimensionless coefficient 7' which entere_igtgzthe expression
for the axial lusinoue intensity as a factor is equal to 7' - (A) A < l. and it
acquires the meaning of the fraction of the aperture area effectively filled with
emission. If the aperture over which averaging is carried out when calculating Y'.
is circular, this parameter becomes entirely analogous to the parameter Y introduced
for real emitters. In particular, under the condition of replacing Y by 7‘. formula

(9) remains valid for the axial luminous intensity after the external shaping system.

It is important that the coefficient 1' becomes significantly less than one only for
very large nonuniformity of the field distribution with respect to aperture. Let
us present the following numerical example. Let the exit aperture of the emitter

consist of two zones of identical area. over one of which the fraction 6 of the
total radiation flux is distributed uniformly, and over the other, the remaining

flux is also uniformly distributed. For such an emitter (10) leads to the formula
7' - 0.5 + /c(l — c); for c - 0.2 the parameter 7' ie 0.9; for c - 0.1, y' - 0.8.

Let us consider another example. Let the radiation density at the exit aperture
assme all values from 0 to some maximm with equal probability. In this case

' I ‘l
VIN/3 4‘] [It 4‘] '039- From these examples it obviously follows that the nonuni-
.

fornity of the field amplitude distribution is felt comparatively weekly on the
magnitude of the axial luminous intensity (and the emission divergence along with
it).

20

FOIOMCIALISEONLY
NR WHOM. USE ONLY

Phase inconatancy in the exit cross section has much greater influence on the dis-
tribution in the far zone. We shall investigate the frequently encountered case

of quadratic dependence of the phase on the transverse coo dinates in the greatest
detail. This corresponds _(if the coefficients on a? and y; are equal) to a spheri-

cal wave front. Thus. u(r,. y.) =- A(z.. whip [$(I:+U:)]; here Mal, yl) is a real,

nonnegative coordinate function, 0 is the radius of curvature of the wave front. For
0 > 0 the wave front has convex shape (a diverging bean). and for p < 0. concave
(the beam constricts at first).

Substituting this expression for u(xl, yl) in (6), we obtain

F(¢.-au)-|-,'.-HA(21.v.)up[%(z§+ m —
— a: (as. + and] dwinr =

- IT" I; up [UK [(3 — N )' + W] A (’1' VI) ‘3‘!de .'

From a comparison of this formula with (2) it follows that for a wave front with a
radius of curvature of 9 >0, the form of the angular distribution coincides with the
density distribution pattern 1(x2, y ) on the observation plane removed a distance
a - p from the source with the same amplitude A( , y ), but plane wave front (the
conversion from a linear scale to angular is made y formulas “x - lep, any - yzlp).

If we change the sign on p, the similarity of these patterns is retained except one
of then turns out to be inverted with respect to the other.

The results of beam diffraction with plane wave fronts hive been investigated in
sufficient detail in optics. At short distances (2 << a IA. whu'e a is the charac-
teristic size of the source), the shape and sizes of the spot quite precisely repro-
duce the shape and sizes of the source. For a >> a2/A the spot, on the contrary,
can "blur" completely, and we have a far zone -- the shape of the spot repeats the
angular distribution of the emission.

As applied to the case of a spherical ways front of interest to us, this information
is interpreted as follows. For Ipl << a [A or aZIAIpI >> 1, the width of the angu-
lar distribution is simply equal to the source dimensions divided by Ipl; this is
none other than the angle between the edge beans normal to the wave front. Thus.
the divergence of the emission here has a purely "geometric“ origin. For azlklpl <<
1, the curvature of the wave front, on the contrary, is so insignificant that it
ceases to be felt in the emission divergence (the deflection of the wave front can
be less than A); here it is poesibls to talk about purely "diffraction" divergence.
If we consider that the parameter a [Alp] is equal to the ratio of the “geometric"
divergence a/Ipl to the "diffraction" divergence Ala. the meaning of what has been
said becomes entirely obvious. It remains only to trace in specific examples how
the "geometric" and "diffraction" divergences change relative to each other as the
steepness of the wave front changes.

This is done most simply in the case of a so-called gauasian beam, the axisylnetric

anpligude distribution of which is described by a geussian function A(r) - Aoexpl-
(r/w) , where r - A: + y', w is the beam radius defined as the distance at which

the field amplitude decreases by e times by comparison with its value on the axis
(Figure 1.6). Let us note that the intensity is cut in half at a distance “1072)an
from the axis; thus. the total beam width with respect to the 0.5 intensity level

is w/Zln 2 ~ 1.2w.

21
FOROI'FICIALISEONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.6. Anplitude distribution with respect
to the gauaeian been cross section.

 

 

Figure 1.7. Propagation of genuine beans in
free space. -

As we see below, gaussien beans play an important role in the theory of "stable"
resonators. A nos: reaarkable feature of such beans is the extraordinary simplicity
of the laws of their diffraction propagation. Actually, when using (2) it is easy
to see that at any distance from the source with a spherical wave front and gsuaaien
amplitude distribution the bean remains geuasian as before with a spherical wave
front; only the curvature of the front and the bean radius w vary. The minimal
transverse dimension is reached at the "constriction" (neck). where the wave front
is plane (Figure 1.7). Of course, the "neck" occurs in reality only when the bean
has negative radius of curvature at the source exit. that is, it is constricted;

for p > O the bean has an imaginary neck. the location of which is uniquely deter-
mined by its parameters.

If the general phase lead (see 5 2.1) is neglected. the propagation of gauasian

beans in free space is exhaustively described by the following two expressions, an
illustration of which is presented in Figure 1.7:

u" (s) a w: [i + (ls/8109'].

9(8) - x [1 + (nag/hr]. (11)

(12)

22

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

here w is the beam radius at a distance r from the neck. w0 is its value at the
neck. 0 is the radius of curvature of the wave front.

By using these expressions it is easy to find the radiation divergence of a gaussian
beam with spherical wave front of interest to us. Knowing p and w, it is possible
to reproduce the position of the neck and the radius of the beam in it. However,

it is still simpler to use the fact that, as was noted above, the far field pattern
for a beam with radius of curvature of the wave front 0 is similar to the emission
distribution pattern at a distance 9 from an analogous source with plane front. In
accordance with (11), at a distance D from the source of the gauesian beam of radius
w and with plans front the beam radius is W1 + (Ap/wz)!;proceeding from the linear
dimension to angular, we find that the angular radius of gsuasion distribution in

the far zone is (WIO)I’1+(’-Plﬂ;‘)‘ a-V (w/p)‘+(I/nw')i.‘ Hence, it follows that angular
divergence with respect to the 0.5 intensity level is ln2.1/(wlp)‘+(7L/ﬁw)l-

_e_-i
l/(ln2- -:—) +(l-1—3—3) . It is easy to see that ln2(w/p) is "geometric“ divergence.

and (ln2/1r) (Me) is "diffraction" divergence. Thus, in the given case the square of
the resultant divergence is equal to the sun of the squares of the geometric and
diffraction distribution widths.

Let us consider another example of a been with uniform intensity distribution with
respect to a rectangular aperture. In this case Max, my) decays into the product

of two like co-factors, each of which is the angular distribution of the source
emission in the form of an infinite strip with cylindrical shape of the wave front.
Figure 1.8 shows the results of numerical calculations of the intensity distribution
in the far zone for such a source for different relations between the geometric di-
vergence h/p and the diffraction divergence Alp (h is the strip width). The radia-
tion density in the far zone is taken the same in all cases, and the axial luminous
intensity of an ideal "strip" source with plane wave front (0 - 0D) is taken as the
unit for measuring the intensity in the far zone. Here the shapes of the geometric
and diffraction distributions, in contrast to the preceding case, do not coincide,
and the resultant pattern is much more complicated than for a gaussian beam.

Let us emphasize the following. As is easy to see, the. geometric and diffraction
divergences are equal to each other when the deflection of the wave front is a total
of A/8. For deflection A, the geometric divergence is eight times the diffraction
divergence and completely predominates over it. As follows from a comparison of
curves 1 and lo in Figure 1.8, the presence of this deflection with respect to only
one of the coordinates causes a decrease in the axial luminous intensity by more
than ll times as compared to an ideal source; if analogous deflection occurred also
in the other direction, the axial luminous intensity would decrease by as many
times! This again demonstrates the enormous influence on the distribution in the
far zone felt from even such small phase disturbances.

Now let us proceed to another type of source which we must deal with hereafter.
We are again talking about beams with plans equiphassl surface, but the real ampli-
tude of the field on this surface will be a sign-variable value. Let us limit

ourselves to the simplest case of uniform distribution of the complex amplitude of
the type

23

FOIOI'HCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cos("+’ ”. m=o.2.4.

u..(z)- —a<8<-« (13)

singly-E12, m-i.3.5,....

             

      

  

.544-1-11123451717

Figure 1.8. Angulsr snission distributions of sources with uniforsly
distributed enplitude sod sphericsl veve front: 1 - "geosstric" di-
vergence is missing (the plsne ms front is the sens curve as in
Figure 1.6); 2 - h/p - ZA/h (the deflection of the ueve front is
Alb); 3 — h/p - lo.$A/h (the deflection of the vsve front 9AIl6);

Io - h/p - 81/11 (the wave front deflection is A).

These functions ensue. zero vslues at the ends of the intervsl, end they each hsve
n zeros inside; thus, all of then, except the first, srs sign-vsrishls. Let us
vrite then as follows:

u. (z) = cos{% M + m1} -

-+ow{%[m#2+~11++ml-%"'t"*+m]}- 04>

 

The field with complex amplitude of the type c expwmx) for 3 << 1 is s plsne veve
inclined st an angle a with respect to the exis. Therefore u (x) is e superposition
of two mutually coherent plsne UWCO. the directions of propsletion of which asks

the angles :0: + l)/2)( l2s). Cslcuisting 50’P(-M‘a,¢)U.(2)dz(cu. (6)). we obtein

: I" (a )N M+(_nnﬂn[h(a3+%%\’l.
n x |k¢(¢,‘-1;i% h(¢'+§_}t1.;;_)
2/0

MOMMUSEONLY
POROFHCIMJJSEONLY

      

: AA
4-3-I-IIIIJI

 

Figure 1.9. Distributions in the far zone for coherent and noncoherent
superpositions of two plane waves. Solid curves - source with ampli-
tude distribution of the type (13); dotted curves - incoherent sun of
the ease waves; curves 1. 2, 3. lo -— for I - 0. l, 2. 3, respectively.
The graphs of anx) for the first four functions are presented in figure 1.9 (solid

curves). He shall return to this figure soon, but let us note meanwhile that the
sign-vvariable nature of the enplitude leads not only to growth of the divergence,
but also to decay of the angular distribution into individual spots with comparable
intensity (in our example when considering the analogous distribution with respect
to the second coordinate yua‘. ay) there would be four peaks of equal magnitude).

The angular distances between the spots are ~X/A. where A is the distance between
the:anplitude distribution nodes in the near sons.

Nonnonochronatic hitter. Let our source suit a set of nonochronstic waves with
different frequencies simultaneously:

‘u(z., In. l)_uu(zx. Norm-um!) +ug(r.. y.)sxp(—ioat)+.n..l

Thanks to the superposition principle the field at any distance fron the source can
be written in analogous form

“(32. ”a. 0"“:(12. v:)°xP(—¢0:t)+u¢(2a. va)sxp(—w)'+...,

where the couple: amplitude u1(x2. yz) of each component is calculated by substitu-
tion of “i“l’ yl) in the standard expressions presented at the beginning of this

iten. In accordance with the formla there. let us calculate the anission intensity

averaged over a large tine interval (the indices on x and y are onitted, the * will
denote complex conjugation):

l (I. y) <l '4 (I. U. ‘)l'> - (“(3. 9- ‘) u'(-‘t. II. 3)) -
=- <lurexp(-m.‘) + luau-“MN ...l x
x In; exp (mg) + u; exp (tag!) + .. .1) as
alum. ”IN-lads. v)l'+
25

“WNW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All of the cross terns oscillate with difference frequencies; therefore when averag-

ing over a large tine interval they do not contribute to the general sun. Thus. the
total field intensity turns out to be equal to the sun of the intensities of indivi-

dual nonochroeatic waves.

Let us again consider Figure 1.9. Graphs of the functions

 

. _[~__(«.-T *) .. weeds) '
. T}?

are plotted on it as dotted curves for the sees a as the solid curves. Thus. if the
solid curves correspond to the case of coherent addition of two plane waves figuring
in (M). the dotted curves correspond to incoherent addition of the sane waves which
could occur at different frequencies.

Fron this exanple it is obvious that the coherent and incoherent additions can lead
to significantly different results. On the other hand. it is possible to see that
the differences here are small except in cases where both added waves have noticeable
intensity. This is understandable inasnuch as coherent addition differs from inco-
herent by consideration of the cross terns which include the amplitude cofactors of
different waves.

Re have paid definite attention to what would appear to be a quite elementary prob-
lem, for an unclear distinction between the concepts of coherent and incoherent
additions is also encountered in the literature on optical resonators. Host fre-
quently the confusion arises when using a standard procedure consisting in expansion
of the field distribution of a real device in a series with respect to the eigen-
functions of an ideal system (see, for example, 5 2.5). Such a series frequently
contains high-order terns which, if taken separately, correspond to very great bean
divergence. This appears to be a sign that the total divergence is large, but in
reality it can be quite the opposite. Let us present an instructive example. Let
the amplitude distribution u - C - const which is rectangular in the interval -a <

x < a be expanded in a series with respect to the functions of (13): u - £(ur. —-3—+
~++ ) here, as a result of coherent addition successive consideration of

terns of higher and higher order does not lead to an increase in the total diver-
gence, but to a decrease (to be convinced of this, it is sufficient to capsre the
solia curve 1 in Figure 1.9 which pertains to the first tern of the sun with Figure
1.6 which corresponds to the final result of smation).

Some Conclusions. Heasurenent of Divergence. The above investigation of the angu-
lar divergence of the emission of different sources is not at all exhaustive, but

it should make it easier to understand how certain factors considered hereafter in-
fluence the divergence. The prisary conclusion which can be drawn is that for sys-
tems with narrowly directional euission it is necessary first of all to strive for
maximal uniform phase distribution of the esission with respect to the exit aperture.
Nonunifornity of the amplitude distribution is far free so terrible (the case of
sign-variable amplitude which would seem to he exeupt from this rule can be inter-
preted as the case where there are phase junps of 1!). Even nultifrequency is

dangerous only when a significant portion of the total sner goes to the couponents
either with great divergence or with different directions 0 propagation.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conclusion. let us consider the proheln of measuring the angular divergence. 0n
analysis of expression (2).we saw that the transition to the far zone where the forn
of the distribution ceases to depend on the distance is related to the possibility
of neglecting the terms containing x§ and yi in the phase factor of the expression
under the integral sign. Under ordinary conditions, for this purpose it is neces-
sary that the inequality (3) be satisfied, which, as a rule. requires significant
removal from the emission source. Thus, for A - 0.5 micron (green light) and a
source diameter of 3-5 cm, the far zone is completely formed only at a distance on
the order of several kilometers. however, it is easy to achieve complete absence

of the mentioned terms also in direct proximity to the emission source. For this
purpose, it is necessary to install the so-cslled quadratic phase corrector at the
source exit; the simplest device of this type is an ordinary thin lens with spheri-
cal surfaces. The fact is that with small thickness of the lens, the field ampli-
tude distribution does not change on passing through the lens. The curvature of the
wave front only changes discontinuously, which is equivalent to the addition of a
phase factor of the type of epriﬂx2 + y2)]. It is easy to calculate the coeffi-
cient y knowing the index of refraction of the lens material and radius of curvature
of its surfaces; however, it is possible to proceed more simply. Actually, it is
known of a positive lens (f > 0) that it converts a spherical wave front from a -

point source at its focal point to a plane front. The radius of curvature of a
spherical front at the approach to the lens will be f in this case; the complex

amplitude of the field with such a wave front has, as we already know, the phase
factor exp [(1k/2f)(x2 + y2)]. The phase is constant at the plane wave front; thus,
passage through a lens with a focal l gth f leads to multiplication of the complex
field amplitude by exp[(-ik/2f)(x2 + )l (a small total phase lead plays no role
in this investigation).

Now let us return to expression (2). Multiplication of u(x1. yl) by exp [-(ik/Zf)

(a: + yi)] leads to mutual reduction of the terms containing xi and y: if the dis-

tance to the observation plane 1 is equal to f. Hence, we have the simplest formula
of distribution observation in the far zone which everything follows: at the

source exit a lens (or more complex optical system) is installed with focal length

f > 0. The pattern in the focal plane is entirely like the distribution in the far

zone :for transition to the angular scale it is necessary to divide the linear scale
by f1.Inasmuch as the angular distribution of the emnision at any distance fron the
source remains the same, the distance from the source to the measuring lens plays

no special role; it is also necessary to see that the lens always “encompasses" the
entire light beam.

when there are grounds to assume that the wave front has a spherical component, the
compensation of which causes a decrease in the divergence. it is worth while to
measure the beam width d not only in the focal plane. but also at other distances i
from the lens. In order to understand what information such measurements give, let
us mentally divide the lens into two cosponents with focal lengths f' . (l/f - l/£)'1
and f" - 2, respectively. Inasmuch as the observation plane is the focal plane for
the second of these components. it becomes clear that the ratio d]! is none other

—-—-—————____

1A similar situation has already been encountered when analyzing been divergence

with a spherical wave front: transition from a spherical front with p > 0 to a
plane front is equivalent to passage of the been through a lens with f I p.

27

F0!‘0!FKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

than the divergence of the source emission with the first component as the exit
corrector. Finding the distance at which the ratio 6/! passes through a minimum,
we at the same time determine the ocal power of the optimal corrector l/f - lll.0
and the divergence achieved when using it.

5 1.2. Optical Cavities and t’cssification of Them

Initial Infornation. A Little History. Now let us proceed with the investigation
of the nest inportant sources of higth coherent narrowly directional enission-
lasers. One of the basic laser elements, along with the active nsdim and the
system for stimlating it, is the resonator. The standard requirenent imposed on
the resonator is the presence of cooperatively high-Q (slowly damping) characteris-
tic oscillations, the frequencies of which fall into the signification band of the
active medias. 0n the other hand, it is desirable that there not be too many
oscillations with approxinately the same Q-factor - siniltaneona stimlation of
too large a nuaber of them can lead to almost incoherent emission.

are several orders greater than the operating wavelength. This excludes the use of
closed resonators in the form of a closed cavity with reflecting walls: the nutter
of high-Q oscillations on optical frequencies would be extremely large in such
cavities. Therefore open resonators which do not have side walls are used. The

tion of the predominant direction of propagation of the emission which sust sharply
decrease the amber of higheq modes by comparison with closed resonators. Actually,
light beams traveling along the axis of the system (the canon normal to the mirrors)
are reflected alternately from the mirrors and obviously dsnp more slowly than

others; inclined beans exit from the system. and this occursfaster- the larger the
angle they make with the axis.

Sinilar argments led Prokhorov [l] to the basic idea of the prospectiveness of us-
ing open resonators. 0n the other hand. it is still impossible to extract inferna-
tion from these srgments as to whether such resonators have natural .oacillations.
It is possible only to conclude that theseoacillations must be found in the for: of
a superposition of light been directed along the resonator axis or slightly in-
clined to it. Only a careful analysis such as will be performed in this book can
answer the questions of what sortof oscillations these are. how they are influenced
by the presence of an active medium how many of then will be present in the stimu-
lated emission and, finally. what the resultant divergence of the emission will be.
This analysis is for the most part based on the results of the theory of empty (that
is, containing no active nedium). open resonators.

The primry period of developnent of the theory of empty, open resonators extends
free 1961 to 1966. The famous paper by For and Li [9) narked the beginning. The
problem of the existence and properties of the lowest (that is, the highest-Q)
nodes of an empty open resonator was stated and solved numerically for several
special examples for the first time in the paper by Fox and Li. The concept of
diffraction losses was introduced for the first time. Diffraction losses can be
defined as the fraction of the total radiation flux scattered as a result of dif-
fraction and passing by the mirrors. For a number of reasons, this concept is
much more useful as applied to opticalrbsnd cavities than the Q-factor concept,

28

MOFFIOALUSEONLY
FOI40FFKJAL.USE(MULY

and at this time ithasalmoat completely displaced the Q-factor concept.

After reference [9] came the articles by Boyd, Gordon and Kogelnik [10, 11], in
which a more general study was made of open resonators consisting of two spherical
mirrors with arbitrary radii of curvature. and a classification of such resonators
with respect to magnitude of the diffraction losses was presented. It was discove-
red that in a defined range of geometric parameters of the resonator (radii of
curvature of thesurrotsand spacing between theao. the diffraction losses are very
small, but on going outside this range, these losses increase extremely sharply.
During those years it appeared that stable lasing could be achieved only in resona-
tors with small diffraction losses; therefore such resonators were called stable;
as we shall soon see. a system of two slightly concave mirrors can serve as a
characteristic example of such resonators. for this reason. resonators with large
losses which include, for example, a system of convex mirrors.were called unstable.
and researchers did not consider them for several years.

A further significant step forward was made when references [12, 13] appeared. The
general methods of analysis of complex devices consisting of an arbitrary number of
optical elements with plane and spherical surfaces were developed in these papers.
As a result. it turned out to be possible to reduce almost any complex resonator to
the equivalent two-mirror system with the same field distributions of the natural.68-
cillations on the mirrors and the same diffraction losses.

Papers by Soviet scientists -- V. P. Byhov, V. I. Talanov, et al. - made an impor-
tant contribution to the development of the given field of science. Among them a
special role is played by the brilliant research cycle of L. A. Vaynshteyn which
was summed up in the monograph [3] which was already mentioned in the introduction.
Previously, he developed powerful, universal methods of analyzing microwave systems.
The application of these methodstoopen optical-band cavities permitted Vaynsh-
teyn to obtain simple analytical expressions for field distributions and losses in
many cases where other researchers were forced to resort to machine calculations.
His formulas were also suitable for high~order modes and for large-mirror resonators.
that is, they even encompassed cases where machine methods were useless in View of
the extraordinary awkwardness of the calculations.

All of the above-mentioned studies pertained to flat and "stable" resonators which
had small diffraction losses. The results of these papers, that is. the theory of
empty resonators with small losses, have also been reflected quite completely in
almost all monographs on quantum electronics. Accordingly, we shall not go into a
detailed restatement of the methods of solving certain problems or the results of
calculations performed for a great variety of systems (a significant part of which
did not find application subsequently). we shall only present a minimum amount of
information which we need for the following discussion. He shall try to systematise

this information as much as possible and avoid numerous “historical features" which
would only complicate the discussion.

Open resonators are first of all divided into ring and linear cavities (see Figure

. 1). Ring cavities are made up of at least three (most frequently four) mirrors
or other elements which change the direction of a light beam; they are used in a
small number of types of special laser devices (laser gyroscopea, and so on). Ring
resonators are almost never used in lasers with narrowly directional emission: they
do not have any special advantages from the point of view of divergence of the

29

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

emission, and they are complicated to adjust; at the sane time, the requirenents on
adjust-ant precision increase as the enieeion divergence decreases. Therefore
linear cavities will he the prinary subject of our analysis although the results of
the analysis can be extended to the case of ring aystens without difficulty.

Although a linear cavity contains fewer nirrors than a ring‘cavity, as a rule the
linear cavity is an integral optical system. The lirrors themselves are frequently
not plane, but spherical; an active element node of a material with an index of re-
fraction different from one (but still variable with respect to cross section) is
placed between the mirrors; if necessary polarizers, shutters, lenses, and so on
are also placed between the nirrors. Therefore first of all we must discuss the

laws of transmission of light beans through optical systeas made of elenents with
spherical or plane surfaces.

 

Figure 1.10. This lens between source and obser-
vation planes: 1 —- source plane; 2 - observation

plans.
Passage of Light Beans Through Optical Systens. Bean Matrix. Eirst let us consider
the simplest example where there is only one thin lens with focal length f be-
tween a aonochroaatic source and the observation plane; the distance fro- this thin
lens to the source is 9.}. and the distance to the observation plane is I. (Figure
9

1.10). According to (2 the field at the point with transverse coordinites x'. y‘
in the reference plane located directly in front of the lens is

W. n - 51$?foxp{w[(i;—l‘lx+U—-§—L"r]}u(zn ya «18,:

here as1 - dxldyl, u(x1, yl) is as before the complex mlitude of the field on the
reference plane of the source.

After passage through the lens. the couples amplitude is multiplied by exp

(c’)' + ( 0'1.
[—n—FL , finally. applying (2) again, we obtain the expression for the field
distribution u(x2, yz) in the observation plane:

“(‘1' Us) -.2le‘—)(|‘-‘lI——:l‘)lfyexp [“[L—ﬂ’l-lﬁ). +0 -: ’ _

' I _ I. - ’0 -
_(a)'7(r).+£ﬁw:_)_+$hﬂ;£lnu(3n Udaids"

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFEKJA1.USE(NVLY

In order to express u(a2, Y2) directly in terns of uCIl. yl). it is necessary to

change the order of integration and take the integral over the surface of the lens
5'; here we shall consider that the lens more than "enconpasaes“ the entire light
been, and integration can be performed within infinite limits.

Thus, our problem reduced to calculation of the integral

(imp it]: 9% + (1:53—01 ..

(xi). +( I)! (8 _:’)I - (V _")i I
‘ 2/ "' 3 'r .5. lds =

2

',I.- x’-I-y‘ x:+y’
" °"P{-‘[ '5 ‘+4,—‘-(++7‘-—‘7)(=:+y:)]}x

x 5 ~le

(5')

 

I
,i + -,'- — +) u: - x.)’ + (4/ — m} dS'.

where I.== (-‘:-++-+)-‘(;L+%-). Ila-(‘L i—LY‘ (.71. +31).are the coordi-

r n a 1 'r I 1 '1

nates of a point on the surface of the lens at which the bean should be directed
from the point (x1. y1) so that after refraction in the lens it sill hit the point
(:2, yz) (see the figure).

The last integral is similar to the ones investigated by us when discussing formula
(1.2) at the beginning of § 1.1 and also is equal to half the integral over the
first Fresnel zone. The center of a gates: of concentric circles which form the

boundaries of the Fennel zones (see Pigure 1.1) is in the W at the
point (x0. yo); the radii of the zones are equal to r. -I/nll(1l .+ ilk—i] ). After

all of the transfornations.we arrive at the desired formic:
cxplak(1 +l )l a,
“ "1' ”3’ W. + U- ni”) ”9 {56. +1. - WI) x
x In — 1.1/Hr: + u?) + (1 - 1.”) (z: + 24:) - (15,
- 2(‘1‘: + Nays)” u (31: 1h) 331-

Let us know that the sun 2.1 + 2.2 in the exponent in front of the phase factor inte-

gral must he replaced by the optical distance 1. between the source and observation
planes neasured along the systen axis when conegdering finite thickness of the lens.
The exponent in the expression under the integral sign has the forts ikMxl. yl; :2.
yz), where A is the difference betveen the optical distance from (:1, yl) to

(x2, y2) measured along the bean passing through these points and 1.0.

In the investigated example we have not considered partial reflection of light fron
the lens surface. Consideration of this phenomenon vould in the given situation
only lead to a snail decrease in the intensity of the enission passing through the

31

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lens (if we neglect the slight influence of nultiple reflection). However. inside
an optical cavity light beans originating at the interfaces are superposed on
the prinsry been reflected free the end nirror. This can lead to consequences
which cannot be neglected in spite of the apparently negligible intensity of the
scattered light. Let us present a sinple nautical exasple. Let a coherent been
with intensity 0.06 I (the reflection coefficient equal to 62 has an interface be-

tween the air and glass with index of refraction of 1.5 for actual incidence) be
added to the prinary been having intensity I and consequently. field amplitude
no - 5; . The anlitude of this bean is “.0410 - 0.2uo; at the peak fornsd as

a result of superposition of the interference pattern beans. the intensity is equal
to (1.2 no)2 - 1.61. 10. at the minim, (0.8 no)2 - 0.66 10. It is unnecessary to

cos-mt on these figures. Therefore in the following analysis, in addition to the
specially stipulated cases, the interfaces will always be considered coated. In
order to get away froe the influence of the interfaces in the experiments they are
frequently not coated. but inclined slightly. Then the reflected enission leaves
the resonator innediately and has no influence on the structure of the output bean,
only slightlydecreasing its intensity.

Now let us proceed with investigation of note couples optical systens. It would be
possible, of course, sinply to perform an internediste integration over every inter-

face or thin lens inside the resonator; that is how Collins proceeded in reference
[12], which was one of the first articles in the given field. This nethod is highly
universal, but awkward. In the case of paraxial (slightly inclined) beams that are
of interest in our case in system with spherical snd plene interfaces. the bean
netrix nethod is sore suitable. Kogellik and Li [13, lv’o] developed this ssthod

in detail as applied to resonator theory.

The bean natrix is especially convenient in that it is calculated in the geonetric
approximation, but as we shall see later, knowing its elenents nakes it possible.
if necessary, to describe the transnisaion of the light bean through the optical

systen also in the diffraction approrination. The bean or ABCD-natrix relates the
values of the transverse coordinate x, y and slopes u‘. u of the light beans at
the entrance and exit of the optical system y

Ir. y. l-Id 8'15 V| I
“a: “u c D “u “u ' (16)

where the index 1 corresponds to the input plane, 2 corresponds to the output plane
(Figure 1.11). The natrix product in (16) and hereafter is calculated in accord-

ance with its standard definition. Being written for any one of two coordinate
pairs, this fornula acquires the fore

AB
"lcn'

The been natrix elsasnts are uniquely related to the focal length of the optical
system P and the position of its principal planes. In particular, C - v-l/f.

8 ..
a‘l‘l' or "'4‘1+8“Ir “en‘CSd-Dalr

 

 

 

’s
“as

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

\
a) I 5 l 2”“
“a?” I

Figure 1.11. Definition of a bean matrix for the beam path in the
forward (a) and return (h) directions. The arrows indicate the beam
at the entrance and exit from the system; 1 - entrance plane, 2 —

exit plane.

A 8
If the exit plane of the optical system with a beam matrix 6: oil is matched to
the entrance plane of the system having the matrix '3: 3’ . then the following
3
matrix corresponds to passage through both of these system:

‘3 Ba ‘1 8‘ ‘e‘|+3act «BI+'DDII
C D: . c: D: - cr‘t+Deci (ha-+0.0. '

and so on.

Let us proceed to another table of beam matrices for several optical systems (Table
1.1). The first of these systems is simply a segment of thy space of length l,
and the second is a layer of homogeneous medium of thickness 1. and with index of
refraction n. The third matrix corresponds to a single thin lens, the fourth ma-
trix corresponds to the more complex case of a layer of ,edium of thickness 2. with
index of refraction varying by the law n . n - (ll2)n r , where r - Vs! + y! is
the distance fron the axis. Any optical sys eras of inzereat to us (in particular,
presented at the end of the table) can be represented in the form of combinations of
these four optical systems. end their matrices are equal to the corresponding pro-
ducts. ‘I‘he determinants of all of the first four matrices are equal to one; inas-
much as the determinant of the matrix product is equal to the product of the deter-

minants of the individual matrices. the following relation is satisfied for any
optical system

AD—BC — 1. (17)

Setting f2 - 0° (no second lens) in the last of the matrices presented in the table,
we obtain the beam matrix for the abovev-inveetigated case of a single lens between
two reference planes at finite distances from it:

1-1,” 1‘ +1, 411.”
- m l —1‘//
33

l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

Table 1.1. Bea- natrices of several of. the
einpleet optical cyst-Ia

 

Conparing this matrix with formula (15), we see that the latter can be repreunted
in the following form:

kl. '
a (4:. w; x —"j—,‘_',,—-’ 5 am. mm» {-3 (Ax: + m +
( I)

+ 0(3; + 11:) ‘ 2(311: + 111%)“ £15,. (.18)

As can be seen by direct checking, the sale correspondence between tbs diffraction
approxiution for-ulna and the elements of the bean matrices also exists for other

of the simplest system presented in Table 1.1. It only remain to prove that

formla (18) renains valid also for any conbination of theae ayatelaa. Let us do
the proof by the induction method.

36

POI OFFICIAL l8! ONLY
IN)! OFFICJAI.USIZ(”¥LV

Let two optical systems exist. for each of which the integral expression relating
the fields at the input and output, is written in terms of the elenents of a beam
matrix of the type of (18). and let the exit of the first of them be matched with
the entrance of the second. Then. substituting the expression for the field at the
exit of the first system in the integral relation of the second system, we represent
the field at the exit of the second system. just as in our example with a lens. in
the form of a double integral. Performing the integration with respect to the
separating system of the intermediate plane, we obtain the desired integral rela-
tion relating the fields at the entrance and exit of a combination of two systems.
It is possible to see that, as before, it will have the form of (18) with coeffi-
cients equal to the elements of the product of beam matrices of our two systems.
that is, the matrix of the composite system as a whole. Adding another system, we
obviously obtain the same result, and so on.

Thus, knowledge of the beam matrix permits transition to the diffraction approxima-
tion at any time if required; only the optical length of the system L defining the
magnitude of the total phase lead is not represented in terms of matr elements.
Now it is possible to proceed with investigation of optical cavities.

Classification of Resonators by the Properties of Their Beam Matrices. In trying
to apply a beam matrix to the description of a resonator, as before we encounter

the fact that this matrix in its standard definition relates the parameters of light
beams at the entrance and exit surfaces of the optical system which are considered
plane. At the same time the end mirrors of the resonator frequently have not plane,
but spherical surfaces. In order to overcome this small difficulty, it is suffi-
cient to represent each spherical and mirror with radius of curvature R (for a con-
cave mirror R > 0, and a convex mirror, R < 0) in the form of a combination of a
plane mirror and a thin lens with focal length f - R installed beside it equivalent
to the spherical and mirror (Figure 1.12; focal length of the spherical mirror, as
is known, is R/Z; in .turn, the light bean passes through the lens of the equiva-
lent combination on reflection from this combination twice). As a result of this
substitution we obtain an equivalent resonator with plane end mirrors. The trans-
mission of light between them is usually described using a standard ABCD—matrix
which we shall consider to be the matrix and the initial resonator. As an example
let us write the matrix elements for each case of a two-mirror resonator which can
be obtained, setting l . 0, l - l, f - R and f - R in the last matrix of
Table 1.1: 1 2 1 1 2 2

.4=I1—UH“ Ball. c=-+_7’L+W£F’

I I I h (19)

here R and R2 are the radii of curvature of the left-hand and right-hand mirrors.
1 is the distance between them.

If the elements of the beam matrix of an arbitrary resonator introduced in this way
are substituted in (18), we obtain an integral transformation relating the distri-
butions of the complex amplitude directly on the surface of the end mirrors. In
this case it is possible to ignore whether we are dealing with the initial resonator
(Figure 1.12. a) or the resonator equivalent to it (Figure 1.12,b): the integral
transformation of the fields on the mirrors is the same in either case. If we use
such light beam parameters as the inclinations of the beams and curvatures of the

35

KROHKMLMEOMN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.1)

 

Figure 1.12. Determination of a beam natrix for a resonator with

spherical end airrora: a) initial cavity; b) equivalent resonator
with plane mirrors.

wave fronts, on transition from the equivalent resonator to the initial one it is

necessary to introduce the corresponding corrections (we shall present an example
of this operation soon).

Finally. let us proceed to classification of optical cavities; this classification
is based on the properties of their natural omillations. natural oscillations of
a linear cavity, in turn, can be represented in the form of a set of two light bee-s
propagated opposite to each other. On reflection fro- the and mirrors these beam
transform into each other. which insures reproducibility of the process in time.
Thus, the problem of finding the natural oscillation reduces to finding a light been
such that after complete passage through the cavity in both directions it retains
its initial structure. For general classification of optical cavities the most
superficial investigation of this problen in the geonetric approximation which we
shall proceed with now is sufficient. Let us only note that this solution by the
bean matrix method was found for the first tine to be essentially correct. but
highly scholastic in the paper by Kahn [15].

If the optical systen has an ABCD-Iatrix for passage of light through it from left
to right, then passage from right to left is described by the bean setrix once. It
can be obtained free the inverse matrix (that is, the matrix realizing the opposite
transformation to (16)), considering that when going hack along the trajectory the
linear coordinates have the former value, and the angles of inclination change sign
(the direction of reckoning the angles of inclination is discussed in Figure 1.11).

On reflection from a plane end mirror, the linear and angular bean coordinates are
retained. Therefore plane mirrors of an equivalent cavity (see Figure 1.12.1» per-
form the functions of planes separating the optical system with ABCD and DRCA
matrices, and complete passage through the resonator in both directions is described

by the product of these matrices. If we take the right-hand mirror as the beginning,
than the complete round-trip matrix hearthe form

A 8’ D n _ 40+” us
lc DHc 4' I zoo Anne (20)
FOR 030161“. USE ONLY

For any other choice of reference point. the full’round-trip matrix changes, but

the final result of the analysis of course remains the same. The choice made is
convenient in that it pernits us to obtain the form of the solution near the right-
hand mirror, that is, at the exit aperture of the laser, inediately: by the
tradition established in laser literature, we shall always depict lasers as having
emission output to the right.

The solution of the geometric approximation will be found in the form of spherical
waves with centers on the system axis. First of all let us find the law of trans-
formation of the radii of curvature of such waves on passage of them through an
arbitrary optical system. Each spherical wave with center on the axis and radius

of curvature 9 corresponds to the family of beans x/u - 0 (here and hereafter we
shall write all the relations for one of the two coordinate pairs). Thus. the beam
with the coordinates x . an entering the system belongs to the family of wave beams
with p - xlla . Aftér passage through the system, the radius of curvature of this
wave 0 viouslylhecomes equal to 92 - leuk. where :2, (:23 are the coordinates of

the same bcan at the system exit. Substituting the values of 3:2 and a2" here, we

obtain the desired law of transformation of the radius of curvature of a spherical
wave in an arbitrary optical system: 92 - (A01 + B)/(Cp1 + D).

Using matrix (20) and this law, let us compile the equation for reproduction of the
wave curvature after couplete round-trip through the resonator:

(AD +acw’ +2.48 9.
_—-r-————— - e
woo + AD + no (21)

This equation has the solution pi 2 - j; JAB/CD .
’

Now it is time to remember that wears in the general case dealing with the mtrix
of an equivalent resonator (Figure 1.12.b) and we have obtained the solution for it.
In order to proceed with the solution for the initial resonator with spherical exit
mirror, as is easy to see, it is necessary to add the curvature of the exit mirror
of the initial resonator ill! to the obtained wave curvature. Thus, we obtain the
final expression for the radii of curvature p of the waves which are solutions in
the initial resonator:

up” .. i/R, g m. (22)

As has been stated. it is obvious even by the naked eye that the properties of the
resonator depend decisively on the sign of the ratio AB/CD which coincides with the
sign of the product ABCD. Let us first consider the case where ABC!) > 0. Then
(21) has two different real solutions. It is possible to see that on passage
through the resonator the coordinates of each been belonging to the families of
beams of the two found waves turn out to be multiplied by 111,2 - AD + no i ZJABCD .

Obviously in this respect the transverse dimensions of the re on occupied by each
wave vary. Inasmuch as uluz - (AD 4- BC) - AABCD - (AD - BC) - 1 (see (17)), the

absolute nagnitude of one of the values of u is always greater than one, and the
other is always less than one. The transverse dimensions of the region occupied
by the wave with Iul < 1 decrease from pass to pass. For any initial dimensions
of the transverse cross section in the final analysis this wave “contracts" to a

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

point and, in spite of the formal reproducibility of the curvature of its front, it
cannot serve as a steady solution.

The wave cross section with Iul > 1. conversely, expands by In] times on each pass.
As a result of the finite dimensions of the mirrors, this expansion is not un- -
limited: part of the emission simply leaves the resonator, bypassing the mirrors,
which predetemines the greater part of the losses. This wave, in combination with
the wave generated by it, proceeding in the opposite direction, is also a steady
state solution for resonators with ABC!) > 0; as a result of the great magnitude of
the losses, the given resonaton. as we have already mentioned. have been called un-
stable. A detailed investigation of these resonators and the lasers based on them
appears in Chapters 3 and lo. from which it follows that in the given case the geo-
metric approximation gives an entirely satisfactory description of the resonator
properties.

In the intermediate case of ABC!) - 0 there is only one u equal to +1 or -1. The
nature of the solution essentially depends on which of the matrix elements is equal
to zero. If this is B or C, then as follows from (17), the product AD, and with it,

also 11 are equal to one. This means that after complete passage through the resona-
tor, the beam trajectory closes. and the beam again follows the same path. The

path of the beams in these two cases, however. is quite different.

For B - 0, from (22), we obtain p - 0; thus. the center of curvature of the wave
front is located directly at the exit mirror «- tha radiation turns out to be
focused at a point on this mirror. The wave going in the opposite direction is
focused at a point on the other mirror (Pigure 1.13. a). This is also understand-
ahle: the entrance and exit planes of the optical system with B - 0 are conjugate,
the system projects the image of one of them on the other. In the given case
expression (18) becomes meaningless; at the end of this section we shall deal with
the problem of what to replace this relation with. but we shall not go into a de-
tailed investigation of the properties of resonators with B I- 0, for such reson-
stars are almost never used.

0n the contrary, the resonators with c - 0 are the most widespread. In this case,
p - R2 - the right—hand mirror is an equiphasal surface of the wave front; it is
easy to demonstrate that the left-hand mirror is too. Bach beam follows the same
path in the forward and return directions. being incident normally on both and
mirrors. In particular. the layers of empty space or space filled with a homogene-
ous medium (see Table 1.1) have a matrix with C - 0 (P - 60); therefore the given
category includes the well-known flat cavity (see Figure 1.13, b)7the concentric
cavity similar to the flat cavity in many respects (R1 + 9.2 - l, Figure 1.13, c, d)

and a family of resonators similar to them (the latter wil be considered separately
in § 2.6).

For resonators with A - 0 or D - 0 the value of p is -1, and after complete roundtrip
through the resonator the beam goes to the other side with respect to its axis;

after a second roundcrip of the resonator, it returns to the initial position. In
empty two-mirror resonators A - 0 for R I 2., D - 0 for R - 2.; thus, the center of
curvature of one of the mirrors is locafed on the other. 2The same point serves as
the center of curvature of the spherical wave in the geometric approximation; the
second mirror is an equiphassl surface of this wave (Figure 1.13. e, f). Among such
resonators a special role is played by a symmetric confocal resonator with A - D - 0

38

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.13. Different types of optical cavities with ABCD - 0:
a) resonator with B - 0: b) flat cavity (0 - 0); c). d) concentric
cavities (c - 0); e) cavity with A - 0; f) seniconcentric cavity
with D - 0; g) syuetric confocal cavity (A - D - 0); 01. 02 ..
centers of curvature of the left and right mirrors.

(R1 - R - 2., Figure 1.13, g); a wave with any initial curvature is reproduced in

it.

2

All of the laws of the behavior of resonators with ABC!) - 0 discovered with the help

of geometric analysis to a defined degree depict the true picture of the field dis-
tribution of the highest-Q oscillations. Thus. in the resonator depicted in Figure

1.13, f, which is usually called esmiconcentric, the lover mode field is actually
similar to the sun of two spherical waves for which the second mirror is an aqui-
phasal surface; on the first mirror the emission is concentrated at the diffraction
"point" with dimensions ~Alla2, where a2 is the transverse dimension of the second

mirror .

It is only necessary to remember that when ABCD - 0 the slightest deviations from
the ideal configuration of the cavity are sufficient for the field distribution to
change sharply. and for the geosetric approximation to become invalid (thus, for
misalignment of a flat cavity there is no geometric solution). We shall discuss
this in more detail in § 2.5.

Finally. for ABCD < 0 the "geometric" equation (21) has no real solution under any
conditions. Analysis in the diffraction approximation (see 5 2.1) shows that the
lower-mode field of such cavities is primarily concentrated near the axis of the
oyster: and decreases exponentially on going away from the axis. It is obvious that
for sufficiently large mirrors a negligible portion of the total radiation flux
will bypass the mirrors, and the diffraction losses will be extremely snall. This
led in its time to the name "stable“ resonators as the opposite of "unstable" with
ABCD > 0. The argument leading to such names have not withstood the test of time.
but this terminology has become widespread, being a source of numerous nisunder-
standinge among nonspecialieta (the author knows of a case where the term "unstable

39

FOIOFFIGALIBILONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

laser resonator" was translated in an abstract collection as "laser with falling
mirrors"). In view 0. general acceptance, we, too, have been unable to avoid this
unfortunate terminology.

Inasmuch as ABCD - AD(AD - 1), the "stability" condition (that is, the condition of
seallness of the diffraction losses) can be written in the form AD(AD - 1) < 0 or

0 < AD < l. tor empty two-mirror resonators A - 1 - llkl, D - l - ilk (see (19)).
In the theory of such resonators created before the theory of mulgielement
systems, the notation 1 - llkl ' 31’ l - ilk2 3 g2 was adopted for these parameters.

Thus, the two-mirror resonators are "stable" for 0 < g g2 < l; in this form the

"stability" criterion also figured in the mentioned papers by Kogelaik and Li
and many that followed.

Conditionsof Resonator Equivalence.rhe problem of classifying optical resonators
also includes the problem of selecting equivalent resonators, the solution of which,
in particular, makes it possible to reduce the complex multicomponsnt systems to
simpler two-mirror systems. He shall consider this problem in the diffraction

approximation. Here, first of all, it is necessary to consider that the integral
relation (18) is valid for the component system only when integration over all of

the intermediate surfaces is performed within infinite limits. Hence, it follows
directly that in the general case where both and mirrors have finite dimensions

and actually limit the light beam cross section, it is i-poasible to use the matrix
of total passage through the resonator described in (20) to compile the diffraction
approximation equation. Therefore let us consider another expression of (18), con-
sidering that A, B and D are elements of a beam matrix describing passage through
the resonator in one direction, and the indices 1 and 2 pertain to the left and
right end mirrors.

The simplest formula for reducing an arbitrary multicomponent system to a two-
mirror system with the same sizes of end mirrors follows directly from comparison
of (18) and (19). For this purpose it is sufficient to install these mirrors at a
distance Le - B from each other and give them radii of curvature R1 - L /
quiv equiv

(1 — A) and 82 - Lequiv/(l - D). Making use of the meaning which an element of the

beam matrix B has acquired, it is possible to realize the condition of “stability“
in a very interesting form. Actually, on going from the inequality 0 < AD < 1 to
the equivalent inequality -1 < BC < 0 or 1/30 < -l and substituting B - Lequiv and

C I -1/F. we obtain F/Lequiv > 1. Hith this notation the relation of the "stability
criterion“ to the properties of a resonator as an optical system with focal length
P is especially clearly obvious.

Although any resonator can be thus reduced to a two-mirror resonator, the number of
parameters characterizing it will still remain too large even if we consider that
the and mirrors have given shape (circular, square, and so on). There are S such
parameters: any three elements of the beam matrix (the fourth can be found using
(17)) and the transverse dimensions of the mirrors a1, s2. In order to decrease

this number let us introduce the dimensionless coordinates X1 - xilai, Y1 - y1/a1,
and let us write the field distribution functions in these coordinates: U(X1, Y1)-
u(a1x1, aiYi)' Then (18) acquirestheform

60

FOR1OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
POROFFICIALIBEONLY

am. 7,) - 2;.N""""'Uup’|m1v[a, (x:+ yg) +
+ a. (x: + n) - mm, + mam u (x‘, 1") may” (23)

Only three dimensionless generalized paranetere remain: 01-51 A. G.-:—’ D and
N era, the last of then is usually called the hesnel nuﬁer— this parameter

is equal to the geonetric nean betveen the nulﬁers of the Fresnel zones 2n the sur-
face of the first nirror when observing fro- the center of the second (a1 [13) and
on the surface of the second when observing fron the center of the first1(a2/AB).
The factor 81/82 in front of the integral sign simly describes the variatignof

the average enisaion density on transition of the bean to a nirror of another site.

Resonators with identical values of' the paranetersG N are entirely equiva-
lent in the diffraction approximation. Equivaluce 1indicates that the laws of in-
tegral transformation of the field given in one of the nitrate (in di-enaionlese
coordinates) into the field at the other are entirely identical. hence, in parti-
cular, it follows that the equivalent resonators have entirely identical field dis-
tributions of the natural oscillations at the airrors and equal diffraction losses.

If one of the airrors is so large that it covers the entire light bean, the number
of equivalence paranetere decreases to two. Then we shall always consider the
"infinite" nirror located on the left; then for transition to the diffraction
approximation it is possible to make direct use of the natrix (20). Bron (18) we
obtain an integral relation describing the field transformation after couplets
round trip through the resonator in both directions:

In (2. U)- "2&2‘11')IS exp ‘5?“ [(AD + BC) (1' + ye +
+ a" + v") - 2 (n’ + w») u. (2'. :0 my. (21.)

In dimensionless coordinates. (26) acquires the for-
Mr. V) =- N “"7" ‘ ’Hupunmwoumx' + Y' +
+ X" + Y") — 2 (xx' + W31} 0, (x'. Y’) dX’dY’. (24.)

Here the indices 1 and 2 pertain to the field distribution not on different mirrors.
but on the seas nirror —- on the Eightehand nirror before and after couplets round
trip through the resonator; ll ‘ a [(W), a is the dinenaion of this nirror; A, B,
C and D are elements of the bean matrix of passage through the resonator from the
left nirror to the right nirror; the values of X, I, U have the previous neaning.

As one of the equivalence paraneters it is natural to select the l’rssnel nunber N;
as is obvious froa (26s) the other parsneter can be the sun AD + BC or any of the
values uniquely related to it. It is also possible to select AD, 30 and ABC!) and
one of the u as such a parameter.

In addition to N, stable resonators are usually characterized by the product; AD
(glgz); for unstable resonators, hereafter e coebination of a large 11 with respect

41

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I308 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to absolute nagnitude which we shall call the magnification of the resonator and
denote by H. with N or “equiv ‘ (II/304 - Ila) will be used (see Chapter 3).

It still remains to mention cases where the bean cross section is limited in the
resonator not by mirrors, but by an iris located between them. In particular, this
category includes the resonator with B - 0 in Figure 1.13; in this resonator the
beam cross section is primarily linited not by nirrors. but by a lens. In such
cases it is expedient to construct integral relations. beginning the round trip
through the resonator not with one of the end mirrors. but directly with the ele-
nent limiting the beam cross section. If the initial resonator is sy-Ietric, it is
possible to construct a ayanetric resonator equivalent to it in which the bean
cross section will be limited by the end nirrors; the method of construction is
explained by Pigure 1.11.. An asynetric resonator with internal iris does not reduce
to an ordinary two-nirror resonaton.

l’igure 1.14. Construction of a resonator equivalent
to a sy-etric resonator with internal iris; a)
initial resonator; b) equivalent resonator.

§ 1.3. Modes of an Empty Ideal Resonator end Their Use for Describing the Laser
Situation

Just as the preceding section, this section will not contain detailed information
about the structure of the natural oscillations of different specific types of
resonators; it will be necessary to return to this discussion in the following
chapters. In this section we shall only become familiar with the generally
accepted approach to the classification of the natural oscillations of empty open
resonators. In addition. there will be a discussion of the most important problem
of when and to what degree information about the modes of empty ideal resonators can
be suitable for description of real devices with an active Indium However strange,
in laser literature the given problem has received immeasurably fewer pages of
attention than the mindless use of the results of eapty resonator theory even
where it is clearly impossiole to do this.

Classification of Natural Oscillations. The principles of the classification of
natural oscillations are approximately identical for the majority of types of open
resonators. Let us explain then in the example of a resonator made up of two com-
pletely reflecting plane rectangular nirrors 2a x 2b in size (-e _<_ x j a, -b i y <
b) installed at a distance i. from each other (0 i z i 1.). As will be demonstrated
in the second chapter, the field oi high-Q typie of Oscillations of such a resonator
with very lsrge Fresnel numbers (a [ML >> 1, b In >> 1) has in the first approxi—

nation the form of standing waves with respect to all three directions:
62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Oﬂ (WHHM. USE ONLY

“at" (z: y: 3- 0 - “P (" “one." antique: (z) “a (V)! (25)
Ihete , . .. _
m- 23+ m-?:§:§:::::
u.m-(:.°:)“ ~-‘I:§:::::::

are functions of the type of (13). n and nare anallintegers called tranzverr indi-
)

indicee. q 3 22/). is also an integer, but an extrenely large ntﬂer (10 -10 called
the axial index.

Let ue rewrite (25) in the forn

“MIN '3 17‘," “m (I) “n (y)[°‘P‘(¢-‘ (M) — OXpl(-— ‘w— (01)].

from the standing wave we obtain the cuatonery sun of two coherent light beane
following along the zv-axia in opposite directions and having field distribution
oou.(z) u.(y) on any reference plane perpendicular to the ruin.

We have already become partly familiar with the properties of such light been in

§ 1.1. Each been coneiete of four plane waves, the propagation directione of which
. _ _.. ‘I.-.

are characterized by angles of inclination ¢,- 3:52:17“; a. =- :1: 5-453-55- (see

Figure 1.15). All four angles between these directions and the ruin are identi-

cal ana are a-Va: + a: 3%1/(Liﬂ)'+(L:—‘r.

 

 

Figure 1.15. Directions of plane uavea entering into
the oscillation node of a flat cavity.

The expreeeiona for the anglea of inclination (juet an the formulae for the coupler
field amplitude of light been eating up the cavity nodea preaented in 5 2.1 and
note precise than (25)) include, in addition to the transveree indicea a and n, the
wavelength of the natural oscillation A which also depmda on the axial index q.
Hanover. renenbering that all of this intonation in the final analysis ia required

63

MWLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to describe a laser. it is only possible to be interested in oscillations. the
wavelength of which falls in the anplificstion bend of the active medium in the
majority of media the anplification band width M is so narrow that expression

M << A is satisfied (with significant "reserve“); therefore in the fornilas for
the transverse field structure it is possible to consider the wavelength fixed and
equal to the wavelength at the center of the anplificetion band 10. hence, it
follows that the field distribution of the transverse direction and, with it. the
radiation divergence are uniquely related to the transverse node indicea. and they
do not depend on the axial index.

I

i

m——..

Figure 1.16. Determination of the phase velocity

of the bean which is a superposition of plane waves:

1, ll — initial and final positions of isolated
fronts.

Now let us consider the prohlen of phase relations in a resonator and natural
oscillation frequencies. He shall not write out the finished formulas. but derive
then beginning with the field distribution (25) and at the ease tine becoming
faailiar with sons of the properties of light beans which we have still not

touched on. For this purpose, let us turn to Figure 1.16, where for simlicity

two out of four of the plane waves naking up a single bean are represented. Let us
isolate one of the points in the space 0 at which the phases of these two waves
coincide. Have fronts first occupying the position I. intersect at this point. It
is easy to see that the surface on which the total field phase has the sane value
as at point 0 is the plane 1’ passing through this point and normal to the z-axis.

In some tine interval At both waves travel a distance h - At, end the fronts are
shifted from position I to position 11; the point of their intersection can travel
a distance greater than h and equal to c At/cos a, where o is the angle which the
normals to the wave fronts unite with the rude. Together with the point 0, the
equiphasal surface of the total light been is also shifted by the sane distance.
The shift rate of this surface is called the phase velocity; it deter-ines the dis—
tance oetween nodes of a standing wave torned as a result of interference of two
identical counter beans. In the given case the Ehase velocity is greater than the
speed of light c in the ratio of l/cos a x: 1 + a [2; in this ratio “,1“ the 413..

tance between the standing wave nodes Zilq exceeds the wavelength A.“ - ch/uénq.
Considering what the angles of inclination a are equal to for plane waves entering
into the node (25), we obtain the desired formla

21 i
{— ¢+55mu (26)

Ill'l

6‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0:
“:3“? - %' (2M + 6n“).

("LL—2' f+("—'—“)} ‘ “

Formulas (26) and (27) describe the natural oscillation spectrum; theoretically.

they could be derived from the standard relation for the oscillations of mode (25)
inside a rectangular parallelepiped i X 2a K 2b:

(27)

all
where a” _ T

 

MW

Lgt us analyze these formulas. In our case of a flat cavity with szlli >> 1.
b/M. >> 1. the value of dun/21! with small a, n (that is, for the lowest modes) is

small and has the nature of a correction to the integral q. The neanins of this

correction becomes clear if we rewrite (26) as follows: lull/Au“! - 5"“ - 2nq. Here

(mi/Aug is the phase lead which would occur on a complete round trip through the

resonator (that is, on the path 2!.) if the phase velocity were equal to c; 2‘lq is
the true phase lead which obviously auat be a multiple of 21! for self-inning of
the bean. Hence, it is obvious that 6“ is the amount by which the phase lead is

diminished as a result of the fact that the phase velocity exceeds c. This phase
correction, as should be expected (as a result of the fact that the transverse
structure of the field and. with it. the phase velocity are constant along the
length of the cavity) is proportional to i; it increases quickly with a decrease in
characteristic dimensions of the field structure in the transverse direction 2s]

(a + l), 2bl(n + l)

V

Figure 1.17. Amplification bands of the active
medium and oscillation nodes of a cavity with

different axial indicea q.

Thus. the resonance frequencies are deterained prinrily by the axial index q and
they are grouped around values of quell which form an equidistant “comb" in the
frequency scale with an interval between adjacent lines of Am - well. (or Av - c/Zi).
For ordinary cavity lengths, this interval is so snail that for the saplificetion
band of the medium, as a rule. there are many lines with different q (Figure 1.17).
The number of frequencies at which lasing is theoretically realizable is still
greater if we consider the possible versions of the transverse indices a, n.

Let us present a brief discussion of the adopted terninology. For oscillations of
the type of (2S), usually the notation I'm-“q is used; if we are talking about only

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN
I70! OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

the transverse structure of the field, the index q is omitted. Thus. moo is the
lowest mode with m - n - 0 having the least divergence of the emission (see 5 1.1).
Analogous notation is also used for stable resonators with rectangular nirrors; the
first two indices as before denote the numbers of the nodes of the field distribu-
tion function with respect to ‘the corresponding areas. If the mirrors have a dif-
ferent forn, then the modes are nunbered differently (for circular mirrors its
principles are discussed in §5 2.1, 2.2); therefore in the general case we shall
frequently designate the mode by one transverse index I.

When reading laser literature it is still necessary to consider that in the first
papers on the theory of optical cavities, the lowest oscillations of the

type were called, by analogy with the microwave band, axial, and the rest (with. non-
zero transverse indices), transverse. Subsequently, when describing the spectral

or angular enission characteristics of mltimod oscillators, a somewhat different
meaning began to be attached to the terms "axial" and "transverse." He shall dis-
cuss this in more detail in § 2.10; now let us only note that when we are talking
about the angular structure of emission, usually all the modes are called trans-
verse without putting moo in a special category.

Integral Equation and Natural Oscillations of an Arbitrary Empty Resonator. Although
the above-presented analysis is also instructive, it in no way can be considered
sufficiently complete; in it we even failed to nention the most important problen
of diffraction losses, but this was done purposely: whereas the phase relations
from which formulas of the type of (26). (27) follow can be obtained from very
simple arguments, the situation is measurably more complicated with diffraction
losses of flat cavities. It is true that Schawlow and Townes [2] made elementary
estimates of losses based on calculating the number of passes which an inclined
light beam can make before leaving the cavity completely, and based on identity of
the time expended on this with the average lifetime of the photons in the cavity.
As a result of the ohviousnees of it, this simplified procedure was at first
definitely of value. but the calculations by Fox and Li [9] demonstrated that it is
in essence entirely unjustifiable: not only the absolute magnitude of the true
losses. but the entire nature of their dependence on the cavity parameters and -
slopes of the light beams making up the modes differ sharply fron the results of
such estimates. After publication of a series of articles by Vaynshteyn, it became
clear that calculation of the number of passes of an inclined beam must be supple-
mented at least by calculation of what proportion of the emission approaching the
edge of the resonator is reflected back (inside the cavity) as a result of edge
diffraction. As will be obvious in § 2.2, these calculations are hardly primitive;
therefore we have still not begun to deal with the problem of diffraction losses;
going somewhat ahead. let us only note that in a flat cavity with fixed configura-
tion the losses increase with the transverse indices of the modes. just as the
phase corrections.

Thus, let us proceed to a stricter investigation of an arbitrary empty resonator.
In accordance with [16], as the basis for the analysis let us use the universal

expression describing passage of an arbitrary light beam through just as arbitrary
an empty resonator (in both directions) having the for-

u, (r, y) = exp (21kb,) ﬁn, (z, y); (28)

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

here u1(x. y) and u2(x, y) is the complex field amplitude on any selected reference
surfncg before and after passage through the resonator in both directions, exp
(ikLo)P is the integral conversion operator including all the necessary operations
(for example, ingegrstion over intermediate surfaces. and so on). As an example of
an expression of the type of (28) it is possible to use formula (24), where the
operator is described for the special case of a resonator made of elements with
spherical surfaces and with infinitely large left-hand mirror.

The exponential factor, the magnitude of which depends on the exact value of the
eLission wavelength corresponds to the total phase lead in twice the optical length
of the resonator 2L . The result of the effect of the operator 3 remaining after
subtraction of this factor on any complex amplitude distribution function u(x, y).
can be considered independent of the wavelength if it does not go beyond the limits
of the amplification band of the active medium (after the above-investigated example
of a flat cavity, this does not require special explanations).

In addition to the total phase lead in the length of the resonator, in (28) it would
also be necessary to consider the phase discontinuities on reflection of the beam

from end mirrors. If the mirrors are metallic, the phase discontinuity will be n;
this case also corresponds to a standing wave of the type of (25) (the "nodes“ on
the mirrors are formed as a result of the fact that the counter nodes are in oppo-
site phase here). Inasmuch as on a complete round trip through the resonator there
are two reflections from the mirrors, the total phase-lead on their account is 23
and can be neglected (which would make it possible not to consider the phase discon-
tinuities on the mirrors when compiling expression (2b)). If the reflecting mirrors
have multilayered dielectric coatings. the phase discontinuities are not equal to n.
In ordernot to consider them separately, it is possible when performing the
analysis to consider the resonator to consist not only of dielectric mirrors. but
metallic nirrors, the surfaces of which are located where the field node closest to
the dielectric mirror was located.

From formula (28) it follows that the integral equation for finding the natural.
modes, which is a condition ofreconstructing the beam after a

total round trip through the resonator, can be written in the form

ya (x. y) - exp (2ilrL,) pa (1:, y). (29)

Obviously, u must be an eigenfunction of the integral operator 6. Let this operator
have a set of eigenfunctions um and eigenvalues corresponding to them 8. - exp(-16; -

6:) so that sum - exp(-id; - 5:)un. Substituting on in (29), we obtain

1‘... -- oxp (— 6;) exp I! (ZkL. _. 5;” (30)

In order that the complex amplitude distribution be reproduced not only with respect
to form, but also have the previous phase, the value of Y must be real. Hence,
it follows that the total phase lead ZkLo - 6; must be 2nd. where q is an integer.

Thus, the phase condition 2kLo - 6; - an has the same form as (26), (27), and 6; is

the phase correction known to us (in other resonators it can. of course, assume
quite different values than in a flat cavity). The emission intensity after a round

67
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

trip through the resonator turns out to be multiplied by exp(-26:), and the value
of l - expo-26:) is none other than the diffraction emission losses.

When calculating the mode structure many authors do not use the above-discussed pro-
cedure based on analysis of passage of a light be.) through a cavity, but they find
steady solutionsof the differential field equations,- inposing the corresponding
boundary conditions on the mirrors. The emission attenuation caused by. the
presence of diffraction losses is described in this case by introduction of the com-
plex frequency w - w' — in)". so that the dependence of the field on time acquires
the form exp(-imt) - ex(-iw't - w"t) (w' and u" are real). The relation of w' and
m" to the eigenvalues of the operator 9 is very easy to establish. Obviously, the
real part of of the complex frequency figures in the phase conditions such that for
m' formla ”no - (c/29.) (Zﬂq + 6;) is valid as before. Finally. inasmuch as the

field amplitude varies by exp(-6:) times on a complete round trip through the reson-
ator, that is. in the tine ZLo/c, then 6: - Role”; on» 'I'. I (c/2Lo)6'l'|.

Resonator with Active Layer. Let us proceed with a study of the problem of how the
resonator properties vary on introduction of an amplifying medium into it; here,
just as when analyzing the properties of an ordinary eIpty resonator, we shall pro-
ceed in accordance with reference [16].

In order to explain the relation between the spatial distribution of the emission in
real lasers and in enpty resonators, let us consider the ideal case of an infinite
plane-parallel active layer of thickness !. placed in an arbitrary open resonator
(Figure 1.18); the resonator will be depicted as the two-mirror resonator for sin-
plicity). We shall consider that the emission gain with respect to intensity 1:. in
(cm'l) is distributed uniformly with respect to the layer; the index _of refrac-s‘
tion of the layer saterial "0 is also constant and can differ from one (the surfaces
of the layer are transparent in the latter case). Let also only one of the mirrors
have the reflection coefficient equal to one as before; the reflection coefficient

of the second will be 11' < 1.

 

Figure 1.18. Active layer in an open resonator.

First, let us consider the transmission of a light wave through the active layer.
The field distribution u(x2, y ) on the second surface of the layer can be expressed

in terms of the field distribu ion on the first surface Mag y ) using formula (2)
from 5 1.1 if we substitute 2 - IL in it and replace the way enéth in the empty

space A by the wavelength in the layer A’ - Moo, and k, by the complex propagation

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2
constant 2n/A‘ - “gain/2‘ Neglecting the terms kgainuz - :1) [42. and kgainb'z -

yl)zlol. in the exponent of the expression under the integral sign and proceeding to
the wavelength in enpty space A, we obtain

. . 2x ‘ . .

.5?“ u" ‘ x —: -
—L.——) we {— a—M *1: x
X “(In ”ddtudlh-

From this relation it is obvious that the for. of the wave front on passage through
an active layer of thickness 1. is transformed ﬁestas on traveling the distance l-lno
in empty space; the optical thickness of the layer so!- determines only the magni—
tude of the total phase lead; the field amplitude is multiplied by expat 2/2)
(the first of these derivations also follows from the form of the beam :33: for
a plane-parallel layer of dielectric; see Table 1.1).

how let us construct an empty resonator equivalent to the given one, that is, having
the same transverse structure of the oscillations. Let us do this as follows: let
us replace the mirror with R' < l by a mirror of the same shape but totally reflec-
ting; let us remove the active medium; finally, let us decrease the length of the
section in vhich the layer was located by in - l/n ) (in the case depicted in Fig-
ure 1.18 it is simply necessary to install mirrors at the distance I. v - L - 9.

(l - l/n ) from each other). Pros the above-performed analysis of tfaggmission of
a beam t rough the active layer it follows that the integral equation of the reson-
ator with active medium will differ from the equation of an empty resonator con-
structed in this way only by the constant factor in the right-hand side:

we. at) =Vﬁ’omzu-L. -H'xcl)i’u(z.u)- (29,,

here L0 is the total optical length of t» resonator with the medims (for the case
of Figure 1.18, equal to L + !.(no - l), is the integral operator of the equivalent
empty resonator. the eigenvalues of which will be denoted as before as 8II - mud". -
5").

m

It is remarkable that neither introduction of a uniforsly amplifying medium or re-
placement of the totally reflecting mirror by a semitranaparent one implies alter-
ation of the transverse structure of the natural oscillations. Their spectrum is
subjected to significant retuning. Using the same arguments as in the case of an
empty resonator. we obtain the following formulas defining the spectrum of the na-
tural frequencies of the resonator with the active medium

40;... = £79"? + 61-).

I). ',t [.' i—kr].

(. n: 6,. i In? ,I
The first of then, it would appear, does not differ from the formulas for (9‘ already
known to us; however, here the optical length of the resonator includes the optical
length of the active layer n21 as a term. uhich changes the situation somewhat. The

fact is that the index of re raction of the amplifying medium essentially depends on
the position of the line inside the amplification band; this can cause disturbance

(31)

69

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the equidistancc of the frequencies in view of their "pulling“ (us, for
example, [17]). As a rule, the divergence of the emission is not influenced by
effects of this type, and therefore they will not be considered here.

The second formula arouses great interest. According to this formula, the introduc-
tion of the active medium has an enormous effect on the damping rate of the natural
oscillations. This leads to a complete change in the picture of the resonance
properties of the system as a whole.

Actually, the condition of overlap of the resonance curves corresponding to two
adjacent resonance frequencies of the system «31 and «)2 can be written in the form

[3]

I»; — «4| < (vi + «0/1 (32)

If the active medium in the optical cavity is absent or is not excited, this condi-
tion is almost always satisfied, for the natural frequencies of the individual modes
are comparatively close together. and the losses causing damping usually are not

so small (their basic source frequently is not the diffraction effects, but inactive
absorption in the medium and exit of the emission through a aemitransparent mirror).
Satisfaction of the given condition, in turn. means that when testing the use of
this system as a passive filter its resonance properties were not manifested at all,
and it would be meaningless to talk about the existence of individual types of
oscillations.

The situation is quite different in the presence of an excited active medium. In
accordance with (31), the values of u" decrease; on approaching the lasing threshold,
some of them approach zero. As a result, under conditions of regenerative gain,

the resonance properties of the system can be manifested fully in spite of satisfac-
tion of condition (32) in the absence of stimulation of the active medium. The
resonance properties of the system are expressed still more sharply during steady
lasing when one or several values of to“ are equal to zero (generally speaking, as a
result of a continuous "makeup" of the lasing by spontaneous emission, they also are
very slightly different from zero here, but this can almost always be neglected).

Thus, in the case of a lasing laser the situation is not at all similar to that which
would occur if the laser resonator were used as a passive filter and were excited by
an external source. Therefore when describing the operation of a laser it is not
worthwhile to use concepts connected with the attenuation rate in an empty resonator
such as the Q-factor and resonance width of the line. Practice demonstrates that
this only leads to every imaginable error: one gets the idea that in lasers with
large losses per pass, the lasing process is of a "nonreaonant" nature. Therefore
we shall not introduce the given concepts or use them.

Suitability of the Standard Model of an Open Optical Cavity for Describing Real Lasers-
Analysis of the above-presented example makes it possible to formulate conditions,

the satisfaction of which permits direct use of the results of the theory of open,
empty resonators to describe the field structure in real lasers. The most important
of these conditions are as follows [16]:

1. High optical uniformity of the active medium is required.

Passage of the wave front through an inhomogeneous medium cannot be reduced to
traveling the corresponding path in empty space; the selection of the equivalent

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

empty resonator is complicated, and in many cases it becomes impossible in general.

2. In the case of a resonator with external mirrors, the effect of the light re—
flected from the and surfaces of the active element must be excluded. He have

already discussed the importance of this condition in the preceding section; in

condition is satisfied. In individual cases (see 5 6.1) even such measures turn out
to be insufficient, and in order to eliminate aide effects it is necessary to in-

3. when deriving equation (29s), a model of an infinite uniform layer was used.

For its applicability it is theoretically necessary that the index of refraction and
the inverse populationbecconstant not only directly between the mirrors, but also in
the entire region where the emission field has noticeable intensity. The influence
of the lateral surfaces of the active elements, the cell walls. the surfaces

of the discharge excitation electrodes, and so on should not be manifested.

In real lasers, the latter condition is almost never satisfied. Horeover, the role
of the aperture irises limiting the lasing tone frequently is played not by
mirrors. but by the side surfaces of an active rod or the cell walls. In order at
least to exclude the appearance of any type of additional beams observed in the
first experiments with solid-state lasers [18. 19) and arising as a result of total
internal reflection from the lateral surfaces, these surfaces are usually frosted
(more rarely, the rod is submerged in en iIIIersion udium). Usually partial scatter-
ing of the diffracting radiation still occurs, and the open resonator model is not
entirely correct. However, models of the type of the "ideal dielectric rod between
infinite mirrors" or "ideal dielectric cylinder inside a circular infinite wave
guide" are entirely inapplicable for the description of real lasers; it is surpris-
ing that papers dealing with the study of such mdals as applied to the laser situa-
tion are sometimes still encountered.

Inasmuch as the decrease in the role of light scattered on the lateral surfaces is
accompanied by an increase in the degree of directionality of the emission. during
estimates of the limiting system characteristics it is still legitimate to make use
of the open resonator model, which we shall continue to do hereafter.

Is. In order that the laser emission field distribution be able in general to be
described by the natural solutions of a steady integral equation, it is necessary
that the lasing conditions remain unchanged for a sufficiently long time. This
requirement is again far from always satisfied. Thus, in the 1960's. in a nutter of
theoretical [20, 21] and experimental [22, 23] papers it use demonstrated that
during giant pulse operation of a laser with flat cavity and comparatively homogene-
ous medium, the spatial distribution 05 the go and the emission field changes
extremely rapidly (during the time 10' to 10 sec). In such a situation it is
inconceivable to consider the spatial structure of the emission unrelated to the

lasing kinetics. The most fundamental papers on this relation for the case of a flat
cavity belong to Suchkov and Letokhov [26, 25].

The operating conditions of the majority of types of lasers are nonsteady also in
the absence of Q-switching of the resonator (here we are primarily dealing with the
presence of characteristic emission "spikes" which are well known to specialists

in solid-state lasers). A detailed theoretical description of the time—space

51

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structure of the emission turns out to be possible only in certain simplest cases
(for example, [26]), never realized in reality. Therefore in the overwhelming ma-
jority of papers the quasisteady approximation is used which does not talus into
account the peculiarities of the lasing kinetics. The nature of the errors made .'
here is clear if we consider that in real lasers the role of the "seed“ in shaping
the individual lasing pulses ("spikes“) is almost always played by the spontaneous
noise emission. The light beam becomes narrowly directional only after multiple
passage of the "seed" emission through the resonator (for lasers with unstable
resonators this process will he considered in § 4.1).. Therefore the departures
from the quasisteady state of the operating conditions, as a rule, lead to some
increase in the emission divergence.

In spite of this fact, the quasisteady approximation is in many cases efficient.

If departures from the ideal resonator (and with them, also angular divergence in
the quasisteady approximation) are large, then the peculiarities of the kinetics,
for obvious reasons, are felt little in the resultant width of the radiation pattern.

In particular, the angular distribution of the emission begins to coincide approxi-
mater in the giant-pulse and ordinary lasing conditions.

For the case of ordinary free lasing conditions using the quasiateady multinodal
approximation, it is possible to achieve satisfactory description of the properties
even of lasers with highly homogeneous medium ([26], see 5 2. 6).

Thus, having set forth all the necessary stipulations with respect to the possibi-
lity of using the open resonator model in the quasisteady approximation, let us
consider another aspect of the' 'reaonator and active medium“ problem.

5 1.6. Efficiency of Excitation Energy Conversion in Laser Resonators

One of the basic requirements imposed on a laser resonator is high. conversion effi-
ciency of the energy stored in the excited. active medium to atimtlated emission
energy. In order to achieve this, it is necessary:

1) to select the general configuration of the resonator (the placement of the mirrors
and their transverse dimensions) so that the entire volume of the active medium will
be filled with laser emission or, in flow lasers, the entire medium passes through
the stimulated beam. This condition is trivial (although laser builders are not
always sufficiently careful to see that it is satisfied);

2) to select the optimal magnitude of the emission losses. In the case of flat or
stable cavities, the emission losses are the transmission coefficient of the exit
mirror 1 - R3 in the case of unstable resonators, the emission losses are the para-

meter 1 - l/H which has a similar role, where H is the magnification of the resona-
tor. '

In this section we shall discuss the meaning and the method of selecting optimal
losses. This question is the subject of a very broad literature. Methods of cal-
culating ordinary type laser efficiencies (for lasers with stationary medium in
which an inverse population is created) as a function of the properties of the medium
and the value of the exit mirror trannission coefficient were developed generally

in 1962-196, and they are discussed in a number of monographs and surveys [27, 28,

52

FOR omml. USE ONLY
FOR1DFFKJAI.UBB(MQLY

17]. The results of the majority of experiments pertain to the case of a flat

cavity and are based on formal solution of the equations of emission transport of
the type

"* =(Ir —o)I ‘"—' — k I
T Zita) o 4-: dl (Fay-0.) -,
Key: a. gain

where I and l are the intensities of the emission fluxes going to the exit mirror

and in the opposite direction; kgain is the emission gain in the medium, 00 is the

so-called coefficient of "harmful" losses; in totally reflecting (z - 0) and exit

(2 - E) mirrors the following boundary conditions are imposed: Id”.o - I_|z_°,

I_lz.£ - R'I+|z-2' This method is insufficiently clear and, as we shall see later.

it is not always applicable; let us consider the given problem by somewhat different
methods.

Efficiency of Energy Conversion in an Element 0f Volume of the Medium. Let us first
define the maximum possible energy removal per unit volume of active medium; the
operating conditions will be considered quasisteady, and theexcitation conditions
of the medium will be considered given. For solution of this problem it is neces-
sary first of all to know how the number of photons which are produced in the indi-
cated volume per unit time as a result of resonance interaction of the laser emis-
sion with the active medium depends on the laser emission flux density I

(photon-cm'zisec'l). This number is equal to Ikgain(l)' The standard form of the

dependence of lk88 on I is represented by the curve I in Figure 1.19. First comes

in
the linear section, the slope of which is determined by the magnitude of the unsatu-

rated gain of the weak signal kgain‘ Then saturation begins to be manifested, and

the gain decreases. For large I the product Ik3‘1n(l) obviously approaches the
limit Pincl equal to the number of acts of filling the inverse population as a re—
sult of pumping. It is clear that the form of the curve I cannot depend strongly on
such specific characteristics of the medium as the system of levels, the nature of
broadening of the operating transition line, and so on.

Let us consider the processes of nonresonance ("inactive") absorption of the laser
emission on admixtures occurring in the same unit volume. The number of these
processes is equal to 100, where oo(cm'1) is the same coefficient of "harmful"
losses as in the above-presented equations for the radiation transfer (sometimes
the absorption losses in the resonator mirrors also play a noticeable role. but
they, as a rule, can be considered distributed over the entire length in the calcu-
lations. and it is possible to introduce the corresponding correction to 00). Two
saraight lines are plotted inPigure $.19, one of which (11) corresponds to 00 -
k k

8

IS. and the other (111), do - sin/50'

gain

The contribution of the investigated unit volume to the overall balance of the
number of photons in the entire device is Ikgain(1) - 100. From the figure it is

obvious that this difference is maximal for defined laser emission density; both

53

sru:<nnnt1a1.uss‘onmx
FYII1U71NI‘&!.Q#N350I‘&\

    
   

I I 4 i J M 3 M M' 0 I

Figure 1.19. Number of elementary processes in an
active nedium as a function of emission density
(the values of Ikgsin’ 100 are plotted on the y-axis.

the height of the peak and its width increase with an increase in the ratio kg‘m/ao

(in the figure the arrows indicate the dangers of the flux densities for which the
contribution is no less than 801 of its maximal value).

Now it is possible to estimate the efficiency of the energy conversion. It is con-
veniently characterized by the Value of X ' [It ”13(1) - ”OI/Pym; this is the ratio

of the real contribution to the photon balance to the contribution in the case of
an ideal laser in which the "harmful" losses are absent (00 - 0). and I is so large
that the entire inverse population is "processed" into laser emission. For exact

calculation of X. it is necessary to know the ion of the function kssin - kgainuh

which varies, first of all, with the nature of broadening of the operating transi-
tion line. In the case of uniform broadening when all of the atom in the upper
laser level participate identically in the amplification process, it is extrenely
simple to establish this relation. Actually, in the steady-state node it is neces-
sary to realize equilibrium between the processes of filling the inverse population
and its decay. In the inportnnt case of the most effective four-level nedis with
"frozen" lower level of the operating transition (see [17]), the equilibrium condi-
tion has the simplest form Ppunp - 1k “gain/1' where A is the proportionality

+
gain
factor between the inverse population and It , I is the spontaneous decay time of

the excited state. Hence. it follows that gain

P.“ :92?“
"w "‘ n75 " ram-

Key: a. pump
0 0 .
Inasmuch as for I 0kg.“ kgain’ then TPPWIA kgain’ the ratio ‘r/A in the de-

nominator is celled the nonlinearity coefficient and usually is denoted by the letter
at [27]. Thus,

54

MOI-“GALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I: 1 - "' , <33)
(5() 7%!

Key: a. gain

Considering these relations. the resultant formula for x acquires the fort:

a] 0
1(0) - W‘Fﬁd' (34)

The value of x determined by this formla reaches its maximum value Km for a! .
“gain/00 - 1; this value is

x... -(1— V «.11: —,'.'.) (35)

. 0
The graph of the dependence of l".x on ham/00 following frat (35) is presented
in Pisure 1.20 (curve I).

If the pulping power and the density of the laser emission are not distributed too
nonunifornly with respect to the volume of the active nedims, formula (35) gives an
estimate of xm for the entire device as a whole; as we shall see. in this case

X.“ is wholly determined by the ratio kgs inlao’ It is remarkable that the attained

efficiency of energy conversion does not8 at all depend on the fact that the active
nediun is used in the losing or anplifying systes. but it is determined only by the
characteristizs of the medium and the conditions of its excitation. It is only

necessary for any laser to insure optinsl density of the stinulated or amplified
emission.

I...

I

(J

 

Figure 1.20. Energy conversion efficienc in a

laser nediun as a function of the ratio twin/00’

The prinaryo subject of investigstion in this hook is lasers. The neaning of the

parameter Resin/“0 for then is well known: it is none other than the rstio of the

55

W“ W "" “‘M‘.~
I0! 0'11C1Al.llﬂi(ﬂ¥b¥

pumping intensity to the value where kgain is edhal to do (that is. the lasing
I l

threshold is reached in the absence of “useful“ emission losses). This ratio .
usually is called exceeding the lasing threshold and is denoted by n . Then (35)
begins to coincide with the corresponding factor in the known f s for laser
efficiency [29, 17] which, in addition to this factor, also include the efficiency
of the system for exciting the medium and other similar parameters (much later
than in [29], formula (35) was also obtained by Rigrod [30]).

Accounting for Nonuniformity of the Distribution of Laser Radiation Lengthwise of

the CSVIty. There are a number of causes which can give rise to nonuniformity
of the distribution of stimulated emission with respect to the volume of the active
medium even for entirely uniform excitation of it. Let us begin with the fact that
it is possible to do away with the presence of a "fine" structure of the intensity
distribution with respect to length only during operation of the laser on a large
nunber of modes with different axial indices (which also usually occurs). The

fact is that only superposition of many standing waves of the type of sin qua/L
with different q gives more or less uniform total emission distribution with respect
to length; in other words, for a broad emission spectrum it is possible to neglect
the interference of the emission fluxes following with respect to the laser in the
forward and return directions and to consider that I is simply equal to the sum of
the densities of these fluxes. For a flat cavity. lasing is also usual in many

transverse modes; this, by analogous arguments, permits departure from the trans-
verse mode structure (see 5 2.4).

Another reason causing nonuniformity of the distribution 1 in the medium is the

presence of high gain on its length. It is clear that the uniformity of the dis-
tribution with respect to length increases as the reflection coefficient of the

exit mirror 8' approaches one; however, here the average emission density inside the
resonator increases rapidly. sooner or later beginning to exceed the optimal value.

It is again possible to determine the most advantageous reflection coefficient R'
from the point of view of achieving maximum output emission er using formulas "'

(33). (34). Substituting the optimal flux density Iopt - ( gain/00 - l)/a in (33).
we obtain kgain - OORgsin' Obviously, once the total flux density is inevitably

nonuniform with respect to length it is advantageous that it fluctuate around I t;
here kgain must fluctuate around ob ggin’ and the average value with respect :89

length of , the laser kgain can be taken equal to this value.

The condition of steady-state conditions in our case has the form

Warn [2 (I; - a.) 1] =1. (36)

where l is the length of the specimen (the diffraction losses of a flat cavity can
be neglected in the given investigation). Substituting kgain - J°0k:.1n' we obtain

In(iln.'...) - 2o.z(Vk;./o.— 1).

 

Knowing Répt it is easy to estimate the degree of nonuniformity of the distribution
1 with respect to length. Actually, let the flux density incident on the exit

56

\ Palomiustom

.1
FOR1DFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

mirror of the resonator be equal to ; the density of the flux reflected from it is
R'I . Then the density of the flux cident on the totally reflecting mirror is

0
- so)l] - 10/57. Hence, it follows that the ratio of the total

3'10 exp[again
flux densities at the exit mirror and the totally reflecting mirror of a flat cavity
is (1 + law/2&7.

It is easy to see that the total flux assumes extremal values near the end mirrors.
Thus, it is possible to consider that the maximum I is larger than the minimal I by

I i I
(l + Ropt)/ZJ§opt times where Ropt is defined by the formula (36). It only remains

to use Figure 1.19 to check whether the different densities go beyond the limits of
the region inside which x is sufficiently close to x-a‘. If they do not go outside

the region, then formulas (35), (37) can be used without considering the nonunifor-
mity of the emission distribution with respect to length of the resonator. In the
overwhelming majority of cases, that is the way it is. There are two reasons for
this. First, the ratio (1 + R')/ZJiT greatly exceeds one only for very small R'.
Thus. if R' - 0.1, then (1 + RUIN?r I 1.70, and the total flux is distributed not
too nonuniformly. Sec8ndly, from formula (37) it is obvious that R‘ t is very small,
as a rule, for large kgain/OO; in this case the maximum difference 33 Figure 1.19

is very broad. For these reasons formulas (35). (37) are valid in an enormous range
of variation of the laser parameters. In reference [31] it was demonstrated that
they cannot be used only for such large "harmfuf‘losses on the length of the sample
001 that the following inequality begins to be satisfied:

I
(1- V _):;~-:-goxvl—o.(l—z)]dsa'_:°_‘:_(r:_°ﬁ.

. O
O

The value in the right-hand side of the inequality is a value of X averaged on the
length of the sample, which would be reached if all the filling of the inverse

population as a result of pumping were "processed“ into lasing photons which would
subsequently be lost only as a result of absorption on the path to the exit mirror.

Let us present another example of the use of formula (36) to estimate the efficiency
of the laser. This time we shall consider that measures are taken for spectral

selection of the emission and lasing is single-frequency. Then a standing wave with
a period of AIZ is set up along the active element. If the emission fluxes propa-
gated in the forward and return directions do not differ very strongly with respect
to density (R' is not too small), then the intensity modulation depth in a standing
wave period approaches 100%. In this case it is necessary to perform averaging of
X(I) over the flux densities in the interval from 0 to ZI, where l is the mean value

of the density. Considering_that in view of linearity the losses as a result of
inactive absorption loo . 001. we obtain

_i“ aIu— _0 __
xmuﬁoj—a—J—H “3;“. Fig.1..

V: -l- *3. (34a)

57

INJI‘OFIICIAI.U§IZ(HVLY
FIHICNNNCIAI.UBIICMVLY

(the factor 1 - cos c - 2 unﬁt/2) describes the stream intensity as a function
of the coordinate in a standing wave period); the maximum of x is reached for

a 0 2 -
a1 (1/2)I(k8amlao) ’3 1].

x... =- 1 + 4- 0.114. - a} ’ «.114... (35‘)

The graph of this value as a function of k9 1nloo is presented in Figure 1.20 (curve
11). From the figure it is obvious that ti: energy conversion efficiency on making
the transition from nultimode to single'frequency lasing decreases noticeably even
if the spectral selector which isolates one frequency is ideal and does not intro-
duce additional losses.

Although all the preceding formulas of this section were derived for a defined type
of active medium, they are easily extended to the case of media with the same uni-

form broadening of the operating transition line, but with arbitrary level diagram.
For a different level diagram (in particular. for a three-level medium, an example

of which is the ruby), the inverse population balance equation acquires a sore
complicated form. but the final formula (33) describing the dependence of k 0T;

1 remains the same; only the nonlinearity coefficient a is expressed in terig of
the parameters of the median otherwise [27]. In the right-hand sides of formulas

(34) and (35) the factor kgain/arpunp appears which was equal to one for four-level

media with "frozen" lower level of the laser transition. and in all other cases this
factor turns out to be less than one. The reduction in conversion efficiency by
comparison with the four-level medium is explained by the fact that in the presence

of atoms on the lower level of the operating transition a part of the pumping power
is spent on equalizing the populations of the upper and lower levels without caus-
ing the appearance of amplification.

If broadening of the operating transition line is nonuniforn, the form of kgain(1)

begins to depend on the signal spectrum and, in the general case, differs from (33).
After replacement of (33) by the corresponding expreeion, the entire subsequent
analysis can be performed by the same scheme. It is not worthwhile to reproduce

it here: we shall return somewhat later to the case of a nonunifornly broadened
line. considering it by more efficient means.

The above-discussed approach is based on investigation of the energy balance in an
element of volume of the active medium. This is convenient in that it permits
estimation of the attainable energy conversion efficiency in a laser, in practice
based on data on the properties of the medium and its excitation system. we have
noted that it is possible to use formulas (36). (35) independently of whether therde-
vice is an oscillator or amplifier; the resonator parameters were introduced into

the analysis in essence only to estinate the possible errors. If we are interested
in more detail in the properties of the lasers themselves (in particular, the de-
pendence of their efficiency on the transmission of the exit mirror). it will be
more useful to consider a somewhat different approach which will now be discussed.

General Excitation Energy and Stimulated'ﬁmission Balanced” power expended on .excit-

ing the upper laser level is expended along two channels: for spontaneous and stimu-
lated transitions. In turn. the photons created as a result ofatimulated transi-

tions can either be absorbed by sources of "harmful“ losses or exit free the laser

58

FOR 0FF“JAI.USE(”§LY
l1)! OlﬁﬂCJAl.lEﬂB(NVLY

successfully, forming a useful signal. In accordance with this system, the expres-
sion for the energy conversion efficiency can be represented in the form of the
product of two co-factors: X - (l — p1)(l — p2). Here p1 is the proportion of the

total number of processes of deactivation of the upper laser level going to spontan-

eous transitions, and p is the proportion of the total number of photons generated
by stinulated' t ansitions which are then absorbed inside the laser by the

sources of losses. The value of p2 in a flat cavity depends in practice only on
001 and R'; let us consider it first.

The flux density of the emission incident on the exit mirror of the resonator will
be denoted by I as before. Then, as we have seen, the density of the flux incident
on the totally Qeflecting mirror is 10137. In order to calculate the number of
photons absorbed inside the laser, it is necessary to be given the emission density
along the length of the sample. The interference effects, if they exist, can be
neglected in this case: in view of the noted linear nature of the losses. the
averaging of the number of absorbed photons with respect to the standing wave period
offers nothing new. Thus, it is sufficient to calculate the arithmetic sum of the
two fluxes traveling in opposite directions. In estimates of this type each of
these fluxes can be completely considered exponentially increasing along the length
of the sample. Then the flux following free the totally reflecting (z - 0) to the
exit (2 - i) mirror is I+ - Io/ir exp[ln(l//i')z/£]; the flux in the opposite direc-

tion, I_ - Io/Er X exp[-1n(l/ET)z/£]. The total number of absorbed photons is
c
«.5 u, (z) + I- (2)] a: - 21.0.1“ - R')Iln(ilR').
.

Inasmuch as I°(l - R') photons exit from the resonator,

” 2!.0.!(i—R’)Iln(iln') _ 2a:
"' '213,1“~I?)Iln(u?)+l,(t—W) 2o.a+|.(un’)' (38)

With respect to meaning the right-hand side of (38) is the ratio of "harmful"
losses 20 2 to the total losses. Hence, it follows that it is more correct to call
the emissgon losses not 1 - R' as is usually done, but ln(llR') (for R' close to
one, these two values in practice coincide).

Now let us consider the value of p . In the case of multimodal lasing (that is,

in the absence of a standing wave) in a four—level medium with uniformly broadened
line and populated lower operating level everything is quite simple. Actually, when
there is no lasing, all of theexcitation power of she upper operating level is
spent on spontaneous transitions; the gain will be h ‘ in this case. In theﬂreﬁ

81120.
sence of lasing the gain decreases to some value kgain kgain’ the decrease in

gain is a consequence of a proportional decrease in upper level population. which,
in turn, is accoapsnied by proportional decrease in the number of spontaneous
transitions. Thus, when a gain kgain is maintained in the active medium under the

counter effects of pumping and lasing, the proportion of theexcitation - power equal

0
to kgain/kgain is consumed for spontaneous transitions. Considering the pumping

power distributed uniformly with respect to volume and performing the averaging with
respect to it, we obtain the final expression

59

INJI‘OFFICIAI.IISIICHULY
FORioFFKJAl.USE(NVLY

I’I '3 Err/":0 (39)
(a)
Key: a. gain

Expressing igai in terns of the system parameters using the steady state conditions
0
. I
of (36), we obtain p1 [200% + ln(l/R )]I2k8 I l.

Now let us find the optimal gain “opt for which the maximum value of x - l - p1 - Pi+

0
plpz is reached. In our case the product plp2 is equal to oolkgain and does not

depend on k'; thus, it is necessary to find conditions under which p + p is sini-

mal. If the product of two positive values is given, their sun is slaina} when

they are equal to each other. Therefore it is appropriate to select 3' so that she
)1-

condition p1 - p2 will be satisfied. Hence, it follows that [2001 + Ina/R;pt
0 2 I . - - a I '
backgaini or 1“(1/Ropt) 2002(Jigain7oo 1), p1 p2 Ibo/kgain , thus, we have

arrived at the known formulas (37), (35).

This approach helps to understand other results already known to us. Thus. it is

possible to show that in the case of media w th arbitrary level diagram but, as
(k
gs

before, uniformly broadened line 1 - p - (k - k )loP ' Ia? )
1 gain gain pump in pump

(1 - kgain,k2 in); hence, it is obvious that in the expression for 1, just as before.

the factor k In? < 1 appears. Let us write out the resultant formula for x
gain pump

for multimods lasing and arbitrary R':

x- 09L »E_¢.—I-(alu’)/ﬂ Imm’) (1,0)

m“) a” (a) In (1/?) + Inf

Key: a. gain b. pump

The situation with calculation of laser efficiency in the case of uniform lasing
turns out to he more complex: at first glance. it is even unclear in what phase of
the analysis it is possible to consider the presence of a standing wave. A more
careful investigation shows that all of the calculations to formula (39) relain
valid. but it is impossible to substitute the value of Egain calculated using the

condition of steady-state nature of (36) in this formula. The reasons for this
become clear if we consider that at the standing wave nodes the field is absent, there
are no stimulated transitions, and a large number of excited atoms accumulate (the
local value of the gain reaches kgain)° These atone make a defined, and large,

contribution to the total number of spontaneous decay processes and, unconditionally,
must he considered when calculating p1 by formula (39); on the other hand. they do
not participate in the amplification process, and therefore they must not figure in
the condition of reproducibility of the process of the type of (36). Hence it
follows that the radiation transport equations presented at the beginning of this
section from which we have (36) are inapplicable in the given case. It is obvious
that in the presence of a standing wave, the condition of steady state conditions
must be based on more careful calculation of the number ofstimulated transitionsgas

60
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(HNLY
FOE OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was done in (36s) it is necessary to average not kgain’ but It I I over the stand-
ing wave period. Then we automatically arrive at the preceding results.

Meaning and Possibilities of Applying the Derived Relations. The above-discussed
method of calculating the efficiency. in spite of its simplicity. at times turns

out to be useful even in highly nontrivial situations. It is especially convenient
in cases where certain factors exist that increase the nulﬁer of processes of de-
activation of the upper operating level undesirable from the point of view of lasing,
and there is a possibility of estimating the effect of these factors independently.
Let us present two such examples.

Sometimes so—called superluminescence plays a noticeable role. It consists in
the fact that before leaving the active medius the spontaneous emission can be
amplified, causing additional deactivation of the excited atoms at the same time.
As a result, the number of decay processes of the excited state not contributing to
lasing increases by Y > 1 times. The parameter Y can be calculated; it depends on
the properties of the medium, the configuration of the active zone, the conditions
on the surfaces bounding it and, in the first approximation, on the mean value of
the gain with respect to volume [32]. Under steady state conditions the latter is
determined by the magnitude of the resonator losses. Calculating y, it is also
possible to estimate the energy conversion efficiency in the resonator: x - (l -
Yp1)(l - p2) where pl is the proportion of the spontaneous decay processes calcu-

lated without considering superluminescence; p2 retains its former value defined by
formula (38).

The proportion of the spontaneous decay processes also increases in the case of a
nonuniformly broadened operating transition line even if the superluminescence is
negligibly small. Figure 1.21 explains how this occurs in the example of multi-
modal lasing in a four-level medius with unpopulated ("frozen“) lower operating
level. In this medium the shapes of the lminescence and gain lines coincide, which
increases the descriptiveness of the study.

Figure 1.21, a corresponds to the case of uniform broadening of the line, and

Figure 1.21, b, nonuniform broadening. The curves for I describe the spectral depen-
dence of the gain (and ltnninescence intensity) when the medium is excited, d the
resonator and lasing are absent; the gain at the peak of the line reaches k8 sin in

this case. Curves [I describe the spectral relations of the same values in the

presence of steady state lasing; for frequencies at which lasing is realized, the
magnitude of the average gain with respect to volume £8111“ is reduced to 00 + ln(1/

R')I29. (see (36)).

Uniform broadening is talked aboutwhen each atom has the same form and position of
the amplification line (and luminescence) coinciding with the shape and position

of the resultant line of the entire set of atoms. In this case any variation in the
number of excited atoms implies proportional variation of the height of the corre-
sponding graph; the form always remains unchanged. Por uniform broadening even
multimodal lasing is real ited in a narrow frequency band near the peak of the line
(5 2.4); the gain also turns out to be equal to the above-indicated threshold

Value of kgs in for which the lasing is steady state. The height of the graph in-

creases proportionally to Egainlkgain while retaining its former shape (curve 11 in

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFIWC1A1.lEﬂE(HULY

 

Figure 1.21. Problem of the influence of the nature of broadening of

the operating transition line on the energy conversion efficiency in
a laser resonator.

Key: 1. gain

Figure 1.21, a). Therefore, the number of acts of luminescence integrated with re-

spect to frequency, being proportional to the area under the corresponding curve,
decreases in the same ratio; hence, in the final analysis we have (39).

In the case of nonunifora broadening differentatons amplifysrdifferent frequencies.
and therefore they are "responsible" for different neg-ants of the overall ampli-
fication band. The shape of this band is not invariant - it depends on how the
excited atone are distributed with respect to frequencies. In this case lasing is
set up over the entire frequency band noted in Figure 1.21, b by the arrows. inside
which the gain of the weak signal exceeds the threshold value. Here the amplifica-
tion band (and luminescence) assumes the form represented by curve II in the same
figure. The area under the given curve, and with it. the number of spontaneous
transitions, is 1.5 to 2 times greater than in the case of uniform broadening; p1
increases also by as many times.

Thus, if in the case of a nonuniformly broadened line or in the presence of powerful
superluminescence we select R' in accordance with (37), the proportion of the lasing
power lost as a result of spontaneous transitions turns out to be larger than the
proportion of power lost as a result of inactive absorption (let us remember that
this choice of R' insured equality of p and p2 without considering the influence

of the above-indicated factors increasi g p1). In this case it is expedient to use
a resonator with somewhat larger R', at the same time approxiaating p1 and p2 to
each other, which implies an increase in X.

Probably all of these examples would not be worthwhile considering in such detail if
the results obtained were only valid for description of the truly steady-state las-

ing conditions. In reality, such conditions are encountered extrelely rarely -
even if Q-ewitching is absent, the lasing intensity, as a rule. experiences
pulsations in time. One of the most frequently encountered is the "spike" lasing
mentioned in § 1.3 where the time base of the intensity is a set of randomly dis-
tributed individual pulses -- emission "spikes" —- in the intervals between which
lasing is in general absent. The possibility of using the above-derived formulas
to estimate the efficiency of a laser operating under such conditions is far from
obvious; This problcn deserves separate consideration.

62

ltﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFKJAJ.IHHB(MVLY

0n transition from steady to “spike? conditions what can change? Obviously, the
proportion p2 of the total number of lasing photons absorbed inside the resonator
must remain as before: it is determined simply by the ratio of the “harmful“
losses to the total losses. At first glance it appears more complicated to calcu-
late the number of photons coming during the "spikes“ into the lasing channel;
however. when averaging over a large time interval. it is possible, together with
this, to estimate the number of spontaneous transitions in accordance with the
above-developed approach. This presents no special difficulties.

The number of continuous decay processes of the excited state is at any point in
time proportional to the instantaneous value of the inverse population; in the
"spike" mode the latter naturally experiences oscillations. At the time of comple-
tion of the next "spike." it drops below the steady lasing threshold, from which it
damps. in the inverval between “spikes," the inverse population increases mono-
tonically as a result of incessant pumping until it begins to exceed the threshold
level somewhat; then the next "spike" develops from the noise emission. and so on.
Thus, the inverse population fluctuates around the threshold value; the scale of
the fluctuations is relatively small, which is obvious from the fact that the
spikes follow each other quite frequently —- in this short time the inverse popu-
lation cannot increase sharply. As a result, the inverse population averaged over
a long time interval and for a long time must be close to threshold; therefore the
number of spontaneous processes remains approximately the same as under steady-state
conditions.

The given analysis indicates that all the formulas of this section have much broader
limits of applicability than can be initially indicated. In addition to everything
else, they can be used not only for continuous, but also for pulse excitation of the
active medium if the pulse duration exceeds the period required to set up steady
oscillations in the resonator somewhat (or the average time interval between _
"spikes"). Only when calculating the output energy is it necessary to drop the
initial and final sections of the pumping pulse in which lasing is absent (at the
beginning, while the inverse population still does not reach the threshold value,
and at the end when the pumping intensity drops below threshold).

The presented arguments and estimates explain the mechanism of the interrelation

between the resonator parameters and energy characteristics of the laser emission.
This analysis cannot claim to completeness; we have even not touched on one of the
most widespread, if not the most widespread, case of giant pulse lasing. There is
sufficient justification for this: the emission energy of a giant pulse laser de-
pends on the choice of resonator parameters much less than on the type and charac-
teristics of the shutter. on what measures are taken to control superluminescence

in the inverse population accumulation stage, and so on.

Hereafter we shall consider the energy characteristics of lasers with unstable re-
sonators. The specific nature of the analysis here consists in the fact that in
unstable resonators, the radiation fluxes going to the exit mirror and back fill the
active medium differently; in addition, the region adjacent to the resonator axis
acquires a special role. The important case of a laser with medium moving in the

direction perpendicular to the resonator axis will be investigated separately (5
4.2).

63

FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE(NVLV
“)1! OFFICIAL USS "NI."

CHAPTER 2. RADIATION DIVERGENCE 0F LASERS um STABLE AND PLAT CAVITIBS
§ 2.1. Modes of Oscillations of Empty Stable Resonators

The special characteristics of laser emission are determined to a great extent by
the mode structure of the resonator used. We shall go into a more detailed study

of it, but let us begin with the simplest case.

Eigenfunctions and Frequencies of a Stable Resonator with Infinite Mirrors. As we
already know from § 1.2, resonators are called stable if the beam mtrix elements

satisfy the expression ABCD < 0. The integral equation for the complex field amplitude
onone of the mirrors of such a resonator can be obtained directly from (1.2»:

exp (21". )

W“. I) 31—57337"

Hosp {,ﬁrlun +Bc)(z'+ r +
+ a" + v") — 2(22’ + mm} at. v') war.

Solving this equation at infinite limits by the method of separation of variables
and considering the relation between the coefficients of equation (1.17), we obtain
the following set of eigenfunctions:

“ma (3' V) "_‘ “In (8') lM (”v
um) =- H;(2¢Iw)up (— WM. (1)

where 1],“) (_ 05”., (4)5? ox',(_ 3;.) are Hermite polynomials,

The graphs of several 11.1 (v) are presented in Figure 2.1. All of the functions are
real except the first (1 - 0) and sign-variable, having zeros with respect to j.
The average distance between adjacent peaks of the functions decreases slowly with

an increase in j. The width of the region in which the emission has noticeable
intensity in this case increases just as slowly; at the edges of this region u de-

creases sharply. It is still worthwhile to note that for high-order functions!

the amplitude oscillation scale varies little uith respect to the beam cross section.
increasing slowly toward its periphery. The envelope of these oscillations (the
dotted curve in Figure 2.1, d) has its own "saddle" shape.

ﬁlo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFHCIALUSEONLY

 

Figure 2.1. Form of the eigenfunctions (1) of a stable resonator
with infinite mirrors. Cases a), b), c), d) for j - 0, l, 2. 12,

respectively .

The eigenfunctions (1) correspond to a set of eigenvalue of the equation of Yun-
with respect to which. by the procedure known to us from (§ 1.3). it is easy

to find the natural oscillation frequencies mm:

in.“ 1" 15):;(2M + one» (2)

where 6,... - (M +1: I 1)»th AD; the sign of the root is determined by the sign of

AB so that for A3 > 0 the nagnitude of the srcaine will be within the linits from
0 to +402; for A3 < 0 it will be within the linits fron + IZn‘to +11.

If the same integral equation is written not in a cartesian coordinate systen, but
cylindrical and we find the solution by the neth of separation of variables in

the form u(r, o) - u(r) cos to, we arrive at the following set of eigenfunctions and
frequencies:

n,_, (r, if) ~ (r/m)‘ 1.},(2r’lw')oxp(— r'lw’) cm 111-. (3)
0,: "2-2—(211011- 6").
° (6)

where I.,'.(r) u 'cuv(v)%|up(— 0:)01'”) are the generalized Laguerre polynomials.
6" ‘ 2" + ’ 'I‘ ”am“! 375. the parameter w retains its former vslue(lla)V1(_43/cpjm.

The form of the radial Emotions u(r) resenbles to a known degree the form of the
functions presented in Figure 2.1. In particular, ugg(r) has p roots; for I. 5‘ 0

another root is added at the point r . 0; with an in ease in the radial index p,
the region of noticeable intensity shifts in the direction of larger-r, and so on.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rue mm us. use. mus

A very good idea about the structure of the beams described by formula (3) is pro-
vided by Figure 2.2 which we borrowed from the book [33].

 

ml,

 

Figure 2.2. The field configuration of natural.l0dcsof oscillations
of a stable resonator described by fornula (3). 0n the solid closed
lines the amplitude is 0.2, 0.5 and 0.8 of the maximum value; on the
dotted lines the amplitude is equal to zero; the dash-dot line bounds
the region inside which 86.5! of the total radiation flux is included.

The ambiguity of the choice of the systems of eigenfunctions, on the one hand, and
the similarity of the behavior of these functions on the other, have a common basis.
The fact is that all the functions of system (1), except the lowest (n - n - 0)

are degenerate an infinite set of times; this means that there are as many differ-
ent functions as one might like with the same natural frequency. Actually, it is
little that the frequencies coincide for oscillations with different combinations
of transverse indexes with identical sun of them m + n (see (2)); it is possible

to rotate the x and y axes as many tines as one might like around the resonator
axis. The same thing also pertains to functions of system (3): oscillations not

only with equal 2p + l (see (4)), but also oscillations differing simply by the
origin of reckoning of the azimuthal angle have identical frequency.

The superposition of any number of natural oscillations with identical complex fre—

quencies (in the given case there is no damping and the frequencies are real) de-
scribes a strictly periodic process with the sane frequency, that is, it is also

a natural oscillation. Thus, for degenerate eigenfunctions it is possible to con-
bine them arbitrarily, from which ambiguity of the choice of the systems of these
functions arises. If desired it is possible to find how it is necessary to combine
functions of the type of (l) in order to obtain (3) and vice versa.

66

F!IICIHHCJAI.lEﬂE(M‘LY
FOIioFFKJAl.USE(M“LV

Spatial Structure of Natural Oscillations. In order to understand the meaning of
the obtained solutions, it is necessary to consider the propagation laws of the
light beams making up these solutions. Inasmuch as the eigenfunctions (1) and (3)
are real, the mirrors are equiphasal surfaces, and therefore the beams have spheri—
cal wave fronts near the mirrors. The lowest functions of the sets (1) (I - n I 0)
and (3) (p - I - 0) coincide; this is the gsussian bean already known to us; its
transverse radius, the definition of which is presented in § 1.1, is equal to w.
For other beams the effective spot size, as is obvious from Figure 2.1, exceeds w
the more, the larger their transverse indices; therefore we shall call w the linear
distribution parameter in the general case and not the beam radius.

Using the Huygens—Fresnel principle (l.2), it is possible to see that the beans

described by formulas (l), (3) have the same propagation laws as gaussian beams. In
each such beam at any distance from the source the initial form of the amplitude

distribution is reproduced; the wave front remains spherical; only the radius of
curvature of the wave front 9 and the parameter w vary; this occurs in all of the
beams identically in accordance with formulas(1.1l). (1.12). Thus, Figure 1.7 can
pertain to an equal degree to any beam from the families (1), (3) accept the dis-
tribution picture for which w gives the scale, and each bean has its own.

Innsmuch as on the exit mirror w and p are identical for all of the beams, they
coincide in any segment of the length of the resonator. Figure 2.3 shows the

law of evolution of w for such a family of beams. Any other characteristic dines-
sioh of the cross section of each been varies exactly the same, in particular, the
transverse dimensions of the region of high intensities outside which the field
decreases exponentially. The surface bounding this region is called caustic; for
beams of the type of (1), it has a rectangular cross section, (3) has a circular
cross section. The volume included inside the caustic surface (or the caustic)
naturally increases with the transverse mode indices. As an example, in the figure
the dash-dot line depicts the caustic surface of the beam for which the field dis-
tribution with respect to the direction perpendicular to the axis lying in the
plane of the figure is described by the function u with j - 12 (Tigure 2.1, d).

In the same figure 2.3, the dotted lines show the equiphaaal surfaces which are
common to all beams of the family; there is an infinite set of such surfaces.
Installing the spherical mirrors with the same radii of curvature at the location
of any two of these surfaces, we obtain an empty stable resonator, the solutions for
which will be all of the beams of the given family. Using (1.11) and (1.12) to
relate the resonator parameters and the families of beams, it is possible to obtain
the iollowing expression forthelinear distribution parameter on the right-hand
mirror of the resonator:

‘ Aﬂzilg l 1
m; (T) T1710. l u'—l

(all of the notation is the same as bef7re). This expression is a special case of
the more general expression w2 - (M11)1 2(-ABICD) / The parameter w1 on the

left-hand mirror is defined by the same formulas, in which it is necessary 0? y to
exchange places with R1 and R2 or in the general case, A and D: w1 - (A/n)1 (-BDI

AC)1/‘; hence, it follows that wlw2 - (A/n)J-B7 .

67

FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally, from the same Huygens—Fresnel principle, we have the following expressions
for the phase lag A? which occurs as a result of having the phase velocity exceed
the speed of light (see 5 1.3) on a path of length a, beginning with the "neck":

f0! type (1) beams A‘l' -- (m -|- u + Hummus/tuna;
for type (3) beams A‘l'=(2n +l-H)mlt(hlnw3):

here, just as in (1.11), (1.12). w is the linear parameter at the "neck." If we
use these relations to calculate tRe phase correction in an empty two-mirror reson-
ator. we again arrive at the formulas which are special cases of the nor..- general
expressions (2), (lo). As was already noted in § 1.3, the phase correction is larger,
the smaller the characteristic dimension of the transverse beam structure. In the

given case with an increase in the transverse indices, the distances between ad-
jacent peaks of the amplitude distribution decrease (see Figure 2.1), and the phase

correction increases correspondingly.

.’ 4"

 

Figure 2.3. Evolution of the linear distribution
parameter w for type (1) and (3) beams.

In order to trace the behavior of gaussian beams and, with then, the more couplex
beans type (1) and (3) inside an arbitrary resonator, it is possible to use the
following procedure. The complex amplitude of a gausaisn beam on an arbitrary

I

g .
reference plane is crp[-' If onp f—L—(z‘i—i’d (see 5 1.1). It can be given the

II
same form 01pl—;%(ﬂ+y')]' as for the complex amplitude of an ordinary spherical

wave with uniformly distributed intensity. For this purpose it is sufficient to
introduce the complex radius of curvature 25, defining it using the expression

 

2. 1-; o, 1,1.-.1.
z; 2.. ,.. "5"» m"

This form of notation, of course, would not be of special interest if the conversion
laws for B in the optical systems did not compare exactly with the conversion laws
of the radii of curvature of ordinary spherical waves. Actually, on passage through
a lens with focal length f, the complex amplitude of any beams turns out to be mul-
tiplied by epr-(ilt/Zfo2 + y2)] (see 5 1.1). The value of 1/5 in this case has
-l/f added to it; the curvature of ordinary spherical waves is transformed in the

some way. Using 0.11), (1.12). it is also possible to see that as a result of
traveling the distances z in empty space, 2 is added to 5, just as to the radius of
curvature of an ordinary wave. Thus, all of the relations which can be derived
using geometric optics are valid for 5; in particular., the conversion law of Bin an

arbitrary optical systemhas the form (51.2);7n-= (A;|+II)I(C;I +0). Hence, in turn,
it follows that equation (1.21) and its solution (1.22) retain their meaning even
for ABCD < 0. The radii of curvature in this case turn out to be purely imaginary

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0¥FKJAI.USE(N‘LY

and equal to :iJ-AB7CD. Haves with such.radii of curvature have the following
amplitude distribution:

“1.: (r. u) ~ «pun/23') (1* + m1 —. up Is: (all) 1’ Z C—DITMr' + m].

The amplitude of one of the waves increases without limit on going away from the
axis; this gave is of tarest to us. The second is a gsussisn bean with radius

U ' (Alﬂ)1/ (—ABICD)1/ . Inasmuch as the phase factor in the anplitude distribution
is absent. the mirrors of the equivalent and. therefore. the initial resonator are
equiphasal surfaces; thus, we have arrived at the solution already known to us.

Introduction of the complex radius of curvature permits the parameters of the
gaussian beam to be traced without difficulty (and any beans of the type of (1),
(3)) along the entire length of the arbitrary resonator. For maximum simplification
of this procedure in its time special nonograns were compiled ("naps"); anyone who
wishes to become familiar with them is referred to [121, [13]; we shall proceed to
what goes on outside the resonator.

In the case of stable resonators. the radiation most frequently is output through
the partially transparent exit mirror. As was demonstrated in § 1.3, the trans-
verse structure of the natural oscillations does not depend on whether the reflec-
tion coefficient of the exit mirror is equal to one or is not equal to one (only
that it be the same on the entire mirror surface). Therefore the senitransparent
exit nirror of large transverse dinension originates beans with the amplitude of the
type of (1), (3) for which it is an squiphassl surface.

For a gaussian beam with radius of curvature of the wave front R2, the amplitude

distribution in the far zone also has the form of a gaussian function with angular
radius 5-; yiiﬁﬁ:ﬁ.p(i7nuo' (5 1.1). Inasmuch as the beans of the type of (l),
(3) behave similarly to gaussian beams. in all of them the amplitude distribution

in the far zone is described by the formulas $12: (32 in which n, y and r must be

replaced by the slope angles ax, ny and a - n‘ + “y , and the linear distribution

parameter w must be replaced by the angular parameter 8.

In the expression for B, the first term under the square root sign has a “geometric"
origin. and the second term, "diffraction" origin (see § 1.1). The geometric tern
in stable resonators does not have theoretical significance, for it can easily be
reduced to zero. For this purpose it is sufficient to install a lens with f - Re
directly behind the exit nirror; this lens converts the spherical wave fronts of

all the beams to plane fronts; the common angular parsneter 8 decreases to the value
8 - A/nw. and the emission divergence decreases correspondingly. Hereafter. we
agall always consider that this simplest measure with respect to decreasing the
emission divergence at the output of a stable resonator has been adopted. and the
geometric divergence is absent. For this reason it is necessary to note the follow-
ing. It is easy to avoid geometric divergence so easily in this case only because
the exit mirror of a stable resonator is clearly designated a spherical equiphssal
surface common to all beams. The position of this equiphasal surface renains fixed
even if a thermal ”lens" occurs inside the resonator or there is some other disturb—
ance of similar type —— even if the resonator continues to remain “stable.“ un-
fortunately, the given property is almost the only advantage of stable resonators

69

FOR OFFICIAI.USEGMVLY
FOR OfﬂClAl. USE ONLY

from the point of view of beam divergence: for large apertures lasing takes place
in them on high-order modes which correspond to very large diffraction divergence
(5 2.6). In all of the resonators which provide small diffraction divergence and
are actually used in lasers with quite large aperture, the mirrors are not equi-
phasal surfaces; the shape of the wave front of the stimulated emission, as a rule,
differs noticeably from an ideal sphere, and still worse, it frequently varies with
time. Under these conditions the control of “geometric" divergence becomes. on the
one hand, extraordinarily difficult. and on the other hand. it acquires primary

significance. He shall discuss the methods of this control in the last chapter of
the book.

As for diffraction divergence ¢ of any of the beams (l), (3), it is possible to
obtain a very useful formula for it if we use the fact that the relation between the
angular dimension of a spot in the far zone and the angular parameter 8 is equal to
the ratio of analogous values in the near zone. hence, we have the expression

v - V - 075/33 0- (s)

where 0 is the size of the spot in the near zone (at the exit mirror).

Now let us trace how the beam dimensions vary in the near and far zones on variation
of the parameters of a stable resonator. Let us do this in the example of an empty

two-mirror symmetric resonator with El - R 3 R, which is "stable" for R > 2/2; the

spacing between the mirrors 2 will be cons ered fixed.

For a symmetric two-mirror resonator -AB/CD - R21(R - £)/[28 - z)(n - 1)]. For R >>
l, the resonator is close to flat. -AM/CD z Rl/2. Together with R. the cross sec-
tional dimensions of all the beams in the near zone are comparatively large: 2
w = (2’£/212) 6. The angular distribution parameter in the far zone B a (2A I
133.!)1 ‘ is correspondingly small. As R decreases and the resonator ap roaches
confocal (R - i) - AB/CD decreases, approaching 22; w also decreases, approaching
JAi/n; the angular parameter 80 increases correspondingly and approaches Jxlrl.

The beam dimensions behave the same way if R approaches 1 from the other side: for
R 2 2/2, that is. when the resonator is "stable.” but close to concentric, w is
large, and 6b is small. As R increases and approaches 1. the parameter w + {Xi/n,

B 4 Ills . Thus. the beam dimensions of resonators with l/Z < R < 2 and R > 2 pass
tgrough the same value; why this can occurmfrom is explained by Figure 2.6, a, b.

A symmetric confocal resonator is isolated free the others: the value of the ratio
-AB/CD for R - i will become undefined; therefore the beam cross sections on the

exit mirror can have any transverse dimensions. Only the product of the linear
parameters w1 and w2 on the left and right mirrors turns out to be fixed: wlw2 -

Al/n (Figure 2.A. c). It is necessary to note that not only the above-investi-
gated symmetric resonators. but any other two-mirror stable resonators have a
large value of the given prcduct. Actually, in the general case

we: 1L ——-‘=L ‘ =£'—.-!H=I=
" ' c “ Wh+UE-UEE “pa—nu,

70

FOR.OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

i

b) "D

Figure 2.6. Natural oscillations of stable resonators. a), b) reson-
ators with identical spot dimensions on the mirrors: a) resonator
with 2/2 < R < 2, b) resonator with R > 2; c). d) confocal resonator;
c) two different beams with infinite mirrors. d) type of resonator
oscillations with mirrors of finite dimensions.

where 31 2 - l - i/R1 2; let us remember that only for a symmetric confocal resona-
9 D
tor is 3182 - 0; for the remaining stable resonators 0 < glg2 < 1. From the subse-

quent investigation it will be obvious that as a result of the indicated peculiari-
ties a symmetric confocal resonator has the smallest diffraction losses among all
possible empty two—mirror resonators with given transverse dimensions of the
mirrors and distance between then.

Stable Resonators with Mirrors of Finite Dimensions. when considering finite dimen-
sions of mirrors, degeneration of the eigenfunctions is removed to a significant
degree; the "arbitrariness" of the selection disappears - in the case of rectangu-
lar mirrors the solutions are only functions of the type of (l). and for circular
Iirrors,(3). The shape of the functions undergoes some changes; the equiphasal
surfaces of all resonators except a symmetric confocal resonator cease; to compare
exactly with the surfaces of the finite mirrors. The spectrum of the eigenvalues
also is subject to adjustment. The frequencies become complex: diffraction losses
appear, and with them, damping of the natural oscillations. This adjustment to

a significant degree involves various types of oscillations: the scales and nature
of the variations are determined primarily by how the transverse dimensions of the
mirrors relate to the dimensions of the region encompassing the caustic surface of
given mode.

For such modes. the width of the caustic of which is noticeably less than the width
of the mirrors, the field distribution remains almost the same as for infinite
mirrors. The magnitude of the diffraction losses of the resonators not too close
to confocal can in this case be calculated directly using formulae (1), (3): it is
sufficient to calculate what portion of the total emission flux goes to the distri-
bution "tails" which are beyond the boundaries of the mirror surface. Inasmuch as
beyond the boundaries of the caustic the field decreases very sharply, as the
caustic approaches the mirror dimensions, the losses increase rapidly, remaining

nevertheless, very small with respect to absolute magnitude. Hence. it follows,
that under other equal conditions the highervorder modes have greater losses -—
they have broader caustics.

7l
FOR<NHHC1ALIE§BONLY
FOR10FFHJAI.USEiHNLV

if the resonator is asymmetric. the basic contribution to the total losses is

made by reflection from a mirror, the dimensions of which are closer to the dimen-
sions of the corresponding caustic. This pertains to all stable resonators except
a confocal one with - R2 - 2: inasmuch as for such a resonator it is not the
spot dimensions on each mirror that are fixed. but only the magnitude of their
product, these dimensions are redistributed for finite nirrors proportionally to
the mirror dimensions (see Figure 2.6. d). As a result. the two mirrors make an
identical - and snail -— contribution to the diffraction losses; the total losses
turn out to be less than they would be for any other relation between the spot
dimensions on the mirrors. If we consider that the product of the spot dimensions
itself is minimal in the resonator of the given type, it becomes clear why it has
record-small diffraction losses.

Now let us fix the configuration of the resonator and proceed successively to the
modes with greater and greater transverse indicea. Here the caustic sooner or

later must approach closely to the edge of one or both mirrors. Beginning with this
sweat. it is impossible to neglect the influence of the edge effects on the mode
structure, and formulas (l)v(5) derived in the approximation of infinite mirrors
become inapplicable. At the same time. the types of oscillations of still higher
order still exist; their classification can be based as before on the number of
distribution zeros with respect to the corresponding directions.

In order to understand the nature of the variations of the mode structure under the
influence of the edge effects. it is best of all to trace the behavior of a speci-
fic type of oscillations in detail as the stable resonator gradually approaches a
flat (or concentric) cavity. This analysis can be performed by the Vaynehteyn
method; those desiring to become familiar in more detail with the mathematical
aspect of the problem are referred to [36]; we shall only describe a qualitative
picture of the phenomena. Let us do this in the example of a completely symmetric
resonator consisting of two mirrors with - R > 1 and with identical transverse
dimensions. The given dimensions and the spacing between the mirrors i will be
considered fixed; the initial curvature of the mirrors will be selected so large
that the width of the caustic of the oscillations of the type of interest to us
will be significantly less than the width of the mirrors (Figure 2.5.a). Now let
us begin slowly to decrease the mirror curvature. The approach of the resonator

to a flat cavity is, as we already know. accompanied by an increase in the linear
parameter w; the transverse beam cross section increases with it. This process
lasts until the beam begins to fill the mirrors entirely (Figure 2.5. b). A further
decrease in curvature of the mirrors causes other consequences: the beam cross
section renains almost unchanged, only the distribution peaks gradually become
equidistant. and their heights equalize - there is a gradual transition to the
corresponding type of oscillations of the flat cavity (see Figure 2.5, c).

All of this can be given the following graphic interpretation. For the given
”self-imaging“ (type (1), (3)) structure of the light beam its -:osa sectional
dimensions in a resonator with quite large mirrors (Figure 2.5,a) are established
so that dynamic equilibrium is achieved between the processes of expansion of the
beam as a result of diffraction divergence and focusing of it on reflection from
concave finite mirrors. when the curvature of the mirrors decreases, their focus-
ing effect is weakened, and the state of equilibrium shifts in the direction of
the larger cross sections which correspond to smaller diffraction divergence.

This is what happens until the situation depicted in figure 2.5, b. Then. in

72
FOR OFFICIAL USEilNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spite of the continuing attenuation of the focusing as a result of curvature of

the sirrors. the bean cross section disensions cease to grow, and the deflection
divergence almost does not change. This can be given a unique explanation: a

new factor is added that counteracts the divergence of the light bean; edge diffrac-
tion is a factor of this type. As the resonator subsequently approaches a flat
cavity, the field at the mirror edge increases somewhat; the role of edge diffrac—
tion increases with it. Finally. in a flat cavity edge diffraction remains the
only reason that the bean "does not walk out" of the systen and does not have such
large losses. Adhering to Vaynshteyn‘s tersinology, it is possible to state that
the field in a flat cavity is fixed not by the caustic as in stable resonators,

but by the mirror edges (§ 2.2).

Edge diffraction still "contains" the field less efficiently than the caustic;
therefore the diffraction losses of all types of oscillations on transition from a
confocal resonator to a flat cavity (or concentric cavity) increase monotonically.
Figure 2.6 can be used as a graphic illustration in which the relations are pre—
sented for the losses of two lowest types of oscillations of a symtric resonator
with circular nirrors as a function of the Fresnel nunhsr ll - s21“. (2a is the
sirror diameter) for different values of Igl which vary from zero (the confocal
resonator) to one (a flat or concentric cavity). We conclude the investigation

of stable resonators with this. Let us only state that much more detailed inforna—
tion about the properties of empty, stable resonators. including the sagnitudes of
the diffraction losses, the phase corrections as a result of finiteness of the
nirrors, and so on, can be found in the nonograph on submillineter wave engineering
[33]. This is no accident: submillimetsr resonators are excited by elementary
dipoles or through an aperture in one of the mirrors; then the Q-factor of the
system plays the decisive role, and resonators of the stable type fall into first
place. On filling of the resonator with active mediu- as is done in the optical
band. the initial Q—factor is not so important (5 1.3), and the stable resonators

“a
4-... - ..._.J-_.>
‘0 n 4%” ‘ a .r

I ”r
.

Figure 2.5. Evolution of a natural oscillation on transition from
the symetric stable resonator with transverse mirror dimensions

of 2a to a flat cavity: a) stable resonator; b) stable resonator
with smaller curvature of the nirrorsgc) flat cavity.

73

FOR OFFICIAL 05' 'LY
I”. 0"?“ ‘IAI USS ONIJ

lose their cxclusiVeneaa. In addition to everything else. it will become obvious
that for achievement of small angular divergence of the exit emission of powerful
lasers. in general they are not suitable; in order to arrive at this conclusion.
the information which we already have at our disposal is entirely sufficient.

'a &'h§ k

  

rm ram ’.

h §
a ﬁ §-~

    

I'llﬂl If! .3 ”El

Figure 2.6. Losses of the two lowest types of
oscillations of a symmetric resonator with cir-
cular mirrors as a function of the Presnel number
N for various values of Igl (the magnitude of the
losses is presented for passage through the
resonator in one direction).

Key: a. power losses. 1
5 2.2. Edge Diffraction and Modes of Oscillations of an Empty Plat Optical Cavity

Auxiliary Diffraction Problem. Let us consider plane wave diffraction in a perio-
dic structure made up of semiinfinite absorbing screens (Pigure 2.7). The period
of the structure is equal to l; the direction of propagation of the wave incident
on it makes a small angle a with the plane P passing through the edges of all of
the screens.

Let us successively construct (beginning. of course. at the bottom) the field dis-
tributions on the reference planes normal to the direction of propagation of our
wave and passing through the edges of the acreensas shown in the figure. For this
purpose let us use the Fresnel approximation (1.2a) for the two-dimensional case
of interest to us:

76

FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR1OFFKJA1.USE(M‘LV

u(r,) sﬁjup [ikg‘i—‘mlumwsp

 

Figure 2.7. Plane wave diffraction on a periodic structure nade of
screens: 1 - periodic structure sade of absorbing screens, 2 -
initial plane wave. 3 - reflected wave, 6 —- reference planes.

Let us remember that here a is the distance between the observation and source
planes, the difference x2 - :1 has the meaning of the length of the projection

of the radius-vector connecting the observation and source points on any of these
planes.

In the investigated problem the transverse coordinate x, as illustrated in the fig-
ure, will be reckoned not from the cannon nor-a1 to the reference surfaces, but
from the edge of the corresponding screen. Thus, the origin of the coordinates
when making the transition to the next plane shifts in the transverse direction by
of, and x2 — :1 east be replaced by :2 - of - :1. The distance between reference

surfaces is z - icos a = 2 - fez/2. It is i-poesible to neglect the seal! correc-
tion tern za2/2 only in the rapidly varying phase factor exp(ika) (see also 5 1.1).
In the final analysis we obtain the following recurrent formula relating the field
distribution on two adjacent reference surfaces:

. I
“I.“ (1) --. exp [my -e’l2)l Y up [He (x—e —ol)'] u. (x’) at.

Introducing the dinegsionless coordinate r - M573; and oaitting the cannon phase
factor explil&(1 — a I2) we arrive at the final form of the recurrent foraula for
the functions 0(1) 3 u( 1. hr):

flunk) 17%;: 3 exp [1(1 —x’-—8)’I2IU. (1’)dt’.

(6)

75

FOR<OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
I1)RIOFII(JAL.UGIICH§LY

where s = u/EI; here and hereafter n will be the number of screens on which the
wave has already been diffracted. '

The lower reference plane is an equiphasal surface of an initial plane wave; thus.
U - const. In combination with formula (6) this means that the entire set of
functions U (I) (and with them, the complete picture of the diffraction in a perio-
dic structufe) is uniquely defined by the magnitude of the parameter s. The most

interesting case is the one where the slope angles of the plane wave a are so
small that the condition 3 << 1 is satisfied.

In Figure 2.8 respite are presented from numerical calculations of the radiation 2
intensity Iun(1)| on several reference surfaces for e . 0.3.1 The function IUI(T)|

(Figure 2.8, a) has the form well known in optics: it describes the diffraction
pattern of the plane wave on a halfplane (see, for example, [6], Figure 8.37).

The boundary of the geometric shadow is located at the point r - s - 0.3; although
the edge of the second screen (I - 0) is located to the left of this point, the
field amplitude and. with it. the radiation intensity turn out to be smaller near

this edge than for the initial wave. Therefore near the edge of the next screen
the intensity turns out to be even less (see Figure 2.8,b). With it the radiation

energy in the region I > 0 absorbed in the screen decreases (the area under the
curve decreases); here this area turns out to be less than it should be from geo-
metric optics (the area of a rectangle). 0n making the transition to the subse-
quent mirrors. the absorbed energy continues to decrease. and in the final analysis
it is ottablished at a very low level. Hence, it follows that as a result of dif-
fraction. the periodic structure of the screens basically does not absorb. but
scatters the emission incident on it at small angles.

In the vicinity of T < 0 deep modulation of the amplitude develops with time; the
modulation period gradually increases, approaching a defined limit (Figure 2.8,c.
d, e; on the last graph. the field distribution was almost steady-state - varia-
tions on transition to subsequent screens are already small). This indicates that
in scattered emission a discrete wave is formed, the interference of which with the
initial wave leads to amplitude modulation; the great depth of modulation indicates
that the intensity of this wave is comparable to the intensity of the initial wave.

The property of a plane (or spherical) wave undergoing diffraction on an opaque
screen known in theoretical optics helps to understand the structure of scattered
emission. This property consists in the fact that such a wave can be represented
in the form of the sum of a wave which. being completely absent in the geometric
shadow region. is not distorted by diffraction in the remaining space, and a wave,
the fictitious source of which is the edge of the screen (see, for example, [6]. §
8.9). Actually, in our example, after simple transformations the following expres-
sions can be obtained for the field u1 which arises as a result of diffraction on
the first screen:

u (.r) -3 c-(C/I-’I7I)F‘I/mlx—azn‘ 1. <al,
' (ch/7;)Nl/x—Iﬂlr—allL I>ai,

 

l
The author takes this opportunity to express his appreciation to L. V. Koval‘chuk
who performed these calculations on a computer specially for this publication.

76

INJR¢0FI1C1Al.lEﬂB(ﬂﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

.... ...-.L -. +_L__;
a” ‘I -5 -l -2 I: l t

Figure 2.8. Result of nutcessive diffraction of
a plane wave on periodically arranged absorbing
screens for s - 0.3.

where c is the amplitude of the initial plane wave. Fun-501p (il')d (a>0) is

the Fresnel integral. For the Fresnel integral it is poasihle to propose the
following approxinutc expression giving a correct representation of the behavior of
F(a) in the entire range of variation of the argument: F(a)z(llll2(a+ymmupmt).
Substitution of this expression in the last for-ulas for u1(x) indicates that the
field in the geosetric shadow zone has the fore A(:)oxp[ik(z_¢l)’/21], where A(x)
is a conparatively slowly varying function of the coordinate: A conparison with
the expressions for spherical waves iron 5 1.1. indicates that the given relation
describes a cylindrical wave that diverges from the edge of the first screen. The
amplitude of this wave Ma) decreases on going away from the edge of the geometric
shadow; the nature of the decrease is clear both fro. the above-presented expression
for the Fresnel integral and from the upper graph in Figure 2.8. In the Vicinity
of x < 0.9.. in addition to the entirely analogous cylindrical wave. there is also
an undistorted plane wave with initial amplitude c. It is the interference of a
plane wave with a cylindrical wave that leads to the appearance of characteristic

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

amplitude modulation. the depth of which decreases on going away from the edge of
the shadow together with the cylindrical wave anplitude.

Diffracting on the second screen. the undistorted plane wave generates a new cylin-
drical wave, the fictitious source of which is the edge of the second screen. In
addition to the cylindrical wave. the resultant field contains, as before. an un-
distorted plane wave, diffraction of which on the next screen leads to the appear-
ance of the next cylindrical wave. and so on.

Thus. the field 0.". emission scattered as a result of edge diffraction is a super-
position of cylindrical waves. the sources of which are the edges of all of the
screens, and the amplitudes decrease identically as the direction of the emission
deviates from the direction of the initial plane wave. As a result of the inter-
ference of many cylindrical waves succeeding in getting sufficiently far from the
point of their generation, a number of discrete directions are isolated in which
the amplitudes of these waves are sumed (entirely similar to how this happens on
exposure of a diffraction grating to a monochromatic plane wave, see [6], § 8.6).
The angles 0 which these Cirecgions make with the plane P saiisfy the obvious con-
dition rm — 0.2/2) - uu - enlz) - 2m (eﬂ << 1) or of. - a. + mu, n - o, 1. 2.

Let us note that these formulas can be obtained directly'fron the known rela-
tion of diffraction grating theory sin 6 - sin 9 - i nA/d, where 6 and 0 are
angles which the incident and reflected wave makg with the normal to the lane of
the grating. and d is the grating period (in our case its role is played by 2).
In the intermediate direction, mutual interference "extinguishing" of the cylindri-
cal waves takes place. As for plane waves formed as a result of interference addi-
tion and propagated in the isolated directions, inasmuch as the scattered light in-
tensity increases rapidly with an increase in 0, in the scattered emission the wave
with the least 0 predominates; this is the wave mirror "reflected" from the plane
P (e - 0.). Its presence also causes deep amplitude modulation of the established
fiela distribution with spatial period of A/Za (in the dimensionless coordinates
11/3). The remaining waves have significantly smaller amplitudes and lead only to
small. fine—scale amplitude modulation.

Let us sum the results of the investigation of our auxiliary problem. If the angle
of incidence of the plane wave on a periodic structure made of absorbing screens is

sufficiently small, the greater part of the energy of the emission is not absorbed,
but scattered as a result of diffraction. In the scattered emission, the primary role
in played by the "reflected" wave. to which the greater part of the total intensity
of the scattered emission goes; thus, the amplitude of the reflected plane wave is
comparable to the amplitude of the initial incident wave, approaching it as a de-
creases.

Reflection from the Open Edge of a Have Guide. Natural Oscillations or a Resonator
made up of Strip or Rectangular Mirrors. The above-described phenomena are the
basis for the mechanism of diffraction "containment" of the field inside the reson-
ator that wementioned in the preceding section. Actually, the problem of diffrac-
tion on a periodic structure of screens is entirely similar to the problem of dif-
fraction on the edge of an open semiinfinite wave guide formed by two flat, totally
reflecting mirrors installed at a distance 2. from each other (Figure 2.9). The
radiation ausorbed in the screens here corresponds to the radiation leaving free

the open edge of the wave guide. of course. in both cases the nature of the
setup processes depends on the initial conditions and can be quite different, but

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the steady field distributions must coincide. It is only necessary to consider
that in a wave guide not one, but a set of two plane waves go in the direction of
the open edge, converting into each other on reflection from the mirrors (Figure

2.9). Inasmuch as the nodes of the total field distribution nust be located in
the mirrors, an additional condition k1.(l - a [2) - (11! is imposed on the frequency,

where q is a large (on the order of 21A) integer.

I \ \' I

”"f a! 2 I
.

I

 

" m

Figure 2.9. Set of two plane waves ("wave guide"
wave) propagated in the direction of the open edge
(P) of a flat, semiinfinite wave guide.

Using the wave guide approach, Vaynahteyn and his followers were able to obtain many
valuable theoretical results not only for plane, but other open resonators; there-
fore we shall discuss the laws obtained above in the language of wave guide theory.
The set of two waves that convert into each other on reflection from the wave guide
walls, the frequency and angles of inclination of which satisfy the above-indicated
condition, is the so-called wave-guide wave. It is propagated through a plane wave
guide with ideally conducting (reflecting) walls as large a distance as one night
like without damping. The waves for which the given condition is not satisfied can
not be propagated through the wave guide and damp quickly.

The initial wave guide wave with q - no, being propagated from left to right,

approaches the open edge of the wave guide; diffraction on the open edge leads to
the fact that the emission almost does not exit to the outside and “is reflected"

back. This reflected (or scattered) radiation, in turn, breaks down into a set of
wave-guide waves, the angles of inclination of which 8 satisfy the sane condition
with q - qo, q0 - l, q0 - 2, A wave with q . q0 is similar to the initial wave

and differs from it only by the opposite direction of propagation; it is called re-

flected, and the ratio of its amplitude to the amplitude of the initial wave is
called the reflection coefficient from the edge; for snail a. the modulus of the

reflection coefficient approaches one. Haves with q i q are called transformed;
in the case of interest to us for very saall a, their amplitudes are snail, and
hereafter we shall not be especially interest in the transformed waves.

The field of the wave-guide wave propagated from left to right with constant ampli-
tude in time has the fora

up (—- (w!) exp (Ilr;)(:io:) 5?. - -;- < i < ‘13-.

where sin is taken for even q, cos. for odd q (so that the field on the wave guide

walls will be equal to zero), and the propagation constant k: -ksin a Z (ﬁn/90a is
related to the frequency by the expression

79

FOR ‘ ’0“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L82 ONLY

(%)'=k'=(%)'+*:-

For construction of the oscillation modes of a flat cavity, we need waveguide waves.
the amplitude of which damps exponentially in time. Their fields are described by

the same formula. except the frequency w. and with it also the propagation constants
1:, ix. become complex: (a =- ck I: o’— as". It. -k;—lk;

From (7) it follows that for damping oscillations (0)" > 0) the symbols k' and It"

coincide; hence it follows that the field asplitude of such a wave-guidex wave

any fixed point in time increases along the direction of its propagation(mexp(kx1))
In order to understand the meaning of this, it is sufficient to imagine that the
wave is generated by a remote source that dams in time. The emission which is far
fro- the source at the given point in time was generated by it obviously at earlier
points in Line when the source was more intense; therefore the field amplitude in
remote sections also turns out to be large.

Now let us consider a segment of a wave guide open on both ends. which is a strip
cavity with mirrors 2a wide (-a j x < a). Its natural oscillations will be found

in the fora of a sun of two wave guide waves propagated in opposite directions with
identical natural frequencies and q. For diffraction reflection from the edge,

each of them generates the other; a decrease in amplitude as a result of incomplete

reflection is compensated for by the above-sentionad buildup along the direction of
the wave propagation.

Omitting the factors describing the dependence of the field on t and z, for the
total amplitude we have the expression A erp(ikxx) + 3 exp (-ikxx). The first term

corresponds to a wave propagated in the direction of the edge 3 - +a, where it
generates the second one (the transformed waves occurring on reflection from the
edge with different Ikx I will be neglected); thus, the amplitudes of our two waves

are related at the edge by the expression R 0A emp(ikts) . B exp(-ikxa), where R
D

0.0
is the coefficient of diffraction reflection from the edge. The condition at the
edge at - -a has the form so OB exp(ilr a) - A exp(-ikxa); from these two boundary

conditions we have A- +B,R exp(21kx a) - +1. The last expression is the charac-

teristic equation from which otge set of xnatural frequencies of a strip resonator

can be defined; the only thing left to do is to substitute the value of no 0 in it.
I

By using analytical methods, the investigation of which is far beyond the scope of
this book, Vaynshteyn [35] obtained the following formula for the coefficient of
diffraction reflection of a wave guide wave from the open edge:

”on =' —- OIPI— ﬂ“ - 0-1], (8)

where B - 825 s is the parameter introduced above, which in the general case is
equal to Mil/21: hr and in the presence of damping becomes coupler. The given for-
m1; is valid for ‘9. >> A, Isl « 1; in the optical band the first of these condi-
tions is always satisfied, the second requires that damp.‘ ng in time and the angles
of inclination of the plane waves entering into the wave guide wave be quite small;

it is true that (8) remains satisfactorily accurate even when s s 1. Let us note
that as s decreases. the nodulus of R0 0 approaches one; the presence of not only an

80

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0511C1A1.USEGDNLN

anpi itude factor. but also a phase factor in the right-hand side of (8) corre-
sponds to the fact that the nininun total field saplitude is located at soue dis-
tance from the edge of the wave guide (returning to Figures 2.7, 2.8, it is possible
to say that reflection takes place aonehow free the plane parallel to P and located
nosewhat to the right).

Substituting (8) in the characteristic equation, expressing a in terms of k and
representing 11 in the form of exp (inn), a - 0. l, 2. .... for kx we obtaih the
following set of values:

_ (m -l-l)8

’-‘x 'm)'

(9)

where e - 8(1 + i)l/81m, N = a2/M. is the Fresnel nulber known to us from 5 1.2.

In order that the condition of smallness s be satisfied, the value of a must satisfy
the inequality a {‘< Jan/11 .

Now let us compare the properties of an open strip resonator with the properties of
an analogous closed resonator unbounded along the y-axig (the aid; reflecting walls
with the coordinates x - is are added). For the latter I: - (q‘lI/l) + [(m + l)‘nl2a]2,

I
from which we have munz %[2nq +517+L1 For the open resonator, the expression

defining the spectrum of the natural frequencies has the form ”an N 3°]-

0 a ' "
[3"? | 575%]- For ordinary mirror sizes Isl << 1; therefore the frequency

spectrum of an open resonator is very close to the frequency spectrum of a closed
resonator. The theoretical difference consists only in the fact that as a result of
complexity of e for the open resonator. the frequencies turn out to be conplex -
and damping appears.

The wave guide approach made it possible also to calculate the natural frequency
spectrum of a strip resonator and the field distribution of natural oscillation -
modes. Knowing all of this, it is easy to proceed with the more conventional method
of description where we are not talking about wave guide waves propagated in trans-
verse directions, but a light beam following the resonator axis. The interrelation
between the complex oscillation frequency and the eigenvalues of 8n - exp («16"I -

6") of the integral operator 3 describing the conversion of a transverse field
sfructurc on a complete round trip through the resonator in both directions, was
established in § 1.3. As applied to the given case we have

sun I n? -u’u- -I-1)'N(H-l-§ﬁ).
3

 

 

6:11 n"

 

377?: | n .Im-m I-ﬂ’l
. Mm 1-1)’ .__ Zn'vn + 12'9“! -l- E) (10)
6" ""[srm -| u)‘ [(M-I-W-I-M '
where Mrr Kim I! gnu—a. Usually a >> 1, and 6L~&(m+1)'. “£53 V;%1‘f'

Finally. the diffraction losses of the emission on passage through the resonator
in both directions are

81

FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY
FOI¢OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY

1 -- oxp(~— 26:.) ~26L~p ngﬁyg

The eigenfunctions or a strip resonator can be described in the forn

2 024....
ﬂ.(.t) : m “('3". 3" ' M=l v 0'
L'z4ﬁhﬂﬁi) :‘ ﬁlo”. (n)

The forts of no and "l is presented in figure 2.10, a, b for several different nubers

of Fresnel zones N. In Figure 2.10, a. the dotted lines are used to plot tin curves
obtained in reference [9] for one of the sane versions of a resonator by numerical
solution of the corresponding integral equation. Snell differences between the
exact (the dotted line) and approxi-ate solutions arise from the fact that when
deriving (ll), considering the process of diffraction reflection of the wave guide
from the edge of the resonator. we considered only the reflected wave, end the
remaining components of the emission scattering were neglected. For larger II the
differences become entirely insignificant.

 

Figure 2.10. Lowest sylnetric and antisyuetric eigenfunctions of

a flat strip resonator: a) u (x), l - N - 0.5, 2 -- N - 2.5, 3 -
u-ms; b) 1110:), 1—u-9—u-4, 3—51-10. The solid
curves are the result of calculations by formila (ll). and the dotted
curves are the data from exact nunerical calculations.

Kye: A. phase. degrees 3. anplitude

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F!II(NWNCLALIISE(MVLY

in order to obtain an idea about the behavior of the higher—order eigenfunctions,
it is possible to consider ?igure 2.5, c in which the amplitude u8 is depicted. As
a result of complextity of the argument, this is not an entirely "pure" sine

curve - the scale of the oscillations increases somewhat free the center to the
periphery of the beam. In addition. at the distribution "nodes" the field ampli-
tude differs soeewhat from zero (as a result of inequality of the amplitudes of the
two interfering wave guide waves); therefore the given figure is to some degree
provisional.

By using the method of separation of variables. it is easy to obtain the eigenfunc-
tions and eigenvalues for an open resonator made up of two flat rectangular mirrors
2a X 2b in size installed opposite each other:

u..<z.v) -(‘°’ (“"0" . ) Him
in

9a.. bliT—d- u-I-t‘m'j/ . W'
62.- 61.0".) + 62w.» 6:. — um.) + 6.101.),

where RI. -}’8n/Ila,Alb-Q,’8n/llb,5’ and 6" are defined as before by fornulas (10).

Thus, in the case ofrectangular mirrors the phase corrections and losses are equal
to the sun of the phase corrections and losses of two strip resonators, the mirror

width of each of which is equal to one of the sides of a rectangle.

Flat Cavity- made of Circular Mirrors. It is first necessary, according to
Vaynshteyn, again to resort to the wave guide approach. The solution is found in
«map

an").n=o.1,2..... I.
is a Bessel function, i is. as before, the distance between mirrors. The given
expression, just as the sun of two wave guide waves used when investigating a

strip resonator, is the exact solution of the wave guide equation between flat
mirrors of infinite dimensions. The oscillation frequency w is related to the
values of q, kr just as it was related to the values of q, Itx in the preceding case.

the form «gm—mow. -e)(ff:)1‘.’-'. where Mr. w- 1.0;)

At a sufficient distance iron the center it is possible to use the asymptotic
hankel representation for the function Jn(krr)

1.. (Iv) - n’ 2mm cos w - (2:: -|- 1) 1:14] ~
~ "Hi I'm — (2n 1- 1) ml) + exM- mu - (2n + DIM”,

that is, it is possible to represent the solution in the form of the sun of two
radial waves proportional to exp (ikrr) and exp (-ikrr). The amplitudes of these

waves are related near the edge of the mirrors. just as before, by the coefficient
of diffraction reflection from the edge, where it is considered that the magnitude
of the reflection coefficient depends on kr just as it depended on k:. Thus, it is

assumed that the curvature of the edge and the cylindricity of the wave are not felt

83

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(HHLY
F0.‘OFFTCM\LIJBB¢NULY

Table 2.1. goats of the equation .
n“) - 0

RTTTW—z '
-'.) l 2.0" 33" 5.“ 0.38

I 5.53 7.02 8.52 9.76

  
   
 

in the diffraction reflection coefficient; it is possible to familiarize oneself
with arguments in favor of this proposition and also a number of other mathematical

fine points connected with the problem of circular mirrors in [3].

   

It)

Figure 2.11. Radial eigenfunction factor of a flat optical cavity
node of circular mirrors: e) foo(r); b) £01(r); 1 - N - 2, 2 -—

"-5.3—N-10.

Key: A. phase. degrees 3. amplitude

84

'\

F!"R¢JFF1CIAI.I£BI§(MVLY
FOI¢MﬂﬂCUU.USE(M‘LY

The corresponding calculations lead to a discrete set kt - van/a(l + e), where 2a
is the nirror diameter. 6 has the same value as in (9), “In is the (n + l)st
positive root of the equation Jn(v9 - 0 (Table 2.1). Hence. we have the following

formulas for the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of a resonator made of circular
flat mirrors:
to: no

u... (r. «n w 1.. (r) (m. _,) I. {my :3)

a; ﬁguring 5- ts- _L(_~_¢_2L.?
" " luv-n) +9! " '“I(M+n)+p

where M l /8ﬂ/A . The diffraction losses for large N are equal to 165v:.ﬂl"==
;i$§fV:nN'"': let us remember that N . azlll is the number of Fresnel zones. 8 -

The graphs of the functions f°0(r) and f01(r) are presented in Figure 2.11, a. b.

The nature of thedifferenoebetween these functions and the exact solutions of
the integral equation is the same as in the case of a strip resonator (see Figure
2.10,a).

Polarization of Radiation of Natural Modes. Ditlout considering the systems
investigated in § 3.6 with field reversal, the situation with polarization in all
empty, open resonators is identical; the information presented below pertains to
an equal degree both to the flat cavities investigated in this section and to
resonators of other types (in particular, stable resonators which were discussed

in the preceding section).

Inasmuch as from the very beginning we used scalar diffraction theory, there is no
dependence on polarization direction in any of the derived formulas; in particular,
the natural frequencies for oscillations with any linear polarization are identi-
cal. Hence. it follows automatically that the natural oscillations can not only
have arbitrary linear polarization, but also be-a superposition of oscillations
with different linear polarization. that is, have circular or elliptic polariza-
tion. Hereafter, for more descriptivensss we shall represent the oscillations

as linearly polarized: let us begin with the case of rectangular mirrors.

Figure 2.12 contains a schematic description of the field distributions of TEHOO,

Tﬂﬂlo and TEMO1

rectangular mirrors; on the dotted lines. the field will be equal to zero. In
the general case of unequal sides of the rectangle. the frequencies of the Tﬂﬂlo

and TEHO1

tionnl degeneration occurs. By superposition of such degenerate oscillations,
oscillations with more complex field topology can be obtained as illustrated in
Figure 2.13.

oscillations with respect to their linear cross section with

oscillations are different; for square mirrors they coincide - addi-

85

IIMICHHHCIAI.USE(N§LY
INJR 0I1ﬂ(1Al.USIZ(HULY

 

Figure 2.12. Pield distribution with respect
to resonator cross section withrectongular
Iirroro.

 

Figure 2.13. For-ation of oscillations with
complex fiald topology in o reeonotor with
square mirrors [9].

86
IN)R!0F1N(1AL USIBCRVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c) 3
y 8)
a) .r d) r
u) 3 e) "M" "H" 4'
m a)
Q
E)
' I

Figure 2.14. Field distribution with respect to resonator cross section
with circular mirrors [3]: a) rtuéz); b) rsnégi c) Tﬁﬂéi), u ~ 66s ¢3
d) Tﬁﬂéi). u ~ sin d; e) Tlﬂéi), u ~ sin 0; f) ranéi), u ~ sin ¢S g)
rang); h) mg) .

Finally. Figure 2.1b shows TEMOO and TEHOI oscillations of a resonator with circular

mirrors; superposition of the oscillations depicted in Figure 2.16, c-f, leads to
the natural oscillations TEHO1 with radial (g) and azimuthal (h) directions of

polarization.

with this, we complete the investigation of empty resonators with small diffraction
losses.

5 2.3. Some Experimental Research Results

It was already mentioned in the introduction that the first gas lasers had highly
uniform and extremely weakly amplifying active medium; in addition. the active
medium was included in long narrow cells which led to a small number of Fresnel
zones N on the resonator nirrors. For small N, as will be demonstrated hereafter,
the optical nonuniformity of the medium. imperfection of the resonator elements
and gain saturation effects are most weakly manifested; for these reasons. the
experimental data of the transverse field structure of gas lasers at that time did
not ofter too much to consider. IL is possible to note, it is true, that when

using "stable" resonators distribution patterns similar to the patterns predicted
by the theory of ideal empty resonators were observed quite frequently. In the

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

case of flat mirrors (which were used comparatively rarely for gas lasers), small
deviations from tue ideal configuration led to sharp distortion of the form of the
field distribution. Thus. in one of the first papers on investigation of continuous
gas lasers written by Herriott [36] such distortions were observed for deviations
from ideal planeness of the mirrors of «1/100.

In the 1970's when powerful gas lasers with large volumes of optically nonuniform
active medium began to be more and more widespread, the problem of the divergence
of their emission was solved on the basis of unstable resonators rather than
stable or flat cavities (see Chapter lo). Therefore the basic source of information
on the transverse field structure in nonideal resonators with email diffraction

losses remain the results of the studies of solid-state lasers performed in the
1960 s.

Early Observations of Stimulated Emission of Solid-State Lasers. The first experi-
ments demonstrated that the amuler divergence of the emission of solid-state lasers
was significantly greater (us .ally by one or two orders) than the expected value. In
order to discover the causes of the comparatively large angular divergence of the
emission. various studies were made of the spatial structure of the stimulated beam
as a function of the degree of uniformity of the active medias. the pumping inten-
sity, and so on. The greater part of this research pertains to the case of a re-
sonator with flat mirrors.

when comparing experimental data with the results of the theory of empt open reson-
ators, it was discovered very quickly that the reg lsr spot distribut i". the near
or far zones corresponding to defined oscillation modes of an ideal r-sonator is
almost never encountered. Even approximate similarity of the field distribution
patterns with the oscillation modes of an ideal resonator is observed. as a rule,
only when the lasing threshold is slightly exceeded, the medium is homogeneous to
the maximum and under other exceptionally favorable conditions [37-40]. Hith an
increase in pumping intensity, the number of oscillation modes present in the stimu—
lated emission increases. Modes appear with more and more complicated structure and
greater and greater divergence of the emission [37, 38, (.0, Al]. In addition to
everything else. the spatial distribution of the emission during a lasing pulse does
not remain constant at all. Thus. if the stimulated emission pulae lasts more than
10-5 seconds, as a rule, it decays into a large nmsber of already mentioned emission
"spikes" randomly distributed in time; the field structure varies almost randomly
from spike to spike. Therefore if we are able to observe individual modes of oscil-
lations, then it is possible only with the help of high-speed photography, recording
the field distribution for individual spikes. Even with high-speed photography,
recognition among the other modes of the single, lowest mode which has diffraction
divergence of the emission. is far from a frequent event.

When using active rods with noticeable optical inhomogeneities, identification of
the individual modes of oscillations becomes impossible [42. 63, 39. 60]. In many
experiments it was discovered that very small resonator aberrations with respect to
ugnitude are sufficient for complete distortion of the field distribution cf the
lowest-order modes. Thus, for example in one case [64] such distortion was caused
by elastic deformations of a ruby rod (as a result of especially applied forces),
in another case it was caused by transition from samples with optical length
variations AL ~ 0.1x to samples with A]. ~ 0.25A [391. Accordingly. in subsequent

papers an effort was made to analyse the mechanism of the effect of optical
inhomogeneities on the field structure.

88

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR*0FF1CJAL.USEZCHULY

The papers by Evtuhov and Neeland [38, 45] and. in particular, Leontovich and
Veduta [66] were a significant step forward in understanding the essence of this
mechanism. In these papers it was demonstrated that if a nonuniform active rod
serves as the source of the second-order wave aberrations (of the positive lens
type), then the resonator with flat mirrors is made equivalent to an empty reson-
ator with concave mirrors. The observed field structure in such cases corresponds
to the predictions of stable resonator theory. Thus, the concept of the equivalent
resonator was used for the first time to interpret the experimental data.

In reference [46] an explanatitn was also presented for a number of laws observed
when using stable resonators. when the threshold is slightly exceeded, only the
lowest types of oscillations with least diffraction losses located near the

axis of the sample are stimulated. The appearance of stimulated emission first

in the central zone is promoted by the fact that the pumping emission density and,
with it, the inverse population frequently reach the maximum value on the axis of
the sample [67. 48]. With an increase in pumping power. the threshold of stimula-
ted emission of higher-order oscillation modes is reached, and the region encom:
passed by the stimulated emission expands. Finally. when the threshold is exceeded

by a great deal. the modes of such high order that the stimulated emission fills
the entire active medium appear.

The above-described picture of replacement of the oscillation modes was actually
observed in many papers (for example, [69. 50]); the argument that the maximum
transverse index of the modes present in the stimulated emission is determined by
the condition of filling the entire resonator cross section also found complete
confirmation [51-53]. Let us note that resonator "stability" was insured in
different experiments both by using concave mirrors [51. 53] or introducing posi-
tive lenses into the resonator with flat mirrors [52, 53] and by “lenticularity”
of the sample itself [56]. It is also interesting that on appearance of modes
with high transverse indices in the stimulated emission. the lowest oscillation

modes of the stable resonator are "displaced" - they cease to be observed in the
stimulated emission (for example, [49]).

The following is especially important for us. Inasmuch as with an increase in
order of the modes, the emission divergence also increases, the radiation pattern

of lasers with "stable" resonators not only does not become more constricted as
the active zone diameter increases. but it even becomes broader. Thus. the

situation here turns out to be quite clear, and it is extremely unfavorable from
the point of view of achieving small emission divergence.

89

F0!(MHHK1Al.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with a decrease in sphericalness of the mirrors and as the resonator approaches a
flat cavity. information about the angular divergence of the emission becomes
less and less systematic. The modes of oscillations observed in stimulated emis-
sion frequently have such an irregular structure that whatever it is. classifica-
tion of them becomes impossible; frequently it is not even possible to trace the
correlation between the width of the radiation pattern and the perfection of the
resonator. This is all the more true, as numerous studies have demonstrated, in

that in the case of a flat cavity the field structure turns out to be especially
sensitive to intraresonator wave aberrations. the sources of which are highly

varied. In spite of this fact. for large diameters of the active elements, the
emission divergence. although it exceeds the diffraction limit significantly,

is far from that in the case of stable resonators (for example [55]). Therefore
lasers with flat mirrors remained the basic type of solid-state lasers for many
years.

Divergence of the Rndiationof Solid-State Lasers. Comparatively small emission di—
vergence and, together with this, a variety of factors influencing it. have insured
constant interest on the part of researchers in lasers with flat cavities. Let

us present the basic results from numerous studies in which the causes limiting the
axial luminous intensity of these lasers was investigated.

A significant part of the studies pertain to ruby lasers. Being the typical crystal-
line active medium, the ruby has an enormous number of randomly distributed micro-
and macro inhomogeneities leading to significant scattering of light. The chars -
teristic magnitude of the losses to low-angular light scattering is 0.01-0.l cm.

[56] for this material (just as also for many other crystalline active media [17]).

in the case of noticeable light scattering. the width of the central core in the
angular distribution usually is 5-20'. The core is surrounded by a system of com-
paratively intense rings [57-60, 39. 46] with angular radii equal to the radii of
the rings in the Fabry-Perot etalon for light with a wavelength equal to the emis-
sion wavelength in the central core (for example. [60]; let us note that the magni-
tudes of these angular radii form the same sequence as the slope angles of the
transformed waves 9 in the preceding section). According to some observations,
the ring width in the angular distribution is determined by the same expressions as
in the passive etalon. and it depends on the quality of the sample. respectively
[39]. Finally, in the paper by Vanyukov. et a1. [61] the relation of the indicated
rings to the light dispersion was finnsly proved by introducing an additional scat-
tering element into the resonator.

Observations of the spatial coherence [57-59] and emission spectra [62] led to the

conclusion that the emission pertaining to individual oscillation modes is in prac-
tice distributed over the entire spot of the far-field pattern and the shape of the

wave front at the exit from the laser has an extraordinarily complicated and irre-
gular structure.

All of this does not fit within the framework of the concepts developed by the
theory of ideal empty resonators. The interpretation of the observed phenomena is
also complicated by the fact that in almost every specific case the influence of a
great variety of types of resonator aberrations is exhibited. Nevertheless, in
many of the experiments it was possible to trace a clear correlation between opti-
cal perfection of the active medium and the degree of directionality of the emis-
sion: with a decrease in uniformity of the sample,the angular divergence of both

90

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
INDR‘OFIWCJAI.|£SEL(NVLY

the amplifiers [631 and lasers [63—68] increases. It is worth while especially to
note the fact that with large angular divergence, the magnitude turns out to be
close to the magnitude of the angular divergence of a high-parallel beam from an
external source after single passage of it through the same sample [67-691.

In references [66-68], an experimental study was made of the peculiarities of the
influence of such specific sources of light dispersion as the sliding surfaces.
interfaces between modules, and so on. From the presented data it follows that for
macroinhomogeneities. basically the light dispersion on the microinhomogeneities
- on the distribution "wings" - is felt in the magnitude of the central angular
distribution core.

The angular divergence and power of the emission as a function of length of a flat
cavity for the case of a laser using a macroscopically uniform medium but having
noticeable dispersion on microinhomogeneities (Ca? :Sm2+) was studied in 12?}; it
was demonstrated that the divergence of the emissizn is proportional to L'1 in a
very broad range of variation of L. It is noteworthy that with an increase in the
resonator length. a decrease in divergence until it approaches the diffraction
limit was accompanied only by insignificant reduction of the lasing power.

As has already been pointed out. the light scattering sources in crystalline active
media are distributed more or less randomly with respect to volume. The aberra-
tions caused by nonuniform heating of the active rod (so-called thermal deforma-
tions of the resonator) have an entirely different nature. Their source is the
thermal variations of the index of refraction and the phenomenon of photoelasticity
caused by the presence of thermal stresses [70. 71].

The given effect was detected in 1963 [72, 73] and was studied in detail in many
subsequent papers. 0n the basis of their origin itself, in contrast to light dis-
persion, the thermal deformations reduce to the presence of an index of refraction
gradient which varies slowly with respect to the cross section of the specimen.

The thermal deformations are especially large in active elements of lasers operating
in the periodic [74, 75] or continuous [54] mode. However, even when the laser
operates in the single spike mode, thermal deformations at the end of the pulse
frequently reach noticeable magnitude and have a significant influence on the
angular divergence of the emission. Thus, in one of the early papers by Vanyukov,
et al. [76] pertaining to a comparatively small neodymium glass laser with numping
that is not very intense, a two-fold increase in the divergence at the end of the
lasing pulse was observed which was correctly ascribed to thermal effects. Here-
after. as the size and power of solid state lasers increase, the control of the
thermal deformations has become one of the most important problems of laser engineer-
ing. We shall discuss the methods of solving this problem and other aspects of the
problem of optical nonuniformity of active media in more detail in Chapter 5. Now
let us only note that analogous phenomena are also observed in powerful gas lasers:
microinhomogeneities occurring during the process of excitation of the gas medium

or during its turbulent motion frequently lead to noticeable light scattering; in-
stead of the thermal deformations of the active element. here thermal deformations

occur in the resonator mirrors.

In addition to the enumerated factors, the spatial structure of the beam is in-
fluenced by a number of other factors. Thus, great significance is attached to the

91

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accuracy of alignment of the flat mirrors: if they are not parallel, the spot in
the far zone is elongated in the misalignment direction, and in the case of suffi-
ciently large misalignments. it breaks down into a number of individual spots [77-
80]. Resonators with uniform active medium and correspondingly small emission
divergence are especially sensitive to nonparallelness of the mirrors [80].

The relation was also noted for the angular divergence of the emission as a function
of the nature of the distribution of the inverse population with respect to the
cross section of the sample [81].

The set of many causes in the final analysis also leads to the fact that the mgni-
tude of the angular divergence when using resonators with small diffraction losses
usually is several angular minutes and greatly exceeds the diffraction limit even
in the case of lasers with highly uniform active media.

From the point of view of the beam structure itself, the great magnitude of its
angular divergence can be the fault of both the presence of a large nusber of oscil-
lation modes in the stimulated emission and the fact that in systems with noticeable
aberrations the emission wave front belonging to the highest Q-modes, can differ
sharply from planar. The latter phenomenon is frequently called mode deformation;
although this term is not entirely precise. it is convenient to use in many studies.

From the data presented in many articles [39-43. 57-59, 62, 77-80]. it is possible
to draw the qualitative conclusion that in the case of lasers with flat mirrors in
the presence of noticeable aberrations the mode deformations are especially impor-
tant. The decrease in aberrations is accompanied by an increase in the role of the
effects connected with multinodality (for example [100]); finally, if special care
is exercised in conducting the experiment and a uniform active medium is used, the
angular divergence of the emission turns out to be primarily caused -by mltimodality
of lasing.

Now let us proceed with a more consistent analysis of the phenomena. Let us begin
with multimodal lasing. Its mechanism is so complex that for lasers with noticeable
optical nonuniformities, noone has seriously studied it. Only the theory of multi-

mode lasing in ideal resonators is more or less advanced. Judging by the experi-
mentally observed Lrends, which we discussed above, this case is also of interest,
and we shall investigate it in the following section.

9‘ 2.4. Hultimode Losing in Ideal Optical Cavities

Mechanism of Multimde Lasing. M: the beginning of the 1960's, the approximation
where the inverse population is considered uniforsly distributed through the vol-

ume of the resonator was used to describe the operation of a laser. Within the
framework of this approximation. multimode lasing is totally unexplainable. Actually.
in the case of steady-state lasing, as we saw at the beginning of § 1.4, under the
joint effect of pumping and stimulated emission, the inverse population is
established at a level such that the gain in accuracy compensates for losses in

the resonator. If such compensation occurs for the mode of oscillations with the
lowest excitation threshold (the frequency is closest to the frequency of the

maximum amplification band, the diffraction losses are minimal), then for the

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

remaining nodes the gain turns out to be less than the losses, and the nodes should
not be excited.

As we have seen, the results of experimental studies of the transverse field struc-
ture do not correspond to such representations. The data on the emission spectrum
are. perhaps, more indicative: even for solid-state lasers based on media with uni-
formly broadened line, the lasing spectrum width frequently is comparable to the
gain band width [17]. Thus. in Figure 2.15, the x's are used to plot the results

of the measurement of the intensity distribution between oscillations with different
axial indices q performed in [62] (the corrections to the frequency as a result of
the transverse field structure were quite small in the given case); dotted lines
are used to plot the luminescence line. From the figure it is obvious that the
lasing spectrum has components so removed from the center of the line that the

gain of their frequencies is noticeably less than maximum.

I’m-£7

   

 

'.".."/II:C'J "J'IJ'Z'IIIZJIJ
”'4’ “'1’
u 5.7
(J:
a -
-.I-..'/ll_‘.r' J‘IJC/IIZJIJ
9-,”:
.m ﬂ
zu '
V
’ _;‘_"/l"l.'."

 

Figure 2.15. Lssing emission energy distribution among spectral bands
with different axial indices (the value of (v - vo))cl2no£)‘1 is plotted

on the x-axis, where v is the frequency at the center of the luninescence
line). Temperature of the specimen: a) 15° K, b) 40 Kznnn‘ - the

threshold is exceeded with respect to pumping intensity; x - experimental
data (energy of the emission belonging to individual spectral bands, in

relative units); ” - calculated data; the dotted curve is the curve
for the luminescence line.

———.

l“
lhe effects expanding the lasing spectrum in the case of a nonuniformly broadened

operating transition band or in the presence of factors causing mode synchronization
will not he discussed here.
IND! €Hﬂﬂ€1AI.ll§li(ﬂQLY

The data on the emission spectra also led to the idea that the primary cause of
multimodality is the nonuniformity of the inverse population distribution with re-
spect to the resonator volume arising under the effect of the stimulated emission
field. The first paper in which it was demonstrated that in spite of the elementary
theoretical predictions, the single-frequency lasing mode is unstable, was written
by Kuznetsova and Rautian [82]. Soon Tang and Stats [83, 84] proposed a simple
model of multimode lasing based on the proposition that with simultaneous excitation
of several modes of oscillations, their frequency differences are sufficiently large
that the inverse population does not change noticeably during the intermods beat
period. when calculating the inverse population this permits summation not of the
field amplitudes of individual modes, but their intensities directly (see 5 1.1 on
the addition of fields of several sources with different frequencies). 0n the basis
of the given model which will be discussed below, Tang and State were able to find
the steady state distribution of the lasing emission between modes with pumping in-
tensities somewhat exceeding the threshold. As a result of this, the solution was

extended to the case of exceeding the lasing threshold by large amounts [62, 85,
86].

Another fact is very important. The excitation thresholds of individual modes do
not coincide as a result of two factors -- the presence of differences in the mag-

nitudes of the diffraction losses and the fact that the gain depends on the position
of the frequency inside the luminescence band. As for the diffraction losses, as
is known, they depend on the axial index. "hen investigating angular divergence,
this permits us to do away with the problem of the emission spectrum [84, 86]. As

a result, it is possible to calculate the set of values of A.-§A.'.,', where A.q

is the power scattered in the mode with transverse index m and axial index q, and

the summation is carried out with respect to all possible q. The set of values of
An usually is called the intensity distribution between transverse modes, although
in essence we are not talking about individual modes, but groups of modes, each of

which contains all the oscillations having identical transverse, but different axial
indicea.

In the case of a flat cavity, on the contrary, the oscillation frequency is basi-
cally determined by the axial index; the correction as a result of the transverse

structure is usually small. In turn, this permits us to get away from the presence
of the transverse structure of the field when calculating the emission spectrum;

the calculation result is a set of values Aug-lg]... which usually is called

the distribution between the axial modes. For this reason. it is possible to make
the remark made about the values of Am‘

Now let us explain the multimode lasing mechanism in the example of spectral distri-
bution of the emission in a flat optical cavity. here is it necessary to consider

the field structure along the resonator axis; the transverse structure, as was
demonstrated above, can be ignored.

Let us consider Figure 2.16. The curve in Figure 2.16,a provisionally depicts the
intensity distribution of one of the types of oscillations along the resonator

axis (in reality, of course, an immeasurably larger number of modulation periods
equal to A/Z are fitted into the length of the resonator than on the figure). He
shall consider that the frequency of this oscillation mode fits the center of the
luminescence line, and thus, it has the lowest excitation threshold.

94
FOR 0911C1AI.USEGDNLY
Figure 2.16. Induced spatial modulation of the inverse population as
the cause of instability of the unimodel conditions: a). c) oscilla-
tion intensity distribution with different axial indices with respect

Let the pumping intensity be distributed uniformly along the length of the resonator.
Hhile it exceeds the threshold very little. the lasing intensity is negligibly
small, the inverse population is distributed almost uniformly and is equal to the
threshold (the dotted line in Figure 2.16. b). "hen the threshold is noticeably
exceeded. the situation changes: the lasing power increases. stimulated transitions
begin to play a significant role in the inverse population balance. and the dis-
tribution of the latter acquires the form represented by the solid curve in Figure
2.16,b. At the field distribution nodes, a large number of excited atone accumulate
which do not participate in the lasing process in the given oscillation mode. As a

appreciably greater than the threshold value (this fact also leads to the situation
where the laser efficiency during unimodal lasing is less than the efficiency for
nultinode lasing; see 5 1.4, Figure 1.20).

decreases the gain, part of the intensity peaks are not at the inverse population
distribution ninina as in the first mode, but at the maxima (see Figure 2.16,c).

With still higher pumping intensity the lasing power in these modes increases so

much that they. similarly to the first, create unfavorable inverse population

distribution for themselves; as a result. the lasing threshold can be reached on
subsequent side frequencies, and so on.

verse population averaged over the resonator length gradually approaches the

threshold value. Obviously, sooner or later the time must come when the amount
that the threshold population exceeds the threshold value cannot compensate for
the decrease in gain on transition to the next side frequencies; therefore the

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nunber of nodes on which lasing is realized still remains finite and not too large
with limited increase in the pumping intensity.

The mechanism of spatial competition of the transversed oscillation nudes is entirely
analogous. If the pumping intensity is distributed uniformly over the resonator
cross section, the node with least diffraction losses is excited first. As the
lasing power increases. the inverse population distribution with respect to cross
section becomes more and sore nonunforn; the average inverse population with respect
to cross section increases until the excitation threshold of the next transverse
mode is reached, and so on.

Thus, the nultinodslity arises first of all as a result of the fact that the emission
intensity in individual nodes of oscillations is distributed nonunifornly with re-
spect to the resonator volune. This argment, clearly fomulated in the mentioned
articles by Tang and Stats. quickly found experilental confirmation. In a umber
of papers [87-89], various procedures were tested which made it possible to avoid

modulation of the radiation intensity with respect to the resonator length (the
simplest of them consists in using a traveling wave ring cavity [85]); in all cases

a sharp decrease in width of the lasing spectrum was actually observed by compari-
son with ordinary type lasers.

Procedure and Some Results of Calculations of the Multinode Lasing Regine. In order
to calculate the steady-state multimde lasing regime within the scope of the model
discussed above, it is necessary to solve the syst- of equations, each of which is
the condition of keeping the amplitude of one of the oscillation modes present in
the stimulated emission constant in time. In the case of a four-level medium with
unpopulated lower operating level, this systen described as applied to the problem
of finding the emission spectrum has the form

nu, ~55 ﬂcxdt-mh‘nﬂ) _
T . H.¥h4.(a—m2ﬁtuﬂ)

=0. i=0. :1. 22.....tr
‘°"""('/"m{<o. |1|>r; ' (12)

here q1 - qo + i is the axial index} i is the mode number (reckoning from the center
of the luminescence line where q - no); 1:231“ is the gain on the central frequency
in the absence of lasing; x1 - x(v1), x(&) is a function which describes the shape

of the luminescence line (in the center line - l; for the remaining frequencies
x < 1); A1 is the energy dissipation power in he ith mode (including the emission

power leaving the resonator) in the corresponding dimensionless units; 002. are the
inactive losses, R' is the reflection coefficient of the exit mirror. Lasing is

considered to be realized on 2: + 1 frequencies arranged synetrically with respect
to the center of the line.

In formulas (12), the factor 1 - cos2q1‘n'r/l- 2 sinzqinz/ﬂ. describes the intensity
distribution of the 1thoscillationg1m the resonator length (R‘ is considered

4
close to one); the expression kgainli +%,z.A.(l—cos2¢.mzl)} is the gain distri-

bution on the central frequency established under the overall effect of the entire

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions (12) is quite obvious: for modes present inthe stimulated emission the
gain must be equal to the losses; for the remainder, less than the losses (otherwise
the regime will be unstable). Let us also note that the method of averaging the
gain used here is based on calculating the number of induced emission processes
caused by the given mode field. Thus, formulas (12) are in essence the balance con-
ditions of the number of photons in the individual modes.

for the data on the emission spectrum calculated in [62] for the same conditionsunder
which the experimental measurements were taken. It is obvious that the forms of
the calculated and the experimentally obtained distributions are quite similar.

problem of finding the intensity distribution between the transverse modes of
oscillations. Depending on the frequency, the factor x can in this case be omitted;
then it is necessary to add the diffraction losses which depend on the transverse
index to the losses to inactive absorption and transmission of the exit mirror
already considered in (12). The main change, of course, is that the expressions

1 - cos2q nz/i describing the intensity distributions along the resonator axis must

resonator volume (including that arising under the effect of the lasing field itself)
must, generally speaking, cause a change in the individual mode field structure by
comparison with the structure in the empty resonator. While the problem of spectral
composition of the emission was considered, this could be ignored: the spatial

0n making the transition to investigation of the angular divergence of the emission,
the situation changes sharply: the spatial modulation period in the transverse
direction of both the lowest mode fields and occurring in the presence of quite in-

tense gain distribution fields will be compared with the mirror dimensions. Thus,
the width of the zones inside which the gain predominates over the losses or vice-

versa. is less, is not so small. Inasmuch as the light waves entering into the

retonstor axis. As a result, the light waves in the corresponding segments can
acquire significant additional gain or attenuation by comparison with the case of
an empty resonator. This, in turn, must cause significant changes in both the

form of the field distribution and the magnitude of the diffraction losses.

Hevertheless, in a significant part of the papers devoted to specific calculations
of the competition of transverse modes, the same values of the diffraction losses

97

F!”l(”ﬂﬂ(1AI.USE‘DNLN
Let us first note that in the case of stable resonators the natural oscillation
frequency depends sharply not only on theaxial, but the transverse indices (see
5 2.1; the values of dun and 6p1 usually are significantly superior to the phase

immeasurably larger range of variation of the resonator parameters. In all cases.
a gradual increase in the pumping intensity was accompanied by the process of suc-
cessive "displacenent" of the lower-order modes by the oscillation modes with
higher transverse indices. This process is explained by the fact that in the case
of stable resonators the emission of the high-order nodes is distributed over
greater volume than the emission of the lowest nodes (see Figure 2.1, 2.2). As
a result, the situation arises which is illustrated in Figure 2.17. Curve 2 in
Figure 2.17 provisionally depicts the lowest mode field intensity distribution;
curve 1 provisionally depicts the higher-order modes. If these two modes were
excited simultaneously, as a result of the total effect of their fields, the gain
distribution would assume the for- of curve 3. It is clear that the mean "effect-

 

Figure 2.17. Coupetition of modes of different volume: 1, 2 - field
distribution of different transverse modes with respect to the resonator
cross section (depicted provisionally); 3 - gain distribution with
simultaneous excitation of both nodes.

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Competition of the Transverse Modes in Lasers with Plat Cavities. Now let us pro-
ceed to the case of lasers with flat cavities which we shall discuss in somewhat

more detail. There are no special grounds for assuming that the emission diver—
gence with circular and square mirrors of the same area must differ significantly.

As for square or, in the general case, arbitrary rectangular mirrors, with-

in the framework of the above-discussed simplest model, the angular divergence with
respect to any two mutually perpendicular directions can be calculated independently
of the divergence with respect to the other [84, 86] (similarly to how the divergence
and emission spectrum can be determined independently).

The solution of the system of equations of the type of (12) using the values of the
diffraction losses, calculated for-an empty resonator and the approximate inten-
sity distribution functions with respect to cross section of the type of lum(;)P..

(2:: l!_£gl££ (see (11)) leads to the following results [86]. If the pumping is

uniform, the power Am dissipated in individual transverse modes of oscillations of
a strip resonator (in the case of rectangular mirrors AI ' g Ann) will turn out to

distributed among them by the law A“ 0 A0 - 36;, where 26: are the diffraction

losses (in the case of rectangular mirrors. the part of the diffraction losses which
is connected with the field structure in the given direction, see 5 2.2), A and B
are parameters which depend on the properties of the medium of the resonatog and
also the pumping intensity. The greatest power goes to the lowest mode with minimum
diffraction losses. Thus, in flat resonators the excitation of high-order modes
does not lead to displacement of the lower ones (as a result of the fact that the
volumes of all the modes are approximately identical). The number of modes A in a
two-dimensional resonator and, consequently. the magnitude of the angular divergence
with respect to one of the directions 0 ~KA/2a are sstursfed extremely quickly as
the pumping intensity above the threshold increases (K ~ lax - 157x where x is a
parameter which is equal to the ratio of the pumping intensity to its threshold value
for a four-level medium). With uniform distribution of sufficiently intense pump-
ing and K 2 3, the following simple formulas are valid:

K z 1.5 {A51 + In (1/.1‘77’)a/./i7.z.';)

0 ~ 0.7 V0.1 + In (Up-'7?) 3 1/12....)
A
Key: a. equiv

where Lequiv ~ L - 1(1 - 1/no), L is the distance between the mirrors. 1 is the

length of the model with flat ends made of a medium with index of refraction no
(see the cmmsents to Figure 1.18, § 1.3).

From these formulas it is obvious that inasmuch as K ~ a, with an increase in cross-
section of the active elements the angular divergence of the emission does not de-
crease and is farther and farther from the diffraction limits; the correctness of
this conclusion was confirmed, in particular. by direct experimental checking for
the case of a neodymium glass laser [26].

99

ItlICNWWCIA1.USE(NVLY
I-‘OII oniuai. use unu

Within the framework of the same model. it is also simple to consider the influence
of the nonuniformity of the pumping distribution and the losses with respect to the
resonator cross section [86]. Here, much depends on the specific form of these
distributions. Without going into details, let us note the following trend: in a
laser. generally speaking, an effort is made to establish the lasing emission field
such that the resultant gain distribution will approach the loss distribution to the
maximum (that is, the threshold condition will be approximately satisfied over the
entire cross section). if this emission field is representable in the form of the
sum of fields of several lowest modes. lasing will be realized in them. This in-
dicates not only comparatively small emission divergence, but also that the calcu-
lated model itself is not so rough in the given case: on satisfaction of the thresh-
old condition in the entire resonator cross section mode deformation is absent, and
the use of the same formulas as in an empty resonator to describe the mode structure .
becomes valid. A simple analysis shows that this situation must be observed most
frequently in cases where the ratio of the pumping intensity to the losses decreases
smoothly from the center to the edge of the resonator; the lowest mode intensity in

this case increases noticeably by comparison with the case of uniformly distributed
pumping and losses.1

If the indicated ratio. on the contrary, increases on going away from the axis, this
must be a..ompanied by noticeable mode deformations and must, as a rule, lead to
large angular divergence. Finally, with sharply asymmetric pumping distribution (or
loss distribution), both the mode deformations and the angular divergence of the
emission must be especially large. Actually. the proposition that in the given

case lasing can be realized on nodes . which are similar with respect

to structure to the modes of an ideal empty resonator leads to logical contradic-
tion. Indeed, the sum of the intensities of any number of modes of an ideal reson-

star is always distributed symmetrically with respect to cross section and cannot
"correct" the asymmetry of the gain distribution caused by nonuniform pumping.

This. in turn. can lead to significant mode deformation which contradicts the
initial assumption.

All of the enumerated laws are actually observed when investigating lasers if mess-
ures are taken to reduce the phase aberrations of the resonator to a minimum. Thus,
in reference [92]. the greater pumping concentration on the axis of a cylindrical
rod caused a decrease in angular divergence. The results of a carefully made
comparison of the cases of symmetric and asymmetric pumping distributions with
respect to resonator cross section are also of interest [81]; they can serve as a
good illustration of the presented arguments (Figure 2.18). The object of inves-
tigation was a laser using an active element made of neodymium glass of rectangu-
lar cross section. The pumping distribution with respect to one of the directions
-— along the large cross sectional dimension —— was uniform. and with respect to
the other dimension, it varied (Figur e 2.18. a). This caused variations of the
angular divergence of the emission with respect to the corresponding direction
(Figure 2.18, b). Sharp asymmetry of the angular distribution in the case of
asymmetric pumping distribution indicates high deformation of the modes, for the
modes of an ideal resonator have symmetric far-field pattern.

 

1In real lasers such effects can be manifested only in complete absence of any reson-
ator deformations, including thermal.

100

It”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAl.USlZ€ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Deficiencies of the Model and the Possibilities of Improving It. In spite of the
fact that the shove-discussed simplest model of multimode lasing leads to plausible
explanation of a number of experimentally observed lama. the possibility of using
it for quantitative estimates of the angular divergence is far from obvious. 1n-
deed, it is possible to use the field distributions of an empty resonator, as we
have seen. only in certain special cases; in the remaining cases. it is impossible
to neglect the mode deformations as a result of nonuniform distribution of the gain
(or losses). generally speaking. The proposition that the frequency differences of
the transverse modes participating in lasing are quite large in the case of a large
number of Fresnel zones N also is not entirely justified. finally, the steady
intensity distribution of the emission between the individual modes

predicted within the framework of the given approximation was never observed in
practice, most frequently, as a result of the "spike" lasing regime. It is true
that it was explained in § 1.6 why the energy characteristics of the laser must on
averaging with respect to a sufficiently large number of "spikes" correspond to the
calculation data in the steady-state approximation; the same argments can be stated
also in favor of correctness of the discussed model. but its deflelencleeamestill

obvious.

gm “

§

2 1.;
g! §§4Ji W 0
, 'g' |- ./-

,Eat- /

 

Figure 2.18. Angular distribution of laser emission during pumping
that is nonuniform with respect to one of the directions in accord-

ance with the pumping distribution [81].

Key: A. pumping emission density, relative units
3. 10, relative units

c. o. angular minutes

Numerous efforts have been made at more complete consideration of all of the pro-
cesses occurring in real lasers. Among them it is worthwhile to note the numerical
calculations of the processes of establishment of the multimode lasing regime after
inclusion of the previously absent pumping, performed in the previously mentioned
‘papers by Tang and Stat: [83, 86] Expressions of the type of (12) vote used in the
calculations. Considering the dependence of A on time, these expressions are a
system of differential equations of the type of d 1n Aildt - 31(Ao. A1, ...). It

turned out that although the steady intensity distribution between the individual
modes is also established in the final analysis, the setup process lasts for an
extremely long period of time, and the oscillations ¢f total intensity occuring in

this case are of an irregular nature and are similar to the experimentally observed

101

ROI.OFIICLAI.USEIMVLY
msormuuseomv

random “peaks." It became possible to understand that the excellent "failures" in
operation of the laser caused by pumpmg instability. variation of the resonator
parameters as a result of vibrations, tharnal effects, and so on are sufficient
for the intensity oscillations to last indefinitely. Subsequently, numerous
experinental studies (for exanple, [93, 96]) demonstrated that the causes of the
"spike" node are indeed such.

He shall not discuss the results of other papers devoted to detailed study of multi-
node regines and the emission kinetics of lasers e°ith flat cavities in general.
Although among these papers there are very interesting one:, either special cases
are investigated everywhere or nodels are used which are only a little more per-
fected than the one discussed above. In addition to everything else, the behavior
of real lasers with flat cavities depends to a high degree on such a large number of
factors. frequently not controllable during the course of even the most careful
experiments. that it is inconceivable to fully take than into account.

Let us present the following instructive example to confirm this argunent. In any
nodel of a laser with a flat cavity, boundary conditions are induced in one for: or
another at the edge of the resonator or diffraction losses defined by edge effects
are given. In particular, when deriving the above-presented formlaa for a nunber
of simultaneously excited transverse nodes and angular divergence. the values of
. é . .
the diffraction losses found in § 2.2 vere used: 25.=ﬁ V%.X13NLJ.L-O.26(m+ 0"”
(U)"'- When the losses themselves were considered. it was assumed that the resona-
tor nirrors are installed exactly opposite each other and are equal in size; if
these conditions are not satisfied, all of the for-ulna becone, in general. invalid.

In order to understand what deviations from ideal resonator configuration can lead
to such an effect, let us return to Figures 2.7. 2.9. If the edge of one of the
mirrors is shifted in the transverse direction with respect to the edge of the
other by As = at, one of the mirrors begins to cover the second reflected nave
generated by the edge, and the entire edge diffraction pattern is distorted signi-
ficantly. The angles of inclination of the waves entering into the mode with trans-
verse index n are a I ((m + l)/2) (A/Za); thus. for noticeable variation of the
losses of this mode it is sufficient that inaccuracy in the mutual arrangement of
the eirrors or inequality of their dimensions reached Adz ”3' ' 2‘23.- = 5:716. In par-
ticular. if the halfuidth of one of the mirrors exceeds the halfwidth of other by
this amount, the given nirror can be considered infinitely large in the first
approximation. Transmission of the light been through this resonator in both di-
rections is equivalent -to-traa1rission in one direction through a synetric flat

resonator of double length; the diffraction losses reduced to a unit length increase
in this case by 5 times.

 

Thus. for N >> 1 very ansll deviations from resonator synaetry are sufficient for
the diffraction losses of the lowest nodes to becone different. The nagnitude of
the losses can feel the frequently existing scattering of the light on the lateral
surfaces of the active element or cell walls, and so on. It is true that in the
case of large N usually nany transverse nodes are excited; the properties of the
high-order nodes are less subject to the effect of random causes (indeed the criti-
cal nagnitude of the deviations froa ideal configuration As . n + 1); therefore
theoretical estinstes of the total number of nodes are still neaningful.

102

FOIOI'FICIALUSSONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The efforts to create models of mltimode lasing more adequate to the actual situa-
tion in a laser with a flat resonator are continuing. however. they can obviously
lead only to deeper substantiation of the fact already long obvious to experimenters
that flat cavities with a large number of Preanel cones cannot insure minimum di-
vergence of the emission even with an ideally uniform medium. Therefore it is

best to proceed to an investigation of the effect of intraresonator aberrations.

§ 2.5. Influence of Resonator Defornations on Field Configuration of Individual
Modes

In this section a study will be made of the problem of how the form of the field
distribution of individual nodes varies under the effectof various types of intra-
resonator aberrations. Inasmuch as in the final analysis we are interested in the
possibility of achieving snall divergence, special attention will be given to the
case of comparatively small optical inhomogeneities.

Some General Remarks. Perturbation Theory. The analysis of mode deformations with
small diffraction losses has been the subject of a broad literature. The mjority

of reasonable results were obtained either by a nunerical iterative method proposed
in the paper by Fox and Li [9] or by direct solution of differential equations for

an electromagnetic field or, finally. using the expansion in a series with respect

to eigenfunctions of an ideal resonator. The latter method is very descriptive and
permits unique consideration of the influence of the most varied factors; we shall

pay special attention to it.

The expansion of the arbitrary field distribution it; a series with respect to eigen-
functions u of the operator of an ideal resonator 1’ (see § 1.3) is possible,
strictly spanking, only in the case where these functions font a complete system.
Only stable resonators with infinite mirrors have a complete system of eigenfunco
tions; perturbation theory has been widely used to calculate them since 1964.

[95. 96]. With finite dimensions of the mirrors, the eigenfunctions of open resona-
tors, as Vaynshteyn demnstrated [3], do not form a conplete system. This is all
the more the case in that for nodes of very high order even the scalar formulation
of the uuygens-Presnel principle 0“ which all of our discussion is based, becomes
unexceptable. However, the eigenfunctions corresponding to modes with small trans-
verse indices coincide in the case of stable resonators with the functions of reson-
ators made of infinite mirrors. and with flat mirrors they are very similar to the
-:igenfunctions of a closed resonator with flat mirrors which, as is known, form a
-.:>mplete set. In addition, the coefficients of the corresponding series usually
decrease rapidly. and it is possible to getby with several of the first terms.
therefore the expansion in a series with respect to eigenfunctions of both stable
and flat resonators is still valid (a more detailed discussion for the case of a
f.-.at cavity appears in [97]), and it leads to results which almost coincide with

the data of much more tedious exact calculations. In the case of smell aberrations,
the nethods of perturbation theory are applicable.

In the first approximation of perturbation theory the solutions of the equation (? +
P'}! - B'u' corresponding to a resonator with aberrations are described by the

m II n
formulas . P'
I‘m ='- “as "' .zaﬂluh' ‘5‘ = a“ in”. '
”g a has + P'nlm. (13)
103

FOR omcw. USE ONLY
POROFFICIALUSEONLY

Here 13' in the perturbation operator. u; and .f‘ are eigenfunctions and eigenvalues

of a resonator with aberrations. Pi... = I “Pug, are matrix elements of the pertur-
bation operator.

The mathematical aspect of perturbation theory is explained in any text on quantua

mechanics. The only difference of the above-presented relations from the standard

ones is that in the expression under the integral sign for FL the operation of

complex conjugation of one of the eigenfunctions is absent '(the substantiation of
the expediency of this notation appears in {95. 96]). These relations have. in the
given case. the following meaning. The matrix elements of the perturbation opera-
tor are none other than the relative amplitudes of light waves scattered as a re-
sult of perturbation from certain modes of an ideal resonator to
others (it is possible to understand this when considering specific forms of the
perturbation operator). The values of s are the amplitudes of the induced oscil-
lations; it is natural that they are invﬁsely proportional to the frequency dif-
ferences of the "inducing force" and the free oscillations of the system 8 - 8%.
In the case of stable resonators usually these differences are many times great r
than the differences for the case of flat mirrors (see also the remark in the pre-
ceding section on the emission spectrum of lasers with stable resonators).

The given fact is the basic cause for comparatively vealt dependence of the form of
the field distribution in stable resonators not only on miealignments of the mirrors.
leading, primarily, to a shift of the resonator axis), but also on aberrations of
other types. As a result, the angular divergence of the laser emission with a
stable resonator. as a rule. is determined not by the influence of the aberrations,
but the presence in the stimulated emission of higher order oscillation modes (see
55 2:3. 2.’-). Therefore those who desire to become familiar in more detail vith

the behavior of stable resonators in the presence of aberrations are referred to

the available broad literature on the subject (for example [95. 96, 98, 99]), and

we shall limit ourselves to further investigation of lasers with flat mirrors.

 

Figure 2.19. Equivalent diagram of a resonator with flat mirrors:
I. II —- mirrors, III — perturbation zone.

In the case of flat mirrors with a large number of Fresnel zones, the effect of the
operator 9 reduces to a significant degree to parallel transfer of the wave front.
the diffraction "displacement“ is small. As follows from the consents presented in
§ 1.1 for formula (1.2), the field source at an arbitrary point on the surface of
the resonator mirror (see the equivalent diagram in Figure 2.19) is, in essence,
the initial wave field in the region Q around the same point encompassing several

Fresnel zones. The given fact greatly- facilitates calculation of the matrix
elements of the perturbation operator.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Actually. let the perturbation source be concentrated in the zone occupying a
small part of the length of the resonator (rigors 2.19); on passage through it,
the wave amplitude is multiplied by the aberration factor f(r) which varies slowly
with respect to the resonator cross section (in the general case this factor also
includes the amplitude and phase corrections). If the variations of f(r) in the
dimensions of the region Q are small. the field distribution of the wave passing
through the entire resonator forward and backward turns out to be multiplied by fair)
independently of the segment of resonator length the perturbation zone is
located in. Therefore all such sources of aberrations (including the nonuniformly
excited active medium) can be considered concentrated in narrow zones near the
mirrors, which has been done in many papers (for example, [100, 101, 90, 86]).

Thus. the operator of a resonator with aberrations can be represented in the form
of P9. where P is a factor describing the total influence of all sources of aberra-
tmm;mewnuuumonmmr P-pﬂ_§=w_n§;hmu,ufduwtmt

me 5 mo unsure) — m. (14)
(we used 8. 2 1).

when calculating the expansion coefficients ‘mk by formulas (13), (14). it is

expedient to introduce another simplification. replacing the eigenfunctions and the
eigenvalues by the corresponding values for a closed resonator. Indeed, inasmuch
as when N >> 1 the value of 8/“ in formulas (11) is a small paraseter, the eigen-
functions of the open strip resonator are close to the functions of a closed one

“:(1)" :: "(n-+'13-“As for the difference of the eigenvalues, for an open resonator

it is determined by the magnitude of the phase corrections 6; with accuracy to

terms of the same order of smallness. Phase corrections, in contrast to diffrac-
tion losses, in practice do not depend on random parallel shifts or inequality of

the size of the mirrors (see the end of the preceding section) and coincide with
the corrections for a closed resonator. In the two-dinensional case

c;~(m+1)-57. a..—a.~(v—m');§.

Hence, it follows that the result of the effect of the perturbations on the form
of the field distribution depends little on random causes. Therefore information
obtained using the above-discussed approximation can serve as an objective charac-
teristic of the emission field of real lasers; calculation of the influence of the
perturbations on the magnitude of the diffraction losses requires a much more com-
plex analysis [for example. [102]).

Flat Cavities with Hinor aberrations. Let us proceed with the investigation of
specific types of perturbations. beginning with purely phase aberrations. The re-
sults of this investigation pertain to some degree not only to empty resonators,
but to the case of multimode lasing where the gain in the entire resonator cross

section is close to threshold (see 5 2.4) and the amplitude perturbations are
therefore small.

105

FOR OFFHJAI.UBE(MVLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The most widespread source of firstvorder wave aberrations (the optical wedge) is

nonparsnelnass of the mirrors. In this case, for the two dimensional (strip)
resonator

I"(:)— 1 a "90% 2oz) — 1 tel-2112c:

(e is the angle between the mirrors). The perturbation operator is antisymtric;
accordingly, ‘mk with odd In - kl are not equal to zero. A simple analysis shows

that with an increase in the misalignment angle 8, the center of gravity of the
field distribution shifts monotonically in the direction of more remote edges of

the mirrors (the opposite conclusion in the monograph [3] is based on inaccuracy
in the discussion). In particular, the expression for the eigenfunction of the
lowest node has the form uézuﬁ-A 3fNu, ([97]: (Figure 2.20, a). In accordance

with this expression, the fundamental mode turns out to be noticeably deformed
even for extremely small misalignment angles. when t reaches a value of Alkali, the
angular divergence of the emission of the fundamental mode is approximately doubled
[103]; the perturbation theory itself simitaneously ceases to be applicable for
description of this mode.

Inasmuch as 6". - (m + Hz, with a decrease in the transverse index the deformations

of the modes of oscillations decrease sharply. therefore, in the usual multimode
regime, the total magnitude of the angular divergence turns out to be appreciably
less sensitive to misslignments than the fundamental node field configuration.

Here detailed information about the field structure and the diffraction losses in
resonators with flat eisaligned mirrors can be found, for example, in [79, 80, 99,
102, 105-106]. In the last of the above-enumerated articles, the corresponding
results were obtained by the Vaynshteyn method in analytical form. It it note-
worthy that in accordance with the data of [102], with an increase in the angle of
misalignment, the diffraction losses increase most rapidly for the lowest order
modes (that is, with the least number of field distribution “nodes"). As a result,

the curves on the graph representing the losses of different modes as a function of
the misalignsent angle intersect (Figure 2.21).

Analogous intersection of the curves was also observed in reference [107] when per-
forming the calculations (by the iteration method) for a flat cavity with large
irregular aberrations caused by thermal deformation of the active element in imper-
fect illumination systaas. This fact demonstrated that in the case of resonators
with large diffraction losses efforts to classify the modes by the magnitude of

these losses can lead to complete confusion; we shall discuss an ample of such
confusion in § 3.3.

The properties of a flat cavity are also of interest in the presence of second-
order aberrations (slightly concave or convex mirrors, small thermal lens, and so
on). In the case of a strip resonator the perturbation operator with second-order

aberrations has the form I’(:)—1zlz-E2h(zle)'. where h is the difference in the

distances betveen mirrors at the edge and in the center of the resonator (Figure
2.20, b, c). The operator is symetric, “(I “a no - 0.6(h/Amu2 I97].

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f“ hi'y‘TW 1:3.ng -
i ' I i

[5; A k
~-—‘-o-
-I I 4

1/6 I 3/! 4 I .q/J

”at”: “at”!

-I I .rﬁ -I I .r/a

 

.1 I 1:74 -I I my; :I I we
a) b) c)

Figure 2.20. Effect of phase aberrations on the lowest mode field

distribution: a) mirror nisalisnment; b) concave mirrors; c) convex
sirrors.

For h < 0 (the mirrors are concave) the lowest mode field naturally is concentrated
near the resonator axis (‘02 P 0, see Pigure 2.20 h). The diffraction losses de-
crease in this case [102, 104]. Per deflections Ihl t Anon in order to find the
distribution in the fundamental node usually it is quite possible to use the re-
sults of stable resonator theory.

For h > 0 (convex mirrors). the field distribution with respect to resonator cross
section becossa more uniforn (figure 2.20. c); the diffraction losses increase

sharply.

Now we see hour the lowest node fields very in the presence of anplitude aberrations.
The source of amplitude aberrations is nonuniform distribution of the inverse popu-
lation or losses with respect to the resonator cross section. luznetsova [108]

dc. astrated that for amplitude aberrations a diffraction "makeup" of the zones
with small inversion (or .lsrge losseshith radiation from the region in which the
gain predominates over the losses takes place. As a result. the equiphassl sur-
face begins to be distorted and even for the lowest node the emission divergence
can differ noticeably from the diffraction limit.

107

FOIOH-‘ICMLIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2.21. Diffraction losses in the resonator
with circular flat mirrors of radius a as a function

of the niaalignnent angle 0 [10]]: l —- 111400. 2 -
Ti""01' 3 "" m‘n' ‘ "' raw 5 "' “51'

It is of interest that the nonunifornity of distribution of the inverse population
can lead to the presence not only of amplitude but also phase aherrationa, Thus,
if lasing is realized on frequencies noticeably distant from the center of the

luminescent line, the phenomenon of anomalous dispersion begins to be felt (see,
for example, [109]). As a result, the index of refraction turns out to depend on

the magnitude of the inverse population; for frequencies in different directions
fron the center of the line. the variations of the index of refraction are opposite

with respect to sign.

The ease perturbation theory helps to understand the nechanien of the influence of
amplitude aberrations. Just as phase aberrations. The value of P - l defining the
matrix elements of the perturbation operator is in the general case equal to [97]

oxp(lr .1)“: —p)oxp[1(uk,,z+ffAL)]— 1 z
a: k”! — p + l(nl-,,l + ‘T‘ AL).

Key: a. gain

where p is the total losses (including losses to passage through the nirrora), AL
is the variations in optical length of the resonator as a result of phase distor-
tions not connected with inverse population. [11ng are the phase distortions as

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI¢0FFKJA1.UGEZONLY

a result of the presence of anmloue dispersion of the active medium} For uniform
Lorentian broadening rt I 20: v vol/Av” where v and vn are the operating frequency

and the frequency in the center of the luminescence lines, respectively, Avg is the
halfwidth of the luminescence line (see, for example, [109]).

If the phase aberrations are absent and the only source of perturbations is nonuni-
formity of distribution of kgain and p with respect to the resonator cross section

(n - 0), the matrix elements of the perturbation operator are real. Here the coeffi-
cients ‘mk’ just as 6I - 8k, turn out to be almost purely imaginary values (see

(13)). Por this reason the amplitude aberrations lead first of all not to amplitude,
but to phase distortions of the eigenfunctions.

within the framework of the first approximation of perturbation theory it is also
possible to find the self-consistent solutions for the lasing regime using one
lowest mode [97]. The reason for the nonuniformity of distribution of the inverse
population in this case is the presence of a nonuniform lasing field itself. The
corresponding analysis shows that for small phase aberrations of the type of a
negative lens (convex mirrors), the range of pumping intensities for which the uni-
modal regime is stable expands by comparison with the case where the aberrations
are absent (or, all the more, have opposite sign). This is also understandable:
the volume of the lowest mode increases (see Figure 2.20), and it "burns up" the
inverse population more uniformly with respect to the resonator cross section.

Flat Cavities with Aberrationa of Significant Magnitude. Let us proceed to the
cases where the modes of oscillations of a resona:>r with aberrations have so little
in cot-son with the modes of oscillations of an ideal empty resonator that it is
necessary to forget perturbation theory. Thus, especially for small amounts of
excess over the lasing threshold, the situation is widespread where emission of
individual modes is not distributed over the entire resonator cross section but
localized in a small zone of it. In the already mentioned papers by Kurnetsova
[108], a study is made of the case where this situation is caused by sharp nonuni-
formity of distribution of the gain which for the greater part of the cross section
is appreciably less than the threshold value and exceeds the latter only in a small
segment where the lasing field is located. With sufficiently removed edges of the
mirrors from this section, the diffraction on these edges can be neglected, which
was done in [108]. Let us note that on the bbsis of the given model in [112] it
was possible to explain some of the experimentally observed peculiarities of the
energy characteristics of lasers with nonuniform pumping.

Soskin and Kravchenko [113, 80], using a model of a resonator with "stepped" mirrors,
investigated the case where such localization was caused not by amplitude aberra—

tions, but phase aberrations. For phase distortions of a random nature, the
emission can turn out to be concentrated in several separate segments of the cross

section (like "local stable resonators"); as a result of the presence of

 

1Generally speaking, the index of refraction depends on the degree of excitation of
the active medium not only as a result of anomalous dispersion. In particular, for
neodymium glass it is more important that the atoms in the ground and excited states
have different polarisability [110]; the same effect is described for the case of a

ruby, for example, in [111].

109

FOR‘OFFKJALIINB(31LY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exponentially decreasing distrihutmn “tails“ a weak diffraction relation is
realized between the segments. Dams the given model. it is possible to explain

a number of phenomena observed near the lasing threshold. However. when the
threshold is exceeded little. the laser emission intensity distribution inevitably
becomes much more uniform (as a result of the “equalizing" effect of the nonunifor-
mity of the gain distribution induced by the lasing field). The experimental data
mentioned in § 2.3 [58, 59, 62] also indicate that with intense pumping the emis-
sion of individual modes . although it has small-scale amplitude
modulation, is distributed in practice over the entire operating cross section (in
the sometimes observed intensity spikes - filaments -- a negligible fraction of

the total emission flux is concentrated). Therefore the models, the basis for which
are the concepts of localization’of the field in individual segments of the cross '
section. are unsuitable as a rule for estimating the angular divergence of the
-ission in ordinary lasing modes. '

Efforts at strict investigation of the general case of arbitrary phase aberrations
when considering the mutual effect of the distributions of the laser emission and
inverse population on each other lead to extraordinarily awlnlard constructions.
Therefore it turns out to be expedient to do away with the details of the inverse
population distribution and only consider that, to a significant degree as a result

of the effect of this distribution on the emission field the lasing is realized
predominately in modes with maximum volume. In this way it is possible to obtain
comparatively simple formulas which correspond to the experimentally observed laws
to estimate the angular divergence of the laser emission as a whole. Let us pre—
sent such formulas for two extreme cases -- where the source of the phase aberra—
tions is dispersion of light on microinhomogeneitiee and where a slowly varying
gradient of the index of refraction with respect to cross section exists. The
most successful method of considering the effect of the randomly arranged small
scale inhomogeneities was proposed in 1968 by Lyubimov [116]. who made a large
contribution to the development of the theory of empty resonators with phrse
aberrations. This method is based on the concept of the mode of oscillations of a
real system as a complicated complex characterized by a single frequency which is
a superposition of many modes of an ideal resonator with randomly distributed ampli-
tudes and phases. The relation between individual modes is realized as a result of
light dispersion; inasmuch as it is quite weak, the complex can include only modes

with initial frequencies that do not differ too much. The estimates made bv
Lyubimov for the spectral width of the range in which these frequencies lie lead

to the following resultant formula for the engular aperture 6 of the emission of
such complexes: 6 z: piiszX/L [115].

The experimental data of [26, 115] pertaining to a fluorite and sometime: Laser
where the macroinhomogeneities are absent and there is “pure“ light dispersion on
the microinhomogeneities (perceived as a halo when observing a point source of
light through a crystal), at least do not contradict this formula. It is, however.
necessary to exercise known caution with regard to the formls inasmuch as certain
assumptions which are far from always justifiable were used in its derivation.

In particular, it was assumed that the width of the light dispersion index is less
than the width of the angular distribution of the lasing beam formulated in the
presence of light dispersion. The following is also doubtful: the presence of a
noticeable light dispersion leads to a sharp increase in angular divergence of the
radiation. already not very small. in flat cavities with large N. The cause of

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the light dispersion can be not only nicroinhomogeneities. Thus, sonetimes an
effort is made to use netal reflectors with a large umber of small apertures as
aemitrsnsparent mirrors for lasersin the far infrared range (see i 10.2). Diffrac-
tion in the aperture system leads to the appearance of a significant amount of
scattered light. which in turn, causes the most undesirable consequences from the
point of view of divergence of the emission [116].

Now let us proceed to the most important and widespread case where the optical
length of the resonator varies slovly with respect to its cross section. The

cause of this can be macroinhonogeneitiee of the active element, thermal deforme-
tiona, errors in making the mirrors, and so on. This problem was investigated most
comprehensively for arbitrary deformations equal to the wavelength with respect to
order of magnitude in reference [117]. The authors use the following approach, the
mathematical aspect of which will not be discussed. By solving the corresponding
differential equation of the field for each of the waves traveling to the edge of the
resonator, superposition of which foras a transverse mode, an .equiphaaal surface is
constructed. According to the optical-geometric approximation. the normal ‘0 this suffice
at each point determines the direction of the emission originating from the given
point (in § 1.1 in the example of a spherical wave front we saw that for deflections
of ~A the emission divergence can he completely estimated by this method). The
resultant formula for the maximum angle between the direction of emission and the
resonator axis has the form

“w = “2"" + (WWI-u — [25m + (vh)'/IZI-u.}‘/'. ”

where h are the variations of optical length of the resonator caused by mirror dis-

tortions (the index of refraction of the medium was considered equal to one). If

h varies within the 1 ts of the cross section so slowly that it is esihle to
3} Hf—

neglect the terms (Vh 12, the formula acquires the form “max - 2A9. 9. , where A!

is the total variation of the optical length in the working cross section.

In the same paper [117], it was pointed out that terms with Nb.)2 vanish ,
pletely when the mirrors are flat and parallel, and variations of the optical length
are caused by dependence of the index of refraction on the transverse coordinate
(hence, it is clear what type of errors can occur as a result of "displacement" of
the optical inhomogeneities along the resonator length). In this case the formula
for the divergence can be derived by a very simple nethod. Actually, let us trace
the trajectory of a beam mltiply reflected from flat mirrors and gradually inter-
secting layers with different index of refraction as it moves across the resonator
axis. Variations of the angle 03' between the bean and the axis in this case are
caused exclusively by the refraction at the boundaries between the layers and can
be calculated directly by the sine theorem sin(n‘/2 «- u‘)lsin(nl2 - “5) I nzlnl.

where hi and 015 are values of a' in layers with index of refraction n1 and n2.
respectively. Using 0' << 1, we obtain (3.3)2 <- (3:12 - 2(n2fn1 ‘- 1). Now it rev

mains only to consider that the mode encompassing the entire lasing region correv
sponds to a family of beams intersecting this entire region. Hence, it follows
directly that in one of the s ants of the cross section the angle 0" reaches at

least a value of u' - 2An n, where n is the total variation of the index of

refraction withinmfn‘ the limits of the laat_ing_ zone. inasmuch as the angle in

outer space a is slated to d' by the expression 1- n d',.we arrive at the final
formula duax -{2_ndn.

111 ,'

FOR OWL/USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us note that five years later another method of deriving the same foraula

based on siailar arguments was published in [118] (instead of the sine theorem.

the standard equation of a beam trajectory in a nonuniform nediun borrowed fron'
[119] was used). _

It is tine to sun up our investigation. The following fact is neat resarkable. In
flat cavities, aaaresult of the effect of nultiple passage of the light through the
ease large-scale optical inhomogeneity, the resultant distortions of the me front
of the steady-state oscillations usually greatly exceed the distortions acquired on
one pass. In particular, this pertains to cases where the mgnitude of the aberra-
tions in one pass is small, and the characteristic transverse dimensions of the op-
tical inhomogeneities, on the contrary, are large. Actually, the variation of the
optical length M in the characteristic dimension b in the final analysis causes. as
we have seen. deviation of the direction of the emission from axial by the must
#243271. At the same time, the deviation of the bean direction in one _ (that is,
in the aaplifying mode) is Al/b; the ratio of these two values is 2b 2.412.

As a result, the “sensitivity" of a flat cavity to ensll phase aberrations turns out
to be extremely high. Comparison of the formulas presented in this and the preced-
ing section shows that for A2. '- ). the divergence of the emission of individual nodes
exceeds the divergence which would occur in the absence of aberrations as a result
of multinadality of the lasing.

Thus, the theoretical elements, just as the set of experimental data (52.3), indicate
that in the overwhelming sajority of cases the primary cause of comparatively .1srge
divergence of the enission of lasers with flat cavities is not mltiaodality of las-
ing, but deformation of the nodes under the effect of intraresonator wave aberrations.

Section 2.6. Methods of Angle Selection of mission

In this section an analysis will he ends of the efforts to decrease the divergence
of laser radiation with planar or stable resonators (or resonators similar to then;
see be‘.ow) which have been built at different times and with varying degrees of
succt ts. The majority of these methods are now only of historic interest; however,
some n ‘ then are used even today.

Attempts to Solve the Problea of Divergence on the Basis of Resonators with Small
Diffraction Losses. In a number of papers a study has been made of the possibility
of creating resonators from nirrors with-upberical surface, the shape of which is
selected in such a way that the diffraction losses in the lowest mode are Just as
saall as for stable resonators, but they increase with the transverse index faster
than for stable resonators. ‘l‘his theoretically facilitates the achievement of uni-
nodal oscillation. Sosa systems of this type are presented in Figure 2.22.

The resonators depicted in Figure 2.22.a,b. were made from dihedral reflectors, the
angle between the flat faces of which is n - a in the forner case, and 11/2 - ointhe
latter case (u << 1). The effect of the first type of reflector on a narrow light
been to a certain extent is siailar to the effect of a concave mirror; sole "fine
focusing" of the beam is realized. The reflector of the second type only adds "in-
version" of the beam cross section to this effect; therefore resonators of these two
types are equivalent to each other in the absence of aberrations. It is possible to
see that the transverse diaensions of the light beans corresponding to individual
transverse nodes increase in then with the transverse index faster than in stable

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

resonators. which enemas greater selectivity for reflectors of finite din-naione.
The properties of these resonators are described in more detail in [120. 121].

+ eye—«qt

Figure 2.22. Sone types of resonators with a—spherical nirrors': a, butesona-
tors with dihedral reflectors [120, 121]; c--resonator with cen-
tral "indentation" [122]; d—tesonator proposed in [123].

Figure 2.22, c. depicts a resonator in which the eigenvalue spectrum is still
sore radically rarefied. The dimensions of the central section of the left-hand
reflector—the "indentation “-can be taken so that they will be equal to the di-
mensions of the basic node spot forned by this section and the right-hand nirror
of a stable resonator. Then the losses of this node will be snell; broader
beans corresponding to other nodes will go beyond the linits of the central sec-
tion and scatter quickly in the peripheral part of the resonator. This nust
lead to significant increase in the losses.

At first glance it nay seen that an analogous effect is achieved by sinple irising
of the stable resonator. However. in' the latter case as we have seen in

Sections 2.1, 2.2. the high-order node field begins to be confined inside the
resonator by edge diffraction (thsadp of the .-iria=; has the sane effect on the
light bean as the edge of a mirror); in the resonator depicted in figure 2.22, c,
the diffraction on the edge of the "indentation" turns out to be significantly
attenuated as a result of the presence of halation. Vaynshteyn [3] indicated

the possibility of using a sinilar procedure; the effort at practical inplensn-
cation in the optical range (in the ample of a helium-neon laser) is described
in [122].

Sonstinas proposals for a different plan are encomtered in the literature.
Thus, in [123] the properties of the resonator depicted in Figure 2.22. d, were
analysed. With a strictly defined fora of the coaponents of its reflectors, the
equation for finding the natural oscillations has only one solution. However,
in [123] a study was nade only of the equation of an sapty resonator ends up of
infinite nirrors; consideration of the edge effects and the introduction of an
active nediua should change the situation sharply—nothing nay rennin of "uni-
nodality." In addition to everything else it is unclear how such reflectors
would be nade with the precision required in the optical range.

In contrast to the last-'nentioned version, the possibility of using the resona-
tors depicted in Figure 2.22, a-c. is unquestioned. 'aowever, they are all char-
acterized by the sane deficiency as the ordinary stable resonator itself: under

113

MOWUSEONLY
FOR orncuu. use one:

conditions of uninodel oscillation it is possible to nske effective use of
only a very snall voluse of the optically uniforn sedit- (it is sufficient to
point out that in the neotioned experimental work [122] the depth of the "inden-
tation" was ‘A/lO) . Therefore the devices with asphericel reflectors are not
able to cospete with the stable resonators which are sinple to sake and elign.

It met be noted that for cross section dissnsions of the active nediun not ex-
ceeding several nillinetars. uninodal oscillation can be achieved using
both stable end planer resonators. in particular. it is appropriate to note the
successful method of espiricel selection of the optisal parameters of the reso-
nator nesr the "stability" boundary used for the first tine in [124] and also
used successfully in a mater of subsequent experinents. l'he nethod is based on
the application of e codrination of plane and concave spherical mirrors. the
distance between which I. varies near a value equal to the radius of curvature of
the concave mirror 3. For I. - R (or in the case of the presence of an active
element of length i with an index of refraction no, for I. uiv - I. - i(l -

l/no) - R) a eo-celled seniooncentric resonator is realiz which is equivalent
to the planar resonator and thus is at the "stability" limit (Section 1.2). For
shorter lengths, the resonator is stable; it is isportent that for L : a stall
variations in the distance between the mirrors lead. as it is easy to see. to
significant simltanaous variation of the diffraction losses and spot dinensions
of the fundanentel and other transverse nodes. This makes it easy to select the
optinal conbination of than free the point of view of the output characteristics
of the laser. Obviously. when this choice is nada upirically. the "lanticuler-

ness" of the ssnple is eutonaticelly taken into account if it exists. and so on.
07-.

44

If

u

4:

I
(U M w (I U!

    

Figure 2.23. Results of experiments in oscillation selection in a resonator
close to a seniconcentric resonator [128].

Figure 2.23 shows a standard graph for use of the indicated nsthod borrowed iron
[28], where this nethod is discussed in great detail. The graph was obtained in
experinents with a helium-neon laser; the ratio L]: is plotted along the r-axis,
the line LIE - l is the "stability" limit. 0:: approaching it from the left. the
diffraction losses increase. the total oscillation power P decreases slowly.
then the nunber of transverse nodes present in the oscillations are reduced. At
the point noted by the arrow. only the lowest nods moo remains. The resonator
length corresponding to this point can also be considered optimal: further
noveesnt toward the stability lieit and transition to the region of instability

11‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
located to the right causes only a sharp decrease in power and then cessation of
oscillation.

All of this is good, however, only in the case of lasers with snall cross sec-
tione of the active nediun for which the problem of radiation divergence in gen-
eral is not acute. As for the lasers of prinary interest to us which have a
large exit aperture, for than the application of stable resonators leads, as has
already been noted more than once, to oscillation on higher-order nodes with a
broad radiation pattern. Nevertheless. efforts have been renewed aeny tines to
solve the proh1en of divergence even in this case. In Gupter 5 there is a
brief discussion of the conversion of light been corresponding to the high-
order nodes to narrowly directional light beans by the nethods of holographic
correction. A search was also conducted for sinpler cathode; froe the work in
this direction there are sons interesting papers (for example, [125]), but their
practical significance is low. “therefore hereafter we shall limit ourselves to
the investigation of the methods of angular selection (decreasing the angular

divergence of the radiation) in planar resonators which has received signifi-
cant developnent in its tine.

Lasers with Planar Resonators and Angie ‘Selectors. For constriction of the
radiation pattern of a laser with planar resonator it is necessary in the gen-
eral case also to decrease the amber of nodes in which lasing-'3?- is realized
and, what is usually even sore important, the defornetions of these nodes. ‘lhe
nuaber of nodes is determined prinarily by the ratio between the diffraction and
nonselective losses. Therefore for angllezr selection in the hypothetical case
of an ideally uniforn nediun where the node defornations are snell. it is neces-
sary to try to increase the differences of the diffraction losses.

In the presence of aberrations of any type, the most ilportant problen turns out
to be decreasing the node deforestions; in accordance with perturbation theory
(Section 2.5). for this purpose t is necessary to increase the differences of
the eigenvalues of the operator . including the phase corrections.

Making this remark of a general nature. let us proceed with investigation of the
specific methods of sushi: selection.

In order to obtain the desired effect usually additional elensnts called angle
selectors are introduced into the resonator. They are essentially filters. the
transmission of which depends sharply on the direction of pzopagation or the
radiation. Historically. the first type of anal- ulector m e cyst-s of

two confocal lenses and an iris with small aperture . placed at their coupon
focal point [126. 127]. A concentric resonator withan his in the central
plane [128. 129] (Figure 2.26. b) is entirely identical to a planar resonator
with such a selector (l'igure 2.26. a). The operating principle of such a selec-

tor is obvious. Instead of an .iris 4-» a passive shutter can be used: part that
clears first then sets as an iris aperture 1130].

the effect of the selector based on the Fabry and Perot etalon [131. 132] is
based on the fact that the transmission of the etalon depends not only on the

115

FOIOFFIGALUSlONLY
I'UI Vl‘nbma- vee- um...

wavelength, but also the direction of propagation of the radiation. Inasauch as
for inclined incidence of the bean, this relation becomes sharper, the etalon is
installed at an angle to the resonator axis (figure 2.2b. c). For realization
of angular selection in both directions it is necessary to use two etalons.

Probably the method of selection bued on using the dependence of the reflection
coefficient at the interface of two media on the angle of incidence had the
greatest popularity. Near the critical angle of total internal reflection. the
indicated relation is especially sharp; therefore these angles of incidence are
used. In order to eliminate the selective effect it is possible to make the

light undergo multiple reflections (Figure 2.26, d). In the 1960's a large nun-
ber of versions of selectors of this type [134%] grouped under the general head-
ing of total internal reflection selectors were proposed.

let us consider the nechanisn of the effect of the selectors on the angular di-
vergence. Prom very general arguments it is clear that the presence of a fil-
ter. the transmission of which depends on the direction of propagation of the
radiation is priasrily felt in the nsgnitude of the losses of individual trans-
verse nodes. The phase correction are deter-inad for fixed configuration of
the resonator in practice only by the number of angles of distribution of the
amplitude with respect to cross section (that is, the transverse node indea),
and in the presence of a selector, they not vary insignificantly (see Section
2.2 for the similarity of phase corrections in open and closed resonators). The
results of strict calculations [141] confirn this obvious conclusion.

Let us present the data for the idealized case of a Gaussian selector, the shape
of the passband of which is intermediate between the shapes of the bands of real
selectors presented in Figure 2.24.. and 1: is described by the fornula 32(0) -
“PPM/A02] (Figure 2.25; see [161]): o is the angle between the direction of
propagation of the radiation and the resonator saris; do is the passband width.
g2 is the transmission with respect to intensity. If we consider that the
transverse modes with the index a correspond to values of O s r(n + Doug/2
(see Sections 2.2, 1.1; cuff - 1/2a), the na tude of the—losses introduced by
the selector follow directly 4(263) - (n.+ l) (cuff/2MP (this same result was
obtained in [161] by a stricter procedure).

Let us now trace how the aagnitude of the angular divergence of the radiation
out vary with the passbend width of the selector.

In the absence of aberrations the role ofEths: selector reduces to variation of
the conditions of cometition of the modes (Section 2.6) by increasing the loss
differences. The losses introduced by the Gaussian selector turn out. to be
greater than the diffraction losses an ideal apt! resonator on satisfaction
of the condition zoo/ed“: < (az/AL)? “. Inasmuch as for lasers with large .
cross section azln. - N >> 1, the angular divergence in the given idealized case
can decrease sharply even for cowaratively greater width of the selector pass-
band. Estimation shows that to achieve the uninodal condition with an ideal
active medium it is sufficient to use a selector with M several tines greater
than 0diff/2.
Figure 2.24. Diagram. of laser. with Inslo cclnctorcz 1-—cce1vo atlplc:
2—910“ mirror; 3-wpludcal mirror; bani: with sputum-0:5» '
1m; sunny and Perot anion; 7—p1m-pou1101 plate.

 

d-Ji-Illlll

Figure 2.25. Shape of ch. plasbnnd of dittorunt '8810 scltctor-t Gnua-tnn
nutter (duh-dot um). the uncut band on tho ubry and
Pant etalon (dotted 11m) and tho mu]. «lotto: («ltd 1190).

This possibntty is taxed on the he: that the lone introducad by the 31m
typo of selector are even noticubh for 0 << A0 (on Figure 2.25). Mon; rod
ulcctors.-on1y the sdector band on tho hbry and Perot qtnlon (to. Figure
2.26, c) has this (quadntic) for. at the function 3(9). the «10cm:- vtth an
oponin; (Figure 2.24, a. b) and the total tutu-nu. “auction «hetero (Hm.

117

FOIOMCIALUSEONLY
avae vac-we..- -— .

2.26, d) have a passband with shape approaching a rectangle ("ideal" selectors
according to the terminology of [161, 142]). In this case, just as should be
expected. the presence of a selector is felt noticeably in the value of the
losses only for the nodes. the indicas of which are close to the value of
Zoe/631:: [161]; therefore the selectors of the given type can decrease the
anount of angular divergence only to a value approxinetely equal to As.

In the presence of noticeable aberrations the basic function of the selector
not be to decrease the deformations of the oscillation with the highest Q. Let
us reaeaber that the node defer-nations themselves can be interpreted as the re-
sult of the presence of induced oscillations in the nodes of an ideal resonator
(see the preceding section). Beginning with this fact. it is easy to see that
in order to decrease the node deforaations the losses introduced by the selector
nust turn out to be larger in aagnitude not only thn the diffraction losses.
but also the phase corrections in the empty resonator. Hence, it follows that
for noticeable aberrations (that is. in practice always) only selectors with

sufficiently narrow husband, independently of its shape. can turn out to be
useful.

Uhen using angular selectors, just as in the case of angular selection by in-
creasing the length of the resonator which will be considered a little later.
not only the angular radiation characteristics are of interest, but also the en-
ergy characteristics of the radiation. The possibility of decreasing the width
of the radiation pattern without significant gain in radiation power is con-
nected with the nagnitude and the nature of the aberrations. This relation is
exhibited nest clearly when investigating the shape of the scattering index of a
coherent light bean.

I. relative units 1. relative units

    

" ’ ”'41:: " ’ ”’diﬁ
a) I)

Figure 2.26. Radiation patterns after single passage of the light through the
active nediua: a—light dispersion on aicroinhonogeneities; bulow-

order wave aberrations as a result of the presence of nacroinhoao-
ganeities.

Figure 2.26 contains a schematic representation of two radiation patterns ofa
light beam after single transnisaion through an active sample (at the entrance
to the sample the wave front is planar). mesa patterns directly characterise
the angular divergence of the bean at the exit froa the laser system using the
given sanple as the final amplifier (of course. if a well-collinated bean is fed
to its input).

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The first of then (Figure 2.26, a) pertains to the case of weak light dispersion
on nicroinhonogeneities. The greater part of the energy of the light passing
through the sanple (on the order of l - pm, the presence of secondary diffrac-
tion peaks is neglected; is concentrated in the central core having diffraction
width. The remainder of the radiation is distributed in a conparatively wide
range of angles.

Figure 2.26, b, corresponds to the presence of low-order wave aberrations (refraction
on sacroinhoncgeneities). Frinarily the nost central core of the pattern

“PIE“. the axial luninous intensity decreases significantly. tron the Rayleigh

number it follows that the core width begins to exceed the diffraction linit no-
ticeably when the aberrations exceed Alb.

It is obvious that the effort to realize angular selection will lead to essen-
tially different results in the cases of Figures 2.26, a, and 2.26, b. The light
dispersion on the nicroinhonoganeities does not prevent achievement of the
diffraction limit; the power of the generated radiation in this case, if the
pumping intensity is sufficiently high, decreases insignificantly (the effective
losses increase by approxinataly p.11. [26]). In the case of Figure 2.26, b, an
effort to constrict the angular divergence to less than the width of the central

core of the scattered light indicatrix is coupled with unavoidable significant
energy losses.

“the experinental data correspond quite well to the above-discussed arguents.

First of all, it nust be noted that when using all types of angle selectors a
decrease in angular divergence and an increase in the axial Its-inane intensity were
actually observed. Nevertheless, the "181° ”103°" have Mt 100“ broad 19‘
plication. The reason for this lies both with the high requirements on the pre-
cision of their manufacture and align-ant and a number of specific deficiencies
characteristic of each type of selector.

The basic deficiency 0‘ ”It” With arr iris-‘4 (888 Figure 2.24, a, b) is un-
desirable concentration of the radiation in a snall section of the cross section.
In lasers of conparatively low power this leads to rupture of the diaphrap or
electric breakdown near its surface (see, for axanple, [129]). Angle selec-
tion using the Fahry and Perot etalons is greatly complicated as a result of the
presence of a large number of transnission peeks; therefore no one has followed
the exanple of the authors of [131, 132] who were able to realise it in low-
power ruby lasers. Only total internal reflection selectors have found sons ap—
plication in powerful pulsed lasers, but even they in the final analysis disap-
peared from the scene as a result of the extraordinary requirements on the pre-
cision of manufacture and alignment and also the degree of finish of the working
surfaces.

Angle Selection of Eninsion of Lasers with Flat Cavities by Reducing the_
Mala-er of Fresnel Zones. if we do away with 811.1. selectors, 1t rusins only
to increase the selective properties of the planar resonator itself by decreas-

ing the amber of Fresnel zones N. This can be achieved by reducing the cross
section or by increasing the length of the resonator.

119

FOR OFFICIAL (BE ONLY
A significant decrease in the active cross section by irising the resonator, of
course. nust lead to a corresponding drop in the output power, and therefore
cannot be considered among the efficient selection procedures. Some movement in
this direction is still possible. The fact is that s light been always broadens
somewhat on passage through s planar resonator (as a result. diffraction losses
appear). If we use an enit nirror with cross section only eonewhst less than the
cross section of the active elenent, the letter will still be completely filled

by the irised been. It only renaine to use the radiation exiting from the laser
through a narrow circular zone arotmd the mirror as the useful signal along with
the radiation passing through the s-itrensperent exit nirror. Thus, it is pos-
sible to decrease N somewhat, almost without relinquishing output power. This
procedure was described for the first time in 1163]; the name of diffraction yield
of radiation was attached to it. The same nethod was used with slight nodifica-
tions in [154]; the given direction reached a logical conclusion in the laser de-
scribed by Kalinin et al., the reflection coefficient of the exit nirror of which
decreased smoothly from the center to the periphery [145]. In all of the enunera-
ted cases, just as should be expected. an increase in the degree of directionality
and a decrease in the sensitivity to the miselignnent of the mirrors were observed
(as a result of a decrease in the total or effective site of the exit nirror),

but with intense punping the angular divergence significantly exceeded the dif-
fraction limit.

Let us note that lasers with nirror transmission that is variable with respect to
cross section are a clear exanple of systems having extraordinary dependence of the
node structure on the excitation conditions. In the case of uniforn distribution
of pumping slightly exceeding the lasing threshold, the field configuration of the
individual types of oscillations will be close to the configuration predicted by
the theory of the corresponding enpty resonators 1146]. If the amount the threshold
is exceeded is large. then as a result of the eonpetition of the transverse nodes
the distribution of the gain with respect to cross section approaches the loss
distribution. and the structure of the individual nodes will becone siailar to the
structure in lasers with ordinary nirrors.

A nuch more radical decrease in N without reduction of the working volume can be
achieved by a simple increase in the distance between nirrors. This method of
angular selection is the most natural and. in addition. very effective: here. in
contrast to the case of the application of angular selectors. not only the losses
increase. but also the phase corrections. which leads to a rapid decrease in the
node deformation. In addition. it is simpler by far to vary the length of the
resonator than to introduce a selector and change the passband width; therefore
the given method of constricting the radiation pattern has been studied most
systematically.

The most inportant result of numerous studies was solid establish-ant of the fact
that on variation of L within very broad linits the angular divergent, of the
radiation varies with a high degree of accuracy proportionally to If 2—indeed
the theoretical estimates based on any models pertaining to node defornations and
to multimode oscillations (Sections 2.1., 2.5) lead to the ease relation! This
relation has been amplified by lasers of the nost varied types: a ruby laser
(the resonator length was varied by approximately 15 times) {167},

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a neodymiun glass laser (-15 times), a fluorite laser with sanerium (.103

times) [26], ad an alhyliodids molecule photodissociation laser (~30 times,
[1108]. The following is characteristic. If the medium has a coaparetively high
amount of optical nonunifornity, increasing the length of the resonator above
some limit is accompanied by quite rapid decrease in power to complete cessation
of oscillation, although it may still be far to diffraction divergence. is a
result. mg “1.1 luminous intensity. initially increasing with resonator length,
goes through a peak, the position and height of which depend on the degree of
optical nonmifornity of the medium. This fact was noted for the first time by
Sventsitskaya and Khssov in [167] (in this paper, the neth of representing data
on the angular distribution of radiation in the form of the dependence of the
proportion of the beam energy included inside the axial cone on the angle at the
apex of this cone, see Figure 5.6, 6.7. which hes acquired deserved popularity
was introduced). It is of interest that when the sharp lasing power drop
begins, the angular divergence begins to decrease with an increase in I. even
faster then If ’2 [168]. This is explained by the fact that as a result of a
sharp increase in the threshold, the lasing begins to be localised in indi-
vidual sections of the cross section with the largest gradient of the index of
refraction [167, 168]-the "effective" value of An decreases.

As the optical uniformity of the sodium increases, it is possible to cone closer
and closer to diffraction divergence without noticeable loss of power (it is
true in this case the requirements on the necessary precision of align-ant of
the resonator increase). Finally, when the medium is so uniform that Al. < l/b,
the diffraction limit can be reached. For this purpose the distance between the
mirrors must he usually so large that N exceeds 1 somewhat. Herein lies the ba-
sic deficiency of the given selection method: for lasers in the visible range
even with dianeters of the active elements only 5-8 In. tlu required

resonator length is several netere. If we consider that for maintenance of the
same N the length must increase proportionately to the square of the linear di-
nemions of the working cross section, it becomes clear that in the case of
powerful lasers it is entirely unreasonable to solve the problsa by a simple in-
crease in distance between the mirrors. It is also necessary to consider that
for short lasing pulses long length of the resonator is in general unacceptable
inasmuch as the pulse development tine increases together with the length.

The way out of the indicated difficulty consists in using resonators that have
short actual length, but equivalent to the planar resonator with small N. This
method of angular selection is of definite interest not only from the practical
point of view, but also from the procedural point of view; therefore let us
discuss it in sonewhat sore detail.

lPlat Cavities of Large Effective Length. In Figure 2.27 several versions of

devices of this type are presented. The first of them was used to decrease the
angular divergence in 1963 [169], but correct notions 01 its pr0perties

were still not developed at that ties. Using the netth discussed in Section
1.2, the corresponding analysis will be performed without special difficulty.
However, we shall not consider the bean netricee of these resonators as a whole,

but we shall use a more obvious procedure which will also be useful hereafter to
consider unstable resonators.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI Utl‘lVML was. the...

A col-son characteristic of all resonators equivslent to the planar resonator
(including the one: depicted in the figure) is the feet that in the gsoeetric
approximation all of the beam normal to the surface of one of the tsrninal nir-
tors, on passing through the resonator. are incident nornally on the surface of
the second terminal mirror and follow back along the seas path. Accordingly,
such resonators can be broken down entirely into sections, each of which is
bounded by a pair of parallel planes or concentric spheres. The boundaries of
the edge sections are the terminal nirrors th-aselves; the intermediate thin
lenses can be considered, as usual. phase correctors, passing through which

leads only to the corresponding change in curvature of the wave front (see Pig-
ur. 2027) s '

The result of passage of the light through these sections in the wave approxins-
tion can be calculated by using the apparatus of been natrices or directly iron
the Huygens-Fresnel principle. here it is expedient to give the distributions
of the couples: anplitude directly on. the surfaces bounding the sections and in
dimensionless coordinates r/a, whsrsZa is the difference between the edge beans
in the geosatric approximation (thus chmging the scale on transition to the
sections with another been cross section). Then it is possible to arrive at the
following sinple laws. '

0n passage through a type I section (plane boundaries) 2a wide and I. long, the
complex distribution of the amplitude is transforned Just as on passage through
a section of the ease type 2ao wide and L“: - has/a2 long (this is understand-
able—the number of Fresnel zones N is the suns in than). ‘nxe passage through
the type II section with light been width in the geometric approxination at the
entrance and exit surfaces 2al and Zaz is equivalent to passing through a type I
section of width an and length L.“ - u§la1azs as a result of variation of the
cross section. only an additional anplitn a factor l1/.Iz is acquired (see also

(1.23)); the general phase nultiplier exp(ik1.) plays no special role in our
investigation.

By this procedure. the passage through all of the type I and 11 sections reduces
to pessage through the corresponding distances of type I sections of the sane
width 2410. Inasmuch as passage through several such sections, in turn.‘ is
equivalent to passage through a section of total length, the 1..“ defined in
this way for all type I and II sections can be simply added.

It is easy to demonstrate that passage through the type III sections with en-
trance and exit widths of 2a; and 2a: is equivalent to returning a distance
L“: - Lag/alaz in a type I section; inversion of the beam and variation of the
amplitude in the ratio axlsz also occur. ‘ntsrefore the effective lengths of

the type III sections are subtracted fron the total sun (the growth of the angu-
lar divergence of the radiation caused by this on introduction of the type III
section into the system was observed experinentally, and it was explained in
[115]). If we also consider the extraordinary energy concentration at the con-
atriction points. it baconus obvious that the presence of such sections inside
the resonator. as a rule, is undesirable.‘I

* In powerful anitiats. on the contrary. such sections then called "optical
relays" sometines are specially introduced. for a decrease in L.“ helps to pre-
vent self-focusing [330].

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
W

I

Figure 2.27. Resonstore with long effective length: e—resonstor described in
[149]; b-d--p1ensr monsters with telescope loceted inside then;
e-oresonetor with telescope end uonresount feedbsck; lnective
eleaent; 2--pertis11y reflecting plete; 3-«diffuser.

Thus, e11 of the system depicted in Figure 2.27 ere equivelent to plensr reso-
nators with eesiiy celculsted effective length (let us note thet if such e reso-
nstor is used es the Febry-Perot interfere-seer, the ensuler distsnce between
rings in it will be determined by this effective length). For the one of Fig-
ure 2.27, e, I...“ is equel to Lzeo/ez + 1.1; for Pi 2.27, b, I. - Lzeo/ez +
Lleﬁlei; for Figure 2.27. c. L3 + Lzso/ez + hes/agitate width 03 the equive-
leet resonator Zea is selected in e11 ceses equal to the bees width on the ex-
treme right section where the ective sedit- must be pieced. It is obvious the:
the presence of sections with well bees cross section leeds to s shsrp increase
in the effective length; the effective velue of the pets-stei- N decreases corre-
spondingly (in the one most edventsgsous tron this point of view in Figure

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.27, c, it is Ngff - [(AL3/a3) + (ALz/soaz) + (ul/a%)]'1). If such a section
occupies the greater part of the length of the system, the effective length of
the resonator turns out to be si ficantly greater than the actual length, ap-
proximately in the ratio of sale . 'lhis leads to a gain in the amount of the
angular divergence by ao/az times (let us note that in the-case of Figure 2.27,
b, c, the ratio ao/az is equal to the mltiplicity of the telescope formed by
the lenses). In the final analysis this gain is achieved as a result of concen-
tration of the entire light flux in small sections. but nevertheless the in-
crease in the radiation demity here is not so large as in the cap of selectors
with a diaphragm (Figure 2.24. a, b). In addition, for attenuat of this un-
desirable effect it is possible to use the fact that the radiati flux incident
on a totally reflecting nirror of a planar resonator is less than the flux inci-
dent 07 the semitransparent exit nirror with reflection coefficient 8' by

(ll')'1 2 times (Section 1.4). Thus. in order to decrease the radiation flux in
the sections with a small cross section it is sufficient to realize the energy
yield froa the opposite (right) end of the resonator. The reflection coeffi-
cient of the exit mirror 11' must be selected as small as possible [168]. this

choice becomes possible when using active media with sufficiently large anplifi-
cation coefficient.

We have given so much attention to the nethods of am. . selection in lasers
with planar resonator primarily because there are situations where it is not
possible to get along without a planar resonator. Thus. pulsed lasers exist in
which the excitation occurs nonsinultaneously in the different parts of the res-
onator cross section. In such cases the use of unstable resonators which are
now a cousonly recognized neans of achieving small divergence is impossible-
lasers with unstable resonators operate satisfactorily only under condition of
sinultaneous and not too nonuniform excitation of the entire operating volume.
Planar resonators with snall N can turn out to be more advantageous than mata-
ble resonators also in the case of the presence of noticeable light dispersion
with indicatrix of the type depicted in Figure 2.25. a-as we have seen, it does
not prevent achievement of ainimun divergence in planar resonators

with large I. (or Lag), but can have a sharply negative effect on the parameters
of lasers with unstable resonators (Section 6.1). For these reasons. both the
system depicted in Figure 2.27, c, and the angle selection system entirely
equivalent to it with a mirror telescope (Figure 2.27, d) proposed by one of the
authors of [ltBJuDsnilov-«t the end of the 1960's are sometimes used at the
present time. The version of such systens with nonresonent feedback [118] (Fig-
ure 2.27, e) which can be used for enormous anplification in the active median
is also of noticeable interest. The nonresonant coupling sakes the laser in
practice nonnisalignable and sharply increases the stability of its operation
under the conditions of optical nonuniformities which are variable in time.

hultistage Lasers. There is another truly universal method of obtaining nar-
rowly directional emission which. although it is not a resonator method, on the
basis of its traditionalness it deserves nention in this chapter. ‘Ihis method
consists in using a master oscillator and a number of subsequent anplification
stages. The aaster oscillator can be low-power and have low efficiency. the
schievenent of unimodality under such conditions presents no difficulty. The
emission of the laser is directed toward a telescopic system which increases the

12¢

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
light bean disaster and than, to enplificstion stages urn gradually
increasing cross section. hatching telaacOpea are again placed between the an-
plifying stages. Gradual expansion of the bean cross section theoretically also

keeps the density of the anplified radiation at a level that is not too high and
reduces angular divergence.

me use of alnoet all of the active aaterial when operating in a purely anplify-
ing node has obvious advantages fron the point of view of divergence of the ra-
diation--indeed here there is no mltiple tramnisaion of light vith respect to
the seas nonunifornity leading to accumlation of aberrations as in the planar
resonator (Section 2.5). In spite of this fact, only powerful nonopulse lasers,
priaarily solid-state lasers, are now being aade nultiatage.

 

Figure 2.28. Example of a multistage syetus [129]: lnactive elenant; 2-
telescOpic systea; 3-ang18-r selector of the master oscillator
with dissond diaphragm busenitranaparent nirror of the nester
oscillator based on a prisn with Brewster angle; S-n-shutter.

One of the first systems of this type unsettled by the einlest "classical" sys-
ten is depicted in Figure 2.28. Modern lasers for experiments in the field of
laser thermonuclear fusion appear ineasurehly nore ocular—they consist of a
nininun of six parallel channels (for comprehensive illunination of the target),
and they contain a truly enormous umber of active rods. elements for splitting
and reduction of the light beams, ”decouplers" between the stages for separa-
tion of superluninescence, and so on. Homer, the main thing is that quite
different factors determine the radiation divergence: as a result of extraordi-
narily high radiation density in the enplifyiu channel nonlinear processes develc
leading to expansion of the radiation pattern and, in the final analysis. to
self-focusing of the radiation inside the active asterial which is disastrous
for such devices. Therefore the control of these processes acquires a decisive

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'Ull UIIHLIM. var. ulna

role: In order that they not develop. the above-lentioned "optical releye” and
other epatial filtere are inetalled between the ataxea. which determinee the
angular divergence of the output radiation. "thus, the breakdown of the eyeten
into a set of etagee here eeeentially purauee highly apecific goals.

this situation it quite characterietic—the application of nultietege devices
turns out to be justified only in certain epecial caeee and aloe when it in de-
sirable to achieve record output paranetere with univereality of the device.
Actually. in thia way it ia poeeible to obtain radiation density in the entire '
exit aperture clone to the rupture threshold of the optical neteriale. the nu-
ter oscillator in a small part of the eyeten, and for node changing it can ain-
ply be replaced by another one. .

In the most frequently encountered cues where although not record, but very
cloee to record parentere are required in codination with simplicity. nodeet

sire and weight characteriatica. and so on. the leeere “huh 8" III“ 91‘“ a
single-oscillator systen and one version or another of an unstable resonator

take first position. He shall now proceed with a diecueeion of theee lasers.

126

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
Chapter 3. menents of _the Theory of Dmteble Resonators

Section 3.1. Some Initial Information

Brief Historical Survey. In 1965 the article by Siam [6] was published which
established the beginning of the entire field of quantun electronics. this er~
ticle discussed the possibility of the practical application of notable resona- .-
tors with large diffraction losses.

At that time the idea that resonators with large diffraction losses out have

high selective properties began to win general recognition. This was pronoted
‘ to a high degree by the explanation of the nature of mltinode lasing presented
by Tang and Stats 2 (Section 2.6). free which it followed that in order to de-
crease the nmber of simltaneously excited transverse nodes it is necessary to
increase the differences of the diffraction losses (and not their ratios as was

first sssuned). The loss differences can be large obviously only when the
losses thenselves are large.

It was known that the transition from stable resonators to planar resonators is
accompanied not only by an increase in volun of the lowest nodes, but also an
increase in the diffraction loss differences; both pronote the achievement of
lasing on a sesll nunber of the lowest transverse modes. The results of a few
theoretical works (for exasple, [106]) also indicated that on passing through
the stability liait and proceeding deep into the instability region the losses
of the lowest node continued to increase; this nede it possible to hope that the

losses of the other nodes grow still more rapidly. and the selective properties
of the resonator improve.

however, the transition to the instability region lust, it would appear. also be
acconpsnied by highly undesirable phenonena, above all, an increase in the
threshold and corresponding reduction of the lasing power. In addition, nuneri-
cal calculations have denonstrsted that as a result of the growth of the field
anplitude on the edge of the resonator and enplificetion of the edge diffraction
the field distribution in the resonators with weakly convex nirrors is such more
"cut up" than in the planar ones. “hat happens with field distribution with an
increase in the curvature of the convex nirrors was unclear; by analogy with the
planar misaligned resonator it eeened that it should become entirely unfavorable.

The results of the individual experinents in which variation of the pareneters
of the resonators near the stability linit use realised were. not at all hopeful.
Thus, in [150] when going into the instability region, a sharp decrease in the

127

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
li3l‘0ilﬂC1Al.lﬂSlZ€NULY

lasing power and an increase in the angular divergence of the radiation were ob-
served. In [126) which was already referenced in Section 2.6, the transition to
unstable resonators was accompanied only by a sharp decrease in the lasing power;
the graph borrowed from [125, 28] and presented in Figure 2.23 could not point
to the idea of the expediency of the application of mstable resonators with
large diffraction losses.

Against this background Siﬂtlnn‘Oarticle stood out sharply. The precariousness
of the basic objections to the application of unstable resonators with large
losses was demonstrated in it. The primary point of the paper was investigation
of then in the geometric approximation. It led to results already known to us
according to Section l.2-s set of two spherical waves propagated in opposite
directions converting into each other on reflection from the and mirrors can be
found in an unstable resonator. The geometric investigation was strengthened by
a very important argument that with large losses the influence of the edge dif-
fraction can turn out to be weak. and the strict solution will differ little
from the geometric solution. The fact is that although the peripheral part of
the light beam is sharply disturbed by diffraction. as a result of significant
expansion of the beam cross section on passing through the resonator. it then
passes by the mirrors and the field distribution in them has little distortion.
Running somewhat ahead. we see that the situation in reality turned out to be
not so simple; the conditions under which edge diffraction does not play a spe-
cial role and lasing is realised in a single transverse mode well described by
the geometric approximation were finally discovered only in 1971 [151]. We
shall discuss this in more detail in Section 3.3.

Siegnnuaalao pointed out that in the case of unstable resonators with large dif-
fraction losses it is expedient to realize diffraction output of the radiation,
that is, use that part of the beam which bypasses the exit mirror as the useful
signal (see also Section 2.6). Here it is possible to replace the semitrsnsper-
ent exit mirror by a totally reflecting one, thus leaving the total losses and
the lasing threshold on the same level as in planar resonators. The adoption of

these measures OhOUId help to avoid a sharp drop in the radiation power which pre-
viously appeared to be unavoidable. ’

Of course, all of these arguments needed comprehensive checking. It was even
unclear whether the unstable resonators with large diffraction losses are sctu~
ally selective;Siegman himself stated the fear that the losses for the lowest
and subsequent modes in such systems turn out to be approximately identical.
Finally. the problem of sensitivity of the field distribution to the effect of
intreresonator aberrations which is decisive for the problem of angular diver-
gence of the radiation (see Chapter 2) is in general not discussed in this or
all subsequent papers by Siegnan. It was investigated in 1968-1970 [152, 153];
it was only after this that the advantages of the unstable resonators with large ~~I
diffraction losses in narrowly directional lasers were clearly recognised.

Elementary Examination of the Ideal Unstable Resonator. Let us proceed with a
systematic study of the properties of unstable resonators. First we shall perform

an analysis within the framework of the simplest optical-geometric approximation:
then it will be obvious that as applied to resonators of the given class fre—

quently more precise determination of the conditions of achieving unimodal lasing
is left to diffraction theory.

128
FOR 0i1ﬂCLALIJSB¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us begin with ideal resonators formed by spherical or flat. totally reflect-
ing mirrors and having spherical interfaces between media with different indices
of refraction (or a "lens-like" median). Let us explain the meaning of the
general solution of the geometric approumetion found for such resonators in 51.2
in the specific simple of the resonator depicted in Figure 3.1, a, consisting of
two flat mirrors and a lens with focal length f placed between then. Inasmuch

as this resonator consists of a total of three simplest elements, it is possible
not to resort to the formal apparatus of beam matrices and find the solution by
the are graphic method first med in [A].

As a result of incidence of a spherical wave on a mirror, a reflected spherical

wave is produced. the center of curvature of which is located at a point which is
the image of the center of curvature of the incident wave. Therefore two spheri-
cal waves propagated in opposite directions make the transition into each other

after reflection from the end mirrors under the condition of mutual reflection of
the centers of their curvature 01 and 02. In the given case these conditions have
the form (see Figure 3.1, a, b)

1‘4: 1,-y I'

(l)
1 + 1 _ 1
la+U it“; T

The solution of the aysten leads to the expressions

fi—7—_—— 1 _
31.1 ‘3 * hulls ‘1“: + 101' UL: ‘1:_;31.t-

If one of the inequalities Buzz/(21442) or £1<f<£2 is satisfied (for determinecy
we shall consider 9. ‘12), then the values of 3:13 and 71,2 are real, and the
resonator is unstnb e.

 

The path of the beans for the case of 0<f<21l /(£1+12) is presented in Fig 3.1, a,
b, and for the case of f<0 (a scattering lens , in Tigure 3.1, c. The first
solution (x and y are positive) corresponds to the beam path indicated by the
solid arrows, and the second solution,. directly opposite (the dotted arrows).

Let us first consider the solution describing a spherical wave, the cross section
of which expands on passage through the resonator; from the figure it is obviom
that this is the first solution. For the first solution the coordinate of each
been on the path from the mirror 1 to mirror 2 varies in the ratio

 

" " l '—:
" l " I v; -M' 3 from nirror 2 to mirror 1, in the ratio ’jv‘rfz-IIM'.
l c- I . I

 

The values of H' and H" are negative in the given case inasmch as the trans-
verse coordinate changes sign on intersection of the beam with the axis. After
final passage through the resonator in both directions the coordinate turns out

1 : I’t—I‘An-Iun-Tx

to be multiplied by H'K'Eﬂ, where Al , a
1-" ‘—/'/('.")(':—l)

129

I70! OWL USE ONLY
POROWIBIZONLY

1‘ I, {.1
0 -
a. "‘4"
1 a

 

Figure 3.1. Path of beans in an unstable resonator ssde of two
flat mirrors (1 and II) and a lens: a) resonator with positive
lens; b) its equivalent diagram: c) resonator with negative lens.
The solid arrows indicate the first solution (a basic diverging
wave), the dotted arrows indicated the second solution (a
converging wave).

The parameter H which will hereafter be called the magnification of the resonator
is already known to me from $1.2: this is a larger value of u with respect to
absolute magnitude. In both cases depicted in Figure 3.1 M is positive (for the
resonator in Figure 3.1, c. N', lf'>0). However. there are also resonators with
negative I! -- after a full round trip in both directions the bean turns out to be
on the other side of the axis (see. for examle. Figure 3.3. b. c).

Thus, as a result of couplete passage through the resonator from one end duct to
the other and back. the transverse diumions of the cross sections of one of the
two possible beam with reproducible curvature of the wave front increased by
IMI>1 tine. It is easy to see that the cross section of this been increases as
much not only in the mirror planes. but also along the entire length of the
resonator. Thu, the emission density inside the rssonato decreases by IMI tiles
for the two-dimensional case (a cylindrical wave) and by tines for the three-
dinensional case (a spherical wave). In the case of multiple passage through the
resonator the bean cross section naturally does not grow without liuit. but it
turns out to be bounded as a result of finiteness of the mirror dinensions for
other resonator elenents playing the role of aperture diaphragm. Here part of the
emission exits fro-me resonator. 'l'he «ﬁssion flux inside system decreases
together with its density after each couplets pass by In] or tines.

1.30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is noteworthy that the magnitude of the relative losses equal to l-l/IMI or
1-1/1!2 is entirely determined by the resonator configuration. that is, in the
given case, by the values of 11, I. and f. Only the place where the elission
exits from the systen depends on the transverse dimensions of the resonator ele-
nents. more precisely, their relation. The, if the lens is sufficiently large
and the dimensions a1 and a2 of the mirrors 1 and 2 satisfy the inequality

IH' Ia1>a2>a1IIH"I, the emission exits artially from both sides: the fraction of
the bean cross section equal to azllh'ﬁel hits mirror 2, and the fraction equal to
a1/Ilf'la2 hits nirror 1 (Figure 3.2, a). If one of the mirrors covers the entire
radiation flm: propagated in its direction, the emission exits only from the
opposite end of the resonator (Figure 3.2, b).

Now let us return to the second solution of system (1). He shall hereafter call
the wave corresponding to it converging: on passage through the resonator its
cross section does not increase, but decreases by the same IHI tines. If the
resonator is not excited from any external source. this decreme takes place with-
out linit. Thus, after passing through the resonator. the converging wave is
reconstructed only with respect to curvature. but not with respect to radiation

distribution, and it is iupoasible to me it to construct the steady-state.:field
distribution in the geometric approximation.

'0 2': ------ "a:—
; ZZZ—223“»—
b) 0:

 

Figure 3.2. Diffraction enission output: a) two-way. b) one-way

Generally speaking. in the example of resonators with stable configm‘anion it is
known that in itself the absence of a solution in the geonetric approximation
still does not mean that there is no solution when considering the diffraction
effects. In some phase of the bean constriction. apparently equilibrium can occur
between the focming effect of the resonator and the defocusing influence of the
diffraction (sue 52.1). However, ‘in the given case this possibility is excluded:
in contrast to a stable resonator. an unstable one has defined focusing properties
only with respect to a converyng wave of geonetric approximation. The smallest
departures fron it (in particular. camed by diffraction) lead to fast defocusing.
the bean expands and gradually becomes a stable diverging wave corresponding to

the first solution of system (1). At the end of this section such processes will
be considered in more detail.

Fron 52.1. we already know that the enmreted laws occur not only in the investi-
gated specific cese. but also for any unstable resonators. It is always possible
to conpile and solve s' systen of equations analogous to (l) (for nultielenent

L31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms man use any

resonators this is conveniently done by the bean mtrix method; the solutions
have the for. of (1.22) in the general cue). One of the systen solutions leads
to an unstable converging wave, and the other, to a stable diverging wave which
in essence describes the field distribution of the fundanental resonator node.

In particular, tuo-nirror resonators turn out to be notable if one of the in-
equalities (l-l/Rl) (l-l/R2)>l or (l-l/Rl) (l-l/Rz)<0 is satisfied, where R]. and
32 are the radii of curvature of the mirrors. 1 is the distance between then.

The fornulas for the notification M ad position of the centers of curvature of
the diverging and converging vave are in the general case outward; let us present
intonation only about certain types of resonators which have found or can find
application (Figure 3.3).

 

Figure 3.3. Diagram of unstable resonators: a) resonator made of
flat and convex nirrors: b) resonator node of flat and concave
nirrors (pkg); c) asymtric confocal resonator made of concave
mirrors; (1) confocal resonator made of concave and convex mirrors

(telescopic resonator); a) symtric resonator node of convex
nirrors

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If one of the mirrors is flat (81-0), the center of curvature of the diverging

w ve mving in the direction of then ' mirror is located at a distance
Jizikzﬂ from it; H-(hzikz-HL)“ 9. 132-9.). For £2<0 (the mirror is convex),
the centers of both waves are located outside. the cavity (Figure 3.3, a). For
R2>O (the mirror is concave) and bag, the resonator is also unstable; one of the
centers is located inside the resonator (Figure 3.3, b).

The say-metric confocal systems (R1+R2-21, leltz are interesting versions of un-
stable resonators; for determinacy we shall consider R1>R¥). Both the confocal
resonator sade of concave mirrors (R >Rz>03 Figure 3.3. c and the resonator made
of concave and convex mirrors muall called telescopic [153] (81>0, R2<0;

Figure 3. 3, d). In both cases MRI/R2: the wave propagated in the direction of
the second mirror is plane.

For obvious argments in practical developments mually one-way output of the
emission is used (Figure 3-5. a-d). however. the subject of the majority of
articles on diffraction theory of empty unstable resonators is a ayusetric system
made up of two identical convex mirrors (Figure 3.3, e). In contrast to the
notation introduced earlier for it, the magnification coefficient of the wave cross
section on passage through the resonator in one direction is called the magnifica-
tion coefficient (that is, H'-M"m instead of n'rf'ao. It turns out to be possible
to limit ourselves to investigation of this system as a result of the fact that
passage through it in one direction is entirely equivalent to passage through any
resonator with one-way output and the same values of the paramters H, Neguiv in

8

both directions (for the definition of “e “1‘, sec 53.2). One such reson or with
one-way output equivalent to that depictea in Figure 3.3, e is, as is easy to

see. the resonator of halflength made by the diagram in Figure 3.3, a, and having
identical convex mirror. Thus, for the case of Figure 3. 3, e

. ‘m.

M Vl'li—IRIZ+II2-VI‘+8 a +1
3—?— '
Vm-um-l/z Vii-map:

and the center of the diverging wave is located at a distance x-(l/z) (MZLIRI-i)
from the near mirror.

Properties of Convergent Haves. let us discus another peculiarity of mstable
resonators very important to their practical applications. In real devices there
are almost always certain sources of light dispersion (for exasple, interfaces).
If they generate a converging (or close to it) wave even with negligibly small
initial intensity. frequently this is sufficient for sharp alteration of the field
structure. This phenomenon was observed for the first time in [153]; it was
demonstrated there that it can be explained beginning with the laws of evolution
of light beam during multiple passage through a resonator, and these laws have
been derived for the special case of a telescopic resonator. bet us consider
them, limiting ourselves just as in [153]. to spherical waves, the centers of
which are located on the system axis; these include the converging and diverging
waves.

let us begin with the geometric approximation. Let the curvatures of the diverging
and converging waves in an arbitrary reference plane inside an unstable resonator

1.33

POROFFICIALUSIONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be equal to 1/9 EC and 1/pc5cc. respectively. A resonator with mamification H

can be both a line'a’r and a ring cavity. Knowing cp. cc and K. it is easy to
construct the beam matrix describing a couplets round trip through the resonator
beginning with the indicated reference plane (and ending, of course, with it).
Actually, inasmuch as a beam with the coordinate x and the slope a, belongs to a

family of wave beams of the indicated class with curvature c-ox/x. the conversion
laws of arbitrary x and c have the form (see 51.2)

In = AIM-i + Ben-13m“ min = C‘s-x + Dcuoxfn-n.

or 6+0:
3 n-
#; =A+Bcu-1. Guam-

(2)

where ‘N-l' cN—l’ x", Cu are beam parameters before and after the N—th pass throud:
the resonator.

The curvature of the diverging wave remains as before on passage through the
resonator. and the coordinates of each beam are aultiplied by H; thu,

C + Del!
A -|- Br,

For converging wave. in the same way we obtain knee-1m, C-O-Dcc-cc/H. The solution
of these four equations with respect to A, B, c, D _1_e_ad_s to the formulas

A=(s!{M)-Moc Bail—UN. c-_c"°B.
c

sp—o ' c —s

A -,L Dc, :a M; c,. or- C + Dc, = Me,.

 

Sibstituting them in (2) and introducing q§(c-co)/(c-c¢). it is possible to see
the validity of the following recurrent relations:

zu/xu-u IMU — (I'd/(1 - am). in " iI'M/"’-

Hence, we have the desired formulas describing the variations in the transverse
cross directional dimensions and curvatures after II cowlete passes through the
cavity:

:ulzo - M'U -— qu)/(1— go). 4:: - gall". (3)

From these formulas it follows that when coicc, the parameter q is finite and
decreases quickly; as it decreases the wave s ro chcs a diverging wave (q-O).
Waves close to converging have large initial q I; when Iql'exceeds IHI. the
wave cross section decreases on the next pass tgrough the resonator. Sooner or
later iql becomes less than IHI. and the cross section begins to increase.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 3.4. Passage of spherical waves close to a converging wave through

a sy-setric resonator made of come: Ilirrors along the equivalent
optical line

As an illustration of what has been said we can use Figure 3.6 in which passage
of light beasa along the optical line equivalent to a symmetric unstable resonator
node of convex lirrors is depicted. The been path for convergng and diverging
waves is plotted with a dotted line; the solid lines pertain to waves close to
converging with large positive (a) and negative (b) values qo. At first the wave
with negative values of no is constricted even faster than a converging wave. but

after several passes it is focuud at a point and then diverges rapidly (x changes
sign after focusing).

Pro- the figure it is clear that if for any reason a wave close to a converging
wave arises in the resonator, for examle, as a result of light dispersion, then
for several first passes the scattered enission foradng it renains entirely inside
the resonator. The nusber of these passes no can be determined from the condi-
tion Imo/xol-l and for large [go] the number of passes =Inlqu/Inllil. In this
tine the flux dengity of the emission belonging to the la n diverging van de-

creases by nab-q times; as a result, the relative intensity of the scattered
light increases c rrespodding1y*.

These estimates nsde within the framework of the gsomtric spprodnation indicate
that as co-c'z decreases, the role of the scattered emission in unstable resonators
increases rapidly. For co-cc it is necessary to use the diffraction approximation:

the geoastric approximation predicts an infinitely long process of contraction of
the bean in this case and is obviously maningless.

Let us consider the evolution of a converging wave in the diffraction approxim-
tion in the exasple of the telescopic resonator depicted in Figure 3. 3, d;

 

*In the presence of an excited active Indium this light is ssplified not only
with respect to relative intensity, but also with respect to absolute intensity.

135

summon“
POROWICIALUSEONLY

for this purpose it is most convenient to me the effective length lethod dis?
cussed in 52.6.

 

Figure 3.5. Passage of a converging wave through the optical line
equivalent to a telescopic resonator. The dotted lines separate
the separate of the line, each of which corresponds to a cowlete
pass through the resonator in both directions.

The process of propagating a converging wave generated near s convex mirror of a
telescopic resonator is analogous to the process of passage of a parallel light
been through an optical line depicted in Figure 3.5. The segsents of the line,
each of which corresponds to a signal pass through the resonator are separated
from each other by dotted lines; the solid lines indicate the path of the beans
in the geosetric approximation.

In the first segment the complex asplitude distribution in dinnsionless rans-
verse coordinates is transformd just a when traveling the distance ”ii/cox:
to e

(1m) in espty space (see 52.6; i is half the length of the sag-eat. eq
cavity length); in t e second egnent the transformation is like traveling the
distance (2 2/a2)+iao/a1a2-£( 3), and so on. Thus, traveling through the
resonator N 1.1a; corresponds to Left-“1%.”W'lhlmm-le-l). On
such a path in empty space the cross sectional diunsicu of the bean would
increase as a result of diffraction convergence fron the initial value of Zoo

approxinstely to 2ao+(X/2s°)L.ff-2eo+(M/2so)(qu-l)/01'l).

For transition from enpty space to the case of interest to us it is necessary to
consider that in calculations with Left, the scale of the transverse distribution
varies proportionately to the width of the parallel bean in the moi-attic approx5
imation. After traveling N elements of the line. the width decreases by I!“ tiles.
Thus. the true size of the spot after the converging wave travels through .the

resonator N tiles is h;:£w[ho+(“/M(W’1)/(h—i)]-

For the usually satisfied condition 6 2(Pi-l)/M.>>l, the nutter of passes No, after
which the cross section of the conver ng wave passing throng: the constriction
stage, expands as a iesult of diffraction and reaches the forner dinensions of Zeo.
is equal to Notinuaom-lﬂn lion; in this title the elission density of t e
diverging wave decreases by o-mém-nlmz tines. For real lasers. M NO can
reach extremely large value; thm. for the neodyniun glass laser described in

[153] with a rod disaster of 65 II, this value was sore than 105. Therefore it

is no surprise that the presence of a converging wave even with very small initial
intensity cm change the operating conditions of the laser as a whole sharply.

136

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_llereafter. we shall become fuilisr with the consequences to which the formation
of a converging wave leads as a result of edge diffraction (53.3) on as a result
of partial reflection of lignt from the interfaces inside the resonator (55.1).

It remains only to estimate for what departures from the converging wave it
becomes possible to me the formlu of the geometric approximtion (3).
Obviously. for this purpose it is necessary that it be possible to replace the
diffraction divergence by geometric when analyzing passage of a beam through a:
optical line. In 51.1 it was demonstrated that the geometric divergence predom-
natea over diffraction even when the deflection of the spherical wave front is
J/Z, which corresponds to curvature of the front of ~l/a3. Thtm, for a tale-
scopic resonator the geometric investigation is valid for Icolzllaz. In the
ersl cas of an arbitrary unstable resonator this condition acquires the form
m-cclzllao; hence, it follows that the diffraction approximation is required

only while the deviations of the scattered waves from converging are extremely
small.

53.2. Resonators with Slightly Inhomogeneous Medium

As has already been noted. the properties of real systems are determined not so
much by how the field distribution looks in the ideal espty resonator as to what
degree the given distribution is distorted in the presence of different types of

disturbances. Later it will be .duonstrsted that unstable resonators differ ad-
vantageously from flat cavities in this respect.

From the general argtments it follows that the presence of nonuniformities of the
radius of the type of an optical wedge or a small lens mmt play a significantly
smaller role in mstable resonators than in flat cavities. Actually, in the case
of spherical mirrors the presence of an optical wedge only leads to corresponding
shift of the resonator axis. It is easy to see that a small nonuniformity in the

medium of the lens type causes certain changes in the value of H and curvature of
the wave leaving the resonator.

In the general case of a medium with an index of refraction that varies slowly with
respect to volume, the laws are more cosplicated. but the "sensitivity" of un-
stable resonators to aberrations remains. as before. incowarably less than for
flat cavities. In the final analysis this is connected with very fast establish-
ment of the steady field distribution (let us remewer that in the special case

of spherical waves departures from the exact solution decreae by H2 times with
each pass through the resonator; see 53.1). It is obvious that if a spherical
diverging wave of an ideal system is "released" into a resonator with slightly
nonuniform medium. after several passes the solution in practice is established.
Hence. it is obviom that in the case of umtable resonators the influence of

inhomogeneity of the medium is accuulated over a countable nuber of passes, and
therefore it is small.

Simplest Method of Accounting brInhomogeneities of the Medium. For lasers that
produce narrowly directional emission usually active media with miniml optical

nonuniformities are used. In this case it is possible to use the especially graphic
approach widely used during interferometric studies of slightly nonuniform media.

137

MWWONLY
morhauusaouu

This aethod consists in the fact that the bean path is considered to coincide with
the bean path with an ideally uniforl nadiu, and the amplitude of the em front
distortion occurring as a result of nonuniforuity of the distortion, is equal to
the optical path difference by the corresponding trajectories. The given approach
takes it possible easily to establish the fundaaental qualitative [153] and quanti-
tative [154} late of the behavior of mettle monsters with slightly nonmifona
udiu.

miforn nedima; this process is depicted in Figure 3. , a. As is obvious fro-
the figure. the radiation filling the entire cross section of the active eleaent
"spreads" before this free a snall central segnsnt of the cross section over the
extent of several passes. The dinensions of this central sag-eat of the cross
section decrease on going away from the exit cross section in the geonetric pro-
gression and they are quickly nade sufficiently snall that it is possible to
neglect the wave aberrations within the linits of the cross section.

Hence. it follows that the accumulation of aberrations actually takes place here
only for several passes. The nuﬁer of passes asking a noticeable contribution

to the deformations of the established wave front decreases with an increaaein
nultiplicity of the telescopic system H (or in the general case, with aodulua M).
If the nonmifornity of the nediun reduces to the presence of a slowly varying
gradient of the index of refraction (for examle. as a result of theraal effects,
see 55.1). the finite aptitude of the aberrations of the steady-state front can
easily befomd by simple summation; let us do this, finding the field distribution
u(r) on the reference surface coinciding with an equiphasal surface of an ideal
resonator. It is convenient to locate this surface. just as in 51.2, near. the
exit airror; then u(r) describes the form of the wave leading the resonator directly
In the case of a telescopic resonator the reference surface is a plane (plotted in
Figure 3.6 by the dotted line).

 

Figure 3.6. Passage of a diverging wave over optical lines equivalent
to a telescopic (a) and asymatric confocal resonator node of concave
mirrors (b). The dotted lines indicate the reference planes.

1.38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ISE ONLY

In accordance with the adopted estimation procedure

u(r)~oxp‘i‘-£—[ J; mum'— numr} (a)
A o, ._ ‘. _

where n is the index of refraction of the medium; integration is carried out over
the distance along the corresponding been: thus. the expression in brackets is the
difference of the optical paths with respect to the bean ABC ..., ending at the

point A with transverse coordinate r and with respect to the been 00102... travel-
ing along the resonator axis occurring as a; result of nonuniforuity of the medium

Let u introduce the path difference in one period of the equivalent diagra-

AL(r) .-= 5n(e)d:— j. n(s)de
.w 00.

and the value

F (r) - exp [1 36-61109]

(with a uniform nediun AL(r)50, F(r)-l). Then considering that the coordinates

of the points A. B, C ... are equal to r, r/M, r/M2,.... it is possible to write
(4) in the fore

Mr) ~ °!p{1-?[Ab(r)+ AL(y'-) +a;(;',-) + . .]}=
-r(r)p(,'-)p (3") (5)

With an increase in k the values of Mir/Mk) approach zero. and'P(r/Hk). correspond-
ingly, approaches one. Accordingly. the product in the righthend side of (S)

approaches a defined linit which is the desired solution with unliuited increase
in the number of terns.

Let us note that the introduction of the cowlex index of refraction permits unique
consideration not only of the phase. but also amplitude distortions. occurring as
a result of nonuniform distribution of the gain. In addition, the value of P(r)
can include factors that describe the nonuniforn distribution of the reflection
coefficient with respect to the nirror surface (see the following section).

Aberrational Coefficients. Let us me the shove-diseased mthod for investigation
of the case frequently encountered in practice where nonuniforndtiea are distributed

uniforIly over the e tire length of the resonator and n can be represented in the
fore n(r)-no+n1r+n2r +. .. Then

AL(r) = L[n,r+ n,r' + +ﬁp} (n.r’+n.r”+...)dv’]=-
u

FOROFFICIALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY -

In the brackets of the last expression the one correspontb to the half of the
period of the equivalent diagram vhich the bean passes through, being parallel; the
second tern corresponds to the retaining half (cross section expamion phase).

Now let to calculate the sun AI.(r)+AL(r/H)+... It is easy to see that for this.
in the lat formula it is sufficient to replace r" by

P

w»+(a‘+(n)‘+~~~.-t,.m m»-

 

AL(r)+AL(,’-)+ - Lagoon”.
+

1 I‘m-t

a (6)
mar—93‘ 1-1/1!"

cum-[1

‘me equivalent diagram of the unstable confocal resonator made of concave Iirrora
depicted in Figure 3.3. c is divided exactly the same into sections which the lidlt
been passes through, being parallel and sections in which the bean coordinates vary
by H tins (Figure 3.6. b). Therefore for the given resonator all the above-
.presented calculations remain valid; formulas (6) are also valid (of course. under
the condition of stbstitution of the corresponding. already negative values of n
in then). .

Let us reader that the wave front distortions which occur in the case of single
passage of a parallel been through the given medium are eqml to L;- nkrk. Hence,

the meaning of the coefficients a figuring in (6) is clear. These coefficients
will be called aberration coeffic ents hereafter: their values indicate how my

times the given type of nonuniforuity appears are strongly in metsble resonators
than in single-pass a-plifiers.

   

Figure 3.7. “k as s function of H: a) theoretical resonator;
b) asynctric confocal resonator made of concave mirrors

160

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dependence of the first few “I: on the magnification H is presented in Fig 3.7.
It is obvious that in the case of a telescopic resonator (ml, Figure 3.7. a)

all terms of the series (6) decrease monotonically. The nonmifornity of the type
of an optical wedge is manifested comaratively strongly (It-1; first-order wave
aberrations): for values of "-2 to S which are characteristic of many types of
lasers (see Chapter 4). the beam at the eadt from the resonator is deflected from
its initial direction by an angle exceeding the angle of inclination by 3.5 to 2
times on a single pass through the introduced wedge. The effect of a nonuniformity
of the lens type (k'2. second-order wave aberrations) in the same variation range
of M turns out to be greater than in the case of a single-pass alplifier by only
2-1.5 times; higher-order wave aberrations are manifested still more weakly.

The confocal resonator made of concave mirrors (PK-1, Figure 3.7. b) is simifi-
(.mil lens \‘vnsii iw In the pnn-mvu- ul ukl-«mler wavv aberrations than the telescopic resonator.

l-‘or 1MI'3. the beam direction at the output of this systen turns out to be even more
stable with respect to introduction of the wedge than in the aaplifiers (01<1).
It is easy to see that the reason for this is "reversal" of the beam on passage
of the period of the equivalent diagram, as a result of which each off-axis beam
altemately passes through zones with larger and snaller index of refraction
(Figure 3.6, h; we shall familiarize ourselves in are detail with phenomenona of
this type in 53.5). 11w reaction to the fourth-order aberration on "reversal" of
the beam does not change, and therefore remains approximately the same as in a
telescopic resonator (a small difference arises as a result of half the equivalent
diagram period in which broadening of the bean cross section takes place).

Inasmuch as in the case of the most frequently med telescopic resonator all the
aberration coefficients ck decrease monotonically with an increase in H, the
angular divergence of the emission in this case decreases as a rule. However, if
the series 7.an rk is sign-variable, a nonproportional decrease in its coefficient
can tlleorcticnlliy lead to the situation where the distribution becomes less favor-
able. Therefore for individual specific forum of n(r), the intermediate values of
H can turn out to be advantageous instead of the larger ones. A similar exanple

 

Figure 3.8. Index of refraction as a function of radim. The
solid curve is the function wed in [155].

was presented in reference [155]: machine calculations in the above-discmsed
approximation demonstrated that for the case where n(r)-no has the for:- depicted

1101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

by the solid curve in Figure 3. 8*, the angular divergence of the radiation does

not decrease, but increases with an increase in H. Analyzing this case, it is

any to see that the form of n(r) is selected so that the sberretiomoccurring on
different passes will coupensate for each other. It is sufficient to alter the
form of the function n(r) somhet (for exasple. go to the dotted curve in

Figure 3.8) for the indicated effect to disappear; therefore, the yven exasple

is not typical - as a rule it is still meful that the aberrations were sun-ed for
the snallest possible nutter of passes through a nonuniform nediun.

80m Co-ents on the Possibilities of ﬁll! Gemtric 01M“ Approximation. First,

let us discuss the problem of the applicbility of the above-diseased mthod of
estimating n(r). Obviously. it is valid only for a snall optical nonunifornity of
the nediun which does not cause simificant alteration of the path of the been

by cosparison with the cue of an ideal resonator. For this purpose it is necessary
that in any section of the cross section of the bean incident on due mirror, the
angle between the normal to its wave front and the normal to the wave front of the
diverging wave of the ideal resonator will be much less than the angle between the
latter and the normal to the mirror surface (Figure 3.9). Nathanatially, for e
two-dinensionol or antisymmetric problen this condition is fornulated as follows:

H; [AL(r) +111. (71) -:- A1472) + . . .“< %|h(r)|_where Mr) a 03/29) -(r’IZRa)

is the distance between the nirror surface and the equiphasal surface of the
diverging wave adjacent to it. Using expression (1.22) to find the curvature of

1 1 i [F5 1‘ IAN' '1
the 183C o.weobtain OI 7-K: tlndtnillc d77(M_ﬂ—)'

where Nag/(Ml) is the paraneter introduced at the end of 51.2. Thu.
1
[n(r) a-"z'y-(III —%) 7:7. , and our condition acquires the forn

'7‘?[AL(r)+AL(y'-)+...]l<.z‘7l1vn_g_$_l. (7)

where N i
N M— .

Key: 1. equiv

Let us note that the value of Ne uisz is equal to Me), that is, the distance
between the equiphasal surface of the diverging wave of m ideal resonator and

 

nThe shape of the curve in Figure 3.8 differs somewhat from that depicted in the
figure in reference [155], but it is reproduced by the numerical data presented
there.

142

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOROFHCIALUSEONLY

the edge of the mirror (Figure 3.9). ‘lhe parameter in“, introduced in this way
plays an inportant role in the diffraction theory of notable resonators (see the
next section). As is easy to see, this parameter is, similarly to H. an algebraic
value: in the situation depicted in Figure 3.9, II “190; if the wave front first
touches the edge and not the center of the mirror,°aeo_u1v<0. For confocal syste-
o- and NNdv-Zho/A-(H-lhzlzu. where ho is the deflection of the exit mirror
(in the case of a telescopic resonator R “1‘20. for a resonator made of concave
mirrors N “1.50). For an ewty synetri resonator depicted in Figure 3. 3. e,
Nequiv'(‘ 2n.) (M-l/H).

In the light of criterion (7). the fact attracts attention that as IHI approaches
one the limits of applicability of the developed nodal constrict sharply, inasmuch
as he“. on the one hand. INequivl decreases, and on the other hand. the greater
part of the aberration coefficients “It increases sharply (Figure 3.7). Finally,

in the limiting case of a plane (HI-l). concentric (Fl-l, Figure 1.13, c, d) or
semiconcentric (HI-1. Figure 1.13, f) resonator the presence of small disturbances
as convenient as one might like is sufficient for the sun in $5) to diverge and

the optical-geometric approximation to become disadvntageous. Thus. we obtained
another explanation of extraordinary sensitivity of a plane resmator to a different
type of aberrations.

For performance of specific calculations in the case of a noticeably nonuniform
medius. it is possible to use a inroved Biltonal nethod within the framework of
the optical-geometric approximation [6. 156]. In particular, here the redistribu-
tion of the emission intensity with respect to the beam cross section caused by the
deflection of the beam as a result of phase inhonogeneitiee is already taken into
account; it is true, as it was shown in 51.1, the nonmiforlity of the amplitude
distribution has very little influence on the angular divergence of the emission.

Although the Bikonal mthod has broader limits of applicability than the above-
discussed sinplest approximation. no new behavior laws of unstable resonators have
been discovered by using [156]. Inasmuch as this method, in addition, is less
descriptive and requires machine calculations. we shall not me it hereafter.

In conclusion, let us discuss another aspect of the optical-geometric approxination.
Over the extent of the period of the equivalent line, the field anplitude varies

in the ratio K(0)o(0)/IMIP along the cam running along its axis, where

[(0) Eexp[(l/2)kgain(0)ll and 0(0)5 R'(0) are the awlitude gains in the medium and
the reflection coefficient of the exit mirror on the system axis (a large cross-
section mirror in asymmetric resonators will always be considered coupletely reflect-
ing; for the definition of km“ and 12'. see 51.1.); lulu is a factor which

describes the decrease in the anlitude as a result of broadening of the bean;

in the two-dimensional case p-l/2; in the three-dimensional case p-l.

The field source at the point r is the field at the point rm (see Figure 3.6).
In accordance with the definition of the aberration motion P(r) the complex field

amplitude along this been varies in the ratio (7:); P(r).
I

This calculation permits the following equation to be coapiled

?u(r)=- war) «(1%). (9)

143
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where y is the eigenvalue. Using the stbstitution

u(r)-;(r) F(r)F(F'-) F (7'5) . . ., 1-1'K(0)p(0)

equation (9) reduces to the equation of an ideal resonator which was presented for
the first tine in such fora by Siegnan and Arrathoon [157]:

rim - .,‘,,,Tt(i-)- (9.)

This equation fornally has solutions of the type l'i(r)--rll with eigenvalues
y'-(l/H)P+'. where a is any nulﬁer. Siegnan and Arrathoon arrived at the conclusion
that n can seem values of 0, l. 2. 3, ...; here they began with .the require-ants
that the function Mr) and all of its derivatives at the point r-O be linited.
However, this conclusion, generally speaking, did not have solid ground to stand on:
it is known that the optical-geonetric approxintion is applicable only when the

relative variations of u(r) in the. dimions' of the Fresnel zone 71—1.. are snall,
that is, for

 

,In iglki. (10)

Condition (10) at the point r-O is satisfied only by a trivial solution of the
equation (9a) ﬁ-const (r0) which leads to formula (5), which is therefore the
solution to equation (9) with eigenvalue

1 a x (o)p(om M I'- ' (11)

For final solution of the problem of the node spectrua of an unstable resonator,
diffraction approximation is required. In addition, in the case of sharply out-
lined nirrors conditim (10) is not satisfied even near the edge of the bean. which
leads to a mater of characteristic features of such resonators. Let 1: proceed
with investigation of these problem.

 

Figure 3.9. Have front near the exit nirror of a resonator with aberrations. The
equiphasa] surface for an ideal resonator is plotted by the dotted line.

Key: (1) "equiv

1M

MOWUSEONLY
Section 3.3. Edge Effects and Spectrus of Natural Oscillations.

Equivalence of Unstable Resonators and Interrelation of the Solutions for
Misrent Types- In the diffraction approrination the field distribu-
tion of unstable resonators, just as resonators of other types. is described by
the eigenfunctions of a svsten of two integral equations relating the fields on
the nirrore using the Huygens-Fraud principle. For resonators with one-sided
radiation output. when one of the mirrors is quite large and is totally re-
flecting (see Figure 3.3, a-d). it :1 possible to use the integral expression
(1.26) or (1.2“) pernitting a single equation to be compiled containing only
the field distribution function on the other nirror.

If we go from field distribution on the exit nirror to the distribution on the
equiphasal surface of the diverging wave of the geonstric approxisation (see
above, Section 3.2). the desired equation acquires an especially obvious form
[157]. Actually, substituting in (1.21“) "(2. Y) II x(x. Y)'exp[isu.quiv(x2 1»
Y2)! (by which the indicated transition is realised) and considering that AD +
BC - (H + 1/1012, we obtain the following integral equation:

7.1. (X. Y) “-‘ N ."(f‘lb')jjexp {lull/MI (X’ - 39' +

+ (Y’ — {(7)1} “(xx r'mr' m.

 

(12)

Let us write out the analogous equation for the two-dinensional case which will
basically be considered; here we shall consider that the exit aim: has a peak
reflection coefficient 9(a) which is variable with respect to cross section; the
phase factor exp(21kl.o) will be omitted:

.
_ t
"Mme/nu 3' p, (X')up[laNM(X'— {1) Imx-‘ux'. (13)
n. .
here, just as 'in (12). y. is the eigenvalue. x 2 sis is the dimensionless coor-‘ '
dinate; 2a is the characteristic size of the mirror; the paraneter “equiv used
on asking the transition to the new reference surface is. as before. related to

N and H by the expression Ngquv - (ll/2M3 - 1/3); finally, “()0 1 Mel); for
the case of a finite totally reflecting nirror

1.- mm.
m i... .x.>..

The equation for the synetric resonator has the sale fore (Figure 3.3. e)* un-
der the condition that the reflection coefficient of both of its mirrors is de-
scribed by the sane function 9100.

 

* In this case the value of 7., just as K (see Section 3.1). pertains to pee-
sage through the resonator not at the botton. but to one side.

1'65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘lhus, all unstable resonators with one-sided radiation output equal to N and M
(or H and “equiv) and the sane law of variation of the reflection coefficient of
the exit airror are equivalent to each other (for the special case of totally
reflecting mirrors this result was obtained already in Section 1.2). Moreover,
the eigenfunctions and the values 'for the resonators in which any two paramtars
out of three (N. H, N. uiv) are negative can be expressed in term of the eigen-
functions and values of the resonator with the seas with respect to absolute ”
magnitude but positive paraneters (it is true that for this when H < 0 it is
necessary that the condition o(-x) - 0(x) be satisfied-indesd on changing the
sign of H. the influence of only sylaetrically distributed aberration sources
can renain invariant; see Section 3.2). Let us denonstrate this in the staple
of resonators with N > 0. H < 0, “equiv < 0 (these include, in particular. the
confocal resonator depicted in Figure 3.3. c). On asking the transition froa
(13) to the couple: conjugate equation, r lacing x' under the integral sign by
-X' and using "(-x') - 9101') and M - -|u we obtain

I—‘z-m =- 1/ ,1 fauna:- ItaNIMI(X'- [ﬁlvhxoax'

(the * indicates, Just as everywhere, conplex conjugation).

It is known that the eigenfunctions of such resonators are synatric (x.) or
antisymtric (“)0 Substituting the expression x1 ‘(-x') - :xg'.(x') in the
latter we obtained equations distinguished only by a factor for y and for the
rest coinciding entirely with the equation of the resonator having the rat-ane-
tcrs N, In]. In the final analysis we have

70.0(Nt-IMD- *‘7;0(N:IMDO
heW-‘Iul- n-zL-(NJMI. X).

For resonators with N < 0, M > 0, “.un < O (as an exaaple we can use the syn-
netric resonator nade of two sharply concave mirrors)

ﬁ‘lNIO”) ”7‘01”. ”)0 x(—INI. ”. X)-1.('Nl‘ ”'X).

Finally, for N < 0. H < 0. Ngquv > 0 (for examle. the confocal resonator made
of concave nirrors in which a nirror with large I is used as the ant nirror)

10.0("l”lo -"'l) - :!:l1..-(INI. In“.

1""INIo -l”lo X) - 1”le lu'o X).

P'ron the presented formulas it is obvious that for all types of unstable resona-
tors with identical N, M and new“ with respect to absolute magnitude, the
eigenvalues are distinguished by phase factors. but they coincide with respect

to modulus; thm, all of then have identical diffraction losses. the eigenfunc-

tions recorded on the equiphassl surface of the diverging wave of the geometric
approxination turn out to be maples-conjugate for resonators with ”equiv < 0

'136

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
with respect to the eigenfunctions of resonators with “equiv > O. Inasmuch as
the transition from the indicated reference surface to the surface of the mir-

_rors is realized by mltiplication by exp(irﬂ.qu1vxz), the distributions on the
mirror surface are also conquer-conjugate.

All of this pernits us hereafter to limit ourselves to the investigation of any
one type of resonator. He shell illustrate everything in the example of a reso-
nator made up of two identical convex mirrors (Figure 3.3, e; N > O, H > 0.
“equiv > 0), limiting ourselves, as a rule, to the investigation of the two-
dimensional case and departing from this rule only when the transition to three
dimensional leads to a qualitative change in the oscillation spectrum.

Unstable C8V1t1€8 With Completely "Smoothed" Edge. Initially, following [151,
156], let us consider the properties of such unstable resonators for which the
edge diffraction effects are insignificant. From the general srgusents it is
clear that this occurs in the case where the reflection coefficient of the air-
rors, and with it also the field enlitude, smoothly decrease toward the edge of

the system. l-‘ron the materials presented in Section 3.2, it also follows that
the mm distribution of the fundamental mode in such resonators must be described

well by the ferrule for the opticogeomatric approxination (5) which satisfies
equation (9). ﬁts relation between the equations of the diffraction approxima-
tion (13) and the opticogeoastric approximation (9) is quite obvious. Actually,
the factor exptisflﬂx‘ - X/H)2] for large values of x' - xm oscillates rapidly.
merefore if the product 91)! is a slowly variable function of x' the magnitude
of the integral in (13) is in practice deterninad only by the behavior of this
function in the vicinity of the point xlu (see also Section 1.1). Expanding it
near this point in a Taylor series

v.(X’)1(X’)=9n(1xr)z(-f,-)+(X'--f7)§¥i'.9| ,_m+...

and limiting ourselves to the terms written out, after integration we inedi-
ately obtain (9) with the aberration function P(X) - o1(x/H)/ol(0) (in the case
of an empty resonator K 5 1).

In order to discover what the mode spectrum of unstable resonators with smoothed
edge is, let us consider their properties in the diffraction approximation in
the example of a resonator with Gaussian distribution of the nirror reflection
coefficient:

9(3) - up(—?-:'Ia’). MK) - «IN-21’).

This case is especially interesting in that the mirrors with Gaussian distribu-
tion 9 can be considered to have an ideally smoothed edge: As a result of re-
flection of the light beams from them with an amplitude having Gaussian or uni-
form distribution, the Gaussian beans are generated, the far-field patter; of
which does not have additional peaks. In addition, for resonators with uuch
mirrors there is an exact analytical solution [3]. When the transverse dimen-
sions of the mirrors and the diffraction losses are not too snall (more

147

Pu! chi-12.1.4. USE ONLY
precisely, on satisfaction of the condition 'Nequivm - I!!!) >> 1), after tran-
sition to the normal coordinates this solution acquires the four [151]*

u.(:)~u.(sm.(thy—— "é. “0.1.2.... * ' “9““ (u)
l
'.~(ﬁ_)'*7. (15)

where u2(x) - .xp(-[2/(n2 - 1))Ix2/a21). an“) - (-i)‘up(:2/2) x (d'ldt‘) x
93“-“; /2]) are Hermite polynonials. Inasnuch as %(t) - l, the function u
directly describes the field distribution of the lovest node; it is easy to see
that it satisfies the opticogeonetric equation (9) and can be found using for-

u,(.r) 2-: 9(5):)(5‘). . . zoxp (— 0%;- $$ —. H) - "P(“7l'z:;§)'

Now let us consider the Hernite polynomials. All of thee contain the tern t“; in the
first two polynomials it is unique (Ho(t) - l. 8,0) - t); the rest, in addition
to it, also contain the terms of lower orders (82(t) - t2 - l, 83(t) - t3 - 3t,
and so on). These additional terns play a significant role only for anal]. val-
ues of the ergusent am; from (14) it is obvious that this occurs in the investi-
gated case of large "equiv only on the snell central section of the resonator
cross section. Thus. the first two nodes on the entire resonator cross section.
and the subsequent ones, on the larger part of it are described by the functions
“00!) (s/a)I which are solutions of the opticogeonetric equation (9) (see the end
of Section 3.2). The exponents on ads actually turn out to be integral. except,
in spite of the proposition of Siwmmad'm . this does not follow from any
conditions on the resonator axis (where the metric approxination ceases to be
valid). but from the requireuent of the bounding of u.(x) at infinity [151].

M example of the field distribution of several lowest nodes for H - 2 and
1&un - 50 is presented in Figure 3.10. The field enplitude of the fundamental

node (n - 0) decreases on going away free the center of the nirrors by a Gaussian'
law. the characteristic size of the "spot" in the plane of the mirror is

2a ~ 1. The fields of the other nodes fill the central region of the reso-
nator less uniformly. um: an increase in the trensverse index n the zone of

* 0n comparison with the published data it is necessary to consider that in a
number of papers. including [151, 1541, the dependence of the field on tine

exp(iut) was used and not exp(-iwt) as in the present publication (as a result,
the sign on i changes everywhere).

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Nevertheless, the nost interesting for us now is not the specific form of the
solutions in the resonator with Gaussian mirrors. but the fact that in expres-
sions (16). (1.5) the forn of the distribution 9(x) essentially determines only
the factor uo(x) coupon to all eigenfunction (inasmuch as "equiv ~ a2, the.
value of the argument 3. does not depend on a). It is also remarkable that the
eigenvalues in accordance with (15) do not depend on the sizes of the nirrors
and coincide with the eigenvalues which were obtained by fornsl nethods in ref-
erences [158. 159] for resonators with nirrors of infinite dinensions.

We have already seen that within the framework of the optioogeonetric approxi-
nation the isolation of the factor describing the field distribution of the funda-
nental node for any forn of aberration function 1(1) reduces the corresponding
equation to the equation of an ideal resonator (see the transition from (9) to
(9a)). By analogy it is possible to propose that in the diffraction approvin—
tion the eigenfunctions have the forn (14) not only for Gaussian mirrors, but

also in the general case of many umtable resonators with well-smoothed edge.

the field distribution of the fundeaental node “0 which figures in (16) here nust be
considered using (5); the eigenvalues nust be equal to the following (see (11))

1.. - momma/mm". (15s)

b have
s i: e. \

relative unite

Amplitude,
.
N

 

 

Figure 3.10. Field distributions of the lowest nodes in a resonator with

Gaussian mirrors ()1 - 2, IN. u v - 50): a—anplitude distribu-
tion; bnphase distribution his origin 1. the spherical wave of
the geonetric epproxination).

Then it will be obvious that these arguments for-slated in [151] are basice11y

true; however, it is still necessary to becone familiar with the properties of

resonators, thenirrors of which have regular geonetric shape with sharply out-
lined edge.

1109

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
Unstable Resonators with Sharp Edge. As we heve already nentioned in Section
3.1, in Slegnsnss first paper [lo] he stated the argment that in unstable reso-
nators with large losses the edge diffraction not influence only the peripheral
part of the beam inediately exiting from the resonator. Hence, it follows that
the field distribution on the mirrors (or with one-sided output, on the output
mirror) and the magnitude of the losses mat not noticeably depend on the edge
effects: the analogous conclusion regarding the properties of unstable resona-
tors with large losses can also he found in Vaynshteyn ([3), problem No 8 for
Chapter 6) . However, precise machine calculations performed by Signen and Ar-
ratun [157] by the iterative method denonstratad that the picture of the prop-
erties of unstable resonators with totally reflecting mirrors of finite dimen-
sions is far from simple. It was discovered that the field distribution for
oscillations with the least losses does not differ too strongly, but neverthe-
less, noticeably, ﬁrms the predictions of the geonetric approximation (Pigure
3.11). It turned out that the nature of this distribution and the nsgnitude cf
the losses depend in a conplex way on the transverse diaensions of the mirrors,
revealing explicit periodic dependence with variation of “equiv for fixed 1!.

The typical form of the relation calculated in [157] for the losses as a func-

tion of Ne uiv is presented in Figure 3.12, a (the procedure used made it pos-
sible sin taneously to find the losses of the two highest Q nodes).

0‘ N
k \

\

t

relative units

Amplitude,

 

I I l I
l 4 4 um (I

Figure 3.11. Amplitude distribution of nodes with least losses near the degen-
eration point in the resonator with sharp edge (M - 1.86,
“equiv = S) [157]. Curve 1-41.un S 5; curve Iluﬁuuiv Z 5.

The work by Sicgman and Arrmhoon was a major contribution co the theory of
unstable resonators with a sharp edge; in particular, the parameter N. "1,, was
introduced here. However, the physical neaning of this parameter r ned un-
clear; in addition. when interpreting the calculated data the authors of [157]
erroneously considered that the lower "wavy" line W ... corresponds to one
node of the lowest order, and the V-type branches A63, GED and UP ..., another
symmetric node. In reality, as was indicated in [152] and confirned by the re-
sults of the latest machine calculations [160, 161] the apparent periodicity of
the variation of the losses is caused by the fact that as “equiv grows, the
types of oscillations having the highest Q-factor alternately exchange places
(similarly to how this occurs in Figure 2.21). This exchange takes place near

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the integral values of “equiv for which the modes turn out to be doubly degen-
erate with respect to losses (but not with respect to frequencies). Let us note
that the configurations of the fields of two adjacent nodes near the degenera-
tion point are presented in Figure 3.11.

In Figure 3.12, b, c. a more coaplete picture of the behavior of the natural
oscillations of a twoodimensional resonator [160] end a three-dimensional reso-
nator with circular mirrors [161] is depicted. It is obvious that in the final
analysis there are a small mnber of modes, the losses of which vary with New“
quasiperiodicslly so that these oscillations alternately becone the highest Q.
In the three-dinsnsional case these laws are also maintained for large IQ “1‘; at
the same time as in the two-dimensional case, beginning with a defined v ue of

Ngquiv, the curves cease to intersect—the degeneration of the nodes with re-
spect to the losses is removed.

Without going into a detailed analysis of these phenomena, it is possible di-
rectly to draw the conclusion that the edge effects in unstable resonators are
still manifested although only the central and it would appear, almost undis-
turbed part of the been as a result of diffraction is incident on the exit sir-
ror. In order to understand the cause of this, it is necessary to consider that
as a result of diffraction. in addition to the undistorted reflected wave, an
additional wave also appears, the fictitious source of which is the edge of the
mirror (see Section 2.2). Although the asplituds of the additional wave de-
creases sharply with removal from the direction of the reflected wave (Figure
3.13), some part of the radiation scatters also at large angles, including in
the direction opposite to the direction of the incident wave (noted in the fig-
ure by the dotted arrows). This radiation gives the beginning of the converging
wave, the properties of which were investigated in detail in Section 3.1. Let
us remember the basic characteristic feature of the converging wave: at the
same time as the intensity of the basic wave decreases on a single pass through
the resonator by H or H2 times, the radiation pertaining to the converging wave
remains entirely inside the resonator for many passes. As a result, the con-
verging wave, in spite of its negligible intensity near the edge of the systsn
where it is formed, is anplified as it approaches the resonator axis to such a
degree that it has a significant influence on the entire field structure.

The discussed picture, although primitive, nevertheless per-its understanding of
the. role of the parameter N. uiv [156]. For this purpose let us return to Fig-
ure 3.9. In Figure 3.9 the tted line depicts the equiphasal surface of the
diverging wave moving in the direction of the mirror for the presently investi-
gated case of an ideal resonator (the medium is absent or unifors). It is easy
to see that this surface is equiphaasl also for a converging wave moving evay
from the nirror. Therefore the radiation of the diverging wave incident on the
edge of the mirror and then forming the converging wave passes between the equi-
phasal surfaces of these waves a total distance kquvx. Thus, on variation of
New“ by one, the phase difference between the diverging wave and the converg-
ing wave occurring as a result of edge diffraction varies by 2!, which also
leads to quasiperiodicity of the properties of unstable resonators.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
losses, 2
e e , ms” 19% &

   

_§'

In} I a 4 .r e um,“
b .

Energy

 

Figure 3.12. Losses and eigenvalues as a function of Mu“: nnlossss in the
two-dimensional resonator. Ii - 1.86 [157]; b—losses in the two-
dinensionsl resonator. M - 3.3 [160] (the dotted line is used to
plot the losses for the lowest resonator node with snoothed edge);
c—the eigenvalues in the three-dinensional resonator with spheri-
cal nirrors, h - 5, the azimuthal sods index is equal to are
(there is no dependence on the asimthal engle) [161].

Let us note that it is possible always to deter-inc ”equiv by the distance be-
tween the equiphssal surfaces of the diverging and converging waves near the
elnent bounding the bean cross section in the resonator. whereas the definition

of N “1v given in Figure 3.9 sonetines nakas no sense. This occurs prinsrily
in ring cavities and also in systm in which the bean cross section is limited

not only by the exit mirror. but by the iris placed at e noticeable distance tron
it.

A more careful investigation of the properties of unstable resonators with s

sharp edge can be made by the analytical methods of Vaynshtayn sinilarly to how
this was done in Section 2.2 for the case of a planar resonator. we shall

152
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
become somewhat familiar with the nathusatical aspect of the question in the
following section where there is a disuseeion of the properties of resonators
with central been hole: the solution in the gaoaotric approximation is in
general absent there, and it is not possible to get along without tho Vaymhteyn
approach. Now we only note that as a result of considering the interference ef-
fects tho radiation scattered by edge diffraction inside tho resonator tum out
to be distributed not with respect to all, but with respect to a number of dis-
crete directions. Just as in Section 2.2. one of then corresponds to the wave
"reflected" from the edge. and the rest. to the "transfer-ad" waves: only inas-
much as the angle of incidence of the initial wave on the edge of tho mirror u
(see Figure 2.7) is very large hero. among the "transformed" waves there are
waves which are scattered not only at angles larger than tho "reflected" one (that)
is, with e > a). but also at smaller angles (8 < e). A comparison of riguros 3.13
and 2.7 shows that in the case of unstable resonators. when a divergent wave is
incident on the edge. the wave that is "reflected" free the edge is indeed
convergent. The approximate calculations made by Lyubimov at al. [162, 163]
demonstrated that the above-described complex laws actually are explained by
interaction of the fundamental wave with the "reflected" wave and the one or two
"transformed" waves closest to it. The radiation scattered in other directions
quickly outs from the resonator. and therefore plays no significant role.

 

Figure 3.13. The formation of scattered waves during edge diffraction.

Subsequent foreign publications in which the Vaynshteyn methods were still used
(see, for example, [161.]) do not add anything theoretically new to the results
obtained in [162. 163]. It must he noted that in a case of unstable resonators
such celculstions, especially considering at least one "transformed" wave. re-
quire extraordinarily ewloiard calculations and in the final analysis it is not
possible to get around a machine solution of the systems of transcendental equa-
tions. Therefore their results are very diffith to see and are not clear. In
addition. later it will be obvious that the problem of classification of the na-
tural oscillations in unstable resonators. in general, and in those with a sharp
edge, in particular. is primarily of academic interest. In practice only the
nature of the behavior of the modes with the least losses turns out to be inpor-
tent, and it is entirely clear free the results of references [157, 152, 160,
161] in which the numerical iterative method was used (see Figure 3.12). There-
fore we shall consider this problea in more detail and proceed to a discussion
of the properties of real systems.

153

FOROI-T'ICIALUSEONLY
Specifics of Edge Effects Under keel Conditions. The resonators with
significant cross sectional dinenaions and not too enall Ihl - l are of the
greatest interest fron the point of view of the problem of divergence of the
“41‘qu obviously for them lﬂwuvl >> 1 is satisfied. the specific nature
of the diffraction effects in such resonators prinarily consists in the fact
an; the fundamental diverging wave is incident on the edge of the nirror at a con-
parstively large angle a defined by the geometry of the systen (see Figure 3.13).
tron the radiation scattered as a result of diffraction only that part renains
in the resonator which is deflected free the reflected bean at angles exceeding
a. we have already seen that even in this part of the radiation the primary
role is played by the converging wave corresponding to the angle of deviation 2e.
It is easy to show that the values of a and :1.un are related by the expression
a - ‘EuvA/a. In real resonators of powerful lasers bl.un usually varies fron

sever tens to eany thousands (see Chapter 4); here the angles 2c reach sewral
degrees.

At the sane time it is known that the intensity of the diffraction scattering of
light at large angles depends strongly on the nature of the edge of the mirrors
[165]. The above-enumerated theoretical papers in which the effects of the node
degeneration with respect to losses, and so on were observed essentially pertain
to the hypothetical case where the edge of the mirrors is ideally sharp and pre-
cisely outlined along a straight line or curve with center on the axis of the
resonator. Such a nodel is entirely admissible when we are talung. for exam-
ple, about the lowest nodes of planar resonators which correspond to snell an-
gles of incidence of radiation on the edge of the nirror. For unstable resona-
tors it is incssible to neglect the natural "blurring" of the edge and inper-
fection of the mirror outlines; both of these factors lead to attenuation of the
diffraction scattering of the light at large angles and. consequently, to a de-
crease in the intensity of the converging wave. If this decrease is signifi-

cant, the dageneration with respect to losses is renoved and the eigenvalues ap-
proach the values predicted by ferrule (15).

Let us estimate what the deviations from the ideal conditions should be in order
that the intensity of the converging wave decrease sharply. This is done nost
frequently for the case where the mirror reflection coefficient decreases free
one to zero not discontinuously, but over the extent of a zone of finite width d
(a similar situation occurs, in particular, when using nirrors with nultilayered
interference coatings). Actually, significant variation of the asplitude of the
been reflected from the nirror at the characteristic diaension d indicates that
in the expansion of the amplitude in a Fourier series there are components pres-
ent with spatial frequencies of ~1/d. Inasmuch as the angular distribution of
the radiation is the Fourier type of distribution in the near tone (Section 1.1),
these components correspond to the angles of inclination of 4“. Hence it fol-
lows that in order that the light be scattered primarily at angles less than

2:: - 2N.qw,xla, it is necessary to satisfy the condition d > do 3 a/thuv
[lSl]. Let us note that the situation here is entirely the sane as in radio
engineering where a decrease in the steepness of the pulse front is acconpanied
by the corresponding constriction of the signal spectrum.

154
FOR omcw. use any
A more careful calculation of the decrease in intensity of the scattered waves
can be made as follows. let us break down the entire "smoothing" zone in a
series of sections Ax wide each. Replacing the ”smooth" function p(x) by a

step function, we obtain the set of "steps" of height -(dp/dx)Ax. Each "step"
obviously generates edge waves with relative amplitude -(dp/dx)Ax (see Section
2.2). Adding then in the far zone considering the phase relations and replacing
the smation with respect to all "steps" by integration. we find that the in-
tensity of the edge waves scattered at an angle a is proportional to

C O
0(9) .__, .33.“, (i ¥er)x at d: [106];

let us note that 3(0) is the angular spectrum of a source of width d with ampli-
tude distribution -(do/dx). If we consider that for d + 0 the value of 3(a) -b 1,
it because clear that replacement of the sharp edge by a smoothed edge causes a
decrease in the amplitude of the radiation scattered at an angle a by l/IB(0)I
tines.

The estimates made using these relations in [1661 demonstrated that the parame-

ter do introduced above is actually the critical width of the "smoothing" sons,

on achievement of which the diffraction "reflection" from the edge turns out to

be significantly attenuated. Hith a further increase in tone width, the inten-

sity of the converging wave continues to decrease rapidly (in some cases experi-
encing pulsations; the specific form of the dependence of l/|B(2e)l on d/do na-

turally is determined by the law of decrease of o inside the zone).

In the same paper (166], Sheratobitov and Vinokurov performed the corresponding
calculations for two-dimensional resonators made of cylindrical mirrors with
coaparatively small Rum“. 'lhe calculations were performed by are nuericsl
method of Pox-Li; the "smoothing" of the edge was introduced by direct assign-
ment of the form of p(x). It was found that smoothing does entail elimination of .
degeneration of the lowest modes with respect to losses. As an illustration Figure
3.16 shows the losses of the two lowest synetric modes as a function of ”equiv in
the resonator in which n decreases to zero in a region of width do by a linear
law. It is obvious that the degeneration is coepletely removed, and the losses
are close to the losses in a resonator with ideally smoothed edge (dotted lines).
The field distribution of the basic node uo in this case is excellently de-

scribed by the formls (5); the distribution of the second mode, although not so
good, still satisfactorily coincides with the results of the calculations by
formula (16) with substitution in it of the same uo (see Pigure 3.15).

Let us note that in general on making the transition to the higher-order modes,
the effect of the converging wave regularly increases and for elimination of it.
a greater and greater degree of smoothing of the edge is required. This is easy
to understand if we begin with the field distribution in the resonator with
ideally smoothed edge and introduce the partially smoothed edge of a disturbance
leading to the formation of a converging wave. The initial field of the high-
order nodes is comparatively high on the periphery of the resonator and small on
its axis (see Figure 3 10). Therefore with an increase in the transverse index,

135

MWCIALUSIONLY
on the one side. the initial intensity of the converging weve increeses, end on
the other. its influence on the field structure in the centrel pert of the reso-
nstor incresses. Hereafter we shell not touch on the problem of higher nodes,
but limit ourselves to enelysie of behsvior of nodes with the lesst losses.

Energy losses, 2
ﬂ
I
l
I

 

Figure 3.16. Losses of two lowest syuetric nodes es s function of 1!.un in s
resonstor with pertislly smoothed edge [166]; the dotted lines are
the values of the losses in the reeonAtor with oonpletely snoothed
edge; H - 3.3.

Amplitude.
relative units

 

Figure 3.15. Pield distributions of the lowest symtric nodes in e resonstor
with partially smoothed edge for H - 3.3. N.un : lo [166]: e-
snplitude distribution; b—phese distribution (the origin is the
sphericsl wove of the geocetric epproxinntion). The solid lines
represent the nechine calculetions, end the dotted lines. the cs1-
culntion by formula (16). (5).

Thus. for renovel of the degenerstion of the lowest nodes of the two-dinensionel
unstable resountors with null New“ slight smoothing of the edge is sufficient

(let us remember that for large Elem,“ the degenerstion in the two-dimensions].
resonators is ebsent even without my smoothing). This conclusion can be

156
roe omcw. use any
directly generalized to the case of a three-dimensional resonator with spherical

rectangular mirrors, for in such resonators, as we have seen many times in Char
ter 2. the variables are easily separated.

In resonators with circular spherical mirrors the edge effects are unifested
significantly more strongly: Here. in contrast to the three-dimuional resona-
tors with cylindrical mirrors. a simple increase in "equiv in the presence of a
sharp edge does not lead to removal of the degeneration of the lowest nodes (see
Figure 3.12). The reasons for this consist in the fact that the density of the
converging wave increases as it approaches the center more sharply for spherical
mirrors than for cylindrical mirrors (it is known that the diffraction structure
at the center of the pattern is expressed more strongly with diffraction on a
circular hole than on a slit of the same transverse diunsion). In references
[163. 338], the Vaynshtsyn method was used to show that for removal of the da-
generation in resonators with circular spherical mirrors it is necessary to de-
crease the amplitude of the converging wave by comparison with the case of a
sharp edge by approximately e ln(2rN.qu1v)/ln n times. This corresponds to a

not so small width of the snoothing zone: for the most favorable decreasing
law

"-0)“

o (Mrhé-Vﬁ j uv(—-‘;)d‘lioﬁl)

it will be (do/r) v’l + lnlluutm¢ uivSh“ HI , in the case of a linear law

and laws close to it [166] it rest ~0.5do ln(lsﬂ.qu1v)/ln H. Neverthelus,
for large "equiv this is only a small portion of the total size of the nirrore.

finally, the time has come to see what relation the case of the resonator with
partially smothed edge discussed by us has to the properties of the real sys-
tem. The parameters of solid-state lasers described in the following chapter
correspond to the widths of the smoothing zone required for renval of the de-
generation of the lowest modes by losses 0.1-1 .3 this blurring of the edge oc-
curs quite frequently.

There are other factors which can lead to attenuation of the influence of the
edge effects. Thus, for the smallest misaligmants of the resonator the values

of N.un measured from different sides of the system axis begin to differ from
each other; these differences also arise as a result of the influences of aber-

rations (see Figure 3.9). Finally. the edge of the nirrors can be inexactly
outlined. All of this leads to the fact that the waves beginning in different
sections of the mirror loop arrive at the axis with different phases and there-
fore are mutually extinguishing (it is known that using the diaphragm with un-
even edge. it is possible coupletely to blur the diffraction pattern far from
the boundary of the geometric shadow). The meaning of the parameter do here be-
comes entirely clear: For variation of the distance from the axis to the edge

within the limits from a - do/Z to a + do/Z the value of II. “V varies by one,
the phase difference between the diverging and converging waves, by 21.

1'57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
s V“ V. e swede- v.- v. --.

Everything that has been stated together with certain other results of the
above-enumerated experiments suffices for drawing the following basic conclu-
sion: The degeneration of the lowest nodes'of real resonators with ﬂgquv >> 1,
as a rule, is absent. and if necessary it can be reliably prevented by using
such sisple measures as the application of a bevel to the edge of the mirror
(for more information about the suppression of edge effects by this method see
[3]), the application of a serrated iris, and so on. Of course, we are talking
only about cases where the degeneration is caused by diffraction on the edge of
the mirror and not light dissipation in the active nediun or on interfaces

(the effect of the light dissipation will be briefly comidered in Section 4.1).

ha renoval of the degeneration with respect to losses is acconpanied by the
fact that the field distribution hegine to be described with a high degree of
accuracy by the foraulas of the optioogeonatric approximation (it is only neces-
sary to consider that manifestations of diffraction resein in the peripheral
part of the bean leaving the resonator with small snoothing of the edge). The
applicability of the opticogaonetric approximation in turn indicates that the
operation of the laser will be reliably realized on one transverse node. Actu-
ally, the condition of steady-state lasing on the fundanental node has

the fore y - K(0)o(0)/Iu|P - 1 (see (11). (5a)). hence it follows that the an-
plification coefficient of the nadiun on the system axis for any intensity and
distribution of the pumping in the free lasing mode is equal to [HIP/9(0),
which in accordance with the sane for-ale (15a) is appreciably less than the an—
plificstion coefficient required for excitation of the other nodes. lhus, the
lasing regime can cease to be minodal only in the presence of such large dis-
turbances that the fortunes (16). (1.5) bacon inapplicable even for the lowest
nodes. A special case of such disturbances is, as we have seen, the presence of
an ideally sharp and exactly outlined edge of the nirrors.

All of these problems pertaining to edge effects in mstsble resonators are of
unquestioned cognitive interest. nowmr, free the practical point of view in
itself the problen of degeneration of the nodes with respect to losses is not so inn

portant as can be denonstrated. hen the nunerical calculations psrforned in [157,

153. 162] and other papers. it follows that for snell N u the degenerate nodes
correspond in practice to the seas angular radiation 011.1 tion, especially in

the case of nontransparent airrors, although only the outer part of the bean
will exit free the resonator (see 'also Figure 3.11). With an increase in “equiv,
the fields of the highest Q oscillations, independently of the presence or ab-
sence of degeneration, differ less and less fron the spherical wave field of the
geometric approximation undergoing single diffraction on the nirnr aperture.

In addition, even for an ideally sharp edge if 11.un is sufficiently large
theoe differences are of an almost irregular nature (liners 3.16). thus. degen-
eration cannot be essentially felt in the angular divergence of the radiation,
and it is undesirable only when constructing single-frequency lasers.

If the transverse dimensions of the cross section of the active nediun are so
snell that N. “1‘, cannot exceed a few units. for achieve-ant of the single-
frequency las ng it is possible to select. in accordance with Siegnsn's-reconsn-
dations [167], resonator paraneters such that 5|.un will be close to the

a half-integer. In this case the difference of the losses of the two highest

158
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Q modes turns out to be conparatively large even for a sharp edge (see Figure
3.12). It is only necessary to consider that the field distribution in the
resonators with small Ngquv. as a rule, is highly nonuniform, which prevents
the achievement of the maximum high output parameters of the lasers (for more
information see Sections 1.6, 6.1).

:95

 

relative u
Q
\

Amplitude,

\§
‘5
‘
ﬁ
.

Phase,
radians
in

Figure 3.16. Amplitude and phase distribution of the basic node of a two-dimen-
sional resonator for N.un - 30, H - 2.38 [166].

In conclusion let us note that the above-discussed arguments were basically
stated in [151, 156], and with minimum corrections, they are confirmed by the
results of the numerical calculations in [166, 163, 338]. Thus, the problem of
suppression of nonuniformity of the field distribution occurring as a result of
the edge diffraction, first acquired urgency and found theoretical solution as
applied to the problem of optical resonators. Some time later the same problem
arose for the creators of powerful laser asplifiers. The fact is that when the
density of the amplified radiation approaches the self-focusing threshold occur-
ring under the effect of any factors the nonuniformity of the distribution can
lead to the fact that at any point this thredaold will be exceeded. and the ac-
tive element damaged. One such factor can be edge diffraction; for suppression
of its effect, the same procedures in essence were used as were discussed in

[151] (the so-called anodizing of the aperture).

159

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE(X§LY
”WWMY

53.4. Unstable Resonators with Central Coupling Aperture

Initial Premises. Oscillations of a “No-Dimensional Resonator That Have a

Cautic. An iaportant property of unstable resonators is the fact that in them

the emission somhow "spreads" from the central segment of the cross section (see
Figure 3.6). As a result of this. the possibility appears for controlling the
operation of the laser as a whole by influencing the indicated sealant. In the

last chapter there will be a discussion of mlifiers and lasers based on the given
principle. Their characteristics are determined to a great extent by how efficiently
control is realised; the latter, in turn, depends on to what degree the self-
excitation threshold of the laser with an unstable resonator rises with shielding

of the central segnent of its cross section.

This section of the book is devoted to a theoretical analysis of the properties

of unstable resonators with shielded central segmnt of the cross section or aper-
ture in one of the nirrors which mually is called the coupling aperture. This
analysis not only leads to useful practical conclusions, but also forces us to
discuss a number of important item of the diffraction theory of unstable resonators
in more detail which were discussed inadequately in the preceding section of the
book. Some information which we shall use later can theoretically be extracted
from the already quoted article [163]. However. in our discmsion we shall fully
adhere to reference [168] which was specially devoted to resonators with coupling
aperture and was published almost simultaneously.

In reference [168] the question was investigated quite completely and consistently.
It is inpossible in practice to find exact solutions for an unstable resonator
with coupling aperture in analytical form; therefore we shall limit ourselves to
approximate estimates. The performance of these estimtes can to a significant
degree be based on analyzing the behavior of the eigenfunctions of the resonator
without an aperture. The fact is that, as will be obvious later, among these func-
tions there are those for which the field amplitude in some region adjacent to the
resonator axis is negligibly small. With an increase in dinensions of the indi-
cated region. the eigenvalues decrease (that is. the losses of the corresponding
nodes increase).

Inasmuch as the presence of a disturbance in the zone of a negliably small field
must not have significant influence on the field distribution as a whole. it is
possible to talk about the existence of a class of functions which almost coincide
in resonators with and without an aperture. Anong then, the function in which the
dimensions of the small-field region approximately coincide with the dimensions of
the introduced aperture has the maximum eigenvalue. It is natural to assure that
the given function also corresponds to the highest-Q mode of the resonator with
aperture; then it will be obvious that this assulption is entirely jmtified.

Let us proceed with an analysis, which a we have already mentioned. can be made

by the Vaynshteyn method. First let us consider the case of a symnetric two-
dinensional resonator formed by two convex cylindrical nirrors.

In accordance with the Vaynahteyn method. for construction of the solution in a
resonator with finite mirrors, the eigenfunctions of a resonator made up of un-
limited mirrors are med. As was demonstrated in [162], the eigenfunctions and

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eigenvalues of the integral equation of a resonator made of convex cylindrical
mirrors of infinite dinenaions have the for:

Mn) -= D. ( =1: e"""n). (16)

Y. = M-('+%) (17)

where n? ""e uiv’d‘ is a dimensionless coordinate. D‘, is the Haber function, and
the index v can seems an arbitrary complex value.

It is known that functions of the type of (16) satisfy the differential equation

5%:2+[¥—(v+%)1]3v(ﬂ)‘0 us)

and in the general case they describe a set of three waves. One of then. converging,
is propagated in the direction of the resonator axis (depending on the sign of

the arguaent 0‘, in (16), from the larger positive or negative n direction); then

it partially travels through the central region, partially is reflected froa it

and at the same time starts tvo expanding waves which spread in different directions
from the resonator axis. For In v>0, the greater part of the emission passes

through the central zone of the resonator; for In v<0, on the contrary, the radia-
tion is basically reflected in the opposite direct.'on.

We are interested in the latter cue; when investigating the latter case, it is
convenient to use the concept of a camtic surface, free which reflection is
realized. Analysis shows that although the caustic here is greatly "diffused," for
determinacy it can be considered to be located where Rsln r- v+l/2)i] changes
sign, that is. it can he assigned the coordinate "000112 -Inv. Hence, we have
the following formula for the equivalent Fresnel nutter in the dimension of the
zone next to the axis encomassed by the caustic:

A65. (v) a: — Imv/u. (19)
Key: 1. equiv

The indicated zone bounded by the points i is an analog of the potential barrier
in quantum mechanics. With an increase in arrier width, that is. with an
increase in -In v. the fraction of the emission passing through the barrier
decreases rapidly. Estimates show that even for -In v20.3, the intensity of the
diverging wave in the other half of the resonator will become negligibly snall,

and the modulus of the reflection coefficient fron the camtic is in practice equal
to one.

If the value of In v gives the position of the caustic, then the value of Re v.
in turn, defines the nature of variation of the alplitudes of all the waves at

a noticeable distance from the caustic, and also, as follows fro: (17), the
magnitude of the diffraction losses

‘ _ I“ IQ u 1 _"-('ROV+”. (20)

161

POROFF'ICIALUSEONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY

In the above-investigated solutions for a resonator with infinite lirrors. the
source of the converging wave is located at infinity; the amplitude of this wave
is uniquely related to the anlitude of the diverging wave reflected fro. the
caustic only near the caustic itself. Par fron the resonator axis. these waves
do not interact, any ratio of their saplitudes is admissible, which gives rise
to the arbitrariness in selecting v.

0n transition to a resonator with nirrors of finite dimnsions, the situation
changes. Upon hit ting the edge of the mirror, the diverging wave undergoes diffrac~
tion scattering and, as we already know. generates a nutter of waves with different
propagation directions. Among these waves there is a "reflected" wave -- a con-
verging wave described by the sane Ueber function. For reasons which now should

be entirely clear. this wave plays an especially important role. The renaining

("trmaforned") waves can be neglected in the first approximation; quantitative
arguments in favor of this will be presented later.

Inasmuch as the only source of a converging wave in an emty resonator with nirrors
of finite dimensions can be diffraction scattering of the diverging wave, the
amplitudes of these waves turn out to be interrelated not only near the

resonator axis, but at the edge of the mirrors. Their ratio near the edge met
equal the reflection coefficient from the edge Run known to us frat 52.2, which

in accordance with the Vaynshteyn Iathod can be calculated by an independent mthod
[3, 162].

Analyzing the properties of resonators with coupling aperture. we shall linit our-
selves to an investigation of oscillations with -In v>0.3 (N qtd-V (v)>0.l), for
which the resonator essentially breaks down into two indepsn t halves. This
greatly sisplifies the calculations by comparison with the case of the highest-Q
nodes of ordinary unstable resonators, for which IIn vI is small, and the oscilla-
tions in both halves of the resonator are interrelated (let us note that for this
reason the lowest synlsetric nodes which describe the synchronous oscillations in
both halves of the resonator which sharply "nuke each other up," have significantly

lower losses than all the remaining nodes, including the lwest antisyuletric node
[162]).

Sinplification of the calculations for caustics noticeably renoved from the axis
is also promoted by the fact that the diverging and converging waves "1 and "2

are described highly exactly in this case by the solutions of equation (18) in the
VKB-app roximation:

me~["2'—(»+%)x]'*m[;}§l/ﬂgw};

(21)
the boundary conditions have the form .
Wm.) Rmedm). W.(n..) =Rsz1 (1m). (22)
(l) (2)
Key: 1. reflected; 2. edge
162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where R'refl is the reflection coefficient fro- the caustic (Ih'nnl-l), "ed is
the dimensionless coordinate of the edge of the mirror. Let us note that in ﬁgs
general case the waves H1 and "2 are not spherical. although for ansll Ivl they
are siailar to the diverging and converging waves of the goontric approximation.

Stbstitution of (21) in (22) leads to the following equation for detenining v:
i
i I
mf‘ﬂlt—(wﬁwnla. (23)
‘0

Equation (23) is satisfied by a discrete series of values of v; each of the.
corresponds to its own mode. It is possible to demonstrate that in the case of
large mirrors mequi >>l) and oscillations with caustics not too renoved fro- the

mwﬂm exp

 

axis ("gquifmequiv the following laws exist:
1. 0n transition to each mixed mode the value of N0 increases by approximately

2/(ln I‘mequiv)’ so that the caustics of the possiblﬂuoxcillstions are located on

the mirror surface very frequently, especially at a noticeable distance from the
resonator axis.

2. The value of [y] directly detersining the diffraction losses see 20)) is

related to the position of the caustic of the given made no- In ui by the
eq v
approximate relationship

Inmnllﬂl
lulv|-=

1 + In [4aN,,.,/V (sugar + if (24)
(2) (2)

Key: 1. rail; 2. equiv

Now, in accordance with the argments discussed at the beginning of this section,
it is possible to trace how the losses of the lowest node of a two-dimensional

unstable resonator must vary as the dimnsions of the introduced sampling aperture
increase.

No-Mnensional Resonator with Central Aperture. In a resonator without an aperture,
as is known, the lowest symtric node has the greatest Q-fsctor. Its losses are
siailar to the value of 1-H)! predicted by the geaetric approximation (see 53. 3).
On intr'oﬂuction of an aperture (pore precisely, a slit) with sasll width correspond-
ing to uiv .l, the resonator is broken down into two weakly connected halves.
and the gases increase sharply to a value characteristic of the lowest anti-
cyanctric oscillations. As the dimensions of the aperture of the lowest mde of
such a resonator increase, the nodes with caustics mare and more remote fron the
center must grow alternately. Inasmuch as the spectrul of these nodes is quite
dense for large Ne MW in the first approximation it is possible to neglect the
"stepped nature" 0? the increase in the leases and consider that the formula (26)

is valid for any hgquivsatisfying the condition 0.1“: v < “1 . The value of
Ngquiv now acquires the meaning of the equivalent Presgeui n r In the aperture

dimensions .

163

ms omcw'. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'rhe correctness of the adopted model was checked in the sac paper [168] by
performing numerical calculations on a computer by the Pox-Li method. Among the
results of these calculations, the dependence of the losses of the lowest synetric
(that is. hidiest-Q) nodes of the resonator with aperture on the aperture dimen-
sions is of the greatest interest. An exanple of such a relation for the case of
a sharply outlined edge of the mirrors, "-2.38 and Nady-29.6 is presented in
Figure 3.17 (the solid curve). The dotted curve calculated by formula (24) on
substitution of the following value in it is plotted on the same figure:

[13“,] ~123N.,..(M — “Mn“. (25)
(1) (2)
Key: 1. refl; 2. equiv

The given expression for the coefficient of diffraction reflection from a sharply
outlined mirror edge can be obtained from the corresponding formla of reference
[3]. and it is again valid on satisfaction of the conditions ngquiv<<uequiv and
Nequiv>>1 (see also [162])s

As follows from Figure 3.17. the behavior of the lowest nodes of a resonator with
aperture corresponds entirely to the developed concepts (at least in the case of
a sharply outlined mirror edge). The presence of an aperture with no “1 20.1
causes growth of the losses to the value of ~(1-1/llz) pre ictsd by fﬁuu as (20),
(210), (25) (it is easy to see that for “equiv”1v small equiv and 29155

1 «N... 4 4'
ln-————M .(M—u )[ln__==_=——V(1N%,?‘ +1 +1] :3
1

'(1)
Key: 1. equiv

from which it follows that Iyltlln). As nu-erical calculations have demnstrated,
the lo sea of the lowest antisynaetric and symtric modes begin to coincide for
such equiv'

After sharp initial increase in the losses, a further increase in aperture dimen-
sions accompanied by comaratively slow growth of the losses which is described
satisfactorily by formula (21.). At the break points of the solid curve alternation
of the highest-Q nodes takes place. The mode switching process is analogom to

the one observed with an increase in the mirror dimensions of an unstable resonator
without aperture (see Figure 3.12): the mdes at the switching points are de-
generate with respect to losses. but they are distinguished by the field configura-
tion.

Let us note that the differences between the solid ad dotted curves in Figure 3.17
are essentially of a random nature. for the location of the pulsations on the
solid curve varies with variation of "equiv‘

Now let us consider how the properties of a two-dinensional unstable resonator vary
with the central coupling aperture when smoothing the edge of the mirrors (see the
preceding section). The presence of smoothing leads to a decrease in amplitudes of

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

---—-—-—

   
   

'33:. .I/cpow, ‘33
§ §

"-.
Hana.

A
I
V

%

Figure 3.17. Lowest node losses as a function of the size of the
coupling aperture (two-dimmional reamtor. $2.38, N u1,‘,--29.lo):
1 -- calculation of the losses of synetric mdes on a tog-put",

2 -- calculation by formulas (24), (25), 3 —- calculation by
fornula (26) in the can of a partially smoothed edge; Ikunl
decreased by tenfold.

Key:

a. gang)! losses. 1

b‘ e ui '

q v

the scattered waves reduced on the edge. in particular, to a decrease in lkrefll'
whereas this is felt very little in the nagnitude of the losses of the highest—Q
oscillations in resonators without apertures (they only becone closer to a value
of l-l/H predicted by the geometric approxination). the losses in a resonator with
aperture with edge smoothing increase significantly according to (24). Therefore
in the graph of the losses as a function of the nagnitude of the introduced aper-
ture, the initial segment of the curve beconas still steeper (the dash-dotted curve
in Figure 3.17): as the degree of anoothnesa of the edge increases. the steepness
of this section continues to grow.

The numerical calculations performed in [168] demnstrated that the process of
variation of the losses as the edge is anoothed is described satisfactorily by
formula (24) while the width of the smoothing zone renains significantly less than
the total mirror width. hon the derivation of this foruula it is obvious that in
this case when the "edge" is extended to the greater part of the mirror. the
developed approximation ceases to be applicdale. In order to estilate to what
values the losses can theoretically build in this case, let us consider the cue of
a resonator with ideally smoothed edge investigated in the preceding section. the
airrors of which have gaussian distribution of the a litude coefficient of reflec-
tion p with respect to cross section (p(x)-exp(-2x2/3)). Let us rensd’er that the
field distributions of the various modes in the greater part of the cross section
of such a resonator are described by the functions

165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFﬂClALUSEONLY

u..(x)~oxp(—-‘—lr2_-_T%)(-:-)-, m-0.i,2...., (26)

which are solutions of the equation of an notable resonator in the optical-
geOnetric approximation (9).

If the geometric approximations were completely valid, the presence of a central
aperture of any size would autonstically lead to equality of the field saplitnde to
zero over the entire resonator cross section. that is. to the absence of solutions.
However, near the resonator axis the mode fields with n32 vary with respect to
their relative intensity so critically that the geometric approxination ceases to
be applicable (the condition (10) is not satisfied). This also leads in the final
analysis to the fact that exact solutions of the diffraction ”pron-nation (14)
include the ﬂarnitc polynonials as factors and not (at/a)“. Inasmuch as they also
contain lower order terns. it turns out that exact solutions with m32 in acne zone
adjacent to the axis have additional phase shift (Figure 3.10. b) and significantly
greater anplitude than would be expected fron (26) (althOugh with respect to abso-

lute magnitude it is less than the asplitude in segnents of the cross section nore
renoved from the axis).

If we investigate the nechanian of aelf-inaging of a steady-state field distribu-
tion using the Huygens-Fresnel principle, it is possible to see that as a result

of diffraction the prinary contribution to the field asplitude in the vicinity of
the anomaly does not give a central segment as would be expected from the gaontric
approxination. but more intense peripheral parts :of the bean. Accordingly, shield-
ing the central segment in one of the nirrors should not lead to noticeable altera-
tion- of the field distribution in the other. and the admissible coupling aperture
dimensions can be identical with the dimensions of the anonaly zone. It only
remains to relate these disensions to the magnitude of the losses of the correspond-
ing nodes. Having done this. we arrive at the following formula:

“miner“ ”'73), 1%.;>0,L (27)

Key: 1. equiv

It is true that inasmuch as in the can of a resonator with gaussian mirrors the
measly zone does not have clear boundaries of the caustic type, sons arbitrariness
is permissible in defining its dimensions. For this and other reasms. formula
(27) is of an approadnate nature, but the conclusion derived from it regarding
extraordinarily large losses in resonators with gaussian mirrors and central aper-
ture is indisputable.

Three-Dimensional Resonator with Coupling Aperture. Discussion of Results.

Let us proceed to the case of a resonator with spherical nirrors that is of practi-
cal importance. By using calculations analogous to those performd earlier, it is
possible to see that for axiaylmstric solutions in a three-dimensional resonator
with circular nirrors and coupling apertures the sane approximate formula (24) 18
valid as for a two-dimensional resonator. The formulas for Rrefl in the two-
dimensional and three-dimensional cases also coincide. and the losses in the two

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and three—dimensional resonators with the sense “01111“ Mambo. 1). H and
identical nature of the edge of the mirror turn out to be tical. At the sam
tine. the 1osses in a three-dimensional resonstor without aperture snout to
~1-1/M2 and greatly exceed the losses in the analogous two-dimmional resonator
close to 1-1/H. Accordingly, introduction of a sail aperture in a three-disen-
sional resonator does not lead to such a sharp increase in losses as in the two-_
dimensional resonator (Figure 3.18). The causes of the differences in behavior of
the resonators with cylindrical and spherical mirrors hecone clear if we consider
that the presence of an aperture in the two-dimensional case (thet is, slits and
a cylindrical mirror) led to breakdown of the resonator into two noninteracting
parts. In the three-dimensional case. jut as fast an increase in losses last he
observed on introduction of a systen of two amtnally perpendicular slits breaking
up the nirror into four parts instead of a-circulsr aperture (it is with this
system of elite and not with a square aperture that the variables in the problem
of a resonator with square mirrors are separated).

   

ll ”’~(2)
b)

Figure 3.18. bosses of the lowest syIIIstric mdes as a
fmction of the size of the coupling aperture in the case of

a sharp mirror edge (HI-3.3, N uiv'3-59)= a) two-dinsnaional
resonator, b) three-dinensionﬁ resonator with circular mirrors

1. Energy losses, 2

2.N°

equiv

 

Figure 3.19. Pathof been in an matable resonator with
coupling aperture

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR m1. USE ONLY

Let us also explain the causes of approxinate coincidence of losses in two-
dinensional and three-dimensional resonators with apertures of sufficiently large
size. For this purpose we shall use the not very strict. but very descriptive
"senigeonstric" approximation. the essence of which consists in the fact that the
bean path inside the resonator is considered purely geometrically, and the
coefficient of "reflection" from the edge is taken fron diffraction theory. Accord-
ingly, let us approximtely construct the bean trajectory which, following from
the edge of the mirror and alternately being reflected fron both Iirrors.
approaches the resonator axis until it hits the surface of one of the mirrors near
the edge of the aperture normally. after which it returns along the ease path as
shown in Figure 3.19. Using the current for-alas of geonstric optics (3). it is
possible to find the expression that relates the mater of passes of the been
between the mirrors n along its path from the edge of the mirror to the boundary
of the aperture with mirror disension a and hole size x0:79/a-2}P/(H2°+1)o

Me

For (xo/aZ-ugqutv/uequ<<1. we have n=m(sn.qu1v/uquv)

After every 2n passes. the bean hits the edge of the ulnar, where it is reflected

back with a reflection factor erefll' If we consider that the daming process in
the resonator takes places continuously and the aaplitude varies with respect to
nodulus by Ivl times during one pass. it is possible to write the equality IYIZn.

Ikrefll from which
‘ (1). R do”
In R In

For 0‘3<N2quiv<<ne “1v. this formula in practice coincides with (210). All of the
calculations perfogned when deriving it. and indeed. the path of the bean in two—
dimnsionsl and three-dimensional sxisyuletric cases do not differ in any way (see
Figure 3.19); therefore the final result is, of course, identical.

Key: 1. refl; 2. equiv

The seaigeonetric approunstion also helps to understand why when analyzing the
diffraction scattering of a diverging wave on the edge of the nirror it is possible
in the first approximation to neglect all of the stimlated waves except the
reflected wave having a caustic near the edge of the aperture. The fact is that
the remaining waves either go farther to the center and exit froa the resonator
through the aperture or, on the contrary, they have caustics more revved from

the resonator axis. The latter corresponds to snsller meters of passes n and,
consequently. a smaller lifetiue of the emission in the resonator. Estimtes show
that the influence of these waves nust be taken into accomt by aultiplying lkmfll
by a factor somewhat larger than one but the logarithm of .this factor is small

by comparison with the logarithm of [anal itself, and the value of IYI calculated
by formula [28] varies little. The results of nachine calculations (see Fig 3.17)
also indicate that the above-discussed approximation insures reliable accuracy for
practical requirements.

It remains only to extend the results obtained in this section to the moat inportant
case of asymtric resonators in practice. From the principle of equivalence

(5 3.3) it followa directly that the losses on a dodale pass of an asymmetric
resonator with aperture in the exit mirror are exactly equal to the losses for a

168

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

symctric resonator with the same values of Neqmv' “equiv and the magnification
H on one pass.

Other versions of the location of the coupling aperture are also possible. Thus,
its functions can be performed by a small tilted mirror installed between the
mirrors on the system axis (or a prion). which is an opaque screen for the new
resonator. As indicated in 53.2, the magnitude of the parameter "2un correspond-
ing to the sizes of this screen must be determined by the distance between equi-
phasal surfaces of spherical waves of the geometric approxintion propagated in
opposite directions (Figure 3.20). In particular, for the telescopic resonator.
the corresponding formula has the form No V-‘xﬁ/Zle, where s is the distance

from the screen to the canon focal point 0 the ducts.

    

\NL"
(1) Wm,

Figure 3.20. Problem of the value of N2 ui for variom
q v
positions of the screen
Key:

1a Ngquiv
2. Caustic surface

Analysis shows that the screens installed in different segments of length of the
resonator but having equal “Qquiv "rest" on the seas caustic surface of the
resonator (Figure 3.20). and therefore must have approadmately the same influence
on the magnitude of the losses. Hence, it follows that formulas (20), (24) are
directly applicable for calculating the losses on a complete pass of the resonator
with arbitrarily arranged screen or aperture.

Our theoretical investigation of system with a central coupling aperture ends
with this. These systems are perhaps the only version of metable resmators for
which the Vaynshteyn sethod leads to visible results even in the presence of a
sharp edge. The oscillation pattern in resonators without a central aperture is
much more complicated (we mentioned the causes for this at the beginning of this
section). The cases where nitrors, in addition to everything else, are arranged
asymmetrically with respect to the optical axis are-especially difficult for
analysis. The only effort to solve such a problem by the Vaynshteyn method was
undertaken in [169]; the authors of the indicated paper were able to obtain reason-
able results for two-dimensional resonators with a sharp edge, the mirrors of
which on different sides of the axis have mequal Nequlv- If one of the two

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFFICIALISEONLY

values of N “1‘, is sufficiently large and the other decreases gradually. the
losses oscil ate around the value predicted by the geonetric approximation. This
uiv reaches values of ~0.3; beginning at that
point, further approximation of :he edge to the axis causes mnotonic growth of

the losses. When the edge goes around the other side fron the axis so that the
latter ceases to intersect the mirror. the losses continue to increase. Finally,
when the edge, moving in the for-er direction, goes beyond the axis so that “an“
(sessured on the other side) reaches ‘0a3. the differences between the solutions
for such a resonator and the above-investigated resonators with comparatively large
central apertures disappear (let us renesber that the oscillations in the different
"halves" of resonators with apertures were considered independent of each other).
Those desiring to become familiar in detail with the nthenaticsl aspects of the
latter are referred to [162. 163. 169]: mfortmately, the authors of the indicated
articles use a set of parameters and notation systen differing sharply fron those
used in the literature on matahle resonators. which greatly cowlicates the read-
ing.

53.5. Sose Preperties of Multinirror and Prise Unstable Resonators

In this section and the sections that follow. a nuber of interesting possibilities
will be investigated which are connected with using mstable resonators including
lore than two nirrorreflecting surfaces. This gives no reason to discuss several
problems which are of col-non interest and we did not touch on earlier. First of
all. these include the problen of achievemt of the unidirectional lasing nude in
ring system and the problen of the emission polarization state in anisotropic
resonators. In addition. a study will be node of the properties of special layouts
of unstable resonators with reduced sensitivity to aberrations and with maximal
conpact for: of the exit aperture.

Problea of Nonodirectional basing Mode. In a nusber of cases it is necessary that
the entire stimulated emission flux pass through the ring cavity in only one of the
two possible directions. As was pointed out in 52.6, this node. which is called
mnodirectional (or the trawling wave node) is useful. in particular. for achieve-
nent of a lasing spectra: that is as narrow as possible: the modulation of the
intensity along the resonator axis. which is mually one of the causes of multi-
frequency lasing is absent here. In.order to achieve the traveling wave node,

most frequently the so—called nonmtual filters are used. A nuber of transforma-
tions of the polarization state are realized in then (using a l’araday cup and other
elemnts) such that the losses for the two directions of passage through the
resonator turn out to be equal (see, for exaaple, reference [87] which was cited
in 92.6). More rarely. an additional mirror is installed behind the sedtransparent
mirror of the ring cavity for the sane purposes as illustrated in Figure 3.21, a
(for examle. [170]). This leads to "paying" of the emission going in the direc-
tion indicated by the dotted arrows into the wave with em Jsite direction of
passage. Both nathods insure very high degree of nonodireuionality (that is. a
high ratio of wave intensities with different directions of passage).

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

Figure 3. 21. Ring cavities: a) flat cavity with additional
mirror; b). c) unstable ring cavities; l - flat nirror,

2 -- concave mirror, 3 - ,sctive elemt, 6 -- telescope.

S -- angle selector

Sooe peculiarities of mstable resonators have pointed to the idea that the

arsenal of means for achieving the traveling wave can be supplemented with their
help. The fact is that in resonators used earlier with snsll diffraction losses,
the path of the beam is in the first appronution reversible (see 55.3 about
conjugate waves): hence, it follows that the values of the waves propagated in
opposite directions coincide. In unstable resonators, as a result of the large
diffraction losses, the path of the beans is significantly irreversible (this is
indicated at least by the fact that the lasing cannot be realized on one converging
wave). As a result, as is obvious from Figure 3.21. b. waves with opposite direc-
tions of passage can fill the active radius quite differently.

In reference [152] the seemingly obvious argusent was stated that the installation
of an iris with small aperture at the "neck" of one of the waves (the plane P in
Figure 3.21, b) should completely suppress the wave going in the opposite direction.
The diagram of a telescopic ring cavity with esdssion angle selector presented in
Figure 3.21, c is equivalent to the diagras in Figure 3.21, b (the iris with

snsll aperture at the "neck" is one of the versions of angle selectors; see 52.6)
and also apparently insures nonodirectionality of the node. Let us consider this
situation in more detail in accordance with [171].

The diagram depicted in Figure 3.21. b with an iris installed in the P plane
corresponds to the optical line presented in Figure 3.22. The sy—etry of the lens
with focal length f-R/Z corresponds to the surface of a concave mirror with radius
of curvature R (in order for it to be possible to neglect the astignatisn occurring
in the case of oblique incidence of the been on the spherical nirror, it is
necessary to insure a very small angle of incidence, as illustrated in the figure
or replace the concave nirror by a flat mirror with a positive lens installed
nearby). The snail iris aperture is matched with the center of the spherical

wave which is the solution in the geonetric approxinstion. Thus. the planes of

two adjacent irises are conjugate with respect to the lens placed between then and

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

are at distances of £1.2-(L/2)(13_Jl-lof/L fro. it. where I. is the period of the
line (the total length of the resonator).

 

Figure 3.22. Optical line equivalent to a resonator in
Figure 3.21, b: a) bean path for the Type I wave;
b) bean path for Type 11 vave.

Let us limit ourselves to an investigation of the two-dimensional case. Here it
is impossible to use the bean matrix of a complete round trip through the resonator
to conpile the integral equation inasmh as the bean cross sectiw is limited by,
in addition to the exit mirror. one element - the aperture in the iris ($1.2).

Therefore it is necessary to express the distributions in the aperture of the

adjacent lens and in the plane of the next iris successively in terns of the field
distribution 3(3) in the plane of one of the iriaes. Carrying out this standard

procedure and integrating over the lens surface, we obtain the following equation

for finding the steady-state field distribution of a wave propagated along the line
froa left to right (a type 1: wave):

t.
mm = ﬁm‘ Kw. u’)F:(:/)dv’. (29)
-1

where I a sin on (y - WM)
“9'“ Mv-u'l )

[—Mww—e wo-vren-

X

Here the following notation is used: yEx/b; 2b is the size of the iris aperture;
o-b/bo, bostlxl23, 2a is the transverse dimension of the lens (carrying out the
analogy between the effect of the iris and the effect of the angle selector in the
diagram in Figure 3.21, c, it is easy to see that a corresponds to the value of
A0/(X/2a) where M is the pass band width of the selector); M—lzlilh
(l+v’l-4f/L)/(l-/i:-l¢f7l. is the resonator amplification; finally. y is the eigenvalue
of the equation. The phase factor in front of the integral is omitted.

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The analogous equation can be obtained also for distribution in the plane of the
iris Fu(y) of the field of the wave pr0pagated along the line in the opposite
direction (type II wave). It turns out that it differs from equation (29) only by
the fact that the variables y and y' in the fomlas for the kernel of the equation
K change places. Such an equation is called associated with respect to (29); it is
known that the associated equations have identical spectrun of eigenvalues [172.].
Thus. waves with different directions of passage have the sane diffraction losses.
This law is of a universal nature and occurs in the case of any ring resonators
without special "valve" devices of the type discussed above.

The given conclusion is at first glance paradoxical, especially as applied to the
example investigated by us; therefore we shall continue the analysis and discover
the spatial structure of the oscillations of interest to us.

For simplification of the calculations we shall consider the iris sufficiently
small th t the condition kb2/2f<<l is satisfied, which can be written in the fora
a2/AL>>u IIHI. 11nen the exponential factor in the formula for K can be omitted,
and the kernel of the equation bemnes real. It is possible to show that the equa-
tion for the field distribution ¢I(yo) of the I type wave on a spherical equiphassl
surface of the geometric solution located near the lens (plotted by the dotted line
in Figure 3.22) simultaneously begins to coincide with the associated equation with
respect to (29) for PM. and the equation for the field distribution 0 I(yo) of
the type II wave on the same spherical surface, with the equation for £1 (yoE la
1:: the dimensionless coordinate). Hence. it follows that the normalized dist bu-
tion functions of the field aaplitude on the lens and iris apertures corresponding
to identical eigenvalues for waves propagated in different directions are pairwise

equal: PI-on. Pn-ol.

In the sane paper [171], the iteration method was tuned to calculate the field
distributions and eigenvalues YB and ya of the lowest syuetric and antisnyInetric
nodes for a nunber of values of H and a. As always. it turned out that the anti-
symetric mode has significantly greater losses; thus, for 11-3 and 150155 the
values of y3>0.5, ya<0.3. Therefore the antisymtric node cannot participate
explicitly in lasing, and hereafter we shall talk about only the lowest symetric
node.

Calculations have demonstrated that with an increase in o. the eigenvalue 1,
approaches a value of l/v’h—il predicted by the geontric approzdmtion, oscillating
around it (without breaks characteristic of the dependence of the losses on N “1‘,
in the case of ordinary unstable resonators with a sharp edge. see Figure 3.13,.
The peaks of Ys are. located near the odd values of o; here the field saplitude 01
of the type I wave in the lens plane (md. correspondingly, the type II wave in
the Iris plane) decreases somwhat on going away from the resonator sxis.- For
even u. the field Increases to the periphery. Y is mini-s1; finally. for the half-
integral n, the field distribution is almost uniforl (Figure 3.23, a). With an
increase In a the distribution becomes nore uniform on the average.

At the some time, the type I and II waves are intense only in the central zones of
the iris and lens, respectively. With an increne in o, the relative size of
these zones decreases (Figure 3.23, b). Let u note that for fixed a: with an
increase in H the differences between the exact and geometric solutions decrease
monotonically.

173
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is easy to see that the type I waves are close to the solutions in the usual
mstable resonator (without an iris); the perturbation introduced by the iris
decreases with an increase in a. The nechmism of'their self-imaging is quite
clear iron Figure 3.22, a.

The meohanisn of fornation of the type II waves also per-its graphical interpreta-
tion (Figure 3.22. b). The plane wave incident on the iris, a a result of
diffraction, fills part of the lens. With an increue in the iris aperture. the
diffraction angle and, with it, the region of intense exposure of the lens
decreases. Here the finiteness of the lens dimensions turns out to be saaller and
smaller. and the lens projects the emitting aperture on the plane of the other iris.
with magnification -l2/il-H, which leads to equality of losses for type I and II
waves.

:7":

 

”a 4: aa a: u m

 

'1)

Figure 3.23. Field asplitude distribution in an unstable ring
cavity for "-3 and different a

The situation for the resonators of the type of Figure 3.21. c is entirely analo-
gous. The angular distribution in the selector corresponds to the enission distribu-
tion in the plane of the iris here.

Let us sum up the results. In unatdale ring cavities with angle selection of the
enission, conpletc nonodirectionality is not achieved without taking additional
ensures: in addition to the waves with the desired direction of propagation there
are also waves with opposite direction of passage through the resonator and the
same losses. The euission of the first of thee fills the entire resonator cross
section; the leases in this case primarily are caused by the fact that part of the
bean bypasses the mirror. The emission of the waves with opposite direction of
propagation is intense only in the region with snell transverse dinenaions; the
.losses for them are caused predominantly by the fact that part of the eaission is
scattered on the selecting element (the iris, angle selector), but they have the
former value. It is necessary to note that equality of the eigenvalues for these
two types of waves follows fron the most general properties of integral equations
and cannot be violated even in the presence of a nonunifornly distributed inverse
population.

It is true that it is possible to select the resonator parameters so that the ratio

v of the volumes of the active medium filled with the wave emission with different
directions of passage will be very large (8 follows from Figure 3.21. b, the

174
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

value of v~H2 is insured even without selecting elemnts by siwle selection of
the location of the active saaple [154]; this quite trivial possibility was also
investigated in the much later paper [173] than [171, 1510]). At the sane tine.
significant magnitude of the ratio of the corresponding emission fluxes (of order
Zv-l) is achieved. For certain applications this solution to the problem can be
satisfactory, but achievement of single frequency, unfortunately, is not facili-
tated: indeed, in unstable resonators the emission spreads from the central seg-
ment of the cross section playing the role of the "master oscillator" (see

Figure 3.6). and both waves are present there.

Completing the analysis of the unstable ring cavities with angle selection, let in
note another interesting feature of then. The emission scattered at high angles
is filtered by the angle selector; this is the fate, in particular, of the converg-
ing wave generated as a result of diffraction m the mirror edge. Therefore the
given resonators even with sharp mirror edge behave similarly to the rust usual
(linear) ones with well "smorhed" edge; the proofs of this and discussion of the
problem of optimal characteristics of the selector can be found in [176].

Stabilizing the Direction of Radiationin Prism Resonators. Now let us proceed fro-
the problem of nonodirectionality to analysis of the possibilities of creating
resonators which are less sensitive with respect to the influence of intraresonator
wave aberrations of lower order than the ordinary telescopic one. We have already
encountered one type of then: in 53.2 it was demnstrated that a confocal unstable
resonator made of two concave mirrors (see Figure 3. 3, c) reacts weakly to odd-
order aberrations as a result of the effect of "inversion" of the beam cross sec-
tion. in spite of this valuable property, the practical use of a confocal
resonator made of concave mirrors is frequently complicated as a result of extra-
ordinary concentration of the enission at the connon focal point of the mirrors.

It is possible to get away from this deficiency and, at the sale tine, make use of
the advantages accowanying inversion of the bean cross section by using totally
internally reflecting prisms as the resonator elements (or two-sided or corner
reflectors equivalent to them).

Two diagram of such resonators which are of practical interest and were investi-
gated in [175] are presented in Figure 3.26, a, b. They are both essentially
diagrams of an ordinary telescopic resonator (Figure 3.24, c), for which one (the
concave) or both mirrors are replaced by 90-degree prisms (we shall later discma
the peculiarities of such resonators following from whether the prisms are two-
faced as depicted in the figure or triple prises). The surfaces of these prism
turned toward the inside of the resonator are spherical; their radii of curvature
are equal to -(n-l) R1 2, where n is the index of refraction of the prion material.
R13 are the radii of curvature of the replaceable mirrors of the telescopic
resonator. 0n passage through such prism. the bean curvature is transformed just
as on reflection from replaced mirrors, but the bean itself turns out to be
inverted.

Analysis of the influence of aberrations on the resultant fern of the wave front

can be performed by the ease unethod med in §3.2 for confocal unstable resonators
with ordinary mirrors. Let us remember that the met descriptive result of the
corresponding calculations is the magnitude of the aberration coefficients demon-

strating how many times the presence of different types of wave aberrations is
felt nore strongly in the field distribution in the given unstable resonator than

175
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in u Mimic-plum :mpliflvr (see formulas (6)). If. as in 53.2. we consider that
an optlcally inhomogeneous nediun fills the entire length of the resonator, where
the index of refraction depends only on the transverse coordinate x and can be
represented in the form no+n1x+n2x2+..., for the ﬁerration coefficients 8k in
the case of the two given types of prison resonators we obtain the following

formula: ..
= .. l_'_£’J_“_‘_'_i__.1 1 ~.
6‘ [1-H 1) (k+i)(|M]—i)lU] 1—1/1!" (1))

 

   

  

-. .-.—- —— - --.
"‘...+'J-_.=:-_..- .1 -'_:"'

_-._ _ _...‘.l. .

._.._ - —- __;_--‘ ll

.- ---- __ ..— a- '

 

Figure 3.21:. Diagrams of telescopic resonators: a) resonator
made of prisms with convex and concave surfaces; b) resonator
nade of a prism with convex surface and convex mirror;

c) ordinary telescopic resonator

The factor in brackets. just as in formulae (6) for aberration coefficients ok in
ordinary unstable confocal resonators corresponds to one couplete round trip
through the resonator. The trajectories of been making such a round trip and
having identical values of the transverse coordinate x at the end of the path are
plotted on Figure 3.210 by dotted lines. It is obviom that in resonators with
equal IN]. these beans travel the same paths thread: the active medial, from which
the msmitude of the factor in brackets coincides for the ~"ven two diagrams.
Another factor, l/(l-(l/M‘Q). as before. describes the remit of sumation of the
aberrations on many passes (sec 53.2). Inasmch as for the first of the diagrams
">0, and for the second "<0. for odd I: this factor does not coincide for then. It
is obvloas that the second diagram has lower sensitivity to odd-order aberrations;
its advantages are manifested note strongly as IHI approaches one.

Comparison of (30) with (6) demonstrates that the effect of even-order wave
aberr’..ions in the prism resonators naturally is the same as in a telescopic
resonator and somewhat greater than in a confocal. system made of concave mirrors.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As for odd aberrations and, in particular, first-order mes (an optical wedge),
here the prism resonators have explicit advantages not only over a telescopic
resonator, but also over a confocal resonator made of concave mirrors. Thus,
the values of 83 for zslnlss are less than the values of :13 by 2-3 times.' The
role of the first-order aberrations in all of the mentioned resonators is clear
from Table 3.1. It is obvious that the diagram in Figure 3.24. b has truly
record small sensitivity to the presence of an optical wedge (or gain gradient
constant with respect to cross section kgain) in the active sample.

Table 3.1

 

“I 3:
am: | no u>o I u<o

 

0.10

 

The effect of an optical wedge-can be estinated, of course, by a simpler method.
The direction of the parallel beam exiting from the telescopic resonator is given
by the direction of the resonator axis. In turn, the latter can be defined as the
beam trajectory which after each reflection from a mirror prism returns along the
same path. Beginning with this definition. it is easy to see that the resonator
axis must pass throuyu the centers of curvature of the mirror or the apexes of the
prisms from which this resonator is made.

If the gradient of the index of refraction in the active salple is small, it is
possible to consider the optical wedge thin and located in the middle of the
element. 0n introduction of such a wedge, the optical axes of the resonators Innt
be converted from straight lines to broken lines a shown in Figure 3.25. From
this figure it is obvious that the angle of inclination ¢' of the beam leaving
the resonator is related to the angle of variation of the direction of passage
through the wedge b" by the expression o'anl/(lrtiz), where 11 and 1.2 are the
distances from the wedge to the centers of curvature of the mirrors or the apexes
of the prism. Finally; it remains to express the radii of curvature of the
mirrors in term of the distance between them I. and magnification Mx' Rl-ZHLI (14-1).
R2--2L/(H-l). Now it is easy to calculate the ratio o'lw for all cases of
interest to us.

For a centrally located rod in a resonator made of two prism 1 '22-L/2,
ﬁlo-0.5; in a resonator made of a prisn and convex mirror il-Lh, tz-L/Z-Rz-
L/2+2L/(|HI-l) (see Figure 3.25, a), e'lw-0.5-1/(IMI+1). In both types of
confocal resonators made of ordinary mirrors £1-(R1-L/2), iz-L/Z-Rz (see
Figure 3.25, b), o'lp-l.5+2/(H—l). ﬁne expressions found by this method for
o'lw coincide with the previously presented formulas for 81, (:1. Let us also

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

calculate o'lo for a telescopic resonator made of a pris- and a mirror in which
the prism replaces not the concave mirror as in Pi re 2.26, b, 2.25. a, but
convex mirror: 'tl--(R1-L/2), lz-L/Z; o'lw-l.5—l/( HI-O-l). This value is
spprecitly greater than for the diagram in Figure 3.26, a, b; therefore the
given type of resonator is of no special interest.

I ”gt”

    
    

u,|
b)

Figure 3.25. Variation of the direction of the emission on
introduction of an optical wedge into a resonator:

a) resonator made of a prisn with convex surface and convex
mirror: b) ordinary telescopic resonator

Let us note that in the resonators depicted in Figure 3.24, a, b, as the active
element approaches the prisn with convex surface, 81 decreases together with 9.1.

Among the important advantages of prion resonators is also low sensitivity to
rotations of their elements. Actually, rotation of a mirror with radius of
curvature R by the angle e (in the plane of Figure 3. 24, 3.25) causes transverse
displacement of the center of its curvature by the distance all. It is possible

to demonstrate that this rotation of the prise with respect to its apex causes a
transverse shift of the reference point through which the resonator axis passes
only by the amount ~ch(l-1/n), where n is as before the index of refraction of the
prism material, h is its thickness along the direction of the resonator axis.
Usually h/R—lO‘Z, and the requirements on the accuracy of orientation of the prism
turn out to be two or three orders lower than the requirements imposed in the case
of nirrors. Finally, in the diagrsn in Figure 2.24, b, as a result of the large
distance between reference points (Figure 2.25. a), rotation of the convex mirror
also causes an appreciably smaller effect than in an ordinary telescopic resonator.

Another interesting characteristic of priss resonators is their polarization
anisotropy. It occurs as a result of the fact that the linearly polarized emission
as a result of reflection from sons surface with significant angles of incidence
acquires different phase leads depending on whether the polarization plane lies

in the plane of incidence or perpendicular to it. Hence, in particular, it
follows that if the initial polarization plane was oriented in an intermediate
direction. after reflection the light acquires analytical polarization.

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is no special difficulty with analyzing the polarization characteristics

of resonators with two—sided prist- depicted in Figure 3. 24. Actually, the

plane of incidence for all of the reflections here is the sale and coincides with
the plane of the figure. Therefore linearly polarized emission with polarization
plane parallel to or perpendicular to the edges of the prisms preserves the
initial state of polarization after a complete “'1? through the resonator. Hence,
it follows that the natural oscillations of resonators with two-sided prisms can
have one of these two directions of the polarization plane. As a result of differ-
ent phase lead, they correspond to different natural frequencies; therefore there

are no solutions with other polarizations states which are always a superposition
of these two.

The picture of the properties of resonators with triple prisms is much more oomli-
cated. In order to discover this pattern, it is expedient to use the method of
Jones polarization vectors (see, for examle. [176]), but we shall explain the
essence of this method somewhat later and in a siupler sample; for the tin being
we shall only report the final results of the corresponding analysis [177]. It
turns out that even in the most favorable cases where there is only one triple
prist- (or there are two of then. but with identically oriented sides), the resonator
aperture is divided into three pairs of 60-degree sectors located opposite eI-h
other. Inside each pair its own polarization state is set up which differs fro':
the states in the other sectors. This, just as the presence of faces of finite
width on the edges of the prism. weakens the relation between the adjacent pairs
of sectors. Therefore in resonators with triple prism simultaneously with some
increase in lasing threshold (by corparison with ordinary systems) a trend can be
Innifested toward independent luing in individual regions of the cross section,
which decreases the spatial coherence of the emission.

The above-presented arguments permit completely defined determination of the possi-
ble applications of prisn resonators. In particular, it is clear that the triple
prism proposed in [178] can turn out to be meful primarily in cases where exact
alignment of the resonator elements is complicated, and the active medium is not
too uniform, so that it is impossible to irpose especially high requirements on
the spatial coherence of the emission. It' exact align-mt is realizable (in at
least one plane) and such high beam stability of the resonator elements is desired
as in the case of triple prism, a system of two two-faced prism can be used.
Finally, for hidl spatial coherence of the emission its direction can be
stabilized with respect to one of the coordinates by combining a convex mirror
and two-faced prism. We shall familiarize ourselves with exawles of the use of
prism resonators and similar resonators anode of completly reflecting mirrors in
the following chapter.

53.6. Unstable Resonators with Field Reversal

Operation of Cross Section Reversal and Polarization Oaaracteristics of Radiation.
Up to now we have basically dealt with resonators after a complete round trip
through which, the light beam cross section retains its initial orientation or

is rotated 180' with respect to the system axis. The former include, for example,
a telescopic resonator. and the latter, a confocal resonator made of concave
mirrors, and only in a resonator with one two-sided prism (Figure 3.26, b) did

the cross section turn out to be not rotated, but mirror-imaged with respect to the

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plane passing through the axis and the edge of the prise. At the same time,

there is an entire class of resonators on passage through which the cross section
is rotated by an angle which is neither 0 nor 180‘. In order to achieve such
cross sectional rotation, it is sufficient in a four—mirror ring cawity such as,
for eXulple, depicted in Figure 3.21, a, to take one of the mirrors out of the
plane of the figure and rotate this mirror and the two adjacent ones so that the
light beam can as before pass through the resonator. This type of ring cavity.
the axis of which is a closed broken line which does not lie in one plane, is
called volumetric [179]. It is possible to see that after passage through it. the
light beam cross section will be rotated by an angle 6 which in the general case
is an eXtremely couplex function of the arrangeaent of mirrors [180]. Therefore
we shall not derive the fornulas for 6 in the case'hf an arbitrary resonant cavity,
but we shall limit ourselves to illustrating the possibility of rotating the cross
section in the simplest example where four mirrors are combined pairwise into two
two-aided corner reflectors installed opposite each other with "crossed" edges
(mutually rotated with respect to the system axis: see Figure 3.26. a). Such a
resonator is in essence not a ring cavity. but a linear one (as we see, the face
between the prism and ring cavities is not so sharp). On reflection from each
dihedron the beam cross section is mirror innged with respect to the plane passing
through the axis and the edge of a dihedron; as a result of two such mirror inagings
the cross section is rotated by an angle which is twice the angle between the
edges of the reflectors (Figure 3.26, b). From this example it is obvious that by
selecting the mutual arrangement of the mirrors it is possible to have 6 assume
any given value. Let us note that for resonant ring (or including corner reflec-
tors) cavities with an odd number of reflections on a complete round trip, just as

H .R

I
l / /

Figure 3.26. Field reversal in optical resonators:
a) simplest resonator made of two dihedral reflectors;

b) evolution of the beam cross section (1 .. initial cross
section, 2 -- cross section after reflection from an element

with side along I. 3 - cross section after reflection from
an element with side along II).

in the case of the simplest prism resonator (Figure 3.24, b) rotation is not
achieved. but only mirror imaging of the cross section.

First, let us calculate the polarisation characteristics of steady-state oscilla-
tions in resonators with field reversal [181]. For this purpose let us use the

180
Ftﬂl(nﬂﬁ(]Al.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

above-eentioned Jones method. The state of polarization in the coordinate system
connected with the light beam will be described by the polarization vector which
is a set of complex field asplitudes with respect to two mutually perpendicular
directions: ,gl'. If the ratio el/e2 is reel, the light is linearly

‘r

 

polarized; with cowlex value of this ratio the polarization is elliptic.

Each optical element corresponds to its own ‘i' mtrir. which describes the conversion
of the polarization vector on passage through this element:

T‘J—Elrll ri’l-l'l'g
rs: res "

 

711‘: + 710': .
rﬂ‘l + 721‘:

If the light passes successively through elements with natrices 11 and 1'2, the
final polarization state is described by the vector Tz‘rle, and so on.

Let us apply the Jones method to the case of a resonator made of two dihedral
prisms (or reflectors). Here we can get along with a total of the two simplest
matrices. One of then describes the result of reflection from the dihedral

prism in the case where the cosponent e lies in the plane of incidence, and the
component e2 is oriented, correspondingly, along the edge of the prism; this aatrix
he an obvious form

G (0) ‘ H up (236') “p 214%) II I “9 (161+ iAa)| “P00” exp ((1 M)“.

where MAI-152.131 and A2 are the phue leads on reflection for radiation polarized
parallel to and perpendicular to the plane of incidence, respectively (let us con-

sider that the intensity losses on reflection are absent). Using the second
matrix, the transition is made to the reference systea rotated by an angle 8 with
respect to the old one; this matrix is

W) = “—238 35%“-

Now it is possible to compile the reflection matrix 6(8) from a prism rotated by

the angle 3 with respect to the reference system; actually, rotating the coordinate
system itself by the same angle, we can use the matrii 6(0), after which it is
necessary to return to the old coordinate system by repeated application of 8(3)
(and not S(-B), inasmuch as the direction of rotation with respect to variable
direction of beam propagation turns out to be as before). Thus, c(s)-S(B)G(O)S(B);
finally, the matrix of the complete round trip throng: the resonator, if we begin
utth movement toward the prism oriented with respect to the initial reference
system, has the form

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“H 0| IM‘MI U" “NI \

7(9) 4* b'(l5)6(0)3(5)0(0) =

cos' p-.’“- sls’p sln 2km??-

- exp (2% + 25A.)
l -“D 2’. ‘ +C'“ cw".-Iu_.hi’

_r_

The natural oscillations of the resonator must have a polarization vector that
satisfies the eduation T(p)l:‘l =y‘2‘ (inasmuch as the diffraction has identical
1

influence on both cosponents, when calculating the polarization state the diffra<>

tion can be neglected). Solving this equation. we obtain 11 2-exp(21A1+21a2_+ie).
where O-arccos(oos28cos Za-sinzs); finally, ’

(:—;)...=e'<%+ue—«'

From the expressions obtained, it follows that in resonators with field rotation,
elliptic polarization of the radiation is set up in the general case. which becomes
linenr only when 8-0 or s/Z. that is. when the angle of rotation of the cross
section on a colplete round through the resonator 6 is equal to 0 or 180°. The
modulus of the two eigenvalues is equal to one, which indicates the absence of any
additional losses connected with polarization effects. This is a cannon property
of all resonators which contain only elements leading to different phase shifts of
the polarization components. rotations of the polarization plane. and so on.

Losses can appear only on introduction of polarizers. that is, elements in which

at least part of the radiation of one of the polarizations is absorbed or is coupled
out.

Aberration Characteristics of lhstable Resonators with Field Reversal. Let u
proceed to an investigation of the influence of optical inhomgeneities; for this
purpose we shall use the former method of estimates in accordance with which we
shall consider that the bean path coincides with the path in an ideal resonator.
The basic difference fro: the previously encountered cases is the following: if
in ordinary unstable resonators the beam. multiply reflected from mirrors and thus
removed from the 8818, does not go beyond the limits of one plane. then in
resonators with field rotation the azimuthal angle 6 varies by 6 after each complete
pass -- the beam is somehow "twisted“ into a spiral. This leak to effective
averaging of the azimthal nonuniformities of the index of refraction and gain,

as a result of which the influence of the nonuniformities on the steady field
distribution turns out to be less than in ordinary resonators. The role of the
nonuniformities distributed aidsynetrically remains, of course, as before.

It must be noted that the decrease in sensitivity to the influence of azimuthal
nonuniformity of distribution n and k sin on introduction of the field reversal
operation is, of course. characteristfc of all types of resonators. Flat cavities
have this property to an even higher degree than unstable ones. The case of a
flat cavity also includes the first experimnts in which field reversal was used
to increase the uniformity of the radiation distribution in the near zone [182,
183]. It is understandable that in the first of these experiments resonators with
field reversal were proposed as alternatives to unstable resonators.

182
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H”! OFII‘IHAI USE ONI."

Let us proceed with the calculation; in order to siaplify the calculations as
much as possible, let us limit ourselves to the case where An(r.¢) is represent-
able in the form of the sum of several terms of the type nkmrkcosmmlm). The
terns with m-O describe the axisyanetric component of the distribution of optical

inhomogeneities; the tern with k-l. m-l corresponds to an optical wedge oriented
with respect to direction with azimuthal angle .119 and so on.

 

Figure 3.27. Beau trajectories for one complete round trip
through a prise telescopic resonator with field reversal
(given in the projection on the plane perpendicular to the
resonator axis). The dotted lines are used to plot the
projections of segments of the trajectory travelled inside Ch!

prism .

Let our resonator with field reversal be telescopic and consist of the sane two
dihedral prism as in Figure 3.26, a. The edge of the right - exit -- prism will
be considered oriented along the line 0-0, and the left prism. 45-6/2 (see Fig 3.27).
Let u trace, as always, the trajectory of a been undergoing a couplete round trip
through the resonator and having the transverse coordinates r,o at the end of the
path before the exit prism. Before making the pass, the been had the coordinates
r/H, o-G (the point A in the figure); directly after reflection from the exit
prism it had the coordinates -r/H, G-o (point 3). Then comes the inclined seguent
of the trajectory along the resonator axis. the projection of which is depicted
by the segment BC; here “ne light bean expands, the coordinates before the second
prisn assume the value r. 6-9. Finally. after reflection free the second prisn
the beam travels parallel to the axis in the direction of the exit prise having
the coor-linstes no (point D).

Sui-sing the increments of the optical length with respect to two segments :of the
trajectcry passing through the medium and considering that the inhomgeneous med-
iua is distributed uniforlrly with respect to the entire resonator length. we

‘ +1- .
obtain AL(r. v) =LP1M.” cos (me + m.) + Eli-#:7- co. ('"W + m6 +¢..)|

(I. is the distance between prisms).

The resultant distortions of the wave front are defined by the sun (see 53.2)
our. q»)+AL(r/m. e—o) 461101”! q—26)+... Considering that for

IXI<1
183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eosa -|-xcos(a+ﬂ)+z'cos(a+2§)+ a

= m l'“ (1 + 10" + z’e'“ + . . .)l - Re —L¢ 3.1314) .

in the final analysis we find that the desired sun is [181]

["2- "auum (9) 'A.
a... (v) - [coo (me + o.- - 911-) +

+———-.—""""‘1 cos(— m5+ + ’) x
(k-t-i)(M—t)‘l ”9+ Va. Vu]

X 1 -
li—‘Fmﬂuﬁq
“and

ll“—oosso' The first tern in brackets, jut as in the analo-

 

where oi. - amt

gom formula (6), corresponds to total aberratiouconing to the sag-ants through
which the light bean passes, being parallel (that is. traveling in the direction
of the exit prise). and the second tern, traveling in the opoosite direction.
Hence. it is obvious that if we were dealing not with a prisu resonator, but with
a mnodirectional telescopic ring cavity, the first tern would retain the same.
and the second would be absent.

The entire first factor int'he fornula for on“) is close to that which appears in
the expression defining the magnitude of the aberrations on one pass AL (only
phase shifts of 130'“ are added); in this respect the given formula rasadalea (30).
(6). The second factor.which appears as aresult of sumtion of the aberrations

- i
on my passes. looks essentially different here: it is equal to “4“” )upwsm

1 .
instead of —nn._g ' Thus. the sensitivity to the aberrations of the inVeati-
gated type on transition from ordinary resonator to system with field reVersal
varies approximately in the ratio c _ i—ilu‘

The values of ckn are always less than or equal to one, where equality is achieved
only for add”, 1-0. 1.2. .... that is in the trival cases where the index of
refraction as a function of the azimuthal angle is absent or is periodic with a
period equal to the angle of rotation 6 or less by an integral nunber of tines.
The choice of 6 is most favorable where the condition ld-(21+l)n, 1-0.1.2, ...

is satisfied for the predoninant type of aberrations. If it is primarily required
that the influtnoe of the optical wedge be attenuated (Is-1). it is expedient to
choose 6-1:, that is. see that the bean cross section is inverted on passage through
the resonator; as we have seen, this is easy to achieve even without two crossed
prisms. A very frequently encountered type of aberration is astigmtisn
generated by the resonator elensnts having different focal power with respect to
two mutually perpendicular directions (Is-2); as is known. for quite large angles

18‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of incidence the most ordinary spherical mirrors begin to have such properties.
In order to suppress the astigmatism effect efficiently, it is necessary to
insure 6-1/2, which is achieved by mutual rotation of the edges of the prisms by
16‘; it is possible to become familiar with an angle of this type in [235].

More precisely defining our investigation, it is necessary to recognize that the
most prospective area of application of unstable resonators with field reversal

is lasers with weakly amplifying media [8]. Actually, with significant gain it

is possible to use resonators with large H (see Chapter lo), the sensitivity of
which to aberrations even without field reversal is quite low (53.2). In the case
of small gains, on the contrary. in order to insure satisfactory energy character-
istics it is necessary to select the values of 14 close to one. The criticalness
of resonators with such H with respect to the presence of optical inhomogeneities
is so high that it is worthwhile to take all possible measures to reduce it; the
introduction )f the field reversal operation is. perhaps, the mat effective of
such measures. The gain achieved in this case increases as H approaches one:

if the condition 1116‘st is satisfied. then for 191 the values of lclna' decrease
without limit.

Resonators with Compact Output Aperturesrhe field reversal operation permits the
solution of another problem which arises when building lasers with weakly mlify-
ing media and having great practical significance. We are talking daout the prob-
lem of obtaining a coqact shape of the exit qerturs. The fact is that in
ordinary unstable resonators with Opaque mirrors and small magnification, the out-
put beam is a narrow ring or other analogous figure with large dimensions and small
area. This form of aperture is disadvantageous from the point of view of angular
divergence of the emission; it is desirable to achieve a situation such that with
the former area (for maintenance of the same losses to emission) its dimensions
reduced to a maximum. In 51.1, it was demonstrated that in the presence of an
external shaping optical system, this is advantageous even in the case where the
wave front hu an ideal plane fora: although the sadal luminous intensity at the
laser exdt remains as before. it increases at the shaping system exit (a a result
of an increase in power of the telescope with the same dimensions of its objective).

If the magnitude of the divergence has not so much diffraction origin as "con--
figurationsl" origin (see §l.l), the reduction in the aperture dimensions in itself
causes, as a rule, a decrease in angular divergence; with an external optical

system , the advantage is greater.

The method of obtaining conpact form of the ead‘. aperture in unstable reso' stars
with small H was proposed in [186]; let us discuss his idea.

In resonators consisting of standard optical elements with spherical and plane
mirrors, the light beam in the plane of the exit mirror. cowletely covering the
latter. necessarily has the cross sectional shape geometrically similar to the
cross sectional shape of the exit mirror itself (with a scale of such transforma-
tion )1). Thus. the cross section of a beam leaving the resonator is the result
of "stiotraction" of geometrically similar figures differing only with respect to
dimensions from each other (a ring can be used as an example).

185

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
till m'm'm. USE "NIX

It is possible to see that with identical orientation of these two figures, the
problee of obtaining cowact "difference" of them does not have an acceptable
solution; the mirror conversion of one of then also helps little. Let us consider
the possibilities opened up by introducing the operation of rotation of the cross
section.

I 11’ t’ 11' 5’ g”
l / | / ‘
I I l ' I
"c
a 11
l /,| /,
4) 5) c)

Figure 3.28. Evolution of the bean cross section in s prise
resonator with field reversal and sectional output:

a) been before reaching the sectional output plat: (BCDAE)
and after passing through it (ABCDA); the plate -ccwies the
section A'BCE'; b) been sf: \r reflection from .‘i an '

with its edge along DD'; c) bean after reflection free a
prison with its edge along PB'

l'he condition that part of the outline of the figure having the equation in polar
coordinates f-f(¢) lie on the previous outline after rotation by an angle 6 and
unification by H tines. has the fora H’f(¢-6)-f(o). The sinplast curve satisfy-
ing this condition is the logarithmic spiral r-C exp(ln DINO/6)). Actually, it

is easy to construct the required coubination of two geometrically sinilar
figures. the con-on part of the outline of which is re logarithmic spiral. This
carbination is shown in Figure 3.28. a; the smaller the figures. ABCDA, corresponds
to the exit mirror. the larger. ECDAB. to the cross section of the entire light
bean in the plat of this mirror, the difference. ABCBA, corresponds to the cross
section of the bean leaving the resonator. The resonator axis passes through the
center of the spiral 0. the angle between segments 02 and 0A is equal to the angle
of rotation of the cross section with respect to passage through the resonator 6.
the ratio of their lengths is equal to the resonator negnification H (in the
figure 6030', 11.1.06).

In reality. it is not at all necessary to try to cut out the exit nirror in the
shape of the figure ABC’DA. It is better to make this nirror larger, to install
an inclined reflecting plate inside the resonator near it to couple out the
emission. In ordinary unstable resonators frequently such a procedure is followed;
the reflecting plate in this case covers the entire resonator cross section and
has an aperture for passage of the central part of the bean to the cut mirror
(exasples of such system are presented in Figure 6.15s, b and 4.16). In our
case the resonator with rotation of the cross section. the reflecting plate
(more precisely, its projection on the plane normal to the resonator axis) must
have the shape of the section A'BCB'. Successively rotating and unifying 6306,
it is easy to see that the shape of the bean cross section depicted in the figure
is obtained autonatically in this case.

186
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“ill OFFICIAL NSF ONIA

The use or a sectional reflecting plate is especially convenient in that the
beam leaving the resonator turns out to be rigidly "associated" with a defined
segment of the cross section. The variations of the magnification of the
resonator M caused by deformation of the mirrors or inhomogeneity of the medium,
small shifts of the resonator axis, and so on can cause only a shift of the
outer boundary of the beam AB. At the same tin, witl. ordinary ring output and
)1 close to one, the aimlest deformations of the mirrors are sufficient for the
ring to convert to a "crescent" or decay into individual spots.

Let us explain how the evolution of the beam cross section looks in a resonator
made of two crossed prisms when this method of coupling out the radiation is used.
The edges of these prions will be considered oriented as in Figure 3.27. The
sectional reflecting plate mast be installed directly in front of the prism which
we have called the exit prism. In front of this plate the bean cross section has
the form ECDAE (Figure 3.28, a); after this plate, the beam cross section is ABCDA.
Then the light beam hits the prion installed inediately after the plate with

edge directed along 00'; after reflection from it the cross section acquires a
mirror converted form with respect to 013' (when observed from the same side)
presented in Figure 3.28, b. The edge of the second prisl is oriented along FE';
as a result of reflection fros it, the beam cross section is again mirror 138886
(now, with respect to E') and it acquires the initial shape and orientation
(Figure 3.28, c). A small decrease in area, which is a consequence of subtracting

ABCE, is compensated for by "elongation" of the cross section by H tines on the
path to the second prisn.

It is necessary, however, to make a small stipulation. In order that after
reflection from the exit prism the light been not fall on the back side of the
reflecting plate, it is necessary that the edge of the last BC be symtric with
respect to DD'. This leads to the fact that the outline of the entire light been
in the prism resonator is not "smooth," as in the figure, but it has small "steps."
In the given resonator with the extent of the greater part of its length, the

cross sections of the beam propagated opposite to each other have form very close
to those depi :ted in Figure 3.28, b, c and they make an almost ideal circle when
sumsd.

Let us calculate the shape of the beam ABC! leaving the resonator as a function
of M and 6. Obviously, AEZOE-Z sin(6/2); from thg equation of a spiral it follows
that OC/OB-exp(-2.1/6) 1n I‘D-H'Z'M, (IE-OB (l-M'zn/ ). The maxim- cowact form is
obviously reaghe for AE-CB. for which it is necessary to satisfy the condition

2 sin(6/2)+N" n -l. Inasmuch as the losses to emission, and with then, also
magnification H usually are selected beginning with purely energy arguments (see
the next chapter), the given condition is in essence the equation for determing 6
which always has a solution. Thus, the above-discussed method of constructing
metable resonators makes it possible by selection of the angle 6 to achieve
coupact form of the exit aperture with filling coefficient 1 on the order of 0.6
(for ordinary aystens this coefficient, the definition of which is given in 51.1,
does not exceed l-l/HZ) for losses to enission as small as one night like (H close
to one). Let us note that when desired, by varying not only 6 but also the
configuration of the reflecting plate, it is possible to achieve an entirely
different fern of exit been cross section that in Figure- 3.28, for ermle,
strictly rectangular.

187

FOR Ol-‘HCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

All of the above-presented infatuation on the properties of unstable resonators
with field reversal'vere obtained using the geometric approximation. Diffraction
theory of such systems has still not been constructed; it is possible no assule.
however. that the criterion of suitability of the optical-semestric approximation
here is the standard condition Raqu1v>>1 (for calculation of "eqv the distance
fro. the 0 axis to the eggs of the sectional plate BC out be t as the
characteristic transverse dinension a).

with this, we end the investigation of the not general problem of the theory of
mstable resonators. A outer of more special theoretical problem inortant for

certain specific applications. will be considered in the following chapter when
discussing these applications.

188

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
CHAPTER 5. APPLICATIONS OF “STABLE RESONATORS
5 6.1. Unstable Resonators in Pulsed Free-running Lasers

The basic result of using unstable resonators usually is expected to be the achieve-
ment of small angular divergence while naintaining the sane energy characteristics
of the laser as in the case of using planar or unstable resonators. It is

perhaps simplest of all to do this for pulsed lasers using large volumes of active
neditnn that are not too nonuniforn. Actually. in the case of pulsed excitation
usually high amplification coefficients are achieved; as will be obvious later.

this peraits the application of resonators with quite large unification M, which
without any of the contrivances of the type described at the end of the preceding
chapter have low sensitivity to the effect of optical nonunifornities. If the operating
cross section of the active zone is large. the values of Nun“ also turn out to be

large; therefore the edge effects elnoet have no influence on the node structure
and have no negative effect on the directionality of the radiation.

Selection of the Type and Parameters of the Resonator. m m; ilportmt factors
which determine the angular divergence of the radiation were investigated in the
preceding chapter. Therefore now we shall primarily discuss the problems pertain-

ing to the energy characteristics of lasers wit! unstable resonators: in the case
of large volunas of the active aediun. the problen of efficiency acquires pri-

mary significance. As for the efficiency of the lasers during their operation
on a single transverse node. unstable resonators here have explicit advantages over

resonators of other types. Actually. it is known that the maxim efficiency of a
laser is achieved usually when the use: radiation distribution in general
features repeats the pumping distribution (5 1.4). In planar resonators and.
especially in resonators with stable configuration the field of one node cannot uni-
fornly fill a sufficiently large cross section, the correlation between the foras
of distribution of the lasing and mint fields 1- wry weak (thus. in 5 2.5

it was noted that the amplitude aberrations in a planar resonator priaarily cause
not anplitude. but phase distortions of the wave fronts). Accordingly. in lasers

with such resonators usually the mltinode oscillation node is realized with large
angular divergence of the radiation (5! 2.3, 2.4).

Unstable resonators provide incoeparably sore favorable conditions for achievement
of high efficiency in the presence of single-node oscillation. with a uniforn

active medium and mirrors with reflection coefficient constant with respect to
cross section, the field distribution of the lowest node is close to II-type. If

the inverse population is nonuniform than. as was noted in [152]. in accordance
with fog-ml. (5) the lasing field acquires a shilar nature of distribution.

189
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
however. for realisation of the indicated prerequisite it is necessary that a num-
her of conditions be satisfied. first of all. of course. it is necessary that the
lasing radiation fill the cross section of the active zone well over its entire
length. If this is not so. the output power of the laser decreases, frequently
more sharply than in accordance with the proportion of the used volume: the region
in which the medium is excited, and the lasing radiation is absent. an powerful
source of luminescence and. as a result of amplification of it (so-called super-

luminescence [32]) it can significantly decrease the inverse population in the re-
maining volume.

0n the other hand, it is necessary to see that the lasing radiation does not hit
the sidewalls of the active element or the cell in which the lasing is realized.
In addition to decreasing the efficiency of the systee. this can lead to an increase

in angular divergence of the radiation as a result of the influence of the scattered
light.

Thus. it is necessary that the configuration of the beam prepagated to the exit
mirror exactly coincide with the configuration of the active element (the beam

propagated in the opposite direction has less voluse for one-way output). This
imposes restrictions on the type of resonator used.

Most frequently. the active zone has a cylindrical shape. In this case the beam
going to the exit mirror must be at least close to parallel. If h exceeds one by
very little, the given condition is sore or less observed even when using the

simplest resonator made up of a planar and convex mirrors (see Pigure 3.3.a), the
beam cross section in which on the path from the plane mirror to the convex mirror
increases by 214/01 4- 1) times. However. with large losses to radiation, it becomes
necessary to use the aaynnetric confocal systems depicted in figure 3.3,c,d. The
transverse dimension of the exit mirror must be Ihl tines less than the cross sec-
tion of the active element. Here, its shape should obviously be similar to the
shape of the cross section of the active zone (fros reading the theoretical papers
it appears that it must be circular or square; in reality, this is not so at all).

A confocal resonator made of concave mirrors is less sensitive to aberrations (53.2);
in addition. for the same IMI and distance between the mirrors it has (IMI 4- l)/

(IMI - 1) times larger value of INquvl than the telescopic one. On the other

hand. it also has a very large deficiency: the center of the spherical wave re.

flected from the exit mirror is inside the resonator (Figure 3.3,c). As a result.
the bean following from the exit mirror fills the resonator cross section worse
than in the telescopic one; however. it is still more important that the beam den-
sity at the focal point reaches an extremely large value and can easily exceed
not only the rupture threshold of the solid active medium, but also the threshold
of formation of breakdown in the gas. for the indicated reasons, in the majority
of practical applications the theoretical resonator proposed in [185. 152] is used.

Then the question arises of selecting the optimal magnification M. From the point
of view of diminishing the effect of large-scale optical nonuniformitiea it is
desirable that h be as large as possible. For this purpoae it is expedient to
destroy other sources of losses to radiation and use completely reflecting mirrors.
Then the admissible value of M is determined by purely energy argannents. In order
to understand what these arguments are. let us consider the dependence of the
output power of a laser with telescopic resonator on K. Just as in § 1.6. we

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
shell limit ourselves to the analysis of the sisplest case where the put-ping is
uniformly distributed with respect to the volume of the active medium having a
cylindrical shape, the interference phenomena between the radiation fluxes following
in 'opposite directions do not appear, and the relation between the amplification
coefficient and the total radiation has the torn of (1.33). Introducing the radia-
tion density in dinensionless units 9 5 cl, let us rewrite (1.33) in the form

k” as “J“ +94. + 9-). ’ (l)

(a) "—
Key: e. enplification

where 9+ and p. are the flux densities to the exit mirror and in the opposite di-
rection, respectively (Figure 6.1).

 

Figure 6.1. Radiation fluxes in a laser
with telescopic resonator.

It is easy to see that inside the region I which is filled by the fluxes in both
directions, the inverse population and the flux density itself very only along the
length 2(0 5 z i L), and these values are constant with respect to cross section.

Then for 0+ and o' in the indicated region the obvious relations are valid:

9+ to = 9* (0) up ‘5 Mr) - on a}.
O

9- (z) - 9' (0)919 {-— flhdﬂ- 0.! dz" - (343)..
O

(2)

where do is the coefficient of inactive losses; the factor [to/(z0 - 2)]2 describes

the decrease in the density of the diverging spherical wave on going away tron an
imaginary center 20 coinciding with the cannon focal point of the mirrors.

Equations (1) and (2) not be solved jointly with respect to p+(s) and p‘(s) con-
sidering the boundary conditions 0"(0) - p (0) and 0+0.) - 01L). Finding the
exact solution in analytical forn is impossible. For to inete solution it is
convenient to use the feet that according to (2) lo (s)o'(z) - mono/(:0 - z).

4. ..
Inasmuch as the sun 9 + g is with an accuracy to several percentages equal to
2/p*p‘ up to values of p and p differing by two or three tines (larger differ-

ences in practice do not exist) it is possible by the corresponding substitution
to convert equation (1) as follows:

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
['0‘ Utesw we. vases

1:. -14... Momma-mu. 7 (u)

The substitution of (la) in (2) with subsequent integration leads to the equation
for detornination of 0(0):

.l +11! Isl-H11.
zmpwnnW-r 5' "'- To

where H - 20/ (to - L), as always. is the nagniiication of the resonator.

Finding 9(0), it is possible by using (2) to calculate the distribution 0+(z) in the
region I. when the part of the radiation flux renote iron the axis (17 > a/h. 2a is
the dimter oi the active eleeent) intersects the boundary batman the regions and
goes into none I]: where p- - 0. further alplification of the flux is easily consi-

dered by the corresponding fornule for the amplifying node [186]. which is a direct
consequence a! the radation transport equation:

(. (b)
a“ t. k. e ~1~p -
"(73“”‘"""‘*f"[%‘5r—1“]' .
Key: n. out b. amplification

where p is the flux density at the entrance to region II; punt is the flux density

at the exit iron the resonator as a function of the distance 1L traveled by the flux
in this region (see Figure 6.1). It is obvious that the value of L. and with it
also no“, increase with an increase in r.

Figure 4.2 shows the graphs of the density distributions of the radiation leaving
the resonator calculated in this way. As is obvious iron Figure 6.2, with an in-
crease in h the radiation density at the laser exit decreases, but the width of the

radiating zone (a - a/H) naturally increases. For sons value no t the power of the
outgoing radiation will be nexinel. p

 

I 4144€Illl7¢

Figure 4.2. Density distribution of outgoing rsdiatian with respect
to cross section of the active eleaent for the case k L - 3.0.
0’01. - 0.12 and different values of a!”

Key: a. relative units

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The effectiveness of the energy conversion and the resonator x introduced in 5 1.6
can be calculated as the ratio of the number of lasing photons leaving the resona-
or f I as (integration is performed over the area of the exit aperture) to the
(8)
total number of acts of filling out the inverse population in the volume of the
oscillator I Ppmdv. Inasmuch as in the case of a four-level medium with uniformly
(V)

broadened line and unpopulated lower level of the operating transition PPI-IIP - gap/a

(see 5 1.6), we obtain 1: - («b ”‘13) )I( Skﬁdv). In particular, for the case of a

circular cylindrical elesent with uniform pumping

X arz‘limr‘§ r)rdr.
(1:)
Key: a. out 1:. amplification

Pigue 4. 3 gnaw; the efficiency of the resonator 1: calculated using the last
formla as a function of the value of H for a umber of values of 001. and Itng (let
0

us remember that in the case of a four-level medium the ratio kamp/oo is the amount

the lasing threshold is exceeded in the absence of losses to radiation. that is,
for h - l). The data for a telescopic resonator are compared with the data pertain-

ing to a planar resonator with the same total losses End 1881-08 threshold (the
reflection coefficient of the output mirror 3' is 1/1!)

Fran Figure 4.3 it follows that the efficiency of the energy conversion in a tele-
scopic resonator in the given case is somewhat lesa. but it is very close to the
efficiency in the corresponding planar resonator. Thus, for a laser with a tele-
scopic resonator. the formulas of § 1.4 can be used under the condition of replace-
ment of R' in them by 1/112 . In particular, for 00L that is not too large, the value
of x can be determined using the expression

'kz In! (1-1nll”+olb)

 

l—F—L. +0. k. L (3)
the optimal magnification of the resonator. by the formula
In Mme o.L(]/k;./o. —~ 1), (a)
Key: a. opt
finally, tho maximum value of x. just as in the case of a plane resonator is
approximately equal to
Xmas” (1 - VOJk;).. (5)

The above-discussed analysis was performed in reference [187], being the first
example of calculation of the energy characteristics of lasers with unstable reson-
ators. Later. more complex cases were investigated which require very awbnrd
machine calculations (we shall touch on the methods of performing these calculations

193

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in S 6.2). Thus, in [188] calculations were ends of the efficiency for nonunifors
distribution of the pulping with respect to croos section and large excesses
over the threshold; it turned out that the for-ales (3)-(5) remain in force under

the condition of substitution of the value of k-P averaged over the cross section

in than. Analogous laws occur. as is known, also in the case of planar reson-
store.

 

Figure 6.3. Efficiency of the resonator with telescopic (solid curves)
and plans; (dotted curves) resonators as a function of the values of
1/)! and 3'. respectively. for km]. - 2 and 3.

Key: a. amplification

This sisilarity of behavior of the telescopic and planar resonators of course is no
accident. Its causes consist in the fact that the nature of filling of the cylin—
drical active elenent with lasing radiation in these two types of resonators with
identical losses to radiation is not so strongly distinguished as it appears at
first glance. Actually, with equality of the losses in the sediun, identical seen
values of the amplification coefficient are established; consequently. the mean
radiation densities approximately coincide. Then. along the path fro. the ”blind"
air or to the exit nirror in a planar resonator. the radiation density increases by
l/ tines (5 1.4), in the telescopic resonator, by H times. that is, in the ease
ratio. Hence it is obvious that 0" in these two resonators Ins sinilar values in
the entire volume of the active nsdium As for the radiation traveling in the
opposite direction (9'). in the telescopic resonator its distribution is less
favorable: although the total radiation flux is approsinately the sees as in the
planar resonator it is distributed not with respect to the entire cross section.
but only with respect to .part of it; were; of all is the filling near the exit
mirror. As a result. the total density p + o’ is distributed over the active vol-

use in the case of a telescopic resonator soeswhat nore, nonunifornly, which leads
to insignificant decrease in the efficiency.

Thus, the telescopic resonator insures an efficiency which is close to its main
value defined by for-ale (S) if we select the radiation losses 1 - 1/“2 such as
the optisal planar resonator would have. Koreover. the value of x in the vicinity
of its hem varies very slowly with H. and the variation of K within known
limits is not related to a significant reduction in the efficiency of the systen.

This can he used so that when selecting H the ergusnts connected with divergence
of the radiatiOn are considered. For reduction of the divergence. it is. as a

rule. expedient to use resonators with the largest possible It. Here the sensiti-
vity of the resonator to the aberrations decreases (5 3.2); in addition. the ring

1910

MWLUSEMY
at the erit will becone lees narrow. However. it is necessary to proceed to values
of it significantly exceeding 2 with great caution. Pint of all. from S 3.3 it
follows that single-node lasing with uniforn field distribution is achieved --
lost reliably for large N If the transverse dinensions of the active element

equiv'
are given, {1an reaches a maximal for M - 2. A futher increase in M. in spite
of acne increase in curvature of the nirrors causes a decrease in “equiv as a re-

sult of a fast decrease in the transverse dinensions of the exit nirror.

Extrnely large values of n can be disadvantageous also in the presence of light
dispersion. especially at angles close to 180’ (usually all possible interfaces are
sources of this light dispersion). It is easy to understand the reason

for this if we consider that with an increase in M the proportion of the radiation
participating in the "regular" feedback channel decreases. and the light intensity

medwitb it as a result of dispersion of the basic flux remains unchanged; thus,
the role of the light dispersion increases.

The proper choice of the resonator parameters even in the case of-uniforn active
median still does not guarantee that a high axial luminous intensity will be obtained.
Prue the information presented in the preceding chapter it is clear that for this

to occur, it is necessary to exclude the fornetion of converging waves with notice-
able initial intensity. In the case of a telescopic resonator. the purely converg-
ing wave is forned. as is easy to see. with partial reflection of the basic wave

from the plane interfaces perpendicular to the resonator axis; therefore the inter-

faces existing in the laser (for example, the end surfaces of the rod) must be in-
clined noticeably.

Results of Experinents with Neodymiun Glass Lasers. The above-discussed argunents
about the choice of the type and the para-stars of an unstable resonator and also
a signficant part of the concepts developed in Chapter 3 regarding the properties
of unstable resonators were developed during the course of experilental studies of
neodymium glass resonators [5. 152. 189, 153. 190, 191, 1968. 192-197], and they
were confined by the results of these studies. In the exanple of lasers of the
given type a most detailed conpariaon was nsde between the characteristics of the
lasers with planar and unstable resonators: in practice all of the new versions of
the systems based on unstable resonators were tested and studied for the first time.
Let us discuss the basic results of the experiments pertaining to the lasers with
the simplest two-nirror resonators discussed in this section.

For a diameter of the neodyniun rod of 10 In and length of 120 In, the application .
of an unstable resonator led only to a twofold gain in axial luninous intensity by
conparison with the case of a planar resonator [152]. In the greater part of the
subsequent experinents. a highly efficient laser based on a rod 45 II in diameter
and 600 as long which was described in [198] was used. It served as a prototype
for the series nanufactured cos-1001 lasers and various versions of then. Here the
axial luminous intensity on replace-eat of the planar resonator by an unstable one .in-
creased by tens of tines. the angular divergence of the radiation neastn'ed by the
half intensity level decreased from 2' to 15-20"; with respect to the half energy
level. from 5' to 40" (Figure 4.4. curve I) [152]. Let us note that this situation
is quite characteristic: the larger the laser. the greater the effect from us-

ing an unstable resonator in it. The achieved gain in divergence also increases
with an increase in optical uniformity of the active nediun; in this respect the
investigated laser was entirely satisfactory.

195

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IU‘ 0'0“.“ WI— met

I! -------- --.-~-- --'

     

I z 4 I l ‘e~ 2
NW" (5)
Figure 6.6. Angular distribution of the enieeion of a solid-state
laser with teleecopic resonator [152]: I - resonator without inter-
faces perpendicular to the axis; II — a coated glass plate wee in-
stalled inside the resonator perpendicular to the axis. The propor-
tion of the energy included in the cone with apex angle 0 is plotted
on the y-axis.

Kay: e. energy, relative units
1:. angular minutes

In the experiments with rode 65 I- in diaeeter the nirrors were totally reflecting.
The losses to eniaeion were equal to the optieal transeiaeion factor for the case

of planar airrore. and they amounted to .75: (h - 2). The uee of a telescopic
rseonator insured approrinately the seas radiation energy es in the case of a planar
resonator. In the case of a planoconven ayeten of nirrors. the output energy dropped
by 1.5-2 tines as e result of worse filling of the active eleesnt with the lasing
radiation. After these erperinents with large losses to emission. only telescopic
reeonatora began to he used everywhere.

Subsequently, the output energy of an eeiesion of a laser of the given type was
brought to 10500 joules. end with series installation of two ective eleleente in one
resonator with h - S, to 8000 joules [194]. The angular divergence of the radiation

was: with reepect to 0.5 intensity level. ~40"; with respect to half energy level.
about 1'30".

Let us note the following important fact. In order to realize enall angular diver-
gence. in the case of a telescopic resonator it turned out to he necessary to in-
cline the ends of the active elelent by 2-3' with respect to the resonator axis.
which made it possible to avoid the converging wevee generated by treenel reflection.
The necessity for taking such neaeures was proved by the following denonstrstion
experiment: a glass plate with coated surfaces weeinatalled strictly perpendicular
to the axis in a telescopic reeonator with active elenent. the anda of which were
inclined; the residual reflection of the coated surfaces did not exceed 0.32. Thie
turned out to be sufficient that the lasing pattern changed strikinglh and the
angular divergence of the radiation increased so much that it approached the value
characteristic of a planar resonator (curve II in Tigure 6.4) [153]. The corre-
sponding photographs are presented in Figure 6.5, a. h [photon not reproduced].

196

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOF1WCLALIJSEIDNLY

The mechanism responsible for poor directionality of radiation in such

cases was studied in [197, 336]. It turned out that on introduction of a third
planer mirror into the telescopic resonator. "spurious" nodes appear which corre-
spond to closed beam trajectories. Many passes through the active mediua go with
one reflection from this mirror. Therefore the "spurious" modes even for the
smallest reflection coefficients of the planar nirror have lower excitation thresh-
olds than the fundamental mode of a two-eirror resonator. Inasmuch as these modes, in
addition, are characterized by high nonuniformity of the field distribution. some
of then are excited immediately with all of the sad consequences following from
this. And this is no surprise: in § 3.3 we encomtered the situation where the
presence of even a negligibly weak converging we generated by edge diffraction
leads to degeneration with respect to losses. Therefore the efforts sometime made
to influence the lasing node (in particular. lower its threshold) by artificial
initiation of converging waves obviously always must lead to an increase in diver-
gence of the radiation [336].

however. let us continue the discussion of the properties of lasers with “norml”
unstable resonators not having sources of converging waves. Among the discovered
peculiarities of such lasers. high stability of their output parameters is remark-
able, including the forn of the angular distribution of the radiation. Such
phenomena characteristic of lasers with planar resonators as variation of the an—
gular distribution from pulse to pulse, a gradual increase in angular divergence
during aging of the active elenent. and so on were not observed. This property of
lasers with unstable resonators is to one degree or another inherent in all systens
with spherical mirrors, and it is frequently connected with their small critical-
neas with respect to the alignment preciaiomAsthe experiments have demonstrated,
small rotations and shifts of the mirrors in the transverse direction cause only
small changes in the beam direction. The magnitude of these variations corresponds
completely to the predictions of the eernetric approximation. The form of angular
distribution is essentially distorted only for such large rotations of the mirrors
that the axis of the resonator tightly approaches the flat surface of the aanple
[152] (an analogous cycle of studies for the case of a (:02 laser was performed
later in thepa paper by Krupke and Suya [199]).

Also in accordance with the geometric approximation, the displacements of one of
the mirrors in the longitudinal direction cause variation of the curvature of the
wave leaving the resonator. In the case of a telescopic resonator it is possible
to use this means of focusing the beam at a given distance d >> I. free the laser,

increasing the distance between the mirrors by co’parison with the distance I. for
confocal location of them by the amount ~01 + l)L [Oi - l)d (focusing at the dis-
tance d ~ I. is also possible, but it is accompanied by a decrease in the output
power as a result of "tapering" of the light beam in the active element).

In reference [152], a study was also made of the spectral and time characteristics
of the emission of a neodymim glass laser with unstable resonators. There were
no special differences from the characteristics of lasers with planar mirrors:

the same random spikes, approxinately the same integral width of the spectrun; only
the duration of each spike turned out to be somewhat less, and the average time
interval between them increased.

The reduction in duration of the spikes arose from the fact that the oscillations
in unstable resonators are set up somewhat faster than in planar resonators. The

197

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iain reason for this is the presence of some nechanian of forced "spreading" of the
enission over the cross section. h’s shall discuss this question in note detail at
the and of this section when we are talking about lasers for which the rate of
establiahnent of the oscillations plays the decisive role. As for the spectral
distribution of the radiation. for planar and unstable resonators it is essentially
the distribution of the radiation intensity between nodes with different axial in-
dices (see 5 2.6). Near the axis of an unstable resonator the sane interference of
two counterflows and the foreation of standing waves occur as in a planar resonator.
Therefore the nechanisn of the spatial competition of the axial nodes in resonators
of both types is identical in spite of the fact that in the unstable resonator the
peripheral part of the active elelaent is filled with radiation propagated in only

one direction (see also the discussion of the problen of spectral selection in
ring cavities in 5 3.5).

The observations of the tine expansion of the spatial distribution of the enission
[152. 153. 192] denonstrated that during lasing, insignificant shifts of the center
of smetry of the angular disribution of the enission take place. In addition.
the angular distribution also in individual spikes differed free the distribution
for the ideal eeitter. As a result, the integral width of the angular distribution
with respect to tine for the investigated lasers noticeably exceeded the diffrac-
tion linit. Obviously, this was a consequence of thernal defornations of the
resonator. the vibrations of the sanplea. and so on. Taking neaaures against the
effect of these factors led to a decrease in the radiation divergence.

In particular. the results of experiments with a laser based on an active alenant
of great length and with rectangular cross section are indicative [192]. During

greater than the diffraction linit. and it announced to ~2'20". The replace-ant of
the concave nirror by a dihedral pr'i- with convex surface turned into the resona-
tor and an edge parallel to the large dinsnsion of the cross section led to con- "‘7“-
plete correspondence to the ideas developed in 5 3.5, slnost total

stabilization of the direction of radiation. “the angular divergence decreased in
this case to 1'. If a telescopic resonator nede of two prises was used. the de-

gree of stabilization of the direction was sonewhat less. and the divergence was
~1 10".

threordinarily high selective properties of unstable resonators with large Fresnel
nuebers were fully manifested in the test experinenta perfornsd in [190]. The
lenifutetions of optical nonunifornity of the asdiun and other eieilar causes were
conpletely elininated here. A m-dinensional unstable resonator with it - 2 undo
of totally reflecting mirrors, one of which was planar and the other. convex cylin—
drical (Figure 5.6), was used. The active eleesnt, just as in the preceding case,
use a rectangular parallelepiped. the location of the flashlanps insured high

198

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pigure 6.6. Diagran of a laser with rectangular active rod and two-

dinensional unstable resonator: a) syuaetric, h) asynstric exit of

the radiation (the crosahatched rectangles on the right depict the
exit bean cross section).

Two methods of exiting this radiation tron the laser were tested which are illustra-
ted in Figure 6.6, a, h; “equiv was 4700 and ~7000. respectively. In the former

case the integral angular distribution of the radiation with respect to pulse tine
along the direction in the plane of the figure. coincided alnost with the Praunhofer
diffraction pattern on two rectangular openings (Pigure 6.5, c Iphoto not reproduced];
the long extent of the pattern with respect to the second direction is connected

with the fact that in this direction the resonator was equivalent to a planar
resonator; in addition. the cowensatins lens was not cylindrical as should be.

but spherical). The band contrast is vary close to one. which indicates high

spatial coherence of the radiation (let us note that the distance between two

bases leaving the resonator was .120 u).

Noticenhle deviations fro- the resulta of the diffraction at the exit aperture of
the laser and when using the systn depicted in rigors 6.6. b with exit of the

radiation in the torn of a single been in one direction iron the axis of the reso-

nator were not detected. As a result or increasing the aperture width. in
case the divergence was less than in the first case. and it was 2" or l-lO" rad
(Figure 6.5, a {photo not reproducedl).

After pertorning these experinenta the thesis that unstable resonators with large
N equiv with uniforn nediun provide single-node lasing with attraction angle of

divergence of the radiation could he considered proved. It was only left to estab-
lish whether departure of the divergence of the radiation of real lse‘rr tron the
diffraction linit is a consequence of such prosaic causes as i-perfectiou oi the
elegance of the resonator. optical nonunifornity oi the nediun, or the "high-order
nodes" sonstinee uentioned in the literature are at fault here. According to i 3.2.
the wave front of a light has. which is the fwdansntal node of an matshle resonator
is torned in it just as on transeissic‘n of the been through a mltistage amplifier
(Figure 3.6). Therefore the best answer to the stated prohlen can be given by
direct experinental coeparison of the divergence oi the radiation of a real laser
with an unstable resonator with divergence at the exit of the multistage saplitier

199

MWWOMY
(see 5 2.6) constructed frnn analogous active elenanta. This comparison use under-
taken in [195).

The basic results of [195] are presented in Figure 6.7. Curve 1 corresponds to the
angular distribution at the input of the final stage of anplification, curve 2.

at the output of the multistage system. The data for the laser vith telescopic
resonator are plotted using x's; it is obvious that the nultistags systen in its
"pure" forn insures somewhat less divergence of the emission. However. if we cover
the central part of the exit aperture of the nultistsge systen so that the bean
acquires the sans circular cross section as in the case 'of a telescopic resonator

the divergence of the radiation of the devices of both types cones clean to
coinciding (see curve 3).

ll ,

"1

i,
3!!
(a)
I I I J - 13p. (.5)

Figure 6.7. Angular distribution of the radiation energy (the propor-

tion of the energy in a cone with spa: angle 0 is plotted on the y-

nxis): l - at the entrance of the final stage of a nultiuage systsn;

2 - at the exit of a mltistage systen with circular aperture; 3 -

snmlar exit of the radiation; 2 - telescopic resonator. O - nulti-
stage syetae with annular diaphragn.

Key: a. energy, relative units
b. angular ninutas -

Attention is attracted by the fact that the differences between curves 2 and 3
cannot be explained by purely diffraction phenonsna: the half'idth of the angular
energy distribution as a result of diffraction of the plane front in a circular
opening was 5'.' note under the conditions of [195}, and in the annular opening. a
total of 6" nore. Obviously these differences were caused prinarily by the fact
that the optical unifornity of the central part of the punpsd neodyniun glass

rod is higher than its periphe (infornation about the nonunifornity induced in
such cases is presented in (200 ); therefore the addition of the central part to

the annular exit aperture also causes a noticeable decrease in the divergence.

Pron Figure 6.7 it is obvious that prelininary stages and the final aaplifier in the
given case nake similar contributions to the total radiation divergence with re-
spect to magnitude. From the materials of 5 3.2 it follows that for a telescopic
resonator used in [195] with H - 2 the distortions of the nave front caning as a
result of large-scale nonunifornities before the last pass through the active rod
and directly in this last pass are also ainilar with respect to ugnituds. The
ahnslogy between the mltistega systan and the telescopic resonator is quite obvious
re.

MOI-“MUSIC!!!”
Thus. carefully nade unstable resonators are actually capable of insuring the

same radiation divergence as multistage circuits (considering obvious corrections
connected with the differences in the exit apertures). As will be obvious in 56.3.
by using these resonators amplifiers can be constructed which provide enormous “P11-
fication of the weak signal in one standard active elaent (considerable work is
required. in particular. in devices consisting of nany channels synchronized by a
single master oscillator). At the same time. the experience of [195] demonstrated
that the problels pertaining to energy efficiency are solved on the basis of un-
stable resonators much more simply than when using multistage systems (as a result
of a significantly smaller number of elements in the optical systen of the device).
Therefore the sphere of application of the swhvard nultistage systens primarily re-
nsins the rare cases where for the sake of achieving record radiation parameters
any means are considered justifiable.

The entire research cycle discussed above which was performed in the example of
pulsed neodyniun glass lasers with free lasing permitted sufficiently complete
discovery of the possibilities connected with the application of unstable resonators
in their simplest version. This cycle was preceeded by a total of two articles with
reports on experiments with similar resonators. The first of then is the initial
paper by Siegman[l.] which we have mentioned many times and in which. in addition to
the formulation of a number of the most important theoretical arguments (§ 3.1).

the preliminary results of studying a ruby laser with unstable resonator are also
discussed; the second is the paper [201] on experiments with a pulsed argon laser
having a discharge tube 7 In in diameter. In both cases it was impossible to ob-
tain any positive effect fron transition to the unstable resonator.

Gas Pulsed Lasers with Unstable Resonators. Problem of Studyins Oscillations.
Subsequent foreign publications about the application of unstable resonators in
pulsed lasers began to appear only in 1972 [202. 203], and they pertained to the
case of CO lasers. No new infatuation about the properties of unstable resonators
was cont ed in these papers. and nothing special was presented on a purely tech-
nical level. Actually, among several of the first experiments the highest output
parameters were achiexed in [203]: for a pulse energy of 3.5 31oules. th! radiation
divergence was -210 radians. and the brightness was ~2'lo 1 watts/(cs -s:eradian).
For comparison we nention that in Soviet lasers with telescopic resonator based on
neodymium glass long b ore this the smaller angular divergence was "aaatered" with
an output energy if 510 joules. and in 1971-1972 there were already lasers with
brightness of 910 watts/cmz-steradian) [206. 205].

Beginning with that tine. unstable resonators began to be used also with invariant
success in lasers of almost all types. It is sufficient to mention. for crawls.

the creation of an electroioniration laser with a pulse energy of 7500 joules [206].
however. the results of experinents with metal vapor lasers are of the greatest cogni-
tive interest [207]: the specific peculiarities of these lasers forced a new look

at some theoretically known properties of unstable resonators. The fact is that

the amplification coefficient of the medium is extraordinarily high here; on the

other hand. the population inversion here exists for such a short time that during

this tine the light travels through the resonator only a few times. Since low diver-
gence is desirable at all costs. it is of primary importance for the :Iptical cavity

to be capable of rapidly isolating the fundamental ands from noise radiation.

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The problem of establishing oscillations in optical resonators was first encoun-
tered in 1961 by Fox and Li [9]: the iterative calculations that they perforned
to a significant degree simulate the processes occurring in real lasers; the initial
field distribution written into the iterative procedure plays the role of the
"nucleating center." the source of which in real lasers is spontaneous emission.
Them For and 1-1 noted the obvious relation between the rate of establishment of
steady oscillations and the differences in the losses of the individual modes:
actually, during the time of passage of the light through an upty resonator the
intensity ratio of any no'nodes varies by (l -.A1)/(l - A,) times, where A1 and A2

are their diffraction losses. Obviously the intensity ratio will vary in the same
way also in the presence or a medium with uniformly distributed amplification coef-
ficient kIlP with respect to volume (the eigenvalues of the integral equation of the

resonator turn out to be nultiplied by the same coefficient “pawn in this case,

(see 5 1.3). If the medium was uniformly excited at the time of beginning of deve-
lopnent of lasing iron the noise "nucleating center." the situation will be main-
tained until the lasing power builds up to such a degree that saturation level is
ruchede

Hence it follows that the more the losses of the individual nodes differ, the faster
the generation of certain nodes against the background of the others will occur; in
particular, the oscillations in unstable resonators sust be set up much faster than
in plane. and especially stable cavities. For these reasons the rate of
establisheant of the oscillations in the scat unstable resonators increases with an
increase in IliI. '

Although all of these facts were sell-known. the probles of calculating the tins
required for the diffraction .‘irected beam to fore in an unstable resonator fron
spontaneous emission was clearly stated only in [207). and it was gradually solved
in [207-209]. It is true that the authors of the indicated papers for some reason
considering the given situation exceptional tried to get around using the known
results and nethoda of the theory of optical resonators. even such generally used
ones as the introduction of the equivalent resonator. Accordingly, for this quite
simple problem they obtained a very coqlex solution. making. in the course of the
setter. an entire series of erroneous statements (for sore details see [210]). In
. particular. their advice to select the resonator parameters so that the converging
beam will expand to the former cross sectional dimensions invariably in an integral
number of passes is meaningless. Therefore it is better to discuss a significantly

simpler solution to the sane problea presented in [210].

Let the active nediun have the cross section 2a X 2a and be placed inside a tale-
scopic resonator (Figure 5.8). Let us follow. for example, the fate of the nucle-
ated radiation which at the initial point in time is emitted near the convex nirror
in the direction of a concave nirror. He shall take the spherical equiphasal sur-
face of the diverging wave located on the convex mirror, the center of curvature

of which is at the cannon focal point of the nirrors as the reference surface. The
couple: amplitude of the nucleation field of one of the polarizations on this refer-
ence surface can be represented in the form of the series

u(r. y) =§u..csp(lml—:-)eap (Isl it). 131:0. a: t. t 2.

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- «17::— ..

r . .- _. ‘O '-
1- n e;- ‘ﬁg _

I if<£ .

\ b)

1. H

[A‘- - T-ua:

..l‘_\ n%\‘ . 3“: .. - -.._. +
l-- L‘IILN‘... ‘\ - \

t)

Figure 10.8. Transmission of sphericel wsves through s telescopic
resonstorz e) one of the "diverging" weves; b). c) trsnsnission of
diverging seven with centers of meters see: the tone 2s vide (5)
end outside this zone (c) over so equivslent line.

This series corresponds to the set of spherical waves with rendosly distributed .
enplitudee uu. the seen velue of uhich csn he celculstsd beginning with the power

of the sponteneous rsdistion for e solid sngle (kl2e)2. The caters of curvsture
of these wsves lie in the tocsl plsns end ere shifted iron the canon focsl point
of the mirrors in two directions s distence kHz/2s. ”dz/2s, where £2 is the focel

length of the convex mirror, It end 9. ere the weve indices. The centers of curve-
ture of the weves. the redistion of uhich cospletely covers the concsvs sirror.
fills s zone 2e x Zn in Size (see the figure); the nunbei of such elves. conse-
quently. is equel to (be [M2)2. As the figure shows. eons of the rsdistion of

mes lying user this zone elso resches the renge oi the lessr; however. it very
quickly leeves the confines of the opticsl cevity entirely. Therefore. except
(or the very eerliest ste es. the nusber of wsves teking pert in the process of

lssing onset is (bszllfz) . i.e. the epontsneous enission telling in s solid engle
Of (2s/f2)2.

ﬂow let us trace the hehsvior of the verse; this is entirely possible within the
ironwork of the geometric spproxintion until the divergence tightly spproeches
the diffrsction linit. Obviously site: the first reflection iron the conceve nir-
ror pert of the cross section of esch weve equsl to 1/112 remains inside the reson-
stor; the wsves the-selves go iron whirled to plensr with propegetion directions
inclined with respect to the axis st engles of (It/H) OlZe); (2/10 (Ali’s). The width

of .the entire renge of eagles. thet is, the totel divergence of the enission is
:i-z'r-ﬁ- Ze/MI.. After eech subsequent mug. through the resonstor, the enount

of rsdistion reneining in it decresees by H2 tines. The slopes of ell the beans.
end with then. else the totel sngle of divergence. decreese by n tines.

Thus. after n pssses through the resonstor, the proportion of ti: rsdietion of ell
of the weves entering into the "nuclseting center" equel to 1/)! ressins in it.

203

FOR OFFICIAL (BE ONLY
even veneve-n- --- -.---

and the total "geonetric" divergence is Zalﬂnfz. The amber of passes n0 during

which the "geometric" divergence decreases to A/Za and thus the formation of the
diffractio diverging beam the baiic mode) is completed. is defined by the expres-
sion 2a/( f2) . X/Za or 0 - ba MHZ). By this time the proportion of primary

“nucleating” radiation equal to l/bizno - Of [“52 raisins int ide the resonator.
It is easy to see that this proportion corr to the radiation intensity which
initially pertained on the average to one wave.

In spite of the prinativeness. the given analysis leads to the same quantitative
results which were obtained in [207-209] using somewhat more complex manipulations
with the "compressing waves." Using these results, it is entirely possible to un-
dertake specific calculations of the kinetics of such lasers. havever, the most
important conclusion can also be drawn without perforning such calculations. From
the above-presented relations it follows that the time of formation of a diffrac-
tion-directional beat with fixed dimensions of the resonator decreages slowly and
monotonically with an increase in M (inamch as n - la [60! - l)s [ALI/1n K).
Thus, the thesis that to obtain the smallest possiele divergence it is necessary,
considering the stipulations esde on page 53 to uae‘unstable resonators with the
largest possible magnifications, has received another. quite weighty substantiation.

This entire concept was checked experimentally in [207]. when using a telescopic
resonator with u - 6 in a copper vapor pulse laser. the calculated tine required for
fundamental node lasing turned out to be greater than the ties during which '

the radiation density inside the given laser could grow from the noise density

to the saturation level. As a result, the integral divergence with respect to the
pulse duration exceeded the diffraction limit. by almost an order. For a - 200 (1)
this linit was reached, it is true. at the price of a sharp drop in radiation power
as a result of the extraordinary rise in the lasing threshold. Probably for inter-
mediate h it would be possible to achieve both snsll divergence and sufficient
radiation enargyl).

§ 6.2. Unstable Resonators in Continuous Lasers

Survey of Experimental Work. So awhat later than in pulsed neodymium glass lasers,
unstable resonators began also to be used in continuous gas lasers. Among the
first publications only one short. but exceptionally interesting article [211)
stands out which to a great extent anticipated the future developnsnt of the reson-
ators of gas dynamic lasers; we shall return to this paper later. As- for other
studies in 1969-1973, their subjects were low-pressure electric discharge c02-
lasers [199. 212. 213] and chemical lasers I216, 215]. The early paper by

Krupke and Sooy [199] is isolated here. In this paper a telescopic resonator was
used in practice for the first time; as a result of the carefulness of the experi-
ment and the high optical uniformity of the active medias the authors were able

to observe the diffraction structure of the distribut on in the far zone with full
width of the central peak on the order of 1' (3.510 radians)2.

 

1This was done in the recent experiment [332].

2In this paper an analysis was made for the first time of the consequences of mis-
alignment and variation of the curvature of the mirrors in two types of confocal
unstable resonators.

206

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
It must be noted that in all of the enmerated studies except [211] not only the
goals, but also the conditions differed sharply from the conditions of the experi-

ments with neodymium lasers. primarily by the fact that in view of the modest di-

mensions of the resonator cross sectionaand the long wavelength. the Fresnel embers
N were quite snail. The theoretical limit of the angular divergence of these lasers.

on the other bend. was not small. thus. in the seas paper by Kruplre and Sooy, the
width of the radiation ring at the exit from the laser was .1 us; the angle into
which half the energy went, although it was not neesured, must have been equal to
5'10'3 radians under these conditions. This divergence could be completely achieved
also using a planar resonator. Therefore the basic positive result of the mend
tioned experiaents is not the achievements in the field of angular selection, but
experimental testing of a number of conclusions of the theory of unstable resonators
pertaining to the magnitude of the losses. the nature of their dependence on N uiv'
and so on. A detailed smry of the results of testing the theory is availahlg

in the highly substantial survey by Siegmsn [216]. It is of interest that although
the majority of researchers. in accordance with the recounndations of Siegman [167],
have carefully selected the resonator psraneters so that Ne q uiv will be close to a

half integer. no article contains data indicating that this choice actually
is useful from the point of view of angular divergence of the emission.

 

Figure 4.9. Schematic representation of the active zone and resonator
of a powerful gas dynamic laser (211]: l — planar mirrors, 2 -— con-
vex exit mirror. 3 - external concave mirror, lo — exit beam.

Key: a. flow

Now let us sore carefully consider the results of [211]. this article is devoted
to experiments with a powerful gas dynamic laser; the schematic representation of
the active zone with the resonator borrowed from [211] is presented in Figure 6.9.
As is obvious from the figure. the resonator is installed so that the lasing radia-
tion will pass through the gas flow perpendicularly to the direction of notion of
the flow itself. This arrangement of the cavity. which is called transverse, is
adopted because the high average powers require large flow rates of the gas mix,
and organization of uniform gas flows with large flow rates is possible only in

the case. |mere the resonator elements are beyond the limits of the flow cross sec-

tion (in electric discharge lasers the same thing occurs also with the electrode
assemblies).

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
even wean-e... ~~- -.---

Tests were run on a gas dynamic laser in [211] with resonators of two types. The
first type was a stable resonator made of two large metal mirrors, in one of which
a system of many holes 1.5 n- were nude, the total area of which was on the order

of .61 of the total area of the mirror. This procedure does not withstand any criti-
cism from the point of view of divergence of the radiation (5 2.5), but it permits
realization of a resonator with given smell losses to emission, and, as the
experience of [211] shows. it can be used for experimental optimization of the

energy characteristics of the laser. with this resonator the output power was 55
kilowatts.

The second type resonator is depicted in Figure 4.9. It was formed by four mirrors
and was already unstable. One of the mirrors was convex, it served as the output
gin-or, and accordingly was mller in diameter than the others. The beam passing
near it fell on the additional concave mirror and was focused on the hole in the
wall of the cavity through which it was taken outside. The use of a system with
three passes through the active medium permitted. in spite of mall amplification
per pass, operation of the laser with magnification of the resonator K - 1.6; the
output power was 30 kilowatts.

An almost twofold reduction in lasing power by comparison with the case of a stable
resonator indicates that the achievement of the maximum efficiency of energy con-
version in the gas dynamic laser resonator is not such a trivial problem as for
pulsed lasers. It is necessary to consider that such a resonator consists. as a
rule. of several carefully aligned (or even equipped with an automatic alignment
system. see [217]) cooled mirrors and is. together with the fastenings. the align-
ing slides. and so on. a quite complicated device. It is part of a still more
complicated engineering structure which is the fast-flow laser as a whole. Inasmuch
as the purely empirical selection of the optimal resonator under such conditions
becomes too thankless. the theoretical methods of analysis have been widely de-
veloped, the investigation of which we shall proceed with. -

Methods of Calculating the Efficiency of Flow Laure. It ia necessary to diatin-z
guish two cases inediately. whereas the fast-flow laser operates in the frequency
mode where the excitation of the medium is realized by individual. periodically re-
peating pulses. the procedure for calculating its energy characteristics does not
differ in any way from the procedure for calculating the efficiency of the re onator
of_2rdinary pulsed lasers. Actually. one pumping pulse lasts, as a rule. 10 to
10 seconds; the medium during this time can travel such a short distance that it
can be considered stationary during the pulse (the flow velocity in the frequency
lasers usually does not exceed 100 mine. In pulsed lasers, as we know fron 51.1.,
the state of the active medium in any elementary volume of it under the given
pumping conditions is uniquely defined by the density of the lasing radiation pass-
ing through this volume. This mkes it possible to talk not only about the
efficiency of the laser as a whole. but also about the efficiency of energy con-
version in any part of its volume. which significantly facilitates the understand-
ing of the basic laws (5 1.4). The local nature of the dependence of the amplifi-
cation coefficient on the radiation density leads to significant simplification
also of the quantitative calculations of lasers with unstable resonators. First,
the equations describing the state of the medium themselves are simple in this case.
Secondly. it is very easy by using the threshold condition to find the radiation
density on the axis of the resonator before finding the distribution in the entire

volume (see 5 (0.1), which greatly accelerates the convergence of the ordinarily
used iterative procedure.

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In continuous— wave flow lasers the situation is quite different. the concept of
local efficiency here cannot exist in general: the previously excited active ne-
diun flows through an entire been of generated radiation, and the number of atom
reacting with the bean can be calculated only beginning with knowledge of the radi-
ation distribution as a whole. It is also more difficult to calculate the radiation
density in advance on the system axis inasauch as the inverse population on the

axis depends not on this density, but on the entire history of the medium reaching
here. in particular, the field density on its entire path.

Similar laws occur also in the case of aide optical pulping of in uced Ranan scat-
taring lasers frequently called Ranan [conhination] lasers or m. -converters[218].
0n the other hand, the anplification coefficient of the lasing radiation on the
combination frequency is proportional. to the pulping radiation density on the in-
itial frequency. 0n the other hand. the attenuation of the punping radiation on
passage through the medium is almost wholly determined by its interaction with the
generated radiation - without lasing, the prinary pumping radiation is poorly
absorbed by the medium It is easy to see that the pumping light density in Ranan
lasers is, from the point of view of resonator theory. the complete analog of the
inverse population density in flow lasers; the residual absorption in the Ranan
laser nediun corresponds to a decrease in the inverse population down stress with

respect to the gas as a result of spontaneous relaxation of the active nediun of
the flow laser.

In 1968 Alekseyev and Sobel'nan [219] pointed out that the application of a planar
resonator in a Ranan laser with side pamping is fraught with highly unpleasant
consequences. Inasmuch an the amplification coefficient near the edge of the
resonator from the side of which the pumping is realised, usually noticeably pre-
dominates over the losses on the codaination frequency in the mirrors and the ne-
diun, the lasing radiation density here turns out to he extraordinarily high (if
its growth does not prevent the beginning of lasing on subsequent cmhination fre-
quencies. for which the radiation on the first conbination frequency is itself
pumping). At the same tine. with an increase in the density of the converted
(Rana) radiation, the attenuation coefficient of the primary radiation increases
— the region of powerful lasing screens the reneining volume fron the punping ra-
diation. Thus a tendency shows up for the lasing region to contract into a very
narrow zone, and this is difficult to elininate. Analogwa phmm must occur

also in flow lasers although usually not in such sharply expressed forn (we shall
discuss the causes of this somewhat later).

In the case of an unstable resonator, independent development of lasing on the peri-
phery of the converter or the flow laser is impossible. for the lasing radiation
nust cone iron the central section of the cross section. Extraordinary growth of
the lasing radiation density on the axis of the system is ilpoasihle, for it causes
rapid growth of the density also on the periphery, which leads to a decrease in

the amplification on the axis. As a result. the regime turns out to be self-
balanced; the lasing radiation fills the resonator cross section, its density is
established on a level such that the number of pumping quanta reaching the axis in

the lanes laser or excited atoms in the flow laser insures exact satisfaction of
steady state conditions.

 

J'[I'ha first letters of the Russian words that mean induced Ranan scattering].

207

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
These arguments are formulated in [154], and they were confirmed by the experimental
data of the aboveoquoted reference [211] (the nonuniformity of the intensity distri-
bution observed there with respect to cross section of the unstable resonator did
not exceed 1502). In all of the subsequent theoretical papers devoted to estimation
of the efficiency of the continuous lasers. a study is made of the self-balanced
lasing regime on the lowest transverse mode.

It is true that in the experiment of [220] with defined resonance, a mathematical
model of a flow laser was proposed from which it follows that the lasing regime must
be not steady. but sutooscillatory with an oscillation period on the order of the
drift time of the gas flow through the resonator zone. If this model were correct,
the autooscillstions would be character tic of even a broader class of lasers than
the authors of [220] themselves proposed . However, the medium was considered
single-component in [220], the speed of light was considered infinite, and the
geometric approximation, valid, even under the conditions where the properties of
the medium vary sharply over the extent of small sections of the resonator cross
section near its axis. Judging by the results of [221], it is sufficient to do away
with the proposition of single-component mixture so that the trend toward the auto-
oscillations will decrease sharply (and in real lasers, as a rule. mixtures are

used which contain more than one component). Consideration of the fact that for the
light to pass through the resonator takes a finite time is extremely important and
must also lead to damping of the oscillations (from the papers at the beginning of
the 1960's devoted to the kinetics of solid-state lasers it is known that neglect-
ing this fact usually leads to absurd results). Thus, the deep autooscillation
mode is hardly widespread. As for the ordinary and unavoidable oscillations of
intensity caused by fluctuations of the resonator Q~factor, and so on. they can
hardly lead to significant departure of the energy parameters of the laser averaged

over a large time interval from the calculation results in the quaaistationary
approximation (see 5 1.6).

In itself the calculation of the efficiency of a laser operating in the steady
state mode in the general case reduces to finding a self-consistent combination of
distributions of the amplification coefficient and the lasing field. The equations
describing the dependence of the amplification coefficient distribution on the ex-
citation conditione and the lasing field depend on the peculiarities of the medium
and are quite different. As for the lasing field distribution, for it it turns out
most frequently to be sufficient to use the geometric approximation. Actually, we
have already discussed the causes by which it is possible to neglect the effect of

the edge diffraction in lasers with large “equiv (5 3.3). The consideration of

large-scale nonuniformities of the active medium does not require diffraction
approximation (5 3.2). Moreover. if the mediun is not too nonuniform, it is possible
also to take the path of the beams the same as would occur in an ideal resonator.
Hence, it follows that weak optical nonuniformity of the active medium. just as the
edge diffraction, can in general not be considered in the energy calculation. 0n

the other hand, inasmuch as the angular divergence of the radiation depends primar-
ily on the phase distribution at the laser output. and the nonuniformity of

 

let the end of the indicated article, an additional factor is erroneously introduced
to describe the phenomena of amplification saturation, at the same time as conside-
ration of these phenomena is already built into the initial equations.

208

FilltﬂﬂﬁCLULlﬂﬂE(NUlY
the intensity distribution influences it weakly. the amplification saturation
phenomenon must be felt little in its magnitude; this conclusion follows from the
materials of § 1.1 and is confirmed by the results of sometimes undertaken specific
calculations (for example, [222]). Therefore the width of the radiation pattern

can be estimated in the first approximation without calculation of the energy
characteristics of the laser.

In order to find the self-consistent solution most frequently an iterative method
is used. The simplest iterative p:ocedure used in the 1960's to study the pheno-
mena of amplification saturation in planar end stable resonators [100, 90, 109]
consists of the following. An initial field distribution (usually uniform) is
taken; this distribution is substituted in the equations of the medium; the latter
are solved. and the spatial distribution of the aqlification coefficient is found.
Then the new field distribution is calculated as a result of single passage of the
initial been through the resonator with the active medium. The newly obtained field
distribution is substituted in the equations of the medium. and so on. As applied
to the calculations of lasers with unstable resonators in s weakly nonuniform medium
performed in the geometric approximation, the given procedure can be written as

follows: ful(’)"ll“-(')]. h...(r)$-F.(r)e.(rlll). where l' is the aberration function
calculated considering the distribution of the amplification coefficient (see 5
3.2). and the index denotes the number of the iteration. The calculations are
quite tedious. for although only the field distribution at the exit mirror u(r)
figures in the above formulas. for the calculation of 1'(r) it is necessary to deal
with the amplification coefficient distributions (and, consequently, the field dis-
tribution) in the entire value of the laser.

As was noted above, the convergence of the iterative procedure can be accelerated
significantly by preliminary calculation of the radiation density and inverse
population on the resonator axis. In the case of lasers considered in the preced-
ing section, it was sufficient for this purpose to consider the conditions on the
axis itself. Later it will be obvious that this problun is also solved for flow
lasers, it is true, using more complex calculations. The data obtained on the
Ingnitude of the field under the state of the medium on the resonator axis are used
in the subsequent calculations; here the condition of etationarity of the regime
turns out to be automatically satisfied in all phases of the iterative procedure.
Finding the amplification coefficient distribution next, this makes it possible for
us to not limit ourselves to single "transmission" of the beam through the reson-
ator with the medium and to find the steady state field distribution corresponding
to the given picture of the state of the medium. The iterative procedure acquires

c... fora r.‘..(r)-I[u.(r)l. 9...?» -=u(0)F-(r)r.(rlu)r.(rla_m.... where u(0) u the
previously found field amplitude on the axis. As a result, the volume of the cal-

culations is reduced noticeably, especially for complex uthematical models of the
medium. The calculations of pulsed lasers with nonuniform optical pumping mentioned

in § 6.1 [188] and the calculations of It'dwc lasers discussed below were
performed by approximately the sue method.

Other procedures are also used which permit reduction of the volume of the calcu-
lations both when finding the field distribution by the given parameters of the
resonator and state of the medium and for calculations of lasers as a whole.
Although the authors of each of these procedures present very convincing arguunts
in its favor. it is now difficult to determine which of them is actually more

209

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
affective. Therefore those who desire to familiarise themselves in more detail with
the nsthod of the calculations are referred to mneroue corresponding articles
[222-227. 188. l56], and so on); at the sane tine we shall limit ourselves to the
fact that we shall explain none peculiarities of the calculations and the behavior
of flow lasers in the example of gas dynamic lasers with two-nirror telescopic
resonator investigated in [188, 228]. All of the basic laws here are the sees as
in the case of resonators of the type depicted in Figure 6.9 (if. of course, we
coepare lasers with identical uplification not on the bean width. but on the entire
path fron one terminal nirror of the resonator to another). Lasers with resonators,
the axis of which is "broken" not across, but along the direction of the gas flow
behave differently; we shall not consider than.

Simplest Model of a Gas Dynamic Laser Medina. hethode and Results of Energy Cel-
culetions of Gas Dynanic Lasers with 1&0 whirror Resoutor. In the overwhelming
majority of gas dynanic lasers the inverse population is created. by the proposal
of Konyukhov and Prokhorov [229], by adiabatic expansion of a gas nixture consist-
ing primarily of 002 and N . These two components also play the prinary role in
the lasing process. 002 lecules are characterised by a cooperatively short
oscillatory relaxation tine; the laser transition is also realized in than. Past
loss of the oscillatory energy reserves in this component is frequently compensated
for by resonance trensnission of excitation free the 32 molecules on collision
with than.

The relative molar concentration 1 - c of the second conponent of the mixture is
larger than the first (c) and the najority of the total oscillatory energy reserves
is concentrated in the second conponent, N . which is. therefore. a type of energy
"reservoir." As a result of the long natufsl oscillatory relaxation tins of the
nolecules of the second component. the energy free this reservoir is censured pri-
esrily for excitation of nolecules of the first coeponent.

Although the stone located on a quite large amber of oscillatory levels of both
coeponents participate in the operation of the laser in one way or another. Konyu-
khov [230] proposed limiting ourselves to a systen of a total of two equations for
description of the relaxation processes of the sedit- occurring in the resonator
tone. These equations. being reduced to the nan-u: convenient form for calcula-
tions of the resonators, have the fern [188]

a . G. — I- I D
Agi-_l__‘x_"_1_r:__(,++p-)ku
a (me) ei‘-(l-s)s a

-':'—"—1—-‘-r}-

Here k1 is the amplification coefficient of the laser radiation; it is proportional

to the oscillatory energy reserves in the first coeponent (the population of the
lower laser level is considered equal to zero. which usually does not lead to large

errors); I: is the value having dimensionality (but not leaning) of the amplifica-
tion coefficient and characterizing the oscillatory energy reserves in N2; 9* and 0',

just as in the preceding section. are the densities of the lasing radiation fluxes
directed in opposite directions in the corresponding units; the designations of

the coordinates are presented in Figure 4.10; h1, h: are the distances during the
tine of passage of which by the flow of nixture oscillatory relaxation of the

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

individual components will occur in the absence of resonance energy exchange;
finally, h is the distance during the time of passage of which the processes of
resonance energy exchange. neglecting processes of other types (oscillatory re-
laxation. induced mission), cause relaxation of the ratio of the energy stored in
the coaponents 5/5 to the equilibrium value of ~c/(l - c) (it is considered that

on collision of two different molecules the probability of exchange of excitation
does not depend on which of the molecules is excited before collision). Let us
note that as a result of the fact that the energy exchange between the components
is realized with finite velocity (h i 0). the total oscillatory energy reserve in
the medium cannot decrease too rapidly with as high a density of the generated
radiation as one night like. This should attenuate the manifestations of the
mentioned trend toward "constriction" of the radiation in the case of a planar
resonator.

S

—.
—.
_-
--.
—.
——-.
——o
u”
—.
)—
—
—-.
—.

 

Figure 6.10. Diagram of a telescopic resonator in a flow laser.
Key: a. flow

It is possible to denonstrste that the transition from the density of the output
radiation 0" in the adopted units to the resonator efficiency 1 defined as the

ratio of the number of quanta of output radiation to the total nu-her of excited
molecules at the entrance to the resonator should take place according to the formla

x - 5 9+ (MI {I u. (s') + mom)".

where the first integral is taken with respect to the exit optical aperture of the
resonator. and the second with respect to the flow cross section surface at its

entrance to the resonator.

In spite of simplicity of the given nodal. its application insures satisfactory
precision of the energy calculations of the gas dynaaic laser in a defined range

of variation of composition and parameters of the gas nixture [231]. In the greater
part of the specific calculations perforned with its help. the results of which
will be discussed below. the following initial data standard for gas dynamic

lasers were used: mixture cooposition 152 602. 83.52 Hz. 1.52 320; gas flow

211

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
velocity 1500 since; gas pressure in the vicinity of the resonator 0.1 atn. tenpe-
rature in the flow 350 K. These data correspond to the following values of the
paraneters which figure in the equations of the nediunz c - 0.15, h - 0.1 on, -
6 on. - 250 on. Let us also present the value of such an interesting charac-
terietic of the active nediun of the flow laser as the length E on which independent
relaxation of the excitation is realized in the absence of the lasing field. he is
known. any mlticonnonent mixture, the energy exchange rate between the conponents
of which significantly arcade the rates of the reneining processes. has such a
M1100 relaxation length. for our nediun this condition is satisfied (h << 111. hz);
the total relaxation length is B - [(Clhl) 4* (1 - c)/h2]’1 = 25 on.

At the entrance to the resonator the active needing was considered excited unifornly
over the flow cross section and in equilibriun (kl/k2 - c/(l - c)). the total esgni-

tude of the application coefficient of the entrance to the resonator kglhvaried fron
0.3 to 0.6 (L is the flow width of the nediun). For naximn energy pic p for the
location of the nirrors depicted in Figure 6.10. their shape obviously nuet he

rectangular. which was seemed in the calculations. The reflection coefficient of
each nirror was considered to be 981.

The calculations were performed for resonators both nade of cylindrical nirrors and
nade of spherical mirrors. In the first case the calculations were not too coupli-
csted inasnuch as all of the distributions are essentially two-dimensional. How
ever. the resonator nsde of cylindrical eirrors can insure angular selection only
with respect to one direction. In the case of spherical mirrors which in prac-
tice is sore inortant the calculations are greatly coeplicated: the gas flow
alternately intersects the planes passing through the axis of the resonator at
different angles to the direction of notion of the flow. and the solutions in these
planes turn out to be dependent on each other. Therefore when constructing the
solution in the entire value it is necessary in all steps of the iterations to
nanipulate the total three-dinensional field distributions and amplification co~
efficient distribution. The only exception is one plane passing through the reson-
ator axis on which the solution can he found without constructing distributions in
the rcnaining volune -- the plane in Figure 6.10. The solution of the correspond-
ing two-dinensional problan permits the field on the resonator axis to be found
innsdisrely. which greatly facilitates subsequent calculations.

It also turned out to be convenient to divide the resonator by the axial plane
x - 0 into two parts having in the general case different lengths £1. 12. (see Fig-
ure 4.10) and to proceed with calculations of the distributions in the right-

hand side only after the solution on the left-hand side has been conplately con-
structed.

For optinieation of the resonator. its esgnification H, the widths of the left and
right-hand sides 1.1 and 2.2 were varied. In addition to the effectiveness of the

resonator X. for each version the values of the relative losses characteristic of
flow lasers were also calculated - relaxation in the value It“. renoval from

the resonator X". and absorption in the mirrors Xm - 1 - X - x: e1 - 3:“: Let

us remember that x is the ratio of the number of quanta leaving the laser in
the form of useful radiation to the total nunber of excited molecules entering the
resonator at the sane tine; the relative relaxation and reenval losses are

212

MOWUSIONLY
fractions of this total number lost as a result of the processes of deactivation
by collisions and as a result of renewal of excited nclecules that have incon—
pietely interacted with the radiation iron the resonator; the meaning of xuir is
entirely clear.

 

I J t I 7: oz»:-

Pigure 6.11. Efficiency of the left-hand side of the resonator
x“, the rzlative relaxation losses in its volune. X‘ and the removal
from it xr as a function of the length of the leffshand side 21 for

an
H - 1.33: curves 1, 2. 6 - for kgh - 0.6. 0.5 and 0.4. respectively.
i
Key. n. xi“ b. std

Let us proceed with the investigation of the results of the calculations pertaining
to the case of the resonator with spherical nirrore. The relations are presented
in Figure 4.11 iii the efficiency of the left-hand side of the resonator xi and

r

relative losses en’ x:.1 as a function of the width of this pert with respect to
the flow 21. As is obvious free the figure, with a decrease in 21 the losses to

relaxation are reduced approximately proportionally to £1 at the sane tine as the
losses to removal very slowly; as a result, the efficiency 1; increases. The
meaning of these laws becones clear if we consider the following peculiarity of

the solution for the left-hand side. On the axial plane 3 - 0 separating the left
and tight sides of the resonator. the distributions end densities of the field and.
what is especially important, the amplification coefficient turned out to be quite
uniform in all of the calculated cases. Thus, over the extent of the left-hand
side of the resonator the amplification coefficient with respect to th- entire flow
cross section decreases from the initial value of kg approximately to the threshold

value kn - (In M - 1n R')/L (R' is the mirror reflection coefficient). It is
necesea to add to this the: for the selected nixture the energy exchange be-
tween conponents was so fast that the present radiation field could not signifi-
cantly disturb the equilibrium ratio between the nunber of excited nolecules C02
and N2. hence it follows that the losses to renovsl from the leﬁt- side of
the resonator for any width must in the given case be close to kllkl.

0n the other hand, the less the width l1 hecones. the greater the fields must be

insuring such a decrease in the snplification coefficient. This leads to an in-
crease in the role of 5‘1““1“°d' radiation processes by ionparison with the role
of the relaxation processes. the: is, to an increase in X as a result of a de-

crease in xrel'

213

FOB'OFIICLKL USE‘DBHJV
NU. ”‘th M VI‘U.

Now let us proceed to the righth side. As we have seen. the state of the
radius at the entrance to it can be considered in the first approximation uniquely
defined by the resonator losses. Therefore the only parameter which depends on
the conditions in the left-hand part of the resonator subject to variation when
investigating the right-hand part relains the radiation flux density on the axis
0(0. 0); this makes it possible significantly to reduce the nueber of variants

of the calculations of the right-hand side.

The construction of the solution in the right-hand side offers the possibility of
calculating its efficiency 1' defined as the proportion of the excited nolecules
"processed" into outgoing radiation left after passage through the left-hand side.
The results of the calculstions X' for H - 1.33 and three values of 9(0. 0) are
presented in Figure 4.12. It is obvious that the dependence of I” on 2.2 differs

with respect to nature free the ainilar dependence for the left-hand side: with
an increase in 9. . the efficiency first increases rapidly. then more and more
slowly and. finally, it reaches an extraordinarily gently sloping axis-n. This
is explained by the fact that on passage of the active nediun through the right-
hand side of the resonator the oscillatory energy reserve of the nolacules is
conpletely exhausted; as a result of a decrease in field density down stress this
process takes place more and more slowly. The sexism efficiency is achieved
uhen the anplification in the nediun becones so slell that it col-pares with the
losses on the mirrors. of tours. it is possible in practice to limit ourselves
to a significsntly snaller width of the right-hand side. losing very little in
efficiency. and on the other hand gaining significantly in size of the nirrors.
For the shove-indicated psraneters of the nediun, the value of 2 ~ 15 on (see
[228] and also Figure 6.12) can be used which is also used in :13 subsequent cel-

culat ions .
x.

" m-w
‘1 [1”‘”-'--‘ﬂr

  

l I 11 J'qhsr

Figure 6.12. Efficiency of the right-hand

side of the resonator as a function of its

length 2.2 for H - 1.33 and three different
9(09 0)-

Now it is possible to proceed with investigation of the properties of the ancestor
es a whole. In Figure 4.13 we have the relations for its efficiency X - + xﬁux

as a function of the magnification h and width of the left-hand part for 9.2 I 15 ca.

It is obvious that the given relation coincides with respect to nature with the
analogous function for the left-aide only (see Figure lull). This is also under-
standable: for snall H and t . 0(0. 0) increases. and as a result the efficiency
not only in the left-hand aid . but also the right-hand side incresses, and to-
gather with than. the efficiency of the resonator as a whole. The growth of x
with a decrease in H and £1 continues in the entire investigated range of parame-

ters, slowing only in the case of H.101. - 0.6 for 2.1 .. 3 cn and )1 ~ 1.3; at this tine

11'

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
X already reaches 601. It makes no special sense to investigate the region of
still smaller values of H and 1. a for ordinary sizes of the active zone of a gas

dynamic laser the geometric approximation ceases to be valid there, and therefore
the direction of the radiation nuat become worse.

Thus, in order to achieve high efficiency of energy conversion it turns out to be
sufficient to select a total resonator width which is not too much less than the
relaxation length of the medium (let us remember that B - 25 cm), the width of the
left-hand side is selected approximately an order less. and the resonator losses
such that the threshold value of the amplification coefficient is approximately
half the value at the entrance to the resonator. This choice has quite clear nsan-
ing and say fail to give the desired result only in case of inadequate energy
exchange rate between the components of the nixrure. Actually. than the total
oscillatory energy reserve will not be able to keep up with the gain reduction

in the presence of the field. and the losses to removal nust increase.

In [228) a series of the corresponding calculations were node for mixtures with the

compositions $2 002, 901 NZ, 5! H20 and 82002. 901 NZ. 2% H20; in both cases the

value of R21. use 0.8. the pressure was taken equal to 0.05 atm. and the remaining

parameters vere the ease as in the above-investigated case. The energy exchange
rate between the components for these mixtures was noticeably less (primarily

as a result of reduced pressure). The calculations demonstrated that for analogous
selection of the position of the axis and the dimensions of the minors. the
efficiency on the order of 0.6-0.7 was achieved only when the threshold value

of the esplification coefficient was less than the input value by 3 or Io times.
From the procedural point of view the following is natuorthy. Although the ampli-
fication coefficient in the plane at - 0 is as before close to threshold, the con-
tent of the excited molecules N here also depends on the field density. inasmuch as,
in turn, in the entire indicated plane the field density is close to 9(0, 0), the
value of 0(0. 0) even for mixtures with small energy exchange rate remains the

only parueter subject to variation for calculations of the right-hand side.

Problem of Forming Uniform Field Distribution over the Cavity of a

Flow-Through Laser. The above-investigated example is quite typical;
1! 18 clear from 1! what arguments nust he and are being taken into account when
selecting the resonator for a fast-flow laser. It is also obvious that even the

 

5180“ 4,13. Efficiency x of a resonator as a whole as a function
of its parameters with a length of the right-hand side 2. - 15 cm:
a) dependence of the nsgnitude of X on the length of the left-hand

side for M - 1.33; h) the value of x as a function of parameter H

for 2.1 I 3 ca.

215

FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
simplest unstable laser ends up of spherical mirrors with accurate selection of
its parameters can entirely insure satisfactory efficiency of the energy conver-
sion. however, for practical applications it is almost as inportant to have more
or less uniforn distribution of the radiation intensity with respect to cross ac-
tion (othervise the local thermal loads of the mirrors and angular divergence of
the radiation will increase). Although vith uniformity of field distribution in
the unstable resonators of this type things go better than in planar resonators.
they are not sufficiently good. Thus. in Pigure 4.14 we have the intensity distri-
bution on a concave spherical nirror (curve 1) for the V017 cl“ "h“. “HM-30¢! 0‘
601 (kgb - 0.6. 2. - 3 curl! - 1.3) was achieved for a nixtue with a pressure of
0.1 atnosphere. here the graph is also plotted for a two-dimensional resonator
(curve 2) for the some parameters of the nediun. losses and position of the axis
(let us note that under these conditions it has approxintely the sans efficiency).
Pros the figure it is obvious that the field distribution is quite nonuniform,
especially in the sore important case of spherical nirrors (in the diffraction
approximation a sharp distribution "peak" can smooth off sonevhet. but the total
nonuniformity will still 50 clearly noticeable). A more favorable forn of dis-
tribution is observed only in versions with low efficiency, prinarily with exces-
sively large H when the field inside the resonator turns out to be insufficiently
intense. This type of situation obviously occurred in the above—described experi-
sents using a gas dynamic laser [211]. which is indicated, by the low efficiency of
the resonator vith satisfactory uniformity of distribution.

[‘30
M

     

-—--¢-..-

'Jllllﬁlflxa

Figure 6.14. Field density distribution in a concave mirror: 1 —
for spherical mirrors. M O 1.3; 2 - for cylindrical nirrors. M I 1.69.

The use of nultipsss systens of the type depicted in figure 6.9 pernits a sharp in-
crease in M. As a result of the coqlicstion of the systen, a noticeable positive
effect is achieved, in particular. the ‘actness of the exit aperture increases,
and its filling factor Y increases (see l.l. 3.6; Figure 1.3, s b corresponds
to the single pass and one of the possible versions of nultipass systems). Hov-
ever. it is still not possible to achieve a combination of high efficiency with
high uniformity of the field distribution here.

In order to solve this nest important probles it is possible to consider the prisn
resonators investigated in § 3.5 in which the effect of uavs aberrations of odd
order was significantly attenuated by conparison with the ordinary telescopic reson-
eter. The effect of the amplification coefficient gradient directed across the

216

MWWONLY
axis is identical to the influence of the gradient of the index of refraction
\wedge) and the wave phase, and it must be attenuated to the same degree.

It is true that in the far infrared range where the greater part of the flow lasers
operate, transparent total internal reflection prisms analogous to those used in
solid state lasers are hardly realizable. However. for low magnifications H which
are characteristic of the flow lasers with single-pass resonators. the application
of a confocal resonator becomes mandatory inasmuch as satisfactory filling of the
operating cross section with lasing radiation is also achieved in a resonator made
up of planar and slightly convex mirrors (see also 5 4.1). Replacing the planar
mirror by a dihedral 90-degree reflector made up of two planar mirrors, we obtain
the desired resonator. For equalizing the intensity distribution, the edge of the
reflector must be oriented obviously perpendicular to the plane of Figure 6.10.

This possibility was investigated experimentally in the example of the flow-type

C0 -laser of t:mparatively smaller power in reference [232]. The systems discussed
a e were tested (Figure b.15. a. b); for convenience of selecting the optimal
parameters of the resonator, the convex mirror was not spherical, but cylindrical
with regulated curvature [233] so that the unstable resonator would be two-dimen-
sional. For the same purpose the radiation was coupled out by two auxiliary mirrors,
the position of which could be adjusted. The preliminary recordings of the radia-

tion patterns of the amplification coefficient with respect to the resonator cross
section [236] demonstrated that the medium in the given laser relaxes quickly. and

the conditions are quite typical for continuous flow systems.

47

 

Figure 6.15. Unstable resonators in the flow-type lasers: a) resonator
made of planar and convex mirrors; b). c) resonator ends of a corner
reflector and convex mirror; b) symmetric; c) asymmetric radiation output;
d) various versions of the type of projection of the exit aperture on
the plane perpendicular to the resonator axis; the axis passes through
the point 0. the line PP' is perpendicular to the plane of the figure;

a) to c).

Key: 1. flow

The results of the experiments turned out to be highly hopeful. when vein:
the system depicted in Figure 6.15, a a tenfold decrease in intensity downstream

was observed inside the generated been. Thedifferencss between the intensities and
the left and right halves of the resonator with corner reflector (Figure b.15. b)
did not exceed 251. Another interesting possibility is connected with the appli-
cation of the corner reflector: in order to increase the compactness of the exit

217

FOR‘OFFK341.USIlDNlY
.‘v-o -...-...— .-_ ..

aperture it is sufficient to resort to asymtric output of the radiation. In the
case of a three-dimensional resonator this is done using an output mirror, the
possible versions of the shape and arrangement of which are explained by Figure
6.15. d. In the two-dimensional resonator it is possible simply to remove one
of the two output mirrors (Figure 4.15, c). Then the radiation which was incident
earlier on this mirror and immediately left the resonator now makes an additional
pass through the resonator and leaves from the opposite side. The width of the

output zone approximately doubles, the radiation distribution in the far zone be-
comes more favorable.

From the results of the experiments and rough estimates [232] it is also possible
to draw some conclusions relative to the energy characteristics of the flow lasers
in which an unstable resonator with corner reflector is used. If we select magni-
fication h and the width of the left-hand side the ease as in the case of an ordi-
nary resonator. the average radiation density here will remain as before; the
efficiency of the left-hand side almost does not change. As for the r ht-hand
side. its width in the systems with beam "inversion" is automatically ose to the
width of the left and, as a rule. falls far short of the optimal width

of the right-hand side of the ordinary resonators. However. as a result of much
greater radiation density the efficiency of the right-hand side also remains
approximately on the former level. Thus, it is possible to hope that resonators
with corner reflectors will permit insurance of the sac efficiency of energy
conversion as ordinary resonators with noticeably lees width of the operating zone
and greater compactness of the exit aperture.

The confocal unstable resonators made of two concave mirrors must have similar
properties (see Figure 3.3, c). where "inversion" of the light beam is also realized.

However. their use in many cases can cause undesirable phenomena at the common
focal point of the mirrors where the radiation density reaches an enormous value.

0n the other hand. the great prospectivenese of the application of unstable reson-
ators investigated in § 3.6 with field rotation in continuous-action lasers is
unquestioned. The quite recently published results of the corresponding experi-
ments [235, 333] completely confirm the correctness of the arguments discussed in
this regard in § 3.6. The introduction of the operation of rotation of the cross
section actually csrdinally equalires the intensity distribution in the near zone.
Sensitivity to astigmatism decreases so much that the latter is weakly manifested
even when the corner reflectors forming the linear resonator include spherical
mirrors, the angles of incidence of the light on which are, therefore, n/é.
Finally, the use of a sectional output (see Figure 3.28) instead of annular not only
increases the compactness of the exit aperture. but also leads to a significant de-
crease in divergence of the outgoing radiation without reducing its power.

It only remains to aention that sometimes reports appear in the literature and
resonators, the elements of which have the shape of a surface differing sharply
from spherical -— conical. toroidal. and so on (see. for example. [236]). The

possibility of obtaining a small angular divergence of the emission in this way
still is far from obvious and we shall not analyze properties of such systems.

5 4.3. Unsteady Resonators in Lasers with Controlled Spectral-Temporal Emission
Characteristics

Simplest Types of Lasers with Control Elements. Por aany practical applications
it is necessary that the stimulated emission have not only small divergence, but

218
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
also given tineoapectral characteristics. Their achievement usually is insured by
the fact that the corresponding control elenents are located inside the resonator.

The first publication on building a giant-P0189 . laser with unstable resonator
belongs to the year of 1969 [189]. This was a solid state neodymium-doped glass
laser; a passive shutter covered the entire cross section of the active element.
The output energy was ~20 joules. the peak pover was 4.5109 vatts, the angular
divergence with respect to 0.5 intensity level was --4"(2~10's radians). but a sig-
nificant part of the energy went to the "tails" of the angular distribution as a
result of light dissipation in the shutter liquid. As a result of rapid "spread"
of the emission over the cross section of the unstable resonators the pulse dura-
tion turned out to be noticeably shorter than when using s planar resonator.

Subsequently. giantpulse lasers with unstable resonators have always been constructed
by one of two circuits depicted in Figure 6.16; here the shutter does not cover the
entire cross section of the active element, but only the exit nirror. This leads
to significant improvement of the output characteristics: the peripheral part of
the beam running "to the exit" from the laser. bypasses the shutter and does

not undergo additional absorption and dispersion in it [204]. In addition. possi-
bilities are created for controlling the radiation flux having larger area using

a smell shutter. If we consider that the optically improved fast-acting shutters
usually have anall aperture, the prospectiveness of using such systens to construct
spikeless. nonopulsad and other controlled-Q lasers becomes obvious. Thus, at the
beginning of the 1970's highly improved 8 giant-pulse neodymium: glass lasers were
built with radiation brightness of ~10” watts/(enz-stersdian) [205, 205]. Let us
tlsoante the achievement of the quasisteady lasing node of an analogous laser in
237 .

 

Figure 4.16. Diagrams of Q‘s‘dtChed 139°“; 1 - resonator
mirror. 2 -- additional mirror. 3 -— active sample. lo -- shutter

The entire resonator cross section or its exit nirror can be covered, of course,
not only by the shutter. but also the spectral selector. It is necessary, however.
when installing any controlling elenents to deal with the specifics of unstable
resonators which inpose restrictions on the types and methods of placement of these
elements. First of all it is necessary to take steps to prevent

the occurrence of a converging wave. If. the resonator is telescopic, the flat
surfaces of the controlling elenenta must be also inclined with respect to the

resonator axis just as any other interfaces (see § 4.1; in the light of this fact
Figure 6.16 is provisional).

219

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
Another important characteristic of unstable resonators complicating the problen
of controlling their emission is the fact that the introduction of a small optical
wedge does not lead to sharply exceeding the lasing threshold, just as in a planar
resonator. but it causes only a shift of the optical axis. is a result, it is
necessary to depart from a number of traditional methods of control based on the
application of an optical wedge which varies in time or depends on the wavelength.
Thus, the placement of a dispersion prism inside an unstable resonator leads not

to spectral selection of the enission, but only to the fact that the radiation
spectra will be expanded in the corresponding direction -- in the far zone instead

of one spot the spectral distribution image appears. Efforts to nodulste the Q-
factor using a rotating prisn can hardly lead to good results. '

Th‘us.‘ in giant-polse‘ssers with unstable resonators it is necessary to use predomi-
nately passive or electrooptical shutterslz for spectral selection primarily the
Pabry and Perot etalon: are suitable. on passage through which the value does not
change its direction. however. even here it is necessary to consider the fact that
in any linear, unstable resonator. not a plane wave. but a spherical wave will be
propagated in at least one of the two opposite directions. Under these conditions
the introduction of the etalon will not cause intensity modulation with respect to
the resonator cross section except in the case where the angular width of the uni-
nun transmission of the etalon will exceed the angle of opening of the spherical
wave. The angular width of the nanimun transmission of the etalon in turn is equal
to the angular distance between adjacent rings divided by the number of interfering
beans N which depends on the reflection coefficient of the working surfaces of the
etalon. As a result. we arrive at the following condition imposed on the magnitude
of the etalon base t [196]:

l H lb

‘<m'mm' (a)

where D is the dianeter of the transverse cross section of the active element; K
and L are the magnification and the equivalent length of the resonator; e is the
angle between the normal to the etalon surface and the resonator axis; finally.

as - (h - DID/ML is the angle of opening of the diverging beam in the telescopic

resonator (when deriving (6). the inequality 0 >> M which usually is satisfied was
considered to be valid).

Multiple bean reflection in an inclined etalon also leads to some "blurring" of the
position of the resonator axis. which in turn can cause an increase in the radiation
divergence. The corresponding calculations indicate that the condition of smallness
of this increase by comparison with the diffraction angle again reduces to formla
(6). Inasmugh as the etalon base determines the width of the region of its disper-
sion (AA - X l2t), consequently the expression (6) limits the minimal width of the

spectrun reached in the laser with direct placensnt of the selecting etalon in the
telescopic resonator. .

__..——.——-———

ISelf-Q switching of unstable resonators described in [238] and a number of

subsequent papers is realized only in the anallest lasers and leads to output
parameters which are hardly recorded even for this class of laser.

220

FOR OFFZCIAL USE ONLY
Lasers with Three-hirror Optical Cavity. Farther improve-ant of thenethods of con-
trolling the emission of lasers with unstable resonators is connected with the
idea formulated and experimentally substantiated in [153) of the effect on the .
central section of the resonator cross section. from which the radiation "spreads."
Por normal course of the beams this section is the analog of the master oscillator.
and the remaining part of the cross section. a mnltipeas amplifier. In order to
realize this idea, it is sufficient to make an opening at the center of one of

the mirrors and install an auxiliary mirror behind it; the control elements of
very small size can be conveniently placed in the narrow “appendix" formed in this
way. This three-mirror resonator and the scheme equivalent to it without an open-
ing in the mirror are depicted in Figure 6.17.

+€E~+
ﬁE'r-F

Figure 6.l7. Diagrams of resonators with
radiation control in the central section of
the cross section.

The possibility of efficient radiation control using the given procedure is limited
by the fact that. as follows from the materials of § 3.6. a laser with unstable
resonator is capable of lasing even with a completely shielded central section of
the cross section. Therefore. if in the "appendix," for example, the shutter and
the axial section are "blocked" at a given point in time and the lasing threshold
increases insignificantly. independent lasing which is not controlled. will de-
velop in the remaining volune. hence, it is clear what important practical sig-
nificance the nature of the dependence of the lasing threshold on the dinensions
of the covered central segment of the cross section has.

The results of the measurements of this relation performed in [191, 168. 193, 196]
turned out to be entirely in correspondence to the theoretical representation
developed in 5 3.6. In the case of two-dimensional resonators the threshold in-
creases with an increase in hole sizes (more precisely. the slit width) extraordi-
narily sharply. Thus. the shielding of the central section ~3 mm wide has approxi-
mately tripled the threshold intensity of the pumping of the laser described in

§ 6.1 based on a rectangular large active element with resonator made of planar and
cylindrical mirrors (Figure 6.6) [168]. Therefore the control of the radiation
characteristics of lasers with two-dimensional unstable resonators is realized
without special difficulty. In particular. the use of the simplest disc modulator

has made it possible to convert the mentioned laser to the regular "spike" mode
with repetition of these spikes from 25 to 50 kilohsrtz [168]. In reference [193]

special selection of the radiation of the sane laser without a noticeable decrease
in its output power was successfully produced by the introduction of the Fabry and

Perot etalon into the "appendix."

Lsers with resonators made of spherical mirrors behave entirely differently. Their
lasing threshold increases very slowly with the size of the central circular

221

IND! 0P1ﬂC1A1.USEZ(NVLY
opening. Thue. in a laser with active neodyniun doped glaee element 45 In in dia-
neter and a telescopic reeonator with magnification u - 2 for a hole diameter in

the concave mirror of 6 mm. the pumping threehold intensity increaeed by l.3 timee;
for a diameter of 8 In. it approximately doubled by comparison with the caee where
the hole wee aheent. Even the preeence of a hole with a diameter of 20 In and elmoet
reaching the diameter of the convex mirror (22 II) caueed on] 1 triple increase in
the ear-excitation threehold [191].

  

are: n ”ragga-(b)

Figure 6.18. Loeeee of the loweet Iodee ae a function of the aize

of the coupling hole in a three-dimeneionel reeonetor with circular

mirrore Oi - 2, N - 60). The dote repreeent the experimental

data; 1 -- the ceﬁgﬁtion for the cane of a eharp mirror edge; 2 —

enalogoue calculation in the preeence of "smoothing" of the edge
(Intenl deereaeed by (our timea).

Key: e. energy loeeee. 2

b. "equiv

In Figure 6.18, the data on the dependence of the loeeee of the lowest mode on the
eize of the coupling hole calculated by the reeulte of experimental obeervatione
and by fornulee from § 3.6 in [168] are compered. he is ohvioue iron the figure,
the experimental points lie noticeably above curve 1 obtained on euhetitution of

the value of the coefficient of diffraction reﬂection iron the edge Rretl calcula.

ted by the formula for en ideally eharp edge (3.25) in expreeeion (3.26). In order
to achieve cooperieon of. the calculated end the empirical data it in neceeeery to
decrease the value of lnrefll auhetituted in (3.26) by (our tinee (curvee 2). For

thie decrease [anal in the given caee there vae eufficient "noothing" or the

edge (see 5 3.3) in a zone ~0.l II wide. which. apparently, are curved in the
experiment.

launch an the shielding of the email axial section here only causes an ineigni-
ficant increeee in the calf-excitation threehold, the poeeihilitiee for controlling
the radiation turn out to he eore limited than in the cane of two-dimeneionel

resonators. In particular, it ie explicitly impoeeihle. when placing the control-
ling elenente only in the “appendix" to realize giant pulse laaing or a lasing mode
close to it. It the operating treneition line in hroedeneinonunitornly. the
epectrel eelection of the radiation is aleo coepliceted. Actually, in the loop

222

FOROI’I’ICIALIBEONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of thin line with intenee single-frequency laaing a "trough“ ariaee. and the
amplification coefficient on the aide frequenciea hecoeea noticeably larger than
on the frequency at which lacing occur-a. Therefore the isolation of one frequency

ueing the eelector in the “appendix" cannot prevent nan-excitation of the laaing
on the aide frequenciee in the remaining volune.

airrore frequently can be eolved even in the case of a nonunifornly broadened line.
According to [196) it ia neceeeary to try to inetall one etalon having a anall hate
directly between the prinary nirrore of the reeonator ao that it covere the entire
operating croaa aection. The purpoee of this etalon nuet be to ieolate the band.

the width of which doee not exceed the width of the "trough" in the line contour. If

this can be done without violating condition (6). for further constriction of the
spectrum it 1a poeeibla to use the ”appendix.“

The favorable situation actually occurred when performing the exparinente deacribed
in [196] with a neodynim-doped glaae leeer with the active element 45 II in dinne-
ter and 600 an long. The talaecopic laeer had eagnification of M - 2; the output
power without epectral eelection waa 500 joulaa per pulee. The preliainary con-
etriction of the epectrun from the width none]. to neodymium laaere equal to aeveral
nanonetara, to a value of ~0.5 ma wee carried out using an etalon having a base of
only 0.05 -. Inmch an all of the conditione were eetiafied which were initially
diecueeed. the introduction of thie etalon did not cause any changea in the fora of
the eggular dietribution (its width with reepect to the 0.5 inteneity level was
310' radiane). Ilere the output power dropped to £00 joules. Suheequent introduc-
tion of the etalone with bases appreciably larger than in the f irat one into the
"appendix" caueed only further decreaee in the width of the epectrun. reaching. in
the final analyeie. 0.003 me; not only the radiation divergence. but eleo the out-
put power retained constant.

The following in of interact. In these experiments the width of the opening beyond
which the "appendix" with additional etalone wee located and amounted to a total of
3 n. The overlap of thie mall eection of the croee eection exceeded by only 101
the self-excitation thraehold of the entire laeer. In the central eection taken
aeparately, the laaing threshold, coneidering all of the introduced atalona, uncon-
ditionally would be higher. Thie denonetratee that the above-mentioned diviaion
into the "nearer oacillator" and "amplifier" in purely arbitrary inaemch aa the
radiation control of the "amplifier" ie realized when the eelf-encitation threahold
of the latter wee below the threehold in the "naeter oscillator." The fact in that.
as the experimente denonetrated. with the"oecillator"end "amplifier" epatially
combined in the three-mirror syeta. the radiation arrivee not only fro. the first
to the eecond. but also as a reeult of diffraction. fro. the eecond to the firet.
Thia increaaea the radiation deneity in the "appendix" eepecially for a null dia-
netar of the appendix. and the role of the "appendix" turns out to be quite large.

The uniform part of the line broadening that deterninee the width of the "trough"
wee rather uteneive in the eilicate neodyniu glaee need in Ref. 196, which made
it easier to pick out the precontraction etalon without violating condition (6).
It night not be poeeible to pick out euch an etalon in laeera based on nedia with
a narrower unifora broadening hand. what to do in such cases ia atill unclear; it
is possible that it renaina only to do away with the linear and reeort to the uni-
directional ring cavitieu for which condition (6) “3‘30”“ invalid.

223

MOWMONLY'
Ending with three-eirror resonator lasers. let us note that if there is too such
absorption in the "appendix," its role can be significantly strengthened by place-
ment of an additional snail-cross section active element in it. It would appear
that it is possible to achieve an analogous effect on introducing a special de-
flector (or orienting one of the interfaces perpendicular to the resonator axis)
to produce a convergent save that "overflows" to the center. but this leads

to a sharp increase in the radiation divergence (see [196] and also 5 4.1).

External Signal-Controlled Lasers. Now let us proceed to another method permitting
the use of the special role of the central segment of the cross section of an un-
stable resonator. This nethod was proposed in 1969 [239], and it consists in the
fact that radiation fro: an external source is input to the laser with unstable
resonator through the central coupling hole. The properties of such a laser depend
decisively on the relation between the saplificstion of the mediun and the losses
'of the resonator with the coupling hole. If this relation is such that self-
excitation of the system does not occur in the absence of an external signal, we
are dealing with a "pure" aeplifisr capable of operating in the ‘13" ‘0“ “Id
thus. suitable for effective amplification of powerful short pulses and other
purposes. If the selfoexcitation threshold is low and turns out to be exceeded,

it is more correct to talk not about an amplifier. but about a laser controlled by
an external signal.‘ Let us first consider the latter case. '

The control of laser radiation by an external signal is a well-known: nethod of
obtaining the given spectral-tine characteristics. This method was used success-
fully in planar resonators (see. for example (260-2531). where the "nucleating cen-
ter" fron an external source was introduced, as a rule. innediately over the entire
cross section of the resonator. Inasmuch as in unstable resonators the radiation
quickly "spreads" iron the central region. for such effective control here it is
obviously sufficient to introduce a been from an external source only into the re-
gion which pernits us to go on with quite low power of it. Unfortunately, a con-
parieon of the results achieved in practice obtained when using planar and ustable
resonators is alnost iapoasible inasmuch as these results pertain to entirely
different cases. For planar resonators, a study was primarily ads of the spectrum
control node of a giant pulse by injection of the "molesting center" at the
beginning of its davelopnent. As for unstable resonators. for then the control of
the spectral-tine characteristics of the eeission was still realised only under
conditions close to quasiatstionsry although the possibility of controlling nono-
pulse lasers also raises no doubt.

In order to obtain the seas output power for a controlled laser operating in the
quasistationary mode as for an ordinary laser it is obviously sufficient to use an
unstable resonator for it with the same a and introduce radiation with the same
density into the coupling hole which is developed inside the standard lasers with-
out the coupling hole. however, for more reliable control it is expedient either
to increase the density of the controlling sinsl (which both in the pulsed and in
the flow lasers leads to a decrease in enplification on the axis) or noticeably
increase M or, finally. do both. Than the systes with the supplied external signal
turns out to be significantly below its self-excitation threshold, which improves
its controllability —- in essence; the amplification mode occurs. It is only
necessary. by increasing H . to see that this does not lead to a large decrease in
the output power. This as occur especially quickly in flow lasers with low
anplificstion. As for pulsed lasers using highly saplifying media, the parameters
of their resonators can. as a rule. vary entirely "painlessly" within the broad

224
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
limits. especially in the presence of a quasiststionery controlled signal (we shall
discuss the causes for this somewhat later).

Let us touch on the problem of selecting the sire of the coupling hole. The losses
of resonators made of spherical eirrora and the radiation density required free as
external source to prevent self-excitation depend very slightly on the dimensions

of the hole. Hence. it follows that the required control signal power is in the
first approximation proportional to the area of the hole. Therefore it is advan-
tageous to use quite small holes; however. they oust not be so snall that the reson-

ator axis can go beyond their limits as a result of alignment errors. vibrations.
and so on.

Beginning with these arguaente. the parameters of an unstable resonator were selec-
ted for the first laser of the given class built in [191]. This laser. just as in
many experiments described above. was built on the basis of an active elesent ends
of neodymium-doped glass 65 u in diameter and 600 u long. The telescopic reson~
are: bad magnification of M - 5 instead of the usual H -.2; the diameter of the
coupling hole was determined by the precision of the alignment and it was 3 nm. The
external nester oscillator operated in the mode of tendon radiation "spikes" which
is usual for solid-state lasers; its output power was more then two orders less then
the output power of the basic laser which was several hundreds of joules for a pump-
ing pulse duration of ~l.5 milliseconds. Although the presence of intervals between

the "spikes" does not at all promote control reliability. complete synchrony of the
"spikes" at the output of the naster oscillator and the system as a whole was ob-
served.

In [191]. the requiresente on the required accuracy of sutual alignment of the ex-
ternal oscillator end the control laser were also discovered. and it was demon-
strated that they are not at ell extraordinary: the sdsissible magnitude of the
angle between the direction of the been free the external oscillator and the

axis of the powerful laser was in the given case 41'.

One end a half years later a report appeared on work of a similar nature

in the field of COZ-lasers: under the effect of a weak signal introduced in the
axial section with frequency corresponding to one of the rotational transitions of
the €02 molecule. a powerful laser with unstable resonator began to generate on this
frequency although without the input of the external signal it operated on another
rotational transition [2“]. In the same paper the argument was stated of the
possibility of feeding the control been not to the central but to the peripheral
section of the cross section so that a converging wave amplified as it approached
the axis was forned. Using this procedure. the required spectral characteristics

probably can be obtained. but therewill hardly be sssll divergence of the radiation
simulataneously with this.

Now let us discuss one of the most remarkable peculiarities of pulsed lasers with
unstable resonators operating under the effect of radiation fros an external sauce.
Re are talking about the extraordinarily weak dependence of their output poser on
the resonator paresetere and the control signal intensity if the latter was pre-
sent. ln this respect the results of the calculations of the energy chracteristics
of a controlled laser the psranetera of which are typical of powerful neodymium-
doped glass lasers perforned in [255] are indicative. The diameter of the coupling
hole in a concave nirror of a telescopic resonator was taken equal to the diameter
of the convex sirror or less than it by H times so that the been free the external

225

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
source during its expansion to filling the exit aperture completed three or five
passes through the nediun, respectively (if the given laser wee not capable of
self-excitation in the absence of an external signal it would he a "pure" three or
five-pass amplifier). The value of M varied from 2 to 20 (M - 2 corresponded to
the optinal value of the magnification calculated by formula (6) for an ordinary
laser constructed on the given active elenent).

The calculations demonstrated that as K increases with fixed power of the external
signals falling within reasonable limits. the efficiency of the controlled laser
decreased sonotonically. but noticeably more slowly than the efficiency of ordinary
lasers. This is understandable: when n is so large that the lasing in an ordi-
nary laser is completely curtailed. the laser with coupling hole operates as a
multipass amplifier. and on supplying the external signal it has a finite output
power frequently commensurate with naximun.

The efficiency of a controlled laser depends still less on the power of the exter-
nal signal. It 1. sufficient to present the following data: in the entire
above-indicated range of variation of H. the variation of the controlling signal
power by more than three orders did not lead to a decrease in the efficiency below
the level equal to 601 of its maximum value. This also has a simple explanation:
it is known that the relative fluctuations of the power at the output of any laser
amplifier operating in the quaeistationary node is always significantly less then
the relative power fluctuations at its input as a result of amplification satura-
tion. here, as a result of the presence of several radiation passes through the
mediun. the given effect appears still more rarely.

The results of [2&5] pernit eons conclusions to be drawn which pertain to the
properties not only of controlled but also ordinary lasers with unstable resonators.
It happens that any disturbance on the central section of the cross section strongly
reduces the losses of an espty resonator. and with them. the lasing threshold of

the corresponding laeer. Thus, the presence of even weak anallescale nonuniform-
ities easily leads to the formation of local "stable" resonators near the axis

with all of the consequences following fron this [266]. It can be denonstrated

that a significant reduction in the threshold arising from such causes nust cause

a significant increase in the lasing power. however. in reality the variation of
the conditions on the enall axial section can sharply influence the output power
only in the case where the laser wes quite close to the lasing threshold before
this. If the threshold is greatly exceeded, the output parameters have little sensi-
tivity to variations of the radiation density on a shell segment of the cross sec-
tion independently of whether these variations were caused by the influence of

local disturbances or the radiation is supplied. as in a controlled laser. from
an external source. _

Multipass Amplifiers. In conclusion. let us briefly discuss the "pure" nultipess
slplifisrs, the unstable resonators of which have such large losses that the
self-excitation does not occur even in the absence of an external signal. Most
frequently these enplifiers are constructed on the basis of a telescopic resonator;
then they are called (at least in Soviet literature) telescopic. The possible
versions of telescopic amplifiers are presented in figure 6.19. As a result of the
presence of several passes through the medium. one such amplifier is capable of

replacing several single-pass amplifiers with telescopes between them (see 52.6,
Figure 2.28) [239].

226

PO! OFTIClAl.lEIE(HVLY
c7

.—

figure 6.19. Telescopic amplifiers: a) nultipass, b) three-pass,
c) two-pass enplifiere; in the last anpliiier the mirror aperture
is replaced by an absorbing-screen.

As a rule. amplifiers with unstable resonators are used in the intereediate stages
of powerful giantmpulse lasers (e. g. [2&7, 268]; sinple single-pass snplifiers are
often preferred for the final stages. as they have greater radiation strength
through elieination of the output eirror and concoeitent radiation in the reverse
direction). Therefore. the important thing here is not so much efficiency as it
is the weak-signal gain. which preferably should be misized.

The asplificatlon of the weak signal in the n-pass asplifier is equal to K“, where
K is the enplificetion on one pass of the active sedius. Therefore for the given
K it is necessary to strive for the largest possible n; this proeotes the achieve-
sent not only of high asplification but also satisfactory energy efficiency of the
device.

If K is seall, mltipass systems of the type depicted in Figure 4.19. a can be used;
let us begin with then. He shall consider that the radiation is fed through the
coupling hole in a concave sirror as depicted in the fiﬂsng here u is odd, the
bees cross section expands inside the alplifier by It“. tines. Hence it fol-
love theta-1+2ln (D/d)/lnl1. uheredandb are thebeaadiaeeter at theinput
and the output of the amplifier. respectively. In order to obtain a large n it is
obviously necessary to use a resonator with the lowest possible eagnification )1 end

mini” coupling hole diameter d.

Inaeeuch as the self-excitation threshold of a laser with snall coupling aperture 18
chest equal to the lasing threshold of an ordinary laser vhich is achieved for K -
H. the least admissible value of H is equal to K. As for the diameter of the coup-
ling hole. it is limited fros below. as as have already pointed out. by the pre-
cision of the alignment. The latter. it is true. depends not only on the overall
dimensions of the resonator. but also on ll, but for the large I! characteristic of
the amplifiers this relation is very weak. Therefore se shall consider the minima-
aperture - dianeter fixed and equal to do.

227

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
Time. the maximu- n is “max - l + 2 lnm/doﬂln K. ﬂare amplification of the weak
signal is achieved by Km - Kai/d0)z tines [2&9] (exactly- the sane power trans-

formation coefficient occurs also in controlled lasers operating in the quasista-
tionary mode [191]). Pros the condition am > 5 we obtain the criterion of

applicability of wltipesa system: K < 5/d

for large K three-pass systems can he used (Pigure 4.19 h) insuring a gngrglm

fication coefficient K3. Inasmuch as here H - D/d. even without consiSeringm the1
increase in the threshold as a result of the presence of the coupling hole. self-
excitation should not begin until K - D/d. If we consider that the coupling hole
diameter 1. no smaller than the convex mirror diameter and if necessary can he made as
shown in the figure larger than the convex mirror diameter (at the price of insig-
nificant decrease of output power), the admissible value of K increases ass result of

a corresponding increase in the self-excitation threshold to values on the order of

(D/d)1' '5 to 2 [2691.3ence it folloIs5 that the criterion of applicability of three.
pass tysteme has the form K < (Dido) .

In essence the two-pass systen does not contain a resonator (Figure 4.19. c) and can
he used for K as high as one night like. In order better to "decouple" the two-pass
amplifier with the master oscillator, it is expedient to create a hole in the con-
cave nirror with diameter equal to or somewhat larger than the diameter of the in-
put heam (holes for the analogous purpose not in the concave nirror hut in the cou—

vex mirror can also be made in the case of the systems depicted in figure b.19, a.
b)e

As all these estimates show. if the ratio D/do is sufficiently large, extraordinar-
ily high total amplification coefficients of the weak signal can be achieved in a
wide range of variation of the amplification in one pass. Let us consider an
experiment: in reference [269] indirect measurements were nade of this parameter
in the case of a powerful three-pass neodymium-doped glass amplifier; they led to

a value of 2'10).

It is necessary. however, to consider that the amplification of any laser amplifier
depends exponentially on the excitation energy stored in it. and it decreases
extremely rapidly with depletion of the latter (a different. still sharper de-
pendence is observed only in regenerative amplifiers). For example. it is suffi-
cient that the inverse population he cut in half and the amplification coefficient
of the weak signal will hecoee aqual to the square root of its initial value (under
the conditions of [269]. 4.5-10 ). Therefore when feeding a pulse with energy
sufficient for removal of a significant part of the stored inverse population to
the amplifier input, the amplification at the end of the pulse will become very
small, and the pulse energy ratio at the output and input turns out to be much less
then the initial amplification coefficient of the weak signal (hence it is obvious
that the role of the letter should not be overestimated).

In spite of this fact. the telescopic amplifiers do not in practice provide large
amplifications even in the case where they are measured with respect to the pulse
energies. Thus. in [247], a pulse with an energy of 0.12 joules was fed to the
input of the three-pass neodymium-doped glass amplifier; the output power was 15
joules. In [2&8] the analogous amplifier had an output power of 18 joules for an

228

INJR‘OFFICIAL USE‘OhﬂJV
energy at the input of 0.03 joule (.600 fold amplification with. respect to duet”).
Let us again emphasize that in all the experiments with telescopic amplifiers

(just as with controlled lasers) null divergence of the radiation characteristic
of lasers with unstable resonators was observed.

In conclusion. let us note one deficiency of multipasa systmss which consists in
the following. If the telescopic amplifier is assembled. for example. by the
five-pass system, then thanks to the diffraction. the scattering of the light at
the interfaces. on nenunifornitiss', and so on. some part of the radiation reaches
the limits of the exit aperture, conpleting only three passes with respect to the
active medium, and some. even a total of one pass. Thus. the scattered light
arrives at the output of the amplifier before the basic flux. If we consider that
the first "lots" of the radiation are subject to especially large amplification,

this scattered light can turn out to he not so week by comparison with the basic
signal.

This deficiency can complicate (but not make impossible) the application of tele-
scopic amplifiers in specific lasers for research in the field of thermonuclear
fusion. There, the admissible radiation power incident on the target before the
arrival of the basic pulse is extremely low. It is true that it not excluded that
these phenomena are not so dangerous as it appears: the scattered radiation

theoretically has a quite different radiation pattern and can simply not hit the
target.

There are times when it may also be undesirable that part of the output cross sec-
tion of telescopic amplifiers is covered by the convex mirror and not filled with
radiation, which is detrimental to uniform aposure of the target in laser-driven
fusion. however, 'even though telescopic amplifiers may not be used in such cases.
in my other applications they may be extremely useful.

We conclude with this very interesting example of the use of unstable resonators
for the construction of amplifying systems with pique properties. The neterials

of this chapter indicate that the most varied problems of laser engineering can he
successfully solved using such resonators.

229

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m 5. OPTICAL WW1?! 0? ACTIVE MEDIA AND £13008 0? CORRECTING HAVE
FIGHTS

In the preceding ooctiona of the book we ate talking prinarily about the aoorch
(or optical oyotuo that pornit realization of the limiting energy and angular
:horactoriotico of looor oniooion for tho givon proportion of the octivo ncdiun.
“hon ouch oyotono are found. the {allowing rooult dopondo only on thooo properties.
If tho nodiun io optically nonuniform the anion o'noll divorgenco of the radio'-
tion at the Looor output in the general cooo io unattainablo; it in only poooiblo
to decrease the ottoct o! oono of tho oinploot typoo o: aberrationo it their exis-
tence can he predicted in advance (ooo. for omplo. S 3.5). Therefore oimlton-
oouoly with ioprovonent of the optical oyotono - end on o ouch largo: ocolo -
otudioo woro node of optical nonunifornitioo of variouo activo aodio. and efforts
were node ot a coaprohonoivo docroaoo in the thooo nonunifornitioo. At the use
tine. a'poroiotont ooorch one node to: tho univoroal nothodo which would pornit no
to obtain narrowly directional radiation Iloo with arbitrarily nonuniforn activo

nodium A brief diocuooion of tho oxporioento on thin level will 50 the “5.1“:
of thin chapter.

The out iaportant tonne of optical nonunifornity of active nodio to tho tact that
tho procoao of excitation of tho nodiu io alwoyo occonpaniod by tho dioporoion of
o oigniiicant oncunt of energy in it which in npont on booting tho nodiun. the
tornotion of ohock wavoo in it. and «on. The nature of the nonunifornitioo do-
pondo on the peculiaritieo of the nodiun and the nothod of ito excitation; thoir
voluo incroaooo quickly with tho laoo: power.

ho for high-power goo laaoro. tho nothodo of excitation of certain gaooo and tho
typoo of induced opticol nonunifornitioo oro oxtroooly varied. In pulood electric
diochorgo laooro the active nediuo at tho tine of occurronce of diocharge in heated
intensely. ito ouboequont oxponoion io occoaponiod by tho {oration of ohock waveo;
nonunitornitioo cauoed by nonunitornity of tho diochorgo itoolt are oddod to this.
In“ pulood chaoical loooro nonunifornitioo can be nanifeotod which are cauood by
nonoinultonoity of the occurronco of the roactiono in the entire volune of the
active nodiun, and no on.

The oourcoa of aberrations of opticol chonnolo of high-power continuous-action goo
looero are highly varied. The thornl dotorootiona of tho nirroro, phaoe diotor-
tiono in tho windows uaed for output of the rodidation tron the rooonator are
oddod hero to the opocific phononona occurring on tron-oiooion at light through
foot goo 11m (ocattoring on turbulent pulootiona, and no on). In powerful flow
looero oporating not in the continuous. but in the frequency-periodic node.

230

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
powerful sound waves caused by "pulsating” energy input are auperpossd on the
already couples gas flow pattern.

This entire enormous complex of various phenomenon has still been studied very
little. and it is almost impossible to classify the data available in the literature.
Only one thing is clear — the most favorable situation is the one with optical non-
uniformities in low-pressure gas lasers.

The situation is entirely different with regard to the problem of optical nonuni-
formitias in solid-state lasers. The excitation method in practice in all types of
then is the same - optical pumping - therefore the deformation pattern of the
resonators is not distinguished by special variety; in addition, it is quite simple.
If it is considered that the systematic work in this area started in the first half
of the 1960's, it is no surprise that for a number of types of solid-state lasers
the given problem has already been solved to a significant degree.

In the example of solid-state lasers it is quite obvious how large a variety of
procedures there are which can be used to decrease the resonator deformations; at
the same time what difficulties are caused by the solution of the problem of induced

nonuniformities even in such a comparatively simple case is highly instructive. we
shall limit ourselves to this example.

5 5.1. normal Deformations of Solid-State Laser Cavities -

Origin and Magnitude of Thermal Aberrations in the Case -of Circular Active Rods.
In 5 2.3 we have already mentioned the thermal deformations of a resonator which
occur as a result of nonuniform heating of the active element by pumping radiation.
These aberrations are for the majority of types of solid-state lasers one of the
main obstacles on the path to achievmasnt of diffraction divergence of radiation,
end for the most widespread glass lasers. they are in practice the only obstacle.

In the single pulse mode, the thermal deformations are a consequence of nonunifor—
airy of distribution of heat release with respect to the volune of the sample,
which occurs even when using the most modern illumination systems. In particular,
for standard active eluents of circular cross section, in the best case more or
less axisyunetric pumping distribution can be achieved. The nonuniformity of dis-
tribution with respect to radius is in practice always present. Its nature is de-
termined in the final analysis by two opposite factors. One of then is attenuation
of the pumping radiation on approaching the axis as a result of absorption in the
median. the other one is “fine focusing" of this radiation on the axis as a result
of refraction on passage of the active element through the cylindrical side surface.
Depending on which of these factors predominates. the pumping radiation density on

the axis can be both less than and greater than the density on the lateral surface
[67, 68].

The heat release process in the medium takes place with almost zero lag;
therefore the thermal deformations build up smoothly during a single pumping pulse,
reaching imposing values in the case of high-poser lasers (see, for example, [200]).

Together with the deforutions, the radiation divergence also increases by the end
of the pulse.

As was noted in the same 5 2.3. the thermal deformations of the resonators of con-
tinuous and frequency lasers are especially large. The therul flux in the

23.].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
quasistationary mode here has entirely defined direction —- from the axis of the
element to its lateral surface. through which heat removal is realized. Therefore
the steady-state temperature distribution in lasers of this type is of a quite

regular nature even with noticeable nonuniformity of heat release. On going away
from the axis the temperature decreases approximately by a quadratic law. The

total temperature gradient with respect to the cross section usuallv approaches
close to the limit after which the rupture of the material by the then»? stresses

begins; in the majority of lasers of this type this limits the power of the ptmpimg
radiation introduced into the active element and, with it, the output lasing power.

Let us consider the phenomena occurring on transmission of light through a nonuni-
formly heated active element of circular cross section. We shall consider the
temperature inside the element dependent only on the distance to its axis: T(r.

¢. z) - 'r(r). In order not to deal with awkward tensors. we shall limit ourselves
to the case of isotropic material, which glass also is.

The thermal deformations of the resonator are a consequence of the dependence of the
index of refraction of the medium on the temperature and on the magnitude of the
thermal stresses occurring in the active element: -

8(1', 0..0.)-n.+’(T-T.)+C‘U| +0.0... (1)

where To and no are the average temperature of the medium and the index of refrac-

tion corresponding to it; 8 - child? is the thermal coefficient of absolute variation
of the index of refraction in the absence of stresses; (:1 3 311/30” and (:2 I aslaai
I

are the so-called photoelastic constants [250]; a" are the normal stresses on the
polarisation direction. ai is the sum of the normal stresses with respect to two

other directions (the noml stresses are the diagonal elements of the stress ten-

sor; the positive sign is assigned to the tensile stress). As applied to
our C883

”as (') - "a + MTV) " To! + cluns 4' cs (0, + "9.3- (1,)

where n: 0 is the index of refraction for light polarized in the radial or tangen-
,

tial directions, respectively; or. of a: are the radial. tangential and longitu-

dinal stresses.

Elasticity theory leads to the following expressions fa: the distribution of the
thermal stresses inside a rod of unlimited length for axisylletric distribution of
the temperature [251]: -

“r " {ﬁg-3m - Tom.

a. aﬁlr.+rigr)—2T(rn. (2)
0.- %IT.—T(r)|

Key: a. average

232

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Here a is the coefficient of thermal axpanaion. E is the Young‘s modulus. u is the
Poisson coefficient which fluctuates within the limits of 0.25 to 0.3 for the
majority of materials; To is the average temperature of the rod; T‘"(r) - -

3.} 1'(r’)r’dr’ is the average temperature of the medium in the zone of radius r
P

0
adjacent to the axis.

The substitution of (2) in (la) leads to the known formulae for variations of the
index of refraction inside the circular cylindrical active element first published

in [70, 71]. Let us write out these formulas in the form in which they usually are
used at the present time:

aw) - n. 4 mm - m : omr) — rs (m. (3)

where Pup—m“_‘—M(C.+3C.). Q-I‘TgﬁWn‘cs) are the laser thermal optical

constants introduced in [200]. From (3) it follows that the value of P character-
izes the variations of the index of refraction average with respect to both polari-
zations. Q characterizes birefringence. As will be obvious later, these two constants
remain meaningful and are sufficient for complete description of the resonator de-
formations also in the important case of active elements with strongly elongated
rectangular cross section uniformly illuminated from both lateral surfaces.

The expediency of introducing new thermal optical constants arose from the follow-
ing causes. Before lasers, optics dealt primarily with parts free of large inter-
nal stresses; their temperature could slowly vary with time, remaining. however,

approximately identical throughout the entire volume. if the light beam travels a
distance 2 through such a part. on variation of the temperature of the entire part
by AT the optical length of path inside it varies by A(nl) - nAI-n’. + MT-e. In-
asmuch as the path traveled by the been outside the part decreases in this case by
A1. the total increment of the optical path is A(n£) - A9. - "MI. where H l B (n -

Do is the thermal optical constant which was used earlier in optical instrument
making [252].

In order not to return again to the question of thermal optical constants, let us
note that already at the beginning of the 1970's some researchers preferred to be
guided by the values not of P and Q. but W when selecting the optimal composition
of the neodymium glass (for example. [253, 256]). This was frequently caused by
the fact that for many laser glasses the numerical values of V and P are close to
each other, and frequently by the fact that the authors [253] created a procedure
for measuring H simpler and more convenient than the procedures developed in [200.
255. 256] for direct measurement of P and Q. however, nuserous specific data [256,
257] indicate that the correlation between H and P on variation of the compositions
of the glasses turns out to be not at all ideal. Therefore now in almost all of

the papers devoted to the creation of the so-called athsrmal glass, only P and Q
are used as the criterisl thermal optical constants (for more details see [258]).

Let us continue the investigation of thermal deformations of resonators with circu-
lar cylindrical elements. Formula (3) describes the variations of the index of re-
fraction inside an unlimited long rod. It is necssary to consider the possible

role of the edge effects in real rods of finite length. This problem is nontrivial

and is a source of numerous errors; therefore let us discuss it in somewhat more
detail.

233

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the nature of the distribution of the longitudinal normal stresses and edge effects
in problems of this type is explained by figure 5.1. Let us first imagine that a
rod of length 1. having flat ends in the unheated state is part of the freely sup-
ported (unreinforced) monolithic rod of unlimited length (figure 5.1. a).

how we shall heat the entire infinite rod uniformly over the entire length; for
detersinscy we shall consider the tesperature monotonically decreasing on going
may from the axis. From the srgusents of asymstry it is clear that any cross sec-
tion perpendicular to the axis which was planar in the unstressed rod of unlimited
length r-sins planar also on exisyuetric heating of it. The two isolated cross
sections separated by a distance 9. do not constitute an exception. hence. it
follows that in the given case all of the layers of the rod located at different
distance from the axis acquire the same relative elongation along the resin corre-
sponding obviously to the average heating temperature. For cold layers this elon-
gation is excessive. and for hot layers. it is insufficient. from which we have the
distribution pattern a: depicted in figure 5.1. s described by formula (2).

 

Figure 5.1. Distribution of longitudinal norsel stresses and edge

effects in an active elasent with exisymsetric temperature distribu-

tion: a) circular cylindrical rod of infinite length; b) rod of
finite length.

Let us make sections through the isolated cross sections and thus produce our rod
of finite length. Before this, a system of forces depicted in figure 5.1. a was
applied to both ends of the rod from the outside, which kept then flat in spite of
nonuniform heating. how these forces are rmsoved and the ends are deformed. The
magnitude of the deformations obviously will he the ease as if we applied the same
systes of forces in the opposite direction (Figure 5.1. h) to each end of the

unstressed rod. The results of these forces from each side is equal to zero;
therefore in accordance with the Saint-Venent principle which is known in elasticity
theory [251], they are capable of causing noticeable deformations only in the sec-
tions directly adjacent to the ends. the length of which does not exceed the rod
disaster D. As a result. the total picture of longitudinal defornationa of the rod
acquires the form provisionally depicted in Figure 5.1. h (in reality, in addition
to everything else not only the ends are distorted, but also the sections of the
lateral surface of the rod adjacent to then). The cross sections which were flat

in the unheated rod remain flat also after nonmiforn hesting of it over the extent
of shoot the entire length. Only slall sections near the end freely expand in

2310
FOR omcw. US! ONLY
accordance with their individual tmsperature. Therefore the difference A9. between
the lengths of the rod obtained for measurements along the axis and along the
generatrix (Figure 5.1. b) is not GMT, as can be deeonstrated, but a many tines
smaller value 4:!) AT where AT is the total temperature gradient.

Although the conclusion obtained with the help of elasticity theory and confined
by direct measurements that the amount of sag of the ends is nearly independ-

ent of l and is very smell. was published in 1966 [75] it was not possible at that
time completely to do away with the invalid ideas of thermal deformations. As an
example let us mention the paper [259] in which the estimate of the sag of the
ends and analysis of the consequences following from this were performed beginning
with the formula A9. - our. Apparently, the same error prompted the authors of
[253] to include the term a(n - l)£d‘l' which should not be there in the initial
formula for the resonator deformations.

It is possible to sum up the results. The stress and strain pattern in a rod of
finite length differs from the pattern in an infinite rod only in small sections
of length near the ends of the rod where the state of material is less stressed.
if we consider that the mean variations of the optical path on transmission of
light through the unstressed and thermally stressed parts are described by constants
H and P that are not too different with respect to eagnituds. it becomes clear
that the edge effects in the given situation play a special role. Actually, in
reference [200], they were not manifested noticeably even for i/D - lo. Thus, the
deformations of the resonator with asiayametrically heated rod of length i can be
found by simple multiplication of the equality (3) by 2.. Then, however, we deal
with the case where analogous edge effects will play s larger role.

Consequences of Aberrations and Attempts to Correct Them. Prom formula (3) it

follows that for any form of Mr). except the trivial T(r) - const, changes also
take place in the average index of refraction for two polarizations of the index of
refraction and birefringence. "hat the presence of an index of refraction gradient

leads to. we already know from Chapters 2-6. For quadratic dependence of T on r which
is characteristic of the frequency and continuous lasers. the average index of refrac-
tion is also a quadratic function of r - a powerful thermal "lend' is manifested. If
this lens is in no way compensated for, the angular divergence of the radiation

turns out to be very large. 0n introduction of the corresponding quadratic phase
corrector into the resonator, the divergence decrease [56, 260].

This lens-like nature of a specimen is frequently observed also in the single

flash mode. Its compensation naturally has the same effect on the angular diver-
gence [261. 262]. However, the possibilities of this method of controlling the
thermal "lenses" should not be overestimated. Actual]. . the dynamic correction

of any distortions. including arbitrary "lenticularity is a very difficult prob-
lem. Technically complicated correction methods which will be discussed in the
next two sections have been developed only in very recent times, and they will be
used obviously only in highly critical cases. If we are talking about compare-
tively simple means, it remains only to place the previously selected corrector
inside the resonator. adjust the resonator. considering the subsequently manifes-
ted "lenticulsrity" (this is what was done. in particular, when creating the
monopulse master oscillator in [129]), and so on. In this situation any variations
of the thermal regime of the active element and wiping conditions are sufficient
for compensation to be disturbed. Satisfactory correction in the powerful single
pulse node of free lasing where the magnitude of the deformations changes

235

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
significantly under the effect of the pulse is highly problsnatic. One of the many at-
teapta to create a; element capable of conpansstion for a therssl lens coaing dur-

ing the pulse was undertaken in [263]. This alanent was a mirror that absorbs

a snail portion of the lasing radiation incident on it in its uses and undergoes.
therefore. tharnsl deflection. The airror was successfully tested outside the
resonator, but no special applications were found.

Double refraction also leads to highly unfavorable consequences. It is known that
the results of transnission of planopolarised light through an isotropic nediu.
the optical axis of which is perpendicular to the direction of propagation essen-
tially depends on the nutual orientation of the optical axis and the plane of the
initial polarization. If they are parallel or perpendicular to each other. the
light renains planopolarized. In all the remaining cases the polarization beconee
elliptic - a second linear component appears. and. as is said. the bean depolarizes.‘
In a circular rod with arisy-stric temperature distribution. the local optical
axes of an anisotropic mediu- 'aa a result of the stress effect are directed along
the radii. Therefore the depolarization with respect to passage through this ale-
nent takes place in all sections of the cross section except the ones adjacent to
the tuo straight lines passing through the aria of the elansnt, one of which is
parallel to the polarization plane of the initial been. and the other is perpen-
dicular to it (figure 5.2. a).

If the resonator contains elements realizing the couplets or partial polarisation
of the radiation. the double refraction leads to the highly characteristic "cross“
pattern of the distribution of the polarized conponents with respect to the cross
section. This picture was investigated theoretically and uperinsntally in [266.
265] for the case of week double refraction in planar and telescopic resonators

(in a telescopic resonator it turned out to be nore favorable). however. even with-
out detailed investigation it is clear that the depolarization of such resonators
leads to a reduction in the lasing power inasluch as the radiation of the newly
appearing polarisation cosponent is output in one way or another free the resonator.
ulting no contribution to the useful signal. In the case of large-scale double
refraction the degree of depolarization and power losses batons significant (las-
m; can even he curtailed). It is possible to avoid this. using the systen pro-
posed in [266]. the meaning of which reduces to the fact that the resonator for
eniesion of mdeairable polarization "is blocked" - this radiation returns. not
reaching the part of the optical system which contains the shutter and the output
airror (Figue 5.2. b).

Even in cases where double refraction does not lead to power losses (in particular.
in the absence of polarizers). a nunber of undesirable effects still retains both
in the oscillatorsand in the ssplifiers. In particular. the natural oscillations
of the resonator with axisy-stric anisotropic nadiun cannot have a polarization
state identical with respect to the entire cross section. As a rule. this leads to
a sharp decrease in the spatial coherence of the generated radiation; in the best
case the laser begins to operate on nodes. the direction of the polarization of the
radiation of which in each segnent of the cross section is oriented along the radius
or tangentially [267. 268]. From 5 2.2 it is known that such polarization states
are obtained only as a result of superposition of higher-order nodes than zero

(see Figure 2.16). In laser enlifiers the double refraction even in the single
pulse node can lead to nonuniform distribution of the radiation intensity with
respect to cross section [269. 270]; it prevents the creation of highly efficient
IIultipass anplifiers “decoupled" with respect to polarization [271].

236
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
44:3 -— '44
Qw-zaE‘Zlm-r
‘E’QIL-AJ}

diceted to the aide by the large arrow doea not undergo depolarization);
h) the reeonator for the plane-polarization radiation later in which
double refraction doee not lead to energy loaeea; c) diagrae of the
double-pate amplifier with conpeneated double reirection; d) diegran of
an analogoue laser; 1 - active elenent in the form of a circular cylin-
der, 2 - completely reflecting nirror, 3 - output mirror (etaclted).

6 - Glen prian (radiation of one polarization paeeea without loaeea.
the other in reflected iron the diagonal splicing plane). 5 - tetra-
hedral reflecting prion. 6 — quarter-wave phaee plete, the principal
direction of which ie 65' with the plane at the figure, 7 — polariaer

All of theee phenomena greatly coeplicete the construction of tingle—node laser
systems with alell radiation divergence. Therefore the efforta to coupletely avoid
the coneequencea of double retraction are of unqueationed intereat, realizing 90-
degree rotation of the polarization plane on the path between the two identical
ective elemente. Then the radiation having r-polariaation in the first element

will have o-polarization in the eecond element. and vice varea. Obvioualy, the
phaee chute between the different polarieati'u components in the two active ele-

Iente are conpeneeted for here, and the unilaatationa of double retraction
237

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
disappear [272]. It is possible to achieve the analogous effect also for one
active element, rotating the polarisation plane on the path from the element to
the nirror and hack (which can be achieved. for example. using a lbs-degree Paraday
rotstor of the polarization plane installed between the element and the mirror).

A detailed analysis of the possible diagrams of two-pass amplifiers and lasers

with compensated double refraction. two of which are presented in Figure 5.2, c. d,
was performed in [273]. The experiments performed there demonstrated. on the one
hand, that when using these systans, the double refraction actually does not lead

to such a sharp decrease in power as in ordinary lasers; on the other hand they
demonstrated that the required accuracy of all of the optical elements and their
mutual orientation here are far from simply achieved. In addition. the conpensetion
of the double refraction still turns out to be incomplete inasmuch as the beams

pass through the active element nonparallel to its axis as a result of the presence
of the same thermal aberrations. -

Let us nention such a characteristic method of compensation of the thermal deforms-
tiona as the creation in the active elenant of the correspondingly selected pre-
liminary stresses by quenching it [276]. and let us proceed to the efforts to
decrease the defornetions themselves.

Various methods of Reducing Cavity Defor-tions. The nest natural method
of decreasing the thermal deforaations of the resonator is the adoption of all
possible measures to insure the maxi-us uniforn temperature field with respect to
the active sample. In the single pulse node the decisive role is obviously played
by uniformity of the pumping distribution with respect to the volume of the active
element. Inasmuch as ideal unifornity is still not achieved, sometimes a tempera-
ture gradient is created in the active element which is inverse to the gradient
occurring as a result of pulping. This can be achieved. varying the tesperature of
the coolant in time according to a given law {275] or heating the sample by an
additional puaping pulse and waiting a defined time until the required temperature
distribution is established in the cooling process [271]. In frequency lasers
operating in a series of pulses, obviously it is best of all to cool the active
element only in the gaps between the series. offering it the possibility of being
freely heated during the series itself , which insures the minimun temperature
gradients with respect to cross section [276]. _

From this list alone, the necessity for more radical nethods of elininsting thermal

defomstions is clear. Actually, such methods exist. One of them consists in the
fact that the lateral surfaces of the active element are nade planar, and the light
flux passes through the sample inclined to these surfaces and undergoes total
internal reflection on them. here each ray of the parallel been crosses through
all of the layers of the sample with different temperature and index of refraction.
which leads to equalization of the optical paths, that is. the absence of thermal
deformations.

The generation of radiation beams experiencing reflections from the side walls of
the active elements of rectangular and octagonal cross sections was first observed
by Venyukov. et a]... in 1963-1964 [18]. The different system of lasers and

amplifiers with total internal reflection in the active elenent were subjects of
lively discussion in 1965-1968 [277. 139. 150]; two of than borrowed from [139. 140]
are presented in Figure 5.3. It is true that the creators of these systems pri-
marily pursued the goal of using sharp dependence of the reflection coefficient on

238

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the angle of incidence near the critical angle of total internal reflection for
angular selection of the radiation (ass 5 2.6, Figure 2.26, d). but it turned out
that the prohlma of thermal deformations is also solved sinlltaneously 160].

Figure 5.3. Diagrams of lasers with total internal reflection in the
active element: a). b) diagrams proposed in [139, 140], respectively.

Finally, in 1970 attention was again attracted to this area by the papers of Mikael-
yen and D'yachsnko [278], who did not try to use the mentioned dependence of the
reflection coefficient on the angle of incidence, but were only interested in the
problem of thermal deformation. They classified the resonators which they called
wave guide resonators and demonstrated the possibility of eliminating the thermal
defomtiona experimentally. however. lasers of this type did not become wide-
spread as a result of difficulty of manufacturing the active elements, complexity
of their cooling and other similar causes.

The method consisting in transmission of plane-polarised light through active
elements again inclined with respect to the plane side surfaces but at the Brewster
angle so that the light is not reflected. but on the contrary, passes through the
surfaces almost without losses turned out to he more vital. This method is used
when constructing frequency lasers (for example. [279]) and also powerful output
stages of the :onopulse lasers [280. 281]. In the frequency lasers the elements are
in a coolant, the presence of which decreases the Brewster angle and reduces unavoid-
able losses on transmission of the light through the surfaces to an extraordinarily
small magnitude. This. in turn. creates the possibilities for placement of a large
number of active elements in one resonator to which the form of thin disks is
assigned (Figure 5.1.. a). Small thickness of them implies a sharp decrease in the
temperature gradients and promotes an increase in the uniformity of the pumping
distribution.

in the terminal amplifiers of 818'“? Pulalasers the cooling or i-srsion liquids are
not used as a result of the low self-focusing threshold characteristic of them.

Therefore such amplifiers are capable of operation only in single-pulse modes.
There is a positive side here - the thermal loads for small. and

the thickness of the active elements can he made sufficiently large; thus. in
[281] it was 30 mm. This permits us to limit ourselves to a moderate number of
elements. The diameter of the light aperture here usually is very large and fre-
quently reaches 200 ma [281]. Therefore it is necessary to realize the pumpinga
through the cane lateral surfaces through which the amplified radiation is

239

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
transmitted and locate the closest so that they do not shield each other fro. the
pmping source (Figure 5.4, b). In spite of its unique characteristics. the disc

amplifiers are used only in exceptional cases as a result of snot-nous dimensions
and large labor consuption of manufacture.

 

Figure 5.4. Diagram of the arrangement of the active elements: a)
disc elenents in the coolant (frequency laser); b) flat plates in the
air (aonopulae laser).

The most fruitful idea pertaining to the methods of controlling thernal operations
in the resonator and amplified channels lies in a somewhat different area. It was
first stated by Spitzer [71]; it pertains only to loss lasers and reduces to the
fact that the thernal defornations can be significantly decreased by the selection
of the glass cosposition. The fact is that the variations of the index of refrac-
tion as a result of the temperature gradient itself and the stresses arising here
in practice srenalways in opposite directions - in the fornula for P the terms
with dn/d‘r and an/ao are subtracted from each other (8 < 0, c1 4- 3c < 0). This
is easily explainable: a decrease in the indoor of refraction with in increase in
temperature is connected to a significant degree with reduction of the density of
the medium. and the thermal stresses always prevent redistribution of the density
in the nonuniforaily heated part (see tigers 5.1 and the co-ents to it). At the
same tine the thernooptical properties of the nediun depend. of course. not only
on its density (which is indicated at least by the presence of double refraction),
and there is a certain possibility of independent variation of sons of the parame-
ters entering into (1), (3). The thermal coefficient of the index of refraction
B can vary within especially broad limits. and P also with it.

The experiments in this area quickly led to inpressive progress in the field of
neodyniw glass lasers. Over the course of several yeerc c: entire series of so-
called ethereal laser glasses appeared in which one linear conhination or another
of themoptical constants P and Q reduce to zero. In order to understand what the
developers of laser glasses are striving for. let us return to expression (3).

The optimal version is. of course. equality of P and Q to zero. In this case the
thermal defamation: nust be absent for any fora of 'l‘(r). In recent years it was

actually possible to create glass in which 1’ and Q are extranely snell at room
temperature [282) (the stipulation with respect to the temperature arose from the
fact that the constants P and Q themselves are slowly varying functions of it [283],
and athermelness is insured only in a narrow temperature range). however. such

260

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
response can he achieved only for phosphate glass having much lower chemical
stability and thermal strength than the most widespread silicate glasses. As for
silicate glass. in different types of it. the value of Q is in practice the same;
only P is subject to variation.

If Q i 0 the thermal deformations cannot be avoided for arbitrary form of T(r).
Hhen the temperature distribution is of a regular nature. some possibilities
appear in this respect. In particular. for quadratic dependence of T on r charac-
teristic of frequency and continuous lasers, formula (3) acquires the form

' "u - "e + PAT/2 — (P :i: QIZ)AT(rIa)’,

where AT is the total temperature gradient between the axis and the side surface.
and a is the radius of the rod. Hence it follows that for P 3.0/2 I O the thermal
deformations for the r or o polarization radiation are absent [286). For frequency
lasers P - Q/2 usually approach zero; the divergence of their radiation actually is
sharply reduced as this value is decreased (see. for example, [257]). However, as
has already been pointed out, double refraction in circular active elements pre-
vents plane-polarized radiation lasing; therefore the maximum smell divergence still
remains unattainable.

Lasers Using Active Elements With Elongated Rectangular Cross Section. From every—
thing that has been discussed it follows that even defined possibilities for con-
trolling thermoelectrical characteristics of glass do not permit complete solution
of the problem of thermal deformations in lasers based on traditional active ele-
ments of circular cross section. It is also obviOus that the primary causes of
all of the difficulties here are the following: 1. The form of the stress dis-
tribution near the circular element in the general case does not repeat the form of
the temperature distribution (sea (2)); therefore exact compensation for the vari-
ations of the index of refraction caused by its dependence on temperature and on
the stresses it is possible only for certain specific forms of t(r). 2. Local
optical axes of the anisotropic medium from which the circular axisymmetricelly
stressed rod consists are oriented along the radii and their directions are there-
fore different in different sections of the cross section which prevents plane-
polarized radiation lasing.

     
 

      

.m......~. nu
zﬂlllelwllllwtllll 4.

Figure 5.5. Active element in the
form of a flat plate.

the origin of both of these phenomena is organically connected with the circular
shape of the cross section, and on variation of the type of symmetry of the cross
sections they can disappear. Actually. let us consider the optical properties of

241
FOI.OFF1C1AL US£<DNIN
glaae plate hounded hy the planee x I- in and heated ay-aetrically with the plane
at - 0 (Figure 5.5). Ohvioualy the local optical axea inaide thie plate together
with the tanperature gradient have the ease direction in the-entire value. In
addition, iron elaeticity theory it in known that the ahape of the atreea diatri-

hution in the abaence of external forcea here conpletely repeata the fore of the
temperature diatribution [251]: .

o,ao. ‘Ul-a. -%lr,-r(sn.

where r.-_:.Sr(:)dx- ia the average tenperature. Suhatituting theae for-ole in

I
(l) and considering that the light ia propagated through the plate along the a-exia.
we obtain the following relationa [200]:

M,-n.+(P:i:Q)[1'(x)-hl. (6)
where nx y la the index of refraction for light polarieed along the x and y-exea,

I

reapectively. n0 is aa before—the index of refraction in the eediue without atreeaea

at a tenperature of To.
Hence the ohvioua conclueion tollowe inediately: if the plate node of glaae with
P + Q 0 0 or P ~ Q - 0 ia ueed ae the active element, the deforletiona of the

reaonator for plane-polarized radiation with one of the two directione of polari-
zation met he ahaent for any teeperature diatrihution. Let ua only reeeeber that
thie diatrihution euet alwaya ruain ay-etric with reepect to the x - 0 plane; it
thie is not eo. the plate will hand. and for deacription of the reaonator deforme-

tione. a nuch nore couple: expreaaion ia required in which 14 will figure in addition
to P and Q. -

It ruaine only to diacuae the edge etfecta and the polarization characterietica of
the generated radiation. Let ue begin with the ainpler prohlee of edge effecta.

In euccly the eae way at in the cue of a circular cylinder. the width of the region
adjacent to the edgee of the plate inaide which the atreaaed and attain pattern
differa significantly iron the pattern in an infinite plate doea not exceed the plate
thickneaa (which ia confirmed by the reaulta of the correeponding calculationa
[285]). however, here in contraat to the circular eleeente. thie region bordere

the plate on all four aidea (croaehatchad in Figure 5.5). Whereaa the eonae adjacent
to the ends of the element do not play a epaciel role (for the ease reaeona no for
circular rode). the situation to aonawhat ditierent with regard to the aonea ad-
jacent to the aidea — the light peeaea croaewiae through then, and the effect

turns out to be aignificant along the entire length. hence it followa that for

large tenperature gradient the radiation paeaing near the aidea will deviate eig-
nificantly fro- the rectilinear direction and will not ate a contribution to the
central pealt of the radiation pattern. Thus. iron the point of view of thermal de-
forutiona it ia deairahle that the thickneaa of the plate determining the width of
the edge zonea he as small ea poaaihle; on the other hand, as the thickneaa de-

creaaee. the vibrations of the active eluent [192] and its heating at pumping tine
increaae. '

262

FOROFFICIALUSIONlY
Now let us discuss the problen of the polarization of the stimulated radiation. In-
as-lch as for Q i 0 the resonator deformations can he reduced to zero only for
plane—polarized radiation with coepletely defined direction of polarization, it is
necessary in acne way to achieve a situation where the laser will operate on this
radiation. Double refraction is not dangerous in this case: the required direction
of polarization is parallel or perpendicular to the direction of the optical axis
of the nedim. The data of [266] and subsequent experimental papers indicate that
certain other theoretically important reasons which could cause the decrease in
power in the case of intraresonator polarization sel:ction of the radiation are
absent in the case of neodymium glass lasers.

Thus. the transition to elements with strongly elongated rectangular cross section
permits the use of comparatively siaple neane to avoid thermal deformations with-
out lowering the lasing power. Even the use of a polariaer is not sandatory in
this case: it is possible to select conditions such that the "hareful" polarization

component will be suppressed autoutically. Let us explain this in the example of
the single pulse node.

In the case of symtric two-sided illumination of the planar elenent. the ninimun
pumping density always falls to the central plane (3 - 0); in the single pulse
node, the tenperature obviously is normal at the pulping time. Let the coeposition
of the glass be such that P - Q - 0; inasmuch as usually Q > 0, P + Q in this case
also turns out to be positive. Pros fomla (6) it follows that in this case for
radiation polarized along y. the index of refraction gradient is absent. and for
the other polarization component the elesent is equivalent to a scattering lens.

In planar or telescopic resonators this necessarily leads to an increase in losses;
therefore the x-conponent can be present equally with the y-conponent only at the
very beginning of the punping pulse until a noticeable temperature gradient appears.

Spontaneous polarization of the laser emission with planar active eleeents aust

occur under certain other conbinations of conditions and be actually obeerved in
practice [286].

In spite of individual hopeful experiments with planar active elements to 60°20b°600
m3 in size [192], lasers of this type still have not become especially widespread.
The reason for this is that for now for the majority of solid state lasers an

effort is being made to consider the possibility of Q-lwitched operation. The
large-cross section planar active elanenta are not too suitable

for nonopulsed lasers -— this configuration is highly mfavorable free the point of
view of superluninescence which plays an extraordinarily ilportant role in the
"318”" operating node. is for glass lasers with high output energy in the free

lasing node. the procedure discussed above for constructing then obviously is
Optimal [194].

In conclusion. let us briefly touch on the prohlens of thermal deforestione of the
liquid laser resonators. The value of dn/d‘r here is very large and as a result of
the absence of static stresses is not compensated for any way; therefore the varia-
tions of the index of refraction turn out to be very large. The always available
sizing of different layers of liquid leads to the fact that the temperature field
is unstable. and the nonuniforsities are irregularly distributed with respect to

volume. For these reasons snall angular divergence of the powerful liquid lasers
almost unattainable. Therefore the liquid eedia are widely used only in

263-2“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
snail lasers with tunahle frequency. on the angular divergence of the mission of
which as a rule special requiremnts are not imposed.

S 5.2. Phase Correction of Have Fronts. Dynanic Holography end Stimulated Scattering

Inasmuch as in the optical channels of lasers usually all possible nonunifornities
are present. even an insignificant decrease in which frequently is extremely con-
plicated. there is a natural effort to find aethods permitting insurance of high
output chug-“tuna” even when such inhonogeneitiea are present. a brief dis-

cussion of research for this purpose sakes up the content of this and the follow-
ing sections.

Optical-Mechanical Correction Systems. Let us begin with the possibilities which
are related to purely aechanical displacelents of certain elenents with respect to
the thermal. First of all. the systems for automatic adjustment of laser resonators
which are gradually entering into practice deserve attention. Their function is
adjustment of the nutual arrangeeent of the sirrors in order to optieize any laser
pareneter. Without going into the technical details. let us only discuss the nost
theoretical problem of selecting a para-star, the magnitude of which is subject to
optimization.

The output para-star of the laser which is quite "sensitive“ to

the resonator geonetry and at the use time most simply controlled is its power.
Therefore it is easy to create a self-adjustnsnt systen which maintains the maxi-
In high level of output power. however. this operating algoritln can be far from
always used: the pursuit of an insignificant gain in power can easily becone
enveloped in the large fluctuations in the position of the resonator axis. and.
along with it. also the direction of the generated radiation. In addition, cases
are possible where the shift of the resonator asis leading to an increase in power
is acconpanied not only by "drug" of direction. but also other undesirable con-
sequences. He encountered one such staple in § 4.2 - as the resonator axis of
the flow laser approaches the point of entrance of the flow of sodium into the
resonator which is advantageous tron the point of view of efficiency. the nonuni-
foraity of the radiation distribution with respect to cross section of the lased
been and. consequently, the divergence increase sharply. Finally. it is necessary
not to forget that the systens based on Ieaauring output power can realize adjust-
nent of the resonator only sons time after lasing has started. Therefore for the
overwhelming majority of pulsed lasers such systena are disadvantageous. It is

starting of which frequently such large nisalignnenta occur that the laser in

For all these reasons, the nest efficient operating algorithn for the autoadjust‘
sent systole is maintenance of the resonator axis in the given position. It is

possible to deal with this problem by using the radiation of a low-power external
source which will permit adjustment of the laser without beginning of its lasing.

nentioned paper [217] was constructed by the sane principle; the radiation of the
auxiliary helius-ncon laser is input to the resonator here along its axis through
a small opening in the center of one of the mirrors. Undergoing multiple reflec-
tions. this radiation then "spreads" over the entire cross section. If the
resonator was misaligned, the intensity distribution with respect to cross sec-
tion turns out to be say-attic. which is used for generating the error signal

245‘
roe omcw. we ONLY
putting the corresponding automation circuits into operation. The system described
in [217] permits insurance also of satisfactory precision of adjustment of the
errors (.5") and "capture" of the initial misalignment (S‘-7') in a sufficiently
large range of angles. The application of an auxiliary laser and the receivers of
its radiation operating on a frequency differing from the frequency of the basic
laser permits possible interference caused by the lasing process in the latter to
be avoided. The system with introduction of the auxiliary laser through the central
opening is also convenient in that this radiation passes through the adjusted reson-
ator on the same path as the generated radiation; therefore it can be used so that
the radiation will be directed at the measuring devices and so on visually or auto-
matically.

A further step in improving the methods of mechanical automatic tuning of lasers is
the application of the so-cslled adaptive optical system. Linnik's idea [286]
about the possibility of autocompenaation of phase distortions of the wave front
caused by a turbulent atmosphere and interfering with the observation of remote
objects marked the beginning of this area of study. The typical method of solving
this problem by the methods of adaptive optics consists in the following: one of
the elements of the optical channel of the transceiving system, for example, the
mirror objective of the shaping telescope is made up of many more small mirrors
having the possibility of insignificant translational displacements. By using
these displacements, compensation of the large-scale phase distortions is also
insured. ‘

when creating such devices it is most complicated to deal with the generation of
error signals. bet, for emple, the problem of the formation of a beam with di-
vergence as small as possible be solved. The recording and analysis of the form of
the intensity distribution in the far zone with invariant arrangement of the indi—
vidual parts of the composite mirror still do not permit judgsent of which of their
displacements are needed to improve this form. Actually, the same distribution in
the far zone can be observed for different forms of the wave front; thus. in § 1.1

we are dealing with the fact that the beams distinguished by the sign of the cur-
vature of the spherical wave front had identical divergences.

In order to obtain the required information about the deviation of each individual

mirror from its optimal position corresponding to the maximum axial luminous intensity
of the devices as a whole. it is simplest to use the following fact. The dependence
of total axial luminous intensity 1’ on the coordinate of one of the mirrors 3 measured
along the axis perpendicular to its surface is depicted in Figure 5.6. If this

mirror undergoes oscillations with of amplitude 11 much shorter than a wavelength nears
its optimal position so. the axial luminous intensity as is obvious in the figure. re-

mains almost constant. If the average position of the mirror is shifted to any point
:1 noticeably remote from no. the magnitude of the axial luminous intensity begins to

fluctuate with the same frequency as the mirror. The relation between the phases
of these two fluctuations will obviously depend on the direction from optimal that
the average mirror position is shifted.

Now. leaving only one of the mirrors stationary. let us force each of the remaining
ones to oscillate with its individual frequency and let us carry out spectral
expansion of the time dependence of the axial liaisons intensity. Obviously, the

presence in this expansion of components with frequencies equal to the frequencies
of the oscillations of individual min-ore will indicate that the positions of the

m‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
--ll...---~--_

 

s, o t

Figure 5.6. Axial luminous intensity as a function of the position
of one of the parts of the composite nirror.

given nirrors are subject to adjustment. the phase relations provide inforeation
about the direction of the required shifts.

This principle was also proposed and realized in the known papers [287, 288]. In
the first of then an adaptive systea of seven elements was asnufactured and success-
fully tested; in the eecOnd. a systea of 18 ole-ants. Later the possibilities of
adaptive optics were unconditionally expended. Instead of the set of individual
mirrors now single flexible airrora are beginning to be used - this corresponds

to the transition fron "step" approximation of the given phase distribution to sore
iaproved approxiastion using continuous functions. The nunber of independently
adjustable paraneters will also increase; f'eniliarization vith [336] gives s suffi-
ciently good idea about the paths of developaent of adaptive optics.

In spite of ell of these prospects it is difficult to count on broad application of
adaptive optics directly in the laser resonators: the creation of a low-inertia
adjustable mirror capable of operating under high been load conditions is s highly
conplicated problen. In addition. the eaell phase aberrations and unstable reson-
ators. as we have seen in Chapters 3. 6. cannot lead to either aultinodal lasing or
to large reduction in the output power. and they only cause phase distortions of
the wave front of the generated radiation which can be entirely conpenaated for
also outside of the resonator. Therefore the optinl location of the coupler
adjustable Iirrors is the exit of the shaping systss where the density of the
radiation usually is nany times less than the density inside the oscillator. As
for resonators. song their mechanical correction devices probably only the slap-
lest autoadjuetnent aystens have becone widespread which can be supplemented by

Other nethoda of conversion of the wave front fora are also of great interest. The
most universal and canon of then is obviously holography.
/
/::\ 2:?
III II I
a) b} .0

Figure 5.7. Problem of holographic corrections: a) recording of a
thin hologram; b). c) reproduction of one of the beams on illuaination
of a hologram by the others; d) beans and three-dimensional hologran.

 

these beans -- I — is the light scattered free the object illusinated by the co-
herent radiation; its wave front has a cospler shape which carries information
about the ills. of the object. The boss II - the reference been - has a regular.
for example. planar shape of the wave front. When the hologrn. which is an
inprint of the interference pattern between these two beans is node and than
illuminated by the reference beam itself II. the light scattered froa it in the
direction of one of the diffraction orders has. as is known. the sons structure as
the been I has during the recording, that is. as before, it is the carrier of all
of the infornation about the image of the object (Figure 5.7, b). louver. the
light beam of I and II are theoretically entirely equivalent. If the hologran is
illuminated not by the reference beam. but by the object been I the light scattered
in the corresponding direction will have the same structure as been II has during
the recording, that is, it will have regular (planar) shape of the save front.

The given process is also depicted in figure 5.7, c.

This property of a holograph also provides the basis for holographic asth of
correcting the wave front of the wave mission first realized by Soakin, et al.
[289]. The functions of the object he. of I here are perforned by the laser rao
diation. the shape of the wave front of which is subject to correction. The co-
herent reference beans II with flat wave front can be forned. for example, fron
part of the some emission transmitted through an angle selector.

when using holography to decrease the convergence of the laser

emission, the decisive role is played where the density of the

efficiency of conversion - the fraction of the power of the beam illuminating the
holograa which pertains to the required diffraction order. The lowest effi--

ciency not exceeding a few percentages occurs for thin amplitude hologram which
are obtained on ordinary processing of thin-layer photographic natcrial. Bleach-
1'18 converts the eotallic silver to a transparent conpound with a different in-
dex of refraction than for the emulsion gelatin. and the hologran is converted

from an amplitude hologrsn to a phase hologr- — the peaks and the ninina of the
recorded interference pattern on the hologran eade correspond to sections of
different optical thickness. The efficiency of thin phase holograns can theore-
tically approach 301; such holograms were used when investigating the possibilities
cf the given correction sethod used by the same group of authors in 1969-1972 [289-
91 . .

m'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Aaong the other results contained in the mentioned papers. the realization of

phase correction of the radiation of the helium-neon laser generated on one trans-
verse node of the stable resonator Two [290] deserves to be noted. Before cor-
rection. the lasing been had a flat equ phasal surface in the hologram zone and

just as the radiation of any nonzero node of a stable resonator, it had sign-
variable anplitude distribution (see 5 2.1). It is possible to interpret the
change in sign of the snplitude as a phase shift by 11’; as a result of the holo-
graphic correction such phase shifts disappear. and the wave front becoaes genuinely
planar (although the amplitude distribution naturally remains nonuniform). Under

axial luminous intensity increased noticeably although the energy efficiency of the
conversion was a total of ~19: [29111.

ho less interesting experiments were performed with a ruby laser operating in the
ordinary "spike" free lasing node [291]. here the gain in the divergence turned
out to be still note significant. The possibility of realizing the correction it-
self in the free lasing node which is note frequently sultinodal when using a
planar resonator is, generally speaking, connected with two facts. First. in the
.case of an optically nonuniforn active nediun the general distortion of the wave
front caused by aberrations of the resonator characteristic of different trans-
verse nodes can prevail over the differences in the shape of the wave fronts of the
individual nodes (which. probably, occurred also in [291]). Secondly, although the
spatial field distributions can vary fron spike to spike. the peaks of these dis-
tributions naturally do not coincide; therefore the overlap of the holograne re-
corded by the radiation of the individual “spikes" is only partial. However, par-
tial superposition of the holograns must lead to a reduction in energy efficiency
of conversion; under the conditions of [291] it was a total of 32.

The successful perfor-ence of the individual experinents could not free the given
nethod of holographic correction of the serious deficiencies organically inherent
in it. The use of thin-layer photographic nateriels alone i-ediately inposes 1: id
restrictions on the wgmgwavelength and on the adusaible radiation flux densi es
and. finally, the energy efficiency of conversion. It is still nore inortant that
the correction using the previously nanufactured holograns 1. generally pog.1b1.
only in for! cases where the laser operates mder exceptionally stable conditions.
and the shape of the wave front of the generated radiation renains the sane.

All of this dictates the transition to dynamic volumetric phase holography based on
reversible changes in the index of refraction of certain nonlinear media in the
radiation field; as a result of the presence of the known Bragg condition, the
light incident on the three-dinessionsl hologrsn is scattered predoninately in one

diffraction procedure. and the efficiency of conversion can theoretically reach
100:. ‘

All of the subsequent studies in the given field have proceeded along this path.
The system which is used for correction by the nethods of dynanic three-dimensional
holography is depicted in Figure 5.1, d. the volunetric interference between two

 

J"Having high energy efficiency. although less elegant. the procedure for realizing
the correction in such cases with the help of a stationary phase plate was de-
scribed after several years in [292].

249‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
coherent light beams leads to the fact that a holographic phase lattice isformed in
the nonlinear medium consisting of alternating layers with different index of re-
fraction. If sucha lattice is fixed in some way and then illuminated by one of the
beans participating in the process of its formation. as a result of reflection
from thalatticeit acquires the structure of the second been entirely similarly to
how this occurs in the case of a thin hologram (see figure 5.7, a-c). Reflection
takes place without loss of intensity if the absorption in the medium is quite low,
the lattice is sufficiently thick (the number of its periods along the direction of
the incident been must be significantly greater than one). and the condition An/n <<

“sin 8 is satisfied [293, 296], where An is the adulation amplitude of the in-
dex of refraction, 26 is the angle between the initial beams (see Figure 5. 7, d).
The meaning of the last condition reduces to the fact that the reflection from one
lattice period taken separately must be quite small; only then does the three-
dimensional nature of the lattice acquire a genuinely important role. Otherwise
the light. just as with a thin lattice will be scattered also in other directions.
Hereafter we shall consider that the conditions of three dimensionality are satis-
fied. and the scattering of the light in other directions is absent.

Now let us consider a real situation where both light beams exist simultaneously
together with the three-dimensional hologram created by them. As a result of the
interaction of each of these beam with the hologram, scattered (or. if one likes.
reflected from the hologram) radiation appears. However. inasmch as the shape of
the wave front of the scattered radiation coincides with the shape of the wave
front of another beam, the structure of the initial two beams remains unchanged;
only redistribution of their intensities can occur.

The idea of the dynamic holographic correction is connected with this redistribu-
tion: if it actually occurs, the possibility appears for transmission of the energy
of a powerful light beam. the shape of the wave front of which is subject to cor-
rection, to a reference beam with small initial intensity and plane wave front.

This method of obtaining (more precisely, amplifying) narrowly directional irradia-
tion is obviously applicable when the shape of the wave front of the powerful beam
varies in time; it is only necessary that these changes be sufficiently small
during the lattice relaxation time.

Conditions of Realizing the Process of Holographic ”Transfer" and Its Energy Effi-
ciency. "Transfer" on Thermal Gratings. In spite of the apparent "transparency”
of the above-discussed idea of using dynamic holography. in reality it is not so
simple. A more careful analysis indicates that under steady conditions and in an
isotropic nonlinear mediun redistribution of the energy between beams of identical
frequency does not occur whatever the initial ratio of their intensities [295].
The reason for this is the following. Strictly defined phase relations exist be-
tween any of the two light beams and the radiation scattered in its direction as a
result of interaction of the second beam with the volumetric hologram. These re-
lations depend on how the holographic lattice is arranged relative to the inter-
ference pattern between the beams. Under the above indicated conditions the posi-
tions of the lattice and the interference pattern coincide - the extrema of the
index of refraction are matched with the extrema of the total field intensity. It
turns out that in this case the scattered radiation is phase shifted by «[2 with
respect to the radiation of the beam to which it is added. and therefore it does
not cause a change in its intensity. The phase shift and together with it the
result of the interaction of the beams with the hologram, becomes different only
when the holographic lattice is shifted for certain reasons by a fraction of a
period in the transverse direction with respect to the interference pattern.

250

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Initially we shall consider the hypothetical case where the radiation absorption
in a nonliear nediun is absent. Por derivation of the corresponding equations let
us represent the total field of two beans in the fen

E (r) - A. an (UM) + A. up War).

where A1 and A2 are the couple: asplitudes of beans I and II. v.1 and Ir.2 are the

wave vectors of these beans where k1 - k2 - k0 - Zeno/A where n0 is the index of

refraction of the nonlinear nediul in the absence of a field. The index of refrac-
tion in the presence of the two bases will be considered equal

a - non +a|Au oxn=(l*nr)+ Auxpﬂkﬁuﬂw) l’]- (5)

The value of the index of refractian staged with respect to the lattice period
obviouslyia n - coll + Mullen + IA2I )l. and the sodulation uplitude An -

ZIMIAZI. The introduction of the factor exp (id) in one of the terns in the

right-hand side of (5) leads. as is easy to see. to the fact that the holographic

lattice described by this fornula is shifted with respect to the interference pat-
tern by a fraction of a period equal to 6121!; the direction of the shift for 6 > 0
is shown in Figure 3. 7. d by the dotted arrow. If the conditions are steady state,

and the nediun is isqtropic. 6 - 0; then the for-ula for n acquires a standard
for- n - no(l + nIBI)

The calculation of the interaction of with a nonlinear ssdiun reduces
to the solution of the wave equation V B + It 3 - 0 considering the dependence of
k2 on the radiation field. lass-uch as the terse with a play the role of a snail
correction in the formulas for n. the following approximate for-ale is valid for

2 ' kg(n/no)2:
t" z #2]! -|- 2e| A. esp (lbw) + A, ssp(lk,r) orp(l6)|‘|.

Substituting this formula and the expression for E in the wave equation, as a re-
sult of the calculations analogous to those discussed in the known paper by Kogsl'-

nik [296] by the theory of three-dimensional holograss we obtain the following
differential equations relating A1 and A2:

4.4
35+ -. c-‘gl(-..—~.)+a.a|4...ruv(: w). (6)
wherei are the distances along the directions of propagation of beans I and II,

respecthely.

The equations obtained have obvious meaning. The first terms in their right-hand
sides are identical and do not depend on the lattice shift parameter 6; they

describe the phase incursion occurring as a result of the fact that the average
index of refraction hum the presence of a field differs from no. The origin of
the latter is explicitly related to the reflection free the lattice. This is

251

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
indicated prinsrily by the presence of the "shift" factor exp Qi‘o'). In addition,
inssuich as An ~ Ia1A2I. the anplitude of the radiation scattered in the direction

of bean I nust be proportional to lilail. and in the direction of the second bean
Iaiazl; this dependence is also contained in (6).

Free equations (6) it follows that for 6 - 0 the scattered radiation leads only to
additional phase variations which turn out to be greater for the less intense bean.
“ban 6 1‘ 0 (the lattice is shifted) in addition to the imaginary terns real terns
also appear in the right-sides of (6). Accordingly, the intensity of one of the
beans begins to decrease as it is propagated and the other. to increase - so-
called energy “transfer" takes place. The direction of the "transfer" is defined
only by the sign of the product a sin 6 and does not depend on the relation between
the intensities of the interacting beans; therefore the energy of one of then can
be transferred entirely to the other.

We have succeeded in drawing this optisistic conclusion after the authors of [296]
only because, just as in [296]. we introduced the lattice shift purely for-ally,
not analysing the natural situations in which it could really occur. Nevertheless.
it will be seen later that the "transfer" will be realized in its classical version
(the interacting beans have the sane frequency) prinsrily in the presence of sig-
nificant linear absorption in the nediua. The corresponding theoretical analysis
was performed in [297]. In the case of linear absorption (that is, when the
absorbed power is proportional to the field intensity) the tern -olZ is added to

the right-hand side of each equation of systen (6) where o is thezsbsorption Eoeffi-
cient. After transition fron anplitudes to intensities 11 ' [all . 12 3 IAZI the

systen acquires the fern

i ’.
r-Sl—n 3 t ”.61... 11-6 - a. (7)

hereafter, for deterninacy we shall consider that n < 0 (which is characteristic
of the thermal lattices investigated later) and sin 6 > 0. In this case the been
I is the donor. and the second is anplified. Iron (7) it is obvious that all
sin 6 has the meaning of the amplification coefficient in a nediun for a sec d
bean in the presence of the first. The density of the anplified bean increases
while the condition 11 > 10 - o/(Zkolol sin 6) is satisfied.

It follows inediately fron this that for saxinun use of the energy of the donor
bean it is desirable that its density decrease in the zone of interaction of the
beans to a value of I . In the nost favorable case where the densities of the two
beans at the entrance to the nediun 1'1. 1'2 are constant with respect to cross

section. this condition can be satisfied by using the flat layer of the nediun (Fig-
ure 5.8). the thickness of which sent be correspondingly selected. In Figure 5.9.
a. b. the data obtained by solution of the systen (7) on the optinsl thickness of
the layer of nediu for the cases depicted in figure 5.8. a, b when the beans

enter into the layer from one or different sides are presentedl. Althouh for the
sane I' 1, 1'2 the optinsl thickness of the layer in these two versions does not

coincide. the attained density of the anplified been 12 ea: turns out to be the sans;

 

 

1"the calculations for the second of these cases were perfornad by V. D. Solov'yev.

2 52

FOIOFﬂGALUSEONLY
the data on it are proaented in rigure 5.9. c. It ia ohvioue that high energy
efficiency of tho "tranafer" (on the order of $02 or note) can he achieved only

- I

   

Figure 5.8. Geonetry of the interaction of hoame during "transfer"
in a flat layer of medial: e) one-aided incidence of the been on
the layer; h) counterbeame.

3951...“)

    

Figure 5.9. Optimal thickneoeeo oi the layere o! the modium and maxim

attainable deneity of the amplified beam during "tranater": a). b)
dependence of the thickneae A: of. tho layer of medium in the initial

values of tho hea- deneitiee I' . 1'2 in the diagram in Figure 5.8.
a, h. reapectively; c) dependenie of tho maximu- attainahle denoity

of tho amplified beam 12 max 1'1. 1'2.

Key: 1. opt

when the initial deneity of tho donor beam exceede Io by et leeet moral times;
the initial donoity of tho amplified beam alao nuet not he too amall.

Such is the theory of tho interaction of heame with the holographic phaee lattice
created by them in the quaaietationary mode in general outlines. Now we ohall
diocuaa the caueee of the lattice ehitt with reopect to the interference pattern
required for energy “tranefer.”

In individual caaee the ehift occura aa a r'eault of a natural anieotropic nodium
in which the hologram ie created. The claeeicel example of thia ie deecrihed in
the well-known paper by Stable: and Amodei [298] devoted to the inventigation of
phaae latticee in a lithium niobate cryetal. 0n illumination of thie material

253
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
charge carriers are relaeesed in it. which is the cause of local changes in the
index of refraction. As a result of anisotropy of the given material, the drift of
the free carriers here is directed in an entirely defined direction which also
causes a shift of the lattice recorded in the presence of two coherent beams. The
authors [298] observed noticeable redistribution of the beam intensities. It is
true that they used the given phenomenon not for correction of the save front, but
for discovery of the previously unknown sign of the free charge carriers which can
be established by comparing the direction of the energy transfer process with the
direction of conductivity of the given crystal. This phenomenon can hardly be
exemplary of the dynamic correction - the setup times here are tens of seconds.

In the general case of an isotropic median a defined lattice shift can be obtained
directly during interaction of the beams. obviously continuously shifting the medium
in the direction perpendicular to the lattice planes. The shift must appear as a
result of unavoidable inertia of the processes of recording and erasing it. Later

it will be seen that it is possible to obtain the desired result in practice
using this procedure only when using such comparatively slow recording mechanisms
as thermal recordings. According to (297] let us consider this version.

For the geometry of the interaction of the beams depicted in Figure 5.8, a. the
density of the thermal power dissipated as a result of absorption in the medium is

aII1 + 12 4- 2311112 coa(2nx/A)]. where A - l/Zn sin 6 is the period of the interfer-

ence pattern, and the remaining notation was as before. The origin of the coordi-
nates is matched with one of the peaks of the interference pattern (it is possible
to neglect its small distortions along the Y and 2 area in the given investigation).
A simple analysis shows that in the case of stationary udiu the dependence of the

temperature on x in the presence of such peak release sources has the fern 'r - 'r

+'2 VEé-Xh’i—Yom ($) with setup time of the spatial modulation t a%(;‘:—)’.

where T“ an is the mean temperature of the medium slowly increasing with time. It is
the coefficient of thermal conductivity. c is the heat capacity and o is the density
of the medium. This leads to the occurrence of the phase lattice with modulation

- o A ’ do '
amplitude An-ZVTJZ7(F)JW-I

If the medium is shifted continuously along the x-axis with a velocity V, the lattice

setup time remains as before; its stationery position turns out to be shifted by

A: - (Al2n)arctg art, the depth of the mod téon 7 the temperature and the index
of refraction decreases in the ratio (1 4- u r )‘1 , where w ' ZWIA. A comparison
of these data with (5) indicates that the parameters of the "transfer" theory under
the investigated conditions seem the values

. no; '
u—g—(g) +3“ +n‘r') '. O-urctgm.

As the velocity of the medium increases. 6 increases. approaching the o timal value
of 11/2 from the point of view of the “transfer." and on the other hand .ol decreases
rapidly. From (7) it follows that the intensity of the energy transfe.~ process
from beam to beam is defined in the final analysis by the value of In sin 5| . This

’
value reaches the maximum equal to ' .‘L A " . for m - l/t; thus. the optimal
'5 at F If 0
254

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I A e a u
speed of the Ilil- is Va - (T)(3;)-1"1%ele0. The density of the ‘donor been

for which the enplificetion of the second been es s result of "trenefer" conpenestes
for its sbeorption in the nedime; for V0 is equel to

l..- m unto/(H .34) (a)

All of the relstions derived shove ere sleo velid for the csse of "counter" beens
(Figure 5.8. b) except here the index of refrection is not noduleted slung the

x-exis. but slung the z-exis; novenent of the nediun nust be reslized in the sens
direction.

Relstion of the Ides of Dynsnic Bologrephy to the Phsnonens of Stimlaced Scsttering.
Lasers Based on Verious torus of Stinulatd Scstterins. Pinslly the tine hse cons to
eeplein whet the logicsl dewelopnent of the ides of hologrephic correction hes led
us to. For this purpose it is sufficient to coepere two fects. First. when in-
vestisstina the shove-described "trensfer" process in the coordinste systen which
is ststionnry with respect to not the interference pettern but the medium. the in-
terecting hesns ecquire e defined frequency difference es s result of the Doppler
effect. Its nsgnitude. es is essy to see, is to, which erplsins why in this coor-
dinate system the interference pettern is shifted et e velocity -V. Secondly, es
follows free (7). the differentiel emlificeiton coefficient of the rsdintion with
respect to been 11 does not et ell depend on its intensity end is conpletely deter-
lined by the density of been 1. Therefore when the letter hes rufficient power
thet the "trenefer." process tekes plsce. in its presence not only the specinlly
forned rsdistion is subject to epplicstion. hut slso the rsndonly ecsttered or
"noise" rsdietion of proper frequency end direction.

The phenomenon consisting of the fect thet on illuninstion of the proper nediun by
s powerful coherent been snplificstion of the rsdietion tehss plsce with frequency
ususlly sonewhet shifted with respect to the initiel frequency is, es is known.
celled induced ecetterinx of light. A specific enplificetion nechenisn wee de-
scribed ebove connected with werietion of the index of refrection es s result of
hosting of the nediun during sbsorption of light. This type of induced scettering
is sctuelly known. It wss discovered in 1967 end since thet tine hes been celled smu-
ulstcd thetnsl scsttering (SIS) [299, 300]. In eccordence with the shove-pre-
sented cslculstions. the nsxinm enplificetion of the scsttered redietion occurs
on e frequency shift with respect to the initisl frequency in the entistokss di-
rection (thet is, lsrger) by ”0' The srs threshold on this frequency is defined by

the fornule (8); for other frequencies the threshold increeses proportionelly to
In sin Glu‘lla sin 6| - l/2(wt + l/m).

The "trensfer" observed in [298] in lithiun niohete pertsins to the phenomens of
induced ecsttering on conduction electrons in seniconductors [301]. On the other
head. all types of induced scattering per-it snelogoue "hologrephic" interpretetion
end ere "istinxuiehed only by the nechenisns which csuse vsristion of the index of
refrection end shift of the phese lsttice with respect to the position of the in-
terference pettern. ‘rhe resson for the shift elnoet slweye is novensnt of the in-
terference pettern with respect to the nediue es s result of the difference in
frequencies of prinsry end scsttered rsdietion (the source of the "seed-"r. .
photons with shifted frequency for spontsneously occurring induced scettering which
occurs predoninstely in the forwerd end return directions, ususlly is the scsttering

255

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
on the random dynamic fluctuations of the index of refraction). The fact that for
SIS the frequency of the scattered radiation is shifted with respect to the initial
in the direction opposite to the usual shift direction for emanated liandeletam-
Brillouin scattering on hypersonic waves (SEES) sndstimlated Raman scattering (.538)
are explained simply by the fact that the nonlinearity parameter a has different
signs in these cases.

Thus. the dynamic holographic correction reduced to the well-known idea of solving
the problem of divergence by constructing radiation converters based on induced
scattering - no other is given. Our .corrector on the thermal hologram in the
moving medium is none other then the us amplifier with frequency shift compensated
as a result of the DOpplsr effect. Supplementing this amplifier by feedback - a
resonator - obviously we can construct the analogous laser.

For SIS. the frequency shift is so small that it actually is easy to compensate.
shifting the medium according to the estimates of [297] if in the diagram in Figure
5.8. a the medium is a liquid of the type of an organic solvent. the required speed
of its movement is a total of ~10 cm/sec. If the shift is compensated. it is
possible to use the part of the initial beam transmitted through the shaper as the
amplified. The first experiments with an amplifier of this type are described in
[302]; the source of primary radiation split into two interacting beams was a
single-mode ruby laser operating in the "spike" mode of free lasing. With a total
lasing pulse duration of -600 microseconds. the lattice relaxation time was ~l00
microseconds, which. in turn, significantly exceeded the time interval between
individual "spikes"; therefore for the extent of the greater part of the pulse the
lattice was in practice quasistationary. The highest energy efficiency of ”trans-
fer” was achieved for the initial ratio of the beam intensities of 10:1; after
passage of a liquid moving at a speed of 8 cm/eec, this ratio became equal to 1:3.
and the amplified beam power was about 501 of the total power of the initial beams.

nigh inertia of the thermal processes permits observation of the phenomenon of non-
steady "transfer" predicted in [303] and consisting in the fact that for short-
term interaction of the beams the energy transfer to the weaker one takes place
even if the medium is stationary. This has the following explanation: when the
unshifted lattice begins to be recorded and the scattered radiation appears. it.

in accordance with (6), leads to additional phase incursions of the initial beams.
As has already been noted. for a beam with lower intensity this incursion turns out
to be larger; as a result. the interference pattern, while the processes of setting
up the thermal lattice are taking place. moves through the medium which causes
"transfer." The direction of the displacement is such that the weak beam is sub-
jected to amplification. he applied to the problems of correction of the wave
fronts this phenomenon was experimentally studied in references [302, 306, 305,335].

Although the papers studying the "transfer" on the thermal lattices turned out to
be highly useful for understanding the possibilities of dynamic holography, it is
not possible now to count on the fact that by using this process we will decrease
the divergence by the radiation of reel lasers. here the mechanic of recording
the lattice itself in unfavorable. The heat release required for its formation has,
in addition to everything else, a negative effect on the optical quality of the
medima. As a result of unavoidable nonmiformity of heating of the medium, varia-
tions of the index of refraction averaged over the lattice period appear; in the
liquids. in addition. light scattering begins on the formed gas bubbles and so on.

256

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
All of this. in turn. leads to an increase in the divergence of the bean itself into
which the energy is “transferred.“ The effects of this type begin to be nsnifes-
ted in practice by comparatively enall energy levels of the beans [33$]. '

Now let us proceed to other types of induced scattering. For $18 the energy
"transfer" to a weaker beam with the same frequency is achieved without special
difficulty even in the quasiststionary node. In the presence of suns and. in
particular, for $35 everything looks soneuhat different. The frequency shifts here
are not so small, and the possibility of compensation for them using the Doppler
effect is for a number of reasons for the nost part speculative. It is already
sufficient that in the former case the nediun should be shifted at the speed of
sound in it. and in the latter case. many tines faster. Therefore by -ueing the
given forms of induced scattering having lower thresholds in the mnjority of media
than SIS, it is possible to construct only lasers end anplifiers of radiation

with shifted frequency. Nevertheless. the "transfer" with splitting of the

initial been into the donor and amplified beams is realizable and in this case the
required frequency shift of the later enplified beam can be obtained using the sane
induced scattering. when using this systen [306] conversion on SUBS was obtained
with transfer on the order of 80: of the donor been power to the amplified been.

As a result of the conversion. the axial luminous intensity increased by more than 3
orders.

As for the SHBS and 833 lasers. their properties are quite well-knoun. These lasers
have. of course. many specific peculiarities distinguishing then from standard in-
verted medium lasers. First of all here although the primary radiation frequently
is called pumping radiation as before, theoretically different requiresente are
inpoaed on its coherence - the sources of the punping of lasers based on induced
scattering usually are other lasers with spectral radiation selection. Complex
phanonena arise as a result of the fact that in the case of induced scattering the
theoretical role is played only by the nsgnitude of the frequency different Aw,

but not the exact absolute values. therefore when the density of the converted re-
dietion itself begins to exceed the induced scattering threshold, lasing is

excited on a frequency 2Am from the initial frequency. and so on. Finally. as
already been mentioned in § 4.2, with respect to the nature of the interrelation
between the excitation and the generated radiation fields the converters based on

induced scattering more resemble flow lasers than standard lasers with a stationary
nediun.

In spite of all their peculiarities, the induced scatteringleserssre. of course,
the most genuine lasers. The principles of the selection of the type and parame-
ters of the resonators renein the same as in ordinary lasers; the resonator defor-
nations exist exactly the sane. including those caused by heating of the nediun.
Being the basic. theoretically unavoidable source of heating. the Stokes losses

in the 835 and Subs lasers are much less than in the ordinary lasers uhich gives
rise to the prospectivenese of this entire area. At the present time a number of
experinental papers have already been published in which the conversion of the
radiation with the help of axes and. in particular. 838. has led to a decrease in
the divergence (a broad bibliography exists. in particular. in [218. 306]). It is

not appropriate to enumerate all of then; let us only mention one interesting area
of research.

In 1973 when studying the properties of the $35 converters [307] and $HBS conver-
ters [308] with pumping by the radiation of nultinode lasers, it use possible to

257
FOI<OFITC1AL.USI(RVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

observe significant mlification of narrowly directional light beams without sig-
nificant variation of their spatial structure. The nontrivialness of the situation
consists in the fact that the multimode pulping field is nonuniform and actually
diVided into a large umber of randomly distributed spots with respect to volune.
the characteristic dimensions of which are defined by the parameters of coherence
and the geometry of the illumination. The theoretical analysis of the conditions
under which the nonuniformity of the puqing field does not imply a change in the
spatial structure of the aQIified beam (as a result of the statistical averaging
of the effect of a large meter of small nonuniforeities) was performed in

references [39, 310]. The first purposeful experiment checking this model was
described in [311].

55.3. method of News Front Reversal

The Idea and Theoretical Possibilities of the Method. In 1971 another method of
obtaining narrowly directional laser emission was proposed [312]. The basis for
it was the argument that it is better to realise wave front correction not at the
exit of a powerful laser asplifier, but at its entrance. giving the wave front a
form such that after passage through an optically nonuniform awlifying medium it
becomes plane. Shifting the corrector from the exit to the entrance permits the
requirements on the bean stability of its elements to be lowered; in addition,

even if the correction process has low energy efficiency, the dissipated power

will be small and will be felt little in the efficiency of the systen as a whole.

In order to give the wave front of the beam coming to the mlifier exit the
required shape, in [312) it was proposed that the procedure illustrated in

Figure 5.10, a be used. The reference light wave 1 with plans (or other required)
front shape is fed to the laser aeplifier 2 containing optical nonuniformities
from the direction of its exit and passes throudu it in the opposite direction,
being amplified and simultaneously acquiring the phase distortions. Then this
wave is somehow transformed to a so-called reversed (or complercmjugate) wave 3
of the sane frequency which has equiphasal surfaces common to the reference wave
at the input. to the saplifier and similar saplitude distribution with respect to
cross section but is directed in the opposite direction. It is easy to show that
on satisfaction of certain quite reasonable requirements ilposed on a laser expli-
fier, coincidence of the equiphusl surfaces of these two waves with respect to
one side of the amplifier guarantees their coincidence also with respect to the
other side. Thus. the reversed wave, passing through an mlifier containing
nonmiformities. acquires the required shape of its front (in the given case
plane).

Actually, let us consider the interrelation between the spatial structure of the
reference wave and the reversed' wave. Although this interrelation is of the mat
universal nature. as usual we shall limit ourselves to the case where the scalar
approximation is applicable. Let us represent the field of the reference and
reversed waves in the form E-A exp(-ikz) and B'I-A' exp(iks), respectively, where
A and A' are comaratively slowly varying functions of the coordinates, the
direction of the z-sxis is shown in the figure. Using the condition of sinilarity
of the mlitude distribution with respect to cross section, it is easy to
demnstrate that on any equiphual surface col-eon to two waves, the values of

258
l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

A and A' are related by an expressim of the type A57”, where y is a cmstant

factor. the sywol * denotes conplex conjugation (this is where the second nan
of the reversed wave finds its origin).

_'_,.
n *1
2E 3.
3 3
J g I
‘)

Figure 5.10. Correction of a wave front by the "reversal"
method: a) scheme for oonpensation of phase distortions in

a laser uplifier; l - reference been. 2 - aplifier,

3 - conjugate wave; b) effect of decreasing the conjugation
precision in the presence of aperture irises: l - screen with
aperture, 2 -- reference wave. 3 -- asseialy in which "reversal"
takes place. 6 - reversed vsve; c) diagrenof a luer with
self-induction of emission; l -- laser awlifier. 2 - ssselbly
in which "reversal" takes place, 3 -- object. 6 - auxiliary
laser, 5 -- front of the eaission scattered by the object,

6 - front of the laser exit emission.

Substituting the cypressions for B and 3' in the wave equation VZB-chB-O, we arrive
at the equations vm-zuuMaﬁ-o. 72A'+2ik§3A'/az)-0. Let us write out another
equation comlex conjugate to the first: V AMZikNaM/aﬁ-O. It is obvious that
in the absence of absorption or amlification. that is, when k is real. the values
of A* and A' satisfy the sane differential equation. Inaenuci. as on a cannon
equiphasal surface these values coincide vith accuracy to a constant factor. the
conparison must occur in the entire region of space where the reference and
reversed wave do not go beyond the boundaries of the nediun containing only phase
nonunifortnities. Hence. in turn. it follows that in the entire indicated region
these waves have cos-on equiphasal surfaces and similar distribution of the radia-
tion intensity with respect to cross section.

259
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

The theoretical possibility of using this remarkable property of conjugate waves
for autocompensation of purely phase inhomogeneities is- unquestioned: in 1965.

Kb. Kogel'nik demnstrsted how, forming a reversed wave. it is possible to repro-
duce m undistorted holographic image of the subjected observed throud'n an
optically inhomogeneous sodium [313]. On transition to the problea of correction
of phase distortions in lasers, definite difficulties arise. The nsin one of then
naturally is connected with the fact that the paramter k in the awlifying medium
is couple: and «nations for A* and A' cease to coincide. It is priaerily of
interest that the presence of awlification uniforaly distributed with respect to
cross section involves only multiplication of the colplex amplitude of the wave
passing through the mlifier by sons additional constant; the form of its dis-
tribution renains the same as in the absence of amplification (see 51.3). Hence.
it follows that the presence of sqlificstion reader the condition of uniformity
of its distribution w'th respect to cross section has no influence on the precision
of coincidence of the equiphaaal surfaces of the conjugate waves.

The case is also important where although the anplification is nonmiform with
respect to cross section but varies little at distances on the order of the size
of the Fresnel zone. the phase nonunifornities are not so large as to cause "nix-
ing" of the radiation with respect to cross section inside the enlifier. Then
the equiphasal surfaces of the reversed wave at the awlifier output continue
approximately to coincide with the equiphasal surfaces of the reference been; only
the intensity distribution in then becones different. Inasauch as the intensity
distribution has nuch less influence on the neglitude of the divergence than the
radiation phase distribution (51.1). the given correction net: ad is moonditionally
effective also in this situation. It can hecone neaningless only for the most
mfevorahle properties of the active ndiun.

The accuraqr of reproduction of the initial structure of the reference wave at the
mlifier output can also decrease as a result of the presence of certain aperture
irises. This effect is explained by Figure 5.10, b. Let only part of the
reference beam cross section 2 pass through the aperture in the screen 1. Then if
radiation losses are absent until the reference beam hits the node 3 which realises
"reversal," the reversed wave ’0 formed in this node passes entirely through the
opening; conjugation in the vicinity of the aperture is complete. However,
to the right of the screen the absence of radiation nust be felt in the peripheral
sections of the cross section of the reversed wave near the screen - the wave
somehow diffracts at the aperture, and on going away from the aperture, the
exactness of coincidence of the equiphasal surfaces gradually decreases. Obviously,
it is necessary to achieve the situation where the greatest possible part of the
reference beam entering the aplifier reaches the node realizing the "reversal"
operation. This unset be done especially carefully when using amplifiers with

long path length of the emission travel through the active aediun, in particular,
nultipass amplifiers of the type described in 56.3.

The stipulations made cannot shake the general conclusion of the extraordinarily
prospectiveness of the "reversal" method. let us note another advantage of this
mthod. Preamli fication of the reference been (before it hits the "reversal"
node) makes it possible to get along with very small initial radiation intensities.
This makes the idea of creating a laser with honing of emission on a given.

260

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

object -- a remote target. a target in experiments in laser thermonuclear fusion
and the like - which is very popular at the 'present time, hiﬁxly realistic.

As was pointed out in [312], in order to provide the homing effect, it is suffi-
cient to expose the target to the coherent radiation of an auxiliary lmer and
use the light scattered from the target in the range of the primary laser as a
reference beam (see Figure 5.10, c; it possible to get along without the auxiliary
laser, converting the baic emitter to the lasing node for some period of time).
In this case, the optical distortions turn out to be cosponseted not only in the
laser medium and the shaping system, but also in the atmosphere (if , of course.
the inhonogeneities do not change while the light travels the distance to the
emitter and back). Obviously, this method can be used to solve the problems of
automatic target tracking, and so on.

It is necessary to note that the possibilities of creating emitters with a wave
front which is "reversed" with respect to the wave front of the emission scattered
from the target, began to be discussed in the 1960's (primarily as applied to the
microwave band). However, we are talking only about the corresponding correction
of the phase distribution directly at the output of a couple: nultielenent systen
using phase control of the individual elemntary emitters taking up the system.
The development of analogous ideas as applied to the optical band been one of
the.principal areas of adaptive optics nentioned in the preceding section [334].

"Reversal" in Stimulated Backseattering. Let us proceed with the investigation

of specific methods by means of which the "reversal" operation can be realised.
Although historically the holographic mthods of forming a mien-conjugate wave
began to be discussed first, which we shall discuss somewhat later, general
attention has been attracted to the "reversing" method on a sonewhat different
level. In 1972 it came to be known that a wave reflected back in an uncontrolled
induced Brillouin scattering process under defined conditions turns out to be
conjugate with respect to the initial wave [316]. Soon. by using the given effect,
a ruby laser was built by the schene presented in Figure 5.10, a [317].

Generally speaking. at that time a number of observations had already been pub—
lished indicating that with forced backscattering frequently scathing similar to
the process of formation of a conjugate wave takes place. In the experimnt,

the results of which were revealed by Beapalov and Kubarev in 1966 [339], the
back-reflected been had. just as the initial beam, diffraction divergence. Hen-
tions of the fact that the backseattered beam has approximately [the ease divergence
as the initial beam (or the ease cross section at a noticeable distance from the
cell with the median in which scattering took place) can also be found in the
papers by Rank. et al. on stimulated Brillouin scattering and stimulated Thomson
scattering [318, 310], and reference [319] on stimulated Raman scattering.

Although the presence of an entire series of such observations indicated that they
are not accidental, a clearcut concluion regarding conjugation of the scattered
and initial wave was formulated only in [316]; in the same paper the possibility of
using this effect for autocoapensation of phase distortions was clearly demon—
strated. The experiment performed in [316] consisted in the following. Narrowly
directional emission of a unimodal ruby laser was passed through an etched glass
plate which naturally led to multiple increase in the divergence. Then the
emission was focused on a hollow glass light guide with methane (Figure 5.11).

261

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POROFIICIALUSEONLY'

The been "reflected" back as a result of stimulated Brillouin scattering through

the some lens and scattering plate. acquired the initial structure with very
small divergence.

Subsequent studies demonstrated that conjugation of the incident and reflected
wave also occurs for other types of stimulated scattering [320. 321]. The
mchanism of this phenomenon became mderstandahle. This mechanism is explained
as followa. When a beam, the average density of whid: greatly exceeds the induced
scattering threshold, is incident on a nonlinear medium, a set of scattered light
waves appears in the mediun. On propagation through a region exposed to primary
emission, these waves are amlified. The better the field distribution of any of
them is "inscribed" in the outlines of this region. the more this wave is amplified.
maviously the waves, all of the field distribution peaks of which fall exactly at
the initial radiation intensity peaks, are subject to the greatest mlification.
Inasmuch as the propagation of all of the waves is described by like equtiona.
only the waves with the same shape of front can have intensity distribution
exactly coinciding inside a defined volume. Therefore a wave conjugate to the
initial wave is isolated among the backacartered waves.

 

Figure 5.11. Diagram of the experiment in [316]:

l -- iris 6X6 mm, 2 -- light dividing plate, 3 -- etched plate.
10 -- lens, 5 —- cell with light guide, 6 - systems for measur-
ing the parameters of the primer] and reﬂected radiation.

Fran this primitive explanation. it becomes mdarstandsble that the degree of
isolation of a conjugate wave against the general background of scattered emission
must depend on the configuration of the exposed zone, the average density of the
primary emission and the nature of its distribution inside this zone. The role of
a lens and etched plate in the above-described experiment will also become under-
atandable -- the lens and the etched plate provide the required average density
and nature of distribution. Let us note that without the plate, the conjugation
effect was not observed in [316] -- the scattered emission had much greater
divergence than the primary emission.

0n the other hand, if the initial beam has suitable characteristics inediately
(or sequires them, on being propagated in a nonuniform scattering India), the
lens and special scattering medium can be unnecessary -- then the device realizing
the "reversing" operation reduces to a cell with a nonlinear radius. As an
examle we have reference [321] -- no separate scattering medium was used there.

262

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Those desiring to familiarize themelves in mre detail with the theory of the
process of forntion of a conjugate wave during stimulated backscattering are
referred to the articles [322, 323. 360]. and so on; in this book we shall proceed
with a brief discussion of the general advantages.- and disadvantages characterising
the given ”reversing" procedure. Its basic advantage is, of course, simplicity:

as we have seen, in addition to the cell with nonlinear medium one or two primitive
optical elenents nay be needed. A theoretically inportant item is the absence of
any require-ents on the optical quality of the nonlinear median -- neither the
initial nor the induced inhomogeneities can decreue the conjugation precision.

Now let us proceed to the shadow aspects of using the "reversal" effect during
stimulated hackscattering. One of them should already be understandable to the
reader: a conjugate wave is isolated from "noise" only with suitable nature of
distribution of the emission in the interaction zone, which, in turn, is indiffer-
ent to the spatial structure of the initial bean. The fact that the differences
between the thresholds of the stinulated scattering and destruction of the medium
(camed by optical breakdown or something si-ilar) are usually not too large
iwoses its restrictions also. As a result. the dynanic range of adlissible
radiation densities of the reference wave turns out to be small. This is especially
inconvenient when solving the "honing" problem where the reference beu is formed
from scattered light, the intensity of which. depending on the properties and
degree of remoteness of the target, can vary within the broadest limits.

Finally. an important deficiency of stir-elated scattering from the point of view

of the possibilities of its use in lasers with wave front "reversal," which
theoretically cannot be eliminated. is the presence of a frequency shift. The
situation is especially bad with stimulated Ramsn scattering. Let us begin with

the fact that all of our preceding argulsents were based on at least enqale equality
of the frequencies of the initial and the scattered light. For stimulated Ram
scattering the frequencies are so different that even in the case of exact conjuga-
tion of the waves at the input of an asplifier containing sigtificant phase in-
homogeneities, coincidence of the fronts av its output can turn out to be far from
ideal. In addition, the exactness of conjugation in the process of stimulated
scattering itself decreases: coincidence of a large umber of intensity peaks of
two waves in a thick layer of nonlinear media in general becomes impossible.

Added to this fact is the fact that the frequency shift during stimulated Raman
scattering greatly exceeds the band width of all of the active udia used in power-
ful lasers; therefore in the diagram in Figure 5.10, a, c the light can be amplified
only on one of two passes throud': the medium. 0n the basis of all of the mentioned
facts. the work in the given area offers little promise.

The situation is much more favorable with stimulated Brillouin and Thonon scatter-
ing -- the frequency shifts are too small for then to have a real influence on

the exactness of conjugation. They are also less than the aqlification band
widths of many active India; therefore amplification can be realized on both

passes through the medium. However. other unfortunate situations arise - in the
final analysis the small frequency shift is the consequence of high inertia of

the processes leading to stinulated scattering. Therefore for very rapidly vary-

ing wave fronts neither stimulated Brillouin nor Thomson scattering can be used.

263

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

f—q
4)
4
'b) ,'
J
3 —J

 

Figure 5.12. Method: of "reversal": a) "reversal" systea for
small deviations from plans shape of the wave front; 1:) four-
wave interaction system (1 - hologran. 2 - been subject to
"reversal," 3. 4 - reference beans with plane wave fronts.

S -- desired conjugate beam); c) ”reversal" system using addi-
tional diffraction procedure in the case of a thin hologram
(l - thin flat hologran. 2 - been subject to "reversal."

3 -- reference beam with plane wave front, 6 — bean scattered
in one of the additional diffraction procedures. 5 - mirror);
d) conjugation with paramtric mlification of light

(1 -- nonlinear crystal, 2 - light dividing mirror, 3 — dotble
frequency emission, 6 - bean stbject to "reversal," 5, 6 -
aignal wave and idler wave).

"Reversal" by hthoda of Classical Optics and holography. Now let us proceed to
other methods of "reversal," which, in contrast to the preceding one, can be called
stimulated a a result of the uncontrolled stimulated scattering. Initially we
shall mention one possibility of using the methods of classical optics. of interest
but not having special practical significance [312]. The simplest device capable
of performing the "reversal" operation with smll deviations from a plane wave
front is depicted in Figure 5.12. a; it cmsista of a lens. in the focal plane of
which ‘a mirror has been installed. 0n the systen axis the mirror has a projection
(or depression) of height All. covering only the central peak of the diffraction
pattern which appears on exposure of the lens to a parallel light been. This

2610
NR OHIO“. US ONLY
MWCIALIISEONLY

corrector operates as follows. Let an almost parallel beam incident on the lens
from the right have mlitude distribution A expat). where A-const. 9 is the
phase distortion which is varidale with respect to the bean cross section. For
!o|<1. the mum. A exp(i¢)ZA+iA¢. 1w waves described by these m- are
separated spatially in the focal plane of the lens: the greater part of the first
of then is collected at the central peak of the diffraction pattern. the second is
distributed primarily with respect to the remaining part of the plane. The
presence of a projection leads to the fact that on reflection from the nirror. an
additional phase difference equal to 11 occurs between these waves; as a result. the
nplitude distribution after passage through the lens in the opposite direction
acquires the form A-iAOerxM-io) - the front becomes "reversed." Let u note
that in the known nethod of Zoernicke contrast [7] an analogous procedure is used
except the introduced phue shift is not 1!. but 1/2. Then the sane initial been

acquires amplitude distribution A exp“) - the phase variations are transformed
to intensity variations.

The idea of a holographic "reversal" method for arbitrary phase distortions be-
longs to Denisyuk [331]; the version of the method of practical inortance
described in [313] is explained in Figure 5.12. b. The hologram l. which can be
both voluletric and thin. is recorded with the participation of the beam 2 abject
to reversal and the reference been 3 with plane wave front. If the hologran is
exposed to bean lo also with a plane wave front and opposite direction of propaga-
tion. then as a result of reflection of been lo fron the hologrn. the desired
"reversed" been 5 is found.

Although the authors of the initial papers [331, 313] proposed hologram recording
and ”reading" processes separated in time. the can system can also be realized
in the dynsaic node. that is. with simultaneous feed of been 2. 3 and 6 to the
nonlinear nediun [361. 342. 297]. Moreover. here the situation is such better
than in the case of the method of holographic "puming" discuued in the preceding
section. Actually. the basic difficulties there were connected with the necessity
for the presence of a shift of the holographic grid wid: respect to the interference
pattern between the interacting beams. This. in turn. was caused by the fact that
the snission scattered by the hologram was added directly to the initial beans.
varying their intensity only on satisfaction of defined phase relation. As for
the systen in Figure 5.12. b. here been 5 which is of interest to us is formed
wholly from scattered emission - nothing is fed free the outside to the nonlinear
medium in this direction. there are no phase conditions. and the grid shift is

not required. Therefore in the given systen been. of identical frequency and
media with in practice any nonlinearity mechanism can be used.

With respect to the light beams participating in it this process now is called
the four-wave interaction process. Analysis of spatial evolution of the intensi-
ties of the interacting beam can be made in the sane approximation which was
used in the preceding section when investigating "pumping." except. of course.

it looks more cowlicated [326. 325]. The corresponding estimates show that here
for high. but entirely reasonable densities of been 3 and 6 which serve as the
basic energy source. it is possible to obtain the transformation coefficient of
the direct wave 2 to the reversed wave 5 on the order of 1002 and even higher.

265
Ml OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whereas everything is all ridxt with the energy efficiency of the “reversal"
process in the case of four-wave intonation, the problem of optical uniformity
of the nonlinear medium in which interaction takes place is quite seriom. The
situation is as follows: waves 2 and 5 turn out to be conjugate. generally
speaking, only as a result of the fact that the "pulping" waves of the converter
3 and ’0 are conjugate. Prom Figure 5.12. b, it is clear, however, that for
conjugation of "puming" waves it is necessary that they have plane fronts not
only at the entrance to the nonlinear radium, but also after passes through it.
Thus, in the case of four-wave interaction the precision of "reversal" depends
directly on the optical quality of the medium.

If in the initial state the median has quite high optical uniformity, it is
necessary to consider the inhomogeneities caused by the lidlt fields themelves.
In addition to any type of side phenomena (of the type of the occurrence of gas
bubbles in the absorbing centers in liquid India), the variations of the index
of refraction themelves can lead to distortion of the wave front. These varia-
tions also are the cause for the existence of the holographic grid. Indeed. the
superposition of coherent light beans in a nonlinear medium is acoonpanied not
only by the appearance of spatial periodic modulation of the index of refraction,
but also variation of its mean value with respect to period (usually this varia-
tion is proportional to the total light intensity). As a result, it can turn out
to be necessary to inpose defined. still quite rigid. requirements on the uniform-
ity of the radiation density distribution with respect to cross section of inter-
acting beanzs; this pertains, of course, primrily to intense "pulping" beans of
the converter 3 and lo.

Another possible cthod of "reversal" by the methods of holography is explained
by Figure 5.12, c. The beam 2 subject to "reversal" and the reference beam 3
with plane wave front parallel to the surface of the hologram participate in
recording the thin flat hologran 1. When discussing Figure 5.7, we mentioned in
passing that on illumination of a thin hologram, in addition to the reconstructed
initial beam, beans also appear which are scattered in the direction of other
diffraction orders. One of then -- been ’0 - has a front shape that is mirror
imaged with respect to the desired shape (it is possible to see this if we try to
comarc the wave fronts of beans 2 and lo); after reflection from the mirror 5,
this been finally becomes "reversed“ with respect to beam 2. This system can
also be used in the dynamic node.

Althouym the theoretical possibilities of obtaining conjugate waves using

dynamic holography became obvious quite long ago [3101. 362. 312]. the given
direction began to be developed intensely only at the present tins. In addition
to the mentioned theoretical articles [326. 325], an entire series of new reports
have appeared on experimental observation of "reversal" in the case of four-wave
interaction. The first article [326] in which the realization of dynanic correc-
tion by holographic "reversal" in a ruby awlifier was recorded was published in
Soviet literature. The system used was a costination of system depicted in
Figure 5.12. b. c; a thin dynamic hologran with time constant ~S°lO"’9 sec was
recorded in a MS semiconductor crystal (the variations of the index of refraction
were caused by variations of the concentration of three charge carriers). It

is true that the efficiency of conversion of a direct wave to a reversed one did

not exceed 52; indeed, the awlification on passage through the nby rod was small.

266

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore the resultant aqlification of the device as a whole (two passes
through the rod plus the conjugation operation) did not reach one. but the fact
that comensation of the inhomogeneities in the elplifier was present. Without
any doubt, this is not the limit and we shall soon be witnesses to nuch nore
impressive experinenta.

"Reversal" in Parametric Amplification of Light. Conclusion. The idea of another.
hiduly prospective "reversal" nethod is connected with using long-known late of
the process of paranetric asplification of light [327]. In contrast to stimulated
scattering, parametric saplification is a three-wave process. In addition to the
nplified wave and powerful high-coherent. hidI-frequency light be- playing the
role of "paying," in a nonlinear nediun a so-mllsd idler wave of difference
frequency is formed. It is sigiificant for us that the phase distribution with
respect to cross section of the idler wave is equal to the difference of the phase
distributions of the pulping enission and the enlified (signal) wave. If the
pulping emission has a plane wave front and frequency twice the signal wave fre-
quency. the idler wave obviously turns out to have the sane frequency as the sig-
nal wave, and it ha phase distribution that is opposite with respect to sign.
that is. "reversed" front with respect to the sipal wave (for exasple [328]).

One of the possible ideas of the parametric converter systems performing the con-
jugation operation is presented in Figure 5.12, d. The converter consists of a
nonlinear crystal 1 and light dividing nirror 2 reflecting the emission of a fre-
quency such as the signal and idler waves have. and the transmitted double-fre-
quency emission. The specially forsed dovble frequency been 3 with plate wave
front falls strictly normally on the surface of the mirror 2 and, passing through
it. enters the crystal 1. The bean lo subject to "reversal" reaches the crystal
from the other side; after reflection free the Iirror it acquires a suitable direc-
tion and becomes the signal wave 5 of the conversion process. The crystal is
oriented so that synchrony of the interaction between this wave and the "pulping"
emission 3 will be achieved. The "idler" wave 6 formed during para-attic amplifi-
cation of the signal wave has direction opposite to the direction of arrival of
the initial been 6 and a "reversed” wave front with respect to the initial been.

here the basic difficulties are connected with the fact that been with frequencies
that differ by two tines participate in the process. It is known that such beans
are capable of interacting properly with each other only in a narrow class of
sedia with specific nature of nonlinearity. In addition. even if interaction
theoretically exists. in order to obtain any noticeble conversion efficiency. it
is necessary to provide for the above-mentioned synchrony (explanations of all of
these problems can be found in any text on nonlinear optics). In the aimlest
case of collinear interaction (propagation directions of all three waves coincide

the synchrony conditions reduce to the requirement of exact equality of the
indicee of refraction for the first and second harmnic emission.

Generally spedting, it is necessary to trace the observation of synchrony condi-
tions even in the general case of four-wave interaction; however. in the above-

investigated "degenerate" version of this process where the frequencies of all

beans are identical. the synchrony conditions are satisfied autonntically, which
sade it possible for us to ignore then. As for the three-wave process discussed

267

MOMMUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

here, providing synchrony for this process becomes an integral problem. In the
final analysis it turns out that efficient interaction between the radiation of
the first and second harmonics can be realized only in very few, anisotropic
crystals and with strictly defined orientation of them relative to the directions
of the light beams; it is natural that restrictions are imposed on the magnitude
of the angular divergence of the light beam.

Nevertheless. these difficulties are surmomtable. whid: is indicated primarily by
the experience of building second harmonic lasers (frequency doublers). Indeed,
the same nonlinear crystals and satisfaction of the same synchrony condition are
required for them, but this did not interfere long ago with achievement in practice
of conversion coefficients of the first harmonic radiation to second amounting to
several tens of percentages. Without going into details, it is worthwhile to note
that in a parametric converteo with interaction close to collinear, less rigid
requirements are imposed on the angular divergence of the signal wave than on the
divergence of the first harmonic asission in frequency doublers. It is also possi-
ble to show that in the system in Figure 5.12. d the optical inhomogeneity of the
nonlinear medium is not so large as to disturb the synchrony of interaction, it
influences the precision of the "reversal" much less than in the cue of four-wave
interaction (this advantage of the parametric converter disappears if the double
frequency emission is fed to the crystal from the same side as the initial ”reversed"
beam arrives).

The results of the first experiments with autocowensation of the aberrations in a
neodymium glass laser amplifier with parametric "reversal" are published in [329].
The basic structure was assesbled by the diagram in Figure 5.10, a; in the
operating mode the anifier provided ten-fold amplification of the signal passing
through it in one direction. The reference beam was part of the output emission
of an auxiliary giant-pulse laser, the active medium of which was also neodymium
glass; the remaining part of the emission was directed toward the frequency doubler,
generating the second-harmonic emission required for the parametric process there.
The nonlinear material in the parametric converter having the diagram shown in
Figure 5.12, d, was a lithium iodate crystal; the magiitude of the angle between
the signal and idler waves reached 2.10“2 rads, which was entirely sufficient for
the second of them only to reach the amplifier input.

The energy efficiency of conversion of the signal wave to an idler wave was ~102;
thus. considering the passage through the amplifier in both directims, the entire
device insured approximately lO-fold amplification of the initial reference. beam.
Demonstration experiments with introduction of an optical wedge into the amlifier.
the angle of deviation on passage through which was 10"3 reds demonstrated that
total comensation of the introduced aberrations takes place here.

The list of methods by means of which the "reversal" can be realized clearly does
not exhaust this. Let us also mention, for example, the phenomenon of so-called
photon echo. which consists in the following: on feeding two light pulses
separated by very short time interval to the appropriate medium, this medium emits
a third pulse independently after at identical time interval [337]. If we give
the second-pulse emission a plane wave front. than the fronts of the first and
third pulses turn out to be conjugate. It is now difficult to say what all of this
leads to. Only one thing is clear: the work in the field of angular divergence
of laser emission will in the future lead not only to technical progress. but also
to the discovery of new. interesting phenomena and laws of the behavior of power-
ful coherent light beam. 268

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.
2.
3.
6.

5.

:6.
7.

9.

10.

11.
12.
13.
16.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPY

Prokhorov, A. H. ”Sdnillineter Molecular AQlifisr and Sunset," 21131.?
[Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics], Vol, 36, 1958, p 1658.

Schsulou, A. I..: Townes, c. R. "Infrared and Optical Manors," PHYS. REV.,
Vol 112, 1958, p 1960.

Vaynahteyn, L. A. m: RBZONA‘I’OH I m VOLMVODY [Open Resonators
and Open Waveguides], lbscow, Sovctskoys radio, 1966.

Siesnan, A. E. "Unstabla Optical Resonators for Laser Application,"
PROC. 1233. Vol 53. 1965, p 277.

Ansn'yev, Yu. A.; Sventsitskays, N. A.; Sheratobitov, V. Ya. "Selection of
Transverse Types of Oscillations in Lasers with Convex Mirrors." m 835R
[Reports of the WSR Acadely of Sciences], Vol 179, 1968, p 1306.

Born, 14.: Wolf, 8. OSNOVY arm: [hands-snub of Optical, Moscow, Ranks,

Goodman, J. mm V rune-0mm [Introduction to Fourier Optics],
ﬂoscou, Hit, 1970. ‘

Ansn'yev. Yu. A. "Unstable Resonator for Laura vith Weakly Aqlifying Media,"
PIS'HA v 281'? [Letters to tho Journal of Technical Physics], Vol 6, 1978,
p 372.

Fox, 'A. 6.; Li, ‘1'. "Resonant Modes in a Msssr Interferonater," 321.1. SYS'l'.
TBCRN. J., Vol 40, 19691, p 453.

Boyd, 6. 0.; Gordon, J. P. "Confocal Multitude Resonator for Hillinctsr
Through Optical Wavelength Racers," 331.1. 8181'. new. J., Vol 60, 1969,
p 689.

Boyd, 6. 1).: Kogslnik, R. "Generalised Confocal Resonator Theory." BELL
SYST. TECH". J., Vol 61, 1962, p 1367.

Collins, 5. A. "Analysis of Optical Resonators Involving Fact-ins Mounts,"
APPL. OPTICS, Vol 3, 1966, p 1263.

Kogtlnik, R. "Inning of Optical nodes-Resonators with Internal mass,”
BELL SYST. TECH“. J., Vol 66, 1965. p 655.

Kosclnik, 11.; Li, ‘1‘. "Laser Beans and Resonators," PROC. 133;, Vol 56, 1966,
p 1312; APPL. OPTICS, V01 5, 1966, p 1550.

Kahn, H. K. "Unstable Optical Resonators," APPL. OPTICS, Vol 5, 1966, p 607.

269

MWWONLY
16.

17.

18.

19.

2°.

21.‘

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

Anan'yev, Yu. A. “Angular Divergence of the Emission of Solid-State
Lasers," UPN [Progress in the Physical Sciences], Vol. 103, 1971, p 705.

ﬂak, A. A.; Anan'yev. Yu. A.; Yenahov, B. A. "Solid-State Lasers," UFN,
Vol 92, 1967, p 373.

Vanyukov. M. P.; Isayenko, V. I.;-Serebryakov, V. A. "Study of a Laser
Radiation Pattern," 2mm. Vol No, 1963, p 11093.

Vanyukov. H. P.; Issysnko, V. 1.; Serehryakov, V. A. "Variation in Time of
Stimulated Emission in Separate Side Nodes," ZBE‘I‘F, Vol 46, 1966, p 1182.

Suchkov, A. 1". "Inﬂuence- of Inhomgeneities on the Operation Conditions of
Solid-State Lasers," amp, Vol 49, 1965, p 1495.

Letokhov, V. 8.; Suchkov, A. P. "Dyna-ice of Coherent Light Giant Pulse
Losing," 2881?. Vol 50. 1966; p 1168; Vol 52, 1967, p 282.

Martsunyan, R. V.; Basov, N. 6., et a1. "Structure of a Giant Emission
Pulse of an Instantaneous-Q Laser," mu, Vol 51, 1966, p 606.

Korobkin. V. V.; Leontovich, A. N” et a1. ”Losing Frequency md Field
Dynamics in a Giant Pulse of e Passive-Gate Laser," PIS'HA V 2mm [Letters
to the Journal of Experimental and lheoretical Physics], Vol 3, 1966, p 301.

"Dyna-ice of the Losing Field, Spectru- snd Coherence in a Giant Pulse of a
Rlby Laser," 7.11817, Vol 53, 1967, p 16.

Suchkov. A. P. "Electrodynamics of Lasers with an Open Resonator with
Inhonogeneous Filling." mm HAN 8881! [Works of the Phyaioa Institute of the
USSR Acadeuy of Sciences], Vol 63. 1968, p 161.

betokhov, V. 8.: Suchkov, A. F. "Dynamics of an Instantaneous-Q Laser,"
TRUDY HAN SSSR, Vol 63, 1968, p 169.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.: ﬂak, A. A.; Sedov. B. N. "Angular Divergence of. the
Emission of n Solid-State Laser," ZHBTF, Vol 52, 1967, p 12.

METOUY RASCHETA OPTIC'HESKIKB KVANTOVYI’H CBNBRATOROV [Methods of Calculating
Lasers]. Minsk. Nauka i tekhnika. edited by B. I. Stepanov. Vol 1, 1966.

Mikaelyan. A. I..; ‘rerbmkaelyan, H. L; mrkov, Yu. G. G’TIGIZSKIYE GENERATOR
NA TVERDOH TELE [Solid-State Luers], Noam. Sov. radio, 1967.

Anon'yev, Yu. A.; Yegorovs. V. P.. et a1. ”Operation of a Pour-Level Laser,“
mm, Vol 44, 1963. p 1886.

Rixrod, U. "Gain Saturation and Output Power of Optical Masers," J. APPL.
PHYS., Vol 34, 1963, p 2602.

270

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
31.

60.

- 41.

102.

63.

46.

45.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Shorokhov. 0. A. “Purging Energy Converaion Efficiency in
Laser Resonators,” OPIIRO-HEKHANICRESKAYA mm? [Optico-mchanics
Industry], No 11, 1977. p 12.

Anan'yev. In. a.; Dalashov, I. P.; ﬂak, A. A. "Ibeory o! Giant-Pulse Operation
of Lasers," DAN SSSR. Vol 166. 1966, p 825.

MIRA swmunzmovma VOL". [Sibnilliuter Have Engineerinﬂ. edited by
R. A. Valitov. Hoscov. Sov. radio. 1969.

Lyubinov, V. V.; Orlova, I. 3. "Approximate Calculation of Oscillations in

Resonators with Concave Mirrors," OPT. I SPER‘IR. [Optics and Spectroscopy].
Vol 29, 1970, p 581.

Vaynshtcyn, L. A. DIMTSIYA I 18100 FAK'NRIZA‘ISII [Diffraction and the
Pactorization Method], Moscow, Sov. radio. 1966.

Berriott, D. R. "Optical Properties of Continuom Heliu- Neon Optical
Maseru," J. 0PT. SOC. AIBRICA. Vol 52. 1962. p 31.

Hughes. 1'. P.; Yong. K. H. “Mode Sequences in Ruby Laser Eliseion." NATURE.
Vol 196, 1962, p 332.

ththov, V.; Neelsnd. J. K. "Observations Relating to the Transverse and
Longitudinal Node. of a Rwy Laser," APPL. 0mm, Vol 1. 1962. p 517.

Stickley, C. H. "Optical Quality end Radiation Patterns of Ruby Latex-3,".
APPL. OPTICS.. Vol 2, 1963, p 855.

Jaseja, ‘1'. 5.; user, M. R.; Hadhavsn, D. "Dean Characteristics of Ruby
Optical Hasers." APP]... 0PTICS., Vol 6. 1965, p 1663.

‘l'atuoka, s. "ﬂigtzer Oscillation mdu in Nd-Glass Laser." APPL. OPTICS,
Vol 3, 1966. p 986.

Dayhoff, B. 5. "Emission Patterns of Ruby Lasers,” PROC. IRB., V01 50, 1962,
p 1684.

Dsyhoff. B. 8.; Kessler. D. ”Riga-Speed Sequence Photography of a Rwy Laser,"
apr. OPTICS. Vol 1. 1962, p 339.

Lippsett, M. 8.; Strandbsrg. H. P. U. "Node Control in Ruby Optical Hasars
by Means of Elastic Defer-nation." APPL. OPTICS., Vol 1. 1962. p 343.

thmov. N.; Neeland. J. K. "mesurelsents and Interpretation of Laser Beam

Divergence." APPL. OPTICS, Vol 2, 1963. p 319'

Leontovich. A. 1%.; Veduta. A. P. "Node Excitation and Explanation of Bean
Divergence in a Ruby Laser," ZHBTP. Vol 66, 1964, p 71.

271
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(07.

48.

(09.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

SS.

56.

57.

58.

59.

61.

62.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Korolev, Ye. A. "beauty Distribution of Pulping hission
in a Laser Crystal." OPTIKA I SPBK‘I'ROSKDPIYA [Optics and Spectroscopy].
Vol 16, 19.6, p 702.

mom RASGlETA OPTIGESKIKH Kvmovm GENERATO‘ROV [Hathods of Calculating
Lasers]. edited by B. I. Stepanov, Mink, Nuts 1 tekhnika. Vol 2, 1968.

Rigrod, H. w. "Isolation of Axisymetrical Optical-Resonator Modes,"
PNC. THIRD INTERN. CONGRESS 0P QUART. mm” New York, militia Univ. Press.
1964, p 1285.

Bliss, D.; Zeidler, G. "Hodenselaction und Rinschwingverhaftsn ainss
konfokalen kontinuierlichen Rubinlasers." Z. NATURP.. Vol 21a, 1966, p 340.

Bonch-Bruyevich. A. 14., et al. "Study of a Neodyuiun Class Laser with
Spherical Mirror Resonator," ZR", Vol 36. 1966, p 2175.

Ron-Krichevekaya, I. A.; Ratner. A. H. "Angular Distribution of Emission in
an Optical Resonator with Lenses." OPTIKA I SPEKTMSKOPIYA, Vol 22. 1967,
p 653.

ﬂak, A. A.; Sons, 1.. 8.. et al. "Angular Divergence and Trmsverse Oscilla-
tion Fades of a Neodymium Glass Laser with Spherical Resonator,” OPTIKA
I SPEKTROSKOPIYA, Vol 26, 1969, p 793.

Roess. D. "Analysis of a Roan Temperature C" Rlby Laser of 10 II Resonator
Length: the Ruby Laser as a Thermal Lens," J. APPL. PHYS.. Vol 37. 1966.
p 3587.

Sventsitskays, N. A.: matey, L. D. "Some Results of Cornering a Ruby Laser
with Plane-Parallel and Confocal Resonators." ZR. Pm. SPR‘I’ROSKDPII
[Journal of .‘.pplied Spectroscopy]. Vol 6, 1966, p 345.

Muzhdaba, A. A.; 'rikhonova. N. P.; Korolev, Ye. A. "Light Dispersion in
Corundun Cwatals," amino-mama“ PWSHLENNOST', No l, 1968, p 16.

Abella, J. D.; Townes, c. H. "Mode Characteristics and Coherence in Optical
Rwy Masera." NATURE, Vol 192, 1961, D 957.

Calanin, H. D.; Leontovich. A. PL; Chizhikova, 2. D. "Coherence and Radiation
Pattern of a Ruby Laser." ZHE‘I'P. Vol 43. 1962, p 347.

Korobkin, V. V.; Leontovich. A. H. "Coherence and Tim Base of the Radiation
Spectra of a Ruby Laser," ZRETP, Vol lob, 1963, p 1867.

Stoicheff, B. P.; Scabo, A. "Interference Rings in Ruby Maser Dean."
APPL. OPTICS, Vol 2, 1963, p 811.

Vanyukov, H. I'.; Iaayenko, V. I.. et a1. "Pu-ﬁns of Additional Extra-axial
Stinulated Emission Beans," ZHETP, Vol 108. 1965, p 3.

Anan'ye 4- Yu. A.; Sedov. D. H. "Spectral and Tine Characteristics of
Cal-‘2:S Stimulated Emission." leE‘I‘P, Vol 68, 1965. p 782.

272
li‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
63.

6‘.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.
72.

73.

76.

75.

76.

77.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bortfeld. D. P.; Congleton, R. S., et al. "Influence of Optical Quality
on Rwy Laser Oscillators and mlifiera," J. APPL. PHYS», V01 35, 1966,
p 2267.

Kellington. c. 11.; Katrnan. )1. "Bean Divergence and Par-Field Patterns of
Rubies of Varying Optical Quality." J. APPL. PHYS., Vol 36, 1965. p 2910.

Korolev. Ye. A.; Bondarchuk. V. A.; Tikhonova, ll. 1’. "Influence of Rwy
Crystal Flaws on Laser hission Characteristics," OP‘rno-WIGBSKAYA
PUWSELENNOST'. No 3, 1967. p 9.

Akulenok, Ye. 14.; Bagdssarov, Kh. 8., et al. "Influence of Modular Structure
on Ruby Laser hission Divergence," KRISTALLOGRAPIYA [Crystallography],
Vol 12. 1967, p 286.

Danileyko, Yu. IL; Mansnkov, A. A.. et a1. "Optical Bonageneity of Ruby
Crystals and Its Relation to Laser hission Divergence.” m [Solid-State
Physics}, Vol 10, 1968, p 2738.

Danileiko, Yu. K.; Khainov-Hal'kov. V. Ya.. et al. ”Surface and Volm
Scattering Surface Danges. and Optical Bomgsneity Studies of Ruby Crystals
and Their Connections vith Laser Emission Characteristic." 1m J. 01'
QUAKE. ELECTR.. V01 (IE-S. 1969. p 87.

Arisonis. P. V.; Doss. T. T.;~Beinlich, R. "I‘leasurensnt of Sean Divergence
of Q-Svitched Rtby Laser Roda," REV. SCI. IRS“, Vol 38, 1967, p 334.

Quelle, H. "Thermal Distortion of Diffraction-Linked Optical Elements."
APPL. OPTICS., V01 5. 1966, p 633.

Snitrer, 3. "Glass Lasers,” PROC. 1333. Vol 56, 1966, p 1249.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; ﬁsh, A. A. "Variation of Laser Resonator Characteristics
in the Lain; Process," OPTIKA I symmrna, V01 16, 1966, p 1065.

Schmidt, U. .1. "Change of the Refractive Indsx of Rwy During Optical
Punping," J. nrwt. PHYS.. Vol 35. 1964. p 259.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Kozlov. N. A.. et a1. "Thermal Deformation of a Solid-
State Laser Resonator," ZR. PRIXL. SPEKTROSKOPII. Vol 5, 1966, p 51.

Grishnanova. N. 1.; Sventsitskaya, N. A.; 1:11ro, 1.. D. "Investigation of
Thermal Dotonations of Ruby Laser Crystals." 2H. PHIL. SPBKTROSKOPII. Vol 7,

1967. p 340.

Vanyukov, H. P.; Isayenko, V. I.. et a1. "Study of Thermal Distortions in
Samples of Glsss Generating Stilulatsd Emission," 21!. Pm. SPEKTROSKOPII,
Vol 2. 1965, p 295.

Vanyukov, H. P.; Isayenko, V. 1., et al. "Effect of the Resonator Mirror
Align-ant on the Lasing Mode of NeodyIiuI-Doped Glass." 31. Pm.
SPEKTROSKOPII, V01 2. 1965, p 415.

2.73
POROFFICIALWONLY
78.

81.

82.

83.

85.

86.

87.

89.

90.

91.

92.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Broude, V. L.; Zaika, V. V., et a1. "Operation of a may Laser with
Tilted Mirrors," 23. PRXL. SPEKTROSKOPII, V01 3, 1965, p 225.

Ralinin, V. P.; Lyubinov. V. V. "Effect of Hisalignnent of Laser Resonator
Mirrors on Angular Distribution of the Laser Emission," OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPII,
Vol 22, 1967, p 123.

Kravchenko, V. 1.; Soskin, H. . . "Ilperfectiona of the Active )kdia,
Aberrations of Resonators and Oscillation Modes of Solid-State Lasers,"
KVANTOVAYA ELECTRON!“ (TRUDY 113$?!”me SMNARA) [Quentin Electronics
(Proceedings of the Republic Seminar”. Kiev, Naukova data, No lo, 1969, p 62.

Kalinin, Yu. A., et al. "Influence of Inverse Population Distribution on
Transverse Laser Oscillation Modes," 2311’, Vol 38, 1968, p 1108.

Ruznetsova, T. 1.; Rnutian, S. G. "Instability of the Monochromatic Losing
Conditions in Solid-State Lasers," PIT, Vol 5, 1963, p 2105.

Tang, c. L.; Stats, dc Mars, G. A. "Spiking Behavior of Solid-State Luers,"
J. APPL. PHYS., V01 34, 1963, p 2289.

Stats. 11.; Tang, C. L. "Multinode Oscillation in Solid State Masers,“
J. APP]... PHYS., Vol 35, 1964, p 1377.

Livahits, B. L.; Tsikunov, V. N. "Spectral Properties of Forced Emission in
a Broad Puwing Range," 2mm. Vol 49, 1965, p 1863.

Anan'yev, Yu. A. "Bussion Intensity Distribution of a Solid-State Laser with
Plane Mirrors with Respect to Transverse Oscillation Modes," Zli'l'F, Vol 37,
1967, p 139.

Tang, C. L.; Stats, IL, et a1. "Spectral Properties of a Single-Mode Ruby
Laser: Evidence of Homogeneous Broadening of the Zero Phonon Lines in
Solids." PHYS. REV., Vol 136A, 1964, p 1.

Livshits, B. L.; Nazarov, V. P., et a1. "Spectral Composition of Forced
Emission as a Function of the Speed of a Crystal," PIS'MA V m, Vol .1,
1965, p 23. -

Evtuhov, V.; Siegnmn, A. B. "A Matted-Mode Technique for Obtaining
Axially Uniforn Energy Density in a Laser Cavity," APPL. OPTICS, Vol 4, 1965,
p 162.

Fox, A. 6.; Li. '1'. "Effect of Gain Saturation on the Oscillating Modes of
Optical Masers," IEEE J. QUANT. BLECTR., Vol QE-Z, 1966, p 776.

Belouaova, I. M.; Vinokurov, c. N., at al. "Interaction of Oscillation Modes
in a Gas Laser with Spherical Mirror Resonator," ZIIETP, Vol 52, 1967, p 11106.

Kalinin, Yu. A.; Hak, A. A. "Influence of the Inverse Pepulation Density on
the Angular Divergence of Solid-State Laser Emission," OPTIKD-WARICHESKAYA
Pnomsmmnos'r'. No 5, 1969, p 61.

276

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102 .

103.

106.

105.

106 t

107.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Livahita, B. 1.. "Traveling-Medium Laser." um, Vol 98, 1969, p 393.

Vinokurov, G. N.: Calaktionova, N. H., et al. "Spiking Behavior of Solid-
State Lasers." MP. V01 60, 1971. p 489.

Gloge, D. "Calculation of Pabry-Perot Resonators for Lasers Using Scattering
Matrices," KVAZIOP‘l'IKA iQuasioptios], Moscow, Mir, 1966, p 26‘; "General
Method of Calculating Optical Cavities and Periodic lens System," Ibid.,

p 280 (also published in ARG. ELECTR. UBBR’IRAG, Vol 18, 19610, p 197;

Vol 19. 1965. p 13).

Averbakh, V. 5.: Vlasov, S. 11.; Talanov, V. H. "Effect of First and Second
Orobr Aberrations on Open Resonator Characteristics," RADIOTBERRIRA I
BLEKTRONIKA [Radio Engineering and Electronics], Vol 10. 1965. p 1150.

Anan'yev, Yu. IL; Lyubinov, V. V.; Orlova. I. R. "Mode Deformation in
Open Resonators with Mirrors," ZB‘T, Vol 39, 1969, p 1872.

Belomova, 1. FL; Danilov, o. 3. "Study of Various “Upes of Resonators to

Obtain a Single-Made Laser with Optimal Parameters," 2111?, Vol 37, 1967.
p 1519.

Sanderson, R. I"; Streifer. H. "Laser Resonators with Tilted Reflectors,"
APPL. OPTICS, Vol 8, 1969. p 2241.

Statz. 11.; Tang, C. 1.. "Problem of Node Deformation in Optical users."
J. APPL. PHYS” Vol 36, 1965, p 1816.

Li, 1.; Skinner. J. G. "Oscillating nodes in Rwy Lasers with Ronunifom
Pumping Energy Distribution," J. m. PRYS., Vol 3, 1965, p 2595.

Ogura. IL; Yoshida. Y.; Ikenoue, J. "Theory of Deformed Pabry Perot
Resonator," J. PHYS. 8°C., Japan, Vol 20. 1965, p 598.

Lyubinov, V. V. "Obtaining Laser Bniaaion with thremly Narrow Directional-
ity." OP'l'IKA I SPECTROSKOPIYA, Vol 21, 1966, p 226.

Fox, A. 6.; Li, T. "Modes in a Maser Interferometer with Curved and Tilted
Mirrors," PROC. 1283, Vol 51. 1963, p 80.

Wells, w. R. "Modes of a Tilted-Hirror Optical Resonator for the Far
Infrared," IEEE J. OP QUART. ELECTR., Vol QE-Z. 1966, p 94.

Lyubimov, V. V.; Orlova, I. B. "Betinating the Influence of Hisalignment of
Resonator Mirrors on Losses and Angular Distribution." 281?, Vol 39, 1969.

Schaack. 6. "Modes in a Deformed Laser Resonator," IEEE J. 01' QUART. ELEC‘l'R.,
v01 05-3, 1967, p 130.

275

FOROI'HCIALUSEONLY
108.

109 .

110.
111.
112.

113.
114.

115.

116.
117.
118.

119 .

120.

121.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kuznetsova, T. I. "Risen Solutions of the Wave Equation for an
Inhonogeneous Laser," 2111?, Vol 36, 1966, p 1.19; "Influence of Bonmifornity
of Dielectric Constant on the Properties of Natural Oscillations in
Resonators," le‘rl’. Vol 36, 1966, p 58.

Tang, c. 1.; Statz, H. "Effects of Intensity Dependent Anomalous Dispersion
on the Mode Shapes of the Fabry-Perot Oscillators," J. APPL. PHYS», Vol 38,
1967, p 886.

Riedel, B. P.; Baldwin, 6. D. "Theory of Dynamic Optical Dispersion in
Isotropic Laser Materials," J. APPL. PHYS” Vol 38, 1967, p 2720.

Anisinov. N. A.; Kononchuk, G. 1.. "Variation of the Index of Refraction of
a Ruby as a Result of Inverse Population," PTT, Vol 10, 1968, p 3150.

Ansn'yev, Yu. A. "Losses in s Nonuniformly Pumed Solid-State Laser,"
21!. Pm. SPEKTROSKOPII, Vol 7, 1967, p 825.

Soskin. H. 3. "Linear Phase Distortions of a Resonator and Forced Emission
Lasing by a Ruby Crystal," KVAN‘l‘OVAYA mum (TRUE! RBSPUBLIKANSKOGO
SEMINARA), Kiev. Naukova duita, No 1, 1966, p 107.

Lyubinov, V. V. "Rstinating the Width of the Angular Distribution of Laser
Emission in the Presence of Inhonogeneity in a Plane Mirror Resonator,"
OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA, Vol 26, 1968. p 815.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Lyubinov, V. V.; Sedov, B. B. "Effect of Light Scattering
on Laser Properties," 28. Pm. SPEKTROSKOPII, Vol 8, 1968, p 955.

Ansn'yev, Yu. A.; Grishmsnova, N. 1.; Sventsitsksya, N. A. "Properties of a
Laser with a Grating Used as the Resonator Exit Mirror," um, Vol 43,
1973, p 1530.

Kslinin, V. P.; Lyubimv, V. V.; Orlova, I. B. "Effect of Mirror Deforma-
tion on the Angular Distribution of the Eaission of Lasers with Flat
Hirrors," 2H. pm. snmosxopu, Vol 12, 1970, p 1019.

Kirillov, G. A.; Kormr, S. 3., et a1. "Study of the Emission Divergence of
s Photodissociation Laser with Inhomogeneom Active Media," 211. PRICL.
SPEKTROSKOPII, V01 12, 1970, p 1019.

Landau, D. 0.; L'ifshits, Ye. M. ELEKTRODINAHIKA SPLOSHNYKH SEED [Electro-
dynamics of Continuous Media], Moscow, Gostekhizda't, 1957, Chapter 10.

Torsido di, Francis c. "Plat-Roof Resonators, APPL. omcs, Vol 6, 1965,
p 1267.

Soncini, 0.: Svelto, 0. "Single Transverse Mode Pulsed Rwy Laser," APPL.
PHYS. 1.311., Vol 11, 1967, p 261; "Single Hode Pnaive Q-Svitohed Ruby Laser,"
1338 J. QUART. ELECL‘R., Vol 03-16, 1968, p (022.

276

F0!” “GALUSIONLY
122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129 .

1”.

131.

132.

133.

135.

136.

137.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Averbakh. V. S.; Vlaaov, S. N. "Merinntal Study of a Bc-Ne-Laur with
Nonspharical Mirrors,” umormn I 2mm, V01 16, 1969, p 1709.

Haslov, V. P.; Vorob'yev, Ye. N. "Uninodal Open Resonators." DAN SSSR.
Vol 179, 1968, p 558.

mkaclyan, A. L.; Korovitayn. A. V.; Remove, 1.. V. "Laser with Diffraction
width of tho Radiation Pattern," ”3'!“ V MP, Vol 2, 1965, p 37.

Troitskiy, Yu. V. “Nonuniforn Energy Eli-Mon of Higher Tranavcno Oscilla-

tion lbdea in a Gas Laser," KVAN'I’OVAYA ELMO!!!“ [Quantum Electronics],
Vol 1. 19710, p 124.

Baker, J. A.: Peters, C. V. "Mode Selection and Enhance-ant with a Ruby
Laser," APPL. 0PTICS.V01 1, 1962. p 674.

Skinner. J. 0.; Geuaik, J. B. "Diffraction-Lint“! Ruby Oscillator,"
J. 0PT. SOC. ”ERICA, Vol 52, 1962, p 1319.

Li, 1‘. "Mode Selection in an Aperture-Limited Concentric Maser Interferometer,"
BELL SYS‘I'. new. J., Vol 42. 1963, p 2609.

Hagen, H. P. "Diffraction-united Hiya-Radiance lid-glans Laser Systel,"
J. APPL. ms.. V01 (00. 1969, p 511.

Stein. A. "Mode Selection for Gimt Pulls. Ruby Lasers," APPL. OPl'ICS, Vol 6, '
1967, p 2193.

Collins, 8. A.; White, 6. R. "Interferometer Laser Mode Selection," APPL.
OPTIG. V01 2, 1963, p 468.

Gehrer, 6.; Ross, D. "Modenaeloctive Kigenochaften cincr planparallelen
dielektriochen Platte ale Reflektor einca merreeonatorc," z. NATURPORSG.,
Vol 20a, 1965, p 701.

Duly, R.; Sims, 8. D. "An Ilprovnd Method of Mechanical Q-Switching Using
Total Internal Reflection," APP]... OPTICS, Vol 3, 1964, p 1063.

Giordnaine, J. A.; Kaiser, H. "Node-Selecting Prion Reflector for Optical
Racers." J. APP'L. PHYS., Vol 35, 1966, p 3646.

Kruzhilin, Yu. I. "Anisotropic Reflector for a Laser," OPTIKA I SPEKTROSROPIYA,
V01 20, 1966, p 713.

Lyubinov, V. V.; Nilov, Ye. V. "Optical-Hechanical Shutter for Q-Switching
of a Laser Resonator." ONO-WIGESKAYA PROHYSHLENNOST', No 2, 1967,
p 32.

De. Shazer, L. 6.; Hamders. B. A. "Laser Mode Selection by Internal Reflec-
tion Prism," APPL. OPTICS. Vol 6, 1967, p 631.

277

POIOI'I'ICIALUSEONLY
138.

139.

1‘0.

161 .

1‘2.

163.

11010.

165.

1‘6 0

167.

1108.

169 .

150.

151.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ishchenko, V. N.; Starunskiy, V. N. "Application of Lnr-Gehrcks Plates
in a Ruby Laser," IZV. VUZOV, RADIOPIZIKA [News of the Institutions of
Higher Learning, Radio Physics], Vol 10, 1967, p 1189.

Bondsrenko, N. 0.; Yerenins, I. V. ; Talsnov, V. I. "Solid-State Laser-with
Node Selection Inside the Active Blsmnt," PIS'HA V m, Vol 6, 1967,
p 459.

Boyko, B. 8.; Petrov, N. 8., et a1. "Laser with ﬁve-Dimensional Resonator,"
ZR. PRIKIu SPEKTROSKOPII, V01 3, 1968, p 351.

Lyubinov, V. V.; Orlova, I. 3. "Consideration of the Influence of the
Angular Distribution Selector on the Oscillation Modes of Open Resonators
with Plat Mirrors and Constriction of the Angular Distribution of the
Emission," ZR. PRKL. SPEKTIDSKOPII, Vol 9, 1968, p 54.

‘l‘alanov, V. I. "Suppression of Nonaxial Modes in Open Resonators with
Broad Have Beats by the Combined Selection hthod," 12V. WCOV, RADIOFIZIKA,
Vol 10, 1967, p 298.

La Tourette, J. '1'.: Jacobs, 3. F.; Rabinowitz, R. "Imroved Laser Angular
Brightness Through Diffraction Coupling," Am. OPTICS, Vol 3, 19610, p 981.

Evtuhov, V.; Neeland, J. K. "Study of the Output Spectra of Rlby Luers,"
1888 J. 01’ QUART. ELBCI'R” V01 03-1, 1965, p 7.

Kalinin, Yu. A.; ﬂak, A. A., et al. ”Laser With Cross Sectionally Variable
Transmission of the Resonator Mirrors," ZRETP, Vol 56, 1969, p 1161.

Vskhitov, N. 6. "Open Resonators with Mirrors Having Varid>le Reflection
Coefficient," RADIOTEKHNIKA I BLBKTRONIKA, Vol 10, 1965, p 1676.

Sventsitskaya, N. A.; Khuov, 1.. D. "Increasing the Ruby Laser Blission
Directionality by Using a Remote Reflector," ZR. PRIKL. SPRUROSKOPII, Vol 3,
1966, p 230.

Ansn'yev, Ya. In; Belousova. I. H., et a1. Angular Cllaracteristics of the
Emission of Lasers with High Effective-Length Resonator," KVANTOVAYA
BLEKTRONIKA, Vol 1, 19710, p 296.

Okaya, A. "Off-Axial Mode Rejection of Ruby Laser Using Ball Mirror,"
PROC. 1388, V01 51, 1963, p 1033.

Nash, D. I.; Panulovskiy, V. L; Chirina, I... 1’. "Experimental Study of the
Beam Divergence in He-Ne-Llsers," omu 1 SPWKOPIYA, V01 18, 1965,

p 866.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Sherstobitov, V. Ye. "Influence of Edge Effects on the

PrOperties of Unstable Resonators," KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA, edited by
N. G. Bssov, No 3, 1971, p 82.

278

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
152.

153.

156.

155.

156.

157.

158.

15" .

160 .

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

166 .

POI! OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

Anan'ysv, Yu. A.; Sventsitakaya. . . A.; Sheratobitov, V. Ye. "Properties
of Lasts with Unstable Resonator," mm, Vol 55, 1968, p 130.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Vinokurov, G. 31.. et s1. "Laser with Telescopic Resonator."
ZHBTP, Vol 58, 1970, p 786.

Anan'yev. Yu. A. "Unstable Resonators and Their Applications." KVAN‘IOVAYA
ELEKTRONIRA, edited by R. G. Baaov, llo 6. 1971, p 3.

Vail'yev, L. A.; Dentin. V. K., et a1. "Calculating the Angular
Distribution of the Emission of a Laser with Inhomogeneous "edit. and
Telescopic Resonator," KVAHTOVAYA WI“, Vol 2, 1975, p 51.

Rogov, V. 8.; Rikenglaz. H. II. "Ntnerical Investigation of the Inﬂuence of
Optical Nonuniforuities of the Active lhditﬂ on the Operation of an Unstable
Telescopic Resonator," KVANTOVAYA 31.31qu, Vol lo, 1977, p 35.

Siepan, A. 8.; Arrathoon, R. "nodes in Unstable Optical Resonators
and Lens Waveguides," 1382 J. 01’ QUART. mom, Vol 03—3. 1967. p 156.

Streifer, U. "Unstable Optical Resonators and Waveguides," 1833 J. 01’
WW ELECTRONICS, Vol QE-é. 1968, p 229.

Bergstsin, L. "Modes of Stable and Unstable Optical Resonators,“ Am.
omcs, Vol 7. 1968. p 695.

Sanderson. R. L.; Streifer, U. "Unstdale Luer Resonator Modes." APPL.
OPTIG, Vol 8, 1969, p 2129.

Siegnan. A. 3.; Miller. R. Y. "Unstable Optical Rasmator Loss Calculations
Using the Prony Method." APPL. OPTICS. Vol 9. 1970. p 2729.

Vinokurov, c. N.; Lyubisov, V. V.. et a1. PRIRLIZRBNNYY RASCHET ROLRRANIY
V OTKRYTYKB REZONATORAKH S WPIKLY'MI 22mm (TRUDY V VSBSOYUZNOGO
SIH‘POZIUMA PO DIPRAKTSII I RASPROS‘IRAIIENIYU VOL“) [Approximate Calculation
of Oscillations in Open Resonators with Convex Mirrors (Proceedings of the
5th All-Union synpoumn on wave Propagation and Diffraction”. Leningrad,
Nauka, 1971. p 72.

Vinokurov, 0. IL; Lyubinov, V. V.; Orlova, I. 3. "Study of the Selective
Properties of Open Unstable Resonators," OPTIKA I spmsumA. Vol 34,
1973, p 7101.

Santana, 0.; Pclsen, L. R. "Unstable Open Resonators: I‘m-Dimensional and
Three-Dimensional Losses by Waveguide Analyses," AI’PL. OPTICS. Vol 15, 1976,
p 1678.

Somerfeld. A. OPTIKA [Optics], Moscow, 111., 1953.
Sheratobitov, V. Ye.; Vinokurov, G. N. ”Properties of Unstable Resonators

with Large Equivalent Fresnel Mater," KVAN’I‘OVAYA BLEKTRONIKA. edited by
N. 6. Basov, No 3(9), 1972. p 36.

279
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

190.

181.

182.

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sieman, A. E. "Stabilizing Output with Unstable Resonators," LASER
rows, No 5. 1971, p 1.2.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.: Sheratobitov, V. Ye. "Unstable Resonators with Central
Coupling Role in Lasers and Amlifiers," 2111?, Vol 63, 1973, p 1013.

Lyubinov, V. V.; Nevgenen, N. N.; Petrov, V.-P. "Asy-etric Unztable
Resonators," OPTIKA I SPBKTROSKOPIYA, Vol 35, 1973, p 1132.

Netrm'kin, Yu. V.; Yesepkina, N. A.. et a1. "Problem of Obtaining the
Traveling Have Mode in a Couple: Optical Resonator," RADIOTEKENIKA I
ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 12, 1967, p 166.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.: Vinokurov, G. N. "Sou. Properties of Unstable Ring
Cavities with Emission Angle Selection," ZNTP, Vol 39, 1969, p 1327.

Snimov, V. I. KURS WSSHEY HAWTIKI [Course in Higher Mathemtics],
Moscow, Gostekhizdat, Vol lo, 1957.

Freiberg, R. 3.; Chenausky, P. P.; Buczek, C. J. "Unidirectional Unstable
Ring Lasers," APPL. OPTICS, Vol 12, 1973, p 11100.

Lyubimv, V. V.; Orlova, I. B. "Unstable Resonator with Angular Distribution
Selector," 0mm 1 spzxraosxonu, Vol 33. 1972, p 138.

Anan'yev, Yu. A. "Prism Unstable Resonators," KVANTOVAYA MMNIKA,
edited by N. C. Basov, No 1(13), 1973, p 105.

Holchanov, V. Yn.; Skrotskiy, G. V. "Matrix Method of Calculating the
Natural Polarization States of Anisotropic Resonators," KVAN'I‘OVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA, edited by N. G. Basov, No 4, 19-71. p 3.

Peck, E. R. "Polarization Properties of Corner Reflectors and Cavities,"
J. OPT. SOC. 01’ ANERICA, Vol 52, 1962, p 253.

Lyubilwv, V. V. USSR Author's Certificate No 357875, priority as of
31 August 1970, BYULLETEN' {Bulletin}, No 34, 1972.

Arnaud, J. A. "Degenerate Optical Cavities,“ APPL. OPTICS, Vol 8, 1969,
P 189a

Nogarcv, C. V. OPTICHESKIYB YUSTIROVOCHNVYE ZADACHI [Optical Align-em:
Problems], Leningrad, Mashinostroyeniye, 19710.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Kuprenyuk, V. 1.; Sheratobitov, V. Ye. "Properties of
Unstable Resonators uith Field Reversal, 1, Theoretical Elenents,"
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 6. 1979, p 1871.

Danileyko, Yu. IL; Lobachev, V. A. "New Resonator for Lasers — Resonator
with Rotating Field," KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 1, 19710, p 668.

280

FOR OMCML USE ONLY
183.

184.

185 .

186.

187.

188.

189.

190.

191.

192 .

193.

194.

195.

196.

um W‘WﬁN“ b-{ﬁ \MM

Kytina, I. (3.: Nesterenko, V. H. "Laser with Increased Uniformity of
Emission Field." KVANTOVAYA nan-mum. Vol 1, 19710. p 721.

Anan'yev, Yu. A. USSR Author's Certificate No 530606. priority 8 of
1. April 1975.

Anan'yev. Yu. A.; Sventsitsksys. N. A.; Sheretobitov, V. Ye. USSR Author's
Certificate No 276256, priority no of 18 March 1968, ”01.1.8731", No 26,
1970. p 63.

Ansn'yev, Yu. A.; flak. A. A.; Sedov, B. )1. "Light Gain by Four-Level
Quantum System." ZHETP, Vol 108, 1965, p 7.

Ansn'yev, Yu. A.; Sherstobitov, V. Ye.; Shorokhov. 0. A. "Cslculsting the
Efficiency of Lasers with Large Emission Losses," KVANTOVAYA MTMNIKA,
edited by N. G. Bssov, No 1, 1971. p 91.

Ansn'yev, Yu. A.; Kovsl'chuk. L. V., et s1. "Procedure for Calculating the
Efficiency of Lasers with Unstable Resonstors," KVANTOVAYA mmn,
Vol 1. 1974. n 1201.

Ansn'yev, Yu. A.; Sventsitsksys. N. A.; Sherstobitov, V. Ye. "Characteristics
of Giant-Pulse Lsser with Unstable Resonstor," 2111?, Vol 39, 1969, p 1325.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.: Chernov, V. N.; Sheratobitov. V. Ye. "nigh Spatial-
Coherence Solid-State Laser," KVANTOVAYA BLBKTIDNIXA, edited by N. G. Basov,
No a, 1971, p 112.

Ansn'yev, Yu. A.; Crishmsnovs, N. 1., et s1. "Possibility of Controning the
Emission of Lasers with Telescopic Resonators." KVANI’OVAYA 3mm.
edited by N. G. Bssov, No 2(8), 1972, p 85.

Ansn'yev, Yu. A.; Sirszetdinov. V. 5., et s1. "Bnission Direction Stabilize-
tion Effect in Unstable Prism Resonators," KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRDNIKA,
edited by N. G. Basov, No 305), 1973, p 115.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; stgorodnevs, S. 1., et s1. "Possibility of Spectral
Selection in Unstable-Resonator Losers," LAZBRY S PBRBS‘I'RAIVAYDDY GASTO‘rOY
[Frequency-Tunable Lasers]. Kiev. Izd-vo AN USSR. 1973. p 41.

Alekseycv, V. N.; Ansn'yev. Yu. A.; Dsuengsuer, E. I". "Solid-State Telescopic-
Resonator Lasers," DAN SSSR, Vol 2110, 1974. p 535.

Ansn'yev. Yu. A.; Crishmanovs, N. 1., et s1. "Conparison of the Emission
Divergence of a Multistage System ad Laser with Telescopic Resonstor,"
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 1, 19710, p 12107.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Grishmsnovs. N. 1., et 8].. ”Spectral Selection of the
Emission of Unstable-Resonator Lasers," KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA, Vol 2, 1975,
p 738.

281

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
197.

198.

199.

200.

201.

202 .

203.

2010.

205.

206.

207.

208.

209 .

210.

211.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ansn'ysv, Yu. A.; Grishnanova, N. 1., et a1. ”Reflecting Surfaces Inside
lhstable Resonators," KVANTOVAYA BLBKMIKA, Vol 2, 1975, p 1952.

Anm'yev, Yu. A.; Buzhinskly, I. 11., et a1. "Highly Efficient Neodyniun-
Glass Lear." OHIKO-WCHBSKAYA PROHYSELBUOST', No 9, 1968, p 26.

Krupke, ﬂ. 8.; Sooy, H. R. "Properties of an Unstable Confocal Resonator
002 Laser System." 1333 J. 01‘ QUART. ELECI'RONICS, Vol (28-5, 1969, p 575.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Grishnanova, N. I. "DeforI-tions of the Active Elements of
Interferometers and Theml Optical Constants of Neodyniul Glass,"
2“. PRIICL. SPEKTROSKOPII, Vol 12, 1970, p 568.

Sinclair. D. c.; Cottrell, 1'. N. 3. "Transverse Node Structure in Unstable
Optical Cavities," APPL. OPHCS. Vol 6, 1967, p 865.

Reilly, J. P. "Single-Mode Operation of a High-Power Pulsed 112/002 Laser,"
1332 J. or QUART. 51£crn., Vol 93-8, 1972, p 136.

Dyer, P. 8.; James, D. 3.; Rauden, S. A. "Single Transverse Mode Operation
of a Pulsed Volume Excited Atmospheric Pressure 002 Laser Using an
Unstable Resonator," OPTICAL comm, Vol 5, 1972, p 2%.

Vanyukov, H. P.; Gorlanov, A. V., et a1. "Hultic‘Jannel Giant-Pulse Neodymium
Glass Laser," KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRWIKA, edited by N. G. 38807, No ’0, 1971, p 117.

Vanyukov, H. P.; Serebryakov, V. A., et al. "Powerful Giant-Pulse Unstable-
Resonator Laser," OPTIKO-WIUIBSKAYA PROMSWNOST', No 1, 1972, p 58.

Datskevich. N. P.; Karlova, Ye. K., et al.‘ "Powerful Pulsed c02-Laser
with Unstable Resonator," KVAN‘I‘OVAYA 2W1“, Vol «'0, 1977, p 457.

Zenskov, K. 1.; Issyev, A. A., et a1. “Application of Unstable Resonators
to Obtain Diffraction Divergence of the Elisaion of Pulsed Hiya-Gain Gas
Lasers," KVANTOVAYA EIHTRONIKA, Vol 1, 1976, p 863.

Isayev. A. A.; Kazaryan, H. A., et a1. "Pinched Bears in Telescopic and
Stable Resonators," KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA, Vol 1, 1976, p 1379.

Isayev, A. A.; Kazaryan. H. A.. et a1. "Evolution of Gaussian Beans and
Pulsed Lasing in Unstable-Resonator Lasers," KVAN'NVAYA BLEK‘I’RONIKA, Vol 2,
1975, p 1125.

Anan'yev, Yu. A. "Setting Up Oscillations in Unstable Resonators,"
KVANTOVAYA BLZKTRDNIKA, V01 2, 1975, p 1138.

Locke, E. V.; Hells, R. A.; Hestra, L. "perforlance of an Unstable
Oscillator on a 30-h: CH Gas Dynamic Laser," 1323 J. 017 QUART. 8136111.,
Vol 05-7, 1971, p 581.

282

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
212.

213.

215.

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

220 .

221.

222.

223.

226.

225.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Freiberg. R. J.; Chenausky, P.; Buczek, C. J. ”An Expertnantal Study of
Unstable Confocal co2 Resonators," Inn .1. or noun. 3!... Vol qz-s, 1972,
p 882.

Eisner, C. 11.; Poster, 11. 6.; Blausuk, P. R. "Unstable Pasonatora of 002
Electric-Discharge Convection Lasers." APPL. PHYS. 1.311., Vol 22. 1973.
p 16.

Hansen, D. N.; Love, J. A.; Snell, U. L. "Investigations 0". an Unstable
Confocal Resonator and (metrical Laser System," 1333 J. 0? Q11: ‘n'. ELECT!”
Vol 03-7, 1971, p 177.

Chodzko, R. A.; Hirels, 11., et al. "Application of a’Single-Prequency-
Unstable Cavity to a CH 111' Laser," 1232 J. 0? QUART. 3mm, Vol 02-9. 1973,
p 523.

Sieyaan. A. B. "Unstable 0ptica1 Resonators." APPL. OPTICS, Vol 13, 1974,
p 353.

Kuprenyuk, V. 1., Rybalko. I. 0., et a1. "Possibility of Creating Autonatic
Alignment System for Lasers with Unstable Resonators," OP‘IIKO-MEKBANICHZSKAYA
PRONTSMOST'. N0 9, 1976, p 3.

Grasydn. A. 2. "Roman Lasers," KVM'NVAYA BLBKTRONIKA, Vol 1, 19743. p 1085.

Alekseyev, V. D.; Sobel'nan. I. I. "Conversion of Deer Bussion in the Case
of Stimlatec‘ Ranan Scattering." 2112‘”, Vol 51., 1968, p 1834.

Dreyzin. Yu. A.; Dykhne. A. H. "Autooscillatory Latins Inatdaility of ligh-
P1ow Lasers Using Unstable Resonators." PIS'MA V ZBBTP, Vol 19, 1975, p 718.

Alan, H. L. "femoral Oscillations in the Output fron a Gas-Dynamic Laser
with an Unstable Resonator." APPL. PHYS. LET'I., Vol 29. 1976, p l.

Karmin. Yu. N.; Konev, Yu. 3. "Numerical Investigation of Unstable
Telescopic Resonators Considering Diffraction and the Saturation Effect in the
Active Medina," KVAN'IOVAYA atmnoutu, Vol 2, 1975. p 236.

Reach, D. 3.; Chester, A. N. "Iterative Diffraction Calculations of Trans--
verse Node Distributions in Confocal Unstable Laser Resonators," APPL.
OPTICS, Vol 12, 1973. p 997.

Chester, A. ll. "Three-Dinensional Diffraction Calculations of Laser
Resonator Nodes," APPL. OPTICS, Vol 12. 1973, p 2352.

Mamet, A. 17.; Rogov, V. S. CHISLENNYY HETOD ISSLEDOVAHIYA ENERGE‘I‘ICHESKIKH
KHARAKTBRISTIK 0K6 S HBUS‘I‘OYGIWH REZONA‘mmH [Ntmrical Method of Studying
the Energy Characteristics of a met with Unstable Resonators]. Hoscou,
preprint of the Nuclear Power Institute. 80 2669, 1976.

283

POIOI-‘I’ICIALUSBONLY
226.

227.

228.

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

236.

235.

236.

237.

238.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Breyev. V. V.; met, A. F.; Rogov, V. S. HB‘l‘OD ISSLEDOVANIYA
WRISTIK BYSTROPROTOCHNOG) COZ-LAZBRA S NBUSTOYCBIVYH REZONATOROH
[method of Studying the Characteristics of a High-Plow (”z-Laser with-

Unstable Resonator], Moscow, preprint of the Nuclear Power Institute.
No 2650, 1976.

Siegnan, A. 8.; Sziklas, B. A. ”Mode Calculations in Unstable Resonators with
Planing Saturable Gain. 1. Hermite-Gaussian Expmsion,” APPL. OPTICS,

Vol 13, 1976, p 277$;"II. Fast Fourier ‘rrmtorn Method," APPL. OPTICS.

Vol 16, 1975, p 1875.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Truaov, V. P.: Sheratobitov. V. Ye. "Selection of an

Unstable Resonator for a Gas Dynamic Laser," KVAN‘I‘OVAYA WI“, Vol 3,
1976, p 1715.

Konyukhov. V. IL; Prokhorov, A. M. USSR Author's Certificate no 223956
with priority as of 19 June 1966.

Konydthov. V. K. OPTICBESKIY nzommn GAZODINAMIGIESKOG) LAZBRA [Optical
Cavity of a Gas Dynamic Laser]. Moscow, Otchet HAN SSSR, 1971; preprint
FIAN SSSR, No 161, 1976.

Aleksandrov, B. 8.; Anan'yev, Yu. A., et a1. "bbdel of a Medium for
Calculating the Resonators of Gas Dynamic COz-Lasers," KVAN‘I‘OVAYA
BLEKTRONIKA, Vol 6, 1977, p 1460.

Anan'yev, Yu. IL; Kuprenyuk. V. 1., et a1. "Study of the Properties of an
lhstable Resonator with No-Faced Corner Reflector in a Continuum-Action
.1 (”z-Laser," KVAN'DOVAYA ELMRONIKA, Vol 6. 1977, p 1656.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Sheratobitov. V. Ye. "Cylindrical Mirror with Adjustable
Curvature," KVANTOVAYA ELEKTIDNIKA, V01 1, 19710, p 2636.

Zavgorodneva, S. 1.; Kuprenyuk. V. 1., et al. "Measurenent of the Spatial
Cain Distribution in Infrared Lasers," KVAN'I‘OVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 3. 1976,
p 1126.

Zavgorodnevn. S. 1.; Kuprenyuk. V. 1.; Sherstobitov. V. Ye. "Unstable
Resonator with Field Reversal." KVAN‘I‘OVAYA ELEKTMNIKA. Vol 6, 1977. p 1383.

Casperson, L. V.; Romro. C. "Properties of a Radial Mode coz-Laaer." IBEE
J. 0? QUART. ELBCTR.. V01 06-9, 1973, p 4810.

Corianov. A. V.; Lyubinov, V. V.; Petrov. V. F. ”Neodymium Laser in the
Quasicontinuoua Made." KVANTOVAYA BLEK'IRONIKA, edited by N. G. Basov, No 6,
1971. p 116.

Mikaelyan, A. I..: Kuprishov. V. 17., et al. "New Hethod of Giant-Pulse Lasing,"
PIS'MA V ZHETF. Vol 11, 197). p 226; "Study of the Losing of an Auto-atic

Q-Switching Laser," KVAN‘I‘OVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, edited by N. G. Basov, No 1,
1971 p 102.

286

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
239.

260.

261.

262.

263.

266.

265.

266 .

267.

268.

269 .

250.

251.

252.

253.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Shorokhov, 0. A. USSR Author's Certificate No 282562
with priority as of 19 March 1969. BYULLBTBN', No 1), 1970, p 86.

Bonderenko, A. “.3 Polio, K. 6., et al. "lasing of e Q-Svitching Ruby Lao:
Under the Effect of an External Signal." PIS'HA v 2331?, vol 6, 1967, p 692.

De Shout. 1.. 6.; Haundero. 3. A. ”Spectral Control of Laser Oscillators by
Secondary Light Sourcee." Ian J. OP QUANT. ELECT!” Vol 05-6, 1968, p 662.

Bondarenko. A. 11.; Krivoohchekov, G. V.; Snitnov. V. A. "Nd3+-Doped
Giant-Pulse Laser under the Effect of an External Stimulating Signal,"
IZV. VUZOV, RADIOPIZIKA [News of the Institution: of Higher Learning,
Radiophysios]. Vol 12, 1969, p 1895.

Prilezhayev, D. 5.: Duthovnyy, A. M., et a1. "Controlled Neody'nitn-Glese
Start-Pulse Laser," OPTIKA I SP‘EKTROSKOPIYA. Vol 33. 1972, p 733.

Buczek, C. J.; Preiberg, R. 3.; 8col..i-.. H. 1.. ”Laser Injection locking."
PROC. I-.. Vol 61. 1973, p 1611.

Aneh'yev. Yu. A.; Koval'chuk. 1.. V.; Shentobitov. V. Ye. ”Calculating the
Energy Characteristics of Hultipaee Teleaoopic Aqlifiera." KVANTOVAYA
BLEKTRONIKA, Vol 3, 1976, p 1612.

Kovel'chuk. 1.. V.; Shentobitov, V. Ye. "Effect of Snell-Scale Phase Non-
miforlitieo on the Propertiea of Unwteble Resonators," KVANTOVAYA
MTRONIKA, Vol 6, 1377, p 2176.

Andreyev. R. 3.: Voloaov, V. 1).. et al. "Powerful Giant-Pulse Laser with
Stabilized Spectrum and Emission Directionslity Close to Diffraction,"
ZR. PRIKL. SPBKTROSKOBII, V01 17. 1972. p 355.

Dukhovnyy. A. n., Malt, A. A., et el. "High-Coherence Neodymium-Clan Laser.”
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRDNIKA, Vol 2, 1975, p 2521.

Gorlanov, A. V.; Kalinina. A. A., et el. “Study of the Poaaibilitiea of
Building High-Gain Telescopic Amplifiers.” 21!. PRIKL. SPL'K‘I'RDSKOPII. Vol 17,

1972. p 517.

Cocker. 3.; Pylon. I... OPTICMSKIY “END ISSLBMVANIYA uuumm
[Optical Method of Studying Stresses], Macaw-Leningrad, om, 1936.

Timhenko, S. P. TBORIYA UPRUGJS‘II [Elasticity Theory], Hoecou-leningred,
out. 1936.

(DST 13659-68 "STBKLO OPTIGIESKOYE BESTSVBTNOYB. PIZIKO-KFIHIGMKIYﬁ

SVOYSTVA. PARAHE'I‘RY" [All-Union State Standard 13659-68 "Colorless Optical
Glass. Physical-Chemical Properties. Parameters”.

Buzhinnkiy. I. 11.: Dianov, Ye. M" et a1. "memoptical-Characteristics
of Neodysiun-Doped close." DAN SSSR, Vol 190, 1970. p 558.

285

FOIOMCIALUSEONLY
2510.

255.

256.

257.

258.

259 .

260 .

261.

262.

26 3.

264.

265 .

266 .

267.

268.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BUBNOV, M. 11.; Buzhiaskiy, I. 11., et a1. "Brightening of-Neodymim-Glass
Lasers by Selecting the Active Element Hatrix Composition," KVANTOVAYA
BLBKTRONIKA, edited by N. c. Basov, No'lo(16), 1973, p 113.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Grishmanovs, N. 1.; labelin, A. A. "Use of the Jamin
Interferometer in a Shear Interferometer System," OPTIKO-HEKRAIYIGESKAYA
PROHISIILENNOST', No 7, 1970, p 68.

Nah, A. A.; Mit'kin, V. H., et a1. "Thermooptical Constants of Neodymium
Glass," OPTIKO-WICHESKAYA PROHYSHLKNNOST', No 9, 1971, p 42.

Hit'kin, V. H.; Shchavelev, 0. 8.; Bmkins, N. N. "Selecting-the Temperature
of a Neodymium Glass Laser,“ 2H. PRIKL. SPEK‘I'R., Vol 23, 1975, p 248.

Hit'kin, V. 11.: Shchavelev, 0. S. "Problem of Athermanality Criteria of
Doped Glass for Lasers," 2H. PRIKL. SPEKTRDSKOPII, Vol 26, 1977, p 667.

Zeidler, G. "Abschatzung den Temperaturgradienten in thermisch stationlir
betriebenen Festkbrpenlasern," 2. NATURE, Vol 22a, 1967, p 909.

Voron'ko, 0. N.; Kozlov, N. A., et al. "A Possibility of Increasing the
Q-Factor of s Resonator for a Neodymium Laser,” DAN SSSR, Vol 173, 1967,
p 542.

Sticley, C. )1. "Laser Brightness Gain and Mode Control by Cowensation for
Thermal Distortion," 1333 J. 01" QUANT. 31.2611!” Vol 08-2, 1966, p 511.

McMahon, J. H. "A Correlation Between Passive and Active Test of the Beam
Divergence of a Ruby Laser," APPL. OPTICS, Vol 6, 1967, p 2191.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Grishmanova, N. I. "A Postibility of Dynamic Compensation
for Thermal Deformations of a Laser Resonator," 211. Pm. SPKKTROSKOPII,

Vol 12, 1970, p 1109.

Ansn'yev, Yu. A.; Grishmanova, N. I., et s1. "Energy Characteristics of s
Neodymium Glass Laser uith Polarized Emisszon," 211. PRIKL. SPER’IROSKOPII,
Vol 13, 1970, p 227.

Alekseyev, V. N.; Gorokhov, A. A. "Energy and Polarization Characteristics
of a Neodymium class Laser Using Flat and Telescopic Cavities," KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 2, 1975, p 733.

DiShington, R. ll.; Hook, H. R.; Hilbert, R. P. "A Polarized Laser Cavity
which Is Inaensitive to Birefringence in the Laser Rod," mm. 133:, Vol 55,
1967, p 2038.

Malt, A. A.; Mit'kin, V. 11.; Sons, 1.. N. "Excitation of Me Brmq md
E°mq Nodes in Optical Cavities," OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA, Vol 33, 1972. p 996.

Vinokurov, G. N.; Malt, A. A.; Hit'kin, V. 14. "Generation of Tangentially
Polarized Higher-Order Nodes in the Optical Band," KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA.
Vol 1, 1971:, p 1890.

286

FOR OFFICIAL L83 ONLY
269.

27o.

271.

272.

273.

276.

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

280.

281.

282.

283.

MOWISEONLY

Kortes, 1.; Kononkov. Ye. A. . et al. "Influence of Birefringence Arising
in Neodymiu- Glass During Pwing on Laser Operation." mu, Vol 59. 1970,
p 1115.

Vanyukov. H. P.; Hit'kin, V. m. et al. "Giant-Pulse Neodyliun Glen Lasers
with Diffraction Bean Divergence,"- KVAM‘OVAYA WWI“. edited by
N. G. Baeov. No 1(13). 1973. p 85.

Kryzhenovekiy. V. 1.; Serebryakov, V. A.; Starikov, A. D. "Depolarization
of the Elission of Giant-Pulse Beodyniu Glue Lasers," OPTIKO-HEKEANIGBSKAYA
PmmSHLDINOST'. No 8.1973. p 15.

Scott. H. 0.: Hit. N. "Birefringence Conpensation and T9100 Node Enhancement
in a Nd: YAG Laser," APPL. PHYS. 1.811., V01 18,1971,p 3.

Yevdokinova. V. 6.; Halt. A. A.. et a1. ”Coqensation of Induced Birefrin-
gence in laser System by Passive Anisotropic Elements," KVAN'I'OVAYA
ELECTRON“, Vol 2, 1975, p 1915.

ﬂak, A. A.; Hit'kin, V. H... et al. "A Possibility for Brightness Gain of a
Neodymium Glass Laeer," KVANTOVAYA erxrnouer. Vol 2. 1915. p 850.

Bradford, .1. N.; Eckart, R. C. "Commotins for Pup-Induced Distortion
in Glass Laser Rods.” APPL. OPTICS, Vol 7, 1968, p 2618.

Buchenkov, V. A.; Kolesnikov, 8. 11., et al. "Investigation of a Neodyniu
class Periodic Laser in the Transient Thermal Mode," KVANTOVAYA Emu,
Vol 2, 1975. p 728.

Deﬂaria. A. J. "A sultiple Internal-Reflection Polded-Path Optical Maser
Geo-etry." PROC. 1322. vol 53. 1965. p 1757.

Mikaelyen. A. I..; L'yachenko, V. V. "Plienonenon of Maintaining a Have.
Front in Sharply Informed Solid Media." PIS’HA V ZHBTP, Vol 16, 1972, p 25;
"waveguide me Optical Cavitiee." KVAN‘IOVAYA nmm, edited by

N. c. Basov. No 5(11). 1972. p 97.

Buchcnkov. V. A.; Halt. A. A.. et al. "Study of Periodic Disk Lasers."
KVAN‘I‘OVAYA WWII“, Vol 2, 1975. p 2037.

Swain, J. 3.; Kidder. R. 8., et al. "Large-Aperture Glass Disk Laser System,"
J. APPL. PHYS” V01 40, 1969, p 3973.

Sir-one, H. ".3 Speck, D. 11.; that, J. 1'. APPL. OPTICS. Vol 17, 1978,
p 999.

Shchevelev. 0. 8.; Bebkine, V. A.. et a1. "Glass with Snell Thermoptical
Characteristics P and Q," OPnKO-WCEESKAYA PMMYSWOST', No 7,
1976, p 32.

Shchavelev, O. 5.; Hit'kin, V. H., et el. "Thermoptical Characteristics
of Glass as a Function of Temperature," omxo-mmcarsmA PROHYSBLENNOST'
No 1, 1975. p 30.

287

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
280.

285.

2“.

287.

288.

289.

290 .

291.

292 .

29 3.

296 .

295 .

296 .

29 7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬂak, A. A.; Sons, 1.. 11.. et al. "Influence of Induced Anisotropy of the
Active Element on the Operation of a Neodyniua Glass Laser," OPTIKA I
SPHTMSKOPIYA, Vol 1), 1971, p 1081.

Libik, 1.. P.; Koval‘chtk, L. V. 'VLIYANIYB mmvml BPFBK’TOV NA.
TEMGBSKIYE DEPORMMSII AKTIVNYKB WW PHAIOUGOL'NO! POM.

TBZISY DOKLADOV NA 1 VSBSOYUZNUY KONFBRBNTSII "OPTIKA LAZEROV“ [Influence of
Edge Effects on Thermal Deformations of Rectangular Active Elements. Topics
of Reports at the First All-Union Conference on Laser Optics]. Leningrad,
1976, p 38.

Linnik, V.- P. "Theoretical Possibility of Decreasing the Influence of the
Atmosphere on Star Imaging," OPTIKA I SMSKOPIYA, Vol 3, 1957, p 401.

Bridges, H. 3.: Brunner, P. T., et a1. "Coherent Optical Adaptive Tech-
niques," APPL. OPTICS, Vol 13, 1976, p 291.

Pearson, J. 5.; Bridges H. 3., et al. "Coherent Optical Adaptive Techniques:
Design and Perfomnce of an 18-Bleunt Visible Hultidither (DAT System,"
APPL. OPTICS, Vol 15, 1976, p 611.

Mndsrenko, H. D.; (hatovskiy, A. V.; Soskin, M. S. "Holographic Method of
Transformation of Coherent Light Fields," DAN 8888, Vol 187, 1969, p 538.

Soskin, M. 8.; Bondsrenko, M. 0.; Onatovskiy, A. V. ”Holographic Method of
Phase-Amplitude Correction of Laser Beans," PIS'MA V 2831?, Vol 14, 1971,
p 27.

Bondsrenko, H. 1).; Gnatovskiy, A. V.; Sosltin, H. S. "holographic Method of
Controlling Laser Blission Divergence," KVAN‘IOVAYA MTRONIKA, Kiev,
Naukova dunks, No 6, 1972, p 71.

Casperson, 1.. IL; Kincheloe, N. K.; Stafsudd, 0. )1. Phase Plate for Laser
Bean Compensation," 0PT. comm!" Vol 21, 1977, p 1.

Klein, H. R.; Cook, 3. D. "Unified Approach to Ultrasonic Light Diffraction,"
IEEB TRANS. 0N SONICS AND ULTRASONICS, Vol 80-14, 1967, p 123.

Stasel'ko, D. 1.; Sidorovich, V. 0. "Light Bean Conversion Efficiency Using
Dynamic Volumetric mane Holograms," ZHTP, Vol 66, 1976, p 580.

Zel'dovich, 8. Ya. "Nonlinear Optical Effects and Conservation Laws,"
KRATKIYE SOOBSHCHENIYA P0 FIZIKE [Brief Reports on Physics], fIAN SSSR, No 5,
1970, p 20.

Kogelnik, H. "Coupled Have Theory for Thick Hologram Gratings," BELL SYST.
TECH". J., Vol 48, 1969, p 2909.

Anan'yev, Yu. A. "Possibility of Dynamic "eve Front Correction," KVAN‘ICVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 1, 19714, p 1669.

238

FOIOFFK'IALUSIONLY
298.

299.

300 .

301.

302.

113.

3010.

305.

1’6.

307.

308.

310 .

311.

312.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Staebler, D. 1.; Amodei, J. J. "Coupled-Have Analysis of Holographic Storage
in LiNbO3," J. APPL. PHYS., V01 (03, 1972, p 1062.

Herman, R. M.; Gray, H. A. "Theoretical Prediction of the Stimulated normal
Rayleigh Scattering in Liquids," PHYS. REV. 1.3112, Vol 19, 1967, p 8210.

Higgins, ‘1'. A.; Cho, c. 11., et a1. "Stimulated thermal Rayleigh Scattering,"
PHYS. REV. LETT., Vol 19, 1967, p 828.

Wolff, P. A. Theory of Stimulated Light Scattering from Electrons in-Seni-
Conductors." PROC. 2ND (13111“. INT. OONF. LIGHT SCAT. 80!... Paris, 1971, p 180.

Bryskin, V. 2.; Croznyy, A. V., et a1. "Effective Gain of Weak Light Beams
Using Dynamic Volumetric Holograms with Thereal Recording Mechanism,"
PIS'HA V ZHTP, Vol 2, 1976, p 561.

Rother, $1.; Pohl, 0.; Kaiser, V. "Time and Frequency Dependence of Stimulated
Thermal Rayleigh Scattering," PHYS. REV. 1.311., Vol 22, 1969, p 915.

Dukhovnyy, A. M.; Stasel'ko, D. 1. "Efficient Conversion of a Diverging
Light Been to a Plane Have by a Volumetric Dynamic hologram with Thermal
Mechanism of Recording," PIS'HA V 2111?, Vol 6, 1978, p 3510.

Gorlanov, A. V.; Griehmanova, N. I., et a1. Nonsteady Self-Diffusion of Laser
Been in an Absorbing Liquid." KVANTOVAYA EMTRORIKA, Vol 6, 1979, p 856.

Regul'skiy, V. V. LAZERY NA VYllUZHDmm RASSEYANII W'SHTAHA -
BRILLYUBNA, TRUDY FIAN SSSR [Stimulated Brillouin Scattering 1.8611.
works of the Physics Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences], Moscow,
Nauka, Vol 85. 1976, p 3.

Graayuk, A. 2.; Zubarev, I. P., et a1. "Light Gain and Lasing Dynamics in
Stimulated Ranan Scattering," KVANTOVAYA mm. edited by R. 6. how,
No 5(17), 1973, p 27.

Kovalev, V. 1.; Popovichev, V. 1., et al. "Influence of Saturation on Light
Cain During Stimulated Brillouin Scattering," ZHBTP, Vol 66, 1973, p 2028.

Pasnanik, c. A. "Roman Interaction in Incoherent Puwing Beam Field,"
IZV. VUZOV, RADIO FIZIKA, V01 17, 197‘, p 970.

Bespalov, V. 1.; Paananik, c. A. ”Parametric Conversion and Stimulated
Incoherent Light Scattering," Izv. VUZOV, RADIOFIZIKA, Vol 19, 1976, p 634.

Betin, A. A.; Pasmanik, G. A. "Maintenance of Spatial Coherence of Stokes
Beam During Amplification in s Multimodal Panning Field," PIS'HA V ZEBTF,
Vol 23. 1976, p 577.

Anan'yev, Yu. A. "Author's Claim No 1705406 with Priority as of
12 October 1971, Author's Certificate No 416935."

289

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
313.

31‘. '

315.

316.

317.

318.

319 .

320 .

321.

322.

323.

3210 .

325.

326 .

327.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kogelnic, N. "Holographic Image Projection Inhonogeneous Media,"
BELL SYST. TEEN. J., Vol 44, 1965, p 2651.

Hang,V .; Giuliano, c. R. "Correction of Phase Distortion vis- Nonlinear
0ptica1 Techniques," In: J. 01’ QUART. ELECTR” Vol QE-13,1977, p 83!).

Kruzhilin, Yu. I. "Adaptive Laser-Target Systen for Laser Thermnuclear
Fusion," KVAN'IDOVAYA BLMWIKA, V01 5, 1978.1) 625.

Zel'dovich, B. Ys., Popovichev. V. I., et a1. "Relation Between Have Fronts
of Reflected and Stimulating Light During Stimulated Brillouin Scattering,"
pIs' MA v znsrr, Vol 15, 1972, p 160.

Nosach, 0. Yu.; Popovichev, V. 1., et a1. "Conpensation of Phase Distortions
in an Amplifying Medit- Using a 'Brillouin Mirror'," PIS'HA V ZEBTP,
V01 16, 1972, p 617.

Wiggins, '1‘. A.; Hick, P. V.; Rank, D. H. "Stinulated Effects in N2 and cab
Gases," APPL. OPTIG, Vol 5, 1966, p 1069.

Kudryavtseva, A. 0.; Sokolovskaya, A. 1.; Smhchinskiy, N. H. "Stinulated
Rama Scattering and Self-Focusing of Light in Liquid Nitrogen," ZHBTF,
Vol 59, 1970, p 1557.

Zel'dovich, 8. Ya.; Mel' nikov. N. A., et a1. "Observation of the Effect of
Wave Front Inversion During Stimulated Ranan Scattering of Light," PIS' NA
v zaerr. Vol 25, 1977, p 41.

Sokolovskaya, A. 1., Brekhovskikh, 6.1. .; Kudryavtseva, A. D. "Vave- -Pront
Reconstruction of Light Bean with Induced Ranan Scattering of Light,"
DAN SSSR, Vol 233, 1977, p 356.

Sidorovich, V. G. "Brillouin Mirror Theory," um. Vol (.6, 1976, p 2168.
Zel'dovich, 3. Ya.; Shkunov, V. V. "Limits of the Existence of the Wave
Front Reversal Effect During Induced Scattering of Light," KVAN‘DOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA, v01 5, 1978. p 36.

Helluarth, R. W. "Generation of Time-Reversed Have Fronts by Nonlinear
Refraction," 306A, Vol 67, 1977, p 1.

Yariv, A.: Pepper, D. H. "Alplified Reflection, Phase Conjugation and
Oscillation in Degenerate Pour-Have Mixing," OPTICS 1.311., Vol 1,1977,

p 16.

Odulov, S. 6.; Sal' hove, Ye. N., et a1. "Elimination of Laser Bean Distor-

tions Induced in Amplifiers by the Methods of Dynanic Holography,"
UKR. PIZICH. ZR. [Ukrainian Physics Journal], Vol 23, 1978, p 562.

Akhmanov, S. A.; Khokhlov, R. V. PROBLEM! NBLINEYNOY OPTIKI [Problem of
Nonlinear Optics], Moscow, Nauka, 1961..

2911

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
328.

329.

330.

331 .

332.

333.

3310 .
33S .

336.

337.

338.

339 .

340.

341.

um vnulAl vet UM.-

Yariv, A. "Compensation for Atmpharic Degradation of- Optical-Bean
Transmission by Nonlinear Optical Mixing," OPT. cam.. Vol 21, 1977, p «'09.

Shostko, S. N.; Podoba, Ya. 6.; Anan'yev. Yu. A., et al. "A Possibility of
Compensating Optical Nonmiforndties in Lasers," PIS'NA V 2811’, Vol 5, 1979,
p 29.

Runf, J. 1.; Renard, P. A.; Simona, U. N. "Iwroved Perfornance of Fusion
Lasers Using the Imaging of Multiple Spatial Filters," APPL. OPTICS, Vol 16,
1977. p 779.

Denisyuk, Yu. N. "Imaging of the Optical Properties of an Object in the
Wave Field of Bdsaion Scattered by the Object," OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA,
Vol 15, 1963. p 522.

Isayev, A. A.: Kazaryan, N. A., et a1. ”Process of Fox-nation of the Output
Been in a Pulsed Gee Laser with Unstable Resonator," KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA,
Vol 4, 1977, p 1325.

Goryaehkin, D. A.; Kalinin, V. P., et el. "Properties of Unstable Resonators
with Field Reversal. III. Experimental Results," KVAN‘I'OVAYA ELHITRONIKA,
Vol 6, 1979, p 18%.

"Adaptive Optics," JOSA. Vol 67, 1977, pp 269-409.

Anan' yev, Yu. A.; Gorlanov. A. V., et a1. "Phenomnon of Nonateady Self-
Diffraction of Coherent Light Been in an Absorbing Fluid," IVANTOVAYA
amm,Vo1 6.1979,p 1813.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.: Goryachkin, D. A., at al. "Study of the Properties of a
Laser vith Unstable Resonator and Additional Peetback," KVANTOVAYA
ELEK‘I'RONIKA. Vol 6, 1979, p 1773.

Allen, L; Aberly, J. OHIGESKIY news I DVUKHUROVNEVYYB Am.
[Optical Resonance and ﬁve-Level Atom]. Moscow, Mir, 1978.

Lyubimov, V. V.; Orlova, I. B. "Influence of the Shape of the Edge of
Mirrors on the Selective Characteristics of Unstable Resonators." OPTIKA I
smmsxonn, Vol 1.1. 1976, p 288.

Bespalov, V. 1.; Kubarev, A. M. "Report at the Second All-Union Symposium
on Nonlinear Optics," Novosibirsk, 1966, NELINBYNAYA OPTIIU [Nonlinear
Optics], Novoeibirsk, Nauka, 1968.

Reepalov, V. 1.; Retin, A. A.: Paenanik, G. A. 12V. VUZOV. RADIOFIZIKA
[News of the Institutions of Higher Learning. Radio Physics], Vol 20,
1977, p 791; Vol 21, 1978, p 961.

Hoerdlnln. J. P. 0”. COM” Vol 2. 1970, p 212; PHILIPS RES. Rms SUP”...
No 7, 1971, p 58.

291

FOIOFFICIALUSIWLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

342. Stepanov, B. 1.; Ivakin, Ye. V.: Rubmov. A. 5. "Recording the and Th'ee-
Mutational Dynamic Rologrm 1n Transparent Stbetancu," DAN 8881!,

Vol 196, 1971, p 567.
COPYRIGHT: "hauka" Glavnaya redaktsiya f izimtemticheskoy literatury, 1979

10865
(230: 8144 /1776

-END—

292

MWLUSEONLY