FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10269
21 January 1982

USSR Report

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

Eon OFFICIAL use ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[J are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGRT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

Puvstcs AND MATHEMATICS
(FOUO 1/82)

CONTENTS

CRYSTALS AND SEMICONDUCTORS
Principles of Thermodepolarization Analyaia .....................
ELECTRICITY AFD MAGNETISH

Inertial Pile-Driver Accumulator for Producing High-Energy
Electric Pulaea ...............................................

LASERS AND HASBRS

Producing Band-Like High Current Ion Deana in Tetrode With
Non-Selfdeatructing Anode for Caa Laser Pumping ...............

Controlling Divergence and Spectrum of XeCl Later ...............

Optimizing Average Power of Extinct Pulae-Periodic Kr?
and XeCl Laaera ...............................................

Hultipaaa Neodymium Claaa Amplifier .............................

Stiuulated Scattering of Light by Temperature Vavea Excited
in Thernodynanically Nonequilibriun Media Due to Bnthalpy
of Light-Controlled Chemical Reactiona ........................

Intensity of Ultraaound Excited in Stimulated Light
Scattering by Light-Controlled Chenical Proceaaeo .............

Nonlinear Optical Inho-ogeneitiea in ActiVe Media of

CI. Idler. caco-can.aceaaaeoooaoaoeaaocaonoeaaoaaoaalaaaooaaoeo

reaaibility of Developing Bxciner Laaera With Ionization
by External Low-Power Source ..................................n
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Measuring Copper Vapor Concentration and Degree of Gas
Heating in Transverse-Discharge Copper-Vapor Laser ............

Subnanosecond Atomic Iodine Photodiasociation Laser .............

Using Argon in working Hixtures of CW Electron Beam-
Controlled C02 Process Lasers .................................

NUCLEAR PHYSICS
Papers on High-Energy Physics ...................................

All-Union Seminar on Physics and Engineering of Intensive
Sources of Ions and lon Beams .................................

OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

Determining Spectral Dependences of Absolute Quantum Yields
of Re? Excimer Formation (B, C, D) in Xer Photolysis .........

Diffractometer With Thermomagnetic Registration for Checking
wavefront Eistortions of Pulsed Laser Emission ................

Instrument for Measuring Laser Emission "avelengths .............

Effect of Temperature on Phase Anisotropy of Dielectric
Laser Mirrors .................................................

Deceleration of Atons and Rearrangement of Atomic Velocities
by Resonant Laser Radiation Pressure ..........................

Low-Frequency Spectrum Analyzer of Correlation Type .............
OPTOELECTRONICS

PRIZ Image ConVerter: Its Use in Optical Data Processing Systems
PLASMA PHYSICS

Radiation Relativistic Gas Dynamics of High Temperature

Phenomena .....................................................

STRESS, STRAIN AND DEPORHATION
Calculating Internal Structure of Detonation Wave ...............
MISCELLANEOUS
Survey of Research in Physics and Astronomy .....................
HATREHATICS
Optimum Control of Systems with Indefinite Information ..........
.. b -

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
CRYSTALS AND SEMICONDUCTORS

UDC 539.2

PRINCIPLES OF THERHODEPOLARIZATION ANALYSIS

Moscow OSNOVY TBRHODEPOLYARIZATSIONNOGO ANALIZA in Russian l98l (signed to press
3 Mar 81) pp 2-8

[Annotation, preface and table of contents from book "Principles of Thermodepolariza-
tion Analysis", by Yuriy Andreyevich Gorokhovatskiy. Izdatel'stvo "Nauks"ﬁ 2800
copies, 176 pages]

[Text] The monograph contains a systematized exposition of the theory of thermo—
stimulated depolarization and the method based on this phenomenon for studying
electrophysical properties of dielectrics, semiconductors, and also various devices
and components of integrated circuits that contain such materials. The principal
capabilities and fields of application of the method of thermostimulated depolari-
zation are pinned down. A special section deals with exposition of the peculiari-
ties and "stumbling blocks" of the experimental technique. Modifications of thermo-
depolarization analysis are described--thermostimu1ated depolarization under con-
ditions of self-consistent and fractional heating. which can appreciably improve
the information content of the method. An extensive bibliography is presented

on thermostimulated depolarization.

Figures $7, table 1, references 32!.

Preface

The method of thermostimulated depolarization (TsD) has found extensive application
in recent years in the investigation of electrophyaical phenomena in semiconductors,
dielectrics, and also in a variety of devices and elements of integrated circuits
mass on the basis of such materials. -

The TSD method attracts researchers by its high informativeness combined with com-
parative simplicity of hardware realization and processing of experimental data.
However, it is not always that this method is effectively used to the full extent
of its capabilities; in some cases the experimental technique is misused, and the
experimental data are improperly interpreted. These negative tendencies are due
both to a lack of the necessary analysis of the theory of the physical phenomenon
of TSD, and to inavailability of special literature on the experimental methods

of TSD.

In monographs dealing with thermoactivation spectroscopy. which includes the TSD
method, this technique has remained practically unanalyzed with the exception of

FOI.0FIICIAI.IEN!(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE-I ONLY

8 recently published book by V. N. Vertoprakhcv and Ye. G. Sal'man [Ref. 49]. This
situation can be attributed first of all to the fact that the TSD method began

to be intensively used only in the late sixties, and secondly to the fact that
until recently it has been used primarily only in research on the electret effect
[Ref. 91, 118, 129. 310]. in which the first attempts have been made at outlining
the theory and experimental methods of TSD.

However, because of the topical thrust of this research, the TSD method has been
superficially treated, and as a rule from a quite specific standpoint (in both
theory and experiment).

In this hook the author has set himself the task of more detailed and systematic
analysis of the theory of the phenomenon and experimental technique of TSD for

the purpose of further development. explanation of fundamental peculiarities. capa-
bilities and drawbacks of the method of thermostimulated depolarization.

The book consists of five chapters.

The first chapter PLESEhtS the essence of the TSD effect. and of the technique
based on this effect for studying electrophysical properties of dielectrics and
semiconductors. The author describes processes of polarization that take place

in objects that :ontnin polar defects and free charge carriers. The class of phe-
nomena is pointed out for which the TSD method can be used in research, the advan-
tages that the TSD method has over other techniques usually used for these purposes
a": enumerated. A Bibliography is given under headings of years, subject matter

ad scientific collectives. A sample of terminology is presented at the conclusion
of the first chapter.

The second chapter examines the elementar: theory of TSD of homogeneous material
(semiconductor or dielectric) that contains a single kind of electrically active
defects. An analysis is made of electronic and ionic processes associated both
with orientation and with space-charge polarization. Expressions are derived that
describe the TSD current for different models of charge migration and ionization.
The author discusses the ways that the behavior of curves for TSD current is in-
fluenced by conditions of the contacts (blocking or non-bIOcking electrodes). equi-
librium conductivity and disruption of electrical neutrality of a specimen. A

list is given of research papers on TSD in which an examination is made of different

limiting cases and approximations.

In the third chapter. a brief examination is made of the major methods of analyzing
experimental curves to determine the parameters of electrically active defects
(concentration, activation energy, frequency factor). An estimate is made of the
errors of the methods that are considered. A technique is described for determin~
ing the nature of the polarization process from TSD curves by varying the conditions
of polarization of the object.

The content of the first three chapters is essentially an introduction to thermo-
depolarization analysis, providing the requisite theoretical and procedural basis
f.r going further into the specifics of the theory and the experimental technique
with more complicated objects. as presented in the fourth and fifth chapters.

2
FINI¢JFFNJAL.USE¢)NLY
In particular, the fourth chapter examines the way that curves of TSD current are
influenced by quasicontinuous energy distribution of electrically active defects
in the object. A method is described for evaluating the parameters of this distri-
bution from the initial section of the T80 current peak. Results are given on

the use of computers for calculating TSD current curves in the case of a still
more complicated model of the dielectric (semiconductor) object with two—dimen-
sional quasicontinuous distribution of electrically active defects with respect

to activation energy and with respect to frequency factor. Possible causes of

the phenomenon of TSD current inversion frequency observed in experiments are dis-
cussed. In addition. the fourth chapter examines the phenomenon of repolarization
inthe internal electric field. the strong internal field effect, association and
dissociation of complexes of electircally active defects. and their influence on
the TSD current curves.

The fifth chapter describes some modifications of thermodepolarization analysis
--TSD under conditions of self-consistent and fractional heating--which considerably
increase the information content of the method and reduce ambiguity in the interpre-
tation of experimental data. It is shown that the use of self-consistent heating
enables determination of the order of the kinetics of the relaxation process, and
accordingly affords unambiguous calculation of the activation energy and frequency
factor of electrically active defects. Use of the fractional heating state enables
reconstruction of the behavior of the distribution of electrically active defects
with respecc to activation energy or frequency factor. as well as establishment

of the fact of existence of bivariate distribution. An examination is made of

the question of choosing the optimum mode of fractional heating that minimizes
measurement error while maximizing the resolution of the method. At the end of

the chapter. a brief survey is given of different complexes of methods of studying
dielectrics and semiconductors, including the TSD method, and their capabilities

are analyzed.

The experimental data used in the book serve as an illustration of the theoretical
principles and experimental technique of thermodepolarization analysis. An exten-
sive survey of experimental material on investigation of some inorganic substances
and compounds by methods of thermoactivation spectroscopy, and in particular by
the method of TSD. can be found in Ref. 49.

The book is based on the results of studies done with direct participation of the
author. A list of fundamental and additional literature is given. The additional
literature is given as an aid to the reader for more detailed and complete acquain-
tance with some questions that are onl; touched upon in the text, but are not taken
up in depth because of the limited scope of the book.

The author considers it his pleasant duty to thank the people at the Scientific
Research Institute of-Solid State Physics of Latvian State University imrni P.
Stuchka and the Physics Department of Moscow Institute of Electronic Machine Build-
ing. who were of help to the author in his studies, and who also took part in dis-
cussing the results of these studies.

The author is particularly grateful to associate members of the USSR Academy of
Sciences G. A. Smolenskiy and Yu. A. Osip'yan, as well as to Candidate of Physical
and Mathematical Sciences 3. L. Lutsenko for thorough and extremely useful analysis
of the manuscript of the book during its review.

3
FORl0FFﬂJAl.USE<ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

The author owes a debt of thanks to doctors of physical and mathematical sciences,
professors A. N. Cubkin and Yu. R. Zakis. and to Candidate of Physical and Mathe-
matical Sciences. Docent V. E. Eirap. who acquainted themselves with the manuscript
of the book and made a number of constructive comments.

Contents page
Preface 5
Principat abbreviations and symbols 9
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL CONCEPT OF THERMODEPOLARIZATION ANALYSIS

1.1. Essence of thermostimulated depolarization method 11
1.2. Basic possibilities and areas of application of TSD method 16
1.3. Basic stages of development of TSD method 20
1.6. Qeustion of terminology 23

CHAPTER 2: ELEMENTARY THEORY OF PHENOMENON 0F THERMOSTIMULATED DEPOLARIZATION
2.1. Analysis and classification of physical effects that lead to TSD current

in homogeneous object 25
2.2. TSD of macroscopically homogeneous relaxation polarization 33
2.3. TSD currents in case of electronic space-charge polarization (monoelec-

tret) 36
2.6. Electronic TSD currents in electroneutral object 65
2.5. Generalized expression for electronic TSD currents in case of space

charge "auctioning" 52
2.6. TSD currents in case of ionic space-charge polarization S3
2 7 Influence of equilibrium conductivity on TSD currents 56

CHAPTER 3: METHOD OF PROCESSING TSD DATA FOR OBJECTS RITE ONE KIND OF DIPOLES
OR CAPTURE CENTERS
3.1. Methods of calculating dipole parameters or capture center parameters from

TSD current curves 59
3.2. Technique for varying polarization conditions 76
CHAPTER 6: SPECIFICSOF’THERMOSTIMULATED DEPOLARIZATION IN MORE COMPLEX OBJECTS
6.1. TSD in objects with energy distribution of electrically active defects 86
6.2. TSD in case of bivariate quasicontinuOus distribution of electrically

active defects with respect to activation energy and frequency factor 90

6.3. Influence of type of spatial distribution of space charge on TSD current 100
6.6. TSD current for objects with comparable rates of “auctioning" and

neutralization of space charge 106
6.5. TSD current due to effect of strong internal electric field 110
6.6. Influence of association and dissociation of complexes of electrically

active defects on TSD current curves 115
CHAPTER 5: MODIFICATIONS OF THERMODEPOLARIZATION ANAJXSIS
5.1. TSD 1n self-consistent heating mode 121
5.2. TSD in fractional heating mode 127
5.3. Research method complexes including thermodepolarization analysis 166
Conclusion
References
Subject and literature index 170

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". Glavnaya redaktsiya fizikofmatematicheskoy
literatury. 1981

6610
C80: 1862/66

lg
FOR OIWWCJAI.USIZCHVLY
ELECTRICITY AND WISH

UDC 621.373.].
INERTIAL PILE-DRIVER ACCIHULATOR FOR PRODUCING HIGH-ENERGY ELECTRIC PULSES

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKENIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 3, Hay-Jun 81 (manuscript
received 22 Feb 80) pp 199-201

[Article by V. N. Kunin, V. V. Dorozhkov and M. V. Sergeyeva. Vladimir Polytech-
nical Institute]

[Text] A pulse generator is described that consists of a DC
electromagnet with armored magnetic circuit, and a working coil.
Pulses are generated when the electromagnet falls into a coaxial
coil. Mass of the facility is four metric tons, and the math
height to which a 1350 kg electromath is raised is nine meters.
The facility generates bell-shaped current pulses with energy of
up to 50 RJ and duration of 50-100 ms.

An inertial accunulator is described below in which the kinetic energy of a falling
electromagnet is converted to the energy of an electric pulse [Ref. 1]. The acculu-
lator is a system that consists of a DC electromagnet with armored magnetic circuit
and a coaxial working coil. When the electromagnet falls into the coil, an electro-
motive induction force arises that is closed to a low-resistance active load.

The magnetic circuit of the electromagnet is cast from grade St.20 steel. has an
Outside diameter of 930nm: (Fig.1 [photo not reproduced]) and masses 1350 kg. The
magnetizing coil contains 125 turns 0.? copper wire with 50 an: cross section.
Experiments have shown that the leakage coefficient of the magnetic field is 1.5-1.7.

In the accunulator the electromagnet moves mder the force of gravity along guide
columns by means of centering rollers on bearings. The columns are mounted on

a foundation that also carries the working coil. The facility is fastened on

a concrete base with shock-absorbing layer of wooden beams. The electromagnet

is raised by a winch with electric drive. The hoisting cable is equipped with

a lock that permits release of the electromagnet from the cable at a predetermined
height. The operation of the facility is remately controlled from a panel situated
in a laboratory. The mass of the facility is four metric tons. and the height

to which the electromagnet can be raised is nine meters.

Fig. 2 shows oscillograas of the current and voltage across an active load, produced
by the K-llS light-beam oscilloscope. At a magnetizing current of 400 A. voltage
of 30 V and height of elevation of the electromagnet of 2.0 m. the current pulse

amplitude was 3“ at voltage of 100 V. Pulse duration was 0.11 s. and the energy

5
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

, 6 § I
“is i} U

Fig. 2. Oscillograms of current I and
voltage U across resistive load

N, kJ
, R
0 _.L._.L——
o a! a: as a. n

Fig. 3. Energy w released in load as a
function of load resistance R

released in the load was 10.! kJ. Thus the coefficient of amplification with re-
spect to electric power in this experiment is equal to 25. This parameter reaches
90 in experiments with maximum heights of magnet elevation.

The coefficient of conversion of accumulated mechanical energy to the energy of

an electric pulse is 382. The load resistance and resistance of the working coil
are approximately equal (maximum power mode), and therefore about 601 of the stored
energy is released in the working coil as heat. The remaining 22% of the energy

is mechanical losses and losses in the connecting wires.

The efficiency of the pile-driver accumulator also depends on losses associated
with residual kinetic energy of the falling magnet. Actually. generation of the
minimum attainable working voltage necessitates a certain residual velocity

of the magnet vres relative to the working coil. and therefore energy mv§e3/2 is
expended, where m is the mass of the magnet. For example when the accumulator

is used for feeding arc sources, the arc is extinguished at a voltage where

v,es- 0.2V x (Ref. 2], and the losses amOunt to 61. Quenching of Vres requires
transfer o?amomentun P-Imvres from the magnet to the base by inelastic impact.

If the braking path is about 101 of the working stroke, then in case of triangular
shape of the generated pulse a constant force is required that is equal to half the

6
FIMRCNﬂﬂCIAl.UGE4DNLN
maximum working force of [00 metric tons. Such a force can be easily provided

by brakes of various designs. such as a rubber bumper. However. the construction
must provide for accident prevention in case the working electric circuit is run-
tured. when all the energy accumulated by the magnet is transferred to the base.

In this case the braking force is five times the maximum working force. Experience
has shown that the required conditions are met by a lead crusher 100 mm in diameter
and 80 mm high that spreads Out between the flats of the base and the magnet upon
impact. Energy of 1.2 k1 is expended on deformation of such a crusher by 901.
ensuring efficient braking under extreme experimental conditions.

The base of the accumulator is the same kind of electromagnet as the working unit.
but turned through 180°. Shorting of its coils ensures efficient braking of the
working magnet on the concluding segment of the working stroke, when the working
magnet begins to induce magnetic flux in the base. The force of electromagnetic
braking is proportional to the velocity of approach of the working magnet and base.
which is favorable with regard to extremum situations when the approach takes place
at Vmax 0

When the magnet strikes the base. a seismic wave arises that represents a certain
danger to brick structures. Therefore the accumulator is situated at a distance
of 30 m from the laboratory.

To reduce the power of the seismic wave, the base of the accumulator in the ground
bears on the foundation thrOugh a wooden floor 50 mm thick. The foundation is
built up of concrete blocks with total mass of 11 metric tons buried in the ground
and laid on a sandstone bed. To reduce losses on formation of the pulsed magnetic
field around the wires of the working circuit. and to alleviate the danger of harm-
ful action of this field on the health of experimental workers, the forward and
return working wires are stretched over the entire length in direct prOximity to
one another.

The pulse power under conditions of maximum generator power is determined by the
expression

N = ZB‘v'Vplp.

where B is the induction in the working gap, v is the velocity of magnet motion.
VP is the volume of copper in the working coil and p is resistivity.

A disadvantage of a converter of this type is that the magnetic circuit is open
before the working stroke begins. As a result. the total reluctance of the magnetic
circuit includes the reluctance of an air gap equal to the width of the working

coil (in our converter 51- 150 mm), which appreciablyreduces the working value

of B. and as a consequence the power of the resultant pulse.

Among the advantages of this design is moderate sensitivity of accumulator current
pulse parameters to the magnitude of the external load. Fig. 3 shows how the energy
released in the load depends on load resistance. In the experiments that yielded
this curve, H- 2 m. and the current in the magnetizing coil was 600 A.

It can be seen from Fig. 3 that the energy maximum is rather flat, and when the
load changes from 0.06 to 0.28 9. i. e. by a factor of 4, the power changes by

7
FOR 0FFKJA1.USI:ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

only 202. In producing powerful pulses. we have to reconcile ourselves to the

fact that about half the stored energy is expended on internal losses. Nonethe-
less. with respect to the ratio of electric energy in a pulse to weight of the
facility. the described design corresponds approximately to a capacitive accumu-
lator hased on IHUS-IAO capacitors. The maximum stored potential energy for this
facility is about 110 kJ. The inertial pile-driver accumulator enables generation
of bell-shaped current pulses with energy up to 50 RJ and duration of 50-100 ms.

REFERENCES

1. Dorozhkov, V. V., Kunina, H. V., "Sbornik. Voprosy nizkotemperaturnoy plazny

i magaitogidrodinamiki" [Collectian. Problems of Low-Temperature Plasma and
Magnetuhynrodynamics]. Ryazsn', Radio Engineering Institute. 1978. p 37.

2. Kunin, V. N., Zalazayev. P. H., Gradusov.'n. P. et al., "Sbornik. Voprosy

nizkotemperaturnoy plazmy i magnitogidrodinamiki". Ryazan’. Radio Engineering
Institute. 1978. p 3.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Hanks", "Pribory i tekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

6610
C80: 8104/0623

8
FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
LASERSMDMBBRB

UDC 533.951.2.3

PRODUCING BAND-LIKE HIGH (”BRENT ION BEAMS IN THRODE mm NON-SELFDBSTRUCTING
MODE FOR GAS LASER PUMPING

Tomsk IZVESTIYA wssum ucuzaum: uvznnum rum in Russian Vol 2a, No 9,
Sep 81 p 138

[Abstract of article by V. H. Bystritskiy, Ya. Ye. Krasik and S. S. Sulakshin]

[Text] The work is devoted to the study of a new type of high current proton
beam generator developed for gas laser pumping. A band-like for. of proton
beans was produced, and the energy, tine and spatial characteristics of the beam
were studied. It is shown that the resources of the generator exceed the
operation by 100 to 1,000 times. The possibility of focusing a high current
proton beam by two types of magnetic lenses is considered. It is noted that the
application of the developed generator for Ar-NZ and XeCI laser pumping allows
new results in laser research to be obtained.

COPYRIGHT: Izvestiya vuzov. Pizika, vyp. 9, 1981.

080: 1862 ISO-P

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.373.826.038.823
CONTROLLING DIVERGENCE AND SPECTRUM 0F XeCl LASER

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 9(111), Sep 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 1 Nov 80) PP 1861-1866

[Article by V. Yu. Baranov, V. H. Borisov and Yu. Yu. Stepsnov, Institute of atomic
Energy imeni I. V. Kurchatov. Moscow]

[Text] The paper gives the results of a study of divergence

and spectral composition of radiation from an electric-discharge
XeCl laser with non-dispersive and dispersive cavities. It is
shown here for the first time that the spectrum of the Xecl laser
can be considerably narrowed by merely reducing the level of
stimulated emission in a non-dispersive cavity. It is found

that discharge inhomogeneity in the direction across the current
has an effect on laser emission divergence. Losing is achieved
with line width of 0.1 cm" and divergence close to the diffrac-
tion limit.

Introduction

At the present time. excimer lasers are in fairly wide use in photochemistry [Ref.
1]. laser purification of material (Ref. 2. 3], separation of uranium isotopes
[Ref. 4] and also in laser-driven fusion programs [Ref. 5, 6]. Naturally, each

of the possible applications imposes certain requirements on laser characteristics.
The distinguishing feature in use of excimer lasers for nuclear fusion is that the
laser cannot be used as an amplifier in the conventional arrangement of series
amplification of a short pulse because of the short radiation lifetime of excimer
molecules. Under discussion at present are various methods of converting or com-
p:essing an intense excimer laser pulse with duration of 100—500 ns into a pulse
with duration of 1 ns [Ref. 5-7]. For example. Ref. 8 suggests time compression
of a Kr? laser pulse in stimulated Raman scattering of amplification of opposed
beams. An approach of this kind is one of the most promising. To realize stimulated
Raman scattering of amplification of opposed beams in methane, as experimentally
shown in Ref. 8. the spectrum of the Kr? laser must be narrowed from its initial
free-running width of Av- 50_ cm"1 to Av- 0.! cm". Such narrowing should be done
in a master laser with subsequent injection of the narrow-band radiation into an

amplifier.

The following circumstances must be taken into consideration in developing a master
laser with narrow spectrum and divergence close to the diffraction limit. The time

10
FUR(MWHC1AL.USE(NVLY
of formation of inversion in electric discharge excimer lasers is ordinarily 10-

20 ns (Ref. [0]. Heating of stimulated emission from the level of spontaneous
noise at a characteristic cavity length of about 1 m takes place in approximately
3-0 double passes of the cavity. Under these conditions, appreciable narrowing

of the spectrum and reduction of divergence can be achieved by using strongly dis—
persive elements, which should be accompanied by a considerable reduction of lasing
energy. For this reason. for such a master laser particular attention should be
given to reducing non—selective losses in the cavity and ensuring a high level

of stimulated emission of the electric-discharge system.

The purpose of our research is to develop a master laser using XeCl that gives

the requisite emission parameters. It has been recently demonstrated that an elec-
tron beam-pumped XeCl laser may have efficiency as high as that of the KrF laser
[Ref. 9]. Besides, the XeCl laser has certain advantages: its lasing mixture

is more resistant to dissociation. and withstands a much greater number of flashes
than the KrF laser mixture. the free—running width is narrower--Av= 15 cm".

Therefore, to do experiments on stimulated Raman compression of excimer laser emis-
sion we have selected the Xecl laser.

Fig. 1. Optical system of the facility:
I. 2--flat mirrors of the cavity (R1-

/_L_. a . 992, R2 I851); 3, la-—lenses (f, . 619 m,
\J\ ft- 340 mm); 5, 6--optical wedges (95-
‘ 29: 47‘, 05' 20'); 7--calorimeter; 8, 10--
5 Pabry-Perot interferometers° 9--spectro-
1 __ _.__.,_. .._.._.— 5 a
Mac—:1 r“? % graph; ll-~lle—Ne laser

Description of Facility and Method of HeaSurements

The optical arrangement of the facility is shown in Fig. l. This arrangement made
it possible for as to measure energy, spectrum and divergence of laser radiation

in each pulse. A laser was used with UV pre-ionization by four rows of sparks;

the electric circuit for producing the discharge is analogous to that of Ref. ll.
The discharge was set up in a volume of box 5)¢0.7- lhO cm’, where S cm is the
interelectrode spacing. Mainly, a cavity with external mirrors was used. and Li?
windows were installed in the chamber. The laser operated on a mixture of HC1:Xe:He
- 1:15:500 at pressure of 1.5-2.0 atm. To narrow the lasing spectrum, one or two
IT-28-30 Fabry-Perot interferometers (8) were placed in the cavity with mirror
reflectivities of 701. The spectrum was monitored by the STE-l spectrograph (9)
with crossed IT—28-30 Pabry-Perot interferometer (l0). To reduce absorption of
laser emission, the aluminum coatings of the interferometer mirrors were replaced
by multilayer interference coatings. Divergence of laser radiation was determined
by photometry of one of the spots produced in the focus of lens 4 after passing
through wedge 5. Divergence was determined with respect to the level at half inten—
sity. Laser emission was attenuated upon reflection from wedge 6 and transmission
through wedge 5. Both wedges were made of quartz and had 70% interference coatings

on each face. The system comprising wedge 5, lens 4 and the camera, was aligned

ll
FKHICHNHCJAI.U8513NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with respect to the beam of He-Ne laser 11. coinciding with the excimer laser beam.
The spectrograms and focal spot were photographed on KN-Z film at normal exposures.
The laser pulse energy was meaSured by KT? calorimeter 7 with Pllb/l microvoltmeter.
The duration of the light pulse was determined by coaxial photocell FK-3 and an
12-7 timer. The glass window of the FK-3 strongly attenuated the laser emission.

and therefore duration could be measured only for pulses with power greater than
0.1 w.

Narrowing of the Radiation Pattern

Usually electrical-discharge excimer lasers give strongly diverging radiation

(e- 5-10 mrad [Ref. 11. 12]). Ref. 13 describes a laser with unstable cavity
(magnification 20-30) on which a divergence of 6-I0.5 mrad was attained with output
aperture 5 mm in diameter. To narrow the lasing spectrum. a Pabry-Perot etalon
must be placed in the laser cavity. but as pointed out in Ref. 14. the size of

the base of the Fabry-Perot etalon placed in an unstable cavity is limited by the
angle of aperture of the spherical wave in this cavity. 0n the other hand it is
known [Ref. 141 that the limiting divergence is attained more easily in lasers

with flat cavities than in those with unstable cavities. Therefore in our research
we studied the divergence and spectrum of the XeCl laser with flat cavity.

    
    
 

 

   
   
    
    

   
   
 

Cavity
characteristics

Pulse
duration
at level

Divergence a.
with respect to
larger dimension,
mrad

Divergence 82
with respect to
smaller dimension,
mrad

 

Note: In the last case a Pabry-Perot interferometer was placed in the cavity,

d- 0.3 nm

 

The table summarizes the energy, time and space characteristics of laser operation
with stimulated emission over the entire discharge aperture (50! 7 mm) for different
cavities. As usual for lasers of this kind. the maximum lasing energy is realized
with a short cavity with weak coupling. In this case the cavity mirrors were in-
stalled directly on the discharge chamber. Radiation divergence was rather large.
and on the larger dimension of the aperture it was seven times the divergence with
respect to the smaller dimension. For a cavity with external mirrors and strong
coupling, divergence was about two times lower. In this case there was a sharp
reduction in lasing energy. It was found that divergence 61 with respect to the
larger dimension of the aperture is nearly independent of the level of energy input.
and for central regions of the discharge is about double the level for the edge
regions. 1. e. in the vicinitv of the electrodes. 0n the other hand. divergence

02 with respect to the smaller dimension of the aperture shows little difference

in the center and on the edges of the aperture, but is appreciably dependent on

the level of energy input. For example, when the charging voltage is increased

12
FOR OFI1CLALIISEIDNLN
from 50 to 60 kV. 82 increases by 501. The transverse dimension of the discharge
in this case does not change; visually it shows a large number of luminescent chan-
nels, and the increase in divergence is apparently mainly due to this deterioration
of discharge homogeneity.

To further reduce divergence. a circular diaphragm is placed in the cavity. In
addition, the use of a Fabry-Perot interferometer for frequency selection of the
radiation is also accompanied by angular selection. By way of example. the table
presents the characteristics of lasing without a diaphragm when one Fabry-Perot
interferometer is installed in the cavity. The interferometer base d-0.3 mm.

and reflectivity of the mirrors was 70:. The Fabry-Perot interferometer was in-
stalled in such a way that angular selection was in the direction of greater di-
vergence 8,. It can be seen that divergence actually decreases with some fall-off
of energy and shortening of the laser pulse. By way of illustration, Fig. 2 [photo
not reproduced] shows focal spots produced at the focus of lens 4 (see Fig. l) for
variOus cavities and dimensions of the intracavity diaphragm D. In the case of
large image magnification (Fig. 2a-c) the focal spots consist of individual points,
i. e. lasing has inhomogeneous spatial distribution. Moreover, for lasing with
non-dispersive cavity the focal spots in individual cases were stretched out in

the direction across the discharge current. The observed distortions of shape
amounted to 30-60%. The deformation of the focal spot. and accordingly the increase
in 0. are obviously related to discharge inhomogeneity.

It was possible to eliminate deformation of the focal spot by shifting the dia-

phragm in the direction across the discharge. The reduction in 6 in one of the

directions when a single Pabry-Perot interferometer was installed in the cavity

was accompanied by compression of the spot in this direction (see Fig. 2c). The
focal spot corresponding to the state with minimum divergence and 6 close to the
diffraction limit is shown in Fig. 2d.

Fig. 3. Divergence 6 (solid lines)
and lasing energy 51 (dashed lines)
as functions of the diameter of the
intracavity diaphragm: l-cavity
with two Fabry-Perot interferometers,
d- 2 on; 2—cavity with one Pabry-
Perot interferometer, d-0.3 m; 3--
non-dispersive cavity

 

Pig 3 shows dependences of 6 and lasing energy E; on the size of diaphragm D for
different lasing modes; each of the points on the graph is the average of 5-7 mea-
surements. For a cavity with a single Pabry-Perot interferometer, e is given for
the larger dimension of the spot (see Fig. 2c). All cavities show a common pattern:
decreasing 0 with decreasing D. This is apparently due to a reduction in the number
of transverse modes. Divergence close to the diffraction limit is obtained only

at D- 2 am and additional angular selection with respect to two directions by using
two Fabry-Perot interferometers «1-2 am). Inclusion of the Fabry-Perot interferom-
eters also reduces the energy and brightness of the emission. But whereas the

13
FOR OFFIClAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

total energy due to Suppression of transverse modes falls off rapidly, the emission
brightness decreases to a lesser extent, and the spectral brightness increases.

For example for D-2 mm with transition from wide-band to narrow-band lasing with
two Pabry-Perot interferometers, the energy decreases by about two orders of magni-
tude, whereas the brightness falls off only to one-half, and the spectral brightness
increases by a factor of 20.

In the mode with minimum divergence. the laser pulse had an energy of about 10 uJ.
Although this is not much energy, according to Ref. 15 it is completely adequate
for injection into an amplifier that produces a pulse with energy of ~100 mJ. It
is known from Ref. 15 that for a Kr? amplifier an injected pulse with narrow spec-
trum and energy of the order of a few tens of microjoules is capable of controlling
the spectrum of a pulse with energy of ~000 mJ; on the other hand, we know that

all major characteristics of excimer molecules Xecl and Kr? and of lasers based

on these molecules are similar. Therefore we have good reason to assume that the
resultant pulse with energy of ~10 uJ can be used for effective injection into

a powerful Xecl amplifier.

Narrowing of the Spectrum

Ref. 15 and 16 report on getting narrow-band stimulated emission in Kr? and Xecl
master lasers; radiation divergence was not measured in these lasers. We have
studied the spectral composition of XeCl laser radiation for stimulated emission
both with a non-dispersive cavity and with intracnvity Pabry-Perot interferometers.
The width of each lasing line was determined from a system of interference rings
obtained from the control Fabry-Perot interferometer (10) in the focal plane of

the 515-! spectrograph (see Fig. 1). Systems of rings from different lines were
separated by the spectrograph. Line width was determined with respect to the level
of half-intensity. Pabry-Perot interferometers were used with bases d- 1, 2, 5.

10 and 20 mm; reflectivity of the mirrors was 852.

An attempt was made to increase the spectral power of the XeCl laser by reducing
the pressure of the mixture as was done for an Xe? laser in Ref. 12. Reducing

the pressure of the mixture from 3 to 0.6 atm did not lead to any appreciable nar-
rowing of the lasing spectrum.

As an example, Fig. 4 [photo not reproduced] shows spectrograms of free-running
emission and lasing with a single Fabry-Perot interferometer (d- 0.3 mm) in dif-
ferent positions. With a non-dispersive cavity, the XeCl laser usually emits two
lines: 308.0 and 308.2 nm, corresponding to transitions (0-1) and (0-2) [Ref. 17].
The width of each line under our conditions was 7-8 cm'1 at lasing power density
of [-3 mw/cm’. With 1 Fabry-Perot interferometer (d-0.3 mm). the spectrum shows
several components. For some positions of the Fabry-Perot interferometer (see

for example Fig. 4b. c). a single component remains with a reduction in lasing

level by a factor of 3-4.

Fig. 5 shows the dependence of lasing line width Av on lasing energy density 318
for cavities with a diaphragm. For a non-dispersive cavity and a cavity with a
single Fabry-Perot interferometer (d- 2 mm) the spectrum consists of two lines

of approximately equal width. The figure shows the Av for one of these. A com-
mon feature of all curves is thIt as 316 increases, so does Av. This shows up most

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_1 Fig. 5. Lasing line width Av as

a function of lasing energy den-
6 ° sity 318‘ l, 3—lasing on one

‘ ‘ line; 2. b-on two lines; 1--

, . o lasing with two Fahry-Perot inter-
.) ferometers (d-2 m); 2-with
. ,,9;"‘ one Pabry-Perot interferometer
(d- 2 m); lo—lasing with non-
dispersive cavity; intracavity
diaphragm (19-2 (0); 3 (A) and
4' J» a m (0))

Av. cm

weakly in the case of selection by two Fabry-Perot interferometers (curve 1, the
straight line is an arbitrary approximation). The quantity Av shows the greatest
dependence on 323 for a non-dispersive cavity (curve 6). As 8 decreases from

4 to 0.8 mJ/cmz. the width of each of the two lasing lines falfg to half. If we
consider the fact that for 313' 20-60 mJ/cmz. Av- 7-8 on" for each line. we can

see that by merely reducing the lasing level we can narrow the spectrun of the

Xecl laser by a factor of b-S. Such a technique may be useful for sons applications.

The width of the spectrum can be further reduced by using a Psbry-Perot interferome-
ter; however. narrowing of the spectrum in not in proportion to the resolution

of the interferometer (curves 2 and 3). This can be attributed to the fact that

an isolated Pabry-Perot interferometer in the cavity selects the mode composition
only with respect to one direction (see Fig. 3). while selection with respect to

the other direction is considerably poorer. Only under conditions of "rigid"
selection by two Fabry-Perot interferometers is the spectrum narrowed in proportion
to the resolution of the interferometer. Typically. emission is on only one line

in this case, and a fairly strong relation shows up between Au and 9 (see points

above curve 1; here an increase in e by a factor of two with a change fro: D- 2 to
11-10 leads to doubling of Av as well).

And so. in this paper we have investigated the conditions of narrowing of the spectrum

and radiation pattern of the XeCl naster laser. We have attained the required

parameters: lasing line width of 0.! all-1 and divergence near the diffraction limit.

In conclusion. the authors thank s. N. Borisov for assistance with the experiments.
REFERENCES

I. Hampler. P. 3.. Tiee. J. J.. Rice. 0. IL. Oldenborg. R. C.. .1. cm. PHYS.,
Vol 71. 1979. p 3926.

2. Donahue, 'l‘., OPTICAL ENG” Vol 18. 1979, p 181.

3. Clark, J. IL. Andersen. R. 6., APPL. PHYS. LB‘l'l'S.. Vol 32. 1978. p 66.
lo. LASER FOCUS, Vol 16, No 5, 1980. p 18.

15
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Murray. J. R.. Coldhar. J.. B1mer1, 0.. Szuke. A.. 1382 J., Vol QB-lS, 1979,
p 342.

Ewing, J. J., Haas. R. A.. Suingl. J. C.. George. B. V., Krupke. w. F.. 138E J..
Vol QE-IS. 1979. p 368.

Krupke. H. F.. George, E. V.. Haas, R. A.. "Laser Handbuch", Amsterdam. Vol 3.
1979. p 627.

Hurray, J. R.. Goldhar. J.. Szdke, A.. APPL. PHYS. LBTTS.. Vol 32. 1978. p 551.
Bathe. D. 8.. West, J. 8.. Bhaumik. M. L.. 1288 J.. Vol 08-15, 1979, p 3l4.
Lakoba, I. 8., Yakovlenko, S. 1., KVANTOVAYA ELEKIRONIKA. Vol 7. 1980. p 677.

Borisov, V. M., Vysikaylo. F. 1.. Hamonov. S. C., Nepartovich. A. P..
Stepanov, Yu. Yu., KVANTOVAYA ELBKIRONIKA. Vol 7, 1980. p 593.

Baranov. V. Yu., Borisov, V. H.. Kiryukhin. Yu. 3., Stepanov, Yu. Yu..
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 5. 1978, p 2285.

James. D., McKee. T. J.. Skrlac. W., 1338 J.. Vol QE-lS. [979. p 335.
Anan'yev. Yu. A.. "Opticheskiye rezonatory 1 problems raskhodinoati lazernogo
izlucheniya" [Optical Cavities and the Problem of Laser Emission Divergence].
Moscow, Nauka. 1979.

Goldhar. J.. Rapoport. w. R.. Murray. J. R.. 1388 J.. Vol 03-16. 1980. p 235.

Tellinghuizen. J., Hoffman. J. M.. Tisone, G. C., Hays, A. K.. J. CHEM. PHYS..
Vol 64. 1976. p 2484.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

6610

CSO:

1862/41

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 621.373.826.038.823
OPTIMIZING AVERAGE POWER OF EXCIHER PULSE~PERIODIC Kr? AND XeCI LASERS

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 9(111). Sep 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 5 Jan 81) pp l909nl912

[Article by V. Yu. Baranov. V. M. Borisov, F. I. Vysikaylo. Yu. 3. Kiryukhin and
N. Ya. Smirnov]

[Text] An examination is made of the possibilities for increasing
the average power of Kr? and XeCI lasers in the pulse-periodic
mode withOut increasing the rate of circulation of the gas mixture
in a closed loop. Improvement of the homogeneity and stability

of the volumetric discharge resulted in an average power of about
60 u with several hours of laser operation.

There has recently been an upsurge of interest in pulse-periodic inert halide gas
lasers because of a wide range of possible applications. Attainment of a high
average power in such lasers involves rapid circulation of the gas mixture. For
example in Ref. 1 an average power of 26 n was attained at a gas mixture flowrate
of about 25 m/s. In this paper an examination is made of the possibilities for
increasing average laser power [Ref. 2] at low gas mixture pumping velocity (abOut
6 m/s). On a fairly simple and compact laboratory facility, the main thrust is
at attainment of good homogeneity and stability of the volumetric discharge with
high efficiency of converting electrical energy to lasing.

Fig. 1 shows the construction of the pulse-
periodic excimer laser. Chamber 1 is made of
stainless steel. and the removable coveré.hold-
ing high-voltage electrode 3 is made of glass-
textolite. The surface of the cover that faces
the discharge was covered with sheet Teflon.
improving passivation of the loop and extending
the service life of the laser. Pre-ionization.
as in Ref. 2. was produced by four rows of sparks
formed between the electrodes and fourrrowsof'pins Fig. I. Design of pulse-
that were introduced into the chamber. The periodic excimer laser
length of the row was equal to the length of

the grounded (2) and high-voltage (3) electrodes (720 mm). The closed stainless
steel loop contained simple heat exchanger 8 and compressor 9.

 

17
ﬁOIiOlFIChtLIkiE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The electric power supply contained an ION-100 high-voltage source of Supply that
charged storage capacitor Co (7) in a resonant diode system. Peaking capacitor c
was structurally accommodated on the removable cover and made on the basis of
KVI-3 capacitors (6). A TCI-ZSOO/SO thyratron (5) was used as the commutator.
Firing of the thyratron flash-charged the low-inductance peaking capacitor, and
the energy stored in it by the time of breakdown of the main interelectrode gap
ensured high current density of the volumetric discharge. The amplitude of the
Current pulse. its rise time and duration are thus functions of the parameter
C/Co. As measurements show. this parameter has an appreciable effect on both the
energy input to the volumetric discharge and its stability in the pulse recurrence
mode. 1. e. it determines the average power of the laser. In the measurements
that we made. Co=-0.S u? did not vary, but capacitance c was varied. The limiting

current through the volumetric discharge reached 35 kA at a half-width duration
0 ~60 ns.

P. watts P. watts
an I

20

v

  

#241 ’
1 4842 x 4/6 32 J! a "110.le

Fig. 2. Lasing output power Fig. 3. Laaing output power
as a function of ratio C/Co in as a function of charge voltage
mixture Pzzxr:lle- 1:25:500 (l) for unilateral (l) and hi-

and uc1:Xe:ae=1:2o:soo (2); lateral (2) illumination of

p- 2 am; 110- (.5 U) the active volume

The b:havior of curves for P- £(c/c.) (Fig. 2) depends strongly on the composition
of the working mixture. The presence of a pronOunced maximum for the Kr? laser
(curve 1) can be explained as follows. KrF* molecules are formed only as a result
of inelastic collisions of F; with Kr*. Excitation of Kr* atoms requires electrons
of fairly high energies. At values of E/p lower than 2.5 V/(cm°mm Hg) the number
of such electrons falls rapidly with increasing E/p due to collisions (with energy
transfer) of electrons with light helium atoms (Ref. 3]. Therefore the reduction
in lasing power for the KrF laser as c/c. increases past 0.28 can be attributed

to the low value of E/p in the discharge, which is due to the stretching of the
voltage front as C increases. resulting in breakdown of the gas gap at lower vol-
tages across the high-voltage electrode. At the same time, there is no power maxi-
mum for the XeC1* molecule as a function of 0/69 (curve 2) in the investigated
range of values of C/Co.

He also studied the influence that the level of pre-ionization of the discharge

gap had on lasing power. The level of pre-ionization was varied. as in experiments
with a monopulse laser [Ref. 4] by shorting out a row of pins to one side of the
high-voltage electrode, which cut the intensity of UV radiation in half. since

the sources on both sides of the electrode are identical. It should be noted that
in this case there could be a change in the degree of homogeneity of photoelectron

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
distribution by changing the lighting geometry. As can be seen from Fig. 3. in
the case of unilateral illumination the lasing power is more sharply dependent

on the charge voltage across the storage capacitor, the lasing power remaining
much lower than with bilateral lighting.

The considerable dependence of average laser power on hoaogeneity and the level
of pro-ionization shown qualitatively in Fig. 3 prompted us to use a discharge
over the surface of a dielectric as a pro-ionizer and plasma electrode. Such a

discharge has already proved its effectiveness as a powerful homogeneous scurce
of UV radiation in the monopulse mode [Ref. 5].

The electrode system with pre-ionization by discharge over the surface of n dielec~
tric that we used for work under conditions of high pulse recurrence rate is shown

Fig. as. Construction of
chamber with discharge over
dielectric surface: l--stain-
less steel chamber; 2--grounded
electrode; 3-low-voltage elec-
trode; é--die1ectric; S--high-
voltage electrode; 6--storage
capacitor; 7--ceramic-capacitor
peaking line; 8--charging in-
ductance; 9--thyratron commutator

 

in Fig. 40. As the dielectric 4. we used a ceramic plate with t- 150 of dimensions
165x 100x 5 mm. Located on the plate were two metal electrodes 3 and 5. between
which an auxiliary planar discharge was developed on the surface of the dielectric.
In laser chamber 1 along its optical axis were four plates. Metal electrode 2

was located at a distance of 2.6 cm from the ceramic plate. The discharge over

the surface of the dielectric was formed upon charging of peaking capacitor 7.
Detailed studies (the results of which will be published separately) have shown
that a surface discharge with high homogeneity is stable under certain conditions
even at quite high pulse recurrence rates (is 10 kHz). Fig. 4b [photo not repro-
duced] shows luminescence of four sections of the plasma electrode at f- 200 Hz.

A volumetric discharge arose between the plasma and grounded electrodes. Observa-
tions of the volumetric discharge with plasma electrode showed that it is quite
homogeneous and stable. It is interesting to note that the previously observed
growth of a spark filament from the metal surface of the high-voltage electrode
(at elevated energy inputs) [Ref. 2] is absent on the plasma electrode.

In Ref. 6 an examination is made of the problem of the possibility of arisal of
local perturbations (near the electrode) under conditions of volumetric plasma
stability. The principal causes of universal instability observed in Ref. 6 are
current focusing in the region with elevated conductivity (in the presence of field

gradients along and across the current). The threshold conditions derived in Ref.
7 for a self-maintained discharge

6.xL.>|. 6, =alnv,/aln£, . (I)

19
FOIIOFTICIA1.USNE(MVLY
FOR¢0FFKJAL.USE(NHLY

and for a semi-self—maintained discharge

u‘v‘ﬁ,L.>v‘; ﬁ,-6Inu.ldln£; usually “2(0. . (2)

show the appreciable dependence of these conditions on the field gradient (or on

r. E-IE exp(-xx) and plasma concentration along the current; the X axis is directed
from the electrode being considered). Here La is a dimension of the electrode
layer; v1(E/N) is the frequency of independent ionization from the intensity of

the normalized electric field; v1 is the ion drift rate; he is electron mobility.

In our experiments the use of a plasma electrode increases the electron concentration
in the electrode region. and in this way apparently reduces the field gradients
along the current. which leads to stability of the electrode regions of the plasma
and increases the stability of the discharge at large f. The limiting possible

f for the investigated system with pre-ionization discharge over the surface of

a dielectric were not attained in Our experiments due to absence of cooling of

the dielectric, as such cooling was technically difficult in the available chamber.

An important aspect ofthe pulse-periodic lasers is the work life without changing
the gas mixture. Fig. 5 shows how the average power of the XeCl laser depends on

P. watts
Fig. 5. Emission output power as a function

of laser operating time at f- 100 Hz.

0.. -IoS kV. p-2 am: l--mixture HCl:Xe:He-
1:20:500; 2--mixture after an hour of
operation with addition of HCl of from

50 to 1002 with respect to its initial

0 20 w t. min concentration

    

working time without changing the gas mixture in the loop. The total volume of
gas mixture in the loop is about 200 liters. the active volume occupied by the
discharge is 70:<0.8x 3 cm, or 168 cm’. where 3 cm is the interelectrode spacing.
It can be seen from the figure that in an hour of operation the laser power

falls from 30 to 20 H. In Ref. 8 with the same volume of mixture in a closed loop.
the power of la w attained in the laser fell by 202 over a time of about 2.5 hours.
Such a discrepancy can be attributed to lower average power and higher purity of
the gases used in Ref. 8.

It was noted in Ref. 2 that one of the causes of a reduction in lasing power may

be a reduction in the concentration of halide in connection with its drift to

the walls of the chamber. Therefore we added different amounts of HCl to the gas
volume of the laser after an hour of operation; however, there was either no increase
in lasing power at all. or it was only slight (see curve 2 on Fig. 5). This is

an indication that in our case there is an accumulation of plasma-chemical reaction
products that may absorb on the laser emission wavelength, as well as products

that are capable of quenching the excited XeCl* molecules in the discharge.

With operation under forced conditions (charge voltage about 45 kV at interelectrode
spacing of about 4 cm). the power produced on the laser amounted to 60 H at efficiency
of about 0.92. and after an hour of operation it had decreased by 40-50! without a
change of gas mixture in the loop. Gradual replacement of the gas mixture in the

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
loop during laser operation enables many hours of operation with.ut any appreciable
reduction of power.

Thus the results of this research show that the average power of pulse-periodic
excimer lasers can be considerably increased without increasing the rate of circu-
lation merely by increasing the homogeneity and stability of the volumetric dis-
charge. This is done by choosing the optimum relation between parameters of the
electric circuit for a specific laser mixture. and by providing a high level of
uniform pre-ionization.

REFERENCES
1. Wang. C. P.. Gibb, O. L.. 1553 J., Vol 03-15. 1979. p 318.

2. Saranov, V. Yu., Baranov, G. S.. Boriaov. V. H.. Kiryukhin. Yu. 8 . Hamonov,
S. 6.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 7, 1980, p 896.

3. Sac, R. C.. Scott. P. 3.. REV. SCI. INSTR., Vol 49, 1978, p 772.

6. Baranov, V. Yu., Vysikaylo, V. 1.. Hamonov. s. 8.. Napartovich. A. P.,
Stepanov. Yu. Yu.. KVANIOVAXA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 7. 1980. p 593.

5. Baranov, V. Yu.. Borisov, V. H.. Khristoforov. 0. B., KVANTOVAXA ELEKTRONIKA,
Vol 8, 1981. p I65.

6. Vysikaylo, V. 1.. Dykhne. A. H.. Napartovich, A. P., "Tezisy dokladov pyatoy
Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po fizike nizkotemperaturnoy plazmy" [Abstracts of
Papers to the Fifth All-Union Conference on Lou-Temperature Plasma Physics].
Kiev. 1978, p 165.

7. Dykhne. A. H.. Napartovich, A. P., DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR, Vol 267, I979.
p 837.

8. Miller. J. L.. Dickie, J.. Davin, J., Svingle. J.. Kan, T.. APPL. PHYS. LETTS..
Vol 35. 1979. P 912.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

6610
C90: 1862/41

21
FIMICHﬂﬂ(IAl.USE(3NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.378.32
HULTIPASS NEODYHIUH GLASS AMPLIFIER

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 9(lll). Sep 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 17 Mar 81) pp 1962-1967

[Article by A. V. Kil'pio, A. V. Larikov. A. A. Malyutin and P. P. Pashinin. Institute
of Physics imeni P. N. Lebedev. USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] The paper describes the design of a multipass amplifier
that uses prism optics for organizing passes. The calculated
and experimental characteristics of the amplifier are given.

A gain of ~2'10” is achieved (with consideration of losses--
-2,5.103) for pulse duration of 25 ms with energy of a mJ.

As multipass devices are well known and extensively used in optics. it is no wonder
that the idea of using multipass devices for amplifying electromagnetic radiation
was suggested even before lasers put in their appearance. In quantum electronics.
the use of a Fabry-Perot interferometer as a resonator has helped us to make lasers
even on media with quite weak amplification.

At the present time. the upsurge of interest in multipass devices has been prompted
by development of powerful laser facilities for nuclear fusion (Ref. 1]. where

the use of this idea promises a considerable reduction in cost and an improvement

in the efficiency and reliability of systems. At the same time, the use of multi-
pass amplifiers is also attractive for other types of facilities. since this reduces
overall dimensions, while simultaneously improving radiation power and energy.

Three major types of multipass amplifiers are known. The first type-—regenerative
amplifiers--is analogous to the conventional laser with Fabry-Perot cavity. Input
and output of radiation in these devices is by electro-optical shutters (Ref. 2].
The second type is amplifiers with telescopic optics (spherical or cylindrical)
[Ref. 3]. Both these types of amplifiers have considerable drawbacks. In regen-
erative amplifiers, the limitations on aperture and stability of electro-optical
shutters preclude the attainment of high emission power. Work with large-aperture
beams is difficult. Another considerable disadvantage is the leakage of radiation
from preceding passes into the output channel of the amplifier, in the former case
due to the finite contrast of the shutter. and in the second case--to diffraction
effects on the mirrors. The tendency to self-excitation appreciably reduces the
advantage of these types of multipass amplifiers.

The third type is multipass amplifiers uith spatial separation of beams. Here
the power limitations are determined only by the stability of the reflective

22
INDR‘OFIWCJAI.IHHE(MVLY
Fig. 1. Diagram of multipass uplifier; nuabers 1-12 indicate
the successive positions of beam 0.13 on the "hypotenuse" faces
of the prisms.

components. and if arrangements are used with separation of beams in the far zone,
there is no leakage of radiation from preceding passes into the output channel

of the amplifier. A disadvantage of this type of multipass amplifier (as of the
other two types) is high sensitivity of the direction of the output beam to sta-
bility of the components used for organizing passes through the active element.

This article is devoted to a multipass amplifier based on neodymiun glass that
uses prism optics for organizing passes. The proposed design can be used with
other types of active media as well.

There are a number of advantages to using prisms as reflective elements. First

of all, their radiation resistance is higher than for mirror reflectors. Secondly.
the stability of the direction of the output radiation of the amplifier can be
considerably improved. Besides, the described multipass amplifier design rotates
the image [Ref. lo], which considerably improves uniformity of amplification over
the beam cross section. The proposed design can be used with fairly large beam
apertures.

If for any reason the use of prisms is impossible (for example because of high
absorption of the amplified emission) , the design can use mirror reflectors
that are equivalent in action to the prisms.

The proposed amplifier with prism optics uses seven passes through the active ele-
ment (Fig. 1). This number of passes corresponds to "dense packing" of the ampli-
fied beams since in this case the beam axis in any cross section of the active
element forms a regular hexagonal structure with the center in successive passes.
The system of laser beam reflectors is made in the form of two modules of iden-
tical prisms with total internal reflection. Fig. 1 shows only the "hypotenuse"
faces of these prisms. The path of a been through an individual prism and the
active element is shown on Fig. 2.

Obviously the following relations must be satisfied for compactness of the system:

a =2r.; Ii +2r. uh; H—2(R.—r.) -(L—L.) tgy; 2(R.—r.)/L. =ctg 0; 0 =90“—
—aresin (sin yln).

which can be used to find any five parameters of the anplifier if the five others
are known. It is convenient to take as the starting parameters the dimensions
of the active element (length and diameter), the aperture of the beam to be ampli-
fied. the base of the amplifier and the index of refraction n. The base of the

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
      
   
   
 

        
     
 
 
    
   

~— ‘ ' ////////.I{/I.,*///-_.
,////////////////1 (KI/.4111: {ﬁg/559,9, (ﬁg/”MIL! L" m {L

\
//_/II/////lluum,m..’.. ..‘_-‘—'|Wl:\’\\>
'II.-'

  
 

 

  

 
     

V a
I///////// /l////I///Illll/ 'Illu

I, ..V....,//,‘,:' — '
/////// ////////////////A //////I// ZZZ/£53324 7W" W '0
mun/10”.)”

   

Fig. 2. Bean travel through active element and individual prism:
L--base of aaplifier (distance between prism nodules); [qr-length
of active eleaent; Ronradius of cross section of active element;
ro——radius of cross section of beam being amplified; h. a—height
and width of prism; 6--ang1e between reflective faces of prism;
H—-—diatance between beam centers on hypotenuse face of prism;
Zy--ang1e of convergence of beams being amplified; n-index of
refraction of material of active element and prisms (taken as

equal for the sake of simplicity)

Fig. 3. Arrangement of prisms in
modules (above or to the side of the
amplifier input) and orientation of
the beam being amplified on differ-
ent passes (the numbers of the passes
are indicated by the numerals)

 

amplifier is made as short as possible con-

sistent with practical considerations. The W
aperture of the beam to be uplified must
be taken somewhat larger in the calculation

1

with consideration of the necessary align-

ments and the structure that holds the prises 9 g m
I. J o

in a group .

Pig. 3 shows the arrangement of the prisms 6 § ?
5 I I

in groups. Even numbers correspond to the
input group of prisms, and odd anthers--

to the output group. Hith this arrangement,
the prism optical system of the amplifier rotates the cross section of the ampli-

fied beam as a whole relative to the axis of the system.

It can be shown that transformation of the coordinates of points of the beam after
a ent. of k prisms arranged as in Fig. 3 takes place according to the law

R.-(’r'1 7:) m. la)

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where i-{x,y} is the radius vector f beam points in a unified coordinate system
(such a system is shown in Pig. 3); 0 corresponds to the points at the input to
the system; k< 6;

T, .- (C03231 3i“ h,
shIZu, -cos2aq

is the matrix of transformation of the j-th prism. Components T are defined by
the angles o1 formed by the edges of the prism (line of intersecgion of reflecting
'.aces) with the X axis. For our system. we have al-ut-o;--n/6, oz-as- 1/2,
ag-‘-Sx/6. Pig. 3 also shows the positions of the cross section of the beam being
amplified (for an arbitrary image) on all seven passes.

The arrangement of the prisms ensures high stability of the direction of the output
beam under condition that they are tightly secured in the modules, since their
orientation in the module is similar to the orientation of the faces of a triple
prism. An exception is the last prism on the beam path (No 6) that directs the
amplified beam along the axis of the active element.

Obviously bean rotation and the different inclinations of the beam to the axis

of the system ensure uniform amplification even in the case of nonuniform distribu-
tion of inversion with respect to the active element. Qualitative evaluation of
the relative role of rotation of the beam cross section and oblique passage through
the active element with nonuniform distribution of inversion in a specific system
of a seven-pass amplifier is done by calculation.

Distribution of inversion was taken in the form

Aer. y)-b. +A.(»= +50 +4”.

which corresponds to the model of a four-lamp illuminator. The magnitudes and
signs of A] and A2 determine the specific behavior of inversion. In particular.

in the calculations it was assumed that A1<IO and A2) 0, which is equivalent to

an increase of inversion from the center to the edge in planes passing through

the lamps, and to a fall-off between then. Fig. b shows the results of calculation.

Pig. 4. Normalized amplification of laser beam
0/60 as a function of normalized radius Elk; and
r/ro with nonuniform distribution of inversion:
a-nornal passage through active element; b--
oblique passage. and c--oblique passage with field
rotation. Calculation done for seven passes,

60- 3000 is gain in the center of the beam. ru/Ro-
0.67.

 

25
F08‘0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR'0FF1C]A1.USEIDNLY

we can see that while amplification on the edge of the active element varies by an
order of magnitude depending on azimuthal angle a. amplification on the edge of

the beam with consideration of rotation and oblique path differs by less than 102.
Rotation of the field leads to a change in the output beam with respect to azimuthal
angle with period I rather than 11/2, as assumed for distribution of inversion in
the active element.

The prism optics of the amplifier also transforms bean polarization. If polariza-
tion of emission is given by the vector

P—Ce‘°)' where 92+?2 - 1,

then after passes through R prisms of the system we will have

A
map, [1 Dr‘oID,. (2)
I-I
where I: (I 0) is the unit matrix; 0=(exp GA.) 0 is the matrix of the phase
0 —1 0 ”NM

advance, and 01 and D31 are the direct and inverse matrices of rotation through
cosa, sina,

angle «j: 01:" ,
—sma, COSCI

); P. is polarization at the input.

Let us note that the matrix given above 'l'J-D‘IID . Quantities axa 161.38% Ay-
69.44' are determined by angle 6-88°SS' of t e reflective prisms.

Y] Fig. 5. Change of beam polarization
’ 7 by passes (calculation); input beam
. \ polarized linearly with respect to
$7” 2 :«u‘ ”11:1; X axis; coordinate system the same
I “1' J ‘ , as in Fig. 3.
av j;/\\¢c :glbrﬁ
.. .L
/h" 5 7

Emission polarizations by passes calculated from (2) are shown on Fig. 5. It was
assumed that radiation at the input to the amplifier is linearly polarized along
the X axis. It should be noted that althOugh the phase delay that arises in the
case of total internal reflection in the prisms is fairly large (on the fifth pass
we have polarization close to circular), the polarization at the output of the
system is again close to linear and is rotated relative to the input polarization
through an angle of about 60°.

An important characteristic of the amplifier from the standpoint of its operation
at high power densities of laser emission is the nonlinear phase advance [Ref. 5].

L
5:248; [u (2) mo dz. (3)
a

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where I(2) [w/cmz] is beam intensity; n and n; [0638 units] are the linear and
nonlinear parts of the index of refraction of the active element and reflective
prisms. If the aperture of the beam being amplified does not change during ampli-
fication, calculation of (3) presents no difficulty. For practical purposes it

is convenient to use multipass amplifiers for amplifying divergent beams. e. g.

as a preamplifier, i. e. immediately after the master laser in a laser unit. If
we assume gaussian distribution of the beam at input to the multipass amplifier

Hr. 1) =1. exp l—(ﬂrJ'kxpl—(rlrd'l

(1° is half-duration of the beam at intensity level Jule; to is the half-width

of the beam at this same level; J. is intensity at the maximum), and consider be-
sides that ro varies during propagation in accordance with the law

r3 =a'l l +(z—z.)’/Iz’a"l

(a is the dimension of constriction of the gaussian beam), which is close to the
case of practical interest of using a laser with zero transverse mode as the master

laser, then analytical calculation of (3) is impossible. Therefore integration
of (3) in this case must be done numerically

Fig. 6. Change in integral 3 by
passes through the amplifier for
gauusian pulse of duration 1 with
input energy Bin (calculated),

3' - suo‘ltm. r n- 1.5 mm. rout-
13.5 mm. length of active element
34 cm, length of pumped part of ac-
tive element 28 cm, optical path in
prisms 75 mm. base of amplifier

1.5 m, n- 1.5, rig-10'” ccst unit.
scale on the left for passes 1-4,
on the right for passes 4-7

The results of a computer calculation for

a seven-pass amplifier are shown in Pig. 6.
The calculation shows that nonlinear effects
are negligible (8 5!) at peak power of pulses
at the input up to 10 NH and amplification

of (”-3)‘10’. If we consider the fact that
the prism optics of the amplifier produces
elliptical polarization. nonlinear effects pass number
are still further reduced (for circular pola-

rization on all passes. the integral 3 would be reduced by a factor of IE).

 

The experimentally studied multipass amplifier used a GLS-22 neodymium glass active
element with dimensions of 1.3- 31.0 m, 2110 -45 m. The base of the amplifier was
1.5 m. At dimensions of the hypotenuse face of the reflective prisms of 7 cm and
angle B-88'55' . the maximum possible aperture of the amplified beam 2r. - 25 mm.
The hypotenuse faces of the prisms were anti-reflection coated (reflection <0.3Z);
the end faces of the active element were not coated. but were beveled relative

to the axis of the active element by 7.5°. Pumping of the active element was by
four lFP-8000-l lamps (illuminator geometry same as for COS-1001 laser).

27
FOR!OFHKJAI.USE(NVLY
F0! OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

IRA-am

Fig. 7. _E erimental values of gain
x11 Kt. K' rand 0.

 

input to the amplifier. Beam diameter at the input was ~3 In. at the output

~20 m (with respect to ha1f~intensity level). Radiation energy at the input was
40 nJ at pulse duration of 25 ns. Measurements were made of amplification on the
first pass K1. and the total amplification on seven passes K2. If X; was measured
in the weak-signal case, then Kg. especially at high nplifier pulping energies 8P.
could be considered as measured at signal saturation. Fig. 7 shogs the pulping
energy dependences of K; and K2. together with K- ’17; and a- 1n K/L (LP-28 cm

is the length of the pmped section of the active element). Amplif cation is
normalized to the amplifier output, 1. e. no consideration is taken of losses to
absorption in optical elements of the system. Fresnel reflection or scattering.
The latter is apparently responsible for most of these losses since accounting

for inactive absorption (the nameplate for the active element gives o- 10" cm“).
Fresnel reflection on the end faces of the active element and faces of the prisms
givesJosses nf ~0.56. Accuracy of measurement .f K‘ and K; was :51. He can see
that K is somewhat lower than R; and has a bend due to saturation at high pumping
energies: output energy with pumping of 19.2 k.) is ~10 J. The difference between
K and K; can apparently be attributed to reduction of inversion in the region of
overlapping of the amplified beams in the active element (see Fig. 1).

We also measured polarization at the amplifier output with linear polarization
of emission at the input. The orientation of the ellipse and the ratio of its
amimajor and semiminor axes are close to the calculated values (Fig. la).

In conclusion the authors thank D. V. Bardin and V. N. Lukanin for assistance with
the work.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

4.

S.

6.

REFERENCES

Laurence Liverwore Laboratory. Annual Report UCRL-50021-76, 1976.

Hakukha, V. K., Smirnov. V. A., Taraeov, V. H.. Troshin, B. 1.. 1n: "Lazernyye
sisteuy" [Laser Systems]. Novosibirsk, Hanks, 1980. p 47.

Anan'yev, Yu. A., Sventsitskeye. N. A., Sheratobitov. V. Ye.. ZHURNAL
EKSPBRIMENTAL'NOY I TBORETICHBSKOY FIZIKI. V01 56. 1968, p 131.

Danileyko, Yu. K., Lobachev. V. A.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol I. 1974. p 74.

Bliss, E. 8., Speck. D. 3.. Bolzrichter, J. F.. Erkkala. J. H., Glass, A. J.,
APPL. PHYS. LETTS., Vol 25, 1974, p 448.

Bulatov, E. D.. Vodop'yanov, K. L.. K11'pio, A. V., Halyutin, A. A..
Otlivanchik, M. A., Peahinln, P. P., Filippov. A. N., Shpuga. S. H..
"Proc. XIII European Conf. on Laser Interaction with Hatter". Leipzig.
1979, p :13.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 evyez'". "Kvantoveyn elektronike", 1981

6610

CSO:

1862/41

29
FOI10FFKJAI.USB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 535.36.621.373.826.038.826

STIMULATED SCATTERING OF LIGHT BY TEMPERATURE WAVES EXCITED IN THERMODYNAMICALLY
NONEQUILIBRIUM MEDIA DUE TO ENTHALPY 0F LIGHT-CONTROLLED CHEMICAL REACTIONS

Moscow KVANIOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 9(111). Sep 81 (manuscript re—
ceived 15 Apr 81) pp 1968-1977

[Article by V. s. Zuyev and Ye. P. Orlov, Institute of Physics imeni P. N. Lebedev.
USSR Academy of Sciences)

[Text] Based on the example of working gas mixtures of iodine
photodissociation lasers it is demonstrated that in thermodynam-
ically nonequilibrium media where the chemical reaction rate
depends on the intensity of the electromagnetic field, there
may be stimulated scattering of light by temperature waves that
are excited due to the enthalpy of the thermodynamically non-
equilibrium medium. A theoretical investigation is made of the
spectrum of the scattered light; it is shown that light amplifi-
cation is realized on the anti-Stokes frequency. and the gain

of stimulated scattering under typical conditions characteristic
of iodine lasers at a pressure oftheuorking mixture of ~0.5 atm
may reach [00-600 cm/HH.

1. Introduction

It was observed in Ref. 1 that in the active mediua of iodine photodissociation
lasers when a certain pumping power level is exceeded, small-scale optical inhomo-
geneities arise. and laser emission divergence is shaprly increased. In Ref. 2.
and later in Ref. 3 it was established that this effect is associated with the
presence of exothernal reactions in the active medium with rates that depend on

the intensity of the laser field. The initial working gas mixture of iodine photo-
dissociation lasers consists of buffer gases such as SP. or CO: with a small amount
of molecules of type n-C3P7I. Upon photolysis of n-CngI molecules, excited iodine
atoms are formed. some of which make a transition to the unexcited state under

the action of the resonant laser field. Exothermal reactions take place between
iodine atoms and n-Cng radicals. the unexcited iodine atoms reacting with the
radicals many times faster than the excited atoms. Dependence of the rates of
these reactions on the intensity of the laser field is due to the fact that in
causing induced transitions. this field changes the concentrations of excited and

unexcited iodine atoms.

30
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY
It has been shown in Ref. 2 and 3 that inhomogeneities of laser field intensity

lead to gasdynamic perturbations of the medium due to thermal expansion with non-
uniform heating, which show up as small-srale optical inhomogeneities. In Ref. 2,
consideration was given to the fact that this gives rise to nonlinear defocusing
self-stress of light. and the arisal of small-scale optical inhomogeneities was
attributed to instability of the laser emission wave front. assuming positive feed-
back and the possibility of parametric buildup of small-scale optical inhomogeneities
because of the response lag of the medium.

In Ref. 4 it was demonstrated that the phenomenon observed in iodine photodissocia-
tion lasers may represent a new kind of stimulated scattering of light. 1. c. it
was shown that interaction of a laser field with the active medium of the laser
takes place in such a way that the gasdynamic perturbations of the medium are re-
plenished by the enthalpy of light-controlled chemical reactions, and energy is
pumped from the wave of the stimulating laser field to the wave of radiation
scattered by gasdynamic perturbations. It has been proposed that this effect be
called enthalpy-stimulated scattering. As an example, an investigation was made
in Ref. 4 of stimulated scattering of the given type by ultrasonic waves excited
in the thermodynamically nonequilibrium active medium of iodine photodissociation
lasers.

A fundamental qualitative difference between the enthalpy-stimulated scattering
considered in Ref. 4 and conventional types of stimulated scattering (stimulated
Handelstam-Brillouin scattering. stimulated temperature scattering ikcf. 5-7],
stimulated absorption scattering [Ref. 8], etc.) is that internal oscillations

of the medium may be excited exclusively due to the energy of processes that occur
in a thermodynamically nonequilibrium medium. In this regard. the light acts as
a controlling element: it controls the process rates.

The threshold of enthalpy-stimulated scattering is quite low. For example in the
active medium of iodine photodissociation lasers at pressures of 0.5-1 atm this
effect has been observed at a laser field intensity of about I0 kW/cm2 [Ref. 2].

The gain of enthalpy-stimulated scattering on ultrasound at scattering angles of
about 10 mrad reaches 10 cm/MH (Ref. 4]. which is almostIO“ times higher than

the gain of stimulated Mandelstam-Brillouin scattering in gases at the same pres-
sures, and two or three orders of magnitude higher than in liquids and compressed
gases [Ref. 9, 10]. The intensity of ultrasound reaches tenths of a watt per square
centimeter. This is implied by experimental data on the relative change in gas
density in small-scale optical inhomogeneities [Ref. 1, 2], where it is 11, and

the known speed of scund, and is also demonstrated by theoretical analysis [Ref. 11].

Ultrasonic waves are not the only partial waves of the medium that are excited
under the given conditions. Since fluctuations of electromagnetic field intensity
in enthalpy—stimulated scattering lead to nonuniform heating of the medium due

to the energy of light-controlled processes, the excitation of ultrasound should
be accompanied by excitation of isobaric density and temperature waves [Ref. 5]
which. as noted in Ref. 4, should also give rise to stimulated scattering of light.

This is the phenomenon that we will study in this article.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Formulation of the ProblemandPrincipal Equations

Among the chemical reactions that occur in the active region of iodine photodissocia-
tion lasers lRef. 12]. we will consider only the two fastest reactions in our exami-
nation of enthalpy-stimulated scattering on temperature waves:

R +J—vRJ. (I)
R +R"Ra (2)

where R are organofluorine radicals. The contributions made by other radicals
to this stimulated scattering process can be disregarded.

The rate of energy release in a unit volume as a result of reactions (1) and (2) is

Q=4.Jt.lRIIJl+q.Jt.lRP. ' (3)

where [J], [R] are the concentrations of unexclted iodine atoms and radicalsgdr.
and Jr; are the rate constants of reactions (1) and (2); q1,2 is the energy re-
leased in recombination of one iodine atom and a radical into the initial RJ mole-
cule. and of two radicals into an R2 molecule respectively. (Let us note that

in this article the quantities Q and Jr, replace Q and JrJZ from Ref. 4.)

To find [R] and [J], we start from equations that describe the concentrations of
particles of the working substances [N]. excited iodine atoms [J*], iodine atoms
in the unexcited state [J] and radicals [R]:

40;? ‘DNV‘INl=—wINI+Jr.IRIIJI: (4)
’ :9 J
1'3’,—'—D:-v'u'l= w:NI—o,(u'|——gfm)ﬁ};_"—vl; (5)
a , .
7::J'—stIlJl-o,(lJ-l—%lJ|)ﬁi—E—x.mml_g;l; (5)
ing-Dav’lRl-wlNl—xlmmpzmlpp' (7)

where w is the probability of photodissociation of molecules of the working gas
under the action of ultraviolet pumping radiation; oy is the cross section of the
laser transition; g1/gz is the ratio of statistical weights of the upper and lower
laser levels; 1P is the time of nonradiative relaxation of the upper laser level;

E is the total field of the exciting (E0) and scattered (33) electromagnetic waves;
n is the index of refraction of the medium; ha» is the energy of a quantum of

the laser field; DN' DJ*, DJ. ”R are the coefficients of diffusion of molecules

of the working substance. excited and unexcited iodine atoms. and radicals in the
buffer gas.

Equations (3)-(7) in combination with the thermal diffusivity and Haxwell's equations

saw-so. <8)

as d‘E I 6' 62

77:- V'E- ‘FW (7W1 ‘9’
32

FtNICHHHCJAl.USEGDNLY
form the complete closed system of equations necessary for solving the problem

of stimulated scattering by temperature waves. Here 1' is the deviation of the
temperature of the median from its equilibrium value To; x is the coefficient of
thermal diffusivity; p is the density of the median; cp is specific heat at constant
pressure; e- n2. Let us note that in (9) we have left out the term corresponding
to amplification on the resonant transition of atomic iodine, since accounting

for amplification in the final results presents no difficulty.

3 . Linearized Equations

Obviously we cannot get a general solution of system (3)-(9) in analytical form.
Thereforg we linearlize the system, assming that the intensity of stimulated scat-
tering '- g is considerably less than the intensity of the stimulating light rig.
Then the deviations of particle concentrations from those that would have taken
place in the absence of the scattered field are small. and equations (3)-(7) can
be linearized. After linearization, they will take the form

5!. lchth+xulRLth —(%—D~ v' +w)INI. =0: (10)

42' “a". m. - (7:07-0:- v' + OJ. + 71;)l1'h-t- wlNh - owl: (1|)

mutual + (7?,— —D:v’ + x. lRl.+ {fay/Jun. —

_(o,l.+—:’—)[J']-o,.A.I,; (‘2)
(g’T—DRV' +x,[J],+ 4x, [RI.)IRI‘+ MIRIJJI‘ —-wlNl. H0: (13)
Q‘Qo‘i'QIo ('4)

where [N10, “ﬁg, [310. [lilo are the concentrations of particles in the absence

of a scattered field; [N11, [J*]1. [J]1, [R]; are the deviations of particle concen-
trations from [N19, [J*]o, [J]o, [R]o; A.=lJ'l.—|JLg,/g.; l.=ncE;l4:Iﬁco. is the intensity
of the exciting wave; 1,-2ndgﬁsmuﬁu. is deviation of the intensity of the resultant
field from 11., due to interference of the exciting and scattered waves; Q.=q.x,lRl.lJl,+

(If’rgIR P; leq|x|aJlJR1|JflRlolJII)-*-2q’xJR]JR‘I'

In linearlizing equations (8) and (9) we will asstnle that Q.) heats the medium to
temperature 'r'. We denote the deviation from 1" due to Q; by 1'}. Then equation
(8) is transformed to

or,/or+xv'r.=Q./pc.. (I5)

and equation (9), transformed to the equation for ﬁg. in the approximation of the
given field 3,, takes the form

ass-v:e.-—%(s),awm- «16>

In this article we will limit ourselves to the case of a monochromatic stimulating
field. and will consider only the steady-state theory. The conditions of

33
FOR OFFICIAL L83 ONLY
INIR()FFNJA1.USE1DNLN

applicability of the steady-state theory will be made clear below. Let total field
E consist of linearly polarized stimulating (Bo) and scattered (Es) waves with

the same polarization. Then we can consider only scalar waves. Let us represent
E as

E ='/,E. exp (iwdhr) +‘l,Esexp(iw,l—illsr) +compl. con) . 9 (I?)

where u) and us are the frequencies of the stimulating and scattered light waves;
Ito and is are their wave vectors. Here Luna/hie». and

Il =1/J exp (ml—iqucomp. conj . . ('8)
where T:2ncE.E§/8nﬁu.: 9310." “a; q-k.—ks.
Let us represent IN]..[J‘I.. IJih IR]|.T,.Q. in the same form as 1;:

Wk =‘l.lmexp(iQI.—iqr) + comp . ‘ conj . ;

lJ ‘ I, =‘/,I.Tlexp(iQ!—iqr) + comp . conj . ;

[J]. ='/,I.Tlexp(in—iqr) + comp . con) ., ; '

IR]. ='/.IR'lexp(iQ!—iqt) + comp . con 1 . ; (l9)

T, g'ljexp (in—iqucmp. conj .; Q‘ -'I,Q'exp (lQ!—iqt)+ comp. conj .

Substituting (ID-(19) in equations (lO)—(l6). we get the following system of
linear equations relative to

Jr. lJl.[7él +x. lRl.l'3_l —(iQ+an'+ w) lﬁ1=o: - ' (20)
—§’— 0,].13] — (i9 + Our + {1,1, +-%-) [3‘] + mm] - o,A.73 (2|)

an ul.l§l+ (19+Dm' +x. 1R1. +—§f aylo)[Jl -

_ (0,], + 3'?) ['1'] =- o,A.7: (22)
(i9 + 052‘? + Jr, [J]. + 4x, [12],) [i5] + x,[R1.[]]— m [N] -o; (23)
6- qix.(u1.[§1+IRI.IJD + 2M. IR]. [7?]: (24)
(“H moi-Owe» (25)
05' ‘8 a. .
“—5 = ‘W W)?” (25)

where c is the coordinate in direction is; I. and l are determined by using E.
and Es above. In deriving (25), we have limited ourselves to the case where there
is no amplification of the temperature wave during propagation, and in deriving
(26), consideration was taken of the fact that the relative change in amplitude

of the scattered field is small at distances of the order of a wavelength of light,
and therefore only the first spatial derivative of amplitude has been retained

in (26).

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6. Scattering Spectrun

Solving equations (20)-(23) relative to [i] and {3]. and substituting the solutions
in equation (25). we get the complex amplitude of the variable component of the
rate of specific energy release Q:

iQ+D . '
6'41“: [RMvAoﬁ[IQ-FDRQ.+
iQ+D ' .
+m.|R).( l-gtmﬁT'HT, (27)
where the matrix
I'Q-i-Daq'i-WJRI. '(Dr-DrN’ “(I'Q+DJ-¢l')
xl'JlI iQ+DJ¢+xllRlo+ _.(a[ +4.)
' +('+£'-oI+—' H "
la..I-—- (m 0 arm no) " *9 .(28)
'I‘ p...) 0 (59+ ﬁ')‘ [R’s ('Q-l-D-
“—mtrbﬁu'T Wr+ ‘ ’ q.)
+(DJ-DJ-N'

Substituting (27) in (25), we find the complex amplitude of temperature. and by
using (26) we find that in the region of nonlinear interaction. the scattered field
intensity proportional to IESI2 varies in accordance with the law

IE.(€) I'm IE.({ =0) Penman]. (29)

__ a: (IIIRlpA! . m+D,.q' .
ugh—#475)» I m» ' Rel' (15+u')ﬁtlaul [‘Q+D“q’+

Q ~D
+ 4x.lRl.( l— ﬂﬁ) J} 1.. (30)

where

5. Principal Results

let us analyze the major features of the kind of scattering considered above. We
will make the following assmption to simplify the analysis: all coefficients

of diffusion will be taken as equal. 1. e. DR-DN-DJt-DJ-D. Then (30) takes
the form

0: .Jr IRMA, p"’a+i(n'—a‘") I
g (9) = k5 (0—7), ‘1 '4"? ’ Re (i9 + m!) (6" ’9! - a‘” + i9 (95 - am» I"
(3‘)

where
'1‘" --7r. m. +x. [R|.+4Jr,|R|, +w+ (I +g./g.) o.-I. + 3W + 1“,;(32)

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

am = (mx + m) (be + (I + m.) 0,1. + II») + (W + We IRW-
x (2ng3 + w + (I + g,lg‘) 0,1. + lit.) + .x, “I. (200' + (l + ldlxlay’c +

+ 1/1,) + or, [R], (20¢! + w + 4.x, [R]. + a,I. + 1m): €33)
«xm -I(Dq‘ +41th I.)(Dq'+w) +0!le |.Dq’|(Dq' +(I +gele.)0,l. +|/'r,) +
+x.lRl.4Jr,|Rl.(Dq' +w+o,l. +l/tp): (34)
5") -2Dq’ MNRLU —4./2q.) +w: (35)
9‘” =(Dq')’ +(4xalR lo(l —q./2a.) +w)Dq’+4~7falRlav~ (36)

After calculating the real part of the complex expression in braces in (31). we
represent the dependence gm) in the form

(9)“ k «.1, "11.0.4. 9 WW + rmn' + w‘” ,
g "’ TT), apt» 5* + (10¢ a“) + W’o‘ + vmo’ + w‘“ "

(37)

where “7(1):. (am__ﬂm) +73% ‘7‘" “UV—2a."): Wm-L(B"’a"’--—¢("B"’)— ¢(S)_(a(i)_¢(l)ﬂ(l)+pm)an;
um» um. gamut»; ur/m4_‘¢(ngm+(ampta)_ “(swung Wt')=a“)'.

It can be seen from (37) that dependence 3(9) is antisymmetric relative to the
sign of 9.1. e. gm) - -g(-Q). This means that. 3(9) will be positive either in
the Stokes region or in the anti- Stokes region, depending on the sign of (ac/3‘01, .
i. e. amplification of the scattered light waves is realized. Consequently, thep
temperature waves stimulated in media in which the chemical reaction rates depend
on laser field intensity should give rise to stimulated scattering of light.

Formula (37) is much simplified in tuo cases: when xq’<§- min{IW"’/W"3 l"“"”}.
where ja 1, 2. 3. a; k- s. 6. and when diffusion time r..=(Dq')“‘ is considerably
less than the time of chemical reactions, the time of photodiasociation and the
lifetime of iodine atoms in the excited state.

Actually, cofactor [(9):(W('&‘+W"K2’+V‘”:’(Q‘+|¥’“)QH- WWQMJVM) in (37) varies
insignificantly in frequency band |n| S n: fzwﬂth". and cofactor f,(Q)-Q/(Q’+(xq‘)')
reaches extremml values at Qatxq’. Therefore if angle 6 between the wave vectors
of the stimulating and scattered light waves is such that xq‘<§, the gain gm) can
be approximated as

car A w“)
a (Q) as k. (7r), ué—iﬁm— ,m my!” ‘33)

The maximum gain is

(39)

_ as mm A v“)
(""—k‘l7lp_LiP_‘;]1$Ll'7-‘Tl'

The time of establishment of the steady state in this case is detemined by the
time of damping of the thermal wave: 1”,»1,=(xq*)-1,

 

in the second case. the gain gm) can be represented as

1' R 9(DQ'+ Q
Mmzh(h)11_d_l'&mlr (40)

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The frequencies at which 3(32) reaches extremum values in this case are equal to
as: {7'61/ ‘D'+x‘ (V '1'+—01_D*'12xi /( 1W —.1)*. (41)

If D: X- the fr: ,uencies determined by (41). Q=ixflﬂ i. e. the frequency shift
is considerably different from that with stimulated temperature scattering or
stimulated concentration scattering Ref. 13, 14]. The maxi-us g(9) is

011'. [RIQVAI 3V3 I
a 09"» 5 (1—47“ (42)

 

Enuﬂksl'gf

and the half-width of the scattering spectrum can be determined from the equation

E‘ +283 +3E'—2§—l -0. (43)

where gal/559K214”: 69' is the difference between the frequency where I8(ﬂ)| is
maximum and the frequency where it has fallen to half. The real roots of equation
(43) £1 '-' 0.7_and £2 r-OJS, implying that the half-width of the scattering spectrln
69z2.l1q’I1/3. l. e. approximately three times lower than with stimulated temperature
scattering. The time of settling of the steady state is accordingly as many times

longer.
6. Discussion of the Results

It can be seen from (37) that in media that do not absorb the energy of the electro-
magnetic field, there is non-zero gain of stimulated scattering by temperature
waves. Just like ultrasonic waves [Ref . lo], temperature waves are stimulated in
this case not by the energy of the electromagnetic field as occurs in stimulated
temperature scattering or stimulated absorption scattering. but rather by the energy
of chemical reactions controlled by the electromagnetic field, i. e. by the energy
of the thermodynamically nonequilibrium medium. It is clear from this that the
given stimulated scattering cannot be reduced to either stimulated temperature
scattering or stimlated Mandelstam-Brillouin scattering. Moreover. if the amplifi-
cation of scattered light waves is realized in the anti—Stokes region (KO, then
every second an amount of energy equal to ﬂea—umglﬁv is added to the energy

of the electromagnetic field because of stimulated scattering from every element

of voitne dV. 1: can be easily seen that in an ideal (nonabsorbing) media the

only source of increase in the energy of the electromagnetic field is from chemical
reactions.

Thus by using the given kind of stimulated scattering, it is possible in principle
to convert energy of chemical reactions to energy of an electromagnetic field.

Let us evaluate the gain of enthalpy-stimulated scattering on temperature waves
in the active medium of iodine photodiasociation lasers operating in the quasi-
steady amplification mode.

We note that special studies (Ref. 16] have shown that no absorption of laser emis-
sion is observed in the active medium of these lasers, or at any rate the coef-

ficient of absorption does not exceed l0"~ cm'l. Consequently we should not observe
ordinary stimulated absorption scattering [P.M'. 8] in these lasers at typical radi-

ation intensities of 10-100 kw/cmz.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our estimates are for lasers with a working gas mixture consisting of n-C3F7I at

a pressure of 0.03 atm and CO; at pressure of 0.67 atm. In this mixture with flash-
lanp pulping for a time of ~100 us the energy extracted from 1 cm3 reaches ~0.05 J.
which corresponds to probability of photodissociation of n-Cal’yl molecules w-

10-103 3". amplification cross section ay-IO'” cmz. No (initial concentration

of n-CgFJ molecules) egual to 7.5.10” on”, .7!“ = 7 10'12 cm’ls, or, 2010‘” cn3/s
[Ref. 171. q1-3.8o10'1 . q2-6.7o10‘” J (Ref. 18], x-1.315 uni [Ref. 12].

Since the gain of a resonant transition of the iodine aton 0on depends on the in-
tensity of the stimulating field lo. we consider two separate cases. In the first
case we will assume that In is much greater than the intensity of the saturating
signal I":(oyrp)" ~10" quanta/mz-s (1 210'~ 3 [Ref. 19]). In this case for
quasisteady concentrations [11].). [J10 and for the product oonIo from equations
(lo-(7). using a method analogous to that in Ref. 12, in the case of free-running
emission we get the relations

Iha V__——————(+( u. )2 + oJaw‘ "

II 01’ g _
l+ﬁ)'+05077 “11("i'0v’0,
l g 0,! I .
-T(I+T—+=T.T- «4)
[J10z2ﬂxglRlolxﬁ O’A.I .532”, iR lg: (45)

where constant 8 is weakly dependent on initial conditions and lies in a range
of [0-25. In estimates of [a]. and [J]. wewill take 3:20. Then [n]o=s.6-io”
cm". and [Jlo = 6.4-10” cm". We take 10-13340” quanta/cmz-s (20 kH/cnz).

 

gpv'

0.1

0.1

0-6 .-l. -2 to

Fig. l. Scattering spectra at Fig. 2. Frequency dependence
I¢>>In and 0-l (l), 2.5 (2), of gain in enthalpy-stimulated
5 (3). 7.1. (6). 10 (5). 50 (6) scattering at Io>>IH and 8-2.5
and 100 rated (7). Along the (l), 5 (2). 7.5 (3) and 10 Inrad
axis of ascissas b- (Q/Iﬂl) x (4). Scale along the axis
1g(i+ inl), so that for IQ|<<1 of abscissas same as in Fig. l.

the scale is linear with respect
to frequency, while for IQ|>>i
we have a logarithmic scale.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Characteristic dependences 30]) described by formula (37) for different scattering
angles 0 are shown in Fig. l and 2. It can be seen that amplification is realized
in the anti-Stokes region. the dependence of gain on 9 showing two maxima in the
range of scattering angles 0<e<10 mrsd. For one of these maxima, the frequency
shift and amplification are nearly independent of 6 and accordingly (I; i 105 rad/s
and gml) :: 240'2 cm“. The second amplification maximum occurs at a lower absolute
value of the frequency shift 92, where [92' decreases with decreasing angle, while
amplification increases. At 6:5 mrad the amplification of scattered waves shifted
in frequency by (11:10“ rad/s becomes greater than the amplification of waves shifted
by (21. and with a further reduction of 6 the displacement lnzl decreases as 92, and
amplification increases as 6'2 (see (39)). At angles e>10 mrad. as we see from
Fig. 2. amplification falls off sharply (as 6'“, see (42)). Thus for typical scat-

tering angles of 6- 5-10 and the gain of enthalpy-stimulated scattering g 10.54)!
10‘ cm" .

Let us now consider the case where Io<<I". Here concentrations [J*]. [R]°>>[J]o.
The unsaturated gain of the resonant transition of the iodine atom, as implied by
(1.)-(7), oerzowao‘o/U+£J£x+mp)z0.16 cm“. and lRl.~l(l+g./x.)wN./(M.(lMalad-
m,))]',l'z2.lo~10” cm". In this case go: 10, and a more convenient characteristic

of amplification of enthalpy-stimulated scattering is G—g/ﬁa).l.. In the range
of 67 5—10 mrad, G: 100-1000 cut/MW.

For purposes of comparison. let us estimate under the same conditions the gain

of enthalpy-stimulated scattering by ultrasonic waves stimulated by light-controlled
chemical reactions. For characteristic scattering angles 8:5-[0 mrad, the maximm
gain in accordance with Ref. 4 can be calculated from the formula

_ £ 9.31“. [313215; ’-
g°--"8( P 0.), w. m- “6’

where Qua-‘10,.q; 0,. is the speed of sound; 26ng =I‘q' is the half-width of Handel-
stam-Brillouin scattering [Ref. 20]; I‘=(‘/,n+n')lp: n and n' are the shear and volu-
metric coefficients of viscosity. Substituting the same values in (46) as in the
case of scattering by temperature waves. we get for Io>>Im g”: (0.5-lo)'10'2 cm",
and for Io<<l.. the quantity 6” ‘ 10-70 cm/Hw, i. e. under the same conditions ampli-
fication of stimulated scattering by temperature waves at Io>>Iu is comparable

with. and at Io<<I,. is even much greater than amplification with scattering by
ultrasound.

Thus the arisal of small—scale optical inhomogeneities in the active medium of
iodine photodissociation lasers during stimulated emission or amplification of

light pulses (Ref. 1] may in principle be due to enthalpy-stimulated scattering
both by ultrasonic and by temperature waves. In connection with this. let us note
that prevention of the development of small-scale optical inhomogeneities by re—
ducing the initial inhomogeneity of the laser field intensity, as suggested in

Ref. 3. may not be successful. The fact of the matter is, that in Ref. 3 no consider-
ation was taken of the possibility of existence of positive feedback between pertur-
bations of the medium and the electromagnetic field, or the possibility of arissl

of instability. This precludes consideration of the part played by spontaneous
processes in development of the given effect and. in particular. the role of the
spontaneous process corresponding to enthalpy-stimulated scattering. This

39
FOR omcuu USE ONLY
FINRCNNWCJAL USE¢MVLY

spontaneous process is probably due to the discreteness of the process of stimulated
emission analogously to the way that discreteness of the process of absorption

of the electromagnetic field in an absorbing medium causes the spontaneous process
corresponding to stimulated scattering caused by absorption of light [Ref. 8].

In conclusion it should be noted that enthalpy-stimulated scattering examined in
Ref. 4 and in this paper is not specific to iodine lasers. As noted in Ref. 2

and a. analogous effects should arise in other types of powerful lasers as well.

and in general in media in which energy release depends on intensity of laser radia-
tion, for example in C0; lasers due to VT relaxation. In this connection we note
Ref. 21 which reports on an experimental study of perturbations of the index of
refraction of the active medium of a C0; laser produced by the difference in heat
release between lasing and non-lasing regions due to VT relaxation. and also Ref.
22. which examines the question of excitation of ultrasound in C02 lasers with
unstable cavity.

The authors thank N. G. Basov for support of the work. and 0. Yu. Nosach and
K. S. Korol'kov for constructive distussions.

REFERENCES

1. Borovich. B. I... Zuyev, V. 8.. Katulin. V. A.. Nosach. V. Yu., Nosach, 0. Yu.,
Startsev. A. V., Stoylov. Yu. Yu., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 2, 1975, p 1281.

2. Zuyev, V. 8., Netemein, V. N., Nosach. 0. Yu., KVINTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 6,
1979. P 875.

3. Alekhin. B. V., Borovkov. V. V., Lazhintsev. B. V., Nor-Arevyan. V. A..
Sukhanov, L. V., Ustinenko, V. A.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 6. 1979. p 1948.

4. Basov, N. 6., Zuyev, V. 8., Nosach, 0. Yu., Orlov, Ye. P., KVANIOVAYA BLEK-
TRONIKA. Vol 7, 1980. p 2614.

5. Stnrunov, V. 5.. Fabelinskiy. I. L.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKB NAUK. Vol 98, 1969.
p 441.

6. Zaytsev. G. 1., Kyzylasov, Yu. I., Starunov, V. s.. Fabelinskiy, I. L.. PIS'HA
V ZHURNAL EKSPERIMENTAL'NOY I TEORETICHESKIY PIZIKI. Vol 6. 1967, p 802.

7. Herman, R. 11., Gray, M.A .,PHYS. REV. LETTS, Vol 19, 1967. p 829.

8. Zel'dovich, 3. Ya.. Sobel'man. 1.1., USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 101, 1970,
p 3.

9. Gangardt, H. 6., Grasyuk, A. 2.. Zubarev, I. 6., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. No 6,
1971. p 118.

10. Ragul'skiy. V. V.. TRUDY FIZICHESKOGO INSTITUTA IMENI P. N. LEBEDEVA AKADEMII
NAUK SSSR, Vol 85, 1976, p 3.

ll. Zuyev. V. 5.. Orlov, Ye. P.. Preprint FIAN [Lebedev Physics Institute]. Moscow,
1981, p 158; KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 8. 1981. p 1978.

40
FOR OFIHCIAL.USE¢MVLY
12.

13.

la.

15.

l6.

l7.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Borovik, B. L.. Zuyev. V. 8.. Kstulin. V. A.. Hikheyev. L. D., Nikoleyev. F. A..
Nosach. 0. Yu.. ansnov. V. 3.. "Itogi nouki i tekhniki. Seriya deiotekhniks"

[Advances in Science and Technology. Electronics Series]. Moscow, Izdstel'stvo
VINITI. Vol 15. Pp 135. 153-156.

Aref'yev. I. H.. Horozov. V. V.. PIS'MA V ZHURNAL EKSPERIHENTAL'NOY I TEORE-
TICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 9. 1969. p 448.

Stsrunov. v. s.. zuumuu. mspmmwnov I rmmmxmsxu nznu, Vol 57.
1969. p 1012.

Likhsnskiy. V. V.. Napsrtovich. A. P.. KVANIOVAYA ELBKTRONIKA. V01 8. 1981.
p 637.

Zuyev. V. 8., Korol‘kov, K. 8.. Nosach. 0. Yu.. Orlov. Ye. P., KVANTOVAYA ELEK-
TRONIKA. Vol 7. 1980. p 2606.

Kuznetsovs, S. V.. Haslov. A. 1.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 5, 1978. p 1587.

Gurvich. L. V.. Karachevtsev. 6. V.. Kondrst'yev. V. N.. Lebedev. Yu. A..
Hedvedev. V. A.. Potapov. V. K.. Khodeyev. Yu. 8.. "Bnergiya rszryva
khinicheskikh svyazey. Potentsisly ionizatsii i srodstvo k elektronu"
[Breaking Energy of Chemical Bonds. Ionization Potential and Electron
Affinity]. Moscow. Nauka. 1974. pp 72. 91.

Zuyev, V. 8.. Katalin. V. A.. Nosach. V. Yu.. Petrov. A. L.. TRUDY PIZICHBSKOGO
INSTITUTA IHENI P. N. LBBBDEVA AKADEMII NAUK SSSR. Vol 125. 1980. p 46

Landau. L. D.. Lifshits. Ye. H.. "Blektrodinamiks sploshnykh sred" [Electro-
dynamics of Continuous Media]. Moscow. GIFHL. 1959. p 501.

Roper. V. 6.. Lanberton. N. M.. Parcelland. E. 9.. Manley. A. H. J.. OPTICS
COMHS. Vol 25. 1978. p 235.

Likhanskiy. V. V.. Napartovich. A. P.. KVANTOVAXA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 8. 1981.
p 170.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Radio 1 svysz'". "Kvsntovays elektronika". 1981

6610

030:

1862/41

#1

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 534.61:621.373.826.038.823

INTENSITY 0F ULTRASOUND EXCITED IN STIHMLATED LIGHT SCATTERING BY LIGHT-CONTROLLED
CHEMICAL PROCESSES

Hoscow KVANTOVAYA ELBKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 9(111). Sep 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 15 Apr 81) pp 1978-1986

[Article by V. s. Zuyev and Ye. P. Orlov. Institute of Physics imeni P. N. Lebedev.
USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Relations are derived for the intensity of ultrasound
and the number of phonons falling to each scattered quantum of
light with stimulated scattering in thermodynamically nonequi-
librium media in which chemical reaction rates depend on light
intensity. Estimates showed that in gas mixtures of CO; with
n-CaFyI at a total pressure of 0.5 atm in which exothermic reac-
tions arise between iodine atoms and organofluorine radicals
upon photolysis of n-C;P71. light with intensity of ~105 w/c-z,
resonantly interacting with iodine atoms. may excite ultrasound
with intensity of tenths of a watt_per square centimeter on a
frequency of ~1 MHz; in this case ~10” phonons fall to each scat-
tered photon.

I. Introduction

In this paper we continue our examination of enthalpy-stimulated scattering of
light [Ref. 1. 2] (Ref. 2 is the preceding article in this issue of KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA) that arises in thermodynamically nonequilibrium media where reaction
rates depend on the intensity of light.

As before. we study enthalpy-stimulated scattering in the active medium of iodine
photodissociation lasers, which as a rule consists of SP; or CO; doped with a small
amount of n-Cngl vapor. Upon photolysis of a-Cgfyl molecules, free radicals
Ran-C3F7 are formed along with stimulated iodine atoms J*. some of which make the
transition to the unexcited state in the field of resonant laser radiation. As
this happens. exothermal reactions take place in the mixture between iodine atoms
and organofluorine radicals ﬂ'C3P1, the unexcited iodine atoms J reacting with

the radicals many times faster than the excited atoms. The dependence of the rates
of these reactions on laser field intensity is due to the fact that in causing
stimulated transitions. this field changes the concentrations of excited and unex~

cited iodine atoms.

42
FOR(NHWCJAI.USE(NVLY
In development of enthalpy-stimulated scattering. both ultrasonic [Ref. 1] and
temperature waves [Ref. 2] may arise. It will be shown in this paper that the
enthalpy of chemical reactions gives rise to many phonons for each scattered pho-
ton rather than just one phonon as is the case in stimulated Mandelstam-Brillouin
scattering. Relations will be derived for the intensity of ultrasound excited
during enthalpy-stimulated scattering. and it will be shown how many phonons are
produced for each scattered quantum of light. including numerical estimates of
these quantities for specific experimental conditions.

2. Formulation of the Problem and Initial Equations

Since we need account for only the two fastest of all chemical reactions that occur
in the active region of photodissociation lasers [Ref. 3] when considering enthalpy-
stimulated scattering. i. e.

R+J->RJ. ("
R+R—‘Rtl (2)

the power released in a unit of volume can be represented as

Q=q,Jr.IRllJ I+q,lr,lR I’. (3)
All symbols used in (3) are explained in Ref. 1 and 2.

Since [J] depends on the intensity of the resonant laser field, intensity fluctu-
ations according to (3) lead to energy release that is nonuniform with respect

to yolune. As a consequence of thermal expansion of the gas in nonuniform heating.
ultrasonic waves arise which. as shown in Ref. 1. are replenished by the enthalpy

of chemical reactions (1). (2). and the energy of the stimulating emission is trans-
ferred to the electromagnetic wave scattered by ultrasound. i. e. enthalpy-stimulated
scattering arises.

To find the intensity of the ultrasound that arises in enthalpy-stimulated scat-
tering due to the enthalpy of chemical reactions. let us consider in more detail
the effect of the laser field on processes of energy release in the nonlinear ac-
tive medium of iodine photodissociation lasers. Let two waves propagate in this
medium: a powerful stimulating laser wave'A(ELepr0LL-Jknﬁ4-comp. conj.) and

a stimulated scattering wave‘ﬁ(ﬁ.cxpﬂugt-—ﬁsry+ comp. conj.). both waves being
planar and linearly polarized. If the intensity of the scattered wave. which is
proportional to ﬁg, is much less than the intensity of the stimulating wave. which
is proportional to EB. then the deviationsof particle concentrations from those
that would have occurred in the absence of a scattered field are small. and (3)
can be represented as

q=Qo+Qn (4)

where Qo’qrxleIoUIo'l'tha'ng. Ql=¢r7f1lRlo U]: +(leylllo+2q.7f.lRlo)lRlﬁ UL. [R].
are the concentrations of particles in the absence of a scattered field; [J1]. [R11

are the deviations of concentrations from [J]o, [R]o.

He will limit ourselves to consideration of ultrasound whose frequency Il=o5—-mg
is much greater than the probabilities of recombination of iodine atoms and radicals

43
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which. according to Ref. 1, are equal to grim]. and JrlU].+4.7t,[Rl., and also much
greater than the probability of induced transitions o,IL/ﬁ (9,, where 03, is the cross
section of amplification of the laser field; IL is the intensity of laser emission;
is the energy of a quantum of the laser field. Utrasound excited in iodine
photodissociation lasers, as shown by experiments (Ref. 4. 5]. satisfies these
conditions. Actually, from the increase in divergence of laser emission and from
the characteristic transverse dimension of small-scale optical inhomogeneities
we can conclude that scattering occurs at angles of 5-10 mrad to the direction
of propagation of the stimulating radiation. At a laser emission wavelength of
A- 1.315 um [Ref. 3] in mixtures with co.“ where the speed of scund v” =260 m/s.
this corresponds to £2: (6-12)-10s rad/s. while the characteristic values of
.7l,lRl.~.7t'.lJl.+ 4x,lRl.le‘ s". and probability a,l,_l,‘,¢n"<10's'l right up to laser
radiation intensities of ~105 H/cmz.

Within the framework of this limitation. as implied by Ref. 1, in the steady state
[Jllwl/Q, while lRl,~l/Q:. and as a result the second term in the expression for Q;
can be disregarded compared with the first. and the equation for [J]; can be approxi-
mated by

a [J l,/at-=o,A.I ./;i «L. (5)

where A.=lJ‘I.—(g,/g;)Ulo; [J‘]. is the concentration of excited iodine atoms in
the absence of a scattered field; gz/g1 is the ratio of the statistical weights
of the upper and lower lasing levels; l.=l(ncE,_E§/8ﬂ)€XP(lm—iqr)+ comp. conj.) is
the deviation of intensity of the overall field from 11,; n is the index of refrac-
tion of the medium; q=k,.—ks. Substituting [J]; found by using (5) 1n Qn we get

Q' = _i W {-7 ELE; exp (19! — iqr) + COIPo cohj , (5)

The linearized equation of gas dynamics with consideration of the power Q released
in the medium takes the form [Ref. 6]

a I 0»
%:¥- '— 0:.V'P" r T!- '9 " T(7§)'V' SQ”- (7)

where o is the density of the material; F- (on/3+n'; n and n' are the shear and
volumetric coefficients of viscosity; 1' is absolute temperature; (3p/38)p is the
derivative of pressure p with respect to entropy S at constant density 9. Using
(7) with consideration of (lo) and (6) we find the change in density of the material
in the ultrasonic wave, and then the intensity of ultrasound.

3. Principal Results
Let us consider the steady-state case. i. e. we will assume that the duration of
a pulse of stimulating radiation is much greater than phonon lifetime l/va”.

where u is the coefficient of absorption of sound. In this case the deviation
of n from the equilibrium value on will be sought in the same form as Q}. i. e.

69-‘leexp(i0l—iqr)+conp. conj. , (8)

1016
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where the complex amplitude of 5 is time-independent. If we assume in this case
that the amplitudes of light and sound waves as well as concentrations [J l and
Ill] change slowly over distances of the order of a wavelength of sound. then we

get an equation for 5 front equation (7) when (8) is substituted into (7) with con-
sideration of (6):

l - '. 92—92us Q )~ . 3- Ag
_ + (1—. ._ x 0p 4 :lRlﬂv o as m .
9 “W” .‘W+ 9m " 7(7):“). “TWP-dis- (9)

where the derivation is based on relations au,.-'/,l‘q’ and "Ma‘uul‘ll [Ref. 7, 8].
we select a right-handed rectangular cartesian coordinate system in which the oper-
ator V acts in such a way that the direction of the X axis of this ’ystem coincides

with the_.dir%ctign of vector q. while the Z axis lies in the plane passing through
vectors 1:1,. 5, q. Then

(Mi/F490.

and, using the thermodynamic identity

+02%);— (a),

where op is specific heat at constant pressure, we transform (9) to

 

.-

op 9’43“ 9 ~ .- 0, .. minnow... a. .
W " (‘ W+ “ml 9 ‘oTJWLW—W— Hamlet-w)- <10)

Equation (10) is a linear first-order differential equation with solution that can
be represented as

_~ g9 _ Q3_Q:“ ) i A 0] xllRlﬂvdo
9(3) "P(0)exP(-mX—lmx 'Fp—g(OT),EI:_E:§i—A

’ -
xﬂmg%§EL(X'.2)Es(X'.1)¢XPI-£M£‘(x—x')—‘ X,

Xms— (X—X’)] dx'. ('1)

Let us assume that the rate of acoustic losses is greater than the rate of change
in 3;, and as in the direction of sound wave propagation. i. e.

a , I OE ‘ a
‘ _IL
6% >22: a. I 17h?

Let us further take into consideration that the factor expl—aﬂ(x —x’)/QM5] makes
the principal contribution to (11) in region lx—X'KQus/alal. Then EL(x'. z)E' (x’.z)
can be brought out of the integrand. and its value can be taken at x-x'. en
in region x»QM5/a|9| we will have

 

 

- ' 3'"!le tn gunﬁght) .
N‘-"'sﬁ:(§9')ﬁr "67-797mm: “2’

65
FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where it is taken into consideration that in iodine lasers amplification of the
scattered field is realized on the Stokes frequency Ref. 1], and the half-width
of thermal Handelstam-Brillouin scattering [Ref. 9] is

Substituting (12) in the known relation for sound wave intensity [Ref. 10]

In = Uri-WM.- 03' I Eli/29°.

where the vinculun over (M)2 denotes averaging over the period of the sound wave.
we get

u’
I" (Q) = ﬁ-(Ff': (-3-). 1%]: MOM-ﬂ), (9 “ 6:43,: (35,“)! ' ('3)

where I; —anZ/8n. Is=cuE§l8n.

Using the expression obtained in Ref. 1 for the gain of enthalpy-stinulated scatter-
ing

_ I tau ) Jr IR ,A on
um—a-ksﬁﬁr-ﬁg—A—a'm (admit‘um, IL. (I4)
we transform (13) to
Adm-Kgﬂ—fh. (l5)
where 2“ 2
_ n I. 1 q x'IRFA' _

Considering that the product g(ﬂ)Is- P8 is the density of power transferred to

the scattered field with frequency us, and the product 20113302) -P33 is the density
of power transferred to the ultrasonic wave with frequency 9, we get the following
relation from (15):

P..-KP.n/u., (.7)

from which we see that K is mnerically equal to the number of phonons produced
upon scattering of each light quantum.

4. Discussion of the Results

If we were to have K- I in (17), it would then mean that a single phonon is produced
when one photon is scattered, and (17) would be the well known Manley-Rowe relation,
which holds in particular in the case of stimulated Handelstan-Brillouin scattering
[Ref. 8]. Let us estimate K in enthalpy-stimulated scattering in the thermodynmni-
cally nonequilibriuln active medium of iodine photodissociation lasers operating

in the quasi-steady state amplification mode.

To do this, we express [11]» and A0 in (16) in terms of the parameters of the working
substance. the pumping source and the intensity of the stimulating field. He limit

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ourselves to the case where lc)l,,=e.lr, (In and g-ﬁoL/o, are the intensity and
energy of saturation of the laser transition [Ref. 11]); 19 is the time of nonradia-
tive relaxation; Ins 103 “Ice2 since 1 , as implied by Ref. 12. is at least 10‘~ s,
o,- 10‘" cm2, th- 1540'" J [Ref. 3 . In this case, if we disregard the accunu-
lation of molecular iodine in the amplification process, the quasi-steady concen-
trations [R19 and A0 can be estimated by the formulaisef. 2, 3]:

[RI-W (+(‘+%)m‘?.§7) + Lie» -
";'('+%)7:1‘w.x—1= as)

A. ~2mtkl3o./IL. (19)

where No is the initial concentration of working substance. w is the probability
of photodissociation of molecules of the working substance under the effect of

UV pumping radiation; 8 - 10-25 is a constant that depends slightly on initial con-
ditions [Ref. 3].

Substituting (19) in (16) and taking consideration of the fact that nivnq, and

q- 291M, where A is the wavelength of ultrasound. we get the dependence of K on
[R]c=
T

=- ‘“ 2 “3131““: 'A' .
K 77(7 '3”. ﬂat/Mm 7:7 (2°)

With consideration of (18). formula (20) gives the dependence K(w). from which
we see that K increases with increasing w. The figure (curves 1, 2) shows the

dependences K(w) for a mixture of n-C 3F71 at pressure
of 0.03 atm and a buffer gas of CO; at pressure of 0.7
atm. which can be treated at T‘-' 300 K as an ideal gas
with properties determined by the buffer gas. The

8
3
, thermodynamic parameters appearing in (20) are as fol-
2. lows: (%%)D'— I; (9%)r=4.5.10-6; c,=-0.2kcal/g deg
2 (Ref. 13]; nuns-10* cm'1;n-l;q1 - 3.8-10‘“ J

x‘ [Ref. 14]; g2/g1 -0.5 [Ref. 3]. The reaction rate can-
a: stants Jr, and Jt', for the n-Cg F11 molecule are 7- 10'12

. p cm’ls and 2-10'12 cm’ls (Ref. 151; n.-7.s-10" cu".

"v 3 In the calculations 8 was taken as equal to the geometric
Curves for the number of mean of the minimum and maximal values. 1. e. 8- 250316.
phonons produced in scat- The quantity IL was varied over limits such that on the
tering of a single light one hand the condition 11,»qu 10’ H/cm‘ was satisfied.
quantum normalized to It2 and on the other hand the condition o,IL(ﬁoLQ was not
(1. 2) and for intensity violated, where formula (6) is valid.
of ultrasound normalized

to A°(3, I.) as functions Under typical experimental conditions (Ref. 5]. where

  

of the probability of photodissociation of n-63P71 molecules is produced by
photodissociation of ultraviolet radiation of an open discharge, w: 5-10‘ s'l,
n-C3F7I molecules at a and 11,3105 ﬁlm“. In this case, as can be seen from the
laser field intensity figure. at characteristic scattering angles of 0: 5-10
of IL- 10 (l, 3) and 100 mrad. from 5°103 to 2-10“ phonons are produced for each
kw/cm2 (2, 1.) scattered light quanta. These quantities may be off from

the true values by a factor of 1.26 due to uncertainty

of 8.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORlOFFNJAl.USEi0NLY

Let us now estimate the intensity of ultrasonic waves. To do this, we represent
formula (13) for 133(9) with consideration of (19) in the form

..x,.vr, .v’IRI: ’s «
’"M‘KaT ar). .,r _)m"‘« — m) HEM?) 7? ‘2"

It is clear from (21) that the ultrasonic waves with maximum intensity are those
with frequency Q=Qu song. Considering the relation 269m=rqﬁ we find that
the maximum intensity

.u A‘ 1' HUI 'uB’lRl I
” 'W (p 76%)"]:-—,.[1'—:7’-' (22)

Hhen (18) is substituted in (22). we get the dependence Iggx(w). Since [R10 ap-
pears as its sixth power in (22). the intensity of ultrasound is quite strongly
dependent on the probability of photodissociation of molecules of the working sub-
stance. This is illustrated on the figure by curves 3 and b, which show the depen-
dences llﬂx(w) as calculated from (22) for the same experimental conditions as K.
The following_ parameters of the medium were additionally used in the calculations:
0., = 10 J"g/cm , v,,-2. 6 10b cm/s. n-l. 1.9 -"‘10 glcmos [Ref. 131.712 volumetric
coefficient of viscosity n' is taken as equal to n. In this situation the coeffi-
cient of absorption of ultrasound agrees well with reality at the given pressures
of C02 and frequencies of sound [Ref. l6, 17]. The ratio Is/IL was preasaigned
as equal to 0.1.

From the curves on the figure we can see that when w- 5 10~ s", IL: 105 ﬁlm2 and
8~ 5-10 mrad, we have Imgx-0. 01-0. 7 "Ian2 . This corresponds to experimental data
on relative change of gas density in small-scale optical inhomogeneities [Ref.

5, 5]. where it is equal to 11. Since 8 appears in (22) as its square, the re-
sultant values may be off from the true values by a factor of 2.5 due to uncertainty
of B.

It can also be seen from the figure that at IL= 10s H/cmz, a reduction in w by

a factor of only 5 leads to a reduction of the intensity of ultrasound by a factor

of more than 100. i. e. ""oouﬂ But if Isa 0 at the amplifier input. and enthalpy-
stimulated scattering starts with spontaneous noises. than as w decreases there

will also be a reduction of Is in the volume of the amplifier, and as a result

the dependence IngX(w) will be still sharper. In this sense, enthalpy-stimulated
scattering is a threshold process with respect to the probability of photodisso-
ciation of molecules of the working substance, 1. e. with respect to pumping power,
which agrees with experiment. As we know, small-scale optical inhomogeneities

in iodine photodissociation lasers are observed only when a certain level of pumping

power is exceeded [Ref. 6. 5].

In conclusion the authors thank N. G. Basov for supporting the work, and 0. Yu.
Nosach for constructive discussions and assistance with the work.

REFERENCES

l. Basov. N. G., Zuyev. V. S., Nosach. 0. Yu.. Orlov, Ye. P.. KVANTOVAYA ELBKTRONIKA.
Vol 7, 1980. p 2614.

#8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

4.

7.

8.

9'

10.

ll.

12.

13.

N.

15.

[6.

l7.

COPY

6610
C80:

Zuyev. V. 5.. Orlov. Ye. P.. KVANTOVAYA BLEK‘I'RONIKA. Vol 8. I98]. 1) 68.

Borovich. B. I... Zuyev. V. s.. Katulin. V. A.. Hikheyev. 1.. D.. Nikolayev, P. A..
Nossch. 0. Yu.. Rounov. V. 8.. "Itogi nauki i tekhniki. Seriya Radiotekhnika"

[Advances in Science and Technology. Electronics Series]. Moscow. Izdatel'stvo
VINTI. Vol 15. 1978. PP 153-177.

Borovich. B. l... Zuyev. V. 8.. Katalin. V. A.. Nossch. V. Yu.. Nossch. 0. Yu..
Startsev. A. V.. Stoylov. Yu. Yu.. KVANTOVAYA EEKTRONIKA. Vol 2. 1975. p 1282.

Zuyev. V. S.. Netenin. V. N.. Nosach. 0. Yu.. KVANTOVAYA EEKTRONIKA. Vol 8.
1979. p 875

Zel'dovich. B. Ys.. Sobel'nsn. I. 1., USPEKHI PIZICHBSKIKH NAUK. Vol IOI.
1970. P 3.

Starunov. V. 8.. ZHURNAL BCSPERIHBNTAL'NOY I TBORBTICHESKOY FIZIKI, Vol 57.
1969. p 10l2.

Starunov. V. 8.. Fabelinskiy. I. I... USP-III FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. V01 98. 1969.
p 441.

Landau. L. D.. Lifshits. Ye. 11.. "Blektrodinanika sploshnykh ared" [Electro-
dynamics of Continuous Media], Moscow. cmn, 1959. p 501.

storskiy. B. 11.. Detlaf, A. A.. "Spravochnik po fizike" [Physics Handbook].
Moscow. Nauka. 1971. pp 5103-5410.

Kryukov. P. 6.. Letokhov. V. 8.. USPEKHI PIZICRESKIKH NAUK. V01 99. 1969. p 169.

Zuyev. V. 5.. Katulin. V. A.. Nosach. V. Yu.. Petrov. A. I... TRUDY FIZICHESKOGO
INSTITUTA IHENI P. N. LEBEDEVA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 125. 1980. p 66.

Kikoin. I. K.. academician. ed.. "Tablitsy fizicheskikh velichin" [Tables of
Physical Quantities]. Moscow. Atouizdat. 1976. p 635.

Gurvich. L. V.. Karachevtaev. G. V.. Kondrst'yev. V. N.. Lebedev. Yu. A..
Hcdvedev. V. A.. Potapov. V. K.. Khodeyev. Yu. 5., "Bnergiya razryva
khimicheskikh svyszey. Potentsialy ionizstsii i srodstvo k elektronu"
[Breaking Energy of Chemical Bonds. Ionization Potentials and Electron
Affinity]. Moscow. Nauka. 1974, p 91.

Kuznetsov. S. V.. Maslov. A. L. KVAN‘I‘OVAYA ELHTRONIKA. Vol 5. 1978. p 1587.

Pabelinskiy. I. I... "Holekulyarnoye rssseyaniye sveta" [Molecular Scattering
of Light]. Moscow. Nauka. 1965. p 237.

Mezon. U.. ed.. "Fizicheskaya akustika. Tom II. ch. A. Svoystva gszov.
zhidkostey i rastvorov" [Physical Acoustics. Vol 2. Part A. Properties of
Gases. Liquids and Solutions]. Moscow, Kit. 1968. p 175.

RIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 swaz'". "Kvantovays elektronika". 1981

1862/41 49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 62l.373.8.029.07l
NONLINEAR OPTICAL INHOMOGENBITIBS IN ACTIVE MEDIA 0P GAS LASERS

Moscow KVANTOVAXA ELEKIRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 9(111), Sep 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 13 Mar 81) pp 1987-1989

[Article by L. A. Vasil'yev, H. G. Galushkin, A. H. Seregin and N. V. Cheburkin]

[Text] A theoretical examination is made of the mechanism of
formation of nonlinear optical inhomogeneities in active media
of gas lasers that is associated with the influence of emission
intensity on the relaxation rate of excited molecules._ Density
perturbations of the anplifying medium of a C0; laser are calcu-
lated. and an estimate is made of the change in phase character-
istics of its emission.

An important factor that determines the phase characteristics of output radiation
of high-pressure gas lasers is the formation of gasdynamic perturbations caused
by the limited range of energy input [Ref. 1]. Therefore the radiation usually
takes up only part of the volume of the active medium for elimination of their
effect.

However. under certain conditions in molecular lasers and amplifiers the dynamics
of heat release depends on emission intensity as well, which also may lead to spa-
tial nonuniformity of temperature. pressure and density of the working substance.
In the C02 laser the rate of nonradiative relaxation of co: molecules from the
lower lasing level may be an order of magnitude greater than the rate of relaxation
from the higher level. and therefore induced transitions are conducive to faster
transition of C01 molecules from the upper laser level to ground level. As a re-
sult. the rate of heat release in the emission zone may be considerably greater
than in the remaining region of the active medium. and during a pulse. more thermal
energy may be released in a unit of volume of this zone than in the near vicinity
[Ref. 2]. For this reason, a temperature differential arises on the edge of the
laser beam. resulting in formation of perturbations of density of the gas medium.

For quantitative analysis of this mechanism of formation of nonlinear optical in-
homogeneities in an amplifying medium, we use a model of kinetics of an electron
beam-controlled CO; laser in the quasi-cw mode (Ref. 3] where a change of its phase
characteristics is most appreciable:

de 29 +
#-'—.'*+%[

26]
‘3‘) + Ehckuuﬂsr “‘01 +W:W: (l)

50
Ftﬂl(lﬂW(1AI.lﬂnE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dz «J
2!. -PI+PlD—'h‘ll(‘l_‘a)l— 1.(5.—6.)EW ; (2)
dt
'3‘; - h + P “I‘ll (‘s — ‘0) + 13‘» (hr:- ‘01: (3)
4T
7,,— - (v—Im.n§vuk..u (hr-3s): (4)
d1
T—dm—h). (5)

where ’( )
I-B ' as |+t,
D‘ﬁ§7~*uu[#ﬁ—-—Eaﬁ+m' :
m-(aa;+a,+2)/a(t+a,)’; smug—0,17);

c1 is the average nunber of vibrations] quanta per molecule in the corresponding
vibrational modes; subscripts i- 2, 3, lo refer respectively to deformational and
antisymmetric modes of oscillations of cog. and to the type of normal oscillations
of N2; p, 'l‘ are the pressure and temperature of the gas; “’2’; are the mole frac-
tions of C02, N2 and He respectively in the mixture; kn is threshold gain; 61 -

1980 K; 82- 960 K; 63- 3360 K; Nk-p/T; pi-jEcSi/ukNei; o is gain; 3. E are the
current density and electric field strength in the discharge; 61 is the relative
fraction of pumping power that goes to the v1-node; J is intensity of laser mission;
1 is the adiabatic exponent of the gas; :11. is the equilibrium nunber of quanta

in the modes.

System of equations (l)-(S) was numerically solved in the radiation-filled region
at threshold gain lap-1.1.6.10"3 cm“ and at different pulping values N1 - jBrH/p.
where 1" is punping duration. A solution was also found for system of equations
(l)-(6) at 1-0, referring to the region where there is no radiation.

Figure a shows the time depen-
dences of the temperature of
the mixture in the region of
radiation ‘1‘; and outside it
‘1‘: for pumping values that are
constant during the pulse and

in space. varying over a range
of 1.5<N1<10.

Figure b shows the time change
in the difference of thermal
energy in a unit of voluse
AQ(t)-Qr(t)-Q2(t). where
Q1(t) refers to the region of
radiation. and Qz(t) refers
to the vicinity of the laser
Time dependence of 1'1. T; (a) and thermal energy beam. For all investigated

 

differece AQ (b) for "1- 1.5 (l). S (2) and cases the dependences T; (t).
10 (3). Mixture C0;:N2:He- 1:5:6, po-0.l HPa. 'l'z(t). AQ(t) show qualitatively
To- 300 K. 1“- 50 us. simpler behavior.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considering the nature of the time dependence of function AQ(t), in calculating
the distortion of gas density on the boundary of the lminous region we will use
an approximation of the form AQa(t) -aot(l- t/r), where 1 corresponds to lasing
duration, and on can be determined from the condition of equality of the maximum

values of functions AQ(t) and AQa(t) from the values of AQ(t) calculated from equa-
tions (l)-(5).

1n the acoustic gasdynamics approximation in the case of cylindrical symmetry

amp) p.600) .

T+TT"°' ‘6’
.a: a() an
p.7+¢g_a_’_+_3r_._o. (7)

where Pr-(Y—IMQU)z(1—l)a.!(I—!Ir); bp=p—p.: 99 is initial gas density. v is .’:s
radial velocity and a is the speed of sound.

Let us solve equations (6). (7) under condition of a sharp drop in radiation inten-
sity on the edge of the laser beam, since in this case the density perturbations
have the strongest effect on the optical properties of the median. We introduce

a new coordinate n-r- R (R is the radius of the laser bean). Density distribution
69(n, t) in the perturbed region (Inl (at) will be determined for the unsteady
case (t<<R/a). where motion can be considered two-dimensional. The solutions of
equations (6), (7) are waves traveling in opposite directions from the edge of

the laser beam, and the change of density in region r<ll [Ref. 4]:

ap-—1Er'a.r[(I-'%L) -('-"3:i)7+]- "1"“
6p-o. |n|>cL (8)

By simple transformations, (8) can be reduced to the form
—-I 9 -—l) '
w-‘-’aw¥’(lnl+ 321-") -i'—a-'-“‘-v (9)

from which we see that the change in index of refraction with respect to coordinate
n has a parabolic profile.

It is known that an inhomogeneous square-law medium characterized by index of re-
fraction n-no damn: in the case nIRL<<l can be replaced by a thin lens with focal
length f- nolnlL. where L is the length of the inhomogeneous medium along the beam
[Ref. 5]. Taking into consideration the relation Gn- Budp. where Bo is the
Gladstone-Dale constant. we find that the perturbations arising on the boundary

of the laser beam act as a thin dispersing lens with focal length f-nora“/ooBo(y-1)L
that moves at the speed of sound toward the beam axis. During a pulse, Such a

lens benetrates into the laser beam to distance at. and causes distortion of its
wave front. By the end of the pulse (tm r). the center of the lens is at distance
R— r- (11/2 from the edge of the beam. Hence the maximum angle of beam deviation is

emu-W2!=(Y-l)ﬂo¢aU9nod’- ('0)

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Let us estimate angles aux for the three cases shown in Fig. a where (10- 13.3,
3.2 and 2.1 kw/tm’. After substituting values from (10), we get aux/L- 1.5-10‘2.
0.35-10'2 and o.2l.-1o-2 r1 respectively.

Thus under typical experimental conditions the nonlinear optical inhomogeneities
that arise on the boundary of the luminous region due to a difference in the rates
of relaxation of excited molecules may have a considerable effect on the phase
characteristics of radiation. This mechanism of formation of nonlinear optical
inhomogeneities shows up in greatest measure in gas lasers with unstable confocal
cavity in which the width A of an annular beam (A<R) may be comparable with the
length traveled by 1 sound beam during the pulse.

REFERENCES

1. Clotov. Ye. P.. Danilychev, V. A.. Kruglyy. A. Ye.. Pustovalov, V. V.. Soroka,
A. H., Cheburkin, N. V., KVANTOVAYA ELK‘I'RONIKA. Vol 5. 1978, p 1924.

2. Lamberton, ll. 11., Roper, V. G. in: "Gas-le and Chemical Lasers". J. P. Wendt,
ed.. Hemisphere Publ. Corp.. Washington-Nev York-London, 1978. p 1.71.

3. Biryukov. A. 8.. TRUDY PIZICHBSKOGO INSTITUTA WI P. N. LEBEDEVA AKADDHI
NAUK SSSR, Vol 83, 1975. p 12.

1.. Rayzer, Yu. 9.. 2511mm. mspaammm'uor 1 mmrcnsxov nzm, Vol 52.
1967. p 470.

S. Markuze. D., "Opticheskiye volnovody" [Optical Waveguides], Moscow. Mir, 1975.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

6610
cs0: 1862/61

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
II‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.37S.8

Moscow KVAN'DOVAYA BLEKIRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 9011). Sep 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 6 May 8!) pp 1992-1993

[Article by A. Yu. Aleksandr-0v, N. G. Basov. V. A. Danilychev. 0. M. Kerimov and
A. I. Hilanich. Institute of Physics ineni P. N. Lebedev. USSR Acadeny of Sciences]

[Text] A method of pumping exciner lasers is proposed that is
based on accumulation of negative ions, and model experiments
are done using an electron beam as an external ionizer. Lasing
on transitions of the Xel’ excimer (A- 353 nm) was observed at
the minimun negative ion concentration of ---1011 cm".

The development of electroionization and electron-beam pumped excimer lasers has
now reached a qualitatively new stage associated with the fact that with respect

to some important parameters like efficiency (11: [Ref. 1]). specific energy output
(-40 J/Z [Ref . ll) and others. they have come close to electroionization CO; lasers.
However, there are a number of obstacles in the way of development and extensive
industrial introduction of such lasers, the main one certainly being destruction
of the foil that separates the vacuum space of the electron gun from the laser
chamber. 1e foil is destroyed because the current densities of the electron gun
that are Lequired for exciting the active medium of an excimer laser are consider-
ably greater than those required by electroionization CO; lasers (by a factor of
[Oz-10’). This paper is devoted to a study of one possibility of reducing the
current density of the electron gun.

Several methods can be suggested for attaining this goal with the cannon feature

of setting up another channel for electron production besides direct ionization

by high-energy electrons. For example an earlier paper [Ref. 2] proposed using
photoionization of metastable states of noble gas atoms as such an additional chan—
nel. AnalogOus results can be achieved by using Penning-discharge ionization.
photoionization of an easily ionizable additive and so on. In this paper we study
the feasibility of accumulating negative ions (which are essentially an easily
ionizable additive), and using them as electron donors.

Let us write a system of equations that describe the change in concentration of
electrons n and negative ions H‘ in the active medium of an excimer laser:

510

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
dil-
T aanﬂ—pH-(n + (1-).

where a is the sticking constant (1.5-10'9 cm’ls for N1“; [Rah 3]); B is the recom-
bination constant (5010“ cm’ls for He at p-2 atm (Ref. 4]); q is the concentration

of electron-ion pairs created by the ionizer in a unit of time; ll is the concentra-
tion of halogen-containing molecules.

The equilibriua concentration of electrons n-q/(aﬂ) is reached in time 1a3(aﬂ)'13
10 ns in mixtures that are typical for excimer lasers.

The equilibrium concentration of negative ions

 

—- '
,,_l/_g_+ v'_v (I)
is reached in time 183 [q8+ “Ba/(10335145.

After the action of the external ionizer stops. the concentrations of electrons

and negative ions decrease from the initial values of no and ii; by the laws
n=n.exp(—alﬂ). H--M;I(I+II;‘M. (2)

It was shown in Ref. 5 that effective operation of an. excimer laser requires a

concentration of negative ions of ~5-10n cm”, which according to (1) corresponds
to an external ionizer with q '-‘ 5'10" cm"vs".

In the case of a helium laser mixture at a pressure of p- 2 atm when using an elec-
tron beam as an external ionizer, the current density of the electron gun should

be equal to j: l mA/cmz. Then the concentration of negative ions is settled within
'8' 1 us.

Thus by using a relatively low-power ionizer we can accumulate negative ions and
then. by applying a voltage pulse with B/pi 5 kV/(cm-atm) to the discharge gap,
we can loosen the electrons from the negative ions. multiply them, and finally
stimulate the active medium of such a laser.

In our research. we did experiments to simulate the operation of such an excimer
laser. To do this, after exposing the active medium of the Xe? excimer laser to

an electron beam for 50 ns 0-353 nm. mixture Ile:Xe:NFg- 350:2.S:l, p- 2 atm.
volume of active region 0.5x 1.5x 18 an: M cm'). a voltage pulse was applied to

the discharge gap with delay controllable over wide limits (up to ~10 us). By
combining signals from voltage meters across the peaking capacitance of the electron
gun [Ref . 6] and across the cathode of the discharge gap. we Ionitored the time
delay and voltage amplitude across the discharge gap. Fig. 1 shows a typical oscil-
logram of the voltage pulses [photo not reproduced].

The dependence of lasing energy on delay time at different electron bean current
densities is shown on Fig. 2. This curve implies that the minim concentration

of negative ions at which lasing is just observed is about 1011 cm", which agrees
with the results of Ref. 5. It should be noted that we did not optimize the mixture

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 2. Dependence of lasing energy on
delay tine; mirror reflectivities ~1001
and ~9OZ

    

”1’.

with respect to maximum attainable initial negative ion concentration. Moreover,

an appreciable increase in lasing energy when the voltage pulse across the discharge
gap is superimposed on the electron beam pulse shows the considerable part played

in the multiplication process by the initial concentration of electrons produced
directly by the electron beam.

And so. in our research we have suggested ways to eliminate the drawbacks of the
electric-discharge laser with ultraviolet pre-ionization-'restrictions due to
the short mean free path of the UV photon (~10 cm [Ref. 7]) on the maximum volume.
degradation of the mixture as a consequence of the high spark temperature of the
ultraviolet ionizer, inefficient utilization of the ultraviolet ionizer because
of its nonuniformity Ref. 5]. etc.-by using an external homogeneous ionizer.

Moreover, when using present-day scurces of ionizing radiation (electron guns that
operate in both the on and pulse-periodic modes. continuous-duty nuclear reactors,
pulsed x-ray units and so on), we can realize the pulse-periodic operation of
excimer lasers with pulse-recurrence rate of tens of kilohertz and an average
radiation power of several kilowatts.

REFERENCES

1. Tisone. G. C.. Patterson. B. L.. Rice. J. K.. APPL. PHYS. LETTS. Vol 35. 1979,
p 437.

2. Basov, N. 6., Glotov, Ye. P.. Danilychev. V. A.. Hilanich, A. I., Soroka, A. H.,
PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI, Vol 5. 1979. p 649;
Danilychev, V. A.. Glotov, Ye. P., Hilanich, A. 1.. Soroka. A. H.. 1883 J,
Vol 03-16. 1980. p 154.

3. Basov, N. 6.. Vasil'yev. L. A.. Volkov. V. N.. Danilychev, V. A., Keri-0v, 0. H..
Hilanich, A. 1.. Lonakin, V. N.. Ustinov. N. 0., Kachapuridze. T. 8.. IZVESTIYA
AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: SERIYA PIZICHBSKAYA, Vol 63. 1979. p 239.

4. Flannery, H. R., Yang, T. P.. APPL. PHYS. LETTS. Vol 32. 1978. p 327.
5. Hsia, J. A., APPL. PHYS. LETTS., Vol 30, 1977. p 101.

6. Basov, N. 0., Brunin. A. N.. Danilychev, V. A., Kerimov, O. H., Hilanich, A. 1.,
Khodkevich, D. D., ”8'!“ V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHBSKOY PIZIKI. Vol 3, 1977. p 1297.

7. Andrews, A. J.. Kearsley, A. J., Webb, C. 3.. Haydon, S. C.. 0PT. COMMS, Vol 20,
1977. p 265.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

6610

C80: 1862/41 55

F0l40FFKJALlﬂﬂ§ONlY
UDC 621.373.826

MEASURING COPPER VAPOR CONCENTRAIION AND DEGREE 0F GAS HEAIING IN TRANSVERSE-
DISCHARGE COPPER-VAPOR LASER

Moscow KVANIOVAXA ELEKTROEIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 9(111). Sep 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 9 Dec 80) Pp 1996-2000

[Article by B. L. Borovich, L. A. Vasil'yev, V. Ye. Certs. S. A. Negashev, S. N.
Regeda and L. N. Tunitskiy]

[Text] Copper vapor distribution over the discharge gap cross
section is measured in a transverse-discharge copper-vapor laser
on the basis of integral absorption in the resonant line. The
gas temperature profile in the discharge is determined, and an
estimate is made of the coefficient of conversion of electric
energy to heat in a nanosecond pulse-periodic discharge (about
301). The gas in the center of the discharge gap is heated to

a temperature of about ZSOO'C.

ission parameters that have so far been achieved in copper-vapor lasers [Ref.
1. 2] are still far from those expected. especially with respect to efficiency
and specific energy output. At the same time, there are not enough experimental
data on characteristics of the active medium to construct an adequate model of
physical processes in such lasers. Further progress in increasing efficiency of
lasers of this kind can be assured only by a detailed study of physical processes
and parameters that determine the particulars of their operation, such as concen-
tration of working particles and electrons. degree of heating of the gas, electron
energy and so on.

This paper gives the results of measurements of the distribution of copper vapor
concentration in a laser with transverse discharge [Ref. 2]. We also determine
the gas temperature profile in working modes, and the coefficient of conversion
of the electric energy invested in the discharge into heat. Measurements were
based on the well known spectral method of determining particle concentration from
the integral absorption of probing radiation in the resonant line [Ref. 4] (for
copper we used the line 62855-62P’5. XI-324.7 nm). Under the conditions of the

experiment, the size of the transilluminated zone and the concentration of copper
vapor were such that the index of absorption in the center of the line koL was
large (~105),_and the intensity of the transmitted light was determined by absorp-
tion in the far wings of the line, i. e. by the lorentzian part of the line contour.

57
INDR10FFIC1Al.lEﬂE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A“, rel. units

.o 1:!- nm-I 7
is m;

n ‘.
5 7q> IQ”
6 $0.

   

' 4..—A.__a__
I’ M II 0,” 4' LI!

Fig. 1. Schematic of measure- Fig. 2. Integral absorption
ment system: l--DKSSh-3000 as a function of width of the
lamp; 2--disk nodulator; 3 and monochromator slit

7--quartz lenses; 6. 6 and 10--

mirrors; 5--1aser chamber; 8--

HDP-2 monochromator; 9--FBU-36

photomultiplier; ll--disk shut-

ter; 12--photodiode; l3--LG-l3

laser

In this case the strong absorption approximation is applicable, and assuming that

the width of the slit of the spectral instrument is sufficiently great, the concen-
tration of copper vapor is

N“:- Atma/zgam. (I)

where A- [[(lo- I)/Igldl is integral absorption (the parameter to be measured)'
lo and I are the spectral intensities of the probing radiation at input and output
of the chamber respectively; m and e are the electronic mass and charge; c is the
speed of light; he is the wavelength in the center of the line; f is the oscillator

strength of the given transition; y-aNcu+bNCu is the lorentzian width of the
line determined by collisions with neon and copper atoms [Ref. 5].

A schematic of the system for copper vapor concentration measurements is shown

in Fig. l. The emission source was DKssh-JOOO xenon lamp 1 with continuous spec-
trum. The quartz lenses and mirrors 3. 4. 6. 7 shaped the probing beam and focused
it on the input slit of EDP-2 monochromator 8. The radiation receiver was PEU-36
photomultiplier 9. Every effort was made to suppress spurious background illumi-
nation, the main source being luminescence on the probed transition excited by

the laser pumping source-a high-voltage nanosecond pulse generator. Two techniques
were used to enhance the signsl-to-noise level. First. the emission of the xenon
lamp was modulated at a frequency of 87 Hz by a mechanical modulator 2, and the
photomultiplier signal was recorded by a resonant voltmeter with passband of

4.35 Hz. Secondly. A disk shutter II was placed in front of the monochromator
input slit. Signals to trigger the voltage pulse generator were supplied from

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
photodiode 12 at the instant when the recording arrangement was covered by the
disk. The recording system was uncovered ~l00 us after the excitation pulse. with
duration of ~IOO ns. Thus the measurements were taken in the space between pulses

when the luminescence intensity had fallen to a negligible level. Pulse recurrence
rate we. 2.8 kHz.

To determine the distribution of copper vapor concentration over the cross section,
diaphragms were installed on the laser chamber windows. The neon pressure in the
chamber was monitored by a laboratory voltmeter. The temperature T of the walls
of the acitve zone of the chamber, determined by copper vapor concentration in

the working zone. was measured by an LOP-72 pyrometer. In each working mode. the
copper concentration was measured 5-6 times. and then the average was taken.

The width of the monochromator slit was selected on the basis of two considerations.
0n the one hand it had to be large enOugh so that the entire section of the spectrum
cut off by the absorption line would fit into the spectral width of the recording
system. On the other hand, 2.7 nm from the line to be used is another resonant

line 42seb-42Py5, A- 327.4 nm, and we had to be sure that the wings of this line

would not fall into the region of registration. This imposes constraints from
above and below on the width of the monochromator slit. and consequently on the
measurable copper vapor concentration. Fig. 2 shows typical dependences of the
square of the integral absorption on the width d of the monochromator output slit
at different temperatures of the discharge chamber walls. At a wall temperature
below [500°C, dependence A2(t) shows pronounced saturation, which demonstrates
the feasibility of using the selected strong absorption approximation. At higher
temperatures, and consequently at higher copper concentrations, saturation is not
reached because of the contribution that the adjacent line makes to absorption.
and the proposed method of measurement is inapplicable.

The copper vapor concentration was determined by using values of the line width
from Ref. 5, and specifically y-lo-IO’ can"1 at Rue-13°10” cm".

Another source of errors in determining "Cu is the inconstancy of copper vapor
concentration lengthwise of the region being probed due to the inconstancy of 4

the temperature of the walls of the discharge zone of the chamber. Special measure-
ments of the wall temperature made with a pyrometer and graphite rods with a depres-
sion simulating an absolutely black body gave a temperature spread over a range

of 20 K with the exception of the and regions taking up about 20% of the entire
length of the chamber. Temperature falls off sharply on the ends. with consider-
ation of the temperature dependence of copper vapor concentration in the given
region, the error in determination of the average copper concentration due to

edge effects apparently does not exceed 102.

The overall absolute accuracy of determining copper vapor concentration is apparent-
ly not worse than #02. Experimental confirmation of this value can be seen from
Fig. 3, which shows the measured dependence of copper vapor concentration on tem-
perature of the walls of the discharge zone without switching on the discharge.

Also shown on this figure is the saturated copper vapor concentration from Ref. 6.
The difference between the two curves does not exceed 301. Let us note that the
accuracy of determining temperature profile is considerably higher than the accuracy
of absolute measurements.

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

Fig. 3. Copper vapor concentra- Fig. 4. Distribution of

tion as a function of the tem- copper vapor concentration
perature of the chamber walls over the cross section of
(without discharge) the discharge gap

Pig. 5 shows the distribution of copper vapor concentration over the horizontal
cross section of a discharge zone of 6x 6 cm for different pumping powers. A typi-
cal feature of these dependences is a dip in concentration at the center of the
discharge zone. The depth of the dip increases with increasing power input. This
behavior of the distribution can be attributed to the fact that in the center of
the discharge gap the temperature of the gas is higher than on the edge since when
the pressure is constant through the volume. the particle concentration is lower
where the temperature is higher.

The change in copper concentration when pumping is started (or stopped) enabled
measurement of the gas heating temperature. For this purpose. the change of inte-
gral absorption was measured when pumping was started (stopped). Recording was
done several seconds after starting (stopping). During this time. the gas had
time to heat up to the steady-state temperature. but the wall temperature of the
discharge zone (and hence the saturated vapor concentration) did not change appre-
ciably. According to measurements. in 10-20 a the wall temperature changed by
only 5-10 K. Under the given conditions. the copper vapor could be treated as

an ideal gas, and we could assume that ANCu/NCu'-ATg/Tg. where T3 is gas temperature.
If the experiment is done under conditions where impact broadening of the line

by copper atoms is insignificant. then, considering the temperature depends cc

of the cross section of impact broadening of the line by neon atoms (o-T§‘ 5).

we can readily get an expression for the gas heating temperature from (1):

73- Tu (AJAP'N.
where A0 and A are the integral absorptions without and with discharge respectively.

Fig. 5 shows the gas temperature distribution over the horizontal cross section

of the discharge zone for different pumping powers. The latter was determined

from the current-voltage characteristics of the discharge. In virtue of the specif-
ics of the measurement technique in these experiments. the pumping power was mea—
sured only by varying the amplitude of the voltage generator pulses. The recurrence
rate of the pulses was 2.8 kHz. The figure shows that the gas temperature in the

60
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NRC

    

W a H. H/cm

Pig. 5. Gas temperature profile Pig. 6. Dependence of gas

temperature on power invested
center of the discharge gap is much higher in the discharge: in the
than the temperature of the chamber walls. center of the gap (1) and

Under conditions that are optimum with at a distance of 0.2 xo from
respect to lasing power. the temperature the walls of the chamber (2)

of the center of the discharge zone reaches

about 2500°C. i. e. the gas in the center is heated by 1000 K. Under such con-
ditions the thermal population of the lower metastable level of copper (for the
green emission component) is about 11. The resultant data also imply that the

degree of heating of gas by the discharge is a linear function of the electric
power invested in the discharge (Fig. 6).

0n the basis of the temperature gradient on the walls of the discharge zone and
the coefficient of thermal conductivity of neon at working temperatures. we can
readily get the overall value of the heat flux carried off from the discharge gap.
By comparing the heat flux with the average power invested in the discharge. we
get the coefficient of conversion of electrical energy to heat (heating of heavy
particles) in the investigated pulse-periodic discharge-about 302. The rest of

the energy invested in the discharge is apparently re-radiated and carried off
to the walls of the chamber by radiant heat conduction.

Thus. in the operation of a copper-vapor laser. rather appreciable heating of gas
takes place in the central zone of the discharge. which apparently leads to direct
population of lower metastable laser levels. and in addition slows down the rate
of plasma relaxation in the period between pulses. which may cause considerable
population of metastable levels by electron impact. Besides, there is a nonuniform
change of plasma conductivity over the cross section of the discharge gap, which
leads to nonuniform energy release in the discharge. and to redistribution of the
electric field with respect to the height of the gap. All these factors can appra-
ciably reduce laser operating efficiency at high levels of pumping power.

REFERENCES
l. Isayev. A. A., Lemmerman, G. Yu., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIRA. Vol 4, 1977. p 1413.
2. Arten'yev. A. Yu.. Babeyko, Yu. A.. Bakhtin. 0. H.. Borovich, B. L..

Vasil'yev. L. A.. Certs, V. Ye.. Nalegach. Ye. P., Ratnikov, G. Ye.,
Tatarintsev, L. V.. Ul'yanov. A. N.. KVANTOVAXA ELBKTRONIKA, Vol 7 80, p 1948.

61
FORllﬂﬂCIALIHiEODEN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Isayev, A. A.. Kazaryan. H. A.. Petrash. G. 6., KVAN‘I‘OVAYA ELECTRONIKA, No 608).
1973. p 112.

la. L'vov, B. V.. ”Atomo-absorbtsionnyy spektral'nyy mliz" [Atomic-Absorption
Spectral Analysis], Moscow, Banks. 1966.

5. Nerheim, N. 14.. J. APPL. PHYS.. Vol #8, 1977. p 3246.

6. Nemeyanov, A. N.. "Davleniye parov khinicheskikh elementov" [Vapor Pressure
of Chanical Elements], Moscow. Izd. AN SSSR. 1961.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'“. 'Xvantovaya elekcronika". 1981

6610
C80: 1862/61

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR CHHHCJAI.IEHE(NHLY

UDC 621.378.8
SUBNANOSECOND AIOHIC IODINE PHOGODISSOCIATION LASER

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 9(111), Sep 81 (manuscript re-

ceived by ns'm v 2mm. mmrcaasxov nzm 19 Sep 80; by xvm-mvm umm
6 Mar 81) pp 2034-2035

[Article by V. I. Annenkov. A. V. Belotserkovets and s. V. Grigorovich]

[Text] The paper gives the results of studies of an iodine photo-
dissociation laser in the mode of periodic Q-switching by a k~wave
Pockels cell. The modulating voltage was formed by discharge

of a cable line. and was a series of damped pulses of trapezoidal
shape with steep fronts. The recurrence period of the Q-switch
transmission was matched to the round-trip time of light through
the cavity. The mixture used was C3P11 (7-15 mm Hg) and Ar at
total pressure of 1 atm. A train of subnanosecond laser pulses
was produced, consisting of 3-4 peaks. Total energy of the train

was 10-20 mJ, and minimum duration of an individual pulse was
0.4 ns.

The main requirements on the master oscillator of a laser facility for controlled

nuclear fusion are high quality of the beam, regular pulse duration (0.3-1 ns)
and high contrast of emission (>107).

 

ND
WA
0
w "
?, ___ _
0
I t
Fig. 1. Optical diagram of the Pig. 2. Voltage waveshape
facility: l--DKDP crystal; 2-- across the shutter (a) and
shaping line; 3-discharger; 4. transmission function of

5--cavity mirrors; 6-~polarizer; the shutter (b)
7--cell; 8--punping lamp; 9, 10--

diaphragms; ll--beam splitter;

12-- calorimeter; l3--SDF-ll

photocell

63
INHICHHHC1A1.USE(ﬂﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These requirements are met by a neodymium glass laser with periodic Q-switching
[Ref. 1]. The purpose of this article is to explain the working capabilities of
an iodine photodissociation laser in the periodic Q-switched mode. and to study
its characteristics. A diagram of the measurement facility is shown in Fig. l.

The research was based on laser chamber 7 with inside diameter of 9 mm and length
of the active section of l m. with windows beveled at the Brewster angle. The
pumping source was two xenon flashlamps 8. The lamps were placed so as to minimize
the magnetic field on the axis of the cell. The lamp supply was from a 3 u? capaci—
tor charged to 50 RV thrOugh a lowbinductance discharger. The main pumping energy
was released within the first half-period of the discharge current of 4 us duration.

Periodic Q-switching was accomplished by a h—wave Packels shutter based on DKDP
crystal 1. Shaping line 2 with shorting discharge: 3 produced the controlling
electric pulses across the shutter with period Tel of shape shown in Fig. 2a. The
corresponding transmission function of the shutter is shown in Fig. 2b. The charac-
teristics of the controlling electric pulses are as follows: charging voltage

6.5 kV. pulse rise time 1-2 ns. damping of pulse amplitude by a factor of e takes
place in time of lSTel.

The working medium was a mixture of CngI (7-15 mm Hg) and Ar at a total pressure
of 1 atm. Gain of the active medium was selected so that the lasing threshold
was slightly exceeded during pumping with the shutter closed.

Q-switching was started at the instant of the first zero of the pumping current.
This led to rapid development of a train of subnanosecond laser pulses with period
equal to the round-trip time of light through the cavity. Each train consisted

of 3-4 laser pulses. The pulses reached maximum amplitude after 10-15 round trips
through the cavity. The overall energy of the train was 10-20 mJ with a diaphragm
3 mm in diameter and cavity length of 220 cm. An instrument with time resolution
of ~0.3 ns was used to record the duration of an individual laser pulse. Pulse
duration was appreciably dependent on matching Tel with the round~trip time of
light through the cavity Tlight; in the case of optimum matching. pulse duration
reached a minimum value of 0.é ns at half-amplitude (without consideration of the
time resolution of the instrument). It should be noted that there was little change
in pulse duration when Tlight and Tel were matched within 0.1 ns. A typical lasing
oscillogram is shown in Pig. 3 [photo not reproduced].

Measurements of the angular distribution of lasing showed that radiation divergence
is close to the diffraction limit.

Results on energy, pulse duration and divergence show that this laser could be
extensively used in multistage iodine laser facilities (Ref. 2. 3], e. g. for
laser-driven fusion.

REFERENCES

l. Basov, N. 6.. Bykovskiy. N. Ye., Danilov, A. Ye.. Kalashnikov, M. P.. Krokhin,
0. N.. Kruglov. B. V.. Hikhaylov. Yu. A.. Osetrov, V. P., Pletnev, N. V..
Rode, A. V.. Senatskiy. Yu. V.. Sklizkov. G. V.. Pedotov. S. 1.. Fedorov. A. N.,
TRUDY FIZICHESKOGO INSTITUTA IHENI P. N. LEBEDEVA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 103.
1978. p 3.

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Katulin, V. A., Nosach, V. Yu., Petrov, A. I... KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 3,
1976. p 1829.

3. Belotserkovets, A. V., Gaydash, V. A.. Kirillov. G. A., Komer. s. 3., Krotov,

V. A., Kuratov, Yu. V.. Lapin, S. 6.. Murugov. V. 14., Rukavishnikov, N. N.,

Samylin. V. A., Cherkesov, N. A.. Shemyakin, V. 1., PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TECHNI-
CHESKOY FIZIKI, V01 5. 1979, p 204.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'scvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

6610
C80: 1862/41

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.373.826.038.823
USING ARGON IN WORKING MIXTURES 0? CH ELEC‘IZGN BEAM-CONTROLLED C03 PROCESS LASERS

Hoscow KVAN‘NVAYA ELEK'I‘RONIXA in Russian Vol 8. No 9(111). Sep 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 2 Feb 8!) pp 2063-2065

[Article by A. P. Averin, N. G. Basov. Ye. P. Glotov. V. A. Danilychev, N. N.
Sazhina, A. H. Soroka and V. I. Yugov, Institute of Physics imeni P. N. Lebedev,
USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] It is shown that the use of argon in working mixtures

of cw electroionization CO; lasers considerably enhances the
specific volumetric energy output (by a factor of 1.5-2) without
detriment to the physical efficiency of the laser. Substituting
argon for helium considerably reduces the cost of processes of
laser technology.

At present one of the main factors that determine the cost of laser technology

is the high price of helium. which has a content of 40-801 in typical laser mix-
tures [Ref. 1]. Therefore a very important practical problem is total or partial
substitution of less expensive gases for helium in the working mixtures of electro-
ionization process lasers. One possible way to do this is to use helium-free mix-
tures such as COZ-Nz. i. e. to replace helium with nitrogen. However, this con-
siderably reduces lasing efficiency. due chiefly to an increase in the threshold
pumping energy up i. e. the energy carried off by the gas flow from the active
volume, a quantity that increases with the ratio of concentration of nitrogen and
C02: 51* ~ (n+1), where m- [ml/[C02]. when helium is replaced with nitrogen,

we can retain the ratio of [Hal/[C02] and accordingly the threshold pumping energy
as a result of increasing the CO; content in the mixture. However, this would
require a corresponding increase in electron beam current density because of the
accelerated loss of electrons in the electroionization discharge plasma as a result
of sticking to molecules of carbon dioxide (the electron sticking rate constant
'3~ [C0, 1). In existing cw electroionization lasers. the current density of the
electron beam je is limited by overheating of the separative foil of electron guns
on a level of 10-15 uA/cm (in the plane of the anode of the discharge chamber).
Therefore the content of carbon dioxide in optimum laser mixtures at the present
time does not exceed a few percent [Ref. 2] . and an increase in CO: concentration
leads to reduced pumping power. emission power and lasing efficiency.

In Ref. 3 an investigation was made of the possibility of increasing the specific
characteristics of helium-free mixtures of C02 electroionization lasers by trace

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

doping with hydrogen. whose molecules effectively depopulate the lower lasing level.
which is very important for laser operation in the powerful short pulse mode. In
co; cw electroionization lasers hydrogen doping cannot improve lasing parameters
since 8; molecules sharply increase the relaxation rate of the upper lasing level.
and accordingly the power of relaxation losses that determine operation of the

cw electroionization laser [Ref. 2].

It was experimentally established in Ref. 1 that using xenon additives in the laser
mixture improves the characteristics of the electroionization discharge by reducing
electrode potential drops [Ref. 4]. However, the use of Xe leads to still greater
increase in laser cost as it is priced 600 times as high as helium.

 

Fig. 1. Typical loop oscillograms of
voltage U, discharge current J and
lasing power QCB (a) and dependences
of discharge current density (1, 2)
and specific lasing energy (3, 6) as
functions of the voltage across the
discharge chamber (b) for laser mix-
tures C02:N2:He:Ar- l:29:0:30 (l, 3)
and l:29.30:0 (2, 5) at pressure of

60 mm Hg; interelectrode spacing 10 cm

 

Fig. 2. Lasing efficiency
n (1-3) and maximum spe-
cific energy output Qca
(4-6) as functions of the
argon concentration in
laser mixtures coz:Nz:
(He+Ar)- 1:29:30 (1, lo).
1:16:15 (2. 5) and 1:4:5
(3. 6)

In this paper an experimental investigation is made of the possibility of replacing
helium with argon. and it is shown that the use of argon not only is not detrimental
to the specific characteristics of the cw electroionization laser. but also increases
the specific lasing output without reducing efficiency as a result of increasing

the power of the energy contribution at unaltered electron beam current. This

is due to an increase in the density of the laser mixture and accordingly in the
number of electron-ion pairs 1 formed per unit of length of the mean free path

of a beam electron (for mixture C0;:Nz:ﬂe- 1:30:29 when argon is substituted for
helium its molecular weight increases from 16.76 to 34. i. e. more than doubles).
The other discharge_parameters remain practically unchanged (Ref. 5].

Experiments were done on a process cw laser facility (duration of a single operating
run about 10 minutes). Fig. 1a shows loop oscillograms of the luminosity-current-
voltage characteristics for a laser mixture coznzzAr- 1:29:30 at pressure p- 60 mm Hg

67

FOR10FFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USEIONLY

and electron beam current density jen 12 uA/cm’. Voltage U and discharge current

J were measured by an ohmic divider and a shunt respectively. Lasing power was
measured by a wire-type duct bolometer [Ref. 6]. Fig. lb shows curves for dis-
charge current density and lasing energy taken from a unit of volume of the circu-
lating gas as functions of the voltage across the discharge chamber for two mix-
tures. It can be seen that in the mixture containing argon. the non-self—maintained
discharge changes from "Thomson" burning, where nearly all the applied voltage

is shielded by the cathode layer, to "electroionization" burning (Ref. 7] at a
slightly lower voltage than in a mixture of COz-Ng-He (510 V instead of 960). This
is due to an increase of electron density in the discharge due to more efficiency
in use of the electron beam. At the working voltages of an electroionization laser
the discharge current in a mixture of coz-Nz-Ar is more than double the current

in the coz-Nz-He mixture. The curve of lasing power as a function of voltage for
the mixture containing argon is also everywhere higher than for the coz-Nz-Be mix-
ture. However. the maximum working voltage in the COz-Nz-Ar mixture in all the
experiments was 10-152 lower than in the COz-Nz-He mixture. This is not due to

a reduction in electric strength of the mixture. and can be attributed to the fact
that the gas density at the end of the active volume in the first case as a result
of energy input drops more strongly. and accordingly there is a stronger increase
in the normalized field strength BIN. The results of the experiments are in good
qualitative agreement with the formula that defines the dependence of breakdown
voltage U* on pumping power:

(Elm. 49.
l -i- Ina/(«,T.) .
where (E/o)* is the normalized breakdown field strength; w is pumping power; q is
gas flowrate; To is the initial temperature of the laser mixture; cp is specific
heat of the gas at constant pressure; d is the spacing between electrodes.

U. (W) -

Pig. 2 shows the curves for maximum specific energy outputs Q corresponding to
limiting field strength. and lasing efficiency as functions of the argon content

in laser mixtures with predetermined concentrations of carbon dioxide and nitrogen.
The total content of helium and argon was 502. The energy output increases mono-
tonically with increasing Ar content in the mixture. For a mixture with high carbon
dioxide content C02:N2:(Re4-Ar)- 1:4:5. complete replacement of helium with argon
leads to an increase in lasing power by a factor of 2.5. which is associated with

an increase in energy input almost without any change in punping efficiency; in

this case the laser efficiency also increases. In a mixture of CO;:N2:(He+ Ar)-
l:29:30 (curve 1) the lasing efficiency with substitution of argon for helium

falls from 8 to 6.52. which is due on the one hand to overheating of the laser mix-
ture, and on the other hand--to a reduction in the rate of depopulation of the

lower lasing level in the absence of helium. In the mixture CO;:N2:(He+-Ar)- 1:14:15
(curve 2) the dependence of efficiency on argon concentration has a flat maximum.
The comparatively wide scatter of the experimental points is dueto unstable behavior
of the threshold voltage of streamer breakdown of the discharge gap, which depends
not only on pumping power. but also on electrode surface state. which could not

be controlled during the experiments.

Thus. substitution of argon for helium in working mixtures of cw process lasers
increases pumping power by a factor of 1.5-2 without any change of electron beam
current. and with almost no reduction in lasing efficiency. This is especially

68

F!HR(NHWCIA[.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

important for prolonged cw laser operation when pumping power falls to half because
of the formation of nitrogen oxides [Ref. 8] even when a regenerate: is used. The
cost of the laser mixture in this case decreases by more than an order of nsgnitdue,
and the total cost of processes of laser technology is cut in half.

5.

6.

7.

8.

REFMCES

Basov. N. G., Babayev. I. K.. Dentlychev. V. A” Hikhsylov. H. 0.. Orlov, V. K.,
Savel'yev. V. V., Son. V. 6.. Cheburkin, N. V., KVAN'mVAYA “MIRA. Vol 6.
1976. p 772.

Averin. A. P.. Glotov, Ye. P.. Danilychev, V. A.. Sszhina, N. N.. Soroka. A. H.,
Yugov. V. I., PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TRINICHBSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 7, 1981. p 769.

Danilychev, V. A., Kct-‘sh. I. 3., Sobolev. V. A.. RUDY FIZICIIBSKDGO INSTITUTA
mENI P. N. LEBBDEVA AKADDHI NAUK 8883, Vol 116, 1980. p 98.

Averin. A. P.. Glotov, Ye. P., Danilychev, V. A., Koterov. V. N.. Soroka, A. H..
Yugov. V. 1.. PIS'MA V ZHURNAL MHNICHBSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 6, 1980, p 405.

McDaniel, I. 1., "Protsessy stolknoveniyvlonizovannykh guakh" [Collision
Processes in Ionized Gases], Moscow, Mir. I967.

Kuz'michev, V. lb. Perepechay. H. P.. KVANMAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 1, 1971.,
p 2407.

Aleksandrov. V. V., Koterov. V. N., Soroka. A. H.. ZHURNAL VYCHISLITEL'NOY
HATEHATIKI I HATEHAIICHESKOY PIZIKI. V01 5. 1978. p 1214.

Glotov, Ye. P.. Danilychev. V. A" Kholin. I. V.. TRUDY FIZICHBSKOGO INSTI‘I’UTA
DWI P. N. LEBEDEVA AKADD‘III NAUK SSSR, Vol 116, 1980, p 189.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektroniks", 1981

6610

C80:

1862/41

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NUCLEAR PHYSICS

PAPERS 0N HIGH-ENERGY PHYSICS

Leningrad PIZIKA VYSOKIKH ENERGIY in Russian 1981 (signed to press 9 Mar 81)
pp 2-3, 22-26. 26, 50-51. 54. 81-83, 115, 162-163. 200

[Excerpts from book "High-Energy Physics (Materials of the 16th Winter School
of Leningrad Institute of Nuclear Physics imeni P. N. Konstantinov)". edited by

V. Ye. Bunakov, H. H. Maharov, A. N. Hoskalev and G. Ye. Solyakin. LIYaP. 500
copies. 231 pages]

l.ext] The materials of this volume include papers dealing with various aspects
of high-energy physics. These articles discuss deeply inelastic processes at high
energies, problems of e+e‘ annihilation. processes with large transverse momentum.
Material is given on three-baryon resonances. In addition. papers are presented
that are fundamental in nature even though not directly related to processes be-
tween elementary particles at high energies. Among these are items on neutrino
experiments at low energies, and effects of parity violation in nuclei.

The papers are intended for theoreticians and experimental researchers dealing
with problems of high-energy physics. elementary particles and the atomic nucleus.
With respect to level of presentation, they are accessible to scientific workers
and graduate students.

UDC 539.12

DEEP INELASTIC PROCESSES IN THE LOW-x REGION
[Article by L. V. Grihov. Ye. M. Levin and H. G. Ryskin]

[Excerpts] An examination is made of the structure function of deep inelastic
scattering at low x in QCD perturbation theory. Diagrams are summed in which the
smallness of the cOupling constant as is compensated by large logarithms: lns
and lnq’. It is shown that the increase in the structure function at small x is
masked by multiple-ladder diagrams. As a result of this screening. the unitarity
conditions are not violated. The paper discusses the resultant solution and its
physical consequences for "rigid" processes.

Conclusion. In this paper we have attempted to demonstrate a method of calculating

the asymptotic behavior of scattering amplitude at high energies within the frame-
work of QCD perturbation theory. It has been shown that in these calculations, it

70
INDR OFIHCJAL.USEZ(nHLY
FORl0FFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY

is not only the Feynman diagrams in which the smallness of the coupling constant
as is compensated by a large energy logarithm (lnfz-ln %) that are important,

but also graphs in which each power of 08 has its own logarithm of virtuality

(i. e. usln q2~ l). as well as a more complex class of diagrams in which the proba-
bility of parton rescattering

2 2
w-j’q We (111%. q". <13)dq'z

reaches values of the order of unity due to an increase in parton density 0. It
should be emphasized that no other large parameters arise in the problem.

Summation of diagrams of QCD perturbation theory that contain at least one large
logarithm (Inc: or lniﬂ for each power of as is accomplished by using system of

equations (ll). The parton density 0(lnﬁ. qz, qg) obtained as a result of such

summation is the Green's function of an effective pomeron in QCD.

To calculate contributions of order H“ to the amplitude. a diagram method was de~
veloped analogous to V. N. Gribov's reggeon diagram method (Ref. 3]. where the

part of a pomeron is played by the "ladder" of Fig. 2a. and the vertex of interac-
tion of effective pomerons is calculated by QCD perturbation theory (for example
see Fig. 4 and expression (16) for 63p). Let us note that by gradually increasing
energy in QCD perturbation theory. we again reproduced the "reggeon" diagram method.
However, in contrast to the Reggeon field theory [RFT] that has recently been popu-
lar. we started from low energies and calculated the Green's function of an ef-
fective pomeron and the vertex of its interaction within the framework of pertur-
bation theory. Our main theoretical goal has been to find the sum of the "reggeon"
diagrams at high energy. whereas RFT introduces a seed amplitude at energy ss-w
and phenomenological vertices of interaction of pomerons. and investigates the
feasibility of self-consistency of such a theory.

In this paper we have restricted ourselves to calculation of the cross sections

of deeply inelastic processes in order to avoid discussing the "confinement" prob-
lem and the region of small virtualities where as may be large. For this reason
we have not been able to get to the region of positive t or to verify t-channel
unitarity conditions.* Nonetheless. s-channel unitarity, the relation between
processes with different multiplicity (Abramovskiy-Gribov-Kancheli rules of Regge
cuts [Ref. Ill), is totally conserved here. Moreover. our diagram method coincides
with the old reggeon approach from the phenomenological standpoint since it con-
serves such features of the reggeon theory as introduction of a new quantum number
(signature), classification of asymptotic behavior in accordance with quantum num-
bers of the t-channel, etc. In particular. exchange of a secondary "reggeon" cor-
responds to the ladder diagrams of Fig. 11 constructed from a quark and an anti-
quark. The asymptotic behavior of these diagrams differs appreciably from the
vacuum channel (Fig. 2a), and in the case of Itl> A2. the amplitude takes the form

 

 

*This limitation is fundamental. and does not allow us to move into the region
of q3~ A2. 0n the other hand. limitation lnl/x <ln2q2 (the region below curve 2 in

Fig. l) is due exclusively to the fact that we have not yet been successful in
summing amplified "reggeon" diagrams.

71
FIHRCHHWCJAI.USI1(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[this formula is readily obtained by the method developed in Ref. 12]. From the
standpoint developed here, we get a natural explanation of the difference in nature
of constriction of the diffraction cone in the vacuum and non-vacuum channel. It
is a commonly known experimental fact that '<<n§, where the u' are the slopes

of the trajectories of the pomeron and secogsary R-reggeon. In QCD, the secondary
reggeon corresponds to the above asymptotic formula, which leads to large
aﬁ"t3%7_F' Let us recall that an effective pomeron in this same approximation

is standing, 1. e. a'==0. We take this example as an argument in favor of the
phenomenological value of considering asymptotic behavior within the limits of

QCD perturbation theory.

UDC 539.12.!
OLD PARTICLES AT NEW ENERGIBS 0P e+e' ANNIHILATION
[Article by Ya. I. Azimov, Yu. L. Dokshitser and V. A. Khoze]

[Excerpts] The authors consider new experimental results accumulated in e+e' an-
nihilation over the past year. Prospects for studying intermediate bosons of weak
interaction and processes of multiple formation of old hadrons are discussed.

Conclusion. Over the past year many important and interesting results have been
obtained in e+e‘ annihilation. There is no question that the main one has been
confirmation that has been found for the existence of the gluon. which we promised
at the last "school." It would also seem that we are on the verge of discovering
intermediate 2° and W3 bosons. and there is a general consensus that the results
of this search will be reported no later than the 20-th School of Leningrad Insti-
tute of Nuclear Physics.

Even now experiments are coming close to studying such important problems of chromo-
dynamics as the physics of the color neutralizing process. the individual life

of a gluon jet. direct observation of gluon self—stress. specifics of heavy quark
production and the like. of course. detailed investigation of many of these pro-
cesses will require still higher e+e‘ beam energies.

By the same token. the new energies will lead to some new difficulties in interpret-
ing the results of observations. At /§2 50 GeV the electromagnetic and weak con-
tributions to quark production become comparable. The raw data will be a mixture

of weak. one-photon and two-photon mechanisms of formation of hadron jets that

are buried under the radiation tail of the 2° boson besides (at \/§>Mz). At v/§> 2H‘J
we also get the formation and subsequent decays of H+W' pairs. Nevertheless. the
various contributions can be distinguished. in particular by using the kinematics
specific to their corresponding final states. Polarization of the initial e‘ and

e+ beams may also play an important part in this noble cause.

The authors thank B. L. Ioffe. L. M. Kurdadze. A. P. Onuchin, I. B. Khriplovich,
and especially H. G. Ryskin for useful discussions.

72
F0l:0FTWC1Al.USEiDNLY
LARGE PT AND JETS IN HADRON-HADRON COLLISIONS
[Article by V. Yu. Glebov]

[Excerpts] The paper is a survey of experimental data obtained in the physics
of large P, in 1978-1980. The author discusses inclusion spectra of hadrons with
very large 9,, the ratio of particle yields in up and pp interactions. and mea-
surements of yields of direct photons. Methods of distinguishing jets in hadron

interactions are analyzed. Characteristics of jets in pp. e+e' and vp interactions
are compared.

Conclusion. Over the past two years. a number of important advnaces have been
made in the physics of large PT from both the theoretical and experimental stand-
points.

Advances in theory have been due to using 060 for describing processes of particle
production with large PT. At the present time QCD is capable of not only quali-
tative but also quantitative description of inclusive formation of isolated hadrons
with very large Pr' formation of symmetric hadron pairs with moderate PT. ratio

of particle yields in up and pp collisions. and production of direct photons with
large PT.

A great move forward has been the detailed study of the structure of jets with
large PT. One of the principal ideas of the quark-parton approach to rigid pro-
cesses-universality of jets in e+e' annihilation. deeply inelastic scattering

of leptons by nucleons and production of particles with large PT in hadron-hadron
collisions--has found reliable experimental coufiraation.

A specific feature of the QCD quark model is the presence of gluons in hadrons.
QCD calculations shew that contributions of quark-gluon and gluon-gluon scattering
are not small is the inclusive production of particles with large PT. However,

it is the gluon effects that are difficult to isolate. The process of formation
of direct photons with large P? was observed in 1979. In QCD. the gluon Compton
effect is responsible for this production process. This opens up a unique possi-
bility for verifying a fundamental prediction of QCD: the existence of gluons

in hadrons.

But despite advances in both theory and experiment. there are still a number of
unresolved questions. Three-jet events have been observed in e+e' annihilation.
Their analog is five-jet events in particle production with large P, in pp colli-
sions. How does a small admixture of such events influence the structure of events
treated as containing only two jets with large Pr? At what Pr and energies will
formation of a third jet with large P, be noted? What are the regions of appli-
cability of QCD with respect to the scale of energies and transverse aomenta from
below? What is the mechanism of transition from "small" to "large” PT? These

and other questions so far remain unanswered.

0n the whole the picture of particle production with large P1 is still incomplete.
and further theoretical and experimental efforts are needed for a deeper under-
standing of the nature of processes that occur.

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conclusion the authors consider it their pleasant duty to express sincere grati-
tude to Ye. M. Levin, A. K. Likhoded. N. N. Nikolayev. H. G. Ryskin and R. H.
Sulyayev for numerous constructive discussions, and to L. N. Shevchenko for assis-
tance in preparing the manuscript for printing.

UDC 539.12. 539.171
DO THREE-BARYON RBSONANCES EXIST?
[Article by L. A. Kondratyuk and L. V. Shevchenko]

[Excerpt] The authors discuss the predictions of a stretched rotating 9-quark

bag model for the spectrum of 3-baryon resonances with zero strangeness. An analy-
sis is made of the reaction of pd-backscattering in the region Tp-0.3-l GeV, and
arguments are given to support the hypothesis that the observed structure in the
energy dependence of the cross section of this reaction at /§- 3-3.5 GeV is due

to the contribution of 3-baryon resonances.

UDC 539.173
NEUTRINO EXPERIMENTS AT LOH TEMPERAIURES
[Article by 1.. A. Popenko and A. v. Derbin]

[Excerpt] This paper reviews neutrino experiments carried out up to the present
on reactors. An examination is made of the major goals of studying v- and G-inter-
actions at low energies. The authors discuss the feasibility of setting up neutrino
experiments with the use of a silicon multidetector and radioactive sources of

ve and 6e in the energy range from 0.2 to 3 Nev. An examination is made of some
technical problems of detector design and construction of a radioactive source

with activity of several megacuries.

Introduction. The fourth of December I980 was the fiftieth anniversary of the
"discovery" of the neutrino as recounted in a letter by W. Pauli dated 6 Dec 1930.
where he asks experimenters to look in nuclei for a neutral particle with spin
5-!5. mass of no more than 1/100 of the mass of the proton. and ionization effect
no greater than for a gamma particle.

The establishment and confirmation of this particle over the course of the fifty
years has been associated with the names of H. Pauli. B. Fermi, B. Pontecorvo and

F. Reines. Over the past few years in connection with the sharp upsurge of interest
in neutrino data, construction has started on new detectors to supplement the CERN
neutrino detectors such as VBVS. CDHS. CHARHandnmny others in the United States

and the USSR. We have begun to treat the neutrino as an equal with the electron.
gamma quantum and other particles, dropping the "mystical" epithet that continu-
ously accompanied the neutrino through nearly the entire fifty years from the time
of its discovery at the "penpoint" of E. Fermi and H. Pauli.

We are now seeing a revival of the neutrino in connection with indications of an
experiment at the Institute of Theoretical and Experimental Physics [ITBF] to the
effect that the neutrino has a rest mass of the order of 30 eV [Ref. 1]. This fact

74
FOR 0FFKJAL.USE(MNLY
could radically alter our ideas about the universe. In this case it is a neutrino-
determined universe according to estimates by Ya. B. Zel'dovidh.

Recent indications of neutrino oscillations implied by experiments of F. Reines
have given the square of the mass difference of the electron-type antineutrino

and the u-meson type in a range of 1 eV’ [Ref. 2]. which has indirectly confirmed
the fairly large rest mass of the neutrino. However. the results of a new experi-
ment done in Grenoble [Ref. 3] have not confirmed these data, and the limit on

this parameter is 0.13 eV’. All this shows that we are extremely uncertain of
experimental data both on the physical properties of the neutrino and on its inter-
actions. In connection with this, at low energies we can distinguish two classes
of problems that must be experimentally studied:

—-the problem of neutrino mass and oscillation;

--effects with neutral currents. including interference effects of neutral and
charged currents.

UDC 539.151
PARITY VIOLATION EFFL'TS IN COMPOUND NUCLEI
[Article by 0. P. Sushkov and V. V. Flanbaum]
[Excerpt] The authors discuss effects of violation of spatial parity in inter-
action of neutrons with a nucleus--P-odd asymmetry in fission of nuclei, parity
violation when neutrons are coherently scattered by nuclei (in neutron optics).
and also effects of parity violation in the reaction (a, y).

COPYRIGHT: LIYaF, 1981

6610
C50: 1862/39

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALL-UNION SEMINAR ON PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING OP INTENSIVE SOURQBS 0P IONS AND ION
BEAMS

doscow PIZIKA PLAZHY in Russian Vol 7, No S, Sep-Oct 81 p 1175
[Article by H. D. Gabovich and N. N. Semashko]

[Text] During 21-23 October 1980. the Third Session of the All-Union Seminar on
the Physics and Engineering of Intensive Sources of Ions and Ion Beams was held

at the Physics Institute of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences in Kiev. It was
organized by s decree of the USSR Academy of Sciences Scientific Council on the
Problem of "Plasma Physics". The seminar leaders were: A. I. Horozov.

N. N. Semashko anstitute of Atomic Energy imani I.V. Knrchatov), and ".0. Gabovich
(Physics Institute of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences). Approximately 150 scientists-
representatives of scientific establishments from Moscow. Leningrad. Novosibirsk,
Khar'kov, Kiev and other cities-took part in the session. Forty-eight papers were
presented on the following topics: (1) high-current, quasi-stationary ion sources;
(2) high-current impulse ion sources; (3) negative ion sources; (a) sources of
multiply-charged ions; (5) collective processes in an ion-beam plasma; and (6) in-
dustrial ion beams.

Significant advances were made in the above areas. In particular, the following
results should be mentioned:

1. Obtainment of quasi-stationary beams of positive ions up to 100 A. intended
for the injectors of thermonuclear plants anstitute of Atomic Energy imeni I.V.
Kurchatov; Institute of Nuclear Physics,Siberian Department, USSR Academy of
Sciences).

2. Development of methods of obtaining intensive negative ion beams (Institute of
Atomic Energy imeni I. V. Kurchatov; Institute of Nuclear Physics,Siberian Depart-
ment, USSR Academy of Sciences).

3. Research of the collective processes in an ion-beam plasma (Physics Institute
of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences).

6. Obtainment of intensive fluxes of multiply-charged ions (Moscow Engineering
Physics Institute; Joint Institute of Nuclear Research and others).

It should be mentioned also that advances have been made in the creation of high-
current impulse ion fluXBS. in particular, at the Institute of Nuclear Physics

at Tomsk Polytechnicsl Institute.
The next session of the seminar is planned for October 1981 in Kiev.
COPYRIGHT: Izdstei'svto "Nauka". "Fizika plazmy". 1981

cso: 1862/72-P
76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

UDC 535.37:621.375.826

DETERMINING SPECTRAL DEPENDENCBS 0F ABSOLUTE QUANTUM YIELDS 0F Xe? BXCIHBR FORMATION
(B. C. D) IN Xer PHOTOLYSIS

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKIRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 9(111), Sep 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 9 Mar 81) PP 1945-1951

[Article by N. K. Bibinov. I. P. Vinogradov, L. D. Mikheyev and D. B. Stavrovskiy,
Institute of Physics imeni P. N. Lebedev, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Interest in photolysis of XePz accompanied by production
of excited molecules of Xe? (B, C. D) is occasioned by the use
of this reaction in excimer lasers with optical pumping. In
this paper an investigation is made of photolysis of gaseous
Xer in the spectral range of 108-220 nm. It is established
that the maximum quantum yields of production of XeP(B) and
XeF(C) are 302 9 and 3.5: 12 respectively in the region of
140-180 nm (lmaxﬁ 165 nm). The quantum yield of formation of
XeF(D) in this region does not exceed 1.51. The authors discuss
the mechanism of dissociation of XePz molecules. It is shown
that several electron transitions contribute to the absorption
band of Xer that has a maximum at 158 nm. It is suggested that
a transition in this band to states 1II or 3““ leads to formation
of XeF(D), and a transition to III9 lea s to formation of XeF

(x or A), transitions to ‘E: and it lead to formation of XeP(B)
and XeF(C) respectively.

1. Introduction

Interest in spectroscopy of Xe? excimer at the present time stems from intensive
development of research on excimer lasers. Lasing has been achieved on two electron
transitions of XeF x-B (AI 350 nm) and C-A (A: 480 nm) with different methods of
creating inverse population: in an electric discharge [Ref. 1-3]. under the action
of a beam of fast electrons (Ref. 4. S] and by optical pumping [Ref. 6-9]. (We

will denote the electronic states of Xe? by letters of the Latin alphabet as has
been done for example in Ref.10. 12.)

Optically pumped Xe? lasers use Xer photolysis. To study the kinetics of these
lasers and determine their limiting characteristics, data on absolute values and
spectral dependences of quantum yields of different photolysis products are of
great significance. The reaction of photodissociation of XePz was experimentally
studied in Ref. 10-12. In Ref. 10. ll, formation of XeP(B) was observed when XePz
was exposed to light on wavelengths of 123.6. 160-180. 186.9 and 193 nm. According

77
FOIiOFFNJAl.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to estimates by the authors of Ref. 10. the quantum yield of the process is close
to unity; however, it has not been measured directly. The absolute values of
quantum yields of formation of XeF in excited electronic states 3, C and D were
measured in Ref. 12. It was found that upon photolysis in the region of 145-175 nm
the quantum yields of XeF(B)> 902, XeF(C)< 571. and XeF(D) < 32.

This paper gives the results of a study of photodissociation of XeF; with formation
of excited fragments of XeF(B, C. D) in the spectral band of 220-108 nm.

2. Experimental Part

Descriptions can be found in previous papers [Ref. 13, 16] for most of the experi-
mental facility for measuring absorption cross sections. luminescence spectra and
spectral dependences of absolute quantum yields of luminescence of the molecules,
atoms and radicals formed upon photolysis of vapor in the XUV region of the spectrum.
Only the cell part was changed. In this research a cell was used that was separated
from the rest of the experimental facility by LiF and Hng windows. The cell was
made of brass and plated with nickel. The optical length of the absorbing layer
was 6.7 cm. Before starting the work. the cell and the inlet system were evacuated
to a pressure of 10‘5 mm Hg and passivated with fluorine to such a degree that dis-
sociation of Xer was no more than 102 over the time 01 one complete measurement

(30 minutes). The curves presented in the work were obtained in pure Xer vapor

by averaging four measurements. Scanning over the spectrum was done both toward
shorter and toward longer wavelenghts. The random error of relative measurements
did not exceed :82.

a. 10"7 cm2
Results of Measurements and Their Dis-

K. cm-llatm - l
r 1‘ cussion

.125. !U

I '1

\ .

"ﬁ

. I Fig. 1 shows the absorption spectrum
my: I ‘_ \ ‘m that we obtained for XePz in the region

1 'j \ 1 of 108-225 nm. The error in determining
1 L ‘ , \ j, the absolute value of the cross section

[9 “J I is lOZ. Absorption in the region of
' \\ \\‘1J 220 nm is due to the forbidden tran-
- 0 sition 51“,» 70..., mph: [Ref. 15].
The coefficient of absorption of Xe?
Fig. 1. Absorption spectrum of Xer in this wavelength region is quite
vapor taken with resolution of Al =0.3 nm low (-4-5 cm"/atm). In the region

of 210-145 nm an intense broad absorp-

tion band is observed with maximum at 158 nm, corresponding according to Ref. 15
to transition [Gog->70“, ‘xﬁa-lt . According to our measurements. the absorption
at the band maximum is 1810 cm“ arm. which agrees with the results of Ref. 12.
but is 2 times lower and 1.6 times greater respectively than according to the data
0: Ref. 15 an! l6. Shorter than 145 nm. we observe the Rydberg band series identi-
fied in Ref. IS: nu(3/2. l/2)-vns. nd and age-np with well-resolved vibrational

8! l'llC [ ure .

l
._ a. ._...‘.I.. . . a ..l
l

U? an L9 59 iﬁ—X, am

Under the action of XUV radiation. the following reactions are possible in XeFZ.
leading to formation of primary excited products [Ref. 10. 12]:

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0!“!1’
XeF, +hv —- XeF;, (I)

11‘. XeF (8)+ F em. (2)
MHz—3’. XeF(C)+F(’P.,). (3)
2. XeF (0)+ F(’P..). (4)

where c is the cross section of absorption of light by a molecule of Xer. OB:

oc. OD are the quantum yields of formation of the corresponding excited states of
KcF.

The resultant excited molecules of Xe? either expend the energy of excitation in
collisions with Xer, or emit a quantum of light [Ref. 12, 17, 18]:

I

XeF(B)+XeF; j XencH-Xen (5)
XeFtB) + XeF, 2-» XeF(X. Am, A-/,) T XcF,, (5)
XcF(C)+xeF, If» XeF(x.A'/,.AI/.)+xer,, (7)
XcF(D)-:— XeF, 3—". XeF(X. am. All.) + XeF,, ' (a)
XcF (a) 2'. XeF(X)-:— mun-.350 m) , (9)
XeF(B) 2‘. XeF(A‘/,) -s hv(1~’470 an), (no)
XeF (C) L“. XeF(A'/,)+hv(1.~470 um). (11)
XoF (0) 3i“. XeF (X) + luv (7. ~ 260 nm) , (12)
XeF(D) L”. XeF(A‘/,)+hv(l~290 nm). (13)

where ch. kCB’ k , kc, kb are the reaction rate constants. "BX' "BA' "CA' "DX'
um are the probe ilities of radiative transitions.

Fig. 2 shows the luminescence spectra that we obtained for Xe? corresponding to the
transitions 8-» x and 0+ X. The spectra are plotted with consideration of the spec-
tral dependence of sensitivity of the recording channel. The luninescence spectrum
that we observed on transitions C+A and B-tA was analogous to that obtained in
Ref. [7. being a broad structureless band in the region of 360-550 nm with naxinum
at 450 nm. It can be seen that with an increase in the energy of a quantum of
photoiyzed radiation there is an increase in the width of the luminescence band
XeF(B-. X) due to an increase in vibrational excitation of XeF(B). A structureless
band observed in the vicinity of 290 nm may be due to luminescence on transition
0-9165, as is predicted by the calculation done in Ref. 18.

In the experiment we determined the ratios of intensity of the absorbedlight and
luminescence intensity: 5; - IooQ/WBXB (A~ 350 nm); 82- IooQ/(HBAB+HCAC) (x~1.7o nm);

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

83- looQ/HDXD (l~260 nm). here B, C,
D are the concentrations of Xe? in the

U)
corresponding electron states; Q is the 3:: ‘
concentration of XeF-z; Io is the intensity g J
of the photolyzing radiation. In measuring .
the luminescence intensity. the radiation 7,", 7
was recorded in the corresponding lumines- "‘
cence band in a spectral range of -9 nm. .2, I '
The percentage of photons reaching the "‘ 0‘

given spectral range was calculated from

 

the luminescence spectrum. Consideration a
was taken of the change in the luminescence
spectrum as a function of the wavelength ”
of the photolyzing radiation. Linear 3
dependences of SI. 82. S; on 1(er pressure ”a "
were observed in the investigated pressure 5
range of 0-1 m Hg. ,4 I
a
III
The following relations obtained in anal- . I
ysis of the kinetics of processes (l)- .1.“ 0
(13) were used in processing the measure- ”a M ”A. an
ment results b
S l l v A “44 c Fig. 2. Luninescence spectrum of Xe?
r u— + + ' Q, (14) on transitions 3-»)! (X~ 350 nm) D-vx

v ( -'-v ) -.—— .

" 'V‘ +V" "‘ (xezso nm) and possibly 13+»; (A~
|imS=—”__i'4__ 290 ‘ A I116 61 . nm
9.0 ’ (st+VsA)9c+l'un ' ([5) (b) m). exc (a) an 60 8

=; m *D
S: 00 (l + ‘71): )I'L 9D'Dx Q “6)

The values of on, pg. on, (k3+k3c). kn are determined from a comparison of the
experimental and theoretical relations. It should be noted that terms of the order
of Q: and higher, as well as the term kc3¢c("ax+"BA>Q/(°§"nx"ca) have been omitted
in the second member of expression (11.). Estimates show that the contribution

of these terms is small compared with the random error of the experiment. Calcu-
lations and estimates used the following data taken from the literature: pr-
7.5-10’ s", tau-9.940" 5'1 [Ref. 121.uM-2.9o10‘ s", wa-1.os-lo° s' ,

"or 1.33-107 3'1 [Ref. 18], oc/¢3<0.l. kgc/kcga22.8 [P.ef. 12].

Our value of kB‘H‘BC' (S.0:0.lo)-10'”cm3/s-mol. differs from the values cited in
the literature: (3.5:0.2)-10'1° [Ref. 11], (7.1.20.3)-10-‘° [Ref. 12], (2.6203)
. Io"‘° [Ref. 19]. It should be noted that the authors of Ref. 11, 12, 19 did not
consider reaction (5). and give the values of k3. when they actually measured the
Sum l‘B'H‘BC as well. As far as we know. no one has yet determined the ratio between
constants k3 and kBC'

The value that we got for R1) was (l.6:0.l6)-10"’ cm’ls-mol. In calculating kp.
we used the lifetime TD' ”wa found theoretically in Ref. 18. We know of no ex-
perimentally determined value of To. A value of 19:13: 1 ns was found in Ref. 20
by using the 1;, measured in an inert gas matrix and extrapolating to the gas phase.

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
This value is apparently unreliable since the value of 13- 8 ns given in the same

paper differs strongly from the 13 measured directly in the gas phase; for example
Ref. 12 gives 13- 13.3: 0.2 ns.

 

Fig. 3. Spectral dependences of quantum yields of formation
of XeF(C) (a). XeF(D) (b) and XeP(B) (c)

The spectral dependences of ¢B' 9C, 9D are shown in Pig. 3. By using the value
of the photon energy corresponding to the threshold of formation of XeP(B) (Athr'
220: 2 run). we can estimate the energy required for breaking the chemical bond
Xe-F in the XeF molecule: it is <2.2 eV. This value is obtained with consider-

ation of the results of Ref. 21, according to which the difference in energies
of states 3 (v'- 0) and x (v"-0) of Xe? is 28.865 cm".

Fig. lo shows spectra of luminescence excitation of Xe? on transitions s+x and
D-tX. The luminescence excitation spectra on transitions C+A and B+X are similar.
Comparison of the absorption spectrum of XePz (see Fig. l) with the luminescence
excitation spectra of Xel’ (B +X, D-OX) shows the complicated nature of the absorp-
tion band with maximum at 158 nm. Photolysis of XeP; in this band is accompanied
by formation of three excited products XeF(B. C. D), the maximum in the luminescence
excitation spectrum of XeF(B+X) being shifted toward the long-wave region. while
the maximum of the excitation spectra: XeF(D+X) is shifted toward the short-wave
region as compared with the maximum of the absorption spectrum.

Subtracting the curve of the partial cross section of formation of XeP(B)+XeF(C)
from the curve of the absorption cross section of Xei‘z, we get the difference band

81
FOR OH'ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iz/Io. rel . units

0

Fig. 4. Luminescence excitation spectrum of
Xel-‘(8-> X) (a) and XeF(D->ll) (b)

Fig. 5. Absorption cross section of 1(er (a),
partial cross section of formation of Xel-‘(B. C)
in photolysis of Xel’y (b). and their difference
curve (a- b)

shown in Fig. 5. (The partial cross section
of formation of a product is found by multi-
plying the absorption cross section by the
quantum yield of product formation.) Exci—
tation of Xei-‘z in this difference band does
not lead to formation of radiating fragments
(the partial cross section of formation of
XeI-‘(D) can be disregarded as the quantum yield
of process U.) in the vicinity of 140-180 nm
does not exceed 1.51). Thus we have grounds
for assuming that the band with maximum at
158 nm is due to several electron transitions, and therefore we must re-exsmine
the identification of this band given in Ref. 15. It can be assuned that the tran-
sitions are effected in four dispersion electron states of XeFZ: a. B. y and 6.
the first two dissociating with formation of XeF(B) and XeF(C), the third yielding
no radiating products, and the fourth dissociating with formation of Xel-‘(D). The
electronic states of the RF; molecule were calculated in Ref. 22, and the photo-
electron spectrum of Xer was studied in Ref. 23. According to the results of
these studies. the following electronic transitions are possible in the region

of 160-180 nm: meg» 7a.,(‘v’xt+ 1:3). 3:8» 7au("'r.u+ 12;). lulu" 7ou(‘v’ng<- 1:3)
(transitions are arranged in order of increasing photon energy).

 

Since the partial cross sections of formation of non-radiating products and XeND)
are large. states 7 and r: are apparently associated with the grOund state :16?qu
by allowed transitions. He assune that state a is ‘11:. and state 1 is ‘11“. As to
states a and 6. we assume that a is ’15:, and 6 is 1I! or 3ﬂu. This assumption
allows us to explain the low values of the quantum ﬁelds of formation of XeF(C)
and XeF(D) in photolysis of XeF, in the region of. Moo-180 nun (see Fig. 3a. b) sinc
the cross sections of light absorption on forbidden transitions 32:} ‘2'; and “nu,
‘llg‘ ‘2; are a small fraction of the total absorption cross section above 160 run.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It should be noted that our assumed identification of states a, B, y. 6 agrees with

the rules of correlation of states of the unified molecule and the states of the
fragments [Ref. 26].

There is one more circumstance that supports our proposed identification of state y.
Excitation of XePz on 166.5 nm to the Rydberg state nu corresponding to transition
Inga-r63 does not lead to formation of excited fragments. Therefore it can be
assumed that predissociation from the Rydberg state In“ takes place to a dispersion
state of the Xer molecule correlating with non-radiating fragments of XeP(X or A)+
F(2Pu). Prediasociation to state 1[In is more probable than to 12:. since hetero-
geneous predissociation (AA- 21) is possible in electron-rotational interaction

that shows up markedly in diatomic molecules. and is quite weak in polyatomic mole-
cules [Ref . 26} .

In the spectra; region below 145 nm, the luminescence excitation spectra of XeF(B.
C. 0) show intense bands corresponding to transitions to the Rydber states
Wu’/:.‘/z"n8 an-i 08+np. The only exceptions are the transitions I“ /2" 6s. 7s on
[64.5 and 115.) nm respectively (see Fig. 4).

The absolute values of quantum yields of XeF luminescence shown on Fig. 3 were
obtained by a relative method. The reference standard was the quantum yield of
formation of 0H(A2Z+). equal to 5.2::0.6% on line La (121.6 nm) in photolysis of
water [Ref. l3i. The overall maximum quantum yield of formation of Xe? upon exci-
tation in the absorption band with maximum at 158 nm is equal to 0.34: 0.1 (princi-
pal contribution is from the process of formation of XeI-‘(B), annex-0.30: 0.09).

The quantum yield of formation of 08(Az£+) that we used agrees well with the value
of 51 obtained in Ref. 25. However. Lee et a1., [Ref. 26. 273, in studying the
photolysis of water on individual lines. give absolute values of quantum yields
of formation of 0H(A22+) that average 1.35 times higher than in Ref. 13. If we

use the results of Ref. 26 and 27. the maximum quantum yield of XeF(B) luminescence
may reach 401.

The values of the quantum yield of luminescence that we obtained by using lumines-
cence of the on radical as a standard diverge considerably from the results of

Ref. 12. where calibration was done with respect to luminescence of the Xeo excimer
in photolysis of a gas mixture of “go-Xe. and the total quantum yield of XeP(B,C.D)
was close to 100% in the region of 145-175 nm. The reason for such a considerable
discrepancy is not clear. It is also difficult to understand why the authors of
Ref. 12 failed to observe the wavelength dependence of quantum yield.

ntnnmcss
1. Burnham. 11.. Harris. a. w., Djeu, 11., APPL. mus. LETTS.. Vol 28, 1976. p 86.

2. Fisher. C. 8.. Center. R. E.. Mullaney. G. L., HcDaniel, J. P.. APPL. PFYS.
LETTS.. Vol 35. 1979. p 26.

3. Burnhmn. R.. APPL. PHYS. LETTS., V01 35. [979. p 48.

4. Brau, C. A., Ewing, J. J.. APPL. PHYS. LETTS.. Vol 27. 1975. p 635.

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

10.

12.

13.

14.

IS.
16.
l7.
I8.
19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ernst, W. E., Tittel. F. R.. APPL. PHYS. LETTS., V01 35. 1979. p 36.

Basov, N. C.. Zuyev. V. s.. Hikheyev. L. D., StaerVskiy, D. 3., Yalovéy, V. 1..
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 4. 1977. p 2453.

Eden. J. C.. OPTICS LBTTS., Vol 3. 1978. p 94.

Basov. N. C.. Zuyev. V. 8.. Kanayev. A. V.. Mikheyev, L. D., Stavrovskiy.
D. 3., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 6. 1979. p 1074.

Bishel. w. R.. Nakano, H. H., Eckscrom. D. J.. Hill, R. H.. Huestis. D. L..
Lorents, D. C.. APPL. PHYS. LETTS.. Vol 34. 1979, p 565.

Brashears. H. C.. Jr.. Secser. D. R.. Desmarteau. D., CHEN. PHYS. LBTTS..
V01 48. 1977, p 84.

Burnham. R.. Harris, N. R.. J. CHEM. PHYS.. V01 66. 1977. p 2762.

Lorents. D. C.. Black. 0.. Sharples. R.. Huestls. D., Gutcheck, R.. Helms. D.,
Bonifield. T.. Halters. G. R.. "Proc. Int. Conf. on Lasers 79." Orlando, Florida.
Dec 17-21, 1979. p 143.

Vinogradov, I. P.. Vilesov. F. 1.. OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA, Vol 4‘. 1978.
p 1119.

Bibinov. N. R.. Vilesov. F. 1., Vinogradov. L. D., Hikheyev. L. D., Pravilov.
A. H.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTROHIKA. Vol 6. 1979. p 1630.

Nielsen, U., Schwarz. R.. J. CHEM. PHYS.. Vol 13. 1976, p 195.

Pysh. 8.. Jortner. J.. Rice. 8.. J. CHEM. PHYS.. Vol 60. 1964. p 2018.
Brashears. H. C.. Jr.. Setser. E. w.. APPL. PHYS. LETTS., V01 33. 5978, p 821.
Dunning. T. R.. Jr.. Hay. P. J.. J. CHEM. PHYS.. Vol 69. 1978. p 134.

Eden, J. C.. Waynanc. R. R.. OPTICS LETTS.. Vol 2. 1978. p 13.

Goodman. J.. Brus. L. E.. J. CHEM. PHYS., "01 65. 1976. p 3808.

Zuyev. V. 5.. Kanayev. A. V.. Hikheyev. L. D., Stavrovakiy, D. B., TRUDY
:I§ICHESKOCO INSTITUTA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR IMENI P. N. LEBEDEVA. Vol 125. 1980
Schcirc. L., Phariseau, P., Nuyts. R.. PHYSICA. Vol 101A, 1980, p 22.

Brundlc. C. R.. Robin. M. 8.. Jones. C. R.. J. CHEM. PHYS.. V01 52, 1970.
p 3283.

Gercsberg, C.. "Elekcronnyye spektry 1 stroyenlye mnogoatomnykh molekul" [Elec-
tron Spectra and Structure of Polyatomic Molecules]. Moscow, Mir. 1969.

84
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

25. Carrington. T.. J. CHEM. PEYS., V01 41, 1961., p 2012.

26. Lee, I... Oren, L., Phillips. E.. Judge. 1)., J. PHYS. B, Vol 11. 1978. p 67.
27. Lee, L. C., J. CHEM. PHYS.. Vol 72. 1980. p 4334.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'scvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elekcronika". 1981

6610
C80: 1862/61

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.375.826:535.25:519

DIFPRACTOHETER WITH THERHOMAGNETIC REGISTRATION FOR CHECKING HAVEFRONT DISTORTIONS
0P PULSED LASER EMISSION

Moscow IZMERITEL'NAXA TEKHNIKA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (signed to press 1 Oct 81)
pp 27-28

[Article by Ye. P. Antonets. B. H. Stepanov and V. A. Fabrikov]

[Ttxt] Certain applications of powerful pulsed lasers require an undistorted wave-
frcnt that is close to planar. Such a wavefront is produced when a laser operates

on the TEHoo mode alone. Tuning of lasers to single-mode operation is checked

by analyzing diffraction patterns from the simplest apertures. In this paper,

an investigation is made of the feasibility of using a diffractometer with thermomag-
netic registration of pulsed emission for these purposes.

Cw gas lasers are tuned to single-mode lasing with radiation of the lower TEHoo
more by comparing the measured diffraction pattern of the investigated emission
on a circular aperture with the calculated Airy pattern [Ref. 1, 2]. Tuning pre-
ciuion is evaluated from the degree of swelling of the first maximum. Amplitude
distribution in the Airy pattern is described by the formula

E(r)=yE.-'!-J,(I.22-'-). (I)

I ’g

whvre y is an immaterial phase multiplier; 30 is the field amplitude of the inci-
dent wave in :he plane of the diaphragm; to is the radius of the diaphragm; r is
the modulus of the radius vector r of the observation point in the focal plane.

of the objective lens; J,(x) is a first-order Bessel function of the first kind

of argument x; r1- 1.22f/kro is the radius of the first dark ring in the Airy pat-

tern; f is the focal lengt’ of the objective lens that shapes the diffraction pat-
tern; k- 21/} is the wave number.

Enurgy distribution in the diffraction pattern of continuous radiation is measured
by nohutomnltiplierthat ismechanicaily displaced in the transverse plane [Ref. 1].
Thu photomultiplier is used to ensure the dynamic measurement range necessary for
analyzing distortion of the Airy pattern. however. the procedure based on using

a scanning device with photomultiplier is not applicable in the pulsed mode of
lager operation. The diffraction pattern to be measured must be first recorded
on'a medium that has a sufficient dynamic range, resolution and sensitivity to
radiation in the investigated wavelength band.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He used magnetic films with strip domains as the recording mediu. Registration

was done at an emission wavelength of [.06 um. However. the thermomagnetic method
used for recording on these films [Ref. 3] enables registration of diffraction
patterns in the longer-wave band as well. The recording range offered by the films
(Emax/Emin= 30) is not wide enough for simultaneous Airy-pattern registration of
the zero maximum with respect to which the degree of swelling of zero rings is
found. and the first maximum that serves as a reference point. This explains why
the diffraction pattern from two holes of the same diameter is chosen instead of
the Airy pattern as a gage for diagnosing mode purity of pulsed laser emission.

The ratio of the first maximum to the zero maximum in this pattern is close to

0.5 for a distance between the centers of the holes of 6kg. This is considerably
greater than in the Airy pattern, where this ratio is 0.0175. The distance between
the centers of the holes can be selected differently as well, and with increasing
distance there is an increase in the ratio of the first maximum to the zero maximum.

As we know. the Fraunhofer diffraction pattern is the Fourier transform of the
aperture function with spatial frequency g-Ikr/f. In the case of two holes of
identical shape. the aperture function ¢(r) is written as [Ref. 4. S]

¢('r')—c(7)*mf7+33+6(7—35L (2)

where g(?) is the aperture function of one hole; 3 and -3 are the radius vectors
of the centers of the holes; 6(r) is the Dirac delta function; the symbgl * denotes

the operation of convolution of two functions with respect to variable r. In the
given case

‘(ﬁ—CIN(L)=:{II"°

’0 o'>'.I
-o c. -o I
O-ia-ﬂlo'

I is the unit vector along the x-axis joining the centers of the holes. The Fourier
transform of the convolution is equal to the product of the Fourier transforms
of the convoluted functions. From (1) and (2) with consideration of the formula

of Fourier transformation for amplitude distribution in the diffraction pattern
from two apertures we get

I
w. y) .. maﬁa-H.244) cmﬂ. (3)
I ‘ ’1 I

 

where r'u I/I"‘|' y'.

This distribution serves as a gage in diagnosing laser radiation in the proposed
method. Experiments in diffraction pattern recording on magnetic films used a
neodymium-doped glass laser with pyroceramic diffuse pumping reflector and a passive
modulator based on dyes. The diameter of the holes in the aperture diaphragm was
0.6 mm, and the distance between centers of the holes was 1.2 mm. Recording and
visualJzation of the diffraction patterns were done by a procedure described in

Ref. 3. A preliminary check on tuning of the laser to operation close to single-
mode was doneby‘recording the radiation on photosensitive paper.

Fig. I shows a diagram of a magnetic-film diffractometer, where l is a pulse laser;
2 is a beam expander; 3--is a screen with diaphragms; a is the magnetic film;

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFN3A1.USE()NLY

 

Pig. 2

5 is the reco ing device. Fig. 2 shows the intensity distribution along the x
axis in diff; ion patterns recorded on films with multimode (a) and singlemnode
(b) laser emi-: 1 (curve l-experiment; curve 2--ca1culation). In the given case,
single-mode radi. ion is understood to be emission in which the main part of the
energy is concentrated in the lower mode that produces an axisymmetric spot in

the recording on photographic paper. Single-mode operation was achieved by using
a selecting diaphragm with aperture diameter of less than 2 mm. Multimode emission
that produced a spot of diffuse shape on the photographic paper was achieved by
increasing the diameter of the diaphragm to 4-5 mm. This spot had a structure

in which the traces of higher spatial modes could be clearly delineated.

In the diffraction patterns recorded on magnetic tape the position of the maxima
and minima coincided with the calculated values determined from Ref. 3. The rela-
tive levels of the maxima also coincided. but the depths of the minima differed
strongly. The ratio of the radiation intensity in the first minimum of the dif-
fraction pattern to the intensity in the zero maximum in multimode radiation was
about 301. In single-mode operation, this ratio is less than 0.03. i. e. it lies
beyond the limits of the dynamic range of the films. The depth of the minimum

of the recorded diffraction pattern varies with a change in diameter of the select-
ing diaphragm close to 2 mm. and may serve as an indicator of the accuracy of tuning
the optical system to single-mode operation. The sensitivity of the method as
estimated from the relative power of higher transverse modes is close to 131.

REFERENCES
l. Heineman. H., Radline. H., TlIBR. Vol 53, No 88. I965.

2. Hard. 6.. "lzmcreniye lazernykh parametrov" [Measurement of Laser Parameters].
Moscow , "Mir" . I970 .

3. Klyuchkin. L. M. et 81.. "FotografirovaniyenaInagnitnyye plenki" [Photography
of Magnetic Films], Moscow. Atomizdat. I971.

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lo. William. R. P.. "Transform Approach to Paraxisl Optics". CONTEMPORARY PHYSICS.
Vol 15, 19710.

S. Papulis. A.. "Teoriya sun. 1 preobrazovaniy v optike" [Theory of Systems
and Transformations in Optics], Moscow. ”Mir", 1971.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo standsrtov, 1981

6610
C50: 1862/38

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL.USE'0NLY

UDC S35.853.S:621.375.826
INSTRUMENT FOR MEASURING LASER EMISSION HAVELENGTHS

Moscow IZMERITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA in Russian No 10. Oct 81 (signed to press 1 Oct 81)
pp 28-29

[Article by L. Ya. Gustyr'. V. N. Puchkov, A. K. Toropov and Yu. A. Fedorov]

[Text] To measure laser radiation wavelength. facilities have been developed in
which (as for example in Ref. 1, 2) continual refinements are made in the value

of the wavelength found by preliminary measurement with a low-accuracy monochro-
mator. or a method of comparison with the wavelength of a reference laser is used
[Ref. 3 6]. Efforts to get high accuracy in measurements (the error of wavelength
meaSurement in Ref. 1 is 33.5 10-6 um. and in Ref. 6 it is 210'7 um) in realization
of these methods. and to provide capabilities for operation with pulsed and cw
radiation over a wide spectral range lead to development of unique measurement
facilities. In many practical cases the use of such facili'ies is inadvisable.

In this article a device is described that is intended for automatically checking
the wavelengths of tunable cw lasers in different technological applications. as
wells; in developing and making such lasers. The instrument is based on an inter-
ference method of getting successive approximations of the wavelength by using

a scanning Fabry-Perot interferometer with known distance between mirrors. The
essence of the method is as follows. The fractional part c of the interference
order is determined from the magnitude of the scanning interval from its beginning
to the closest transmission maximum of the interferometer. Then the preliminary
value A of the wavelength to be measured is determined from the size of the in-

terval ggtwcen two adjacent interference maxima. The integral part K of the inter-
ference order is found from the equation

2L—t
’np

 

+0.5..K+5. (I)

(by dropping the fractional part 6), where L is the length of the interferometer.
and the refined value of the wavelength is determined from the formula

2L—-a
K

Addition of the fraction 0.5 to the first member of equation (1) allows us to re-
place thc operation of rounding off the resultant number with the operation of

separating the integral part of the number, which is an operation that can be done
in a computer.

 

1. - (2}

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
he figure shows a block diagram of the instrument

or measuring wavelengths. The laser emission whose
avelength is to be measured is directed at a multi—
.eam scanning plane-parallel Pabry—Perot interferom-
:ter Inih Both mirrors of the interferometer are
?astened on piezoelectric elements. A linearly vary-
oltage of triangular shape with frequency of

I Hz is sent to the piezodrive of one of the mirrors.
Ihis voltage is formed by the principle of digital-
analog conversion by a channel consisting of pulse
reversible counter PIFI. code-to-voltage

and controllable power supply )Gﬂ7. The
nted by the binary ll—digit reversible

lng v

 

generator [in

converterlfﬂl
clock pulses from the pulse generator are can
counter. The parallel code from the counter outputs is sent to the ll—digit code-

to—voltage converter. when the reversible counter is filled with ones or zeros.
reversal takes place automatically. and a step voltage of triangular shape is formed
at the output of the code—to-voltage converter. The number of steps on the leading
and trailing edges of this voltage is the same. and is equal to the number of pulses
coming to the input of the reversible counter from the output of the pulse generator
in one half-period of scanning of the Fabry-Perot interferometer. In the control—
lnble power supply. the amplitude of the scanning voltage is boosted to the requisite

value for scanning tw‘ orders of the interference pattern.

The use of a digital—analog canverter in the scanning voltage shaper channel ensures
rigid one-to—one correspondence (forced synchronization) between the number of

pulses and the increment in length of the Fabry-Perot interferometer. The measure

of the increment in length of the interferometer by values equal to the fractional
t and integral lnp parts of the interference order is the number of pulses that
the first interference maximum and between

will fit from the beginning of a scan to
two adjacent maxima respectively, which is recorded by counters CH. The distribu-
is handled by control circuit Cy under con—

tion of pulses between these counters
dition that optical radiation is acting on the input of the device.

Fabry-Perot interferometer is registered by

photomultiplier 60?. The instant that the mirror passes through the maximum is
determined by differentiating the signal with respect to the first derivative on

the modulation frequency. To do this. an audio frequency signal (5 kHz) is sent

to the piezodrive of the second mirror from oscillator ﬂ". Resonant amplifier

JT’is tuned to the first harmonic of the modulating frequency. The first derivative
of the signal shape is sent from the output of synchronOua detector an to shaper

w that generates a short pulse to trigger the control circuit Cy at the instant

when the derivative passes through zero. Filling of one of the counters CU begins

at the beginning of each scanning period. and ends upon passage through the first
(measurement of t). At this instant, the second of counters

NW is energized. and it is de-energized at the instant of transition through the

second maximum (measurement of lnp). The counter content is transcribed by trans—
[ transcription is determined

The interference pattern after the

by command generator

a program that is compiled for the store

Solution of (l) and (2) is accomplished by
beforehand. Solution is done

that is used. and that is introduced into the store

91
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY '
FOR OFFICIAL USE Ohlh’

automatically by commands from (K. The value of the measured wavelength is shown
digitally on the display of the store.

The wavelength measuring device uses the iskra-123 store. Information input to
the device is through an auxiliary built-in plug to which wires are led directly
from the keyboard contacts. Binary information is transmitted thorugh a decoder
that converts binary—decimal code to decimal code. The translator is based in
RES—5? “clays that simulate keyboarding. With this setup, the maximum rate of
information transmission is 100 decimal digits per second.

This type of data input thrOugh a keyboard does not interfere with use of the store
[or extraneous calculations at the instant of cessation of running measurements,
and upon disconnecting the automation device. In principle, such an arrangement
can be used with any store regardless of its specific structure or element base.

in calculating the value of the wavelength. consideration is taken of the nonline-
arity of the piezodrive. The dependence of the overall elongation AL of the piezo-
ceramic elements of the drive on the applied voltage. or what amounts to tne same
thing, the number of pulses n of generator TM. is completely satisfactorily approxi-
mated by a cubic polynomial

ALuM'-Hm’ +ru. (3)

where I. b. o are the coefficients of the polynomial that are determined when gradu-
ating the meter with respect to radiation of known wavelength. Polynomial (3)

with defined coefficients is also introduced into the program of calculations of
computer store 343”.

For operation of the device in the range of 0.5-1.1 um, the Fabry-Perot interfer-
ometer uses silvered mirrors with reflectivity of 0 98 and an Fad-62 photomulti-
plier. To act unambiguous information, the length of the interferometer is selected
from the condition that its region of dispersion must exceed the absolute value

of preliminary wavelength determination. The interval between two adjacent interfer-
ence maxima is determined in the device by the method described above with relative
error of 0.02, and consequently the error of determining A" on the short-wave
bunndurv or the spectral band 0-0.4 um) is 0.02 Alb-0.002 um. The interferometer
length calculated from this value shoald not exceed 20 um. An interferometer is
Installed in the device with patently greater dispersion region (L: 15 um); certi—
iicntinn of its length is by the interference method of Ref. 5.

The error of the inatrument was determined in experimental measurements of known
wavelengths of emission of He-Ne. He-Cd and certain lines of he-Ar lasers. The
relative error of the instrument determined in this way was 10'“. Time of one
measurement was 1 s.

In structure. the device consists of an optical module. three electronic modules
(including power supplies) made in standard casings of the Node] type, and the
iskra 321 computer store. The optical module of the instrument. including the
interferonuter and photomultiplier. is accommodated on a pedestal with aligning
devices fur bringing its optical axis into registration with the laser emission
axis.

92
FOR OFHCIAI. USP, 0ND."
Instability of radiation power of the investigated luer leads to chaotic noises
in the interference patterns registered by the photomultiplier. Studies showed
that when noises amount to more than 101 of the usefulsignal amplitude. there may
be malfunctions in shaper 0. An optical isolater is used to prevent the influence
of optical feedback between the interferometer and laser cavity, which can 3130
lead to interruptions of operation.

REFERENCES
1. Drozhbtn, Yu. A. et 31., IDERITEL'NAYA TBKHNIKA. No 6, 1980.

2. Bycr, R. L. et 211., "Laser Spectroscopy 2‘", Proc. 3-rd Int. Conf., Jackson
Lake Lodge, "yoning, 1977, Berlin e. 3., 1977.

3. Snayder. D. 0., KVANTOVAYA ELEK'I‘RONIKA, Vol 5. No 8, 1978.
1., Salimberui, R.. Pole, R. V., 0PT. LBTT.. Vol 5, No 2, 1980.

S. Custyr'. L. Ya. ct al., Soviet Patent No 748125. BYULLETBN' IZOBRETENIY. No 26,
!980. .

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo standartov, I981

66l0
CSO: 1862/38

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 535.87+621.373:535

EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON PHASE ANISOTROPY 0P DIELECTRIC LASER HIRRORS

Leningrad OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA in Russian V01 51, No 6. Oct 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 23 Jun 80) pp 724-725

[Article by V. G. Gudelev and V. H. Yasinskiy]

[Text] Multilayered dielectric laser mirrors that work with oblique incidence

of radiation have linear phase anisotropy [Ref. 1] that has a considerable effect

on the polarization-frequency characteristics of precision measurement laser systems
(ring lasers, polarization interferometers and so on). Instability of the phase
anisotropy of the mirrors due to heating during the working process may be detri-
mental to the characteristics of such systems.

To study the influence of temperature on phase anisotropy of mirrors, the intra-
cavity frequency method of measuring anisotropy has been used [Ref. 2]. The mea-
surements were made in an amplitude-isotropic corner-reflector laser cavity. Under
ordinary conditions the sensitivity of measurement of phase anisotropy by such

a method is limited by instability of cavity length, modal composition and radiation
power, and does not exceed 10” rad. which precludes observation of temperature
influence on phase anisotropy of mirrors [Ref. 3]. To improve measurement sensi-
tivity, the laser was operated on a single transverse mode. A transverse magnetic
field (B: 7 m?) was superimposed on the active element of the laser [Ref. 4] to
stabilize lasing of two orthogonally linearly polarized waves with a slight fre-
quency difference proportional to the linear phase anisotropy of the mirror A.

To compensate for amplitude anisotropy of the mirror. a weak partial polarizer

was placed in the cavity. To stabilize the frequency of laser radiation with re-
spect to the center of the amplification line. an AFC system described in Ref. 5
was used. A high-voltage current stabilizer with dynamic output impedance of

~600 HR was used for supply of the active element. These steps improved the sensi-
tivity of measurements of phase anisotropy to 10’s rad with intermode range of

315 MHz, which corresponds to instability of the difference frequency of :1 kHz.
Slight misalignments of the cavity and fluctuations of air density that arise during
measurements due to heating of the investigated mirror reduced the sensitivity

of measurements of phase anisotropy to 10' rad at a mirror temperature of ~50°C

An investigation was made of the temperature dependence of phase anisotropy of

dielectric mirrors made by thermal sputtering of Edwave layers of Zns and Hng
on a KB glass backing. Measurements were done at an angle of incidence of 30°

on a lasing wavelength of 1.153 um in the temperature range of 25-55’0.

94
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
A, rad

      

‘ the theoretical dependence of phase anisotropy of
30 0 5” if! a mirror on the parameter xo/x given in Ref. 1. where
Temperature dependence of lo is the wavelength for which the layers of the

irror are ix-wave layers. a

phase anisotropy of mirrors m

with aural-en: initial ani- “““ength' "he“ the “m

sotropy. A. rad: l-- a change in optical thickne

0 038' 2__0 033. 3“ -0 026' is equivalent to diaplaceu

4;- _6 033-.5--,-0 035 ' ’ responding change in phase anisotro
. , .

on the phase anisotropy of dielectric
dence of radiation.

REFERENCES

I. Rybakov. B. V., skulachenko. S. 8.. Chmichev. R. F. and Yudin. I. 1., 01’?le
l SPEKTROSKOPIYA. Vol 25. 1968. p 572.

2. Kotova. A. 1., Rubanov, V. 8.. in: "Gazorazryadnyye pribory. Materialy tret'yey
Vsesoyuznoy nauchno-tekhnicheskoy kont'erentaii

po elektronnoy tekhnike" [Gas-
Diacharge Devices. Materials of the Third All

~Union Scientific and Technical
Conference on Electronics], Moscow, No 2(18). 1970, p 35.

3. Gudelev, V. 6.. Zuykova. N. V.. shchevtaova. A. 1.. ZKURNAL PRIKLADNOY SPEKTRO-
SKOPII. Vol 30. 1979, p 735.

'0. Morris. R. IL. Ferguson. J. 3.. Warniak, J. 8., APPL.

0PT.. Vol 14, 1975. p 2808.
i. Cudelev. V. 6., Yasinskiy. V. H.. PRIBORY I TBKHNIKA RKSPBRIMEM‘A, No l. 1980.
p 215.

l. Ogura, 5.. Sugawara, N., ﬂiraga. R., THIN SOLID FILMS, Vol 30. 1975, p 3.
OPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "ﬂanks”. ”Optika i spektroakopiya", 1981
610

so: 1862 m 95
m omcm. use ONLY
FOR10FFKJA1.USE¢MVLY

UDC 535.214

DBCELERATION 0F ATOHS AND REARRANGEMBNT 0P ATOMIC VELOCITIES BY RESONANT LASER
RADIATION PRESSURE

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEMII "aux sssn: starve FIZICHESKAYA in Russian Vol 45. No 6.
Jun 8| pp 1047-1058

[Article by V. I. Balykin and V. G. Ninogin. Institute of Spectroscopy, USSR Acad-
emy of Sciences]

[Text] Introduction

The main features of movement of atoms in a resonant light field are determined

by the velocity dependence of the force of light pressure and the velocity diffusion
tensor [Ref. 1-6]. Both the force and the diffusion tensor in the case of a mono-
chromatic traveling wave are resonant. reflecting the resonant interaction between
atom and light field. A direct consequence of the resonant nature of the force
and tensor of velocity diffusion is that the force and diffusion change the veloci-
ties of atoms mainly in the narrow range Av-Au/k determined by the width of the
absorption line Au. In this connection. while the diffusion of atomic velocities
does not depend on the direction of wave propagation and symmetrically broadens

the velocity distribution of resonant atoms, the force of light pressure, singling
out a direction in space. forms an asymmetric distribution. As a result. in the
case where atoms propagate along the light wave the center of the velocity distri-
bution is shifted into the region of velocities that are greater than the resonant
velocity, while in the case of contrary propagation the center of this distribution
is shifted toward lower velocities. At the same time, due to the nonlinear depen-
dence of the force of light pressure on velocity, the displacement of the velocity
distribution is always accompanied by narrowing, i. e. by monochromatization of
atomic velocities.

This redistribution of atomic velocities is of interest in the case of deceleration
of atomic beams by an opposed light field [Ref. 7. 8] since slow monochromatic
atomic beans are ideal objects both for direct use in experimental practice and
for injection into atomic traps (Ref. 9-11].

Two methods can be pointed out for decelerating atoms by resonant laser emission.
One of them uses scanning of the frequency of laser radiation along the Doppler
contour of the atomic transition. In this case the effect of the radiation on

the atoms is due to continuous tuning of the laser emission frequency to the reso-
nant frequency of the atom being decelerated. Such a method can be used for

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
generating pulses of cold atoms. The other method of radiative deceleration, which
enables generation of steady-state streams of cold atoms, is head-on exposure of
atomic beams to fixed-frequency laser emission. This method was recently analyzed
for the ideal case of a monochromatic traveling wave in Ref. 8.

Our paper gives experimental and theoretical results of an investigation of the
two methods mentioned above for radiative deceleration of atoms. All studies were
done in a beam of sodium atoms interacting with laser radiation on transition

35172-3P3/2 .

l. Formulation of the Problem

As a basis for our experimental study of the evolution of atomic velocities. we
have chosen registration of the deformation of velocity distribution with respect
to change of intensity of fluorescence of atoms that are in resonance with laser
emission. when atoms are excited on a transition with frequency mo by a head-on
light wave with frequency bl<lno. the fluorescence
signal is proportional to the number of atoms with
y . J velocity vpe3--—(w-wo)/k. Therefore the change in
the fluorescence signal directly reflects the
change in the distribution function of the atoms
w(z. v. t) at longitudinal velocity vz-v-vpea.

A more direct experiment would be to use a probe
light beam to excite fluorescence and record the
latter both at different distances from the point
of entry of atoms into the decelerating laser
field. and at different instants of time. This
method can give adequate information on the change
in distribution function of the atoms w(z, v. t).
Because of limitations on experimental capabili-
ties, we chose a simpler arrangement (Fig. 1).

ll

 

pa h h" in which the fluorescence detector was situated
at a fixed distance 2- Z from the source of the

Fig. l. Deformation of ve- atomic beam. and the fluorescence itself arose
locity distribution of atomic due to the same radiation that was used for de-
beam exposed to a head-on celerating the atoms.
resonant light wave: 1--
source; 2--atomic beam; 3-- The arrangement with scanning of the frequency
laser beam; 4--detector of laser radiation enabled observation of the

contour of fluorescence of the atomic beam, which
determines the velocity distribution of the atoms at point 2- Z. At laser emission
intensity In<<l8 (where I8 is the saturation intensity). the action of the force
of light pressure on translational motion of atoms is insignificant. In this con-
nection, when In»!s the curve for the fluorescence signal as a function of laser
emission frequency copies the velocity distribution of the initial atomic beam.
At intensity ln>>ls. the radiation frequency dependence of the fluorescence signal
represents the velocity distribution deformed by the laser emission. The degree
of deceleration and monochromatization of the atomic beam can be determined by
comparing two distributions with low and high intensity In.

In the arrangement with fixed frequency of laser emission. all information on the
evolution of velocity distribution is contained in the behavior of fluorescence

97
IN)R()FFKJA1.USEGNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Intensity as a function of the time of exposure. The curve describing this behavior
has two distinguisling features. First. because of the drift of atoms into the
region of lower velocities, it is a decreasing function of time. Secondly, the

drop in the curve is always only to a certain level since for a fixed interaction
length Az- Z the velocity distribution is deformed to a certain limit.

 

J‘P ""
1
manly-z -I I I I J I
— f": a
m J!
tin M
r-z
J?“
rm h: m: MHz
11,-: -I a I z m
a b c

Fig. 2. Diagrams of cyclic interaction of sodium atoms with
laser radiation: a-energy diagram of hyperfine structure of
the Dz—line of the sodium atom; b--optica1 orientation of atom
by circularly polarized laser emission; c--resonant transition
in two-frequency excitation of atom

These methods of studying deformation of velocity distribution can in principle

be applied to any atoms, assuming that they are made to interact cyclically with
the light field. In the case of sodium atoms. the cyclicity of interaction can

be achieved either by using circularly polarized radiation for optical orientation
of the atoms, as was done in Ref. 7 (see also Ref. 12), or by exciting the atoms
with a two-frequency light field (Fig. 2). The latter version is preferable since
for any polarizations of laser emission it provides reliable excitation of atoms
from any sublevel F- l, 2 of the hyperfine structure of the ground state 3856'

However. it can be used only in the arrangement with fixed frequency of laser radia-
tion since it is rather difficult to realize simultaneous scanning of two laser
modes with fixed distance between them. In our experiments we used two axial modes
of a cw dye laser as the two-frequency light field. One of the modes excited sodium
atoms on transition 3SVE(P. l)-3Pyi, and the other excited atoms on transition

351/2 (F - 2)-3P3/z (Fig. 2c).

Clearly, the use of the two-frequency light field in principle could have altered
the above-described simple pattern of defamation of velocity distribution since

two light waves can act on different velocity groups of stoma. Actually, at the
temperatures of the scurce of atoms that we used, the overlap of absorption lines

on transitions 351/207-0491,“ and 3817,2(17- 2)-3l’3/2 could be disregarded. In this

connection. the low-frequency mode of laser radiation with frequency m1 excited
atoms only from state P- 2. while the high-frequency mode with frequency uz'.u1+
1772 MHz excited atoms almost exclusively from state P- 1. Since in addition the
frequency interval between modes w2-m1 coincided with the frequency difference

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the two resonant transitions ”own-1772 MHz. both modes acted on the same

velocity group of atoms, and deformed the ve10city distributions on levels F- 1.2
in the same way.

2. Experimental Facility

A diagram of the experimental facility is shown in Pig. 3. It consists of the fol-
lowing principal components: cw dye laser (1), a cell with scurces of main (11)
and reference (10) atomic bears. a system (S, 6) for recording the signal of fluo-
rescence from the atoms (photonultiplier, oscilloscope), laser frequency scanning

Pig. 3. Diagram of experimental
setup: l--dye laser; 2--contro]
cell with sodium; 3. 6--photomu1ti-
pliers; lo--1aser frequency scanning
module; S--oscilloscope; 7--inter-
ferometer; 8--lens; 9--polsrizer;
10, ll--ovens of atomic beans; 12-—
region of interaction of atomic

and laser beams; l3--radiation
interrupter

 

module (4). control cell with sodium vapor (2). and a system for monitoring the
frequency of the laser and the scanning mode. The polarizer (9) and k-wsve plate
produced circularly polarized radiation in single-mode operation of the laser.

The mechanical interrupter (13) ensured switching of laser radiation in the two-
frequency mode of operation.

A Spectra-Physics 580A laser was used to get single-mode scanned radiation. A

system with scanning rate of MOO KHz/ms was made on the basis of the 1.8M scanning
module of this laser.

The two-frequency lasing mode was achieved in the following way. The optical length
of the laser cavity was selected such that the spacing between components of the
hyperfine structure of the ground state of the sodium atoa was a multiple of the
spacing between frequencies of adjacent axial nodes of the laser cavity:

Awe ' Aware/m.

where n- l. 2, 3 . In our experiment. Auc- 35A Mlle, I-S. The lasing spectnn
was prenarrowed to about 2 GB: by using three Fabry-Perot etalons inside the optical
cavity. The effect of spatial burnout of inversion (Ref. 13] and a thin absorbing
metal film inside the cavity (Troitakiy . :lector) [Ref. 14] were used to isolate
from among the six or seven axial modes emitted by the laser two that were sepa-
rated by distance mums-1772 m2, and to suppress the reaaining modes.

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dye laser radiation was sent to a vacuum cell with the atomic beam source (Fig.
3). The chamber was evacuated to a pressure of pa Sclo" mm Hg. The atomic beam
was collinear with the laser beam. Its aperture was determined by a set of irises,
the maximum diameter of the irises being greater than that of the laser beam; there—
fore the zone of interaction of laser radiation with the atomic beam was determined
by the aperture of the laser beam. The diameter of the laser beam near the output
aperture of the source of atoms was equal to d1-'0.9 mm. and in the region of fluo-
rescence signal registration dz- [.1 mm. The length of the interaction region

was 38 cm. The working temperature of the atomic bean source t- 300°C.

When the mechanical interruptor (13) was used. the time of switching of the laser
radiation was tsw= 12 us. which is appreciably less than the average time of flight
of the atoms through the interaction space (tf1-0.4 ms). The duration of exposure
of the atomic beam with the modulator open was 2.5 ms. The region of intersection
of the main and reference atomic beams was imaged on the photomultiplier cathode.
The fluorescence signal could be recorded both from atoms of the main atomic beam
and from the atoms of the reference beam. or bo‘h together. The main atomic beam
was collinear with the laser beam. and the reference beam was perpendicular. The
reference atomic beam was for the purpose of absolute and relative calibration

of the frequency scale. A weak magnetic field of about 1 gauss was applied along

the laser beam in the cell. This field prevented redistribution of the populations
of magnetic sublevels by scattered light.

3. Results of Experiments

A. Scanning of laser emission frequency

In recording deformation of the velocity distribution of the atomic beam with re-
spect to a chauue in absorption line shape (fluorescencr line shaoe), frequency-
tunable circularly polarized single-mode laser radiation was used. Since in this
case all information on the change of velocity distribution is contained in the
shape of the fluorescence line, our principal interest was in comparing two curves
for fluorescence intensity as a function of laser emission frequency: one corre-
sponding to the velocity distribution of the initial beam, and the other correspond-
ing to the deformed velocity distribution. The first curve could be obtained by
scanning the laser frequency along the absorption line contour under two funda—
mentally different sets of experimental conditions. In the first instance the
absorption line contour corresponding to the undeformed velocity distribution

could be recorded at weak laser intensity (Iﬂ<<ls) where the influence of the force
of light pressure on the motion of atoms is negligible. In the second instance
this same contour could be produced at moderate radiation intensities (In~[3) if
the rate of scanning dun/dc of the emission frequency was sufficiently slow. Actu-

ally. for appreciable deformation of the velocity distribution by the force of
light: pressure

F-I—hk' G

W “’

where bk is photon momentum. 27 is the width of the absorption line, 6- In/Is
is the saturation parameter. and Q(t)- mn(t) '(no is the mismatch of the emission

frequency relative to the frequency of the atomic transition. at each instant
the following condition must be met:

”a (0 -o.-kv. (2)

100
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
that maximizes force (1). Differentiating (2) with respect to time and using (I).
we find from condition (2) that the optimum scanning rate is

d0. 6 ~ m
T-hm-FE T~im MHz/ms. (3)

Thus we would expect the most appreciable deformation of velocity distribution
at scanning rate (3). while at lower scanning rates the shape of tb: absorption
line ought to be little different from the undeformed line shape.

6 (1) 6(1)
s :k
l
I””HHz
F. (I) ' 6m. 5 (1)

£1

0

 

Fig. A Fig. 5

Fig. 4. Absorption lines of atoms: a--in perpendicular atomic
beam; b, c--in perpendicular and parallel atomic beams. Frequency
scanning rates: b—-46 MHz/ms, c--370 MHz/ms. Intensity of laser
radiat ion 50 ”Ha.

Fig. 5. Absorption line shape in parallel and perpendicular
atomic beams: a--excitation by linearly polarized emission;
b--excitation by circularly polarized emission

Experinental absorption line shapes are shown in Pig. 4. 5. Fig. 4a shows the
contour of the absorption line of atoms in a perpencidular beam. which was used

for calibrating the frequency scale. The two absorption maxima correspond to hyper-
fine broadening of the ground state of the sodium atom. The position of frequency
maximum F2(l) corresponds to the rate of absorption of atoms from a parallel atomic
been with zero velocity.

Fig. 4b shows joint contours of absorption of atoms in perpendicular and parallel
beams at a slow rate of scanning of laser emission frequency (66 MHz/ms). At such

'101
FCHICHHRCJAI.UBEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a scanning rate the effects of resonant interaction cannot influence the motion
of atoms. and the curves are the absorption contours of the atoms in both beams.

As an example of the influence of the force of light pressure on the motion of
atoms. Fig. 6c shows line deformation in a parallel beam at a scanning rate of

370 MHz/ms. When this line is compared with that in Fig. ab, it can be seen that
the maximum of the absorption line is shifted into the region of frequencies corre-

sponding to slower atoms.

Fig. 5 shows the shapes of the absorption line of atoms in parallel and perpen-
dicular beams at laser radiation frequency scanning rate of in' 370 MHz/ma for
different polarizations of laser radiation.

In the case of linear (a) polarization of radiation under the conditions of our
experiment. multiple interaction of an atom with radiation is impossible because
of the drift of atoms to sublevel F-Il. With a change to emission with circular
polarization (0+), optical orientation of the atom takes place, and as a result
the atom may interact repeatedly with radiation. This should lead to development
of an appreciable force of light pressure on atoms in the beam. 1. e. to deceler-
ation of atoms. which is demonstrated by displacement of the line maximum, the
maximum displacement being equal to *Vpr (Pig. 6).

v Tef, K

 

0 O" I" 1”! I"!

9, MHz/ms

Fig. 6. Displacement of the absorption line center in a parallel
atomic beam as a function of laser frequency scanning rate (black
dots correspond to Fig. 4c). Scale to the right is effective
temperature of atoms interacting with radiation. which was de-
termined with respect to the maximum of the absorption line

The longitudinal temperature of atoms was determined in terms of the rms velocity
of the group of atoms:

1' --—;—((v —<u>)'>. (4)

where '

(v) - ii ommu.’ N. - fun)“.

'102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
<v> is the mean velocity of atoms. N(v) is the velocity distribution of atoms that
results from interaction with radiation. The maximum change of temperature of
atoms during interaction with radiation was determined from (4) by numerical inte-

gration. The temperature change was 73°C.

The main factors that prevent more effective deceleration and monochromatization
(cooling) of atoms in this experiment are discussed in detail in Ref. 7.

8. Fixed frequency of laser emission

Fig. 7 [photo not reproduced] shows the measured dependence of the fluorescence
signal of atoms on the time of interaction with laser emission at a radiation in-
tensity of In- 0.42 VII/cm2 (saturation parameter 6- Inns-1.2. where I3-0.0l W/cm2

is saturation intensity). The time behavior of fluorescence intensity is in complete
accord with that expected on the basis of qualitative ideas. In the case of rapid
switching of laser emission (the lower horizontal lines correspond to a zero fluo-
rescence signal). fluorescence reaches the maximum value corresponding to undeformed
velocity distribution. Then deformation of the velocity distribution (Fig. l)
accompanied by a reduction in the fraction of resonant atoms leads to a drop in the
fluorescence signal. The latter takes place over a characteristic time of deforma-
tion of distribution that coincides with the time of flight of atoms through the
light beam. On the oscillogram of Fig. 7 the time of fluorescence signal reduction
is 0.5 ms, which coincides with good accuracy with the mean time of flight of

atoms through the interaction space. After the mean time of flight. the fluorescence

signal stabilizes on the level corresponding to the deformed distribution.

As was pointed out in Secion l. the amount of change in the fluorescence signal
determines the extent of deformation of the absorption line of the atoms. and hence
the degree of deformation of velocity distribution of tue atomic beam. We measured

Fig. 8. Relative change of the
‘1’]. fluorescence signal of sodium
1‘ atoms as a function of intensity

,4"" ' of laser radiation. Solid curves
show the calculated behavior at
different Au: l--30; 2-—50; 3--

at 70; 4—90; 5—110 m:

41

the dependence of the change in the fluorescence signal on the intensity of laser
radiation. The results of the measurements are shown by the points on Fig. 8.
At an emission intensity of up to 800 mulcmz (GI-80) used in the experiment. the
relative change in the fluorescence signal reached AI/lI-0.36.

103
FINICHHNCJAI.USEZ(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a. EVUIutlun ul At-mlu Velocities at Fixed Frequency of Laser Emission

The experimental results given above are in complete agreement with the theory

of motion of atoms in a resonant light field. In the case of interest to us, where
the natural width of the absorption line 2y (21= 10 MHz for transition 33—3? of

the sodium-atom) exeeeds the recoil energy r (r-IZS kHz), a detailed description
of atomic motion can be obtained from the kinetic equation for the distribution
function w(z, v, t) (Ref. 2. IS. 16]. For an ideal two-level atom and traveling
monochromatic wave in the case of one-dimensional motion of atoms along the z-
axis counter to the light wave, this equation takes the form (Ref. 15. 16]

an iv , a 6'

 

T.”:*3:“"’"r.:-“””" ‘5’
where
G
4-- ,___ 6
1" i+G+(i21-Iw)‘/1' ( )

is the acceleration of the atom under the influence of the force of light pressure.
and

n :_
(9+ku) [1 3 ) (7)

D 1 v'(i+ +0——
--— r a —
2 7 [i+G+(Q+Iw)'/1']'
is the component of the velocity diffusion tensor along the z-axis. In (S). (6)
v.-hk/.ll is the recoil velocity, G—l,/I.. Q-u.,-m.. the parameter a. determines the
z-component of the continuous diffusion tensor [Ref. 15].

Based on equation (5). let us consider the case of deceleration of atoms by a too-
frequency light field of fixed frequency. In doing this. it must be said from

the start that strictly speaking equation (5) cannot be directly applied to de-
scription of the motion of atoms in the experimental arrangement described above.
In the first case, this arrangement used two light waves (two axial modes) with
different frequencies u, and m2. 1n the second case, both modes of laser emission
had a finite width of the frequency spectrum mm, comparable with the natural width
of the atomic transition. Finally. due to the presence of a hyperfine structure
in the excited state JPyB. each of the modes in essence interacted with several

coupled two-level atomic systems (Fig. 2c).

However. it can be shown that accounting for the former circumstance does not change
the form of the equation. Actually. to describe two-frequency excitation of sodium
atoms on two different transitions 381/2(F- 0-315,2 and 381/2(I“-2)-3P3/2 we need to

write two equations; of type (5). However. as was explained in Section 1. since
every atoms actually interacts with only one of the laser radiation modes, and
since the parameters of the equations coincide, by combining these equations we

again arrive at equation (5).

To account for fluctuations of the frequency of laser emission, equation (5) must
be aVeraged over time interval 1: exceeding the inverse width of the frequency spec-
trum: 1>Am.". in carrying out such averaging, we note that the function w(z.

v. t) is already an averaged function of time since it describes a set of atoms in

104
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the time scale l\t>>y'1 [Ref. 15]. Finally, taking into consideration that under the
conditions of the experiment Aun~ y, we arrive at the conclusion that when averaging
equation (5) it is necessary to average only its coefficients A and D. Since in
addition the time dependences of A and D are determined only by the time dependence
of frequency run. it is actually sufficient to average the coefficients of the equa-
tion with respect to frequencies (on.

Averaging of acceleration A and diffusion D with respect to the frequency spectrum
of laser radiation gives a simple means of accounting for the presence of a hyper-
fine structure in the upper level of the resonant transition. Since the width

of the line of laser emission Aun‘ 10 MHz is comparable with the intervals of the
hyperfine structure of state 393/2. it can be assumed with sufficient accuracy for

experimental purposes that the presence of a hyperfine structure is equivalent

to random scatter of resonant frequencies we within the limits of the effective
width of the hyperfine structure Awhfs. Then accounting for the finite width of
laser radiation Am and the hyperfine structure of state 3P3,2 reduces to averaging

the coefficients of equation (5) with respect to mismatches awn-w...

Before explicitly writing out the averaged equation. let us note further that an
estimation of the role of diffusion in the averaged equation shows that for the
length Z of the interaction space used in the experiments and the effective inter-
action width Am. the contribution of diffusion to deformation of velocity distribu-
tion is small compared with that of the force of light pressure. Therefore, limiting
ourselves to consideration of only the latter. we finally write out the principal
equation that describes the experiment with fixed radiation frequency:

aw _.'.. a

——+ —-+--— (AND - , 8

9! v a; 0v( ) 0 ( )
where the average acceleration <A> in the simple assumption of rectangular profile
of distribution of mismatches 9 in effective region A4» is

 

1 "m 1 a (Ao/1)(1+G)"'
_ _ _ _ .__.————. 9
(’1) Ac» “9 7'” (A... ) (1+G)"m‘ i+G+(Au/21)'+(9+Iw)‘/1‘ ( )

In (9) the quantity 52-31-30 has the meaning of the average_mismatch that is the
difference between the central frequency of laser radiation can and the frequency
mo of the atomic transition that is the average value with respect to the hyperfine
structure.

The evoluat ion of velocity distribution w(v) of an atomic beam calculated by equa-
tion (8) for z-l- 38 cm and Am- 70 MHz is shown on Fig. 98. As a time unit we
chose the quantity Owl»).1 - 3.240"6 s. In the case of long times (”>11“)

due to the finiteness of the length of the region of interaction of atoms with
laser radiation. distribution w(v) approaches the steady state. The time depen-
dence of fluorescence intensity corresponding to time defamation of w(v) is shown
on Fig. 10 for different values of G. Since If at t-O corresponds to undeformed
distribution, the change in If as time varies from t-O to the characterizes the
deformation of velocity distribution.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

w. rel. units

   

I m _ 5,, M he]; l 8" _§/, on he],

Fig. 9. Change in velocity distribution at point z- 38 cm as

a function of interaction time t at 9-4701. Am- Nov and G-

30 (a), 6- 1000 (b). Average thermal velocity of atoms v-ZZOY/k-
6.5leh cm/s (Zy- 10 MHz, 6- Ills. 15- 10 mH/cmz). Time unit
(kvrr‘ - 3.2-10'6 a

If. rel. units

Fig. 10. Fluorescence signal

of sodium atoms in the beam

as a function of time of inter-
action with resonant laser emission
for z_- 38 [cm] at 0-4707. Aw-
lloy. v- ZZOY/k and 0-1 (1),

9 (3). 27 (lo) and 81 (S)

 

o m ‘ :00 c
Tint

Fig. 8 shows the behavior of the fluorescence signal as a function of the intensity
of laser radiation at different values of the paraneter Au as calculated from the

curves of Fig. 10. (he best approximation of the experimental points is realized

at Am- 70 11112. This value agrees well with the mean value of the interval of the
hyperfine structure “"hfs‘ 714 MHz.

Conclusion

Our studies show that resonant laser emission of moderate intensity (1,,- Is~

10 mN/m’) is an effective means of controlling the translational state of atoms.
When atoms are made to interact cyclically with radiation, the latter can be suc-
cessful 1y used in particular for decelerating atomic beams and for considerably
narrowing their velocity distributions. Such an application of resonant light

pressure opens up real possibilities for generating beams of cold atoms and inject-
ing them into atomic traps [Ref. 3. 9-11].

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"N
o

3.

9.

10.
11.
12.

13.

14.

IS.

16.

REFERBQCES
Ashkin. A.. PHYS. REV. LETTS, V01 25. 1970. p 1321.
Baklanov. Ye. V., Lubetskiy, 3. Ya.. OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA, Vol 61, 1976. p 3.

Lecokhov. V. 8., Minogin. V. 6.. Pavllk.'B. D., ZHURNAL BKSPERIHENTAL'NOY I
TEORETICHESKOY FIZIKI, Vol 72, 1977. p 1328.

Stenholm, S.. APPL. PHYS.. Vol 15. 1978. p 287.
Scenholm, 5.. J. JAVANAINEN APPL. PHYS.. Vol 16, 1978. p 159.

Krasnov. I. V.. Shaparev, N. Ya.. ZHURNAL EKSPERD‘IENTAL'NOY I TBORETICIESKOY
FIZIKI. Vol 77, 1978. p 899.

Balykin, V. 1., Letokhov. V. 5.. Hishin. V. I.. PIS'HA V ZHURNAL ESPQDCEN-
TAL'NOY I TEORETICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 29. 1979. P 6110; ZHURNAL EKSPERIMUTAL'NOY
I TEOREI‘ICHESKOY PIZIKI. V01 78. 1980. p 1376.

Minogin. V. 6.. 0PT. COHHUNS. Vol 34. 1980 p 265.

Ashkin, A. 0PT. LET'I'S. Vol Io. 1979. p 161.

Gordon, J. P.. Ashkin. A.. PHYS. 11311.. Vol 21A, 1980, p 1606.

Letokhov, V. 8., Hinogin. V. 0., 0PT. COMMUNS. Vol 35. 1980. p 199.

Balykin. V. 1., 0PT. COWS. Vol 33. 1980. p 31.

Hertel, I. V.. Stanacovie. A. 8.. IBEE J. QUART. ELECTRONICS. Vol 08-11. 1975, -
p 210; Becerov. I. 11.. Kirin. Yu. 14.. Yurshtn, 3. Ya.. OPT. COHMUNS. Vol 13,
1975. p 238.

Condina. N. D.. Zakharov, H. I., Troitakiy, Yu. V. ZHURNAL PRIKLADNOY SPEKTRO-
SKOPII, Vol 10. 1979. p 43.

Hinogln. v. 6.. ZHURNAL mspzkmazm'umr I mazncuasxov PIZIKI. Vol 79.
1980. p 2041..

Cook. R. J.. PHYS. REV.. V01 A22. 1980. p 1078.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Seriya fizicheskaya". 1981

6610

C50:

8146/0354

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621. 317.757

LOW-FREQUENCY SPECTRUM ANALYZEg 0F CORRELATION TYPE

Moscow PRIBORY. I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIMBNTA in Russian No 5. Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript
received 29 Jun 80) pp 85—89

[Article by V. A. Kaznacheyev. I. H. Butenko, G. G. Bunin, K. H. BykovandN. H.
Zaytsev]

[Text] The paper describes a portable two-channel spectrum ana-
lyzer of correlation type. Frequency band 10 lit-60 His; hand
of analysis 5 Hz; spectral threshold sensitivity ~l nV/lﬁz}
dynamic range 100 dB. Provisions are made for measuring the
modulus and phase of the complex correlation coefficient between
spectral components of two steady—state random processes.

Results of measurements of the spectra of lowarequency (l.f.) noises in radio
signals when these spectra contain discrete components that considerably exceed

the levels of fluctuation noises in the frequency band of analysis will be inexact
or even erroneous in the case of a narrow dynamic range and a wide band of analysis
of the spectrum analyzer. Discrete components in the noise spectrum arise in the
case of vibrational and audio acoustic effects. under pulsed working conditions,
and when there are strong pulsations of power supply voltage. The fluctuational
noises of instruments and devices under such conditions can be measured between

the frequencies of discrete components of the spectrum by l.f. spectrum analyzers
with narrow band of analysis and wide dynamic range.

The search for major noise sources in the signal at the output of an instrument
or device is considerably facilitated by measuring correlation coefficients between
spectral components of noises of the output signal and the noises of individual
components of the intrument or subassasblies of the device. Such measurements
can be made by two-channel l.f. spectrum. analyzers with correlators at the output.

It should be noted that quite often when measuring the l.f. noises of low-noise
microwave instruments and devices. the set noises of microwave detectors are com-
parable with the noise being studied. The influence that l.f. noises of detectors
have on results of measuring noises of microwave devices is considerably reduced
by using correlational fluctuation meters [Ref. 1-9]. These meters have higher
sensitivity than single-channel meters.

This article gives the results of development of a two-channel spectrum analyzer

of correlation type that has better spectral threshold sensitivity and a greater
dynamic range than analogs made in the Soviet Union and elsewhere (see the table).

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Major characteristics of best l.f. spectrum analyzers

 

Principal characteristics

 

Type of Distinguishing Spectral ,_ ‘
analyzer features Frequency sensi— Dynamic Band of I—ferences
range. a. mu ragga. - auysis,
nV/lﬁ? z
Iescribed Two-channel correla- 10-6-10“ 1 100 5 -
ere tionnl analyzer with

automatic normaliza-
tion in measurement
of correlation coef-

  
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
  
  

ficient
4-1.8 Single-channel 10-2 ~10“ 17 70 s, 150 10
xa-se " " 10-2 -10" 17 80 3 11
P-3580A " " 5-5 .10‘ 30 80 1 12
45533 " " 03-110-10‘ - 130* 10 12
F-l Two-channel correla- lO'-5-10s 15 - '00. 400 3

tional analyzer with
manual normalization
in measurement of

correlation coeffi-
cient

*Assuming that the l.f. set noises of the spectrum analyzer in the frequency
ange from 10 Hz to 1 kHz change according to a 1/? law (flicker noise), the dynamic
ange of this spectrum analyzer on analysis frequency of 10 Hz will not exceed 90 dB.

 

This paper gives designs for improved technical characteristics of the spectrum
analyzer: spectral threshold sensitivity of ~1 nV/Jiz} dynamic range of 100 dB,
automatic normalization of spectral density of the reciprocal spectrum. The ampli-
tude—frequency characteristics of the input amplifiers and mixers of the spectrum
analyzer enable displacement of the lower limit of the frequency band to a fraction
of a hertz. To do this it is sufficient to change the filters that determine the
frequency band of the analysis for more narrow-band filters.

Specifics of Major Components of the Circuitry. The spectrum analyzer consists
of two identical amplification channels that are superhet receivers with double

frequency conversion (Fig. l). A block diagram of one amplification channel is
shown in Fig. 2.

Low threshold sensitivity on low frequencies is enxured by KT3107L low-noise tran-
sistors with high current gain (8)100) at low collector working currents (I¢~
0.1-! mA) [Ref. 13]. Similar results are achieved when KTZOJB transistors are
used for the input amplifiers.

The upper frequency of flicker noises of amplifiers using transistors of these
types does not exceed 30 Hz when the impedance of the signal source is less than

109
F0l:0FFHJA1.USB(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. |. Block diagram of spectra: analyzer: Fem 1--first hetero-
dyne; [hm Znsecond heterodyne (200 kHz); 031. esp-phase shifters;
W1, Mir-devices for manual and automatic gain control; W1, MIN;
--mu1tiplier overload indicators; ll--analyzer mode selector; X--
multiplier; OH'lnlow-frequsncy filter; HII--meter; [IR—digital fre-
quency meter; Arr-multiplier attenuator

. m From 1-st heterodyns

 

Fig. 2. Block diagram of one amplification channel; MN-Arrlo"
attenuators; BIU--low-noise input maplifier with stepwise gain

control; Yﬂ‘lulow-frequency amplifier with continuous gain control;
"NC-mixer overload indicator; Cub-first mixer (128 kHz); K01 --

quartz filter with pss_sband of 5 Hz on frequency of 128 Idlz; nymp-
premnplifier of first i-f voltages; ”Np-first i-f voltage ampli-

fier; K02 --second quartz filter with passband of 30 Hz or. frequency

of 128 kHz; CNZ "second mixer; YIN; --second i-f voltage amplifier (72 kHz)

I0 kn. A diagram of the uplifisr is shosm in Fig. 3. The experimental curve. for
the noise factor as a function of frequency is shown in Fig. lo. The wide dynamic
range (>100 dB) is attained by making the low-frequency amplifiers in a differential
circuit with deep negative feedback (>60 63). Cmutation of the input attenuator

and feedback circuits is done in such a way that the input impedance of the channel
is 100 kn on all measurement ranges.

A schematic diagram of the mixer is shown in Fig. 5. The mixer operates as follows.
In the differential stage based on KlN‘l‘S9l microcircuit and M3128 transistor the
input voltage is changed to antiphsse collector currents of the transistors of chip
KINTS91. The current switches alternately connect the antiphase currents to the
2.2 kn load resistors. In this way the input signal is multiplied by the pulse
signals of the heterodyne with l V peak-to-peak amplitude (from cycle to cycle).

110
I70! OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
Fig. 4. Noise factors of amplification
channel in 5 Hz band at different sig-
nal source impedancea: l-47 kn. 2--
6.7 k9. 3--560 Q

 

Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of low-noise
input amplifier: P1, P2--sealed-contact
relays; T1, T2—-KI3107L; T3, Tu--KP3033;
Ts--KT3102V

   

Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of mixer: H1-K217NT3; Hz--KINTS91
T;--KT3128

111
INJR10FIHCJA1.I§HE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The wide dynamic range of the mixer (>100 dB in a frequency band of 5 Hz in combi-
nation with quartz filter PPZP-34) is achieved by using deep negative feedback

(620 9 resistor) in the differential stages based on chip KlNTS9l, and switch oper-
ation of the transistors of chip K217NT3. An advantage of the switching mode of
mixer operation is that the i-f voltage amplitude is independent of fluctuations

of the heterodyne amplitude. The balanced circuit of the mixer keeps the heterodyne
voltage on a low level in the intermediate-frequency channel (<40 dB over the noise
level in this channel at Ehet'fi-f)'

The dynamic range of the mixer is less than that of the preceding amplifiers since
the mixer as a whole cannot be covered by feedback. Under these conditions the
dynamic range of the amplification channel (together with the mixer) depends on

the ratio of the transfer factor of the first quartz filter to the noise voltage

of the intermediate-frequency channel normalized to the input of the intermediate-
frequency preamplifier (IFPA). The higher this ratio. the wider will be the overall
dynamic range. The above presentation is realized in the described spectrum analyzer
in the following way: the ratio of the transfer factor of the quartz filter to

the noise voltage of the intermediate-frequency channel is brought to about

1/40 nv‘1 by selecting resistors to match the input of the quartz filter to the
output impedance of the signal sOurce (2.2 kn). and to match the output to the

load (5.6 k9); the developed IFPA circuit has a noise factor of <2 dB.

‘5

    

Fig. 6. Schematic diagram of IFPA: T1--GT322V; T2, T3--KT30!Ye

The maximum dynamic range of the amplification channel is realized at an effective
signal amplitude of ~40 mV at the mixer input. This level is established by con-
tinuous gain control of the low-frequency amplifier, and is monitored by the mixer
overload indicator. The indicator is a peak detector with time constant of l s.

A schematic of the first i-f voltage preamplifier is shown in Fig. 6. To stabilize
gain (50 dB), the IFPA is covered by negative feedback (R1. R2). R1 is selected
during tuning.

The noise level of the amplifier (~20 nV in a frequency band of 5 Hz) is determined
mainly by the quartz filter load resistance. The required gain of the intermediate-
frequency channel should be >130 dB since the optimum voltage across the inputs

of the multiplier is ~150 mV. Resistance to self-excitation of the intermediate

112
FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(NVLY
Pig. 7. Schematic of multiplier: H1-101KTI; Hz, M3-K1NT591;
Hu--1150HA1 ; 111-4322 3

frequency channel is ensured by using a second frequency converter. This facili-
tatea tuning of the circuit and simplifies the design of the device (by reducing
shielding requirements for stages of the intermediate-frequency channel).

The gain of the first intermediate-frequency (i-f) channel (128 kHz)-from the

input of the IFPA to the input of the second sixer-is 70 dB; the gain of the second
i-f channel (72 kHz)-from the input of the second mixer to the input of the multi-
plier-is 60 dB. The second quartz filter with frequency band of 30 he installed

in the first i-f channel is intended for suppressing the noises of this channel

that lie outside the 5 Hz frequency band of the first quartz filter. The second
mixer is made in the same circuit as the first.

The phase shifter is built in a bridge circuit (Ref. 16. p 2&0]. The phase of

the input signal is shifted by changing the current through diodes connected in

the phase-shifting era of the bridge. Maximum phase shift is 135°. The signal
multiplier with current normalization [Ref. 15] is based on a lbOHAl microcircuit
(Fig. 7). A logarithmic stages based on lOlKIl and 159NT1 microcircuits expands

the range of voltages of the multiplied signals. Optimum voltages across the multi-
plier inputs (~150 mV) are established by regulating the gain of the low-frequency
and intermediate-frequency channels, and are monitored by the readings of multiplier

overload indicators.

A correlational gain in noises of the correlator (the multiplier together with
the integrator) by a factor of ~5-10 with band of analysis of 5 Hz is realized

at an integrator averaging time of ~10-60 s. The integrator is an RC integrating
circuit with time constants of l, 3, 10 and 65 a.

When measuring the modulus of the complex correlation coefficient between the spec-
tral components of two random processes by the phase shifter in one channel of

the spectrum analyzer. the signal phase is varied by an amount such that the indi-
cator reading is maximized. This reading corresponds to the sought modulus. and

the rotation of the phase by the phase shifter corresponds to the phase shift be-
tween the spectral components of the processes on the given frequency of the spectrum.

113
FOR‘OIIICJAl.lﬂﬂE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The real part of the complex correlation coefficient is read out directly from
the scale of the meter. the zero position being in the middle of the scale. When
measuring correlation coefficients in both channefs, automatic gain control is
switched in to obviate the need for laborious calibration of the device on each
frequency of analysis.

Each heterodyne has two frequency tuning bands: a wide band from 128 to 188 kHz
with frequency stability of 3'10'5 over 15 minutes, and a narrow band from 128

to 131 kHz with frequency stability of 2-10“ over 15 minutes. The wide-band het-
erodyne is a master IC-oscillator with thermocompensation. It is tuned over a
frequency band of 1.2—1.9 MHz. The frequency of the waveforms at the heterodyne
output is obtained by dividing the frequency of the master oscillator by 10. The
frequency of the heterodyne output signal in both ranges is varied by tuning the
frequency of the master oscillator. In the narrow band the heterodyne frequency
is stabilized by phase AFC.

The heterodyne frequency is monitored by a digital frequency meter with liquid
crystal display. The error of frequency measurement by this meter is no more than
20.1 Hz. Undivided frequency is sent to the frequency meter to accelerate operation
by a factor of lo. Kai—28 sealed contacts are used to con-utate the circuits in

the attenuators, feedback in the input amplifiers. the frequency bands of the het-
erodyne and the time constant in the RC circuit of the multiplier.

The described spectrum analyzer can be used to measure the "fine" structure of

the spectrum of low-frequency noises of electronic instrunents in real applications.
in particular at high levels of pulsations of supply voltages and their harmonics.
Correlational analysis of the noises of devices and of the noises in circuits where
they are used reveals fundamental sources of noises, and accordingly enables deter-
mination of possible ways to reduce them. Thus the wide dynamic range and the two-
channel arrangement with correlator at the output are the major advantages of the
given spectrum analyzer. -

The authors thank V. G. Gorbas' for furnishing the frequency meter.
REFERENCES

l. Kornilov, S. A.. Timaaheyev. R. G.. Filippov, B. V.. VOPROSY RADIOELBKTRONIKI.
Ser. 1, No 1. 1965. p 302.

2. Kornilov. S. A.. VDPROSY RADIOELEKTRONIKI. Ser. 1. No 2, 1965, p 114.

3. "Tekhnicheskoye opisaniye i instruktsiya po ekspluatatsii izmeritelya
fluktuatsiy i koeffitsiyenta korrelyatsii IP-l" [Technical Description and
Operating Instructionsofthe IF-l Device for Measuring Fluctuations and Corre-

lation Coefficient], 1971.

a. Lange, F., "Korrelyatsionnaya elektronika" [Correlational Analysis]. translated
from German, edited by V. I. Klyachkin. Leningrad, Sudpromgiz. 1963.

5. Bunin. G. G.. Kiyanov. Ye. P.. Pugachev, G. A., Yazykov. Yu. 0., USSR Patent
No 364040, published in BYULLETBN' IZOBRBTENIY No A, 1973. P 125.

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6. Kornilov, s. A., Skabovskiy. n. s.. vopnosv RADIOELEKTRONIKI. Ser. 1, No 3,
1965, p 132.

7. Kornilov, s. A.. skabovskiy. u. s.. vopnosr RADIOELEKTRONIKI. Set. 1. No 2.
' 1965. p 102.

8. Bunln. G. 6., Shuvalov, B. A.. ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA. Set. 1. No 8. 1979, p 50.
9. Sal'nlchenko. A. Ya.. PRIBORY I TEXENIKA EKSPERIHENIA, No 5. 1976, p 97.

IO. "Tekhnicheskoye opisaniye i instruktsiya po eksplustsii analizatora spektra
54-58" [Technical Description and Operating Instructions for 84-48 Spectrum Ana-
lyzer], 1975.

ll. "Kataiog-prospekt Radioizneritel'nyye pribory 1979 g." [Catalog-Prospectus
on Electronic Measuring Instrulents for 1979]. Moscow. Central Branch Agency
of Scientific and Technical Infor-ation. 1979.

[2. "Hewlett-Packard Catalog", 1977.

13. Zhalud, V.. Kuleshov, V. 8., "shuny v poluprovodnikovykh ustroystvakh" [Noises
in Semiconductor Devices], Moscow, Sovetskoye radio. 1977. p 81.

lb. Alekseyenko, A. 6.. "Osnovy nitroskhelotekhniki" [Principles of Hicrocircuitry],
Moscow. Sovecakoye radio, 1977.

IS. Yakubovskiy, S. V., ed., "Analogovyye i tsifrovyye integrsl'nyye skheuy" [Analog
and Digital Integrated Circuits], Moscow, Sovetekoye radio, 1979. p 231.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pribory i tekhnika eksperinenta". 1981

6610
080: 1862/66

115
FOR OlﬂﬂCIAI.UBEZOBﬂJ!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OYTOELECTRONICS

PRIZ IMAGE CONVERTER: ITS USE IN OPTICAL DATA PROCESSING SYSTEMS

Leningrad ZHURNAL TIKENICHBSKOY PIZIKI in Russian Vol 51, No 7. Jul 81 (manuscript
received 18 Jun 80) PP 1422-1431

[Article by M. P. Petrov. A. V. Khomenko. H. V. Krasin'kova. V. I. Harakhonov
and H. G. Shlyagin. Physicotecbnical Institute imeni A. P. Ioffe. USSR Academy

of Sciences, Leningrad]

[Text] The paper gives the results of a study of the new PRIZ
optically controlled space-time light modulator. The trans-
verse linear electro-optical effect in a 311251020 crystal is
used for light modulation in this device. The authors examine
the working principle of such a modulator. and give the results
of measurement of its parameters. It is shown that with respect
to all major parameters the PRIZ modulator is superior to the
tron modulator using the same crystal. Besides, the new device
can be easily used for outlining, sectoral filtration and dynamic
selection of images. A new method is proposed for describing
the effect of dynamic light modulators that is used for describ-
ing the effect of dynamic selection of images that has been
discovered in the PRIZ modulator. It is demonstrated that holo—
grams can be recorded from such a modulator. and that it can

be used for compressing LFM signals.

Optical methods are advisable for processing large masses of information. and

in particular information in the form of two-dimensional images. It is most ef-

fective in such cases to use optical data processing systems that operate in real
time. However. realization of systems of this kind requires an active element--

what is called a space-time light modulator enabling efficient high-speed record-
ing, readout and erasure of the initial image. In many cases of practical impor-
tance it is sufficient that the block of information imaged on the modulator and

the pace of operation correspond to the television standard (number of resolvable

elements 105-106. frame frequency 20-30 Hz).
At the present time, several space-time light modulators have been developed,
e. g. modulators based on liquid crystals [Ref. 1]. the Phototitus [Ref. 2]. PRO“

[Ref. 3] and others. Nonetheless. up until now no modulator has yet been developed
that would simultaneously satisfy the entire set of requirements to be met.

'116
FOR10FFKJA1.UBB(NVLY
This paper is a report on the results of studies of a new modulator--the PRIZ
image converter--that has high parameters and can be used for such operations
as spatial differentiation and sectoral filtration by an extremely simple and
effective method. In addition, this modulator has shown an effect of dynamic
selection of images. enabling differentiation of the time-variable part of two-
dimensional information blocks.

Working Principle

Operation of thePRIZInodulator is based on the photorefraction effect, 1. e.

on the change in birefringence of a crystal under the action of incident light.
The same effect is used in the well known PROM device. Let us explain the working
principle of both modulators by means of the structure illustrated on Fig. l.

 

Fig. 1. Structure of Fig. 2. Cross section of
PRIZ modulator display by plane (111)

This structure consists of plate of working crystal (1) and a current feed system
that includes transparent conductive coatings (3) and thin dielectric layers (2).
Crystals that simultaneously show the linear electro-optical effect and photocon-
ductivity can be used as the_working material. Host suitable are cubic crystals
that belong to point groups 63m and 23. Hereafter. all results will be discussed
on the example of crystal 31281029 (group 23). It is on this crystal that the
modulator will give the best results. although experiments were also done with
31] 20e02 o and 311 2T102 o .

The mechanism of operation of the modulator is as follows. Recording light from
the blue-green part of the spectrum excites charge carriers in the crystal that
drift into an electric field applied to the crystal plate. As shown in Ref. 4.
this results in formation of a spatially inhomogeneous electric space charge in
the crystal with distribution in the plane of the plate that reproduces the inten-
sity distribution of the recording light. The presence of the space charge gives
rise to an inhomogeneous electric field thqt has both longitudinal components

117
Itﬂl(nﬂﬂ(JAl.lEﬂ£(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(relative to the field set up by the supply voltage) and transverse components.
Since the crystal has the linear electro-optical effect. a spatial change in bi-
refringence arises in conformity with the magnitude and direction of local internal
electric fields. When polarized light from the longer-wave part of the spectrum

is used for readout, the readout beam is modulated with respect to the state of
polarization. An analyzer can convert modulation with respect to the state of
polarization to amplitude modulation.

In order to understand the characteristic features of the PRIZ modulator that
distinguish it from the PROM modulator we must go into more detail in the theory
of the electro-optical effect for crystals of the given type. As is known [Ref.
5]. the linear electro-optical effect in a cubic crystal that belongs to group 23
is described by the tensor of electro-optic coefficients in which only the diagonal
elements rt1, rs; and r5; are non-zero, with r.1- r52! :53. Both the longitudinal
and transverse field-linear electro-optical effect is possible. The electro-
optical effect is termed longitudinal or transverse depending on the mutual orien-
tation of the electric field in the medium and the direction of light wave propa-
gation (in the longitudinal effect. these directions are parallel, and in the
transverse effect they are orthogonal). In the absence of an electric field.

the given crystals are isotropic, and the optical indicatrix is a spherical surface.
On the other hand, if an electric field acts on the crystal. the indicatrix is
deformed into an ellipsoid. To determine the birefringent properties of the crys-
tal. it is necessary to find the cross section of the indicatrix by the plane
perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the readout beam, or in our case
by the plane parallel to the plane of the plate. Therefore the orientation (cut)
of the plate with respect to the crystallographic axes has decisive significance
in calculation of the electro-optical effect. Besides, it is important to con-
sider that the electric field giving rise to the change in birefringence is the
sum of the external applied field and the internal inhomogeneous field produced

by the volumetric distribution of the charge. The phase difference between the
ordinary and extraordinary beams of the reading light depends on the x and y co-
ordinates of the plane of the crystalline plate.

Let us consider the three principal orientations of the plane of the plate (100),
(110). (Ill). In cut (100) when the plane wave of the reading light is normally
incident, only the longitudinal electro-optical effect is possible. In this case,
no matter what the orientation of the electric field in the crystal, birefringence
is produced only by the longitudinal field components (1. e. those along the z-
axis). Hereafter, the z-axis will everywhere be taken to mean the direction of
the normal to the forward surface of the crystal plate. The phase difference is

‘u
2
am. y)=%n:r..§ 54:. y. z)dx=-;n:r..u. (1)
0
where Ez(x, y. z) is the longitudinal component of the electric field, which in
the case of nonuniform charge distribution in the crystal depends on the z-coordi-

nate; de is the thickness of the crystal; U is the potential difference between
surfaces of the crystal plate; no is the index of refraction of the crystal.

In contrast to cut (100). in the case of cuts (110) and (111) when a plane light
wave is normally incident only the transverse electro-optical effect is possible.

118
FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£1DNLY
In cut ([110 the cross section of the optical indicatrix in the principal axes
takes the form

[L — ﬂames. y. z)]==+[,i‘+ ﬁrst“; u. z)]v‘==1- (2)

where Bxy(x. y, z) is the magnitude of the projection of the electric field vector
on plane (111). In the general case, Bxy is a function of the z-coordinate. Here
the phase difference will be

4"

Am. u)=°% 1/?»er 8.,(2. 9. ad:- (3)
0

Thus the magnitude of birefringence is independent of the direction of the electric
field projection in plane (111). and is determined only by the modulus of this
projection. The angle 1 between the principal axis of the cross section of the
optical indicatrix ox and the axis [110] of the crystal. and angle 1 between the

projection of the electric field vector and axis [110] are related by the ex-
pression

2‘? + 1 = «[2. (4)

When cut (110) is used, Ad is determined both by the magnitude of the projection
of the electric field vector on plane (110). and by its direction. The maximum
phase difference is reached when the electric field is directed along axis [110].
In this case

2: "’
Am. u)=-rnz.ru 5 (8.,(2. y. 2m (5)
0

At a given electric field strength. this is the maximum phase difference that
can be obtained by the transverse effect in a cubic crystal [Ref. 6].

As we know, A¢ determines the modulation of the reading light with respect to
the state of polarization. When linearly polarized reading light is used. and
behind the modulator is an analyzer that isolates the component orthogonal to
the initial polarization. the light is amplitude-modulated. The light intensity
I(x. y) behind the analyzer is described by the following expression:

1 (z, y) -..= I. sln’ 2»: sin‘ 69/2. (6)

where lo is the intensity of the light passing through the modulator to the ana-
lyzer; a is the angle between the direction of the field of polarization of the
reading light and one of the principal axes of the optical indicatrix (Pig. 2).

0n the other hand. if circularly polarized light is used, the intensity of the
light behind a circular analyzer (combination of k-wave plate and linear polarizer)
does not depend on the direction of the field since A¢ is independent of the orien-
tation of the electric field vector in plane (111). In recording a sine-wave
grating, the magnitude of the phase difference A¢(x. y) is described by the follow-

ing expression:
A? (3' U) = A7. + Ma, 005 *8" (7)

'119
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USB(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The diffraction efficiency of the instrument n, i. e. the ratio of intensity of
the beam diffracted in the first order to the intensity of the reading light inci—
dent on the modulator with consideration of (2) and (1.) can be related to the
amplitude of modulation of the phase difference ”It; by the following expressions:

'1‘= 1mm.) 608' (2? + 1) (8)
(J1 is a first-order Bessel function) for the case of linear polarization, and
n=1f(°?a) (9)

for he case of circular polarization. At small values of Ad. J1me) 3 A9/2.

As we can see from relations (l)-(9), the parameters of the modulator. and as

will be clear later. the functional properties depend in a radical way on the
orientation of the crystal. Modulators using the transverse electro-optical effect
are hereinafter called image-converter modulators in contrast to the PROP! modulator
where the longitudinal effect is used.

It has been noted earlier that spatial modulation of light is determined by the
electric field of the space charge produced in the recording process. For the
PRU“ modulator in which the longitudinal electro-optical effect is used, an in-
crease in thickness of the space-charge layer leads to a sharp reduction of A.
and resolution [Ref. 4]. Under the same conditions for the P311 modulator an
increase in the effective thickness of the space charge leads to increased reso-
lution of the device. For example. for cut (111), calculation analogous to that
of Ref. 4 yields the following expression

Ah,=%g X

.1 [oh k,(a,,_.)+1 —ou,a.,-cht,.|—o.,¢u,d,abk,a
Xli— s,(t.thk,d.,+c.,t ‘ q }' (10)

where on is the space density of the charge produced during recording; a", 511'
de, dn are the permittivity and thickness of crystal [up] and dielectric [11]
respectively; a is the thickness of the space charge layer. This formula implies
the following.

I) At large values of lax (kx>1/a). A¢~ l/kx, whereas in the ease of the PROM
modulator A¢~ l/kf‘. i. e. the PRIZ modulator has smoother dependence of A. on
spatial frequency kx. This leads to an increase in the resolution of the modulator
as compared with the PROM modulator.

2) At all spatial frequencies “)1 In" the magnitude for the PRIZ modulator
is greater than the as given by the PROM modulator. As a result, the diffraction
efficiency of the PRIZ modulator is higher.

3) As Int->0, (lo->0, i. e. the null space frequency is not reproduced by the PRIZ
modulator. This automatically leads to spatial differentiation of images.

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Results are similar for cut (110). the only difference being that a factor of

the order of unity depending on angle y shows up in formula (10). It shOuld be
noted that the external electric field in the PRIZ modulator lies in the direction
of propagation of the reading beam, 1. e. geometry analogous to the longitudinal
electro—optical effect is externally realized in the modulator. However. in the
recording process an inhomogeneous field is set up in the crystal, and the trans-
verse components of this field are actually used to modulate the light.

Experimental Results

Fig. 3 shows the results of measurement of the diffraction efficiency of the PRIZ
modulator as a function of the space frequency. The measurements were done in

a logarithmic arrangement with Michelson interferometer. The space frequency

was selected by varying the the angle of inclination of one of the mirrors of the
interferometer. The source of recording light
was either a helium-cadmiun laser (l-lolol nm)
or an argon laser 0-488 nm). It can be

seen from Fig. 3 that the PRIZ has high reso-
lution with recording by laser light. Its
sensitivity in this case remains practically
the same as in the case of recording by He-Cd

: * laser light. The given experimental data
\3 ° agree with conclusions drawn from formula
0.1 _ . \ (m).
\ .
141.. .
i 2 6 '0 20 700
kx. lines/mm
Fig. 3. Diffraction efficiency as

a function of space frequency for

the PRIZ modulator (l. 2) at wave—

lengths of the recording light of

MI nm (1) and 488 nm (2). Shown

for comparison is the same curve

for the PROM modulator (3). A-
1041 nm, E- 200 erg/c1112.

 

Pig. 4 shows curves for diffraction ef~
ficiency as a function of the angle be-

tween the vector of the space lattice and
the crystallographic ames for cut (111).
The solid lines show calculated curves

for n in accordance with formulas (8) and
(9) for linear and circular polarization
of the reading light. The space frequency
of the lattice was 5 lines/m. The plane
01' linear polarization was oriented along
axis [115]. For linear polarization we
see good agreement between the theoretical
curve and the experimental data in the case

121

Fig. 4. Diffraction efficiency

as a function of the angle between
the vector of the space lattice

and the crystallographic axes for
circular polarization and for linear
polarization parallel to axis [112]:
l--recording from the side of the
negative electrode; 2—-frou the

side of the positive linear polari—
zation n(¢) - no cos2 ¢$ 3--circular

polarization n(¢) - const

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where negative potential is applied to the leading electrode with respect to the
recording light. On the other hand, if "+" is applied to this electrode. the
experimental values fit satisfactorily on curve 1" nocos (y- 30°). This can be
explained with consideration of the optical activity of the crystal by the fact
that an inhomogeneous electric field is formed in the layer situated closer to

the negative electrode [Ref. 4]. In this case, when the negative electrode is

the trailing one with respect to the recording light. the plane of polarization

of light is turned through an angle of ~15“ due to optical activity upon passage
through a crystal layer ~0.7 mm thick. In accordance with expression (8), this
leads to displacement of orientational dependences through an angle of ~30°. This
fact is one more confirmation of the assumption that the effective thickness of
the layer responsible for modulation of light is considerably less than the thick-
ness of the crystal.

The curves shown on Fig. 4 demonstrate that in the case of readout by linearly
polarized light. the modulator does not reproduce all spatial frequencies. but
rather only those whose vector lies in a certain angular sector. 1. e. sectoral
filtration of images is realized.

Circularly polarized light can be used for readout of images. In this case. when
the crystal plate has orientation (ill), the diffraction efficiency in accordance
with (9) does not depend on the direction of the space lattice vector. The experi-
mental data on Fig. 4 confirm this conclusion.

   

Fig. 5. Recording of hologram from PRIZ modulator: a--original
image; b--image recorded on PRIZ modulator; c--image recon-
strucred from hologram

Fig. 5 shows a photograh of an image recorded on the PRIZ modulator that was read
out by linearly polarized light. It can be seen from the figure that the null
space frequency of the image was not reproduced, which led to outlining of the
image. The arrow indicates the directions in which the sectoral converted image
is realized; this specific feature is reflected in the name PRIZ [PReobrazovatel'

IZobrazheniy: bnage converter].

The same figure shows an example of the image reconstructed from a hologram that
was recorded by the PRIZ modulator. In this case the modulate. acted as a con-
verter of incoherent light to coherent light.

122
FOR OFFIC’AL USE ONLY
The sensitivity of the PRIZ modulator is at least an order of magnitude better
than that of the PROM modulator. This means that the PRIZ can be effectively
used in systems for real-time optical processing of information. Ref. 7 has re—

ported on the use of this modulator in an optical spectrum analyzer. correlator
and as a medium for recording holograms.

The PRIZ modulator can also be used for processing electrical signals. and specifi-
cally for compression of an LEM signal. In this case the signal is recorded as

an LFH grid on the modulator, and readOut is by coherent light. At a certain
distance from the modulator. one of the diffracted beams is compressed into a
narrow band. In the same plane. another diffracted light beam and the null order
have remained defocused. The theoretical coefficient of compression in this case
is expressed by the formula [Ref. 8]

kcomp=%+l/1:’—"‘ n=A/l, (11)

 

where A5 is the deviation of the space frequency of the grid. and Z is its length.
Fig. 6 shows the result of signal compression with deviation of 8 lines/mm,

Z- 15 mm. obtained by a PRIZ modulator. The signal was recorded on the modulator
from photographic film by He-Cd laser light.

The experimentally detenmined value of the co-
efficient of compression was ~100 (theoretical
coefficient of compression of such a signal

is kcomp' 120).

Dynamic Properties

Thanks to high sensitivity (-5.10‘7 J/cm2 per
12 of diffraction efficiency) and the capability

 

 

 

for fast erasure by a flashlamp when the elec-
— trodes are shorted. the PRIZ modulator ensures
speed of the order of the television standard
. (20-30 frames per second) or more. The working
IIIIIIllIlllllllllllmlﬂlﬂlmnm mode corresponds to the usual well-known cycle:
"“""“"‘ recording - readout - erasure. However. on
Fig. 6. Result of compres- modulators with a modified current-conducting
sion of LFM signal: a--image system. another mode of operation is possible
of LFM signal; b--inage of as well, i. e. a mode that does not require
null order and compressed sig- image erasure. Since some experimental results
nal; c--scanogram or zero order that explain this node have already been pub-
nnd compressed signal lished [Ref. 9]. we give here only the diagram

of Fig. 7. As we can see from this diagram.
when the recording light is energized an image arises in the modulator that begins
to fade within a certain time (in the given specific example within about 0.5 s).
but flares up again when the recording light is switched off. Thus a time-variable
image (or part of one) is isolated in the modulator. These effects can be attrib-

uted to redistribution of the space charge as the image changes. and they determine
the entire dynamics of operation of the device.

Available experimental results of investigation of the response of the PRIZ modu-
lator to unsteady controlling pulses show that this modulator is actually dynamic.

123
FIN!(HWNCJAI.USEGDNIN
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

Irec

Fig. 7. Response of device
to change of light intensity
in image being recorded

relative units
A

 

Iread

'o a: 1.0 1.5 1,3

and can provide time-continuOus image processing. whereas in most known cases.
discrete frameby frame processing is realized. In this connection, the problem
arises of describing the characteristics of a modulator that adequately reflects
their unsteady nature.

In the scope of our research. a phenomenological approach is developed to descrip-
tion of a dynamic modulator within the framework of the theory of linear systems.

The microscopic nature of the processes that take place in the modulator. as well

as its functional capabilities in devices for processing unsteady two-dimensional
signals will not be discussed here.

Let us consider the response of a dynamic optically controlled modulator to the
action of light that has distribution of intensity in the plane of the modulator
P(x, y, t). We will take the modulator as fairly thin to avoid accounting for

the three-dimensional nature of data recording. In the general case. the action
of the modulator on the reading light can be described'by a tensor of second rank
P(x, y. t). If the reading light has the corresponding wavelength and does not
influence the parameters of the dulator. then the amplitude of the reading light
immediately behind the modulator out(x' y. t) is related to the amplitude of

the reading light Eread before the modulator by the expression

Eout‘“ Ya t)'§(xo Y9 t)irud' (12)

Under the influence of the recording light there will be a change in §(x, y. t).
so that we can write

Hz. y, ¢)=P,+AP(:. y. t). ' - (13)

As we know. 50 is a Jones matrix. Hereafter we will consider only A§(x. y. t).

In accordance with the theory of linear systems, the response of the system
AP(x. y. t) to signal F(x. y. t) can be represented as

W. v- I>.= SEE use as“. .,. 9"”“"“"“"‘..“"s"‘v"' (1‘)

124
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(HULY
whcrc kx’ ky and m are the spatial and time frequencies respectively; 5(kx. ky. w)
is the three-dimensional Fourier transform of the function P(x, y, t). and r(kx.
kl, u) is the Fourier transform of the function of response of the modulator to

t e recording light AP5(x. y. t)

ems“). i)= $333305. 19. .)g«t~ww?m‘auo. : (15)

The function 2(kx. ky. m) characterizes the response of the modulator to the re-
cording light. It is related to the transfer characteristic with respect to the

reading light by the expression
5

3m, k,.3)=_, 3 :0... k,.. 430... k,. drew. (t6)

J

which is thus a function of time. An important quantity in the experimental re-
spect is the diffraction efficiency

we; k,. o)='|x(k,. 1",. .)s(k,. k,. .w. . (n)

The difference between this case and the traditional case where the recording

of steady-state time-independent images is considered is that the unsteady images
are distributed with respect to traveling rather than steady-state waves. And

the response of the modulator is also represented as a sum of traveling waves
with amplitude :05“ ky. w)S(kx. ky, «0). Since in our case the action of the
recording light gives rise to a change in the index of refraction (photorefraction
effect), apparently traveling waves also represent the photorefraction waves.

As can be seen from comparing formulas (8) and (17). for low intensities of the
recording light when the system meets conditions of linearity, the diagonal ele-
ments of the transfer characteristic «(kx. ky. m) coincide with Aq.h.'. except
for a coefficient that depends on angles a and p.

It is important to emphasize the difference in the two stages of analysis. The
first stage examines the linear response of the medium to the intensity of the
recording light, 1. e. the recording of the image. Fourier analysis is done with
respect to three variables, and the transfer characteristic is the function

E(kx, ky. m), while the response function is AP(x, y, t). In readout. the trans-
fer characteristic of the device is the function Je(k,k .l) (16), which depends
on time as a parameter.

For experimental determination of r(kx. Ry. w). blue light was used to record on
the modulator an image of the form

N1. y. ¢)=B(l+moosk;cmd). (1s)

The intensity of diffraction of He-Ne laser light was measured at the same time.
Based on (17) and (18) we can easily find that the intensity of light in the first

diffraction order is

‘n..o.-=¥ We. 0. «w. (19)

125
FOR¢lﬂﬂ€1A1.USE(NVLY
FOI.0FFIC1AI.USI2(MNLY

Fig. 8. Dependence of K on
temporal and spatial fre-
quencies: l-w/21 - 2 82;
2-4/2: - s an"

      

0 8 l

ujzx , a!

Pig. 8 shows the values of IKM, 0. m)l as a function of It; at fixed u and as

a function of u at fixed kx for a modulator in vhich the (110) cut is used. and
kxllllol. It can be seen from the figure that the frequency response «(km 0. to)
vanishes at w-O. and increases linearly at small w. This type of behavior of
the frequency characteristic means that the PRIZ modulator in the given mode of
operation does not transfer null temporal frequencies. 1. e. steady-state images.
but ensures continuous isolation of unsteady parts of the image. thus realizing
dynamic image selection. At small u in the 0-3 Hz range. the operation of dynamic
selection coincides with differentiation of images with respect to time.

REFERENCES

I. Kompanets. I. IL. Parfenov. A. V., Popov. Yu. 14., Preprint No 1110. Physics
Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev. Moscow, 1979.

2. Crenot. H.. Pergrals. J.. Donjon. J.. Marie, 6.. Al’PL. PHYS. 1.811., Vol 21,
1972. p 83.

3. Oliver. D. S.. OPT. ENG. Vol 17, 1978. p 288.

lo. Petrov. H. P.. Khomenko. A. V.. Berezkin. V. 1.. Krasin'kova, M. V.. mo-
ELEK‘I'RONIKA, Vol 8. 1979; nomenko. A. V.. Petrov. H. P.. Kraein'kova. H. V..
PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TWICMSKOY PIZIKI, Vol 5. 1979. p 336; Petrov. H. P..
Khonenko. A. V.. Berezkin, V. 1., Krasin'kova, H. V.. PERROEBCTRICS. Vol 22.
1978. P 651.

5. Sonin. A. 5.. Vasilevskaya, A. 8.. "Blektroopticheskiye kristally" [Electro-
Optical Crystals]. Atonizdat. Moscow. 1971.

6. Mustel'. Ye. 8.. Parygin, V. IL. "Hetody nodulyatsii i ekanirovaniya eveta"
[Methods of Light Modulation and Scanning]. "Mun". Moscow, 1970.

7. Petrov. H. P.. Marakhanov, V. 1.. Shlyagin. M. 6.. Kilomenko. A. V..
Krasin'kova. H. V.. DIURNAL WIMSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 50. 1980. p 1311.

126
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8. Shiman. Ya. 0.. "Rszrezheniye 1 szhstiye signslov“ [Expansion and Compression
of Signals]. "Sov. radio", Moscow. 1976.

9. Petrav, H. P.. Khomenko. A. V., Harskhanov. V. 1., Shlyagin. H. 6.. PIS'HA
V ZHURNAL TWICHBSKOY PIZIKI. Vol 6. 1980, p 385.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Hanks", "Zhurnsl tekhnichsskoy fiziki". 1981

6610
680: 1862/54

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IMHI(MﬂﬂC1Al.USElMNLY

PLASMA PHYSICS

UDC 533.93I.95
RADIATION RELATIVISTIC GAS DYNAMICS OF HIGH momma: PM

Moscow RADIATSIONNAYA RELYATIVISTSKAXA GAZODINAHIKA VYSOKOTEHPERATURNYKH IAVLENIY in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 6 Feb 81) pp 2-6, 87-88

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents fron book "Radiation Relativistic Gas
Dynamics of High Temperature Phenomena", by Vladimir Sergeyevich Inshennik and
Yuriy lvanovich Horozov, Atomisdat, 1065 copies, 88 pages]

[Text] On the basis of relativistic covariant equations of radiation transport,
which include processes of absorption and scattering of photons in matter, the au-
thors derive various approximations of radiation relativistic gas dynamics: radia-
tive heat conduction with local thermodynamic equilibrium. nonequilibrium Thomson
coherent scattering of photons and Compton scattering of photons. Expressions are
obtained for the energy-radiation pulse tensor. Diffusion approximations of radia-
tion relativistic gas dynamics are examined. The authors derive completely closed
nonrelativistic diffusion equations of Compton radiation gas dynamics which gener-
alize the ordinary approximation of radiative heat conduction for the case when
photon scattering processes predominate.

The book is intended for scientific workers in the fields of high-temperaturs-plasma
physics and relativistic astrophysics. It can be used by graduate students and sen-
ior course students in physics.

The bibliography contains 49 references.

Foreword

Relativistic effects during the movement of a gas interacting with occurrent radia-
tion play a very substantial role in many problems of high temperature gas dynamics.
Equations of radiation relativistic gas dynamics must be employed in order to take
these effects into account when diverse physical phenomena with a high energy densi-
ty are being investigated. One can mention in this case powerful electrical dis-
charges in plasma of the plasma focus type and compression and heating of targets by
laser radiation, relativistic electron beams or beams of high-energy heavy ions.

For phenomena like these it is necessary to account for such effects as the part
radiation plays in pulse transport, the effect of macroscopic movement of matter on
radiation transport of energy, the influence of various effects of interaction be-
tween radiation and matter on gas dynamic characteristics of movement and so on.
Especially important is the consideration of relativistic effects in a number of

128

FOR OIIﬂCJAl.USEIMNLY
astrophysics problems, such as the propagation of strong shock waves in stellar en-
velopes toward the star surface, typical in the gravitational collapse of stars and
in supernovae outbursts; high-speed fluxes of matter in the surface layers of stars
and the sun, of the stellar wind and solar wind type; the development of flare ac-
tivity of the sun and stars and so on.

A detailed, comprehensive investigation of these problems necessarily touches upon a
broad range of questions of a theoretical nature which call for a well-grounded pre-
sentation on the method used to obtain approximations of the equations of radiation

gas dynamics in relativistic covariant form, and on their merit and limits of ap-
plicability.

The basis for the study of radiation transport in a medium moving at relativistic
velocities was set-forth in the classic work of Thomas [1]. Cited works [2-6] are
devoted to various forms of covariant formulation of the Thomas equations within the
framework of the special theory of relativity. In the work of Lindquist [73. eQua-
tions of relativistic radiation gas dynamics are obtained in a general covariant
form which holds for general relativity theory. Characteristic of the works along
this line is that most of them rely on the representation of radiation in the form
of a photon gas and on the use of the Boltzmann equation, whereby the effects of

the radiation's interaction w i t h matter are viewed phenomenologically--in terms
of the coefficients of radiation absorption and scattering, the effective opacity of
the medium and the function of the source. This approach enables linking the rela-
tivistic covariant description of the effects of radiationdmatter interaction with
the well developed formalism of classical transport theory. Moreover, for many
practically important cases it enables finding effective methods of solving the
equations using angular and spectral moments of the rediation's intensity.

However, many aspects of relativistic radiation gas dynamics which are important in
regard to high-temperature media are treated inadequately or not rigorously enough
in the pertinent literature. This is particularly so as concerns coverage of the
role of radiation scattering effects, which are a governing factor for certain pro-
cesses occurring in such media. It addition, it is necessary to mention the rather
complicated way of deriving relativistic covariant equations of radiation gas dy-
namics whichrelies in certain cases [7] on a mathematical apparatus scarcely acces-
sible to a lot of physicists. Meanwhile, a simple and effective method of obtain-
ing the equations of radiation relativistic gas dynamics using widely known formal
procedures of special relativity theory is entirely feasible, a method which enables
properly allwing for a number of important effects described at present on the basis
of a specific tetradic formulation of general relativity theory.

The purpose of this book is to simply and comprehensibly set forth certain complex
problems of the radiation relativistic gas dynamics of high temperature phenomena

and to formulate the equations of radiation relativistic gas dynamics in a number
of practically important approximations.

129

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
Foreword
Chapter 1. Boltzmann Relativistic Equation
1. Lorentz General Transformations
2. Phase Space
3. Distribution Function of Particles
é. Boltzmann Relativistic Equation
5. Collision Terms
Chapter 2. Relativistic Equations of Radiation Gas Dynamics. The
Energy-Radiation Pulse Tensor. Radiative Heat Conduction
and Radiation Viscosity
6. Equations of Distribution Moments
7. Equations of Radiation Relativistic Gas Dynamics
8. The Energy-Radiation Pulse Tensor Under Near-Equilibrium
Conditions in a Natural System of Reference
9. The Energy-Radiation pulse Tensor Under Near-Equilibrium
Conditions in a Laboratory System of Reference
10. Radiation Viscosity. One-Dimensional Case
Chapter 3. Effects of Radiation Interaction With Matter in Equations
of Radiation Relativistic Gas Dynamics. Thomson and
Compton Scattering of Photons by Electrons of Matter
11. Photon Scattering on Electrons of Matter
12. Allowing for the Effects of Thomson Scattering in Equations
of Radiation Relativistic Gas Dynamics (Natural System of
Reference)
13. Effects of Thomson Scattering of Photons in a Laboratory
System of Reference
16. Allowing for the Effects of Compton Scattering in Equations
of Radiation Relativistic Gas Dynamics. Initial Relationships
15. Allowing for the Effects of Compton Scattering in Equations
of Radiation Relativistic Gas Dynamics. Calculation of Com-
ponents of the Vector of Energy-Radiation Pulse Exchange
with Matter
16. Conditions of Closing Equations of Radiation Relativistic
Gas Dynamics. Galilean Approximation
Chapter 4. Equations of Radiation Transport in Noninertial Systems
of Reference
17. Definition of a Co-moving System of Reference. Introduction
of the Movable Reference Point. Migration of the Reference
Point Along a Universal Line
13. Definition of Synchronization Space
19. Formulas of the Link Between Components of kchceleration in
Different Systems. Generalization of the Definition of
Co-moving System
20. Derivation of Equations of Moments in a Co-moving System of
Reference on the Basis of Boltzmann's Equation
21. Derivation of Equations of Moments From the Equation

of Radiation Transport
22. Components of the Energy-Radiation Pulse Tensor Under Con-
ditions Close to Local Thermodynamic Equilibrium If Compton
Scattering is Taken Into Account

23. Equations of Gas Dynamics in a Co-moving System of Reference

Chapter 5. Diffusion Approximations in Radiation Gas Dynmios.
Radiative Heat Conduction and Comptonian Radiation
Gas Dynamics

24. Diffusion Approximation. Hethod of Baskog

25. Approximation of Radiative Heat Conduction

26. Basis of Approximation of the Total Comptonization of Photons

27. Basic Equations of Comptonian Radiation Gas Dynamics

28. Equation of Photon Continuity

Conclusion ‘

Bibi iography
COPYRIGHT: Atouizdat, 1981

5654
C80: 1862/29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STRESS, STRAIN AID “FORMATION

UM 536.2223
CALCULATING INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF DE‘IONATION HAVE

Hoscow mm AKADEHII MIX sssn in Russian Vol 260. No 5. 1981 (manuscript re-
ceived 23 Apr 81) pp 1154-1157

[Article by S. K. Aslanov and 0. s. Golinskiy, Odessa State University ineni
I. I. Hechnikov]

[Text] It has been experimentally shown (Ref. 1-3] that the detonation propaga-
tion process has a pulsation structure. This is explained by instability of the
detonation wave relative to unsteady perturbations that curve its wavefront and
result in formation of Mach configurations there. Their complete calculation,

in particular determination of the frequency 9 of appearance of the configurations
and the size Ay of inhomogeneities that they generate must be based on nonlinear
analysis of perturbations. Such an approach to investigation of stability runs
up against serious analytical difficulties. Therefore we will try in this paper
to find estimates for the principal structural elements a and Ay of the detonation
wave on the basis of linear stability theory. While this theory cannot lay clain
to any final conclusions. nonetheless the quantitative estimates that it yields
explain some known experimental factors.

In studying detonation stability relative to perturbations ~exp<6x+ ihy- me),
Ref. 6 used the Zel'dovich model [Ref. 5, 6] vith chemical kinetics of the delta
function type 6(t-r). To solve the equation derived in Ref. 6 relative to m,

we use the hypersonic asymptotic form of Ref. 7, which gives a good approximation
up to shock-wave Mach numbers H92 3. By taking the nunber H1 in the induction
zone (Ref. 8] as a small parameter. we obtain for analysis of instability the
dimensionless form of expansion of the eigenvalue c-co-i-cﬂG-O- (c- 1m. r is
the induction period) and an equation relative to principal terICo of the follow-
ing form:

a) ﬂop + o a o.

F, o are algebraic functions of Coo B/RT,€, Ho. “8’ r1. :2. where £-lﬂ.-2wL/A.
I.-V1t, E is the activation energy. R is the gas constant. T is temperature. V is
velocity. r is the ratio of specific heats. A is the perturbation wavelength
(Fig. l). L is the thickness of the detonation front. subscripts l and 2 refer

to gasdynamic quantities of the induction zone and detonation products.

The transcendental factor e’c° shows the presence of a vibrational spectrum of
unstable pertturbations expressed by an infinite sequence of complex roots co-a+ib.

132
FOR10FFNJII.USE(NNLY
Depending on the value t of the geometric di-
mension of the perturbation. two types of
instabilities may develop on the front: one-
dimensional (C-O) and two-dimensional ((#0).
The former is associated with the predomi-
nantly one-dimensional nature of initial per-
turbations and the galloping mode of propa-
gation of the process. The frequency spectra:
for this case was studied in Ref. 8.

The two-dimensional type of instability is
associated with development of curvatures
of the detonation front and arisal of breaks
there formed by Mach configurations that ig-
nite the mixture in the transverse direction.
Generally speaking, perturbations may take
place in this process with arbitrary value
of the parameter 59‘0. However. such breaks
should be generated primarily by the pertur-
bation that develops with accompanying maximum
curvature of the detonation front. This curva-
ture is determined both by the initial level
ength A. The only way to determine the param-
om the standpoint of the overall average level

of the amplitude of its displacement Mt) ~exlee(-iwt)]
given perturbation A~ 1/: (Fig. I). With reference to
onation wave as a whole (as a wavefront). it makes sense

 

curvature of the wavefront. reaching its maximum value at points B (B'). It is
precisely in the vicinity of such points that we shOuld primarily expect the
breaks BI, 3: (Bi, B!) as perturbations develop, with formation of the triple
configurations experimentally observed by the wake and optical method [Ref. 1-3].
Numerical analysis has shown that the maximal of c(€) is weakly sensitive to se-
lection of the time interval.

Solution of equation (1) has been nmerically confirmed on a computer with initial
isolation of roots for the limiting case 5-0. The calculations were done on

the basis of the example of detonations in a mixture of 2H2+02 (xx-1.4. x2-1.3.
To-293 K) for the following cases: I) self-maintained mode H2 - l at po- 760.
300. 100 and 45 mm Hg; 2) overdriven mode (oblique Mach wave at the tip of the
spin nucleus for po-AS mm Hg [Rah 3)). liq-6.05. Hon-5.88. Dim-0.553.

Activation energy E was taken as 18 keel/mole [Ref. 9, 10]. the speed of sound
in the initial mixture was 514 m/s, and the detonation rate was based on experi-
mental dependence on pg from Ref. 3.

133
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

Fig. 2 Fig. 3

Results of calculation are given only for characteristic cases: po- 760 and

65 mm Hg. Accordingly, Fig. 2 and 3 show curves for the distribution with respect
to wave nunber 6 of the fundamental harmonic of the eigenvalue (0(a, b). as well
as the only real root so of equation (1) that is associated with aperiodic insta-
bility, and the value of C(E). The dot-and-dash curve of a“) for overdriven
compression given for comparison on Fig. 2 clarifies the experimentally observed
stabilizing action of this mode on the detonation process.

The value of in found in each case corresponds to a certain value of the frequency
parameter vo-b/(Zm) that characterizes the frequency 9 of appearance of inhomo-
geneities in the detonation front. Their average dimension Ay can be estimated
by using Ala/2, since Fig. 1 shows that an average of two Mach configurations

(Bi, Bi) develop over the extent of one wavelength.

Determining T1 from the enthalpy of the shock-compressed mixture (Ref. 3]. and
using experimental values of 1 recalculated for the pressure of the mixture
(1-~1/p1) [Ref. 9]. we get the following final results. For po-760 mm IIg (Ho-
5.as; 1-2-10-7 8): 5,-0.5; b-l.95. 1. e. Ann-0.68m and v.-l.5 mu. Data
of experiments (Ref. 3. 9]--Ay-0.6 III and 9- 1.3-1.4 m. For po-300 mm Hg
(Mo-5.25; 1" 7.240"7 s): :m- 0.57; 5-2.33, 1. e. 512-“ us and ”-0.52 us:
for experimental Ay: 1.8 mm and 0-0.6-0.5 MHz. At 130- 100 In ﬁg (Mo-6.55;
1-5-10"5 5): En" 1.05; b-3.0lo. i. e. Ann-7.3 [mm]. and w- 92 kHz (experiment
Ay-6.6 m; 0-85 kHz).

In case po-loS an Hg (Ho-4.28; r- 1.440“ s). -1.23; b-3.3, 1. e. x_/2-
16.7 um. and vo - 39 kHz. The initial data for th a case correspond to the spin
mode in a tube 16 mm in diameter. with experimentally observed spin frequency
of 64 kHz. The interesting fact that Xn/Z remains close to the diameter and is
greater than the diameter is evidence of the possibility that a single break may
exist in the cross section of the tube, which ensures spin detonation.

1310
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
With a further reduction in the initial parameters of the mixture (beyond the
region of the spin mode), I rises rapidly, and a slight change in 5111 ensures a
strong increase in Am, which may considerably exceed the diameter of the tube
as the characteristic transverse dimension of the wavefront. If the detonation
limits are not reached in this case. the instability becomes one-dimensional.
resulting in galloping of the process with periodic pulsation of extinguishing
and ignition of the mixture behind the shock wave (with frequency vo at c-O).

Thus we have shown on the basis of the phenomenological theory developed above
that each set of parameters of the initial fuel mixture, and in particular the
value of the initial pressure po. has a definite natural frequency that character-
izes the internal pulsation structure of the detonation wave and the size of the
inhomogeneities that develop there.

The authors are sincerely grateful to Ya. B. Zel'dovich for constructive discus-
sions of the work and useful remarks.

REFERENCES

l. Denisov, Yu. N.. Troshin. Ya. K.. DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR, Vol 125. No l,
1959. p 110.

2. Voytsekhovskiy, B. V., Kotov, B. Ye.. Hitrofanov. V. V., Topchiyan, H. Y.,
IZVESTIYA SIBIRSKOGO OTDELBNIYA AKADEMII NAUK SSSR. No 9. 1958. p M.

3. Shelkin, K. 1., 'l‘roshin. Ya. K., "Gazodinsmika goreniya" [Gasdynamics of Con—
bustion], Izdatel'atvo AN SSSR. Moscow. 1963. p 66.

lo. Aslenov, S. K., DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 163. No 3, 1965. p 667.

5. Zel'dovich. Ya. 3., ZHURNAL EKSPERIHENTAL'NOY I TBORETICEHSKOY PIZLKI,
V01 10. I960. p 542.

6. Zel'dovich. Ya. 8.. Koapaneyets, A. 5.. "Teoriya detonatsii" [Detonation The-
ory]. Gostekhizdat, Moscow, 1965.

7. Chernyy, G. 6.. "Techeniye gaza s bol'shoy sverkhzvukovoy skorost'yu" [Gas
Flow at High Supersonic Velocity], Fimatgiz. Moscow. 1969. pp 1-5.

8. Aslanov, S. K., DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK UKRAINSKO‘! SSR, Series A. No b, 1977.
p 313.

9. Shchetinkov. Ye. 8., "Fizika goreniya gazov" [Physics of Combustion of Gases],
Nauka. Moscow. I965. p 129.

10. $010ukhin, R. 1., "Udamyye volny i detonatsiya v gazakh" [Shock Waves and
Detonation in Gases], Fizmatgiz, Moscow, 1963. p 115.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Doklady Akademii nauk SSSR". 1981

6610
C80: 1862/59

135
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KISCBIMNBOUS

SURVEY OF RESEARCH IN PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY

Moscow USPEKHI PIZICHBSKIKH NAUK in Russian Vol 134, No 3, Jul 81 pp 469-483,
512-517

[Table of contents. introduction, concluding remarks and bibliography from article
by V. L. Ginsburg, Physics Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev. USSR Academy of Sciences:
"What Problems of Physics and Astronomy are now of Particular Importance and In-

terest? (Ten Years Later) "]

[Excerpts] Table of Contents

I.

Introduction

II . Macrophysics

III.

IV.

1. Controlled nuclear fusion (471). 2. High-temperature superconduc-
tivity (472). 3. New substances (problem of creating metallic hydrogen
and some other substances) (474). 4. Metallic exciton (electron—hole)
liquid in semiconductors (475). 5. Phase transitions of the second kind
(critical pressures). Some examples (475). 6. Surface physics (478).

7. Behavior of matter in ultrastrong magnetic fields. Investigation of
very large molecules. Liquid crystals (479). 8. x-ray, gamma and new
kinds of optical lasers (481). 9. Superheavy (far transuraniun) 81¢-
Inents. "Exotic" nuclei (482).

Hicrophyslcs
10. Quarks and gluons. Quantum chromodynamics (484). 11. Unified theory

of weak and electromagnetic interaction. "’9' bosons. leptons (488).
12. Grand unification. Decay of the proton. Superunification. Haas of
tne neutrino (491). 13. Pundaasntal length. Interaction of particles at

high and ultrahigh energies (493). 14. Violation of GP invariance. Non-
linear phenomena in vacuum in ultrastrong magnetic fields. Some remarks
on development of microphysics (495).

Astrophysics

15. Experimental verification of general relativity theory (499). 16.
Gravitational waves (500). 17. The cosmological problem (501). 18. Neu-
tron stars and pulsars. Physics of "black holes" (502). 19. Quasars and
nuclei of galaxies (506). 20. Origin of cosmic rays and cosmic gems and
x-radiation (508). 21. Neutrino astronomy (511).

‘ 136
FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY

page

469
471

498

498
IWJR OFTWCJAI.USIZ(NHLY

V. Concluding remarks 512
References 513
I. Introduction

In 1971 in the "Present-Day Physics" section of USPEKHI PIZICHBSKIKH NAUK, an
article [Ref. 1] was published with the same title as the present article, but

of course without the subtitle ("Ten Years Later"). Ref. 1 was expanded into

a small booklet that was subsequently translated into several languages, and has
now been published in the Soviet Union in a third edition in 1980 (Ref. 2]. It
seems to me that such a fate of Ref. 1 leaves no doubt that the formulation of
the problem contained therein and its discussion is of real interest to many.

and apparently primarily to yOung physicists and astronomers. At the same time.
it is quite obvious that setting apart some small class of problems to be elevated
to the ranks of those of special importance and interest is an arbitrary matter,
and must not result in neglect of the enormous number of other problems. It is
also clear that the author's selection issubjective. and no claim was then or

is now made that Ref. 1. 2 are anything more than popular science articles. All
this has been fairly well stated in Ref. 1, 2, and there is no need here to go
into any more detail in developing these remarks. However, I should note the
following: if Ref. 1 were being written from the start, in order to avoid irri-
tating some readers (if we assume that everyone who has criticized the article
has actually read it). a more neutral title would have been chosen (such as "Some
Interesting and Important Problems of Physics and Astrophysics“). Unfortunately,
from the very nature of this. the second article, it is impossible to change the
title.

It is clear from the foregoing that for ten years the author in reworking Ref. 1
for new publications has been following the transformation of certain trends and
topics in the area of physics and astrophysics. Thus in a natural way the idea
has arisen of writing the present article. which has the purpose of reflecting

the changes that have taken place in physics and astrophysics over the past ten
years. But. of course, we are not speaking of physics and astrophysics as a whole.
but rather principally only the problems discussed in Ref. 1. Therefore the orga-
nization of the article is as in Ref. 1. which singled out 17 problems; in Ref. 2
there were 21 areas. but some of them should have been broken down. On the whole.
in this article we will deal with approximately 25 problems and scientific areas.

Finally, I would like to emphasize the following. This article is obviously not
what physicists refer to as a "research paper". but neither is it a review of

the literature. Therefore it should not be expected to meet requirements that
are appropriate for other cases. For example, in the first place the author as-
sumes that we can dispense with questions of priority in the article proper and
in the list of references. NumerOus names or citations of priority would be both-
ersome to the reader. Besides, time and again we have had to come to the con-
clusion that priority citations in the literature “adapted by repetition" are
frequently inexact or even incorrect. And to undertake a special priority search
with respect to the history of the numerous citations would be entirely out of
place. Secondly. the author does not follow the "impersonal style" of exposition
favored in scientific literature. especially in Russian. According to the tenets
of this style. not only is it forbidden to use personal pronouns (1. me, etc.),

‘137
IN)! 0i!ﬂ(lAl.lEﬂE(H'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

but the author must in general be hidden as far as possible from the eyes of the
reader. I remember how 1.. D. Landau was always interrupting speakers who had
started to say what they thought or assumed with the comment: "Don't forget.

your wife is the only one interested in your biography." The impersonal style
has come into being as a result of lengthy experience in the development of science
and I consider it perfectly appropriate in scientific papers. surveys. monographs
and textbooks (I daresay my own practice is no contradiction). But another matter
entirely are journalistic articles. memoirs or articles like the one I am writing.
and I wouldn't know what genre it belongs to. At any rate, this article is already
"personal" in its very inception (i. e. it is subjective by definition). being
devoted to my own idea of certain trends and directions in physics and astro-
physics. I know some people who would find such an approach in itself inappro~
priate or immodest. Others disagree with many of my opinions. All this is their
own business and their right. I would be the last to make any categorical claims
regarding my opinions, and moreover I myself feel that some remarks of mine are
quite controversial. I only reserve the right to have such opinions and not be
afraid to express them. In such a situation. the author cannot and does not mean
to "keep his innocence and still make a profit." Therefore I will have to use
personal pronouns. and to some extent not hide my "biography." I very much hope
that this form of exposition will not invoke a negative response on the part of
readers.

II . Macrophysics

Macrophysics as a whole is grounded on a firm foudation (classical and quantum
mechanics. classical and quantum electrodynamics, including the special theory

of relativity). Therefore it is natural that the development of macrophysics

in qualitatively new principles is taking place more slowly and less dramatically
than in the case of microphysics and astronomy (including cosmology). To be sure.
we anticipated events somewhat [see Ref. 1, 2] in putting nuclear physics in the
category of macrophysics. as this field borders closely on microphysics. On the
other hand, the general theory of relativity (having in mind Einstein's classical
theory) is in its essence a part of macrophysics. but it operates in full force
only in outer space. and is therefore discussed in the astrophysics section of

the article. But even when we consider the advances in nuclear physics and gen-
eral relativity theory over the past decade. macrophysics is not up to microphysics
in quantity of profound and important new reSults. However. advances and results
in science cannot be weighed out on scales. much of this progress being poorly
commensurable anyway. Therefore we will not divide up "places" and will rather
get on with the specific problems.

I. Controlled Nuclear Fusion

This problem has been dealt with for 30 years now. The initial "rosy optimism"
was quickly replaced by what could often be taken as even pessimistic views after
it was learned how capricious hot plasma could be, how difficult it is to contain
in traps. But it gradually became clear that with careful control over the homo-
geneity of the magnetic field (to be more precise there must be no field inhomoge-
neities that are unforeseen in calculations), and also when heavier impurities
are removed from a hydrogen plasma. variOus magnetic traps (tokamaks, stellarators
and some others) operate in general in accord with expectations (Ref. 3a]. As a

138
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
result. there is no longer any doubt as to the possibility of success in systems
with magnetic plasma containment. But to check calculations and overcome diffi-
culties, it is necessary to build ever larger facilities. Naturally this requires
considerable money, effort and time. Tokamaks are currently the favorite. but

as far as I can judge, their superiority over. say. stellarators has not been
demonstrated. Research is also continuing on "open" magnetic traps. called
"mirrortrons" in the jargon. There is scarcely anyone who would try to assure

us that open systems. in some ways the simplest and most convenient. will never

be able to compete with toroidal facilities.

Over the past decade there has been an upsurge of interest in systems with inertial
plasma containment involving micro-implosion of motes (droplets) of a mixture

of deuterium DE d and tritium TE t (of course. we cannot rule out the use of pure

0 as well in the future). In principle. the initial implosion of the mote can

be accomplished by light (lasers) and by electron and ion beams [Ref. 3b]. Elec-
trons are especially difficult to use. at the present time laser systems have

been most thoroughly studied, and interest in the use of ion beams is increasing.
Unfortunately. as in the case of magnetic traps, generally speaking. very large
facilities are needed for studying the capabilities of the "inertial thermonucleus."
In general. research on possibilities of controlled nuclear fusion in the seven—
ties has to a greater extent than formerly turned from a physical problem simul-
taneously into an engineering problem of industrial scale. However. physics is
still leading as competition goes on between rival principles and methods of plasma
containment. and no operating reactor that delivers power has yet been produced

on any of the roads being taken.

2. High-Temperature Superconductivity

This problem was formulated, at least on modern principles, in 1966. The purpose
is clear: to develop or find superconductors or some kind of inhomogeneous super-
conducting "components" that would remain superconductive at least at the tem-
perature of liquid nitrogen Tb,"2 I77.10 K (the boiling point of nitrogen at atmos-
pheric pressure). However. the state of superconductivity theory. despite its
enormous advances in certain directions. is still not such that it could predict
the critical temperature of superconductive transition Tc for more or less compli-
cated compounds or dielectric-metal-dielectric "sandwiches." Therefore. any recomn
aendations that can be made with respect to the search for high-temperature super-
conductors are qualitative and not overly precise. To some extent under the in-
fluence of these recommendations (exactly to what extent it would be hard to say).
a fairly large number of quasi-one-dimenaional and laminar (quasi-two-dimensional)
compounds have been synthesized. and several new superconductors have been found.
But so far (with a stipulation relative to CuCl and Cds that will become clear

from the following) the compound Nbgce has the highest critical temperature of
Tc:=23.2 K. which was learned in 1973. At the same time. we must point out that
the search for new superconductors has turned up such interesting results as the
discovery of metallic conductivity (and superconductivity with Tc:=0.3 K) in poly-
meric sulfur nitride (SN)x. which obviously does not contain metal atoms. In 1980,
superconductivity was discovered in the organic crystal ditetramethyltetraselena-
fulvalenc-hexafluorophosphate [(THTSP)2PP51. To be sure. this crystal has metallic
conductivity at low temperature. as well as superconductivity with T¢~ 1 K, only
under pressure of several kilobars [Ref. 4]. Nonetheless, we are apparently

‘139
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dealing with a new class of metals and semiconductors since it is known to be
comparatively easy in some cases to vary organic compounds. Besides. there are
certain grounds for expecting attainment of rather high critical temperatures

for organic compounds (Ref. 5]. Of course. no guarantee of success can be given

in this respect, but the occurrence of a new class of superconductors is of inter-
est even if they are lowbtemperature superconductors. Also worthy of mention

here are experiments that have led to the conclusion of superconductivity in sulfur
(5) under high pressure and with specific pressure treatment. Tc lying in a range
of 26—31 K [Ref. 6].

Returning directly to the problem of high-temperature superconductivity. it must
be noted that theoretical analysis gives no grounds for rejecting the possibility
of existence of equilibrimn (or perhaps metastable) materials with TcS 300 K.

At the same time. it is clear that rather severe conditions must be met to attain
critical temperatures T> Tb. N; - 77.4K. and no guarantee of success can be given.
In this area we must try. seek. check out all new materials. sandwiches and so

on for superconductivity.

It is possible that success has already been achieved on this path. In 1978 there
were reports [Ref. 7] of "superdiamagnetism"* in appropriately prepared copper
chloride (CuCl) held under a pressure of several kilobars. The "superdiamagnetism"
effect was observed at temperatures exceeding 150-200 K. Hhether the observed ef-
fect is genuinely new. or is a result of experimental error or simulation of real
superdiamagnetism is unfortunately not yet quite clear. If superdiamagnetism

in CuCl has actually been observed. it might have been due to the occurrence of

a high-temperature superconductive phase. possibly arising in principle upon tran-
sition of certain semiconductors or semimetals to the superconductive state [Ref.
5. chapter 5]. Another possibility is the formation of "sandwiches" of Cu and
CuCl. or the occurrence of true surface conductivity (Ref. 8]. However. another
entirely different hypothesis has been suggested: apparently there may be sub-
stances of a type as yet unknown with spontaneous currents that must have super-
diamagnetism. but are different from ordinary superconductors (Ref. 8]. The latter
possibility is not yet quite clear even in its theoretical formulation. to say
nothing of experiment. However. it must be noted that even thOugh further investi-
gatlon of CuCl has not cleared up the problem. high-temperature superdiamagnetism
in this material has nevertheless been confirmed by one other laboratory under
conditions that are so far unclear [Ref. 9]. The difficulty of getting a clear
idea of the behavior of cuc1 is nothing exceptional. as I feel is rightly pointed
out in the survey of Ref. 10. There are precedents for complications of this

kind (e. g. in the case of some semiconductors) when dealing with materials that
have properties difficult to control. And here the problem may be impurities. or

 

*A sufficiently weak magnetic field does not penetrate deep into an ideal
superconductor (this property is called the Meissner effect). Formally. it can
be stated that in the case of the Heissner effect. the magnetic susceptibility,
just as for an ideal diamagnetic material. is xid-‘-l/bn. In ordinary diamagnetic
materials x~ 10"-10“. I call superdiamagnetics (appropriately, I believe) those
materials for which X is comparable with X1d"'1/4“’ let us say if x-(0.01-0.l)
times 1/41. Although superconductors are superdiamagnetics, the reverse may not
be true. i. e. superdiamagnetism may not necessarily be accompanied by supercon-
ductivity (in the sense of zero resistance to flow of electric current) (Ref. 8].

140
FIN!(NWNCJAI.IEHE(HVLY
various lattice defects or residual stresses. Therefore it is not at all ruled
out that high-temperature superconductivity is what has been observed in CuCl.

And moreover. in 1980 a strong diamagnetic effect analogous to that described for
CuCl was observed at liquid nitrogen temperature (Tb.N,-77.6K) in Cds crystals
treated by the method of pressure quenching. In this technique. a pressure of
about 40 kbar was relieved at a rate of greater than 10‘ bar/s (Ref. 11]. No
details are given in the article on the method used for preparing the specimens
(which might be attributable to the worksite of the authors-U. 5. Army Armament
Research and Development Command, Large Caliber weapons Systems). Doubtless the
result for CdS raises interest both in CuCl and generally in any still totally
enigmatic mechanism of high-temperature superdiamagnetism.

The search for high-temperature superconductors, in contrast to studies in the
area of controlled nuclear fusion. does not require building gigantic facilities.
Therefore success may come in a small laboratory and be a complete surprise to
other physicists. Moreover. perhaps such success has already been achieved in
the case of CuCl and Cds. If this is actually the case. we can assume that there
is the brightest outlook for obtaining and studying high-temperature supercon-
ductors.

3. New Substances (Problem of Creating Metallic Hydrogen and Some Other Sub~
stances)

Development of new materials is usually the province of material science or chem-
istry. But the situation changes when dealing with materials like metallic hydro-
gen. Without argument. this is a physics problem. and the solution is unknown.

There is no doubt that a metallic phase of hydrogen exists at pressures exceeding
1.5-2 Hbar. Probably metallic hydrogen will be superconductive at high tempera-
tures ~100-200 K. which makes this metal even more interesting. The literature
has already mentioned production of metallic hydrogen (see bibliography of Ref. 2).
but on the whole the question is not clear. Specifically. it is not completely
certain that the metallic phase of hydrogen has actually been observed. and most
importantly its properties (in particular with respect to superconductivity) still
remain admittedly unknown. The main difficulty involves setting up pressures
greater than 2-3 Hbar. This can easily be done by using shock waves, but gener-
ally speaking this is accompanied by heating, to say nothing of the difficulties
of measuring a number of parameters of the metal in a very short time. On the
other hand, under quasi-equilibrium conditions the necessary pressure can be pro-
duced by simple presses in small volumes (between miniature anvils), but there
are no suitable materials for doing this. Even diamond begins to "flow" at such
pressures [Ref. 12]. Apparently a new approach is needed here. One way or anoth-
er, it is still a long way off before we make a "piece" of metallic hydrogen.

As another example of an "exotic" material. Ref. I mentioned anomalous (super—
dense or polymeric) water, whose existence was being widely debated in the litera-
ture at that time. For this reason, it was remarked in Ref. 1 that "the question
must be considered open. although in my opinion. research [references to the lit-
erature were given here-~V. 0.] does not offer much hope for the existence of

pure polymeric (superdense) water. But regardless of the final outcome, studies

141
IN)! (HHHKJAI.I£SI1(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that have already been done clearly show how difficult it is to solve even such

a problem as the possibility of occurrence of a new phase of one of the most
widespread substances... This example is instructive in many respects. in particu-
lar as a reminder that any discovery should be considered finally established

only after repeated and comprehensive verification."

This quotation. expressing doubt in the existence of anomalous water, even though
the question as a whole was considered open, prompted some authors of papers on
anomalous water to write to USPEKHI FIZICBESKIKB NAB! (special letter. Vol 105.
1971. p 179). In this letter I was advised"not to draw hasty negative conclusions
that may be tempting because of simplicity, but are based on incomplete. biased
and uncritical use of literature on the question." however. just a short time

has elapsed. and the question on anomalous water has been "closed": it turns

out that the liquid being studied was ordinary water containing a number of im—
purities.

I have taken up this episode here only because I wanted once more to emphasize

how important it is to verify experimental data from many aspects, particularly
when far-reaching conclusions are being drawn on the basis of such data. The
authors of pertinent papers are right to publish them, for they risk more than
anyone else in so doing. In addition to being objective. it is still more impor-
tant that the publication permits more rapid verification in other laboratories.
Therefore, in my opinion one should not severely denounce (as is sometimes done)
authors who have published incorrect work if. of course. they have made a mistake
in good faith, and their experiments have been done on the whole at a proper level.
But by the same token, no one has a right to demand that "discoveries" be recog-
nized as such before they have been confirmed in several places. Within reasonable
limits. authors have a right to err; but those around them have no less of a right
to be dubious.

4. Metallic Exciton (Electron-Hole) Liquid in Semiconductors

In Ref. 1. the topic of this section was set apart from others in the field of
semiconductor physics. and I feel that there were grounds for doing this. But
now the problem has been basically solved (or. if you will. "earned our confi-
dence"): metallic exciton liquid has been created in semiconductors and to a
great extent has been studied. This problem has even been covered in a special
monograph [Ref. 13a] that came out in the English original in 1977. To be sure.
the situation is far from complete (but this can be said in nearly all cases);
some essentially new problems have arisen (involving quasi-one-dimensional and
quasi-two-dimensional semiconductors; see Ref. 2 and the literature cited there).
Nonetheless. we would scarcely be justified today in citing the problem of metallic
exciton liquid as the sole representative of semiconductor physics and almost

all of solid state physics. Metal-dielectric phase transitions and disordered
semiconductors are of great interest and are being studied on a broad front (Ref.
13b]. He could also mention here the so-called spin glasses and quantun crystals.
as well as laminar and straight-chain compounds (materials).

5. Phase Transitions of the Second Kind (Critical Pressures). Some Examples

Strictly speaking. phase transitions are not a single problem. but something
broader. To be sure. since all phase transitions have common features. we can

142
INNICHNHCIAI.USB¢WNLN
single out a general theory of phase transitions. In such a theory, typical tran-
sitions of the first kind in which (and near which) the thermodynamic potentials
of phases have no singularities, are in no way remarkable (unless we are dealing
with superheating and supercooling, formation of nuclei and the kinetics of tran-
sitions). But transitions of the second kind, transitions of the first kind that
are close to them (having in mind for example a fairly low latent heat of tran-
sition, which is zero for transitions of the second kind) and critical points

do have singularities. and have attracted considerable attention for a long time.
To be sure, the singularity in the thermodynamic potential is by no means always
sharply pronOunced. and in a number of cases (as an example for the transition

to the superconducting state. and usually for magnetic and ferroelectric tran-
sitions) a fairly simple theory is applicable in which fluctuations are disregarded
and the singularity is ignored. Such an approach, which can be traced back to
van der Heals, Weiss and others. was systematically developed by Landau, and is
frequently called the Landau theory of phase transitions [Ref. 14]. The fact

that such a theory diverges from experiment near the critical point in a liquid
was noted even at the turn of the century [Ref. 15a]. A clear example of a tran-
sition to which the Landau theory cannot be applied is the l-transition in liquid
heliun (meaning the transition Helzueu in liquid me).

The creation of a theory of phase transitions of the second kind and critical
phenomena that properly accounts for fluctuations and generally enables description
at least in principle of all real transitions, has turned into one of the most
fundamental problems of the physics of condensed media. The task has been formi-
dable. Nevertheless. even in the sixties some progress was made, and this suc-
cess has been reinforced in the past decade. The introduction of so—called criti-
cal indices, the use of gage invariance hypotheses, the development of rather
powerful methods of approximate calculation of critical indices in combination
with numerous more exact measurements of different quantities close to transition
points--all has brought about a considerable advance in the theory of phase tran-
sitions. Since the principal achievements of theory in this field have been re-
flected in the theoretical physics course of Ref. 14a (see also Ref. 14b), we

will not take them up here.

The problem that we must not overlook here is as follows: to what extent can

the theory of phase transitions at the present time be considered basically com-
plete? Of course. the answer to this question does not at all demand the caps-
bility of exact calculation, say. of the critical indices--any exact calculation

of specific constants or coefficients in the field of physics of the condensed
state is the exception rather than the rule. But certainly we ought to be able

to ask that the theory give us the capability of unified examination of all thermo-
dynamic and kinetic processes and phenomena in the near vicinity of a transition
point. In this connection, the coefficients in the corresponding equations can

be matched within certain limits on the basis of experimental data. If we approach
the theory of phase transitions even with such somewhat constraining requirements,
we cannot but acknowledge that this theory is still far from complete. Without
going into kinetics, even in the thermodynamic aspect when using critical indices.
the questions of the region of applicability of given limiting laws with increas-
ing distance from the transition point frequently remain unanswered.* But the main

 

*For example. the density of the superfluid part of Hell near the X-point,
which corresponds to temperature TA, is written in the form p3(T)-const(T-Tx)28,

143
FOR 0F11C1AI.USEioﬂlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

point is that the theory is usually limited to homogeneous medium, whereas there
are numerous cases that are of interest in which there are granules or defects.
inhomogeneous external fields are present. and so on. Finally, there are a number
of kinetic and dynamic problems (flow in liquid crystals and in helium. propaga—
tion of sound. relaxation of some quantities) that must be solved even near the
phase transition point. and in fact are of particular interest just when they
are close to this point. In the light of such natural requirements, the imper-
fections in the theory of phase transitions are particularly glaring. This can
be seen specifically in research on superfluidity in helium II near the l-point
(Ref. 16]. although in this case the theory has apparently advanced further than
in Other areas.

Thus the problem of phase transitions remains outstanding and significant within
the framework of development of the general theory as well. But in addition to
this. the problem pertains to some extent both to specific transitions. and to
some phenomena near transition points. An example of such phenomena is light
scattering that has a number of interesting peculiarities close to transition
points [Ref. 17]. The same thing can be said about scattering of x-rays and neu-
trons.

As to individual phase transitions. or even transitions in a whole class of sub—
stances. the past decade has indeed brought much that is new. Let us mention

here the "disproportionate" phases in ferroelectric and magnetic materials [Ref.
15b], phase transitions in liquid crystals, quasi-one-dimensionsl and quasi-two-
dimensional materials. phase transitions on a surface. phase transitions in liquid
3He and in atomic hydrogen. A separate article c0uld and should be devoted to
each of these questions, as has already been partly done in the pages of USPEKHI
FIZICHBSKIKH NAUK and other journals. Therefore. I shall not even attempt to
explain anything with regard to all the enumerated cases. but will restrict myself
to a few comments on liquid aha and atomic hydrogen (however, see section 6 below).

The possibility that "pairs" of two atoms with integral spin might be formed in
liquid JHe (as occurs in superconductors) has a long history of discussion. The
formation of pairs with integral spin and their subsequent Bose-Einstein conden-
sation should lead to superfluidity analogous to superconductivity (as we know,
superconductivity can be considered as superfluidity of a charged electron fluid
in metals. or of a proton fluid in neutron stars). However. theoretical attempts
have been unsuccessful in getting reliable estimates of the temperature of super-
fluid transition. and experimental results have been in large measure unexpected.
For example it was found in 1972 and 1973 [Ref. 18] that not just one, but two
phase transitions occur in liquid 3He (albeit at a pressure exceeding 34 atm)

at temperatures of approximately 2.6-10" and 2.0010‘3 K respectively. Then it
was learned that it was a matter of transition to superfluid states differing

from one another in the total angular momentum of "pairs". The attraction leading
to pair formation is apparently mainly exchange interaction (forces of the same
type lead to ferromagnetism). Studies of superfluidity and other effects in liquid
JFle (and we should say that this isotope is quite rare; its occurrence in nature

_—_————————

where the critical index 8 is close to 1/3 (experimental data imply 28-0.67:0.01).
But what is the accuracy of such an expression for 93(T), especially with increas-
ing distance from the A-point?

144
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
is several orders of magnitude less than that of isotope “He) that have been done
in recent Years are striking in their subtlety and scope [Ref. 18]. After all,
this work involves temperatures less than 3 m! away from absolute zero, and an
object (superfluid 3He) distinguished by great complexity (compared with superfluid
“He) due to the presence of orbital and spin moments. I am inclined to think

that in the physics of condensed media the advances in research on liquid 3Re

are perhaps the most impressive over the last ten years.

Let us also take up the possibility of superfluid transition in atomic hydrogen
gas, since this example is fairly interesting. although apparently of much less
general physical significance than transitions in 3He. Atomic hydrogen gas. if

it is somehow produced. under ordinary conditions is rapidly converted to molecular
hydrogen gas (H3). However. atomic hydrogen gas can "last” for several minutes

at a low temperature‘TS l K in a vessel whose walls are covered with auperfluid
helium 11. And if the gas in addition is held in a fairly strong magnetic field.
the stability of atomic hydrogen is enhanced (Ref. 20]. and apparently under at-
tainable conditions we can disregard recombination (the reason for this is well
known: in the H; molecule the spins of the electrons are directed opposite to

one another; in a strong magnetic field the spins of all electrons are in the

same direction. and to form the H; molecule the spin of one of the atoms must

be flipped. which is not easy to do). Atoms of H with parallel spins in the ground
state repel one another (more precisely, there is some van der Waals attraction
between atoms at great distances. but it is weak). Therefore such a gas at atmos-
pheric pressure is not liquefied right down to absolute zero. At the same time,

in a Bose gas of H atoms at low temperature depending on its density. Bose-
Einstein condensation should take place. and the resultant phase should be super-
fluid (here it is significant that the gas is not ideal, and accounting for the
corresponding interaction is what leads to superfluidity).

There is no doubt that the problem of phase transitions on the whole remains one
of the main directions in physics.

6. Surface Physics

The physics of surfaces and of various processes and effects on a surface has
been under study and development for more than a decade. It is already clear
from quite general considerations Lnat atoms and electrons on and near a surface
are under different conditions than in the volume. and therefore there are grounds
for assuming that on the surface there may be new phases. different transitions
between these phases. new types and branches of excitations. and so on. In this
connection, "new" is understood to mean phases and excitations different from
those that are volumetric. For example on the surface (including the thin layer
near the surface), the crystal lattice may have another structure and/or param-
eters. there may be magnetic ordering in the surface layer that is absent in the
volume at a given temperature and so on. The possibility of propagation of a
variety of surface waves is also known (ac0ustic waves, polaritons. magnons) [Ref.
21]. Closely related are the properties of thin films and layers. especially
monomolecular layers. as well as the question of surface behavior of individual
atoms, molecules, defects and inhomogeneities.

Nonetheless, ten years ago in Ref. 1 there was no section on surface physics.
and although it did show up later in Ref. 2. it was quite modest. It is, of course,

145
FOR OFFKJAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

debatable whether such inadequate attention to surface physics was justified in
Ref. 1 and the booklet [Ref. 2]. And the same applies to a number of other prob-
lems that have been set apart here. But one way or the other. special mention
and emphasis of the role of surface physics at the present time is absolutely
necessary. The reason in general is that in recent years what has seemed merely
possible is becoming a reality because of progress in experimental techniques.

We have learned, at least in some cases. how to produce a clean surface and check
its state (degree of roughness and the like). methods have been newly developed
or considerably improved for studying the surface and near—surface layer. atoms
on the surface and surface inhomogeneities (steps and so on). Let us mention
such methods as the LEED technique (low energy electron diffraction), ARPS (angle
resolved photoemission spectroscopy). inelastic scattering of ions with energy

of the order of l Nev. electron microscopy. analysis of surface acoustic waves
and surface polaritons (surface electromagnetic waves [Ref. 22]). Also known are
some other methods involving the use of light. x-rays and neutrons.

A great deal of progress has already been made. Surface magnetic ordering has
been observed. Particularly noteworthy are studies of inversion layers on the
Si-SiO; interface. properties of electrons on the surface of liquid helium [Ref.
22). investigation of surface polaritons [Ref. 2|] and reconstruction of some
crystal surfaces (Ref. 22. 23].

Here we take surface reconstruction to mean a change in lattice parameter for
atoms that are situated on the surface. For example on the surface of Si (face
111) under certain conditions the lattice parameter is seven times greater than
in the volume. It is possible that in examining the effect of reconstruction
in many cases it is important to consider the role of surface electron levels.

Studies of phase transitions in two-dimensional and quasi-two-dimensional systems
are impressive both in scale and in significance. Strictly speaking, this problem
is not new. but is, so to speak, gathering momentum (Ref. 22. 26. 25]. The tasks
here are quite diverse. and are of course intimately related to surface physics.

There is no doubt that surface physics is on a steep climb and will bring us much
that is new.

7. Behavior of Matter in Ultrastrong Magnetic Fields. Investigation of Very Large
Molecules. Liquid Crystals

The problems mentioned in the heading of this section have little relation to

one another. none of them was mentioned in Ref. 1. but they were included in Ref. 2.
Unification of these three problems in a single section stems merely from the
reluctance to go into any of them in detail. At the same time, I did not wish

to simply omit them as I have done with many others that go beyond the scope of

this article.

Ultrastrong magnetic fields are those in which the structure of atoms, molecules
or condensed substances formed from them are determined to a great extent by the
magnetic field rather than by Coulomb forces. Such a situation arises when the
Zecman (magnetic) splitting between levels exceeds the distance between the levels
in the absence of a magnetic field. For the hydrogen atom the characteristic

146

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
difference of energies between levels in the absence of a field (or in a weak
field) is 33- e“m/2h’~ 10 eV. 0n the other hand. Zeeman splitting is Ea-eh/mc~
10'°H eV (here field strength H is measured in oersteds or gausses since R could
also mean magnetic induction 3). Obviously Ba>>Ea when H>>e3mzc/h’-(e2/hc)2x
(mc/eh)mc2- 3°10g 0e. For heavy atoms. the right-hand member of this equation
contains a factor Z3 (Z is atomic number).

As is clear from this estimate. the problem of the behavior of matter in ultra-
strong magnetic fields was to some extent abstract before the discovery of pulsars
(1967-1968). But we now know that on the surface of magnetized neutron stars
(pulsars) the magnetic field reaches values of h--10”-1013 0e. Thus the surface
layer of neutron stars. and especially of pulsars is in a strong field (the field
at the surface of some neutron stars may not be so strong). If iron is predomi-
nant in this layer. as is quite probable. such iron is a material quite unlike
anything that we know. apparently consisting of Fe; molecules stretched out along
the field, forming some kind of polymer structure with large binding energy. The
latter is significant for the entire electrodynamics of pulsars since it determines
the possibility of electrons and ions being torn from the surface (see some litera-
ture cited in Ref. 2).

Fortunately, the matter is not limited to the surface properties of neutron stars
so far away. While we cannot set up ultrastrong magnetic fields for atoms and
molecules (in the sense described above) in the laboratory. there are situations
where the effect of a magnetic field is stronger than the influence of Coulomb
forces in fields that are accessible right here on earth. For example, the bind-
ing energy of hydrogen—like excitons in semiconductors is meff/msz times less
than for the hydrogen atom (here neff is the effective mass of an electron and

a hole. m is the mass of the electron and c is the permittivity of the material).
Splitting of levels in a magnetic field in this case is m/meff times greater than
for the atom. As a result. the field is ultrastrong for the condition H>>3~lO°x
méff/mzc2 0e. At values of meff"0.lm. c-10. which are completely realistic

for a semiconductor, the action of the field predominates at ll>>3010s 0e. 1. e.
even in accessible fields. In general. "exciton matter" can be studied in strong
and even ultrastrong fields in the laboratory.

It is to be hoped that even this discussion will give an idea of the diversity and
extraordinary nature of the problem of the behavior of matter in ultrastrong mag-
netic fields.

Despite the exceptional importance of biological problems for science and for the
development of all human society. we completely omit them here. just as in Ref.

1 and 2. By way of justification. if such is needed, suffice it to quote the
well-known advice not to try to bound the unbounded. There are two reasons that
we mention giant molecules here (proteins. nucleic acids) though they are mainly
of biological importance. First of all. such molecules occupy a certain inter-
mediate place between "ordinary" molecules and a condensed medium. or droplets
and filaments of condensed medium. With certain stipulations. the concepts of
phase transitions. ordering. conduction bands and so on can be applied under such
conditions. Secondly, as far as I can judge. there is still a great lag (compared
with some other areas of physics) with respect to developing effective methods

of analyzing the structure of giant molecules, especially under conditions where

167

FOR OFFICLAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

they are few in number and are in solution or in a mixture with other molecules.

The potential importance of pertinent research is so great that physicists nught
not to forget it.

Liquid crystals have been known for a long time. But I remember when physicists
treated them as a sort of oddity: will wonders never cease-crystal and liquid
at the same time. The availability of a large number of simpler objects for re-
search. lack of engineering applications brought about a situation leaving the
study of liquid crystals in the dark. Now the situation is quite different.
Liquid crystals are extensively used in technology, play a large part in biology,
and finally. liquid crystals of various types and the phase transitions in them
have been of interest for various studies in the field of physics of condensed
media. The interest in liquid crystals is unabating.

8. X-Ray. Gamma and New Kinds of Optical Lasers

This section was also missing in Ref. 1. despite the fact that interest in lasers
in science and engineering is enormous. and has not slackened for about twenty
years. However. although the development of laser technology as well as applica-
tions of lasers (including nonlinear optics) comprises an extensive physical and
technical problem, there is still little to choose from when it comes to material
for this article. Lasers of fundamentally new types and those with powers several
orders of magnitude greater than conventional lasers are another matter (it is
quite probable that attainment of such high powers will require new methods and
principles).

And by the way. here we can clearly see the arbitrary nature of any list of ”Par-
ticularly important and interesting problems." In nearly every field of physics
and astrophysics. a jump by several orders of magnitude. and sometimes even by

one order, is a big problem in itself. though far from always realistic. One

of many examples is in high-pressure physics. Pressures right up to about 1 Mbar
have generally been mastered, but as we pointed out in section 3. we have not
managed to go much further in the static mode. and here we are running into funda-
mental difficulties. Getting to static pressures of 10 Hbar in volumes that are
not too small and with control wOuld be a breakthrough. But there is no such
problem in our list (at least not in explicit form) since an actual physical prob-
lem is more than mere wishes and conversations.

Returning to our topic, we note than in recent years a great deal is being written
about free electron lasers (Ref. 26]. This refers to realization, and in some
cases considerable development of the rather old idea of generating electromagnetic
waves by a beam of relativistic electrons passing through an undulator or wiggler
(in the simplest version. this is a system of magnets that creates an alternating
field along the beam. shaking the electrons in the beam). It is difficult to

see the analogy with lasers in systems of this type. and the term "free electron
laser" seems a misnomer. But of course we are not dealing with names. It is
quite possible that the "free electron laser" will be of practical interest in

the field of microwaves and optics. As to the transition to the x—ray region

of the spectrum, here the effectiveness of a device of the undulator type using
dense relativistic beams still remains entirely problematical.

148
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It should be noted that the problem of making very powerful x-ray sources has

in general been solved by using synchrotrons (the same end can be attained by
using an electron linac combined with an undulator. or by setting up an undulator
section in the synchrotron). But usually this means incoherent emission of indi-
vidual electrons. However. one w0u1d like to use coherent emission as in the
laser, and to have the capability of achieving a high degree of monochromaticity.
Such a device. the analog of the laser in the x—ray region. could be called the
xaser. and in the case of germs rays the term gaser could be used.*

In systems with an electron beam. coherence "works" only ir sufficiently dense
beams. and under a number of other conditions that are hard to realize in the
x-ray region. It is in this sense, 1. e. in the sense of a coherent "free elec-
tron laser" that we called attention above to lack of clarity in the transition
to the x-ray region of the spectrum (and it is only when coherence is used that
the name makes any sense).

Besides dense electron beans. it has been suggested that xasera could be made

by using atomic transitions. and gasers could use transitions in atomic nuclei.
Ref. 2. section 7 contains some information relating to this. As far as we know,
there have been no important advances in this field recently. All the same. the
paths that have been brought to light already in the literature are very complex
(it is reasonable to include among such paths, for example. those associated with
the use of atomic explosions).

Not all dreams become reality and are of practical interest besides. Therefore
it is entirely possible that xasers and gasers will never be built. or in any
event will not find wide application. But who knows... Some unexpected idea,
as has often happened in the history of physics. could in principle radically
alter the situation.

9. Superheavy (Far Transuranium) Elements. "Exotic" Nuclei

In Ref. 1. nuclear physics was not only included in the "macrophysics" section,
but was represented only by a single problem (superheavy elements). Both were
debatable. and it is now clear that there are more problems of "particular impor-
tance" in the area of nuclear physics in any event. Therefore. Ref. 2 already
contained the heading "exotic nuclei."

The problem of the search for superheavy elements has not undergone any appre-
ciable changes (with a reservation that will be clear from the following). To

be sure, a report appeared in 1976 in one of the most prestigious physics journals
(PHYSICAL REVIEH LETTERS) on occurrence of quite stable elements with 2- 116.

126 and others. However, this paper was in error. But the only ones safe from
error are those who do nothing. We already pointed out in section 3 that such
errors should not be dramatized. Articles cited in Ref. 2 shed light on the ways

 

*As we know. the word "laser" is an acronym formed by the first letters of
words in the phrase "light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation."
Therefore it would be inconsistent to use the terms "x-ray laser" and "game laser."
The words "xaser" and "gaser" result from substituting "x" (x-ray) and "g" (gamma
ray) for the letter "1" (light) in "laser." But of course terminology is a secon-
dary matter. the moreso as we are not yet dealing with actual devices in the case
of xasers and gasers.

' 149
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

being used in attempts or hopes to synthesize or detect auperheavy elements. We
can add here only that a report appeared in late 1980 [Ref. 27] on possible obser-
vation of a track of a nucleus with Z) 110. The track was detected in an olivine
crystal of meteoric origin.

Nuclei that are part of cosmic rays leave tracks in crystals that are revealed

by special treatment (in particular by etching and annealing). The length of

the tracks depends on the atomic number of the nucleus. In Ref. 27. about 150
tracks of nuclei of the uranium group were observed with lengths of 180-240 mm.
In addition. the above-mentioned single track was observed with length of 365 um.
which corresponds to a nucleus with z>1110. Of Course this result must be con-
firmed by finding other such tracks. and also by additional proof of the state-
ment that we are actually dealing with a nucleus with 2) IN). If the observed
track indeed belongs to a nucleus with 23'110, then the occurrence of such nuclei
relative to the occurrence of uranium nuclei is of the order of 10".

As concerns other problems from the field of nuclear physics. it shOuld be noted
that investigation of the nucleus in some cases sheds light on the interaction
between nucleons. and between nucleons and leptons [Ref. 28]. Considerable atten-
tion is being given to nuclear matter. which exists primarily in neutron stars.
Here there is an obvious connection with astrophysics (see for example Ref. 29).
0f considerable interest is the possibility being discussed in the literature

of existence of nuclear matter and atomic nuclei with density exceeding the usual
value by a factor of two or more (see some citations given in Ref. 2). In known
nuclei, such a dense phase is apparently not realized. but prospects are being
discussed for observing its "precursors" in certain nuclei (it is known that

a phase transition influences the properties of matter even before the transition
point is reached) [Ref. 30a]. Considerable attention is being given in recent
years to collisions of relativistic heavy nuclei. In general. there is no doubt
that investigation of the atomic nucleus. as formerly. is associated with a number
of fundamental physical problems (see also Ref. 30b).

V. Concluding Remarks

Before the author's mental gaze. and I hope that of my readers as well. has flashed
a decade full of intense work by physicists and astronomers. Ten years is a long
time to a person. For a young person, because ten years ago he might not yet

have been an adult. For an older person. a decade in science is also a long time.
but for quite another reason: there is less and less chance of prolonged partici-
pation in the development of science. or even keeping track of such development.
However. if we can set aside our subjective perception of time and its passage.

a decade in sciences is not so much. Let us recall that special relativity theory
is about 75 years old. general relativity theory-~65. and quantum mechanics--SS.
And at the same time. it is these theories that lie at the foundation of contem-
porary physics. Superconductivity was discovered in 1911. and cosmic rays in 1912.
Yet even today both these problems are at the center of attention. and are being
studied by many more people than in the first two or three decades after their
discovery. Thus the time scale in contemporary physics is longer than an active
human lifetime. to say nothing of a decade. Let us add that the complexity of
some modern experimental facilities (accelerators. space-station observatories.
ground-based optical and radio telescopes. and so on) is such that at least

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ten or fifteen years have elapsed between the time of the initial planning stage
and final completion.*

In light of what has been said, it is natural that over the decade separating
Ref. 1 from the present article, even though much that is new has occurred, still
most of the problems remain on our list. It is true that considerable changes
have occurred in microphysics, but this apparently makes the intervening years
exceptional (however, many of the new ideas came up earlier, e. g. the quark hy-
pothesis in 1963-1964).

Thus a decade in the development of physics and astronomy, though not extremely
long. nevertheless has been witness to much that is new.

Therefore, it seems to me. if this article was worth writing at all as a kind

of continuation of Ref. 1. then it has been appropriate to do it just now. ten
years later. But should these articles have been written? I leave that to others
to judge. Let me just say that the writing has been an interesting challenge

for me. The burst of growth in physics and astronomy has been so great that it

is no easy matter to trace that growth in even a score of areas and problems,

as have been singled out in this article. 0n the other hand, in any given period
it is possible to treat only one or two problems profesicnally, so to speak. going
into details. In this regard. work on an article such as this one gives occasion
to become acquainted, if only fleetingly. with a lot of material of wide scope.
One learns much that is interesting, the trees no longer overshadow the forest,
the outlook for the future can be seen, the latitude and at the same time the
profoundunity of physics, the wealth of its content become clearer. If some of

my readers share these feelings to any extent, the purpose of the article will
have been achieved. I invite constructive criticism from those who read the arti-
cle but are partly dissatisfied or even irritated. Such criticism, I feel, should
come down to the writing of other articles, short or long, in which various prob-
lems and questions are treated otherwise than here, put in a new light. 1 think
that this is just what many readers of USPKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK want.

In conclusion, I want to take this opportunity to thank all those who made com-
ments after reading the article in manuscript. Just as in Ref. 1, their names
are not mentioned lest I impose upon others. even indirectly, the responsibility
for the content and inadequacies of the article.

RBPERENCES**

*To avoid overloading the article, we will not make any other comments here
relating to the development of physic° and astronomy. The author's opinion on
this account is clear from Ref. 2, 78 (let me note that I have changed my mind
regarding the nature of the "second astronomical revolution" as expressed in Ref.
2. and now hold the View presented in Ref. 78).

**A rather large number of references to the literature on almost all of the
questions dealt with in this article can be found in Ref. 2. Besides, in many
cases additional references can be found by looking through the indexes of articles
published in USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Such indexes are published each year

in the December issue of the journal.

151
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3D

9.

lo.
11.

12.

I3.

I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ginzburg. V. I... USPEIGII FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 103. 1971. p 87.

Ginzburg. V. L.. "O fizike i astrofizike (kskiye problemy predstavlyayutsya
seychss osobenno vazhnyni i interesnyui2)" [Physics and Astrophysics ("hat
Problems are now of Particular Importance and Interest?)]. Moscow, Nsuks. 1980.
a) "Novosti cermoyadernykh issledovaniy v SSSR: Operativnaya informstsiys"
[News of Fusion Research in the USSR: Operational Information]. Hoscow.
Institute of Atomic Energy. 1980. 1981.

b) Ionsss. Dzh.. USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 133, 1981. p 159.

Jerome, D.. Hazaud. A.. Ribault. H.. Bechgsrd. K.. J. DE PHYS., (PARIS). LBTT..
Vol 41. 1980. p 95.

Andres. K., Wudl, P.. McHhsn. D. 3., Thomas. G. A., Nslewajek. 0.. Stevens.
A. L.. PHYS. REV. LETTS. Vol 45. 1980, p 1449.

Greene. R. L.. Engler. E. H.. Ibid.. p 1587.

Cinzburg, V. L., Kirzhnits. D. A.. ed.. "Problems vysokotenpersturnoy sverkh-
provodimosti" [Problem of High-Temperature Superconductivity]. Moscow. Nsuks.
1977; see also USPEKHI FIZICFIESKIKH NAUK. Vol 118. 1976. p 315.

Stepsnov. G. N.. Yakovlev, Ye. N.. PIS'MA V ZHURNAL EKSPERIHENTAL'NOY I
TEORETICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 32. 1980. p 657.

Brandt. N. G. et a1.. 1616.. Vol 27. 1978. p 37.
Chu, C. W. et 31.. PHYS. REV.. SER. B. Vol 18. 1978. p 2116.

Volkov. B. A.. Ginzburg. V. L.. Kopayev. Yu. V.. PIS'HA V ZHURNAL EKSPERIHBN-
TAL'NOY I TEORE‘I‘ICHESKOY FIZIKI. V01 27. 1978. p 221.

Volkov. B. A.. Kopayev. Yu. V. et 31.. Ibid. p 615; Vol 30. 1979. p 317.
Ginzburg, V. L., SOL. STATE COMM., 1981 (in press).

Lefkouitz. 1.. Manning. J. S.. Bloomfield. P. 2.. PHYS. REV.. SER. B. Vol 20.
1979. p 4506; see also PHYS. REV.. SER. B. Vol 23. 1981. p 3022.

Gebale, '1'. 1.. Chu. C. It. COM. SOL. STATE PHYS” Vol 9. 1979. p 115.

Brown, 3., Roman. C. 6., HacCrone. R. K., PHYS. REV. LBTTS. Vol 45. 1978. p 478.
Stishov. S. N.. USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 127. 1979, p 719; see also
PIS'HA V ZHURNAL EKSPERIMENTAL'NOY I TEORBTICHESKOY PIZIKI. V01 33. 1981.

p 136.

3) Rays. T.. Khensel. Dzh., Fillips. T.. Tomas, 6.. "Blektronno-dyrochnaya

zhidkost' v poluprovodnikakh" [Electron-Hole Liquid in Semiconductors].
Moscow, Mir. 1980.

152
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b) Sadovskiy. H. V.. USPEKHI PIZICHBSKIKH NAUK. Vol 133. 1981. p 223.

a) Landau. L. D.. Lifshits. Ye. H.. "Statisticheskaya fizika" [Statistical
Physics]. Part 1. Hoscou. Nauka. 1976.

b) Ma. Sh.. "Sovrenennaya teoriya kriticheskikh yavleniy" [Modern Theory
of Critical Phenomena]. Moscow. Mir. 1980.

a) Levelt Sengers. J. H. 8.. PHYSICA SBR. A.. Vol 82. 1976. p 319.

b) Levanyuk. A. P.. Sannikov, D. G.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 132.
I980. p 694.

Ginzburg. V. L.. Sobyanin. A. A.. USPEKHI FIZICHBSKIKH NAUK. Vol 120, 1976.
pp 153. 733; PHYS. LETT. SBR. A. Vol 69. 1979. p 417.

Fabelinskiy. I. L., "Holekulyarnoye raaseyaniye sveta" [Molecular Light Scat-
tering]. Moscow. Nauka. 1965.

Ginzburg. V. L., Levanyuk. A. P.. Sobyanin. A. A.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK,
Vol 130. 1980. p 615; PHYS. REPT.. Vol 57. 1980. p 153.

"Svcrkhtckuchest' geliya-3. Sbornik statey" [Superfluid 3He. Collection of
Articles]. Moscow. Mir. 1977.

"Kvantovyye zhidkosti i kristally. Sbornik statey" [Quantum Liquids and Crys-
tals. Collection of Articles]. Moscow, Hir. 1979.

Hardy, H. H. et al., PHYS. REV. LETTS. Vol 45. 1980. p 453.
Cline. R. H. et al.. Ibid., p 2117.

Halraven. J. T. H.. Silvers. I. F.. Hattey. A. P. H.. PHYS. REV. LETTS.
Vol 45. 1980. PP 449. 915.

Agranovich. V. H.. Cinzburg. V. L., "Kristallooptika s ucheton
prostranstvennoy dispersii i tsoriya sksitonov" [Crystal Optics Hith Regard
to Spatial Dispersion. and Bxciton Theory]. Moscow. Nauka. 1979.

“Proc. Intern. School on Condensed Matter Physics". Varna. Bulgaria. 1980.
Tabor. D.. SURFACE 301.. Vol 89. 1979. P l.

Pokrovsky. V. L., ADV. PHYS.. Vol 28. 1979. p 595.

Nelson. D. R.. in: "Proc. Summer School in Statistical Mechanics".
Enschede. Netherlands. 1980.

Brantman. V. L., Ginzburg. N. S. [sic]. Petelin. M. 1.. OPTICS COMMUNS.
Vol 30. 1980. p 409.

153
FINICHHNCJAI.USE|NVLY
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

33.

3b.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

61.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Perelygin. V. P.. Stetsenko. S. 6.. PIS'NA V ZHURNAL EKSPERIMBNTAL'NOY I
TEORETICHESKOY PIZIKI, Vol 32, 1980. p 622.

Blin-Stoyle. R. J.. CONTEHP. PHYS.. V01 20, 1979. p 377.

Nikolayev. N. N.. USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 134. No 3. 1981.

Pines. 0., USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 131. 1980. p 679.

Pines. 0.. SCIENCE. Vol 207. 1980. p 597; J. DE PHYS.. V01 41. 1980. p 02-111.
a) Alberico. w. H. e: 81., PHYS. REV.. SBR. B. Vol 92. 1980. p 153.

Vasak. D. et 31.. Ibid.. Vol 93. 1980. p 263.
Mohan. L. R. R.. Hinich. R. H., Ibid., p 467.

b) Sliv. L. A.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 153. 1981, p 337.

Einstein. A., Collected Scientific Papers Vol 2. Moscow. Nauka. 1966. p 406.
Salem. A.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKU NAUK, Vol 132. 1980. p 229.

Vaynberg. 5.. Ibid.. p 201.

Glashow. 8.. Ibid.. p 219.

Cleine. D.. Rubbia. c.. PHYS. TODAY. Vol 23. No 8. 1980. p 44.

Iliopoulos. J.. CONTEMP. PHYS.. Vol 21. 1980. p 159.

c'Hoofc, C.. SCI. AMERICAN. V01 2&2. No 6, 1980. p 90.

Berger. Ch. et 31.. PHYS. REV.. SER. B. Vol 86. 1979. p 518; PHYS. REV. LETTS.
V01 43. 1979. p 830.

Azimov. Ya. 1.. DokshLCSer. Yu. L.. Khoze. V. A.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH HAUK,
Vol 132. 1980. p 443.

Vaynshteyn. A. I., Zakharov. V. I.. Shifnan. H. A.. USPEKHI FIZICHBSKIKH
NAUK. Vol 131. 1980. p 537.

Georgiund. H., Clashow. S. L.. PHYS. TODAY. Vol 33. No 9. 1980. p 30.

Okun'. L. 8.. USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 134. 1981. p 3; see also
Okun'. L. 8.. "Leptony i kvarki" [Leptons and Quarks]. Moscow. Nauka. 1981.

Rikhtcr. 8.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 125. 1978. p 201.

Ting, 8.. Ibid.. p 227.

Lederman. L.. USPEKHI FIZICNESKIKH NAUK, Vol 128. I979. p 693.

15‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
42.

43.
44.

45.

46.
47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

Bartel. H. et a1.. PHYS. REV.. 588. B. Vol 89. 1979. p 136.
Barber. D. P. et 31., PHYS. REV. LETTS, V01 44. 1980. p 722.

Chanovitz. H. 8.. Ibid.. p 59.

Heisenberg. w.. USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH “AUX. Vol 121, 1977. p 657.
Nambu. Y.. USPEKHI FIZICEESKIKH NAUK, Vol 124. 1978. p 147.
Dre11. s. D.. PHYS. TODAY. V01 31. No 6. 1978. p 23.

Yang, Ch.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKB NAUK. Vol 132. 1980. p 169.
P313. A... REV. HOD. PHYS.. V01 15. 1979. p 861.

Vaynberg. 8.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 118. 1976. p 505; Vol 120.
p 677.

c1e1ne, 0.. Mann. A.. Rubbia, c., USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 120. 1976,
p 97.

Illopoulos. J.. USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 123. 1977. p 565.
Slavnov. A. A.. USPEKBI PIZICHBSKIKH NAUR. Vol 124. 1978. p 487.
Kitzhnits. D. A.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK, Vol 125. 1978. p 169.
Rikhter. 3.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 130, 1980. pp 707. 717.
Wilson. R. R.. SCI. AMERICAN, Vol 242, No l, 1980, p 26.

Barkov. L. M.. Zolotarev. H. S.. Khriplovich. I. 3.. USPEKHI FIZICHBSKIKH
NAUK, Vol 132, 1980. p 409.

Bogdanov. Yu. V.. Sobel'man. I. 1.. Sorokin. Yu. N., Struk. I. 1.. PIS'MA
V ZHURNAL EKSPERIHENTAL'NOY I TEORETICHESKOY FIZIKI. V01 31. 1980. PP 234, 556.

Azimov. Ya. I.. Khoze. V. A.. USPEKHI FIZICHBSKIKH “AUX, Vol 132, 1980, p 379.

Dolgov. A. 1).. Zel'dovich. Ya. 3.. USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 130. 1980.
p 559.

Markov. H. A.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 111, 1973. p 719.

Fridman, D.. van N'yuvenkheyzen. P.. USPEKBI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 128,
1979. p 135.

Lyubinov.v. A. et 31.. Preprint ITBP. Moscow. 1980; PHYS. REV.. SER. B. Vol 94.
1980. p 266.

Kozik. V. S. et 31.. YADERNAYA FIZIKA. Vol 32, 1980, p 301.

155
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(NWLY
58.

S9.

61.
62.

63.

610.

65.

66.

67.
68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

FOR OFFICIAL USE 01 'LY

Reines et 31.. PHYS. REV. LETTS, Vol (15. 1980, p 1307.
Berger, V. et 31.. PHYS. REV.. SER. 8. Vol 93. 1980. p 194.

Bilen'kiy. s. M.. Pontekorvo. a. u.. USPEKHI trzrcamsxrxn “aux. v01 123.
1977. p 181.

Gunn. J. E. et 81.. ASTROPHYS. J.. Vol 2113. 1981. p 1.
Dtell. 5.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK, Vol 130. 1980. p 507.
Bartel. W. et 31.. PHYS. RBV.. 8811. B. Vol 92. 1980. p 206.

Ginzburg, V. L., P=IS'MA V ZHURNAL EKSPBRIHENTAL'NOY I mmrcansxo‘z FIZIKI.
V01 22, 1975. p 516.

Ginzburg, v. 1.. Prolov. v. 9.. PIS'HA v asrsouaulcuzsxrv ZHMRNAL. Vol 2,
1976. p 474.

Nikol'skiy. s. I., Peynberg. Ye. I... Avakyan, V. V. et 31.. USPHHI FIZICHESKIKH
NAM. Vol 132. 1980. pp 392. 394. 395.

Peynberg, Ye. 1... VESTNIK AKADEMII NAUK SSSR. No 1, 1981. p 25.

"Problem narusheniya CP-invarientnosti" [Problem of CP-Invsriance Violation],
USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKE “AUX. V01 95. 1968. P 401.

Henopoulos. D. V. et 111., ANN. PHYS., N. Y.. Vol 127. 1980. p 126.
Nikishev, A. A.. Ritus. V. 1.. "Quantum Electrodynamics of Phenomena in
Intense Field", TRUDY PIZICHESKOGO INSTITUTA WI P. N. LIBDEVA AKADEHII
NAUK 8851!, Vol 111, 1979.

Linde. A. D., REPT. PROG. PHYS.. V01 (12. 1979. P 389.

Turner. H. S., Schram. D. 11.. PHYS. TODAY. Vol 32. Ho 9. 1980. p 112.

Ginzburg, V. 1... Han'ko. V. 1.. FIZIKA ELDENTARNYKH CHASTITS I ATOHNOGO
YADRA. Vol 7. 1976. p 3.

Oppenheimer. J. R.. Snyder. 11.. PHYS. RBV.. Vol 56. 1939. p 655; a Russian
translation of this article can be found in the collection "Al'bert Bynshteyn
1 teoriya gravitstsii" [Albert Einstein and the Theory of Gravitation], Moscow,
“1!) 1979’ P 353.

Rees. M. J.. CONTEMP. PHYS.. Vol 21. 1980. p 99.

Vessot. R. F. C., Levine. H. 11., GENERAL RELATIVITY AND GRAVITATION. Vol 10,
1979. p 181; see also PHYS. REV. 1.31.18. Vol 1.5, 1980. p 2081.

Reasenberg. R. D. et 81., ASTROPHYS. J. 1.811.. Vol 36. 1979. p 1.219.
Hill. C. 14.. PROC. ROY. SOC. SER. A. Vol 268. 1979. p 5

156
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7b.

75.

76.

77.
78.

79.

80.
81.

82.
83.

Ginzburg. V. I... USPHCHI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK, Vol 128, 1979, p 1035; this article
was also published in the collection: Ginzburg, V. L., "0 teoru
otnositel'nosti" [Relativity Theory]. Moscow. blanks, 1979.

Hukhanov, V. P., USPKHI FIZICFESKIKH NAIR, V01 [33, 1981, p 729.

Chaffee, P. H., SCI. AMERICAN, Vol 2103. No S, 1980, p 60.

Braginskiy. V. 3.. USPHHI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK, Vol 132. 1980. P 387; ZEHLYA
I VSELENNAYA, 30 3. 1980. p 28.

Rudenko, V. N., USPDU'II FIZICHBSKIKH NAUK. Vol 126. 1978. p 361.
Taylor, J. H. et 81., mm. Vol 277. 1979, p 437.
Glnzburg. V. I... VOPROSY PILOSOFII, No 12. 1980, p 24.

Bernshteyn, I. M., Shvattmn. V. F., ZHURNAL EKSPERIHENTAL'NOY I TBORETICHESKOY
FIZIKI, Vol 79. 1980, p 1617.

Bond, J. R. et a1., PHYS. REV., Vol 65, 1980, p 1980 [sic].

Linda, A. D., PHYS. REV.. SER. B. Vol 92, 1980. pp 119. 327, 394.

Kirzhnits, D. A., Linde, A. 0., PRIRODA. Vol 11. 1979. p 20.

Kighuchi. 11., PROGR. THEOR. PHYS... V01 63, 1980, p 166.

Nanopoulos, D. V., Veinberg, 5., PHYS. REV. 538. D.. Vol 20, 1979. p 2684.
Bekenstein. J. D., Heisels. A.. ASTROPHYS. J.. Vol 237. 1980. p 3102.

Gurovich. V .‘s.. Starobinekiy, A. A., ZHURNAL EKSPERIHENTAL'NOY I TBORBTICHESKOY
FIZIKI, Vol 77, 1979. p 1683; see also PIS'HA V ZHURNAL EKSPERIHEN‘I‘AL'NOY

I TEORETICHESKOY PIZIKI, Vol 30. 1979. p 719.

Frolov, V. P., Villcovisky. G. A.. "Intern. Center for Theoretical Physics
Preprint 16/79/69". Hirmre. Trieste. 1979.

Zel'dovich. Ya. 3., USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH “AUX. Vol 133, 1981, p 1079.

Hukhanov. V. F., Chihisov, G. V.. PIS'HA V ZHURNAL msrmnmnm'umr I
TEORETICHESKOY FIZIKI. V01 33. 1981, p 549.

Gurskiy, G., Van den Khevel. 3.. USPEHI FIZICHESKIKH “AUX, Vol 118. 1976.
p 673.

Manchester. IL. Taylor. J.. "Pul'sary" [Pulsars]. Moscow. Hit. 1980.
Smith. F. 6.. "Pul'aary". Moscow. Mir. 1979.

Tel: Khaar. D., USPEKIII FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 119. 1976. p 525.

157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

86. Lamb. V. K.. "Pulsars". 1A1! Synp. No 95. Bonn. Rest Germany. August. 1980.
The naterials of this symposiu- represent the latest detailed sway of
data on pulsars (the materials of IAU synposia are usually published by
D. Reidel, Netherlands).

87. Ginzburg. V. I... Zheleznyakov. V. V.. ARR. REV. ASTRON. AND ASTROPHYSICS.
Vol 13. 1975. p 511.

Ochelkov. Yu. P.. Usﬁv, V. V.. PIS'HA V ASTRONGIICHBSKIY ZHURNAL. Vol 5.
1979. p 180.

Hachabeli, G. 2.. Usov. V. V.. Ibid.. p 1065.

88. Landau. L., Lifshits, Ye. H., "Teoriya polya" [Field Theory]. Moscow. Nauka,
1973.

89. Hawking. S. H.. NATURE. Vol 268. 1976. p 30; PHYS. REV. SER. D. 1976. Vol 13.
p 191.

90. Frolov. V. P. USPEKHI FIZICHBSKIHI NAUK. Vol 118. 1976. p 1079; in: the Bin-
stein Collection. 1975-1976. Moscow, Nauka. 1978. p 82.

"Chernyye dyry" [Black Holes]. collection of articles, Moscow, Mir. 1978.
91. Kirzhnits. D. A.. Prolov, V. P., PRIRODA. 1981.

92. Laytman, A. P.. Syunyayev. R. A. et al.. USPMI PIZICEESKIKH NAM. Vol 126.
1978. p 515.

93. Ku, w. a. H., ﬂclfand. n. J., Lucy, L. 3.. NATURE. Vol 88, 1980. p 323.

94. Ginzburg, V. 1... Ozernoy. 1.. H.. ASTROPHYS. AND SPACE 801.. Vol 1.8. 1977.
p 1.01.

95. Dokuchayev. V. I.. Ozernoy. L. 11.. PIS'HA V ASTRONOHICHBSKIY ZHURNAL. Vol 3.
1977. p 391; ASTROWICHESKIY ZHURNAL. V01 55. 1977. p 27.

Curzyadyan. V. 6.. Ozemoy. L. H.. PIS'HA V ASTRONOHICHESKIY ZHURNAL, Vol 5.
1979. p 630.

Duncan.H. J.. Wheeler. J. C.. ASTROPHYS. J. LETT., Vol 237.1980. 1) L27.
96. Berezinsky. V. S.. Ginzburg. V. L.. MON. N01. 1108. Vol 194. 1981. p 3.

97. Longeir. M. 8.. Einasto. J., ed.. "The Large Scale Structure of the Universe".
mu Symposium No 79 (a Russian translation is being done).

98. Ginzburg. v. L.. Ptuakin. v. s.. USPEKHI PIZICHBSKIKB “aux. Vol 117, 1975.
p 585.

99. "Origin of Cosmic Rays". IUPAP/IAU Symposium No 94. Bologna. Italy. D.
Reidel, Amsterdam. 1980.

158
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1w.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

"VII Yevropeyskiy sinpoziun po koanicheakin luchan" [Seventh European Syn-
posium on Cosmic Rays], Leningrad. 1980.

Helfand. D. J. et 31., NATURE. Vol 283. 1980. p 337.

Batty. H. A.. Pterson, L. 2., ed.. "X-Ray Astronomy" (COSPAR). Oxford,
Pergnmon Press, 1979.

Gal'per, A. H.. Luchkov. B. I.. Prilutskiy. 0. P.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK.
Vol 128. 1979. p 313.

Pinkau, Kn, NATURE. Vol 277’ 1979, p 17.
USPEKHI FIZICHBSKIKH NAUK. Vol 132. 1980’ PP 700. 702. 705.

Rozental'. I. L.. Usov. V. V.. Estulin. I. V.. USPEKBI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK.
Vol 127, 1979. p 135.

Levental. M.. HcCallum, C. J.. SCI. AMERICAN. Vol 243. No 1. 1980. p 50.

Svanenberg, B. N. et 31., "Second COS-B Catalog of High-Energy Gamma-Sources".
Preprint, 1980.

Hazets, Ye. P. et 31.. PIS'MA V ASTRONOHICHESKIY ZHURNAL. V01 6, 1980.
pp 609. 706.

Hazets, B. P. et a1., NATURE, Vol 282. 1979, p 587; Vbl 290. 1981. p 378.
Terrell. J. et a1., NATURE. Vol 285. 1980, p 383.

Ramaty. R. et 31., NATURE. Vol 287. 1980. p 122.

NATURE. V01 28‘. 1980, p 507.

Bahcall. J. H.. SPACE SCI. REV.. Vol 24. 1979. p 227.

"Neutrino-77. Proc. of the Intern. Conference on Neutrino Physics and Neutrino
Astrophysics". Moscow. Nauka. Vol 1. 1978.

Berezinskiy. V. 8.. PRIRODA. No 3. 1981. p 13; USPEKBI PIZICHESKIKH NAUK.
Vol 133. 1981, p 545.

La Rue. G. 8.. Ph1111ps. J. D.. Fairbank. H. H.. PHYS. REV. LETTS. Vol 46.
1981. p 967.

Georgi. 11.. SCI. AMERICAN. Vol 266. No 10. 1981. p 40.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKA". GLAVNAYA REDAKTSIYA PIZIKO-HAIEHATICHESKOY
LITERATURY. "USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK". 1981

6610

C80:

8155/0699

159

IN)! OIWHCIAL lEﬂ£(lVLY
FOR<0FFNJAI.USE(MVLY

UDC 519.95
OPTIMUM CONTROL OF SYSTEMS WITH INDEFINITE INFORMATION

Sverdlovsk OPTIMAL'NOYE UPRAVLENIYE SISTEMAMI S NEDPREDELENNOY INPORMATSIYEY in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 12 Sep 80)pp2, 165, 1‘7. 169. 151

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from book "Optimum Control of Systems With
Indefinite Information". edited by L. N. Petlenko. Ural Science Center. USSR Acad-
emy of Sciences. 1000 copies. 152 pages]

[Text] An examination is made of mathematical problems of control and observation
under conditions of uncertainty. The articles of this collection can be put into
three major divisions. The first of these comprises papers in which an investiga-
tion is made of problems of observation. the properties of information sets are
studied, problems of identifying the parameters of controlled systems are examined.
The second division presents results relating to the theory of differential games.
Here an investigation is made of solutions of positional game problems of control
based on program iterations. optima strategies are constructed for some types

of differential games. The third division contains papers where an investigation
is made of game problems of control in the case of incomplete phase information
and problems of controlling information sets.

The collection may be of interest to specialists working in the field of mathemati-
cal control theory and its applications.

UDC 519.9
APPROACH TO DEFINING DYNAMIC GAMES IN THE LANGUAGE 0F GENERALIZED DYNAMIC SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by Baydosov, V. A.)

[Text] It is shown that any family of motions with Markov properties that is gener-
ated by the strategy of one of the players uniquely determines a generalized dy-
namic system. This enables formulation and investigation of problems of dynamic
games by using generalized dynamic systems. References 6.

UDC 517.9
MINIMAX PROGRAM CONSTRUCTION IN DIFFERENTIAL GAME
[Abstract of article by Batukhtin. V. D.]

[Text] The author considers a procedure for constructing sets of minimax positional
absorption in a nonlinear game problem of approach. A relationship is established

160
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
between minimax positional and programmed absorption. A model example is presented.
References 4.

UDC 519.9

EVALUATING UEIGNTING FUNCTIONS OF LINEAR CONTROLLED SYSTEMS FROM MEASUREMENT EE-
SULTS. PART 2

[Abstract of article by Isakov, A. 1.]

[Text] An examination is made of the problem of evaluating the parameters of linear
controlled systems from results of observation of a linear signal that delivers
information on the phase vector of the system. Equations are presented for de-
termining the compatible region of weighting functions. References 8.

UDC 519.9
INFORMATION SETS OF QUASILINEAR SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by Kayumov. R. 1.]

[Text] The author examines a system with motion described by a differential equa-
tion with indefinite interference that appears nonlinearly in the second member

of the equation. Some properties of information sets of such systems are studied.
References 5.

UDC $19.9
SOME STABLE BRIDGES FOR LINEAR CONTROLLED SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by Kryazhimskiy, A. V.]

[Text] The author points out an auxiliary construction used for solving some
classes of linear game problems. References 6.

UDC 519.9
CONSTRUCTION OF OPTIMUM CONTROL OF MOTION IN A PLANE POTENTIAL FIELD
[Abstract of article by Kukushkin. A. P.]

[Text] An examination is made of the speed problem for a material point moving
under the action of a potential force and a controlling force normal to the tra-
jectory. Equations of the principle of the maximum are reduced to a second-order
linear differential equation. A relation is demonstrated between the initial prob-
lem and the solution of the equation for normal variation of the trajectory and also
the curvature of the generalized bachistochrone. References 6.

161
FINICNHHCIAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 517.9

AN EXTRDIUH TARGETING HETIDD IN A nmm DIFFERENTIAL GUIDANCE GAME

[Abstract of article by Loginov. M. 1.]

[Text] The author proposes a modification of the method of extrelIum targeting

in the guidance problem for a conflict-controlled system that is linear with respect
to phase coordinates and nonlinear with respect to controls. When conditions of
regularity are met. a method is given for forming the strategy of one of the players
that guarantees this player a game result no worse than in the programmed maxi-in

problem for the initial position. References 6.
unc 5l9.9

CONSTRUCTION OF EQUILIBRIUM SETS 0? STRATEGIES IN POSITIONAL MANY-PLAYER DIFFEREN-
TIAL GAMES

[Abstract of article by Lutmanov, s. V.]

[Text] An examination is made of linear differential games of several players.
Based on a suggested programed construction. an equilibriua set of strategies
is synthesized for all players without assuming pairwise noninterssction of maximum

stable bridges. References 3.
"DC 519.9

METHOD OF CONSTRUCTING STABLE SETS IN DIFFERMIAL-DIFFERENCE GAMES

[Abstract of article by Hakaimov. V. 1.]

[Text] The author gives a method of constructing stable sets for a differential-
functional approach game. The technique is based on a dynamic programing procedure.
and involves the use of smooth functionals that act as a potential. References [0.

WC 519.9

CONTROL PROBLEM WITH VECTOR QUALITY CRITERION UNDER CONDITIONS OF UNCERTAINTY

[Abstract of article by Nikonov. 0. 1.]

[Text] The problem of controlling an ensemble (tube) of signal-compatible trajec-
tories is considered for a linear controlled system that functions under conditions
of uncertainty. A vector quality criterion is essmed that has components depending

on the realization of cross sections of this ensemble and the time for occurrence
of the process. References 7.

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 519.9
POSITIONAL CONTROL THEORY IN NONLINEAR SYSTEMS WITH DISTRIBUTED PARAMETERS
[Abstract of article by Okhezin. S. P.]

[Text] The author distinguishes a class of conflict-controlled systems described
by ordinary differential equations in Banach spaces. The theorem of the alterna-
tive in the approach-evasion problem is valid for this class of systems. Refer-
ences 9.

UDC 517.9
911le PROGRAMMBD CONSTRUCTION IN APPRACH PROBLEM
[Abstract of article by Ruzakov. V. Ya.]

[Text] The author considers an auxiliary minimax construction. A condition is
given such that the approach problem is solved when this condition is met by an
iteration process. References 8.

UDC 519.9
IRREGULAR INFORMATION GAME PROBLEM
[Abstraat of article by Serov, V. P.]

[Text] The author considers a model example of an infatuation game problem of
guidance. An investigation is made of a linear controlled system with interference
that has dynamics of the "boy and crocodile" type. Control is synthesized from

the results of observation of part of the phase coordinates. Solution of the con-
trol synthesis problem is based on extremum constructions of the theory of game
problems of dynamics. A strategy is found that ensures a game result that is optimum
with respect to the minimax of a functional. Figures 3. references 6.

UDC 519.9
GAME PROBLEM OF GUIDANCE IN THE CASE OF INFORMATION DELAY
[Abstract of article by Filippov. S. D.)
[Text] A game problem of guidance with delay of information is considered for
a linear system of general type. An alternative statement on possible outcomes

of the game is proved on the basis of an analog of the method of extremun targeting
with total recall. References 8.

163
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 519.9
INFORMATION SETS OF PARABOLIC SYSTEMS NIT“ QUADRA'I'IC CONSTRAINT
[Abstract of article by Khapalov, A. Yu.]

[Text] An examination is made of a problem of a posteriori observation for a dis-
tributed parabolic system with unknown perturbations at input and output. Two
different methods of observation are discussed. An analytical description is de-
rived for information sets X(6. Y(')) (8> 0) that are compatible at time 0 with
the realized signal y(t) (tc[0. 0]). References 11.

UDC 519.9
OPTIMALITY CONDITIONS OF DISCRETE-CONTINUOUS SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by Chebykin, L. 8.]

[Text] Necessary conditions of optimality of controls are obtained in the form
of a maximum principle for a system whose behavior on a given time segment is de-
scribed by a set of differential and finite-difference equations. It is shown
that in the case of a linear system these conditions are sufficient as well.
References 6.

UDC 519.9
PROGRAM‘IED CONSTRUCTIONS IN DIFFERENTIAL GAMES WITH INFORMATION STORE

[Abstract of article by Chentsov, A. 6.]

[Text] An examination is made of iteration methods of constructing a stable system
of functional sets and values of a game as a functional on histories of a controlled
process for corresponding nonlinear differential games with information storage.
Different iteration methods are compared and an example is proposed of a differential
game with continuous criterion functional that does not have an equilibrium situation

in positional strategies. References 6.
COPYRIGHT: UNTs AN SSSR. 1980

6610
C50: [862/102 END

16h
FOI,OFFKJAI.USE1ONLY