FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10454

13 April 1982

USSR Report

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS
(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP 0?_
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS

(P000 3/82)
CONTENTS

HIGH PRESSURE PHYSICS
Present State of nigh-Pressure Physics .......................
LASERS AND MASERS

Promising Designs and Punping Methods for Powerful C02
Process Lasers (Survey) ....................................

Change in Relaxation Rate of Upper Laser Level With Prolonged
Operation of Cu Electron-Beam-Controlled 002 Process Laser..

OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY
Holographic Neasurenents .....................................

Feasibility of Controlling Gain of Bnthalpy-Stinulated
Light Scattering ......u....................................

Conversion of Optical Radiation Spatial Spectru- in Parametric

Processes ..................................................
HIGH PRESSURE P818108

000 53.092

PRESENT STATE OF RICE-PRESSURE PHYSICS
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEMII NAUK $583 in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 52-63
(Article by S. H. Stishov, doctor of physical-mathematical sciences]

[Text] Having arisen at the and of the 18th Century and the beginning of the 19th
Century, high-pressure physics as a fully defined field of scientific research was
finally formulated in the first third of our century. An outstanding role in this
was played by P. V. Bridgman. Evidently, it was he who first introduced the term
"High-pressure physics“ publishing a book with this title in l931,* in which he
stated the results of his experimental research.

But neither P. Bridgman nor anyone else defined what would later be understood by
high-pressure physics. Clearly, that of R. Feynman must be considered one of the
best; it says, in essence: high-pressure physics is everything that physicists do
with the help of equipment for creating high pressures. Actually, pressure up to
many millions of atmospheres does not change the properties of substances. One can-
not point to a single effect or phenomenon observed at around 1 million atmosphcres
that could not be observed in some form at atmospheric pressure (this means, first
of all, phase transitions, electronic transitions. metallization, etc.). Thus, in
experimentally achieved ranges of pressures, there is an absence of effects that
are unique for compressed matter. In this connection, the situation in high-pressure
physics in some sense is opposite to the situation in lowbtemperature physics,
where the unique effects of quantum degeneration, auperfluidity, superconductivity,
and so forth are observed. However, it would be incorrect not to note that in the
presence of very high pressures exceeding hundreds and thousands of atmospheres,

we will find unusual riches of physical phenomena, including full ionization of
matter. nuclear disintegration and nuclear reaction,neutronizatknof matter, super-
conductivity, and superfluidity in proton and neutron systems** (unfortunately, all
this is unachievable directly by experimental study and conclusions can be only on
the basis of astrophysical data). Thus, experimental high-pressure physics is
nothing other than the "plain" continuation of the physics of atmospheric pressure
in a new dimension, where the possibilities for experimentation are substantially
increased and where the volume of information is vastly growing.

* For Russian translation. see P. V. Bridgman. "Fisika vysokikh davleniy” [High-
Pressure Physical, ONTI, 1935.

** See D. A. Kirshnits. "Uspekhi fix. nauk" [Advances in Physical Sciences], 1971,
vol. 105, p. 489.

1
FKHICNHWC1A1.1EHE(NULY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a few words must be said about pressure as a physical parameter. First, let us
stress that the numerical significance of pressure, however large, says nothing
about its effect on matter. The degree of such effect, obviously, must be con-
sidered the ratio of the work of compression which is determined by the integral
dev to the size of the thermodynamic potential of the system P-O. Thus, the effect
of pressure on matter is closely related to the response of the system to the applied
effect, in the given instance, to compressibility. Because of this, a pressure of

a million atmospheres turns out to have much less effect on less compressible matter
(such as iron, for example) than several thousand atmospheres on extremely compress-
ible matter such as helium. Hence comes the rule: in research on any phenomena,
select objects that possess the highest degree of compressibility, other conditions
being equal. This provides the possibility for investigating a phenomenon over a
broad range of densities under relatively low pressures, and this is significant for
conducting precision measurements.

The need for achieving very high pressures usually arises in the solution of
specific scientific or applied problems. However, it is obvious that it is these
specific problems that stimulate development of the technology and methods for high-
pressures. A vivid example is the many year history of attempts to synthesize
diamonds, which was brilliantly accomplished in 1955. As the result, diamonds and
borazon (cubic nitride of boron) were synthesized, and high-pressure equipment was
created that permits achieving pressures of about 100,000 atm in combination with
temperature of up to 2000°C and higher. In turn, the new technology quickly found
application in physics, chemistry, and technology. Especially striking results

were achieved in geophysics in research on olivine-spinel transformation and poly-
morphism of silica. These results lie at the base of modern understanding of the
structure and composition of layers of the earth. It must be noted that the aspira-
tion to solve the puzzle of the earth's core is obviously one of the powerful incen-
tives that will determine the development of high-pressure technology in the near
future (the pressure at the earth's center is around A million atm).

CREATION OF HIGH PRESSURES

As follows from the equation of state m(P,V,T)'0, to create increased pressure,
it is necessary in a corresponding manner to change the volume or temperature of the
substance. Both means are used in practice.

Thermal means for creating pressure are fully effective for gasses. Multistage
designs for gas thermal compressors are well known for creating pressures up to
10,000 atm. Autoclave technology is also widely used in science and industry.
However, the direct compression of a substance is the most convenient means for
creating pressure. In this case, it is necessary to have a strong vessel, which
has at least one movable wall. The simplest and most popular design for such a type
is the cylinder-piston type (fig. Is).

As can be seen in the figure, in realizing this method, a strong,
often many-layered, full cylinder is supplied with a piston and a
plug. The cylinder is filled with liquid or previously compressed
gas, and the piston and plug are correspondingly compressed.
Usually, the plug serves as the place for locating electrical lead-
ins, which permit introducing detectors of various sizes into the

2
INTR<DF11CIAI.lHﬂB(NVLY
Figure 1. Sketches of High-Pressure Devices

s. Cylinder-piston type chamber
b. The Bridgman anvil (a thin layer of substance is compressed
between two conic pistons)

c. The "Belt" type device.

d. The multiplunger tetrahedral device (four pistons located
in the space along the diagonal of the tetrahedron ‘
simultaneously compress the specimen)

e. Hultiplunger cubic device

f. Device with sliding anvils (limitations in the degree of

compression are absent)

g. Spherical nultiplunger device; it differs from d and e in
that the loading of the plungers is produced by loading the
whole device in a high hydrostatic pressure chamber

h. A two—stage spherical multiplunger device.

cylinder, first of all for temperature and pressure. To create
pressure, the piston pushes down into the vessel with the aid of

a screw or hydraulic press, but the limit in the pressure achieved
in such a systee is not at all determined by the power of the press,
but the load-carrying capacity of the piston and cylinder. The
strength of modern steel and hard alloys, in principle, permits
using the cylinder-piston type system to achieve a pressure of
60,000 atn (the strength under pressure of the best instrument

steel is about 350 kgf/mmi, and hard alloys of the tungsten-
carbide type cenented with cobalt, about 600 kgf/le. nougvgy,

much before this. many problems arise with the sealing of

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

compressed liquid or gas and, therefore, the field of hydro-
static pressure, that is, pressure that can be obtained by
compressed gas or liquid, is limited to 30,000 or 40,000 atm.

In recent years, industry in a number of countries began to produce strong and
flexible tubing of alloys with low heat conductivity having outside diameter of

1 to 3 mm and able to contain pressure of up to 20,000 to 25,000 ata. It became
possible to separate spatially the pressure being created for the piston system and
the vessel in which the research is being performed. This permits the creation of
various specialized interchangeable chambers (optical, nonmagnetic, and others)

and to locate them in a thermostat or cryostat, between magnetic poles, in an opti-
cal device, or a combination of these.

Using the piston system, it is possible to simplify the experiment and, in place of
liquid or gas, to place inside the high-pressure chamber a plastic-solid body as
the means of transferring pressure. Thus, the sealing problem is made simple, but
complications arise in measurement and control of parameters, and nonhydrostatic
components of stress appear. The pressure limits in such devices are 60,000 to
65,000 stm.

It turned out, however, that to achieve quasihydrostatic pressure (that is,

achieved by compressing solids), other devices were more effective. Among them must
be noted the Bridgman anvil, the "Belt" device, and multiplunger devices. The
devices shown in Figure_l b through h, with parts made of hard alloy, reach
pressures of up to 200,000 atm, depending on design details. Recently, F. Bundy,
of the General Electric laboratory, developed the "Belt" type of design, with a

tip of synthetic polycrystalline diamond, capable of generating pressures of up to
500,000 atm.

All these devices can be adapted for conducting various physical, mineralogical,
technological, and other experiments, including x-ray research on crystalline
structure of matter.

In recent years, the diamond-anvil method has received widespread use (fig. 2).

It began to develop intensively after the means was proposed for measuring pressure
by the R-line shift of ruby luminescence (the wave length of ruby R-line lumines-
cence is virtually linearly dependent on pressure).

The essence of the method is as follows. Two diamonds of

jewel quality, polished in a special way (see fig. 2), are brought
together by means of an uncomplicated lever-screw or hydraulic
device. The specimen is placed directly between the working
surfaces of the diamonds and, in this manner, a significant
pressure gradient arises (see colored insert).* Improved tech~
nology provides for placing the specimen together with a small
piece of ruby in a washer made of strong and sufficiently plastic
material, as shown in the insert (photograph 4). A hole in the

washer is filled with a mixture of methyl and ethyl alcohol, which
provides hydrostatic pressure up to 100,000 atm. At the present

 

* Photographs were made by V. N. Kachinskiy, associate of the high-pressure
sector of the Institute of Crystallography imeni A. V. Shubnikov of the USSR
Academy of Sciences.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
time, methods have been developed that per-it using solidified
inert gasses, including helium, as a means for transmitting
pressure.

Characteristic dimensions of the device are as follows: diameter
of the working surfaces, 0.3 to 1 mm; dimension of supporting
surfaces. about 3 to 5 sun the weight of each diamond, about 0.3
to 0.1 carat; the original thickness of the washer, 0.1 to 0.3 mm;
and the diameter of the hole in the washer, 0.15 to 0.3 II. The
whole device will fit into the palm of a hand.

 

Figure 2. Diamond Anvila

1. Diamonds; 2. Metal washer; 3. Specimen;

a and b are two types of diamond working surfaces:

a -- simple anvils, and b - with additional conic
grinding of the working surface at a small angle, which
reduces the stress gradient and permits the achievement
of greater pressure.

with diamond anvils, it is possible to obtain extremely high pressures of up to
1.7 million atm.* The device is easy to use for conducting various optical, x-ray,
Hossbauer, and other experiments. A virtue of this device of no little importance
is the possibility of visual observation. **

In recent years, Academician L. P. Vereshchagin and his associates at the Institute
of High—Pressure Physics of the USSR Academy of Sciences and, subsequently. A._Ruoff
of Cornell.University (United States) proposed using, to achieve very high pressures.

* See H. K. Mao and P. H. Bell. "Science,“ 1978, vol. 200, p. lle.
** See 8. Blok and D. P'yermarini [8. Block and D. Piermarini]. "Uspekhi fit. nauk"
[Advances in Physical Sciencess]. 1979, vol. 127, p 765.

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR GFFICML USE ONLY

the indentor-plane type of device. It is clear that this device can develop very
high contact pressures. However, this device can be used only to measure

electrical resistance, and the value of this type of devxce for physical research
is not very clear.

C
an instrument is the weighted piston manometer, in which an unknown pressure of a
liquid is balanced with a weight, aided by the piston system. As a result, all
that has to be known is the weight of the weight and the diameter of the piston.

greater than 0.2 to 0.5. Thus, absolute accuracy of measuring pressure in this
range cannot be less than 30 to 100 kgf/cmz, and, consequently, the accuracy of
pressure measurement by any secondary devxces cannot be less than the magnitudes

compounds are selected. The selection of reference substances is conducted with
consideration for many factors, one of which is the ease of observation of phase
transitions, for example, with the aid of measurement of electrical resistance.
1he pressures of phase transitions, Which serve as reference points can he

does not exceed 60,000 to 70,000 atm. The determination of reference pressures
lying outside this range have been based on extrapolations, rough assumptions, and

empirical equation suitable for calculating pressure with the aid of the results of
measuring the density of Nacl under high pressures. And, although the precision of
the proposed equation of state, evidently, was no higher than several percent
(especially under high pressures exceeding 100,000 atm), the use throughout the
world of NaCl as a standard nevertheless allows at least the production of

at the present time, the pressures of reference lines are being redctermined on
the basis of the NaCl scale. 0. Piermarini, with coauthors from the 0.8. National
Bureau of Standards has calibrated the movement of the R-line of ruby under
treasure through 300,000 atm on the NaCl scale. Subsequently, P. Bell and H. Mac

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
conducted calibration of a ruby sensor to 1 million arm, which was based on the

equation of state of a number of metals that was determined with the aid of shock
waves. These same authors lengthened the ruby scale to 1.1 million atm, having
directly measured the contact area and distribution of pressure with various loads.
The precision of the scale under such pressures is about 20 percent.

FUNDAMENTAL RESULTS OF RESEARCH UNDER HIGH PRESSURES

To explain the present situation in high-pressure physics and to evaluate its
trends and prospects, it is necessary to analyze its results in some fashion. In
the limited space of the present article, it clearly is not possible to try to
describe the facts sufficiently and the more interesting projects, the more so
because most of the achievements of high-pressure physics are fused together with
the results of various subdivisions of physics, geophysics, crystal chemistry, and
so forth. Instead of this, the author has undertaken the responsibility of trying
to isolate and describe just those results that have had a deep influence on
science and technology as a whole. There are undoubtedly such results and, in the
opinion of the author, in first priority these must be the totality of phenomena
discovered and described in the research of phase diagrams of matter, electronic
phase transitions, the synthesis of diamonds and borazon, and geophysical research
(phase diagram of silica). Let us look at these results in more detail.

Critical Point, Melting Curve

In 1869, T. Andrews, doing research on CO; condensation, discovered that beyond the
temperature of 31° C, the condensation of gaseous CO; to a liquid takes place
uninterruptedly. The coordinates of the critical point for carbon dioxide

Andrews determined to be 31° C and 76 eta. In his experiments, he used extremely
modest experimental technology, and the pressures achieved did not exceed seVeral
hundred atmospheres. Let us stress that Andrews' discovery was the result of
systematic research on equations of state and the condensation of gasses. The
culmination of this research was the liquefaction of helium in 1908. within three
years after Andrews' discovery, J. D. Ven-der-Hsals formulated the theory that
successfully described for the first time the critical phenomena in simple
liquids.

The research of Andrews and Van-der-Haals provided a foundation for a number of
areas in the physics of the condensed state of matter, the most important of which
was the physics of phase transition and the physics of dense gasses and liquids.

The development of Van-der-Waals' ideas, the significance of which is stressed in
every modern survey of phase transition, led to the creation of the integral
equation method in the theory of liquids (the Born-Green-Bogolyubov-Kirkwood
equation) and the later method of molecular dynamics, realized with the aid of
large computers.

We must also note the recently developing research on critical phenomena in metals,
where a nontrivial situation arises, since in this case, phase transition of
liquid to steam is accompanied by the transition of metal to dielectric. This
problem was first formulated by L. D. Landau and Ya. B. Zel'dovich. One of the
first experimental projects in this field was done by I. K. Kikoin and A. P.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK OI'I'ICIAI. 03f. UNLY

Senchenkov in 1967. Their research was closely related to the general problem of
the metal-dielectric transition, which is also developing intensively at the pre-
sent time.

The discovery of the critical point on the boiling curve became, in its time, a
stimulating factor for the beginning of research on the melting curve. It was
thought that it must end at a critical paint, like the boiling curve. Much effort
was spent in searching for the critical point on the melting curve by P. Simon,
who did research on the melting curve of helium under high temperatures corres-
ponding to a pressure of about 10,000 atm. But even under these pressures, the
critical point was not discovered (it is interesting to note that not long ago

(M. Pesson) of Paris University traced the melting curve to the temperature of

25° C and pressures of around 115,000, with the aid of the technology of diamond
anvils.

A large number of such experiments were conducted by P. Bridgman, who was extremely
skeptical about the possibility of the existence of the critical point on the
melting curve. However, from the theoretical point of view, the situation was
unclear until L. D. Landau in 1937 showed the impossibility of the existence of a
critical point on the melting curve.

A wide discussion arose at one time on the question of the form of the melting
curVe. P. Bridgman insisted that with the growth in pressure, the increase in the
temperature of a melting substance is unlimited. G. Tamman asserted that the
temperature of the melting of any substance must pass through a maximum. As we
now know, there is no general solution to this problem. The answer depends on the
form of interparticle interaction and the role of quantum effects in a given
system of particles. Let us stress that the capability for melting-crystallization
is a fundamental property of multiparticle systems, independent of their specific
nature. Therefore, one must think that the phenomena of melting-crystallization
play an important role in the evolution of white dwarfs, pulsars, and other
astronomical objects.

Electronic Phase Transitions

Insofar as reduction of interatomic distances lead to expansion of bands of
electronic states and to the reduction of energy distances between them, it can be
expected, from very general considerations, that increase in pressure will stimu-
late the occurrence of phase transitions due to transitions of electrons from band
to band (including transitions of the metal-dielectric type). This also takes
place in reality. Transitions of such a type can be seen as a precursor of
phenomena that under further increase in pressure finally lead to the disappearance
of the shell structure of the atom generally.

A remarkable example of a transformation of such a type is the phase transition in
cerium found first by P. Bridgman, with pressure of about 7,000 atm and at room
temperature; in connection with this, the density of cerium increases by 15 percent.
Since, under atmospheric pressure, cerium already possesses a close-packed
structure, L. Pauling and V. Zacharias proposed that in cerium there is a transi-
tiou of an electron from band 4 f to S d.

A. Lawson and T. Tang with x-ray structural analysis demonstrated that phase
transition in cerium is isostructural, that is, it does not change the symmetry or

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the type of packing. In 1958, Ya. G. PonyatOVskiy revealed that with increased
temperature, the heat of the phase transition in cerium approaches zero along the
line of the phase transition and proposed that the phase transition curve in
cerium wOuld end at a critical point. Subsequently, Ye. G. Ponyatovskiy's results
were fully confirmed.

Let us stress that the critical point in cerium is completely analogous to the
critical point of the liquid—vapor type (the symmetry of cerium does not change
with phase transition). It would be interesting to know the significance of
critical indices at this point (one should think that, in this instance, it would
be possible to observe the applicability of an average field theory).

A critical point is expected also on the curve of isostructural phase transition

in Sms, which is simultaneously a sutalbdielectrie transition.Letus note that
phase transitions of the metal-dielectric type in chalcogenides of rare-earth
elements at the present time are a subject of numerous research projects, including
applied ones.

An extremely interesting phase transition that is evidently tied with electron
transition from a 6s- to a Sd—state takes place in cesium under pressure of about
h0,000 atm. This transition was also discovered by P. Bridgman, but J. Bardeen
suggested itSelectronic nature. Calculations by R. Sternheimer confirmed these
proposals. Decisive results were achieved by T. Hall and his coworkers which,
using x-ray analysis, showed that phase transition in cesium is isostructural.
Unfortunately, because of technical difficulties, this transition has been studied
in less detail than the transition in Ce and SmS. It must be pointed out that in
the case of electronic transitions, the real situation evidently cannot be
described by simple diagrams of transitions between two electronic states. At
least, recent experiments in Compton scattering do not support the diagram proposed
by L. Pauling and V. Zacharias for the transition in Ce.

If, as a result of change in the energy state of electrons, there is a disappearance
of the energy gap dividing the band of valence electrons and the conduction band

the substance acquires metallic properties. Such transitions are called Isetalliza-
tion or metal-dielectric transitions. Evidently, metal-dielectric transitions were
observed for the first time by P. Bridgman, doing research on electrical resis-
tance in tellurium and black phosphorus. Later, in the 1960's, a series of

projects on metal-dielectric transition has been conducted by H. Drickamer and
associates.

At the present time, a large number of elements and compounds are known that have
transitions into metallic states under pressure; these are tellurium, selepium,

. . . . . i v
siifgi’ iodine, germanium, silicon, and a number of compounds of types A B and
A B and others. Some of these substances are being found to have superconducting
properties in the metallic state.

Hetallization can take place as a clearly expressed phase transition of the first
kind with sharp change in crystal structure and electrical properties as. for

example, in Ge, Si, and other substances with coordination structure. In other

cases, especially in substances of the molecular type, such as S and Se, change in
electrical properties takes place gradually within the range of several tens or
even hundreds of kilobsrs.

FOR OFFIC?AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It must be noted that a sharp and reversible metal-dielectric transition in
amorphous germanium, silicon, and indium antimonide was recently observed under
high pressures by S. Hinomura and associates at Tokyo University.

Synthesis of Diamonds and Cubic Nitride of Boron

In 1955, the research laboratory of the General Electric firm announced success in
the synthesis of diamonds, and in 1959 a Detroit factory of the firm began series
product manufacture.

Having gone into the “diamond" research group, T. Hall invented the "Belt" high-
pressure device, which helped bring about the first diamond synthesis, and also a
series of multiplunger devices. Soon, R. Hentorf synthesized borazon. Subsequently
it turned out that Swedish researchers had produced artificial diamonds before the
Americans, but had kept their results secret. In the USSR, the first synthetic
diamonds were produced at the Institute of High~Presaure Physics of the USSR
Academy of Sciences under the direction of Academician L. P. Vereshchagin. Let

us stress that success was achieved as the result of using new conceptions in the
design of devices and application of catalysts (metals of the transition group).

At the present time, the diamond industry has been developed in many countries
around the world and, evidently, provides industry with material suitable for
manufacturing grinding wheels, diamond paste, and so forth. however, the need for
large diamonds for manufacturing cutting tools, draw plates, drilling tools, and

so forth, continues to grow. It is satisfied by natural diamonds and also by
baked synthetic material (General Electric compact) and synthetic material of the
carbonado type manufactured in the USSR.

At the beginning of the 1970's, a research group at General Electric again met
with success in growing monocrystals of jewel quality diamonds S to 6 mm in size.
However, the process of growing jewel-grade diamonds is still too expensive for
industrial production. Nevertheless, it must be expected that it will be improved
and that in the end, industry and science will be furnished this material in
sufficient quantities. Much still must be done in this area. particularly in
understanding fully the mechanism of catalytic action in diamond synthesis and the
natural mechanism of diamond formation. It is possible that a way will be found
to lower the parameters of diamond synthesis. It is no less important to manufac-
ture larger components from polycrystal diamond. This undoubtedly will have a
revolutionary effect on the technology of high pressures. The first attempts in
this area are very hopeful.

Geophysical Research

The study of the internal structure of the earth and other planets is extremely
fascinating and has practical importance, but is still an unsolved problem. The
first conceptions, which pictured the earth as a kind of gigantic metallurgical
furnace with its composition divided into slag, matte, and metal, rather soon

ceased to satisfy researchers. The accumulation of data on the thermodynamic and
mechanical properties of the internal layers of the earth led to the conclusion that
the presence of significant quantities of heavy metals and their sulfides in the
earth's mantle (that is, to a depth of about 2900 km) is not possible. An analysis

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
conducted by the American geophysicist P. Burch in 1952 showed that the material
composing the lower mantle must possess a very high ratio of the bulk modulus

to density -— k/p Z 60 \km/s)3; this is typical for oxides of the Hg0 and A120,
type, but is not possible for silicates that compose the surface layers of the earth.
F. Burch suggested a hypothesis about the possibility of the existence in the depths
of the earth of new polymorphic modifications of silicates, which would contain
silicon in sixfold coordination relative to oxygen (instead of the usual fourfold).
This hypothesis later suffered criticism, the more so because the first attempts

at experimental verification did not lead to positive results. However, in 1961,
the present author and S. V. Popova achieved a new dense modification of silica
under pressure of about 100,000 atm and temperature of 1500' C. The crystalline
structure of this modification is equivalent to the crystalline structure of rutile
(1102) and contains silicon in sixfold coordination relative to oxygen. The density
of the new modification of silica turned out to be 4.35 glcm’, or 64 percent more
than the density of quartz.

Thus, :he hypothesis of the possibility for significant compression of silicates
under the action of pressure was proved. Later this permitted constructing a

model of the lower earth mantle, which successfully explained the data of observa-
tions without drawing upon concepts about changes in the chemical composition of
the mantle with depth. It is interesting that subsequently rutile-like silica was
discovered in nature. This modification was found for the first time in an Arizona
meteorite crater by associates of the U. 8. National Geological Service.headed by
E. Chao. * At the present time, the finding of this unusual mineral, and also
another dense modification of silica, (coesite), produced by (L. Goes) in 1953, is
evidence of the impact origin of a number of geological structures.

The significanceof high-pressure physics is not exhausted by the striking results,
some of which have been described above. Actually, when the investigation of a
phenomenon requires variation in the density of a substance under constant tempera-
ture or, in reverse, variation in temperature with constant density, the methods

of high-pressure physics are used. Therefore, the influence of the methodological
achievements of high-pressure physics on the development of knowledge perhaps
exceeds the influence of its "own" results.

?HE PRESENT STAGE IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF HIGH-PRESSURE PHYSICS

The present situation in high-pressure physics to a significant degree is determined
by the peculiar history of its development. The point is that research in this area
of physics was not too popular in the first half of the present century because of
the great methodological difficulties. However, in the 1950' a, the situatio n
changed abruptly. In announcing the synthesis of diamonds, researchers at General
Electric gave a powerful impetus to the development of the technology of high
pressures and inspired many scientists to search for new phases with properties
perhaps even more notable than diamonds and borazon. Thus, a new industrial period
in high-pressure physics was initiated.

'ooking back, one can say that the hopes for creating new materials with astonishing
10pclt5.cs, generally speaking, have not materialized. And, although the scientific
:csults of research under high pressures have been significant (especially geo-

physical problems must be singled out), nothing comparable with diamond synthesis

* The new material was named "stishovite" in honor of 8. M. Stishov, the author
of the present article. -— Ed.

11
FOR OF11CJA1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has been done. A wave of a kind of disillusionment ensued. But, by the end of the
1960's and beginning of the 1970's, a new enthusiasm began. One of the reasons was
the development of the diamond anvils described above, which allowed the production
of a very high pressure. Another reason for the noticeable revival of experimental
and theoretical activity in the field of high-pressure physics was related to the
hope of producing metallic hydrogen. However, in the opinion of the author, the
present period of upsurge still seems to be an echo of the "diamond" boom in the
sense that at its base, possibly, lies a lack of good ideas among a surplus of
professionals.

The idea of transforming molecular hydrogen into a metallic state under high pres-
sure was suggested many years ago in connection with the discussion of the internal
structure of the planets Jupiter and Saturn. In 1935, B. Wigner and (3- Huntington)
conducted the first calculations and evaluated the pressure for the transition of
hydrogen to a metallic state. A more precise and complete calculation was conducted
by A. A. Abrikosov in l95h. Later, V. P. Trubitayn was engaged in this problem.
However, the hydrogen problem did not attract special attention until, in 1968,

N. W. Ashcroft produced results that indicated possible metastability of hydrogen
under atmospheric pressure and the potentially high temperature (~100 K) of super-
conductive transition to metallic hydrogen.

Soon after this, «e. G. Brovman) and Yu. M. Kagan showed that the hypothetical
metastable metallic hydrogen can have an extremely unusual filamentary structure,
representing a kind of hybrid liquid and crystal.

All this caused unprecedented enthusiasm among a wide scientific conmmnity. Some
experimental groups announced their plans to produce metallic hydrogen.* Let us
stress that, according to various evaluations, the pressure for transition of
hydrogen to a metallic state is a magnitude of about 2 million atm. If one takes
into consideration that, from the beginning of the "hydrogen" boom, no one in the
world has achieved a static pressure even approaching this limit,** one must only be

surprised at the boldness of the authors of various projects.. RElative to this,
one can recall the words of Nobel laureate A. A. Szcnt-Gyorgyi. Going fishing with
a large hook, he said: "I know I won't catch anything anyway, but it's more

pleasant not to catch a big fish than a little one."

In any case, work began. At first, it seemed that success might be achieved by
using large multiplunger systems or multistage devices. The group of A. Ruoff of
Cornell University built for this purpose a spherical six-plunger device (see

fig. 1 h) with a diameter of over a half mater. A group at the Institute of High-
Pressure Physics of the USSR Academy of Sciences intended to use for obtaining
metallic hydrogen, a gigantic press with 50,000 tons of force; however, it did not
report any details about a chamber in which a pressure of millions of atmospheres
could be produced.

It must be stated that physicists who plan experiments with hydrogen at one time
underestimated miniature and modest devices such as the diamond anvil. Meanwhile,

* For more detail, see S. H. Stishov. "Uspekhi fiz. nauk“ [Advances in Physical
Sciences], 1979, vol. 127, p. 721.

** He ignore without comment any statements about achieving superhigh pressures
that are not accompanied by proofs at even a common-sense level.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
geophysicists and'geochemists, engaged in a literal sense with earthly cares,

:aw in diamond anvils a means for modeling 2-? conditions corresponding to those of
the lower earth mantle. Geophysical research applying diamond anvils began to
develop rapidly. One of the most important results achieved in this field of
research must obviously be considered the establishment of the fact that magnesia
pyroxene (Mgsi03) under pressures of around 250,000 atm acquires the structure of
the pyroxite type, extremely effective from the point of View of packing. The fact
that, in crystalline structures of this type, large cations (in this case,
magnesium) are included in very dense packing formed by anions. Record results were
achieved in the geophysical laboratories of the Carnegie Institute (United States),
where P. Bell and H. Mao were successful, with the help of diffractions of x-ray
beams, in studying equations of state of geophysically interesting materials, “go
and Fe, up to 1 million atm. These same authors, as noted above, reported on the
achievement of pressures of about 1.7 million atm in diamond anvils. Having such.
technology available, it was difficult to ignore the temptation to do research on
hydrogen. In 1979, P. Bell, H. Mao, and 8. K. Sharma compressed hydrogen up to
~6ﬂh000atm and investigated its Raman spectra. The results of

this work show that the frequency of intramolecular oscillation in hydrogen begins
to decrease under pressures exceeding 300,000 to 350,000 atm. This is undoubtedly
evidence of approaching the instability of the molecular phase of hydrogen. With-
out examining the results of dynamic experiments, the integration of which cannot
be conducted directly, it must be asserted that research on the

Raman spectra of hydrogen under pressures of up to 650,000 stm is practically
the whole of the "dry bones" of ten years of controversy and discussion of plans
and, to a far lesser degree, real experimental projects.

The information that occurs in the literature that, under static compression of
hydrogen equal to that of other substances, a sharp drop in electrical resistance
is observed, apparently must be accepted with caution. Actually, A. Ruoff's
results in measuring electrical resistance of xenon, which seem to be a clear
indication of its metallization under pressure of about'300,000 atm, have turned
out to be incorrect, despite the special measures undertaken by the author to
avert the short-circuiting of the electrodes.

It must be expected that research on hydrogen under high pressure in the present
decade will be continued, in view of the undoubted physical interest in the problem.
Clearly, it must have a more systematic character and develop on the whole plane

of research in compressed gasses under superhigh pressures. Already, now, in the
Carnegie Institute geophysical laboratory, at Los Alamos Laboratory, the University
of Paris, and Paderborn University (PR6), optical and structural research is being
conducted on nitrogen, oxygen, xenon, and helium with diamond anvils. Undoubted
interest is presented also by the study of the possibility for producing metallic
ammonia,* the field of stability of which nearly coincides with the field of
stability of metallic hydrogen.

Despite lack of success in achieving the direct goal of producing metallic
hydrogen, the "hydrogen" problem as a whole has had a strong influence on the
psychology of experimentors. It has become clear that, first of all, the advance
toward higher pressures is not possible without using natural or synthetic
diamonds and, secondly, gigantic presses and devices must, at least temporarily,
yield to miniature devices of the diamond anvil type.

“—- . . a o .
* See 6. H. Stishov. "Uspekhi fir. nauk" [Advances in Physical Sciences], 1978
vol. 125, p. 731.

13
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
150,000 to 200,000 to 1 million atm and more. It is notable that the development

of the diamond anvil technology has coincided with the development of new,

effective methods in optics and spectroscopy, x-ray radiography, and so forth, which
combines well with the application of diamond anvils. At the present time, a

x-ray diffractions from the specimen placed in diamond anvils. The application

of these means permits substantial decrease in exposure, compared with photographic
methods, and improvement in the quality of the primary information. For example, the
use of the linear coordinate detector in combination with diamond anvils allowed

8. Hinomura and his associates to explain for the first time the details of behavior
of iodine under a metal-dielectric phase transition. It turned out that the gradual
metallization of iodine while preserving the molecular-type crystalline st:scture

is accomplished under pressures of about 200,000 atm with uneven transition to

fully dissociated crystalline structure in which it is no longer possible to

isolate individual 12 molecules. The possibility is not excluded that this is

It is apparent that in the next few years, research in high-pressure physics will be
tied to diamond anvils. It must be expected that increase by almost one order of
magnitude of the limits of achieved pressures will bring results. Unfortunately,
this effective technology, for a number of reasons, has not been developed in the

diamonds from Yakutsk deposits for achieving pressures on the order of a million
atmospheres and the beginning of real experimental work. Appropriate projects have
also been started in other USSR scientific institutions. One must not think,
however, that diamond anvils will be successful in solving all the problems of
high-pressure physics. The limited size of the specimen and insufficient precision
for certain types of pressure measurement sometimes force the preference for the
experimental technology of hydrostatic and quasi-hydrostatic pressures.

physics has entered a new, practically untouched range of pressures, and it is
necessary to decide how to introduce its achievements most effectively into general
experimental physics, geophysics, and other branches of knowledge.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

>645
380: 8144/0466

1b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LASERS AND HASBRS

UDC 621.378.326

PROHISING DESIGNS AND PUMPING METHODS FOR POHBRPUL CO: PROCESS LASERS (SURVEY)

Hoscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 12(114), Dec 81 (manuscript
received 24 Dec 80. after revision 23 Apr 81) pp 2517-2539

[Article by G. A.'Abil'siitov, Ye. P. Velikhov. V. S. Golubev and P. V. Lebedev,
Scientific Research Institute of Process Lasers. USSR Academy of Sciences,
Troitsk. Moscow Oblast]

[Text] An analysis is made of the prospects for developing
powerful CO; gas-discharge process lasers with respect to
methods of cooling the working medium. possible gasdynamic and
optical arrangements and pumping methods. An examination is
made of physical and technical pnoblems of using gas discharge
in laser devices. The authors discuss the limiting and opera-
tional characteristics of variOus kinds of process lasers and
the most advisable fields of application.

Contents

Introduction .
1. Designs of 002 gas-discharge lasers
1.1. CO; lasers with diffusion cooling of working mixture
1.2. Past-flow €02 gas-discharge lasers
2. Methods of pumping gas-discharge lasers
2.1. Self-maintained dc discharge
2.2. Semi—self-maintained discharge with electron-beam ionization
2.3. Semi-selfdmaintained discharge with ionization by periodic pulses
2.4. Ac discharge
Conclusion

Introduction

Research over the past decade on interaction of powerful laser radiation with
matter has opened up new prospects for using lasers to process materials, and
also demonstrated some fundamental advantages of laser technology over conven-
tional forms of handling materials. Laser cutting and welding. heat-treatment.
plating and alloying are not only productive and economically effective. but also
can frequently be used to get items with characteristics unattainable by other
technological methods.

1
won omazt use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of particular interest for laser technology are powerful lasers (more than l k"),
and first of all gas-discharge C02 lasers. This is because of their simplicity,
high efficiency, and also the capability for getting high power and brightness
of radiation in relatively compact laser facilities.

The working principle of the molecular €02 laser was formulated by Patel [Ref. 1]
in 1964; the first laser that he produced with glowbdischarge pumping [Ref. 2]
had a power of l m". However, within only a year the power of the CO; laser had
reached 10 H at efficiency of 102, and in 1967 it was 500 H with cw operation
[Ref. 3].

A further appreciable increase in the power of co, lasers became possible with
the advent of convective cooling of the working mixture [Ref. 4]. The CO: laser
developed in 1969 with transverse pumping of the lasing mixture had a power of
~1 kw [Ref. 5]. Use of a semi—se1f~maintained discharge kept alive by electron
beam raised the power of fast-flow lasers to 15 kw as early as 1972 [Ref. 6].

At the present time there are a large number of different stationary systems
with power of 1-15 k". There have been reports on developingandusing stationary
lasers of open type with power from 20 to 100 k” in technological experiments

(Ref. 7]. Nevertheless, most of the described laser systems are of the experimen-
tal laboratory type and are intended chiefly for clarifying and checking principles
of construction of powerful lasers rather than for use in industry.

In addition to the necessary power, the industrial process laser must have a number
of specific features. It must be distinguished by high stability of emission
power, and meet the requirements for technological machine-building equipment:

high reliability and economy, simplicity of design and ease of control, small
overall dimensions and long service life, as well as guaranteeing high safety

of servicing. Hany nations of the world are now engaged in the development of
powerful CO; laser devices for machining materials.

At the present time, several surveys have already been published that deal with

the principles of CO: laser operation [Ref. 14, 15], problems of stability of

gas discharge in molecular gases [Ref. 16-19], and also with the prospects for
development of powerful gas lasers [Ref. 20, 21, 33]. However, as a rule they

have not examined specific methods of excitation of the medium. or such questions
of importance for practical application as simplicity of implementing these methods.
efficiency of the laser as a whole, advantages and disadvantages of different gas-
dynamic and electro-optical arrangements.

In this survey, in addition to the generally accepted classification of gas-
discharge COz lasers according to cooling methods. we give their classification

by gasdynamic and electro-optical arrangements, working conditions of cavities.

and methods of gas-discharge pumping, as well as examining the most advisable

fields of application and the limiting characteristics of different laser systems.
Particular attention is given to description and analysis of different gas-discharge
arrangements used for excitation of the active medium of C02 lasers. Not only

the physica‘, t-t also the technical aspects of implementing these arrangements
are discusSHd.

16
INJR‘OFF1C1A1.UBEZ(NNLY
1. Designs of do; gas-discharge lasers

In the C0; laser. stimulated emission takes place on the transition between vi-
brational energy levels 00°l and 10°0 of the CO; molecule [Ref. 1. 2]. The quantum
efficiency of this transition, corresponding to emission of quanta with wavelength
of 10.6 pm, is fairly high: nKBBOJo.

Due to heat release upon lasing of the mixture (5-101 of the energy released in
the discharge goes to heating). and collisional relaxation of the upper laser
level, the processes of pumping of the laser mixture and stimulated emission are
unavoidably accompanied by heating of the gas. the temperature Tr of the lasing
mixture in the steady state being practically proportional to the power of the
energy release in the discharge.

In the absence of lasing. the population of the upper laser level is proportional
to the intensity of energy release in the discharge. and consequently (disregarding
dependence of the cross section of collisional relaxation or on gas temperature).
to the gas temperature as well. This relationship can only be weakened by account-
ing for the dependence of or on Tr.

The population of the lover lasing level is determined by collisional processes.
and at radiation intensities that are not too great it corresponds to Boltzmann
law, 1. e. it increases exponentially with increasing Tr. In this connection.
upon attainment of a certain critical temperature TK '-500-600°C [Ref. 22]. in-
verse population of the laser mixture dissapears. The maximum inversion is at-
tained at a mixture temperature of Topt"2°°'3°°°c'

Thus, one of the principal conditions of CO; laser operation is inadmissibility
of overheating the laser mixture beyond To t- i. e. availability of efficient
cooling. At the present time. classificatgon of electric-

discharge lasers has been proposed in accordance with -1--——— n
methods of cooling the laser mixture and stabilizing the I ‘E‘ﬁﬁ‘
discharge [Ref. 20, 21]. The sense of this classification n-a

is illustrated by Fig. 1. . y—. n
. T:— ~

In lasers of the first type (discharge tube coaxial with

the optical system). the laser mixture is cooled and the n ...... E.
discharge is stabilized by diffusion processes. The heat N " 0'
released is carried off to the cooled wall of the laser

tube via molecular diffusion. and aabipolar plasma dif- Pig. 1. Types of co,

fusion prevents discharge contraction. The presence of lasers: v-gas flow
gas flow in lasers of this type is not in principle neces- velocity; Q—-heat flux;
sary, and its role is reduced to preventing poisoning q--charged particle

of the active medium as a result of various plasma- flow. P--quantum flux;
chemical reactions [Ref. 23]. l--opaque mirror; 2--

output mirror

In lasers of the second type, differing from the first only in rapid circulation
of gas through the discharge tube, discharge stabilization is handled as before
by ambipolar diffusion; however, the temperature of the laser mixture is main-

tained on the admissible level by the rapid rate of gas circulation (convective

cooling).

FOR‘OFFﬂgal.lEﬂE(NVLY
run UI'PILIAL U5]: Ul‘lal

Finally, in lasers of the third type the gas is circulated in the direction per-
pendicular to the optical axis. In this case. it is the rapid gas flow that
prevents both overheating of the mixture and discharge transition to arcing.

It should be noted that such a classification does not always reflect the princi-
ple of discharge stabilizationcnrparticulars of the electro-optical arrangement
of the laser. The characteristic diffusional dimension is not always determined
by the radius of the glass tube or the size of the discharge zone. At high gas
velocities. charge diffusion due to flow turbulence may exceed ambipolar dif-
fusion and play an appreciable part in discharge stabilization. The discharge
may be stabilized not only by diffusion, but also by electronic means (combined
action of electric fields [Ref. 26], rotation of the electric field vector in
space (Ref. 25]. etc.). Flow in the direction perpendicular to the optical axis
does not preclude diffusional discharge stabilization [Ref. 26]. Moreover, de-
pending on the degree of flow turbulence, the same electric diagram of a laser
may be classified as both type II and type III [Ref. 26]. Therefore. hereafter
we will divide all lasers with respect to type of mixture cooling (diffusional.
convective).

One of the most important characteristics of the laser is its efficiency. The
total efficiency n of the laser defined as the ratio of the laser emission power
to the total expended electric power can be represented as-

fl‘nnlnu'lomnvﬂcot - " (3)

where "x is the vibrational efficiency of the pumping method. 1. e. the fraction
of power released in the positive discharge column that is expended on excitation
of vibrational levels 00°l of C02 and v- 1 of nitrogen; "our is the optical effi-
ciency equal to the fraction of vibrational excitation coupled out of the reso-
nator cavity to molecules that make a transition to the ground state as a result
of stimulated emission processes; is the efficiency of the discharge circuit,
which is equal to the ratio of elezgric power released in the positive column

to the power of discharge Supply scurces; nco is the efficiency of the cooling
system with consideration of the efficiency of supply sources, as well as power
expenditures on producing gas flow and maintaining working pressure. Host publi—
cations«nlgas-discharge lasers represent experimental laboratory research and

do not contain information on the optimum values of "co‘ Therefore the efficiency
of laser systems is frequently characterized by the so-called electro-optical
efficiency:

"so’nn'lu'lomv (2)

defined as the ratio of laser emission power to the electric power released in
the positive discharge column.

1.1. cozlnsers with diffusion cooling of working mixture
Shown in Fig. 2 is a typical diagram of a co; laser with diffusional cooling of
the working mixture (diffusion laser) that is the simplest among other laser sys-

tems. Usually the diffusion laser consists of a water-cooled discharge tube 1
within which a self-maintained discharge is kept alive by electrode system 2.

18
ml: omcm. use ONLY
'l'he mirrors of the opticd cavity are placed at the
ends of the discharge Lube: opaque mirror 3, and
semi-transparent (or beam-hole) mirror 6. Stability
of the laser output characteristics over a prolonged
time is maintained by weak circulation of the laser
mixture. or by placing a regenerating element inside
the sealed-off laser [Ref. 23]. As a rule. diffusion
lasers use mixtures of coz:nz:ne- 1:1:3 or 1:1:6 (or
close to them) at overall pressure p I 10-20 In ﬁg.

 

Fig. 2. Construction of
laser with diffusional

cooling of working mixture Limiting discharge characteristics of the diffusion

laser are due to the efficiency of cooling the work-
ing mixture (Topt ~ 250°), and also the discharge stability. Maximum values of
the volumetric energy input due to rate of cooling of the mixture <jE>om can _
be evaluated from the stationary equation of heat balance in the discharge

(15%" sﬁflL-TWA'. H - h (3)

where j and E are the current density and electric field strength in the dis-
charge, n- cva is the heat conduction of the gas mixture (cv. p and D are the
specific heat, density and coefficient of diffusion), Tm- is the temperature of
the cooled wall, A-R/ZJ; is the characteristic dimension that determines heat
transfer in a cylindrical tube of radius R.

As a rule, pinching of the discharge in the tube is ionization-thermal in nature
[Ref . I7. 27]. The increment of development of this instability can be repre-
sented as

yasAqEMp. (4)

where A is a coefficient (~10) that is determined mainly by the slope of the curve
for the ionization rate constant as a function of parameter E/N (N is the concen-
tration of neutral atoms). p is gas pressure.

The. limiting values of <jE>yc determined by discharge stability are estimated
by setting the increment equa to the characteristic frequency of the process
that stabilizes development of this instability. In the diffusion laser such
a process is the ambipolar diffusion of charged particles to the walls of the
tube. -'.l'herefore'

(iE>ycv€PD./AA' sDJJA As. (5)

where Da is the coefficient of ambipolar diffusion. and bag is its value at normal
pressure po.

iiquations (3) and (S) inply that
615)." ”1&de A.
OE)”: to o opt

where Te is electron temperature. and D1, is the coefficient of ion diffusion
at p- po. Setting Te~ 2 ev, 1?,"th and ”opt-Tc?) -250 K. we can readily see

1
FOR OFFICIZL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

P305»)!!! V'lule(Topx—To,)/}l5lnkﬁ,nL, ' ' ' (6)

where V is the volume of the laser tube, I. is its length. As can be seen from (6).
the quantity PI}. for diffusion lasers does not depend on radius of the discharge
tube. Substituting the values of heat conduction for He in (6) along with values
of n3,,~0.1-0.2 that are usual for diffusion lasers, we can estimate the maximum

The limiting length of the diffusion laser (unless we are considering the wave-
guide mode) is determined by the diffraction values, and must satisfy the condition

L.p€R/2v..WR‘/2l- m

where 7mm” 1.2A/R is the diffraction divergence of the laser with wavelength A.
Setting R~ 1—3 cm, we get an~S-SO m. Thus the limiting power of the diffusion
laser at R/L~ 50 "/m is PSO.3-3 kw.

Practically attainable values of P/L~ 1-2 kw have already been achieved in indus-
trial models of diffusion lasers. For example the most powerful Soviet diffusion
laser models "Katun'" and "Kardamon" [Ref . 10] consisting of gas-discharge tubes
each with R- 3 cm and length of 6 In connected in series by a unified optical sys-
tem provide stable steady-state lasing on the level of ~0.8-l k" with specific
output of ~40 “In. The laser made by Photon Sources, inc. reaches a pover of

I k" with overall length of six discharge tubes of ~13 m; thus P/L' 7O Wm [Ref.

SSW-.6 W~ 10 “HIGH 7,. I (8)

where Farm! is the minimum focal length of the lens that permits focusing radia-
tion without spherical aberrations; the coefficient B- 10. Thus by using the
given diffusion lasers we can realistically get output power of -1 kW and power
density in the focusing spot of ~10 m/cm’; this limit’has already been reached.

joined by two common flat mirrors 2 and 3, one of
which (2) is opaque, while the other (3) is semi-
transparent. The set of gas-discharge tubes is cooled
by circulating coolant 1., and poisoning of the laser
mixture is prevented by slow circulation.

 

Pig. 3. Diagram of multi-
channel diffusion laser

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Attainment of simultaneous lasing in a large number of parallel laser tubes placed
between two flat mirrors that are common to these tubes is much facilitated by
the waveguide mode of laser operation, 1. e. with satisfaction of the condition

R'IalKl. ' ('9)

Thanks to the parallel placement of the gas-discharge tubes. the multichannel
laser system power can be increased to values determined by the possible dimen-
sions of the mirrors and by heat removal from the inside tubes of the laser as-'
sembly.

The limiting power of such a laser consisting of a set of cylindrical tubes of
length L with inside diameter d and wall thickness 6 located a distance A apart
can be evaluated from the formula '

:2 5"(p/Lim; Lb3/(d + 26 + A)’. ‘ (10)

where Do is the outside diameter of the laser tube bundle. We can easily see
that for realistic overall dimensions of such a device (e. g. L-l m. D. =10 cm,
d-0.S cm and 6- (8-0.1 cm). its power under optmum conditions may reach 5-10 k".
which opens up prospects for creation of high-power miniature laser devices.

The nature of dependence of integrated power of the multichannel laser system on
tube diameter at fixed dimensions of the bundle Do and L, assuming 6- A, is shown
' in Pig. 4. The same figure shows experimental values
of gain Ko of the active medium measured at differ-

P‘ S’ “1' units ' ’4“ ent discharge tube diameters (Ref. 31]. The observed
reduction of K. at small d may occur if the charac-

G ' 1' teristic time of diffusion and loss of vibrationally

4‘ excited particles on the walls becomes comparable

with the time of their collisional relaxation.
4' 2 This process may lead to some reduction in P at
I smell d/A. The values of optimum d depend on the

I
4’ composision of the mixture and its pressure, and
04' 0 at p-SO mm Hg are ~0.2-0.S cm [Ref. 31].
Pig. lo. Dependence of ra- If no special steps are taken, each laser tube in

diation power P (1), power the multichannel laser system lases independently
density 3 in the focal spot of the others. In this case, the divergence of

(2) and weak signal gain Kn emission of the entire laser system cannot be better
of active medium of multi- than that of one laser tube, and the power density
channel laser system on dis- of radiation in the focal spot of the multichannel
charge tube diameter: laser system is

<j2- - _100 mA/cmz; mixture -

C02:N2:lie- 1:1:6; p- 20 (O). (P/L) L as “T.

30 (o) and no (A) m Hg S‘TgL—W (’0

which at L-l m and (P/L) ~l01.w/m corresponds to 5:1 leun’. The nature of
dependence of s on d is segwn in Fig. 4 (curve 2). The power density of radiation
of the multichannel laser system does not depend on size of the bundle: P~D3,
but the area of the spot in the focal plane of the lens is ~03 as well (because
of the fact that Fm~Do) and therefore P cannot be greater than the power density

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK UP I'ILIAL U“ 01“. l

attainable when a diffusion laser of the same length is used, although the inte-
grated power of the multichannel laser system will increase in proportion to D2.

Radiation density in the focal spot of the multichannel laser system can be in-
creased if all tubes in the bundle can be made to lose coherently. In this case.
at least part of the radiation will have divergence corresponding to the diameter
of the entire bundle Do>=d rather than to the diameter d of a laser tube.

The possibility of making a multichannel laser system was first demonstrated in
1978 [Ref. 32] as exemplified by an arrangement of 39 parallel laser tubes 1 cm
in diameter and about A m long placed between flat mirrors: copper (opaque) and
KCl single crystal (semitransparent). A special electrode system was used to
produce a dc discharge in each of the tubes with specific volumetric energy input
of ~2 w/cmz. The output power of the laser was 3 k" with specific value of

~20 H from 1 m of each tube.

One of the serious technical problems of making a multichannel laser system with
Inmwing by dc discharge as commonly accepted for diffusion lasers is the intro-
duction of a large number of electrode elementain tubes of small diameter, and
aneuring high dielectric strength between a large number of current leads under
conditions of tight packing of all tubes. This problem is almost completely elimi-
nated by using electrodeless laser tubes in the multichannel laser system with
pumping of the active medium by capacitive ac discharge [Ref. 31]. Studies of
the active properties of a medium stimulated by ac discharge with frequency of

f- 10-70 kHz in tubes were done in Ref. 31. In this paper, besides the depen-
dences of Ko on p, d, mixture composition and discharge current I. which showed
practically no difference from analogous dependences with dc pumping, the authors
studied such peculiarities associated with the pumping method as the relation
between percentage modulation of output emission GP]? and laser working mode.

and gave qualitative interpretations of typical curves GPIP-sf(l. p. f) shown

in Fig. 5. These characteristics show that the percentage modulation of output
emission under optimum working conditions is no more than 51. Such a value of
GPIP is not dangerous for most technological applications of the laser.

5%! >. 'L

Fig. 5. Dependence of percentage
modulation of radiation from the
multichannel laser system with

at discharge pumping as a function
of discharge current (a), pressure
(pﬂx P» mm “B (b) and pumping current frequency (c)

 

f, kﬂr

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The very first experiments demonstrated the feasibility of using ac discharge

in multichannel lasers. For example in the HKTL-l laser [Ref. 86] pumped by ac
discharge with frequency of 10 kHz an output power of l k" was obtained from a
bundle of 6! glass tubes with diameter of 5 mm and length of l m, using a ger-
manium Output window. The outside diameter of the bundle itself was about 75 mm.
The emission divergence of such a laser assembly did not exceed the diffraction di-
vergence of radiation of one laser tube.

The limiting characteristics and structural parameters of the most interesting-
laser systems with diffusional cooling of the working mixture are summarized in
Table I. As we can see from this table. even at a very low specific power output
P/(NTplTp), multichannel lasers enable an appreciable increase in the power taken
from a unit of structural length of the laser (~ZT ). There is a concomitant
sharp reduction in the number of mirrors used and in the transverse dimensions

of the structure.

TABLE 1

Characteristics of process lasers with diffusion
cooling of mixture

  

Name (company)

 
   
 

moo (Ferranti) 8
rdamon , 33 150 13
olcn sources not. 75 450 29

I lan 19 750 32
11-]. IS mo 8‘

 

 

Notes: P-—1aser power; Z,p--1ength of discharge tube; NTp--
number of discharge tubes; [ﬂy-number of mirrors in optical
cavity; SHDCD--se1f—ma'ntained dc discharge; ACD-—ac discharge

1.2. Fast-flow C02 gas-discharge lasers

Significant progress in increasing the power of electric-discharge lasers became
possible as a resulttafutilizing convective cooling, 1. e. rapid circulation of
the working mixture through the discharge zone [Ref. 63]. Such lasers are called
fast—flow electric—discharge lasers or lasers with convective cooling. The ratio
of the rate of convective heat transfer to the rate of diffusional cooling is
equal to the ratio of the diffusion time TD to the time of gas travel through

the discharge zone 1c:

tnl'tgusA'M/D. . ('2)

where Ar is the mean free path of molecules; A is a characteristic dimension that
determines the rate of heat diffusion (in a diffusion laser A«-R/2.4); l is the
length of the discharge zone along the flow; H is the Mach number for the gas flow.

Rapid gas flow along the optical axis of the laser (see Fig. 1) gives appreciable
advantages over the diffusion laser. However. the considerable length l of the

2
FOR‘OFFNJRI.USE¢MNLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. vat. Ul‘hl

active zone'that is necessary for efficient operation of the cavity precludes
making the quantity ‘c sufficiently small, and makes it difficult to produce a
high gas flowrnte. Therefore, even though the specific power output of such sys-
tems has been increased from 50-100 to 500-1500 "In, the limiting power of the
laser has been raised only to 2—6 It“ [Ref. 8, 29]. .

Much more promising is circulation of the gas in the direction perpendicular to
the optical axis of the laser (diagram III of Fig. 1). In this case the length

of the optical axis is not associated with the length of the pumping zone in the
direction of the flow, and therefore, substituting values of M~0.l-l. A~ Z--- 10 cm.
A,» 10"“ cm that are typical of convective lasers in (12) (at p~0.l atm), we
readily see that the rate of heat transfer in convective lasers may be 4-5 orders
of magnitude greater than those in diffusion lasers. For this reason, the main
factor that influences the limitation on specific power <jE> invested in the dis-
charge of the convective laser becomes discharge stability.

The power of convective lasers with transverse circu-
lation, illustrated by the general diagram of Fig. 6.
is determined by the total flowrate of gas mixture
through the laser. the admissible heating temperature
of the mixture Tr‘ To : ~ 150°C. and by the electro-
optical efficiency n,‘o of the pumping method: '

Puzwcpﬂl-mw. (13)

Fig. 6. Diagram of CO; where w - (Tops-Tom is limiting mass energy input;
fast-flow gas-discharge To is the gas temperature at the input to the pumping
laser; vertical shading zone; C and p are the specific heat and specific den-

 

denotes the pumping sity of the mixture; v is the rate of circulation;
zone, horizontal shading H and Lo are the altitude of the pumping zone and its
shows the cavity length along the optical axis. Subsituting values

of parameters that are typical of convective lasers
with different pumping methods: wg=200-300 J/g (depending on the composition
of the mixture), p~ (l-lO)-10"s g/cm’, H~10 cm. v~102 m/a and n o-O.l-0.2.
we readily see that values of (NM) n~l-100 kW/m are possible under conditions
of convective lasers. In the case of diffusion lasers, the limiting values of
(P/Lu)M-were determined only by the admissible heating of the working mixture.
For convective lasers, the quantity P/Lo depends on structural and operational
parameters and to a great extent is determined by the type of gas discharge used
for stimulating the median. The limiting values of power density in the focal
spot of the convective laser in this case are

5 s—TJ—(P'L-zgd 5' suo—noooﬂ. [m]. m/cm’. (140

where B<l is a geometric coefficient that depends on the type and transparency
of the optical cavity used (usually o_1sp<1).

A considerable disadvantage of the convective laser is the necessity for circu-
lating a large quantity of working mixture. In the diffusion laser. the rate
of circulation was determined by the rate of ch-ical poisoning of the mixture,

21:
ton omcm. use ONLY
and could even be zero vith regenerators present. 0n the other hand. in the con-
vective laser it is necessary to circulate 20-50 g]: of mixture through the cavity

DeVelopment of stationary high-power convective process lasers with duping of
depleted mixture (open-cycle convection lasers) is inadvisable from the economic
standpoint, and difficult to realize at high power levels from the technical
standpoint. Therefore as a rule circulation of the working mixture in high-power

convection laser). A typical diagram of such a laser is shown in Fig. 7. It
consists of n gas-discharge chamber 1, optical cavity 2. heat exchangers 3. lb:-
ture circulation unit ’0 and gas lines 5 that connect them. Stability of properties
of the active medium under conditions of the
closed-cycle convection laser is maintained
oolant by continuous renewal of a small portion of
‘- the mixture (0.1-4! of the flowrate in the loop)
or by regenerators located in the loop [Ref. 13].

  

The dimensions of the discharge zone 2 in the
working return direction of gas flow depend on the gasdynamic
'mixture‘ parameters of the working medium and the limit-
ing volumetric energy inputs <jE> of the pulping
Pig. 7. Typical diagram of a method: H .
closed—cycle convection laser (”WW/(IE)- ‘ ' ' ‘ (15)

 

If the vibrational energy stored on levels (00°l) of CO: and N2 has time to relax
in collisions during the time of gas transit through the discharge (ZZv/vr, where

particularly in electric-discharge arrangements with admixing of the C02 before
the optical cavity. A diagram of such a laser is

shown in Fig. 8. Absence of 602 in the discharge I”!
zone sharply reduces v1- and enables operation at e1e~

vated pressures (up to ~100 mm Hg) under conditions ""

of long discharge chambers. Because of this, 002

discharge lasers of high power can be made. However, m,

as a rule because of the limited reserve of working

mixture and difficulties with organizing circulation, Fig. 8. Diagram of open-
such systems operate under quasi-steady state con— cycle electric discharge
ditions. laser with admixing of
CO; preceding the cavity:
l--punping zone (gas-
Extensive use of self-maintained and semi-self- - discharge chamber); 2"-
maintained discharges in cool gas for pumping power- C02 delivery 83'3““);

in! CO, lasers is due to high efficiency of stimulating 3n-optical cavity zone

2. Methods of pumping gas-discharge lasers
I‘UK OFFICIAL Ubl'. ONLY

average energy of electrons corresponding to values of the "normalized" electric
field am: (l.5—2)-10‘” V~cm2 (Ref. 35, 36] (N is gas molecule concentration)

and not supporting self-maintained ionization of the gas, 1. e. under semi-self-
maintained dischar e conditions. Under self-maintained discharge conditions

(at 5/": (3-5)-l0' 5 V'cmz), the value of nK is somewhat reduced. but still remains
fairly high (n530.75-0.85) (Ref. 35. 36]. which makes the self-maintained dis-
charge an attractive pumping method as well. '

find the simplest and most efficient methods of pumping have been intensively
done for the last decade. Let us consider the most well developed and efficient
methods.

2.1. Self-maintained dc discharge

Currently, the most extensively used method of pumping convective lasers and the
simplest from the standpoint of technical realization is the self-maintained dc

discharge. Depending on the direction of the electric £1
to gas flow, lasers with longitudinal and transverse disc
Typical diagrams of gas-discharge chambers with.self-maint
shown in Pig. 9.

The mechanism of closure of direct current flowing in'
the gas stream is satisfactorily described by the
classical theory of a glow discharge with cold

cathode (Ref. 37]. Under ordinary conditions of

C0, laser operation the current density in the glow~
discharge volume is 1-2 orders of magnitude lower
(depending on the pressure and composition of the
mixture) than the normal current density on the cath-

      
   

   

 

\A.3:" ‘ " ..
ode. Therefore cathodes 3 of the gas-discharge chamber III/I‘%%
are made in the form of small emitting sections of 6 " '
elongated or circular shape uniformly distributed
over dielectric cathode plate 2. The overall area Fig. 9. Diagrams of
of these sections is less than the area of the dis- laser gas—discharge cham—
charge dimension transverse to the current. In the here with longitudinal
case of a transverse discharge. the cathodes may (a) and transverse (b)
protrude into the gas flow in the form of pins [Ref. self-maintained dc dis-
38], or may be on one level with the cathode plate charge: l—-anode; 2-
[Ref. 39]. In the case of a longitudinal discharge. cathode plate; 3--cathode;
the cathodes are made in the form of pins or needles b—-pumping zone; S--csvity
uniformly located in the cross section of the gas flow zone

Ref. 40].

to 502 of the voltage of the supply source is lost in the case of a transverse
discharge.[Ref. 12, 36], and ~10! with longitudinal current flow (Ref. 60].

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In most research. anode l is continuous and equipotential [Ref. 11, 12. b0]. In
some gas-discharge chamber designs, transverse self-maintained dc discharge is
made homogeneous by sectionalizing the anode with an equipotential cathode (Ref. 5]
or by sectionalizing both electrodes [Ref. 42].

Let us take up the principal characteristics that determine the outlook for using
this type of discharge for pumping convective lasers. Usually self-maintained

dc discharges with transverse or longitudinal flow of discharge current have weakly
rising or nearly horizontal current-voltage curves. The quantity BIN is (4-6) x
10"16 V-cm’. With transverse current flow. the electric field strength decreases
along the gas stream. and may change by a factor of 1.5-2 within the gas-discharge
chamber [Ref. 31.. («3, 66]. This situation is also one of the reasons for section-
alizing the cathodes and providing them with individual ballast resistors.

Experimental research on energy balance in the positive column of s self-maintained
dc discharge has been done only for nitrogen and air [Ref. (do-1.6]. According

to this research. the value of "x in a mixture of air with CO; falls from 0.85

to 0.6 as the gas pressure increases from 40 to 80 In ﬁg [Ref. 46]. At p- 60-60
nn Hg, 5-102 of the energy released in the positive column is expended on excita-
tion of rotational levels of N; and 02, and at p- 70—100 mm Hg--lO-ZSZ (Ref. 41.,
45]. The remaining energy is apparently expended on excitation of electronic
metastable states and plasma-chemical reactions, the relative contribution of
these as yet little investigated loss channels increasing with an increase in

the pressure of the mixture. Theoretical calculations of the energy balance in
a self-maintained dc discharge for a laser mixture at RIN=(6-S)-10'1‘ V-ctlz give
nx=0.9 and {IT-0.1 [Ref. 36].

Let us compare the values of punping efficiency for longitudinal and transverse
discharges from the electrical engineering standpoint, taking values of EIN-
440"15 Vocm’. p~ 30 mm Hg, H~ S cm and 1-50 cm that are typical of gas-discharge
chambers with self-maintained dc discharge. Assuming overall losses in the elec-
trode region of 400 V and percentage of source voltage lost on the ballast re-
sistors of 40-502 for transverse discharges. and ~10: for longitudinal discharges,
we readily get the efficiencies of the discharge circuit: np|~0.9 [Ref. 40. 4!]
for longitudinal current flow. and up ~0.lo-0.6 [Ref. 5. ll, 12] for transverse.
It is the low values of hp that expla s the. considerable difference between n30
and n observed in Ref. 12. 34 for convective lasers with punping by transverse
self-maintained dc discharge. Despite high values of “30'0'15 [Ref. 1], 12],

the overall efficiency of such devices usually does not exceed n-0.05-0.07 [Ref.
5. l2]. '

As has been demonstrated above, the overall dimensions of the gas-discharge chamber
depend on the limiting values of voluletric specific energy inputs <jE> that are
restricted in the case of convective lasers by formation of pinches [Ref. 17.

18. a7, («8]. The reason for plasma pinching can be feund in various instabili-
ties of overheating nature [Ref. 16-18] that are intensified in self-maintained
discharges due to positive feedback between energy release in the gas and ioni-
zation processes.

The limiting values of <jE> at low pressures can be estimated by setting the time
of development of the overheating instabilities of the self-maintained discharge

2
FOR OFII‘ICIIL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. use. UNLI

TABLE 2

Characteristics of gas—discharge chambers [CDC]
with transverse circulation

    

Trgnsv. 4 100 15 so l8 2:“:5 I.4 1400.5- OCCL.

SHDLU '5]

Ditto 4 90 20 80 50 1220:” 5.5 320 0.6 Ditto II
a 6 In 35 90 25 l:l1:0+2 2.5 240 3 [l2

parts air

Lﬁgt. 5.5 76 :00 240 31 2:5:30 1.9 3660.9 » [52;
on it. 6.3 240 5'5 130 : : . . .

Q band so |6l2 2040009 . m;
r nsv.

Kcﬁ

Transv. I0 I00 20 90 so 1:23:16}. 4.5 I10 0.85 n I3

5525:. .3 .5 . .. .5. +°.: r; .. m. ‘ '

. . : : 0t 65
109133 OCCL I I

k3?§1t' 5.5 76 67 220 30 l:1:l2 2.2 280 0.85 CCC’L [60.72]
Trans. Io 15 23 60 4 I: : , Pilot
5 so 30 6 450 0 83 OCCL _ [67.7”

'01?
ransv. Io I5 20 I00 50 wow 7 300 0.9 Pilot [85.86]
ACD OCCL l

Note: H, Lo and Z are the height, width and length of the dis-
charge gap; <jE> and rig—averaged specific volunetric and mass
energy inputs; SHDCD--se1f-maintained dc discharge; ACD—ac
discharge; NDBB—-non-se1f-maintained discharge kept alive by
electron beam; NDIP--non-selE-_msintained discharge kept alive
by periodic ionization pulses; CCCL—closed-cycle convective
laser; OCCL--open-cyc1e convective laser

(ionizational-superhcating. ionizational-excitation. see (4)) equal to the time
of transit of the mixture through the discharge zone:

(15),,zPo/Al. (I6)

Estimates made by using relation (16) differ sharply from experimental data at

pt 30 mm Hg. Special studies [Ref. 49. 50] have shown that under these conditions
the pinch may develop in the anode region rather than in the body of the plasma.
and then propagate toward the cathode like a streamer at a velocity of ~10"-IOs
calls. In this case <jB> does not increase linearly with P, but remains constant

or falls [Ref. 43].

Currently there is no theory that gives one-to-one relationships between <le>np
and gasdynamic parameters of the flow or geometric characteristics of the gas-
discharge chamber. Therefore the <jE>up necessary for calculating convective
lasers must be taken from experiment.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1n the case of"‘a""t'ransverse discharge,- it has been shown by experiments Inst. 5.
ll, 12. 34, 43] that <jB>np changes in the following way: 1) increases with pres-
sure up to p- 20-40 mm Hg, and then saturates or begins to decrease; 2) increases _
with gas velocity 'up to v~50-100 m/s. and then saturates or begins to fall; 3)
decreases with increasing height H of the discharge gap; lo) beginning at a cer-
tain length. decreases with increasing 1 (there is no additivity of the contri-
bution in the direction of flow); 5) increases with addition of lie to the mixture;
6) decreases with increasing CO; content and 820 in the working mixture. Specific
mass energy inputs V3 in a gas-discharge chamber with self-maintained dc discharge
decrease with increasing pressure, and increase with increasing 1 [Rsf.12. 310.63].

Typical characteristics of gas-discharge chambers with self-maintained dc discharge
are summarized in Table 2.

Host gas-discharge chambers with transverse discharge use mixtures that contain
heliua; at partial pressure of nitrogen not exceeding 30 In ﬁg. and total pres-
sure p of the mixture of the order of 50 In Hg or less. flowrate' of 30-100 m/s.
a= 3-6 cm and 1- 20-40 cm. we can get <jE> ~2-5 w/cn’ at w8~ 250-300 J/g in
helimn mixtures. and 150-250 J/g in helium- ree mixtures. Because of the high
cost of helium. the use of helium-free mixtures is of particular interest for
lasers with partial renewal of the working mixture.

Substituting typical values of <JE’n in (15), we get Z>v/v, for a gas-discharge
chamber with self-maintained dc disc rge. and therefore high n30 can be achieved
only by using a combined cavity scheme. Since the diameter of mirrors used in
the laser D~li< l. resonators of convective lasers with pulping by self-maintained
dc discharge are nearly always multipass [Ref. 5. ll. 12].

At the present time the characteristics of longitudinal self-maintained dc dis-
charges have not been adequately studied. For le-er nixtures we have only isolated
values of <jE>np obtained for fixed conditions [Ref. 24. 60, 51]. As a rule,
these experiments were done at high flowrates (of the order of 100 mla or more),
1 -bO-50 cm, and in the absence of special steps to achieve stabilization were
distinguished by comparatively low values of <jE>S 1 “lens. Higher values

(5 U/cn’) were attained in studying self-maintained dc discharge in an air flow
at pressure of 60-60 mm Hg [Ref. 26]. Just as in the case of transverse self-
maintained dc discharge. <jE> and w in the longitudinal selfémaintained dc dis-
charge decrease with increasing 1 [ f. 26, 51] and pressure of the working mix-
ture lief. 51]. Nonmonotonie dependence of <jB> on air flowrate in such a dis-
charge is noted in Ref. 51.

In laser devices that use longitudinal self-maintained dc discharge for pumping,
the quantity <jB> can be increased by additional gasdynamic or electrical action
on the discharge. '

Stabilizing the discharge by gas flow involves more than mere limitation of the
time that the gas stays in the discharge zone. Since the plasma electrons are
bound by electrostatic forces to ions. and the latter—due to collisiona--are
bound to neutral gas molecules. discharge stability may be influenced by control-
lable changes in the gasdynamic flow parameters (in particular by turbulence in-
tensity). The gasdynamic action of gas flow on a discharge was studied in Ref. 26,

FOR OFFIC€ZL USE ONLY
TV“ VI'I'ISOIIL WC- Vl‘hl

52-60. The authors of Ref. 53-56 made an attempt to find a relation between ob-
served electric characteristics of the discharge and the Reynolds number of the
flow. In Ref. 53, an abrupt change in the discharge burning conditions was ob-
served at ReZRecr. In Ref. 56 an effect of discharge decontraction was observed
upon transition to turbulent conditions. The independent change in degree of
flow turbulence by turbulizing grids [Ref. 57. 58] enabled separation of effects
of stabilization by convection and turbulence. In Ref. 26, 57, the significance
of homogeneity of the flow velocity profile was noted in addition. A qualitative
effect of the influence of turbulence scale on discharge stability was observed
in Ref. 59. A quantitative investigation of the influence of controllable degree
of flow turbulence at lﬂniting values of <jE> in a longitudinal self-maintained
dc discharge has been carried out in air at p-40-60 mm Hg [Ref. 26]. It was shown
(Fig. 10) that controllable flow turbulence set up by a special grid with coef-

U, k“ P. kH

   
       

“QR“

 

0 J0 v. m/s

Fig. 10. Limiting power in- Fig. 11. Emission power (1).

vested in longitudinal self-
maintained dc discharge as

a function of flow velocity

and degree of turbulence of

the medium: p- 50 mm Hg; 1-

10 cm; H-6 cm; D,/v-0.25-10'2;
c-0.05 (I). o.-os.lo‘2-o.12 (0),
2-10'2-o.18 (0), 3-10'2-o.22
(a), 4.5-10‘2-0.26 (A). 7.10"-

-0.3 (0) [Ref. 26]

power invested in the dc dis-
charge (2) and total discharge
power (3) as functions of the
auxiliary rf discharge power
(a) for C02:N2:3e- 1:6:12, p-
30 mm Hg, v- 130 m/s. and dia-
gram of the experiment (b):
l--cathode; 2--anode ; 3-ac
voltage supply; 4-dielectric
plate; 5-discharge zone

ficient of turbulent diffusion DT depending on its scale may either increase or
reduce <jE>; in optimum nodes when the effect of turbulent stabilization was com-
parable with or greater than the effect of stabilization by convective entrainment.
the quantity <jE> could rise by a factor of 2-4. High efficiency of gasdynamic
action of the flow on discharge in a laser mixture was also demonstrated in Ref.
52. 60.

Superposition of an auxiliary rf field on the discharge that is transverse with
respect to the main field may also lead to decontraction of the plasma and an
increase in <jE>np in longitudinal self-maintained dc discharges [Ref. 24. SI. 62].
In laser devices this effect was first demonstrated in the gas-discharge chamber
shown in the diagram of Fig. 11 [Ref. 26. 51]. Switching on an alternating field
with frequency of 13.5 MHz tripled the power invested in the discharge. and the
combined gasdynamic and electrical action on the discharge raised <jB>np to about

2 H/cm’. According to theoretical studies [Ref. 62. 63] superposition of rf fields
on a self-maintained dc discharge can increase <jE>np by a factor of 1.1-1.5.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 3

Characteristics of closed-cycle convection laser
with transverse circulation

 
    
    

  

Name (company) Pumping method

  

Bx

 

rimental .
acility Transv. SHDCD l l

are 913 (Sllvanla) . a
8:; - ’ :
TF1: : to

l 1 .
Expe ‘“ rﬂental fa Longit.’ suncn :95

C1115¥ (CO;

ampli ier) .
Ditto Long 1:. $ch & 27
HPL l0(Avco- -vatt) h5§§3§vﬁbﬁ 15
C01 31— laser Transv. NDEB I0 I
Tgﬂdon Longit. NDIP -_ 5

Note: P-Laser power; Lo-dimension of gas-discharge chamber
in direction of optical axis; Q—-volumetric flowrate of mixture
in loop. m’ls; G--mass flowrate of mixture in loop. g/s

characteristics of the most interesting laser devices that use transverse and
longitudinal self-maintained dc discharges for pumping are summarized in Table 3.
Besides output power and the quantity n sonp that is close to the total efficiency
of the laser (usually n~ (0. 8-0. 9)n9°np ). this table contains data on a most im—
portant dimension Lo that to a great extent determines the overall dimensions
of the entire device; this is the length of the gas-discharge chamber across the
flow. The table also summarizes data on the volumetric and mass flowrates of
the mixture in a closed loop. The working conditions for gas-discharge chambers
used in many devices are given in Table 2. It sh0uld be noted that practically
all modern laser facilities operate on working mixtures with a high helium content.
An exception is the TL-IO [Ref. 12] that uses a mixture of CO; with nitrogen and
air. All lasers with self-maintained dc discharge operate at comparatively low
pressures (the partial pressure of nitrogen does not exceed 20—25 mm Hg) and at
volumetric energy inputs of 2-5 w/cm , and can yield electro—optical efficiency
or 15- 251. The overall efficiency of a convective laser with transverse pumping
by self-maintained dc discharge is less than -O. l, which is due to the low value
of up. In the case of longitudinal discharge,n n3° may reach -O. 2. The power
taken from a unit of length of the laser along the optical axis is 1-8 kH/m for
transverse pumping, and 10-25 kH/m for longitudinal pumping. This considerable
difference can be attributed to the high flowrates in longitudinal systems. The
values of output power normalized to the volumetric flovrate of the device are
1-2 kH/m’ls in either case. In lasers intended for use in industry where closed
loops with a high rate of circulation are inadvisable from the economic standpoint

because of rising hydraulic losses [Ref. 13]. realistic values of P/L. are of
the order of 10 kw/m or less.

1
IIHlCNﬂﬂC3AI.IHﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In estimating prospects for raising power in laser devices with self-maintained

dc discharge, we can expect that for reasonable and realistically attainable values
of L.‘-2 m-and v~ 100 mls the power of a convective laser in the case of trans-
verse pumping will be limited on a level of 10 kW due to difficulties associated
with organizing the discharge at Hz 5 cm. Longitudinal discharge is less sensi-
tive to the quantity H, and thereforeit is to be hoped that the output power of
the laser will increase in proportion to H. However. in experimental devices

with longitudinal self-maintained dc discharge, B<6 cm.

2.2. Semi-self-maintained discharge with electron-beam ionization

The semi-self—maintained discharge can optimize the parameter BIN in the gas-
discharge chamber of convective lasers for pumping of the working medium, and
therefore this discharge has a maximum value of nx of the order of 0.9 or more
(Ref. 35, 36]. Another advantage of the non-self-meintained discharge is higher
stability than the self-maintained dc discharge associated with a sharp reduction
in the increments of instabilities of the ionization-superheating type at values
of BIN 1.5—2-times lower than for self-maintained dc discharges. At the present
time the best developed equipment is for the non-self—maintained discharge kept
alive by electron beam [NDEB]. and the prospects for further increase in power

in process lasers are tied up with this type of discharge.

A typical diagram of a gas-discharge chamber for
pumping the working medium of a laser with “DEB

is shown in Fig. 12. The working medium is ionized
by a beam of fast electrons introduced into dis-
charge gap 5 from an electron accelerator through
thin metal foil 4. The average energy of the plasma
electrons is determined by the magnitude of the
constant electric field maintained between grid—
cathode 2 and anode l of the discharge gap. The
homogeneous beam of accelerator electrons with energy
of 100-250 keV and current density of the order

of 10 uA/cm2 or more provides a homogeneous non~
selfqmaintained discharge, and consequently gives
high uniformity of optical properties of the active
medium.

 

Fig. [2. Diagram of gas-
discharge chamber of laser
with pumping by “DEB: 1—-
gas-discharge chamber anode;
2-GDC cathode; 3-electron
gun cathode; 4-foil; 5-—
pumping zone; 6-optical
cavity zone The physical processes in the NDEB and its parameters
have been quite intensely studied over the last
decade lRef. l3, l9, 6h-66l. Therefore we will take up only the major aspects
of this research that are of practical interest to laser technology.

Questions of NDEB stability are studied in detail in the survey of Ref. 19. In
particular, it is shown in this paper that maximum energy inputs to the NDEB may
be limited by development of volumetric superheating instabilities. as well as
instabilities due to phenoment near the electrodes [Ref. 66].

lypical current-voltage curves of the NDEB are rising. and therefore the electrodes
and ballast resistors need not be sectionalized to ignite and maintain the dis-
charge. The potential drop near the electrodes in the NDBB is 400-500 V [Ref. 13,
65]. In contrast to the selfqmsintained dc discharge, the quantity <jE> in the

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NDEB increases linearly with increasing flourste [Ref. 13] and mixture pressure
[Ref. 13, 65], i. e. the current density 3np of transition to arcing is indepen-
dent of pressure up to ~300 mm Hg [Ref. 19. 65]. The limiting values of <jB>

in the N‘DBB in nitrogen at p- 150 mm Hg reach ~200 H/cms-at 1 ~ 300 mA/cla2 [Rah
65]. Even in facilities of industrial scale, values of j~'25 mA/cm2 are reached
at <jE>~5 wcm’ [Ref. 13].

The non-self-maintained discharge also has advantages over the selfqnsintsined

dc discharge inlthe.energy balance in the discharge. As indicated above. at opti-
mum E/N. 90-952 8f the energy invested in the positive column of the semi-self-
maintained discharge is expended on exciting vibrational levels of nitrogen
("1"0'9'°°95) (Ref. 36, 45]. Expenditures on direct heating of the mixture at
2/": (1.5-2)-10'” V-cm2 in this case do not exceed n..-o.os [Ref. 1.5. 67]. Since
the energy released in the electrode layers of the “DEB at typical values of

H-IO cm does not exceed ~102. while expenditures on creating the electron beam
are 5-101 [Ref. 13, 19. 65] of the ﬁne, the efficiency np of the discharge cirCuit
of the NDEB should be 0.8-0.85.. The possibility of attaining high values of

<jE> of the order of 100 Wen:a or more at elevated pressures (p 2150 In ﬁg) opens
up real prospects for reducing the overall dimensions of laser devices. raising
their power, and simplifying electro-optical arrangements.

' The parameters of gasédischarge chambers and laser devices with NDBB are summa-
rized in tables 2 and 3. Values of <jE> and P near the maximum for lasers with
selfdmaintained dc discharge have already been achieved in devices of this type.

In speaking of the operational peculiarities of lasers with “DEB. it must be noted
that the presence of a high-voltage (up to 250 kv) and high-current (10"-10'2 A)
electron accelerator not only complicates construction and operation of the fa-
cility. but requires effective biological shielding for service personnel.

2.3. Semi-self-maintained discharge with ionization by periodic pulses

The above mentioned technical and operational complexities of realizing NDBB can
be obviated in great measure by using a non-self-maintained discharge kept alive
by periodic ionization pulses [NDIP] for pumping CO: lasers. This is often called
a combined discharge in the literature. Use of this type of ssmi-self-maintained
discharge for pumping a laser medium was first suggested in 1972 [Ref. 68, 69].
The working principle of such a discharge is illustrated in Pig. 13a. Conduc-
tivity of the gas in the NDIP is maintained by ionization that takes place in the
volume under the action of high-voltage (Ii/N«v(l--2)-10"‘s V~cmz) periodic pulses
of short duration (1"50.l us) at recurrence rate of fu~ 1-100 kHz. In the period
between two successive ionization pulses. a non-self-maintained current flows

in the decaying plasma. kept alive by a constant voltage Up applied across the
discharge gap, corresponding to the value of parameter BIN that is optimum for
excitation of the active medium. The ionization pulse recurrence rate must exceed
the characteristic frequency of plasma decay. i. e. it must satisfy the condition

f..>>M.. (l7)

uhzre Bo is the effective recombination coefficient at optimum BIN-~(243)-10'16
V-cmz. 80- 10" [Ref. 70]. Therefore condition (17) at nel~101° cm.3 takes the
form fu>l kHz. '

FOR OFIHC%RI.USE1)NLY
I'UK UI'I‘ILIAL US: ‘11th

 

Fig. 13. Time dependences of pulsed power supply voltage U",
discharge current I. and electron concentration% (a), and
diagrams of gas-discharge chambers (b, c) with pumping by NDIP:
l--anode; 2-cathode; 3-discharge zone; 4-optical cavity zone;
5--grid; 6-dielectric wall; 7--cathode plate

The outlook for using such a discharge in laser technology has been studied on

the two types of gas-discharge chambers shown in Pig. 13b, c. In the first of
these, constant and pulsed electric fields are set up by the same electrode system
and directed perpendicular to the gas flow and to the direction of the optical
axis (transverse version) [Ref. 71]. The electrode system consists of continuous
anode l and a set of copper pin cathodes 2 set flushwithcathode plate 7, each

pin being connected to a source of constant voltage through ballast resistor R5.
The inductance in the dc circuit protects the source of constant voltage from
high-voltage ionizing pulses.

In the second type of gas-discharge chamber for NDIP [Ref. 72] the constant elec-
tric field is directed contrary to the gas flow, and as in the gas-discharge cham-
ber for longitudinal self-maintained dc discharge (Ref. 60], it is maintained
between pin cathodes 2 protruding into the flow and tubular anodes 1 (longitudinal
version). The pulsed ionizing discharge is capacitive and is realized through
dielectric walls 6 of the gss~discharge chamber by means of metal grids S placed

on the outside of the walls. The pulsed electric field is directed perpendicular
to the gas stream.

The proposed versions of gas-discharge chambers can set up a homogeneous dis-
charge with optimum BIN in large volumes (1-20 liters). Just as in the case of
the NDEB, the current-voltage curve of the NDIP is rising (Ref. 60, 72], enabling
a reduction in values of ballast resistors as compared with the self-maintained
dc discharge. The optimum frequencies of ionizing pulses are different for the
two types of gas-discharge chambers, being 2-4 and 70 kHz for the variants of
Fig. 13b, c respectively [Ref. 67. 72]. Studies have shown that NDIP is more
stable than self—maintained dc discharge, and for laser mixtures gives maximum

3h
ma omcm. use ONLY
<_1£> = 5-10 wax.3 and w3~ 250-450 J/g in the transverse version of the gas-discharge
chamber [Ref. 67], and also <32» 1.6 u/cn’ and w ~210 J/g in the longitudinal
version (Ref. 60]. This enables an increase in tﬁe interelectrode gap to H-10 cm
and a reduction in the length of the discharge zone with some increase in pressure
of the working.mixture (Ref. 67]. Studies of the energy balance in the transverse
version of NDIP (Ref. 67] have shown that the values of vibrational efficiency

may exceed 0.9 in pure nitrogen. and reach rig-0320.05 at BIN-1.25-10'“ V-cmz
and wg- 250 J/g in the laser mixture (Ref. 67]. The fraction of energy that goes
to direct heating of gas decreases with increasing BIN, and is (5-6)-10'2 at

E/N- 1.6-10'" V-cm2 (Ref. 45, 67]. In accordance with Ref. 71, about 5: of the
total expended energy is spent on pulsed ionization of the medium. abOut 22 is
dissipated in the ballast resistors. and 101 is lost in the layers near the elec-
trodes. The value of np-0.80-0.85 in the NM? exceeds the corresponding values

In comparing N01? with other pumping methods. it must be noted that use of this
technique obviates certain technical complexities that arise when NDEB is used.

discharge. but still they are considerably inferior to the limiting parameters
of lasers with pumping by NDEB. One of the major technical complexities in making
a laser with pumping by NDIP is development of a nanosecond pulse generator.

2.4. Ac discharge

to non-self-maintained discharges. the ac discharge does not require several sup-
ply sources for realization, and it is fairly simple to realize.

The physical mechanism of such a discharge is reminiscent of the mechanism of

the NDIP (Pig. 14a). Just as in the NDIP. ionization in the ac discharge takes
place only as the absolute value of the electric field is passing through the
maximum. rather than during the entire discharge period; for the rest of the time
the discharge is non-selE-maintained. and current is flowing in the decaying
plasma. The frequency f of the ac discharge on the one hand must be greater than
the effective frequency of plasma deca . and on the other hand must not be too
high. so that the discharge in the plasma is not pinched by displacement currents.
i. e. it must satisfy the condition

(Ma) «Ma.

where o is plasma conductivity. Substituting values of Bone‘~10’ and oa-lO7 n“
that are typical of laser discharges, we can readily see that the quantity f must
lie in a range of 10 kHz-l MHz. The ac discharge in a laser medium has been most
completely studied in the frequency range of 10-100 kHz [Ref. 74, 85, 86]. Pump-
ing of the active medium of a laser by rf discharge ﬁith f-l3.6 HR: was considered
in Ref. 73.

FIH!(”HHK3§I.USE(MVLY
I'Ull UI'I'ILIAL use. VNLI

 

u - 0mm
" Ec-r-v—LF—dzs

rm 3
YILZz/A'Illv’l/I/g'I/Jllll
«r 7/ 7

    
  
  

  

 

77/A 7/; 7/1 7/1 7/]. 7/1. ’ll. ’///1.

-‘.’- @I@0n

Fig. It. Time dependences of supply source voltage Up, laser

mixture ionization rate 21. ne and I (a), diagrams (b, c) and

equivalent supply circuit (d) of gas-discharge chamber with
ac discharge

 

Designs and power supply circuit of the ac gas—discharge chambers used in the
experiment are shown in Pig. llob. c. Transverse ac discharge with respect to

gas flow was set up between two dielectric plates 1 with metal coatings 2 applied
on the outside (electrodeless discharge) [Ref. 74], or in a chamber made up of
dielectric electrode plates 3 with metal electrode pina_b set in (electrode dis-
charge) [Ref. 86]. In this case, the circuit of each electrode contained a ballast
capacitor 5 with capacitance of (;. 50-100 pF. Discharge supply was from a source
of alternating voltage through a step-up transformer. The equivalent circuit

of the ac discharge supply is shown in Fig. lhd.

The mechanism of ac discharge flow and the particulars of observed current and
voltage oscillograms were discussed in Ref. 75, 77. The improved stability of
the plasma in the ac discharge as compared with self-maintained dc discharge is
due to a number of reasons. In the first place the phase of the self-maintained
discharge that is least stable with respect to ionization-thermal instability

in the ac discharge makes up only a small fraction (-0.1) of its period T. Sec-
ondly, the ac discharge has higher values of El“ during this phase of the discharge.
and weaker dependence of the ionization coefficient on BIN. And finally, "infi—
nite" sectionalizing of the electrode element of the discharge occurs in imple-
mentation of an ac discharge. and an increase in the degree of sectionalization
is accompanied by improvement of discharge stability [Ref. 5i]. The more stable
character of the ac discharge enables attainment of the necessary values of 33
at H increased by a factor of 1.502. and lengths of the pumping zone reduced by
a factor of 1.5—2 as compared with the transverse version of self—maintained dc
discharge (see Table 2). In this case, the values of 33 may reach 5-7 H/cm’.

FOR>OF1ﬂCi21.USEGMVLY
In contrast to non-self-maintsined discharges. in the ac discharge the normalized
electric field BIN varies in time, and may amount to -~8-10‘16 V-cm2 at the maximum.
Estimates of "r obtained by integrating its calculated values [Ref. 35, 36] with
respect to the period of change in the field in the discharge yield nKI-0.7S-0.8.
which is closeﬂto‘the "x for a self-maintained dc discharge. Experimental values
of the vibrational efficiency of the ac discharge on a frequency of 10 kHz at
p'~30-$0 mm Hg coincide with calculations. Coincidence of the efficiency of ex-
citation of the working mixture in a self-maintained dc discharge and an ac dis-
charge with frequency of 13.6 MHz was also pointed out in Ref. 51. If we dis-
regard dielectrib'loases in the ballast capacitors. we find that the discharge
efficiency at H~ [0 cm and p~50 mm Hg is n =0.9-0.95, and nxnp~0.7-O.75 (as
compared with n -0.4—0.6 for transverse self-maintained dc discharge and 0.75-0.8
for transverse EDIP). Experimental studies of the change in optical characteris-

dc discharge. Typical parameters of gas-discharge chambers of lasers with ac
discharge are shown in Table 2. A comparison of the values given in the tables
shows that the ac discharge is close to the NDIP with respect to limiting charac-
teristlcs.

One of the peculiarities of excitation of gas-discharge lasers by ac discharge
is unavoidable modulation of emission with frequency 2f. In the case of convec-
tive lasers, the depth of modulation. just as for diffusion lasers. does not ex-
ceed 5-102 [Ref. 3], 85} at f= 10 kHz, and drops with increasing f.

In discussing the technical aspects of developing laser equipment, we must note

the relative simplicity of laser pumping by ac discharge. Like semi-self-msin-
tained discharges, it can produce a homogeneous medium in large volumes with
higher interelectrode gap (~10 cm) and comparatively short pumping zone (~20 cm).
Such a laser can be supplied by a simple and reliable source consisting of a motor-
generator and step-up transformer. Another important condition for feasibility

of using an ac discharge in laser equipment is the availability of industrial
motor-generator sets with frequency of 8-10 kHz and power up to 150 kw.

The ac discharge is a promising pumping method not only for convective lasers,
but for diffusion lasers as well [Ref. 31]. This technique eliminates energy
losses in ballast resistors, reduces the voltage of the laser supply source. and
also enables electrodeless discharge, which may be of interest for sealed diffu-
sion lasers.

increasing the limiting characteristics of ac discharges by rotating the electric
field vector [Ref. 79. 81]. The first reports have also appeared on experimental
confirmations of improvement of discharge stability in rotating electric fields

Conclusion

The present.state of gas discharge physics and engineering now enables us to make
efficient laser devices with steady-state emission power up to 10 k", and opens up

FOR 0FFK31I.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prospects for further considerable increase of power and improvement of oper-
ational. characteristics of gas-discharge process lasers.

Selection of the laser design and pumping method ahOuld be determined of course
not only by the power of the laser, but also by its purpose, working conditions.
and economic effectiveness of utilization.

Analysis of non-Soviet models of process lasers has shown that the cost of the
laser itself as normalized to the output power is weakly dependent on the laser
design and the pumping method used, and decreases from 90-110 to 20-40 dollars
per watt as power increases from 1-2 to 10 kw [Ref. 8].

More important from the economic standpoint is the cost of laser operation. The
efficiencies of different laser systems are similar. usually amounting to 5-101.
The cost of using C02 lasers is determined to a great extent by their capability
for using inexpensive working mixtures, especially helium-free mixtures, since
the overwhelming majority of present-day process lasers with convective cooling
are operated under conditions of partial renewal of the laser mixture (-11 of
the f lowrate in the loop). and diffusion lasers operate under open-cycle condi-
tions. Elimination of helium from the mixture composition leads to a sharp drop
(by nearly an order of magnitude) in the output characteristics of the diffusion
laser due to impairment of heat transfer to the walls. In convective lasers.
the absence of helium does not have such an appreciable effect. especially in
lasers with pumping by self-maintained dc and ac discharges. Development of ef-
ficient systems for regenerating the working medium will in principle enable a
considerable reduction in the expenditure of helium and will reduce labor servicing
expenditures; however. this involves the necessity of adhering to more rigorous
requirements for gas-tightness of laser systems. and improved vacuum hygiene.
Therefore the final choice of a laser design and pumping method requires careful
analysis of their technical. operational and economic aspects.

REFERENCES
l. Patel. C. K. N.. PHYS. REP. LETI'S. V01 13, 1964, p 617.

2. Patel. C. K. N., Faust, W. I... McFarline, R. A.. BULL. AMER. PHYS. SOC., Vol 9.
1964. P 600.

3. Klauss. P. J., AVIATION WEEK AND SPACE TECHNOLOGY. Vol 103. No 9. 1975,
pp 50. 103.

4. Cl.eo.P. K., IEEE J. Vol QE-3. 1967. p 683.

5. Tiffany. W. 3.. Targ. R.. Poster. J. D.. APPL. PHYS. LETTS. Vol 15. 1969. p 91.
6. “0.33, 3.. Pease. 3.. Staal, J., Zar. J., APPL. OPTICS, Vol 13. 1974, p 1959.

7. LASER FOCUS. Vol 13. No 3. 1977. p [4.

8. Spalding. I. J., OPTICS AND LASER TECHNOLOGY. No l, 1978. p 29.

9. Nags]. Akio. MITSUBISHI ELECTR. ADV.. Vol 8, No l, 1979. p 110.

FOR OFFKIBAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.
18.

19.

20.
21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Stcl'makh-. .15. F.. ed.. "Lazary v tekhnologii" [Lasers in Technology], Moscow.
Energiya, 1975.

Kosyrev. P. K... Kosyreva, N. P.. Lunev. Ye. I.. AV'I‘OHATICHESKAYA SVARKA.
No 9, 1976, p 72.

Abil'siicov, G. A.. Antonova, 1.. 1.. Arumov. A. V.. Golubev. V. 8..
Drobyazko. s. V.. Yegurov. Yu. A.. Katsuro. N. 1.. Kazhidub. A. V..

Lebedev. F. V.. Senatorov. Yu. 11., Sidorenko. Ye. 14., Sunerin. V. V..
Turundayevskiy, V. 3.. Prolov. V. 11.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 6. 1979.

p 201..

Basov. N. G.. Kobayev, N. K.. Danilychev, V. A.. Mikhaylov. 11. 1)., Orlov.

V. K.. Save-l'yev. V. V.. Son. V. G.. Cheburkin. N. V.. KVAN'NVAYA “TRONIKA.
V01 6. 1979. p 772.

Sobolev. N. N.. Sokovﬂtov. V. V.. USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKE NAUK. V01 91. 1967.
p 1.25.

Wchinskiy. V. P., USPHCHI FIZICHBSKM NAUK. V01 91. 1967. p 389.
Haas. R. A.. PHYS. RBV., Vol 8A. 1973. p 1017.

Yeletskiy. A. V.. Rakhmov. A. T.. KHIHIYA PLAZMY. No 4, 1977, p 123.
Napartovich. A. P.. Starostin. A. N.. KHIHIYA PLAZMY. No 6. 1979. p 153.

Velikhov. Ye. P.. Pis'mennyy. V. 1).. Rakhinov, A. '1‘.. USPEKHI PIZICHESKIKH
NAUK. Vol 122. 1977. p 1019.

Hertzberg. A.. J. ENERGY. V01 1. No 6. 1977. p 331.
J. P. Reilly. AS‘l‘RmAUTIC-AERWADTICS. No 3. 1975. p 52.
Levinson, G. R. et a]... ZHURNAL PRIKLADNOY SPEKTROSKOPII. Vol 10. 1969. p 425.

Ochkin. V. 11.. TRUDY FIZICNBSKOGO INSTITUTA INENI P. N. LEBEDBVA AKADEMII
NAUK SSSR. V01 78. 19710. p 3.

Brown. C. 0.. Davis. J. V.. APPL. PHYS. LB‘l'I‘S., V01 21, 1972. p 680.
Rayzer. Yu. P.. FIZIKA PLAZHY. V01 5 1979. p 408.

Bondarenko. A. V.. Colubev. V. 8., Dan'shchikov. Ye. V.. Lebedev. F. V..
Ryazanov. A. V.. PIZIKA PLAZMY. Vol 5. 1979. p 687.

Ecker. G.. Kroll, 11.. zvller. PHYS. FLUIDS, V01 7. 19610. p 2001.
Abil'siitov. G. A.. Anamonov. A. V.. Velikhav. Ye. P., Yegorov. Yu. A..

Kazhidub. A. V.. Lebedev. F. V.. Sidorenko. Ye. 11.. Sumerin. V. V.. Frolov,
V. 11., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. V01 7. 1980. p 21067.

3
FOR Ol'I-‘ICIZL USE ONLY
29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

310.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.
40.

41.

“2.

43.

aa.

45.

46.

EUR UFHLIAL UDI'. ONLY

Locke, 8.. OPTICAL ENGINEERING. Vol 17. 1978. p 192.
French Patent No 70. 37698, 19 Oct 70.

Ancyukhov, V. V.. Clova. A. 17.. Kachurin. 0. R.. Lebedev. F. V.. KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA, Vol‘ 7. 1980. p 425.

Kozlov. G. 1.. Kuznetsov, V. A.. Haeyukov. V. A.. PIS'HA V ZHURNAL
TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI. V01 10. 1978. p 129.

Letokhov. V. 5.. Ustinov. N. D.. 'Moahchnyye lazery i ikh primeneniye" [Pover-
ful Lasers and Their Use]. Moscow. Sovetskoye radio. 1980.

Artamonov. A. V.. Yegorov, Yu. A.. Kazhidub. A. V.. Katsuro, N. 1.. Lebedev,

F. V.. Sidorenko. Ye. 11.. Sumerin. V. V.. Frolov. V. M. KVANTOVAYA MWIKA.
Vol 5. 1978. p 920.

Nighan. H. L.. PHYS. REV.. 01 A2, 1970. p 1989.

Karlov, N. V.. Konev. Yu. 5.. Kochetov, I. V.. Pevgov. V. 0.. Preprint, Lebedev
Physics Institute. 110 91. Moscow. 1976.

Granovskiy, V. D., "Blektricheekiy tok v gaze" [Electric Current in Gas].
Moscow. Nauka, 1971.

Lancashire, R. 8.. Alger. D. 1... Maniacs. B. J.. Scalby. J. G., Dunnig. J. V..
Stubbs, R. 14.. OPTICAL ENGINEERING. Vol 16. 1977. p 505.

Hyl'nikov, G. 0.. Napartovich. A. P.. FIZIKA PLAZMY. V01 1. 1975. p 892.
Bckbreth, A. C.. Davis. J. 11.. APPL. PHYS. LETTS. V01 19. 1971. p 101.

Rayzer, Yu. P., "Osnovy sovremennoy fiziki gazorazryadnykh protsessov"
[Principles of Modern Physics of Gas-Discharge Processes], Moscow. Nauka, 1980.

Fahlen. ’1‘. 5.. Kirk. R. P.. U. 5. Patent No 4077018. 28 Feb 78.

Arcamonov. A. A.. Blokhin, V. 1., Vedenov, A. A.. Vitshas. A. F.. Gavrilyuk.
V. 1).. Yegorov. A. A.. Namv. V. 6.. Pashkin. s. V.. Peretyat'ko. P. 1..
KVANTOVAYA ELBKTRONIKA. V01 4. 1977. p 581.

Vedenov, A. A.. Vicshas, A. P.. Certs. V. Ye.. Naunov. V. 6.. TEPLOFIZIKA
WSOKIKH MERATUR. Vol 16. 1976. p 641.

Akishev, Yu. 8.. Artmnov. A. V.. Naumov. V. 6.. Trushkin. N. 1.. shashkov.
V. H.. ZHURNAL MENICHESKOY 1’12le. Vol 49. 1979. p 900.

Artamonov. A. V.. Breyev. V. V.. Kukharenko. A. '1‘.. Samokhin, A. A.. "Trudy
vcorogo Vsesoyuznogo aoveshchaniya po fizicheakim procsessam v gazovykh 0K "
[Proceedings of Second All-Union Convention on Physical Processes in Gas
Lasers]. Uzhgorod. 1978. '

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
67.

(08.

1.8.

50.

51.
52.
53.
54.
56.

57 .
58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

61‘.

65.

66.

Vedenov, A. A.. Vitshas, A. F., Dykhne. A. 14.. Myl'nikov, 6. 1).,
Napartovich, A. P.. '"rrudy odinnadtutoy Mezhdunarodnoy konferentoii po
ionizirovnnnyn gaze." [Proceedings of Eleventh International Conference on
Ionized Gases]. Prague. 1973, ‘

Baranov. V. Yu., Niz'yev, V. 6., Pigul'skiy, S. V.. PIZIIA PLAZHY. Vol 6,
1978. p 858.

Akishev. Yu. 8.. Paohkin, S. V.. TKPLOFIZIKA VYSOKIIH mum. V01 15.
1977. P 703.

Akishev, Yu. 8.. Pashkin. S. V., Soklov, N. A., FIZIKA PLAZMY, Vol lo, 1978,
p 858 [816.].

Eckbreth, A. C.. Davis, J. H” APPL. PHYS. LETTS, V01 21, 1972. p 25.
Hill, A. 3., 1333 PAPER No 71-65.

Gentle. K. w. et .11.. NI. , Vol 203. 1966, p 1369.

Garosi. G. A. et 81., PHYS. FLUIDS. V01 13. 1970, p 2795.

Galechan, G. R.. Pettosyan, S. 1.. ZHURNAL PRIKLADNOY HEKIANIKI I
TEKHNICEESKOY FIZI‘KI. No 6. 1975, p 9.

Eckbreth, A. C., Owen. P. 8.. REV. SCI. INS‘l'R. Vol 63, 1972, p 995.
Heingard. W. J., Nighan, H. L., APPL. PHYS. LBTI'S, Vol 26. 1975. p 544.

Polulyakh. V. P., Kiselev. V. 1., IZVESTIYA VYSSHIKH UCHEBNYKH ZAVBDBNIY:
SBRIYA FIZIKA, No 5, 1977. p 125.

Generelov. N. A., zimakov. V. P., Koaynkin, V. D., Rayzer. Yu. P.,
Roytenburg, D. L, PIZIKA PLAN,-Vol 3. 1977. p 626.

Dan'shchikov, Ye. V.. Golubev, V. 8., Lebedev, F. V.. "Trudy Chetvertoy
konferentsii po fizike nizokotenperacurnoy plenty" [Proceedings of Fourth
Conference on Low-Temperature Plasma Physics]. Kiev,l975.

Rakhimov. T. V.. Rakhimov. A. ’1'., TEPLOFIZIKA VYSOKIKH TMBRATUR, V01 14.
1976. p 1313.

Rayzer, Yu. P.. Shapiro. G. 1., PIZIKA PLAZHY, Vol 6, 1978. p 850.

Basov. N. 6.. Belenov, E. H., Danilychev, V. A., Suchkov, A. P.. USPEKIII
FIZICHBSKIKB NAUK. V01 ”lo. 19714, p 213. .

Velikhov. Ye. P., Golubev, S. A.. Kovelev, A. 8., Persiantsev, I. 6.,
Pie'lncnnyy. V. D., Rakhinov, A. 1.. Rnkhinova, 1'. V., PIZIKA PLAZMY, Vol 1,
1975. p 81.7.

Babichev. V. N.. Golubev. S. A.. Kovalev, A. 8.. Pie'nnnyy. V. D..
Rakhilov. A. T., FIZIKA PLAN, V01 6. 1980, p 195.

hl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
67.

68.
69.
70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

EUR Ufl'ltlﬂl; 08f— UI‘LI

Artamonov. A. V.. Namv. V. 6.. Shachkin, L. V.. Shashkov. V. 11.. KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 6. 1979. p 1442.

Reilly. J. 11., APPL. PHYS” V01 43, 1972. p 3411.
H111, 1!. 3., APPL. PHYS. LETTS, V01 12. 1973. p 570.

Neparcovich. A. P., Neumov, V. G.. Shaehkov. V. 11.. PIZIKA PLAZHY, V01 1,
1975. p 821.

NaunIov, V. 6.. Shashkw. V. 11.. KVAN'NVAYA KLEKTRONIKA. Vol 4, 1977, p 2427‘.

Generalov, N. A.. Zhukov. V. P.. Kosynkin. V. D.. Reyzer, Yu. P.. Roytenhurg,
D. 1., PIS'HA V ZEURNAL rmxcazsm PIZIKI. Vol 1, 1975, p 431; FIZIKA
PLAZMY, Vol 6. 1980. p 1152.

Goykhman, V. Kh., Gol'dfarb. V. 11., ZHURNAL PRIWOY SPRTROSKOPII. V01 21.
1974. p 456.

Gavrilyuk, V. 1).. Glove. A. F.. Golubev, V. 8.. Lebedev. 1’. V.. KVAM'OVAYA
ELEM'RONIKA. Vol 4. 1977, p 2034.

Barkalov, A. D.. Gmilyuk. V. D.. Gledush. G. G.. Glova._A. P.. Golubev.
V. S.. Lebedev. F. V.. TEPLOPIZIKA VYSOKIKH TEMPERATUR, Vol 16. 1978. p 265.

Belikov. A. V.. Glove. A. P., Golubev, V. 8., Lebedev, P. V.. "Trudy pyatoy
Vsesoyuznoy konferentaii po fizike nizokoteupetacurnoy plazuy" [Proceedings
of Fifth All—Union Conference on Lov-Tenpereture Plasma Physics], K1ev,1979.

Barkalov, A. 1)., Gladush, G. 6.. Glove, A. F.. Golubev. V. S.. Lebedev. P. V..
TBPLOI-‘IZIKA VYSOKIKH TEMPERATUR. Vol 18. 1980. p 483.

Glove, A. F.. Golubev. V. 8.. Lebedev. P. V.. TBPLOPIZIKA WSOKIKH mmm.
V01 17. 1979. p 220.

Shapiro. G. 1.. PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TWICHESKOY PIZIKI. Vol 2, No 10. 1976.
p 451.

Shapiro. G. 1.. PIS'MA V ZRURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 4, No 7, 1978.
p 393.

Shapiro. G. I.. TKPLOPIZIKA VYSOKIKB TEMPERATUR, V01 18. 1980. p 40.

Zhilinskiy. A. P.. Kuceyev, B. V.. Smirnov. A. 8.. Shevchenko, Yu. 1.,
ZHURNAL TWICHESKOY FIZIKI, Vol 48. 1978. p 2260.

KuceyGV. B. V.. Smirnov. A. 3., ZHURNAL MICHESKOY FIZIKI, V01 49, No 8,
1979. p 1615.

Antyukhov, V.. Bonderenko. A.. Glove, A. P., Kachurin. 0. R.. Kolesov, L. 1...
Lebedev. Ye. A.. Lebedev, P. V.. Suelov. Yu. F.. Tinofeyev. V. A., KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 8. 1981. p 2234.

he
FOR OFHGAL use ONLY
85. Gavrilyuk, V. 1)., Glove. A. P.. Golubev, V. 3., Imam. A. 3., bebedev.
F. V., Feofilaktov. V. A.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKIRONIKA. Vol 6, 1979. p 5‘8.

86. Bondarenko. A. V.. Gavrilyuk, V. D.. Golubev. V. 8.. Lebodcv. P. V..
Smakotin. H. M., KVANTOVAIA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 7. 1980, p 775.

COPYRIGHT:' Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya olektronika". 1981

6610
C80: 1862/91

ROR‘OFIICHil.lEﬂE(MVLY
I‘vs‘ vs rah-nu van. Ul‘l—O

UDC 621.373.826

CHANGE IN RELAXATION RATE OF UPPER LASER LEVEL RITE PROLONGED OPERAIION 0? CH
ELECTRON-BEAM-CONTROLLED C02 PROCESS LASER

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 12(114), Dec 81 (manuscript
received 5 Jun 81) pp 2710-2712

[Article by A. P. Averin, Ye. P. Glotov, V. A. Danilychev, N. N. Sazhina, A. H.
Soroka and V. I. Yugov, Physics Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev, USSR Academy of
Sciences, Moscow] -

of an electroionization discharge and lasing efficiency in the
course of prolonged continuous operation of a closed-cycle C02
process laser with power of 10 k . It is shown that in the
process of prolonged laser operation. there is a reduction not
only in discharge current, but also in lasing efficiency as

a result of impurity formation in the laser mixture, increasing
the rate of relaxation of the upper laser level. '

One of the Iain factors that determine economic efficiency of laser technology

is the process of degradation of the laser mixture [Ref. 1]. It is known (Ref. 2]
that the principal cause of reduced energy input during operation of electro-
ionization lasers in the pulse-periodic mode is formation of nitrogen oxides in

the laser mixture under the action of the electron beam. The oxide molecules

have electron sticking cross sections more than 100 times those of oxygen mole-
cules. In pulse-periodic electroionization lasers. the pumping power is usually
considerably greater than the power of relaxation losses. and the formation of
relatively low concentrations of N20 and N02 (10‘22) does not lead to any reduction
of lasing efficiency within the limits of measurement error. In cw CO; electro-
ionization lasers. the pumping power is commensurate with the power of relaxation
losses. and therefore the presence of molecular gas impurities in the laser mixture
may lead to an appreciable reduction of lasing efficiency as a result of a reduc-
tion in the time of relaxation of the upper laser level 00°l.

This paper is devoted to an experimental study of the characteristics of the elec-
troionization discharge and lasing efficiency in the course of prolonged continu-
ous operation of a closed-cycle electroionization process laser with emission
power of 10 k" shown schematically in Fig. la.

The laser mixture was ionized by triode electron gun I with thoriated tungsten
cathode [Ref. 1]. The maximum working current density je* of the electron beam

m.
non omcw. use ONLY
Fig. 1. Diagram of electroioniz'ation laser (a) and typical
loop oscillogram of voltage U (Um-I 2:5 kV). discharge current
I (1.“- loS A) and losing power (hm (M- 10 k") at electron
beam current density 19- 12 aisles: and pressure of the laser
mixture C03:N3:Be- 1:30:29 of p- 50 mm Hg (1:)

in the cathode plane of the discharge chamber 2 as determined by superheating
of the separative foil of the electron gun was 12 uA/cm’. Blower 3 provided a
circulating rate of the laser nixture at the input to the discharge chnaber of
up to 90 Isle. The laser mixture was cooled in tubular heat exchanger lo. keeping
the gas temperature at the input to the active volume at 320 K.

 

t min
J/an' '
4 2 1.2
a at, c 9 “ ’
w , A:
J
0 :, min “imam-Hg
44,21,510!“
d
All]! Hg

Fig. 2. Ratio of discharge current I to discharge current In
in a "fresh" mixture (a) as a function of time of continuous

laser operation without regsnerator (l) and with regenerator

(2); lasing efficiency n as a function of pumping power (b)
for a "fresh" mixture (1) and for a mixture with 2-minute de-

pletion (2) at p- 50 In Hg; lasing efficiency as a function
of pressure of the laser mixture (c) at constant normalized

pumping power w/p- [.5 HUI! Hg (gas flowrate 9 n’ls) for
"fresh" (1) and "stale" (2) mixtures; relative increase in rate

of relaxation losses as a function of pressure (1) and average
adjusted temperature of 'the laser mixture e-rav/ 300 I (2) ((1)

FOR 0mg“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To determine the way that discharge current and lasing efficiency depend on the
working time of the electroionization laser. current-photovoltage characteristics
were taken at different instants. A typical loop oscillogram of these charac—
teristics is shown in Fig. lb. To eliminate the possibility of additional accumu-
lation of nitrogen oxides that might occur in breakdowns of the discharge gap.

the working voltage in taking the current-photovoltage characteristics was not
raised to the threshold value (B/p) corresponding to discharge contraction. Fig.
2a shows curves for the discharge current density as a function of continuous
laser operation time without regeneration of the laser mixture (curve 1) and with
the use of a regenerator (2) (Ref. 1]. It can be seen that when catalytic regen-
erator S (Fig. 1) is used, the rate of degredation of the laser mixture is consider-
ably reduced. but the discharge current cannot be totally recovered.

Fig. 2b shows curves for lasing efficiency as a function of pumping power for

a cw CO; electroionization laser with “fresh" and "stale” (Z-minute depletion)
mixtures of CO;:N2:Ee- 1:30:29. At first, with low pumping powers corresponding
to low field strengths, the lasing efficiency on the "fresh" mixture is lower.
This is due to the fact that in the first case the same pumping power w-IjE is
realized at a lower normalized field strength (B/p)1- (B/p)232/11 =0.7S-(B/p)2,
and accordingly at considerably lower efficiency of excitation of the upper laser
level and vibrational levels of nitrogen nef whose value at low B/p rises sharply
as the normalized field strength is increased [Ref. 3]. At high pumping powers
corresponding to the range of working paraemters of the cw CO; electroionization
laser, curve 2 is situated lower than curve I. This is due to the increase in
relaxation rate of the upper laser level up as nitrogen oxides accumulate in the
electroionization discharge.

To determine the way that the change in relaxation rate during degradation of
the laser mixture depends an excitation parameters. let us consider expressions
for lasing efficiency [Ref. 4] of a "fresh" (1) and "stale" (2) laser mixture
with constant energy input per unit of mass of the circulating gas: "

m-naunpnanu.nw—m.nn0..(-)nl-.. ' (I)
m"'ln-‘lp‘la'lemlw-ﬂh’anJﬂ’nP/(Ua'no). (2)

where nKB and np are quantum efficiency and resonator efficiency; “d is the ef-
ficiency of the discharge determined by electrode potential drops "ax(nd‘1-Uax/Uo);
nw- l-W*m/w, H* is the threshold pumping energy at the end of the active volume,
1. e. the energy carried off by the flow from the discharge chamber; wh-Iwip is the
normalized pumping power; na-a/p is the normalized gas flowrate; Q“(w) IQ,‘(w)/p2
is the normalized power of relaxation losses. At high field strengths, the exci-
tation efficiency nef and discharge efficiency nd are weakly dependent on B/p.

and the relation between the change in lasing efficiency and the change in relaxa-
tion rate Avp is written as

Manon-QuhdnAVp/(va'nh (3’

where the dimensionless coefficient "sangqtaP/"a is determined from the dependence
of efficiency on pressure shown in Pig. c. At low pressures. n increases with p.
This is due to the reduction in the fraction of energy carried off from the active
volume by the gas flow as a result of an increase in the rate of excitation transfer

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
from N: to 002, a; well as to the increase in nd caused by a reduction in the
relative cathodic potential drop ”ax/”o as pressure rises [Ref. 5]. At high pres-
sures. the pressure dependence of "d and n" ceases. and lasing efficiency with
increasing p falls off linearly due to the increasing rate of relaxation losses.
Experimental paints fit well on a straight line (see Fig. 2c) for which the tan-
gent of the slope is

tea-npan..(v)l-o-

The product nxgn;nefndnu is determined by the point where this line extended in-
tersects the axis of ordinates.

Fig. 2d shows the pressure dependence of relative increase in rate of relaxation
losses for a gas mixture after two minutes of depletion. It can be seen that

the quantity Avp/vpo determined in this way does not depend on pressure within

the Inuits of measurement error. and not only on the linear section of curve

n(p), but at low p as well. The scatter of the experimental points enables us

to estimate the relative error of measurements 6(Av/v) by the proposed technique.
which in the given case does not exceed 10-151 (see Fig. 2c). Determining Avp/upo
similarly for other values of specific energy input, we can plot the curve for

the relative increase in relaxation rate of the upper laser level as a function

of average gas temperature ZTav-To[l+w/(cpTom)l (see Fig. 2d). It is evident
that the quantity Avp/vp increases with rising average gas temperature, i. e.

the rate of relaxation of excited CO; molecules by nitrogen oxide impurities is a
stronger function of temperature than for the main components of the laser mixture.
This is indirect confirmation of the following mechanism of relaxation by impuri-
ties: resonant transfer of excitation from the asymmetric level of 002 to the
vibrational level of nitrogen oxides (most probably N20) and subsequent transfer
to heat. which is the limiting factor for the entire process.

REFERENCES

l._ Basov, N. G., Babayev. I. K., Danilychev. V. A. et a1.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA,
Vol 6, 1979. p 772. .

2. Glotov, Ye. P., Danilychev. V. A., Zvorykin, V. D. et al., KVANTOVKYA
ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 7, 1980. p 630.

3. Lobanov, A. N., Orlov. V. K., Suchkov, A. F.. Urin. B. H., Preprint. Lehedev
Physics Institute, No 199, Moscow. 1977.

A. anov, N. 6., Glotov, Ye. P., Danilychev, V. A.. Soroka, A. H., KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 7, 1980. p 1067.

5. Aleksandrov. V. V., Koterov, V. N.. Soroks, A. M.. ZHURNAL VYCHISLlTEL'NOY
MATEHATIKI I MATEHAIICHESKOY FIZIKI. V01 18, 1978. p 1214.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

6610
C80: 1862/91

FOR OPHéZL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

OPI'ICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

UDC 621. 373.826
HOLDGRAPHIC W8

Moscow GOLOGKAIICEBSKIYE IZHBRENIXA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 3 Aug 81)
pp 2-5 , 295-296

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Holographic Measurements",
by Vera Hoiseyevna Ginsburg and Boris Hikhaylovich Stepanov, Izdatel'stvo
"Radio 1 svysz'". 8000 copies, 296 pages]

[Text] The theoretical fundamentals of holographometry are discussed, a descrip-
tion is given of a holographic measuring complex of apparatus making it possible
to record holograms and interferograms of stationary and dynamic entities, and
algorithms for processing holographic information for obtaining quantitative
measurement data are presented.

For engineering and technical personnel using holographic measuring methods in
their work.

Foreword

Holography is a new trend in applied physics which appeared relatively recently
but has gained a wide reputation among specialists in various fields and even
among the general public.

The popularity of holography is the result of its enticing possibilities, making
it possible to expand considerably the limits of man's knowledge of his natural
environment, to create completely new graphic equipment and new more informative
computers and recognition systems, and to accomplish nondestructive testing and
make precise measurements of products in the production process, including where
previously for these purposes only quantitative methods of evaluation were used
or measurements and testing were impossible.

After the appearance in print of the works of the founders of holography the
number of publications has grown from year to year. Monographs and review books
have been published in which the fundamentals of holography are discussed and
examples are given of its application. In these publications and numerous articles
questions relating to the application of holography as a new method of measuring

and the metrological problems involved in this have practically not been eluci-
dated. such as the requirements for holographic measuring equipment, the

ks
FOR omcm. use ONLY
The question offthe use of methods of holography in metrology and of the develop-
ment of measurEments as a division of metrology was posed by the authors for the
first time in 1971 and has been partly reflected in monographs.

At the present‘time holographic measurements (or holograpbometry) represent a
relatively youaerapidly growing division of the science of the measurement of
processes and physical quantities, uniting a combination of methods and facili-
ties utilizing all kinds of measurements employed in holographic methods for the
purpose of extracting complete and reliable quantitative information on a three-
dimensional entity or process from a hologram on which is recorded the interference
pattern between a diffracted wave coming from the entity or process and a homo-
geneous coherent background.

This book, devoted to the physical fundamentals of holographomstry, is based
mainly on original work by the authors and their students performed in 1967—
1980.

The book has five chapters. In the first the objectives of practical holography
as a new kind of measurement of processes and quantities are discussed, the key
systems and methods used for measuring are described, general requirements for

the structure of a holographic measuring complex and the objectives of metrological
provision for holographic measurements are formulated, and the key specifications
of facilities for testing holographic measuring equipment are discussed. A
description is given of holographic measuring equipment series-produced in the
USSR for recording holograms in the optical waveband; concise information is

given on new holographic devices and apparatus in the development stage.

In the second chapter the physical fundamentals of methods of holographic mea-
surement and their key metrological characteristics are discussed, and the

results are given of an analysis of the key elements of the holographic process
from the viewpoint of determining sources of errors and substantiating requirements
imposed on radiation sources and holographic systems and equipment designed for
making holographic measurements of stationary and dynamic entities. Theoretical
and practical aspects of the implementation of methods of holographic measurement
in the optical and microwave bands are discussed.

In the third chapter methods of processing holographic information are described:
photogrammetric, machine and correlation. New methods of isolating the distinc-
tivc features of an image are discussed, based on the use of certain data on

the recognition of patterns by man, making it possible to construct optimized
correlation systems of recognition. A brief description is given of multichannel
holographic correlators ready for series production. A description is given of
algorithms for the digital processing of holographic interferograms. the digital
reconstruction of holograms obtained in the non-optical band, and the digital
simulation of holographic processes and systems.

1;
FOR 061109“. USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

In the fourth and fifth chapters applications of methods and equipment for
holographic measurement for solving national economic problems are elucidated,
including nondestructive control of the quality of optical waves; studies of
processes in living cells; nondestructive control of the quality of crystals,
including in the process of their growth; studying the process of the combustion
of condensed matter; determining the continuity of multicomponent flows; studying
the process of the fuel supply in diesels; determining optimum conditions for

the storage of a monumental painting, etc.

All figures whose numbers are mrked with asterisks are placed in the insertion
at the end of the book.

The authors hope that the book will prove helpful to a wide range of readers,
including developers of methods and equipment for holography, scientific per-
sonnel, engineers, biologists, physicians and restorers working in the field

of holography and its applications.

The authors are deeply grateful to the reviewers of the book, USSR Academy of
Sciences Corresponding Member L.D. Bakhrakh and Doctor of Physical and Mathematical
Sciences Professor Yu.A. Bykovskiy, for their valuable hints, which were taken

into account in revising the manuscript.

The authors wish to express their heartfelt thanks to Ya.A. Gabelev for his
great help in preparing and editing the manuscript.

CONTENTS Page
Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Holography as a Method of Measuring
1.1. Kinds of holographic measurements and their features 6
1.2. Key methods and areas of application of holographic measurements 10
1.3. General requirements for the structure of a holographic measuring
complex . 15
1.4. Holographic measuring equipment 19
l 5. Metrological problems in providing for holographic measurements 36

Chapter 2. Physical Fundamentals of Methods of Holographic Measurement
2.1. Relationship between visibility factor and parameters of interacting

interference waves 41
2.2. Limitations imposed on holographic measurements of dynamic entities

by the Doppler effect and ways of overcoming them 55
2.3. Holographic interference measurements of phase entities and their

features 58
2.4. Holographic measurements of the dispersed phase of multicomponent

dynamic systems 70
2.5. Holographic interference measurements of reflecting objects 73
2.6. Methods of holographic measurement in the microwave band 90
Chapter 3. Methods of Processing Holographic Information
3.1. Photogrametric methods of measuring holographic images 120
3.2. Solution to the inverse problem of determining the distribution of

the refractive index of phase entities from masuring the optical path
length or its derivative 126

50
FOR omcm. use ONLY
3.3. Holographic correlation methods of measuring
3.6. Processing optical images in the input and output of holographic
correlators, computers and communication channels
3.5. Defocusing as a means of isolating informative fragments and
the visual-analyzer
3.6. Dciocusing as a means of producing a generalized pattern of an image
in the input of a holographic correlator
3.7. Representation of optical images'in holographic correlators by
teens singenetic functions
3.8. Human—like "drawing" robot
3.9. Use of defocusing for automating the process of inputing holographic
images into a computer
3.10. Use of defocusing for narrowing the transmission band of TV channels
3.11. Compariko'n of the defocusing method with other human-like methods
of pattern recognition
3.12. Digital holography
Chapter 4. Use of Holographic Methods of Measuring for Studying Stationary
Objects and Slowly Occurring Processes
. Study of plant cells
Study of blood cells
Study of crystals
Nondestructive testing of optical fibers
Measurement of the thickness of thin films
Determination of optimum temperature and humidity conditions for
storing frescoes
6.7. Measurement of the relief of the surface of magnetic disks .
4.8. Holographic nondestructive testing of products in the microwave band
Chapter 5. Applications of Holographic Methods of Measuring for Studying
Dynamic Objects and Rapidly Occurring Processes
Measuring the continuity of two-phase flows
Measuring distribution of velocities in a falling sheet of water
Studying the process of combustion of condensed systems
Studying fuses
Studying discharge in flash lamps
Studying the structure of dispersed annular flows
. Studying the fuel line of automotive diesel engines
5.8. Visualization of ultrasonic fields in optically transparent media
Bibliography
Subject Index

§b§&~&&
s o o o s o
O‘UlbUNH

.
N¢U§wNH
s o

sees

a
e

\IIWLIIU‘MU'IU

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981

8831
C50: 1862/106

1
FOR owl-1am. USE ONLY

153
151.
153
166

171
177

182
186

185
189

213
215
221
230
236

241
2&4

268
250
253
258
265
267
269
279
282
291
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. USE UNI-I

UDC 535.3
FEASIBILITY 0F CONTROLLING GAIN 0F ENTHALPY-STIMULAIBD LIGHT SCATTERING

Moscow KVARTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 12(116), Dec 81 (manuscript
received 6 May 81) PP 2699-2702

[Article by V. S. Zuyev, 0. Yu. Nosach and Ye. P. Orlov. Physics Institute imeni
P. N. Lebedev. USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] An investigation is made of the influence that laser
parameters have on the gain of enthalpy-stimulated light scat-
tering by ultrasound in the active medium of iodine photodia-
sociation lasers. It is shown that there is a range of inten-
sities of stimulating laser radiation in which there is a sharp
drop in the gain of stimulated scattering with increasing in-
tensity. By varying the cross section of the laser transition,
this range can be shifted, and the gain of stimulated scattering
can be varied over wide limits. The results are hopeful from
the standpoint of getting high directionality of powerful laser

emission.

It was shown in Ref. 1 that in thermodynamically nonequilibrium media in which
the rates of internal processes taking place with release or absorption of energy
depend on electromagnetic field intensity, a new kind of stimulated light scatter-
ing may arise. Specifically. this stimulated scattering has been considered in
the active medium of iodine photodissociation lasers: n-C3P71 vapor (0.01-0.05
atm) and buffer gases such as SF; or CO; at pressure close to atmospheric.

During pumping in the active region of the photodissociation laser, as a result
of photolysis. n—CgF7 radicals and excited iodine atoms 1* are formed that make
the transition to the ground state under the action of resonant laser emission
(x- 1.3l5 um). Iodine atoms in the ground state I are chemically more active
and therefore the rate of energy release during the exothermal recombination re-
action n-C3F1+I-*n-ch7I is dependent on the intensity of laser radiation.

During development of this kind of stimulated scattering. various partial oscil-
lations of the medium may be excited. For example in Ref. 1 an examination was
made of stimulated scattering by ultrasound, and in Ref. 2. scattering by tempera-
ture waves was considered. since excitation of partial oscillations of the medium
is mainly at the expense of enthalpy of the thermodynamically nonequilibrium medium
we suggest that this kind of stimulated scattering might be called enthalpy-stimu-
lated light scattering.

S2
FtﬂltﬂﬁWCJAL USEICNULY
In Ref. 1, in considering enthalpy-stimulated scattering by ultrasonic waves it
was assumed that the frequency of ultrasound may be greater than the probability ,
with which iodine atoms and radicals enter into reactions, and much greater than
the probability of induced transitions.

In this paper, the limitation on the probability of induced transitions used in
Ref. 1 is removed, enabling analysis of the influence that the intensity of the
exciting laser radiation and the cross section of the laser transition have on
the gain of enthalpy-stimulated scattering by ultrasonic waves.

He will carry out this analysis assuming only that the frequency of ultrasound

is much greater than the probability with which iodine atoms and radicals enter
into chemical reactions. In iodine photodissociation lasers this condition is
nearly always satisfied [Ref. 1]. In this connection, as implied by Ref. 1, of

all the chemical reactions that occur in the active region of these lasers (Ref. 31
it is sufficient to consider only the reaction Ri-In-RI, where R are n-Cng radi-
cals for describing enthalpy-stimulated scattering by ultrasonic waves. Then

the rate of energy release in a unit of volume Qeqld31R1lJl. where Q1 is the energy
released in one act of recombination. 3!. is the rate constant of the reaction,

[R] and [I] are the concentrations of radicals and unexcited iodine atoms respec-
tively, the amplitude of oscillations of [R] in enthalpy-stimulated scattering

by ultrasonic waves being much less than the amplitude of oscillations of [I].

The linearized equation of hydrodynamics with consideration of energy release
Q [Ref. lo] in our case takes the form

3’ 6 l 0 A ‘ ‘
737':— —v3.v’v-FTV’P'T('6§'). "3' ""1 “SW" "’

where o is the density of the substance, vs; is the speed of sound, the term with
I‘ describes absorption of sound, T is absolute temperature, 5 is entropy.

The quantity [1] as a function of electromagnetic field intensity can be found
from kinetic equations for [I] and the concentration of excited iodine atoms [1*]:

an: n 11 ca!’

—,,,—- «(U . ~35") .,. .L —or.mm. m
a J. E.
-—-L‘,, =wlNI—ou(l1'}--—2 Inf—sf? .L- (3)

where w is the probability of photodissociation of n—63F11 molecules. [N] is their
concentration, ay is the cross section of the laser transition, n is the ndex

of refraction of the medimn, has], i the energy of a+1aser field quantum, is

the overall field of the exciting %L and scattered Es waves.

Let us consider the stationary problem. Let the fields Bx,=.‘/.IL(ELGXP(10Ll—Ikbt)+ comp.
coan, Isa-.-I/,e8(55cxp(aosc_msr)+ comp. conj.) be linearly polarized plane waves, where
|I:'_.,|' «£th In this case, the deviations of concentrations of excited and unex-
cited iodine atoms [1*], and [I] from their values [I*]oand [no in the absence

of stimulated scattering are small. Representing them in the form [1°].-

- 'l,lJ"luMiW-mlqu-comp. conj. and |J)|=x/,u].,,(5m_.-qr)+ comp. conj..'where

FOR 91-1-1331. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9" wr—Us-salL-is- with the aid of (2) and (3) we get a system of equations for

. ~

[I] and [1*] which within the framework of the above-mentioned condition takes
the form

cold P MIELI’ ~ mete; .
"ii—('- mﬁrm -(°~ m +‘°)“" =°'°°m'- ‘0
MELE;

8
(£- o, %lé¥ +10) [TI —0- 53%;?7’31— ['3'] = dude—4min (5)

where A.—[J-|.—% [J]. and for the sake of simplicity we have set q. 5:3. From
this we find If] as a function of BL and BS:

0 AoanLEsﬂaMoL

m =W (6’

Substituting uI-“1.1M,“ﬁexp(lm—lqt)+comp. conj.) with consideration of (5) in (1)

and representing 9 in the form p.+('/$exp(im—l¢)+conp. conj.). we find 5. Then,
using the shortened equation for £5

%-—l-%(%)93'5m . (7)

(c is read out along direction k5: c—n’ is permittivity), and the thermodynamic
relations

a: an —' 1; L 1». ___"3-'(_0L)
(79—): ~47)» ( 0T )9 ' T ( as )9 94:9 01‘ a
(c is specific heat), we represent the dependence of-IIE 2 on c in the form
p S
Howl" [Edi-ON'OWMQW;

where

 

__ 3
5(9) " -' a or p“ on! X

WW -I- (I + we.) 0 IL (92 - 9&3)

X "19’ + (l mm)‘ (on?! l(°’ — Ra’s)i +95 ("I’l'l' 1“ (a)

uns— u..|q|; IL-cnlEd'KauhoL) is the intensity of the stimulating radiation in
quanta/(cm2 's). This formula is considerably simplified if we consider that
the lmlf-width of thermal Handelstam-Brillouin scattering 250mm? (Ref. 5] is
much less than 9113’ Then

9 - is 0: ) 1mm 6. cur/9,43
'( )~*'§?(W p Pip ' +((I +‘a‘t‘allllﬂua)g X
09m; t (I + Mn) «MIL/9M3) (a :r on.) .

x (G 4" 5,“ )i + (“as F :9)

Here and below. the upper sign corresponds to the case n> 0. and the lower—to
9(0. If o,I,,IQMs<I. then (9) is transformed to the relation found in Ref. 1.

Ital ( 08) clxllRlalAO
n

1;
FOR OFFIC‘?AL USE ONLY
From (9) we can see that amplification is realized on both Stokes and anti-Stokes
frequencies. The maximal gm) are reached at ‘

a - £93; an” (M +(( + (.130 a. do“, i' |)/((‘l 1&- manual.)

and are equal to ‘

_ I. A x lRl 6. |
~ e--- “5;- ( or), LL—m 'Wu‘ "
x 0,11,10,43 ((I 4- (all!) “Ht/ans )'

|+((I +1.1190779mﬁxl +(( +1420 op! ,4.) ‘ (W)

From (10) we see that g reaches a higher value on the Stokes than on the anti-
Stokes frequency.

Let us consider the case of strong saturation of the laser transition, 1. e.

IL>In-( (l+&/g1)ayrp)'1, where 1‘, is the time of non-radiative relaxation. Here
oyILA. =w[N] and g on the Stokes frequency can be represented as

l l ' I II )I-
“‘7" VF-i-uiﬁmi—l 1+(7LI5n5‘ ' (II)

where
= .(a:) xRuN
‘° “—5T, 09‘ mans'
1 am

If oyILw, then [R], [N] and consequently go are practically independent of IL
(Ref. 2, 3]. Then the graph on the figure for g/go as a function of IL”)! in
essence enables us to find g as a function of IL at different

9/9: values of 0,. Let us emphasize once more that the figure

shows the region IL’IH- To complete the picture, let us

note that if I <I . then g is proportional to IL, 1. e.

g+0 if IL+0 Re . l]. The intermediate case ILIIH re-

quires separate consideration.

It is evident from the figure that 3 does not depend on

IL as long as IL/Iuﬂ. The conditions IL’IH and a L’"

do not contradict the condition IL/Iud since the harac-
teristic values ‘1“. u~lo‘s-l<0us~I0'-IO' rad/s [Raf. l,

3. 6]. However. when I1, becomes much greater than IN, 3
decreases as l/IL. This leads to an increase in the threshold of enthalpy-stimu-
laced scattering by ultrasonic waves. which agrees with the experimental data of
Ref. 7. in which the intensity of small-scale optical inhomogeneities in the ac-
tive region of the laser was attenuated as the reflectivity of the output mirror
of the optical cavity was increased, 1. s. with an increase in IL. The threshold
should also be exceeded with a reduction in the pressure of buffer gases, since
in the first place this increases attenuation of sound. and secondly it increases
0,, met. 3]. leading to a reduction of IN¢1/0y. and °y can be varied over a wide

    

1194/.

FOR 0mg]. USE ONLY
rm; Uri-ICIAI. use our

range. Apparently this explains the fact that (as far as we know) no small-scale
optical inhomogeneities have been observed to arise in photodissociation lasers

with pure n-03P11 without buffer gases.

The results demonstrate how we can influence the gain of enthalpy-stimulated scat-

tering by ultrasonic waves. and are encouraging from the standpoint of getting
high radiation intensity from powerful lasers since arisal of small-scale optical
inhomogeneities is quite detrimental to directionality of laser emission [Ref. 7].

These results are also applicable in the case where the assmption about the fre-
quency of ultrasound made in our analysis is not valid. However. this case is
more complicated in a mathematical sense. and requires separate consideration.

Let us note that the conclusions of this paper will apply to lasers of other types
as well where the processes of energy release in the active region depend on the
intensity of the laser field.

REFERENCES _

l. Basov, ll. 6.. Zuyev. V. 8.. Nosach. 0. Yu.. Orlov. Ye. P.. KVANTOVA‘IA
ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 7. 1980. p 2614.

2. Zuyev. V. s., Orlov. Ye. P.. Preprint. Lebedev Physics Institute. No 11.5.
Moscow. 1981; KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 8. 1981. p 1968.

3. Borovich, B. I... Zuyev. V. 5.. Katulin. V. A.. Hikheyev. L. D.. Nikolayev.
F. A. . Nosach. 0. Yu.. Rozanov. V. 3.. "Itogi nauki i tekhniki. Seriya radio-
tekhnika" [Advances in Science and Engineering. Electronics Series]. Moscow.
published by All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Information.
Vol 15. 1978. PP 153-177.

la. Zel'dovich. 3. Ya.. Sobel'man. I. I.. USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK. Vol 101.
1970. p 3.

5. Landau, L. 0., Lifshits. Ye. H.. "Elektrodinanika sploshnykh sred" [Fluid
Electrodynamics]. Moscow. GIFHL. 1959. p 501.

6. Zuyev, V. 8.. Katulin. V. A.. Nossch, V. Yu.. Petrov. A. I... TRUDY FIZICHESKOGO
INSTITUTE IHENI P. N. LEBEDEVA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR, Vol 125. 1980. p 46.

7. Zuyev. V. 5.. Netemin. V. N” Nosach, 0. Yu.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 6.
1979. p 875.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

6610
(ISO: 1862/91

63‘" '
FOR om AL USE ONLY
UDC 621.378.325
CONVERSION OF OETICAL RADIAIION SPATIAL SPECTRUM IN PARAMETRIC PROCESSES

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 12(115), Dec 81 (manuscript
received 15 Jan 81) pp 2690-2693

[Article by R. A. Yeremeyeva. V. A. Kudryashov. I. N. Hatveyev and N. D. Ustinov]

[Text] An investigation is made of transformation of the spa-
tial spectrum of optical emission upon passage through a stimu-
lated nonlinear medium. The paper gives the results of experi-
ments that confirm re-radiation by the excited nonlinear medium
of energy of the plane wave of the initial radiation under cer-
tain conditions on spatial side frequencies whose spectrum cor-
responds to the autocorrelation function of the spatial spectrum
of pumping. Two models of parametric processes are given that
explain the observed effect. It is demonstrated that this phe-
nomenon can be used for observing spatially modulated radiation
propagating through a phase-distorting medium.

When optical emission passes thorugh a nonlinear medium. some physical effects

are observed that are associated with a change in the spectral makeup of the emis-
sion (generation of harmonics. sum and difference frequencies, stimulated Raman
scattering. parametric luminescence and so on). Most of these effects are due

to conversion of the frequency spectrum of the optical radiation; however, as

the authors pointed out in Ref. 1. as a result of parametric processes we can

also observe conversion of the spatial spectrum, which was later confirmed ex-
perimentally in Ref. 2, 3.

Fig. I. Diagram of ex-
periment: l, 2--lenses
with focal lengths f1. f2;
3--nonlinear KDP element;
a--filter of emission on
frequency w;; 5--trans-
potency; 6--foca1 plane
of lens 1

 

Pig. 1 shows a diagram of the experimental setup used to record the effect of
transformation of only the spatial spectrum of optical radiation while retaining

FOR OFFICE“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the frequency spectrum unchanged. Optical radiation with frequency u; passes
through a nonlinear medium. and its spatial spectrum is recorded in focal plane 6.
.When the nonlinear medium is stimulated by external pumping on frequency m2, ad-
ditional components on frequency m; can be observed at the output from the non-
linear medium. Special steps were taken to shape the spatial spectrum of the
interacting waves in order to enable evaluation of changes in the spatial spectrum
of the field re-radiated by the medium. Radiation with frequency u; had a plane
front, so that the width of its spatial spectrum corresponded to the diffraction
limit. Radiation with frequency u; had a pronounced spatial spectrum. A trans-
parency mounted in the focal plane of lens 2 was used for this purpose.

The typical appearance of spatial spectra of the initial emission m1. pumping
radiation w; and the field of the emission m1 re-radiated by the nonlinear medium
is shown in Fig. 2 [photos not reproduced]. From the results we conclude that

in this experiment we have observed a previously unstudied effect of transforma-
tion of the spatial spectrum of optical radiation upon passage through a nonlinear
medium. This effect shows up as re-radiation of the energy of the plane wave

by the stimulated nonlinear medium into spatial side frequencies whose spectrum
corresponds to the autocorrelation function of the spatial pumping spectrum.

We have suggested two models to explain the change in the spatial spectrum of
the field re-radiated by the excited nonlinear medium on the frequency of the
investigated radiation: four-photon interaction old-oz -(oz4-u1 and two-stage
interaction m1+w2+w1nt; mint -m2+uu. Actually, if radiation w; is a plane
wave BIoexp [3(w1t-k1r)], and the pumping radiation is a spatially modulated
wave Eloexp [j(w;t-k2r)], then in the given-field approximation. the amplitude
of the field re-radiated by the medium as a result of the first interaction will
be determined by the expression 03E10l32(r)lzexp j(m1t-k z). and as a result

of the second interaction-by the expression 03310I32(r)l exp j(m1t-k1z). where
02, 03 are coefficients that characterize the efficiency of conversion on qua-
dratic and cubic nonlinearities of the medium respectively.

These expressions imply that in both cases the fields re—radiated by the nonlinear
medium have the same form, and differ only in intensity; the spatial spectrun

of the field re-radiated by the medium is the autocorrelation of the spectrum
produced by amplitude modulation of the pumping field; phase modulation of the
pumping field should have no effect on the spatial spectrum of the field that

is re-radiated by the medium on the frequency of the investigated emission.

Thus. both our models lead to the observed effect, and predominance of a given
nonlinear process is determined by the ratio between effective values of quadratic
and cubic nonlinearities of the medium. the power of the pumping radiation and

so forth. In the experiment done by the authors, two-stage conversion predomi-
nated; moreover, this arrangement enabled us to overcome the considerable technical
difficulties associated with the necessity of separating the radiation on frequency
m, transmitted through the medium from the emission on the same frequency re-
radiated by the medium as a result of the nonlinear process. In this case it

is possible to replace the simultaneous two-stage conversion with sequential con-
version by separating the nonlinear medium into two different parts by a filter
that transmits emission (oz and (“int' but does not pass radiation w; (see Fig. 3).
The field of m1 at the output from the nonlinear medium in this arrangement con-
tains only the component re-radiated by the medium as a result of the nonlinear

58
FOR omcm. use ONLY
Fig. 3. Diagran of setup for

observing spatially modulated

radiation propagating through
a phase-distorting mediun

   

EH!)

1!.

391%ng

process. while the amplitude of this component has fallen to half. the simltane-
ously achieved suppression of the initial radiation by a factor of 10‘ yields
the necessary positive effect. Since then. several authors have managed to observe
analogOus effects determined by four-frequency processes as well [Rah 4. 5].

     

The given effect opens up new and interesting possibilities in the investigation
of parameters of laser emission. The spatial spectrum of radiation is formed

due to modulation of both amplitude and phase (see for example Ref. 6). In the
experiment considered above. the spatial spectrum of the field re-radiated by

the medium is dependent only on amplitude modulation of the radiation that excites
this medium.

This property can be put to practical use for example where it is necessary to
observe spatially modulated radiation propagating through a phase-distorting
medium. A diagram of the corresponding experimental setup is shown in Fig. 3
(all notation is the same as in Fig. 1). Radiation w1. as in the previously de-
scribed experiment. is a plane wave. Radiation mg is amplitude-modulated by a
transparency mounted in the focal plane of lens 7. and phaseﬁnodulated by phase-
distorting plate 8 maunted in the plane of the intermediate pupil of lenses 7.
In plane 9 we register the spatial spectrum of radiation u; modulated either with
respect to amplitude only (when phase-distorting plate 8 is absent) (see Fig.

2b [photo not reproduced]), or with respect to both amplitude and phase (Fig.

6a [photo not reproduced]).

The spatial spectrum of radiation u; at the output from the nonlinear medium is
registered in plane 6, and is independent of whether the phase-distorting plate
is present or absent (Fig. 2c and 4b [photos not reproduced]). The results con-
firm the previously drawn conclusions about the possibility of using the investi-
gated effect to eliminate the influence of phase distortions of a medium when
observing amplitude-modulated radiation through this medium.

A distinguishing feature of the investigated setup as compared with those based
on the wavefront reversal effect [Ref. 7] is single rather than double passage
of the radiation through the distorting medium, which is much more convenient
for developing specific devices.

It should be noted that although the above discussion was addressed primarily

to spatially modulated fields. in accordance with the space-time analogies that
occur in the theory of nonlinear interactions of modulated waves (see for example
Ref. 8) it can be assumed that the given effect is suitable for separating com-
ponents of laser radiation associated with amplitude and phase modulations in
time as well. Use of a method of this kind for studying the frequency spectra

59
non omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of optical radiation can be expected to be most effective in the investigation
of ultrashort pulses.

1.

REFERENCES

Hatveyev. I. 11.. Kudryashov. V. A.. Yerneyeva. R. A.. "Tezisy dokladov sed'moy
Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po kogerentnoy i nelineynoy optike" [Abstracts of
Papers at Seventh All—Union Conference on Coherent and Nonlinear Optics].
Moscow, published by Hoscow State University. 1976. p 477.

Ustinov, N. D., Hatveyev, 1. 11.. KVAN'IOVAYA RETRONIKA. Vol lo, 1977, p 2995.
310m, D. H” Bjorklund. G. C., APPL. PHYS. LENS. V01 31, 1977, p 592.

Voronin, E. 8.. Ivakhnik. V. V., Petnikova. V. M” Solonatin, V. 5.. Shuvalov,
V. V., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 6, 1977, p 2009.

Rytov, s. 14., "Vvedeniye v statisticheskuyu radiofiziku" [Introduction to
Statistical Radio Physics], Moscow. Nauka, 1976. part 1.

Zel'dovich, 8. 1a., Noaach, 0. Yu., Popovich. V. 1., Ragnl'skiy. V. V..
Fayzulov, P. 8., VESTNIX HDSXDVSKOGO GOSUDARSTVENNOGO UNIVERSITETA, SERIYA III:
PIZ‘LKA, ASTRONOHIYA, V01 19, No A. 1978. p 137.

Akhmanov, S. A.. Chirkin, A. G.. "Statisticheskiye yavleniye v nelineynoy
optike" [Statistical Phenomena in Nonlinear Optics]. Moscow. published by
Moscow State University. 1971.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika“, 1981

6610

C80:

1862/9! END

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY