FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10072
26 October 1981

USSR Report

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS

(FOUO 9/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGBT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS
(P000 9/81)

CONTENTS

ACOUSTICS

Two-Dimensional Nonlinear "eve Pr». asses in Pulsed Locsl
Heat Release 1“ a Gas ylov.oosoosse00.00000090000000!00.0.0.0...

CRYSTALS AND SEMI CONDUCTORS

Registration of Parameters of Pulsed Radiation Using the
Semiconductor-Beta Phase Transition in Vsnsdiun Dioride........

Laser Screens Made of Single-Crystal ZnSe and uh Films Grown

0n s‘pphireooootoo-osnsoo-o'oooooooooesevseooooooooosoooeooouooo

FLUID DYNAMICS

Boundary Layer of a Body of Revolution in s Drag-Reducing
Poly-er solutioncboﬁﬁlIOIOOOOOOOOOOOOIOODOOVIOOOOIOOOOIOOOO0....

LASERS AND HASBRS
Propsget ion of Laser Been in Turbulent Atuosphere. . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . .
“18h-Pover Pulse Laser.‘CIOIOOOODOIOI0.."OOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOQOIO.

Investigation of Gesdynsnic Laser Using Acetylene Conbustion

Productsoesseesovsssoepeosoeooslssssssso...Oososoooosoesssesoooo

Chemical DP Laser With Diffraction Radiation Divergence...........

Stimulated Emission on 18.1. no in 002 Gssdynnnic Laser With
Electric-Arc “e.t1ns.COOOIOOUOCCOOOOOOIOIO.IOI'DOOO'COOOOOOCOOOI

13

18

21

32

37

43
50

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Feasibility of Using Liquid Metal Beatotranefer Agents for
Cooling the Elements of nigh-Power Optical Syetue Based
on Porous stmcturealt.IOOIOOOOIDCOOOOOOOCOOIOI0.0.000...0......

C02 Laaer With Radiation Energy of 3 kJ Excited Under Hatched

condition’eooeeovnooetooeioooeeooeeoooeivtlooeoooeoeeo00-0000...

Conversion of 002 Laser Buieeion to 0.5 no Region in Nonlinear

crystals.ereenter-cote.union-one.eeeooeoelaDeena-00000000000000.

Influence That Heating of Active Medium During Excitation Baa on
Characteristics of Pulsed Electroionization C0 Laser Uains
Pure carbon mm‘idevﬁoolohboo...OIO.I.OOIOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOCIO.

OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

Have Front Sensor Based on Talbot Bffect..........................

Feasibility of Making an Absorbing Cell for A - 1315 nl...........

-1...

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

62

67

71

7b

78
86
FOR OMCMI. USE ONLY

ACOUSTICS

UDC 534.2:532
TWO-DIMENISONAL NONLIhn-a HAVE PROCESSES IN PULSED LOCAL HEAT RELEASE IN A GAS PLOW

Moscow AKUSTICHESKIY ZHURNAL in Russian Vol 27. No 4. Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 13 May 80) pp 595-606

[Article by A. T. Fedorchenko. Moscow Physicotechnical Institute]

[Text] Development of nonlinear wave processes in a homogeneous
gas flow near a stationary zone of pulsed heat release is numeri-
cally studied within the framework of a planar model. The study
is done over a wide range of transonic and supersonic velocities
of the unperturbed flow. Optimum conditions of generation to
maximize pressure amplitudes are discussed.

A separate field of research [Ref. [-7] involves the investigation of wave processes
generated by a thermo-optical source moving in a gas (or equivalent processes in
flow around a stationary beam along the normal to its axis). The phenomenon of
amplification of sound waves as they are generated by continuOus radiation in

a transonic gas flow has been examined as a result of approximate analytical solu-
tions (linear [Ref. [-5] or with consideration of weak nonlinearity [Ref. 7]). An
analogous effect has been experimentally detected [Raf. 8] at near sonic velocities
of scanning of a laser beam over the surface of an absorbing liquid.

However, the approximate solutions have not enabled investigation of appreciably
unsteady processes of pulsed excitation of acoustic waves of finite amplitude.
much less under conditions of strong nonlinearity (i. e. at acoustic Mach numbers
Ma of the order of unity or more). Obviously in solving nonlinear spatial problems
of the given type under general conditions it is necessary to use a complete (two-
dimensional as a minimum) system of gasdynamic equations. But solution of such
problems as of now can be handled only on the basis of numerical methods with
up-to-date computers. In doing this. both the construction of mathematical models
and development of the appropriate numerical algorithms for solution constitute

a separate class of problems, usually attended by considerable difficulties.

In this paper, numerical integration of complete two-dimensional equations of
gas dynamics is used to solve some model problems where an investigation is made
of appreciably nonlinear pulse processes of optical generation of intense waves
in plane-parallel gas flows. In the given range of velocities of the undisturbed

FId!(NHﬂ(JAl.lEﬂE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flow (transonic and supersonic) and heat-release levels. pronounced two-dimensional
effects of nonlinear interaction of the generated waves with the flow are observed.
A detailed examination is made of the formational processes and subsequent evolution
of shock waves; an analysis is made of some optimum conditions of wave generation
to maximize pressure amplitudes. Notice is taken of the possibility of realization

of resonant oscillatory phenomena in a supersonic flow by using a series of succes-
sive pulses.

Two-dimensional unsteady flows of perfect gas were studied in the rectangular
region Charm: 1:). gem; 11:). :.<U. ::>0) . The coordinate system that is used is
fixed to the stationary axis of the beam (axis 02) normal to the plane of the
flow. The initial dimensionless system of gasdynamic equations had the form

dp+apu 6m;
a: 5: 0y "

 

Opu;d( :+_
«"39“ We

dpv L quu a

6! d: Mum-+9) 0'

JpE 0 a

-.._ + _ 15+ -_ _
ill-"(p p) ]+ aylv(p£+p)] Qal.

 

(I)

 

0!

91' u’+v’ T C
—-—. £-¢+ ' g-c.T— ' __’.'
p ‘1 2 10—.) 1 C.

 

 

 

The dimenisonless values of coordinates x. y. velocity components u. v. time t.
density 9, pressure p, temperature T. internal energy e. volumetric absorption
factor a. and radiation intensity 1 are respectively expressed in units ro, co,
ro/Co. oo. coca. To. c3. no, lo. where to is characteristic radius of the beam.
po, To are parameters of the unperturbed gas flow. co=-/yRTo is the adiabatic
speed of sound. no is the average value of the coefficient of absorption on the
investigated section of the length of the beam. Io is the characteristic (maximum)
radiation intensity.

The principal dimensionless number Q can be represented as a product of two dimen-
sionless parameters:

o-aa. where z-aoro. B-Io/oocs.
Obviously formulation of the planar problem is correct only when ((1.

It is assumed that the power of the sources of heat release is independent of
a change in the local thermodynamic parameters of the gas in the zone of absorption.
(1. e. a: const 3 l) . and is completely determined by the unchanged spatial dis-
tribution (in the given case gaussian) of radiation intensity and the predetermined

function f(t)>0 (with norming condition fmax'OU» that characterizes the time
modulation of the pulse:

aI-mmz. u). 3(3. v)-exp (~z‘-y‘).
t>0.' z. yEG.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pulses are considered with characteristic times of action If 2 I.

At the initial instant t-O throughout region 6

(2) u-Mm ”-0- r-b-‘I P-p‘FUY'

0n the lower boundary G(z¢(z,; 2.), y—o, t>0) symetry conditions are used: v-O.
3u/3y- 3p/3y- 3T/3y= 0. The parameters of the unperturbed flow (2) are assigned
on the left boundary (z-z.. yu(0;' ',) ) . The upper and lateral boundaries of 6
were sufficiently far away (y.>i, z,|>1, 1.)” so that during the entire investi-
gated time interval (0; ch) the influence of these boundaries did not reach as
far as the investigated local zone close to the beam. In all calculations 7-1.6.

For numerical integration of system (1), a difference scheme was used [Ref. 9] of
the "predictor-corrector" class with second order of central spatial approximation.
The presence of model viscosity (evaluated and adjusted in the computational pro-
cess) enabled straight-through calculation of shock waves without appreciable
manifestation of dissipating factors outside of the zone of discontinuity. Non-
uniform grids were used with step hx- hy-OJ in the central zone of C (the total
number of intersections of the grid over the region NP. 3200). The step with re-
spect to time ht 3' 0.05-0.02.

The main series of calculations was done with the use of the function f1(t):

’3 U) -‘ c‘P (— (1/1.)'). “-3. (>0.

The maximum value of “ﬂux: 1.29 is reached at t3 2.12. The quantity J(f1),
which in the first approximation is proportional to the total pulse energy 8.,
we introduce in accordance with the formula

10:) - . MOM ‘I>to>ou

where [t;; t2] is the characteristic time range of action of pulse f1. For f1(t)
we get

100—] twat-13124.5.

Setting tz-O. ”721,36, we find the similar value J(f1) s 5.6.

A number of variants corresponding to fixed numbers “0-0-8. 1.0. 1.2. 1.6, 2.0
and 2.1. were calculated at a constant number 0- 10. Let us consider the main
peculiarities of the investigated nonlinear wave processes based on the resultant
series of numerical solutions at 0<tS6-7.

An increase in heat release near the axis of the beam causes formation of a zone
of compressed heated gas with initial (at t5 1) spatial distributions of p and '1'
close to gaussian. Then intense wave radiation is observed to develop from the
compression zone along with continuing heat release. At Had. this radiation
could have been treated within the framework of the one-dimensional model of di-
vergent cylindrical waves. but in the investigated range of H. and Q. complicated
nonlinear interaction shows up between waves and flow, leading to an appreciably

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘W\ \‘ 
‘\\\\\\\\\\&§§\
‘\‘\‘\\.}§\‘\4\1. - _ 1‘ .5 ‘.
/

“\\
“‘ \\\\ \\\\“

\\
\\
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

two-dimensional pattern of the process. For example, in the direction opposite

to the f low, characteristic nonlinear distortion of the compression wave profile
was observed (fairly rapid at 0-10), terminating in formation of a discontinuous
shock wave front at 0.8<H.< 1.6. At the same time. the wave radiation propagating
in the direction of the flow (1. e. in the direction making angles G‘EI'O; 31/2) to
vector u...) leads to constant outflow of energy from the compression zone. In

the entire series of calculations. formation of local zones of rarefaction (minimum
pressures reaching p(l.7; 0; 6.5)lp830.7 in the variant with H.- 1.2) was observed
behind the compression wave downstream along axis y- 0 at £2 3-1.. This physical
effect is typical of divergent waves that are close to cylindrical [Ref. 10].

Shown in Pig. la-c are pressure surfaces in the part of the computational region
(“El—3; 8], yel0;_5]} at t- 2. lo. 6 for the variant with Q- 10. H.- 1. This series
of graphs gives a clear representation of formation of the shock wave and the
following rarefaction zone. The arrow indicates the direction of the velocity
of the unperturbed gas flow.

It should be noted that in the variants with M..< 1.6 during formation of the shock
wave and its departure upstream. the heat release process still continues (at

least until t = 6-7), and as a result. effects of shock wave interaction appear

on the part of perturbations propagating from the paraxial zone of the beam through
the region of locally subsonic flow behind the shock wave front.

Further contrary mot ion of the curved shock wave (with initial radius of curvature
r = 3-1; at t = lo. y: 2, H.‘ 1.6) is accompanied by a reduction in p.(t) (p.(t)-
“SET,” p(z, 0. t)-p(z., 0, 1) both due to wave radiation with respect to angles 8*,

and as a consequence of spatial divergence of the shock wave (with increasing 1'“).

At Hw<l there is continuous motion of the forming shock wave against the flow
with monotonic reduction in p.(t) (p.(t)-Po. I-(‘)-’-°°. azJal-oM.-i as t-N').

At H.>l (more precisely at 1<H..<l.6 in the series of calculations with Q- 10).
after p" falls to some value ps(H..)>pa. the shock wave stops, and then begins
to move with the f low. The quantity p301.) can be approximately evaluated from
the known formula [Ref. 10] for a plane shock wave:

In 21 ‘ 1-1
____M_.___. M.>1.
(3) p. 1+1 1+1

In variants with H...) 2, the pulse energy is no longer sufficient for reaching

the initial degree of gas compression necessary for shock wave formation, much

less for moving it against the stream. It should also be borne in mind that a
reduction in maximum pressure amplitudes with increasing ".2. 2 is due to a consider-
able extent to enhancement of "convective cooling" of the heat release zone, 1. e.
to an increase in the rate of heat transfer from the region of the beam along

the flow (3Tm/3Mu<0 on Fig. lo).

The described effects are partly reflected in Fig. 2a, b, c. showing graphs of
instantaneous distributions of parameters along axis y-O (solid curves—-p(x. 0.
t)/pa. dashed curves—-T(x, 0, t). dot-and-dash curvesnlocal Mach numbers H(x. 0. t))
for variants with M..- 1.6. 2.0 and 2.1; respectively (Q- 10).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 2. Instantaneous distributions of parameters: p(x. 0, t)/pa-solid curves,
T(x, 0. t)--dashed curves. H(x, 0. t)--dot-and-dash curves; Figures 3, b. c corre-
spond to H.‘ 1.6. 2.0 and 2.4 at Q- 10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Notice should be taken of the appreciably two-dimensional character of the flow
around the absorption zone--the ratio lu/VI close to the been reached a value

of the order of 0.5 in some cases. In this connection. it was practically only

in variants with 11,- 1.2. 1.5 that formation of subsonic zones surrounded by super—
sonic flow was observed behind the shock wave. Behind the region of heat release.
a heat trail propagating downstream is formed that is characterized by relatively
weak dissipation of the temperature maximum

Pm
n’Mm" T”, -.r,,,

   

Pig. 3 Fig. lo

Fig. 3. Longitudinal displacements xw(t) of the pressure maximum. Curves l-lo cor-
respond to 11.,- l.2. 1.6. 2.0. 2.4 at Q- 10

Pig. lo. Influence of number N. (at Q- 10) on values of extrenum parameters. Curves
l-lo correspond to Pmax/Pa’ Tn”. Hnin. -m--min(xw) at Q- 10

Fig. 3 shows the curve f1(t) the defines the given change in the level of heat
release, and also a number of curves xw(t) that give an idea of the nature of
displacement of maximum pressure p" along the 0x axis in variants with 0-10.
WI 1.2. 1.6. 1.0. 2.4 (curves [-1. respectively).

Naturally. the maximum advancement of the forming shock wave counter to the flow

(until stopped) increases with a reduction 1.1 H91. For examle. in the variant

with Men-1.2 the shock wave stops at ti 10. x”: -2.1. when this happens. NOW/Pa“
1.5. which agrees well with the corresponding value of Ps/Pa from (3).

At 11,- 2.4. u“- 3xvlat>0 for the duration of the whole pulse. Let us note that in
variants with M.) 2 at t 2 5 momentary maxinm pressure amplitudes (throughout

the region C) were observed on sloping sections of the compression wave (1. e. at
y>0). For example at Hu-ZJ P05. 3. 6)/pa= 1.710. pu(6) 3p(l.7. 0. 6)? 1.39.

It can be seen from Fig. 2. 3 that the condition ng(t)l 5.0.5 at 0<t<6 when H.=2
is satisfied, resulting in near optimum conditions of continuous energetic addi-
tional pumping of the compression wave; these conditions lead to a value of
(p.,,(t)/pa)max a 2.54 that is maximum for all variants of the given series.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the results of the entire series of calculations considered above with Q- 10,
I - nu). graphs are plotted for the maximum pressures pm()i..)_/pa and temperatures
Tmﬂk). minimum local Mach numbers Ham.) and quantities a..- Inin (z.(t))(z.;<0) --

. ->o .

curves 1-4 respectively on Fig. lo. The extremum values pm, '1'“. H. in each variant
were determined from the set 1, 5410.860; 6).

Thus from Fig. ’0 we can graphically determine the "optimum" Mach number 11:3 1.9
at which the absolute maximum (pg/paMux' PG/pai 2.56 is reached.

An analogous series of experiments was also done for Q- 1 (f- f1(t)). In this
case we found m: 1.3 (pg/pa: 1.18). For the variant with 11,-1.2 (i. e. in the
near optima: mode of generation). graphs of the instantaneous distributions of
parameters along y-O are shown in Fig. 5 (notation analogous to Fig. 2). In
the given case, a shock wave was not observed to form (analogously to 11,-2 at
Q- 10) and for the entire heat release process I:.(1)_|<0.15 06(0; 6)).

P/I’a

 

Fig. 5. Instantaneous distributions of parameters: Mat, 0, t)/p.

--solid curves; T(x.0. t)--dashed curves; H(x. 0. t)--dot-and-

dash curves at 0- l. H. 1.2. Numbers near the curves denote the
values of dimensionless time t

It is characteristic that in the two series of calculations with Q- l and 0-10 the
quantity n*- (113- l)//6= const r 0.3 (the parameter n- (lg-1)] Q is proportional

to the dimensionless number 6 introduced in Ref. 7 for the model of one-dimensional
wave processes with weak nonlinearity). General similarity of solutions with
respect to the parameter n was not observed. which is natural in light of the
considerable differences of the given problem (strong nonlinearity. two—dimen-
sionality. the pulse nature of heat release, etc.) from the conditions of the

one-dimensional model of Ref. 7.

In a series of corresponding one-dimensional calculations (v5 0. g-exp(-x2)),
the maximum pressure amplitudes were considerably higher. which was to be expected

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

since no consideration was taken of wave propagation in the transverse direction.
For example in the one-dimensional problem with f- f1“). 0- 10. VI.- 2 the result
was p“,(lo)/pa i 4.10; Tm: 2.9.

It is natural to assume that at 3g/3t-0 for any fixed number H.>l and given
time interval 1f- (Kt: - t1) 21 that determines the characteristic duration of

the heat release pulse there is some set of pulses (Qf) (similar with respect

to norm leI = QJ(f)/(t2 - t1)) for which the compression wave is generated with
attaimnent of maximum pressure amplitudes p* on line y- 0 at (C(M 3.). This opti-
mum mode of generation. apparently. is realized simultaneously with satisfaction
of the condition

(4) Ir.(t)|<e. mum),
where €<l is a rather small quantity that may depend in turn on Of. It. 8....

In the general case. p5 can be determined either as the absolute maximum of
p(z y, t) (.z yCG £60., In), or as the maximum average pa (for the required time
interval (ta; tb) evaluated with respect to a set of points x. ybelonging to
some subregion LCG.

In the inverse problem being considered here (finding the "optimum" number H:
for a given pulse shape Qf(t)) . the optimality of the selected set (H... of} is
determined to a considerable extent by the smallness of the quantity r. found in
the process of solution. Taking as the initial field the solution of variant
[0- IO. M¢= 1.6} at t- 7 (i. e. after practical cessation of the action of pulse
f, and at 29,0) 3 -0.4), a solution was found for the problem of the effect of
the second pulse f2(t) (Q- [0, Fin-1.6, t> 7. tl-S. 12-1). where

cos‘(u(t-t.)/21.) when tale-r}; :.+r.l.

(s) [AD-{0mm DH“.

(Mm-I43) “'1: 1(1.) -0.75.

Fig. 6. Distributions of

Pb‘n 0. t)/Pan T(XI on t):

H(x, 0. t) in the variant with
q- 10. 11,-1.6, f- fz(t).

(t) 7). Numbers near the curves
correspond to different t.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Graphs of instantaneous distributions of parameters along the 0): axis at 7<t< 11
are shown in Fig. 6 (notation analogous to Fig. 2). In the investigated process
at total pulse energy 3(1,)~8(f.)l8 not only higher amplitudes Pg are reached than
in Fig. 2a (pu(8)/p,= 3.1). but also greater average values pg: 1).,(7; ll) = 2.1. >
pw(0; 7) 3 2.1. where

- , 1 "
p.(¢..¢.) mine)“. t.>¢.>0.

It is characteristic that at t - ll. the field of parameters close to the beam takes
on qualitative and quantitative similarities to the initial field (at t- 7). so
that repeated application of a pulse of type f2 (with ‘m' 12. 12: 1) will give

a presumably analogous effect in the range ¢e(ii;15).

For the sake of comparison, calculation was done where a pulse of type f; (t) was
given as the original pulse (0- 10. H.- 1.6. t>0, t.- l, rz-l). In this case.
a maximum pressure was attained of pulpaipw(l)/pa= 2.5 (xni -0.6).

Obviously the examined phenomenon of "suing" of the actions of sequential pulses
can show up most effectively only in the case of relatively small time intervals
between pulses, and also upon satisfaction of condition (6) (at least with 5-00))
throughout the time of action of pulses fl, f2,...

Thus in the case of a stationary beam position, the conditions that are optimum

(in the sense of attainment of maximum pressure amplitudes) for a sufficiently

long process of generation of intense waves in a flow with P1,)! can be realized

by different methods: either by ensuring continuous energy release by means of

an isolated pulse of at H.=ll§, (and accordingly under condition ((0)), or by using

a series of successive short pulses (Qf)1 (i- l, 2, 3....) synchronized with times
t} corresponding to return of the shock wave to x- 0 (each pulse in the series
being obliged to advance the compression wave against the flow by a certain amount).
1n the second case by special selection of the sequence of pulses (Qf) it is pos-
sible to generate a resonant oscillatory process.

At x"! l. u") 0. or at ms 1. effective additional energetic pumping of the primary
wave is possible only by shifting the bean along the 0x axis behind point xv(t).

i. e. it is necessary that 3g/3tf0. This motion of the beam under certain con-
dit ions may be equivalent to transition to a new value of relative velocity of

the flow It! H...

The problem of determining the optimum conditions of generation brings forward

the general problem of controlling the gasdynamic system to be modeled by by means
of distributed sources of volumetric heat release. The obvious advantages of
modeling are associated with the capability of a rather arbitrary change in the
"controlling functions" a. I (or f, g) directly in the process of calculation

with continuous analysis of some set of parameters from the solution of the problem
on the preceding time interval. The given approach is actually realized in variant
(5), where selection of the algorithm of the controlling action (1. e. selection

of f2(t) for the second pulse) is determined by solution of the problem on the
preceding time interval (0; 7).

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FKHR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.lﬂSEZ(MVLY

Naturally the process of operational "external“ control of heat release sources
(especially within the limits of quite short time intervals) is not always feasible
under the conditions of an actual experiment. However, in some cases internal
physical mechanisms of regulating local levels of heat release are possible. There
are real situations where the coefficient of volumetric absorption 0 increases
strongly in some region with increasing 9 or p (for example the mass coefficient

of absorption am-n/o- const). Then under certain conditions the forming shock
wave may make periodic advances against the flow with Ho) 1. receiving energetic
additional pumping in the zone of the undisturbed beam with practically constant
level of radiation intensity I.

In the case where 0 depends mainly on temperature (for example 3e/3T>>0). the
problem of optimum energy pumping of the compression wave is complicated in View
of displacement of the hot spot along the flow (at any H...) 0).

In studying processes of generation of intense compression waves, an important
question is the form of the function g(x, y) that defines the spatial distribution
of radiation intensity. For example uhen g(x, y)-F[(x/r1)24-(y/r2)2]. where

r2) r1. the zone of energy release extends in the transverse direction over the
wave front, improving the optimality of wave amplification. obviously a technique
of this kind can be used in some cases to increase maximum pressure amplitudes
without changing the overall pulse energy.

The question of possible effects of thermal self-stress of the beam (change in
function 3 along axis 02) at considerable levels of heat release remains open
since an answer would require solution of an appreciably three-dimensional non-
linear problem (in contrast to the linearized problems of Ref. 3. 11).

The author thanks K. I. Artamonov. S. A. Akhmanov and 0. V. Rudenko for discussing
the results and for constructive remarks.

REFERENCES

l. Hayes. J. N., "Thermal Blooming of Rapidly slued Laser Beams". APPL. OPTICS.
Vol 13. No 9, 1976, PP 2072-2076.

2. Ellinvood, J. u.. Hircls, H.. "Density Perturbations in Transonic Sluing Laser
Beams". APPL. OPTICS, Vol [4, No 9. 1975. pp 2238-22b2.

3. Wallace, J.. Pasciak. J., "Thermal Blooming of a Rapidly Moving Laser Beam".
APPL. OPTICS, Vol 15. No 1. 1976. PP 218-222.

6. Belokon', V. A.. Rudenko. 0. V.. Khokhlov, R. V., "Aerodynamic Phenomena in
Supersonic Flow Around a Laser Beam". AKUSTICHESKIY ZHURNAL. Vol 23, No b.
{977. pp 632-63h.

S. Kogan, M. N., Kucherov, A. N., Mikhaylov. A. 8., Fonarev. A. 5.. "Planar Gas
Flows in the Case of Weak Energy Supply". IZVESTIYA ARADEHII NAUK SSSR:
MEKHANIKA ZHIDKOSTI I GAZA. No S. 1978. PP 95-102.

6. Akhmanov. S. A., Rudenko, 0. V., Fedorchenko. A. T.. "Optical Generation of
Intense Waves in Transonic Gas Flows", PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI.
Vol 5. No 15, [979. PP 934-936.

11

INJR (NHHCJAI.I£§EZ(HNLY
10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Karabutov, A. A.. Rudenko, O. V.. ”Nonlinear Plane Haves Excited by Volumetric
Sources in a Medium Moving at ‘rransonic Velocity", AKUSTICHESKIY ZHURNAL.
V01 25. No 1.. 1979. pp 536-541.

Bunkin, F. V.. Malyarovskiy, A. P.. Mikhslevich. V. 6.. Shipulo. G. P. . "Ex-
perimental Study of the Sound Field of a Moving Optical-Acoustic Antenna".
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 5, No 2. 1978. pp (057-659.

Fedorchenko. A. 13., "On a Method of Calculating Two-Dimensional Unsteady Flows
of Viscous Gas in Nozzles". DOKLADY AKADBMII RAW 8881!, Vol 251, No 3. 1980,
pp 578-582.

Landau, L. D.. Litshits. Ye. M., "Mekhanika sploshnykh sred" [Mechanics of
Continuous Media]. Moscow. Gostekhizdat. 1953.

Kogan, M. N., Kucherov. A. N.. "Self-Focusing of a Gaussian Been in a Super-
sonic Gas Flow". NRLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 241. No l. 193“}. pp 48-51.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Nauks". "Akusticheskiy zhurnal". 1981

6610

C50:

8144/1798-3

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORloffuJAl.USE20NLY

CRYSTALS AND SEMICONDUCTORS

UDC 621.378.9:535

REGISTRATION OF PARAMETERS 0F PULSED RADIATION USING THE SEMICONDUCTOR-METAL PHASE
TRANSITION IN VANADIUH DIOXIDE

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 6(108), Jun 81 pp 1363-1366

[Article by L. P. Ageykina. V. N. Gavrilov. V. V. Kapayev, V. G. Hokerov.
I. V. Ryabinin and A. A. Chastov]

[Text] An investigation is made of the feasibility of measuring
the cross sectional area of beams S and the energy E of pulsed
radiation by utilizing the photoinduced stepwise change in the
electrical resistance Ag and coefficient of light transmission
At associated with the semiconductor-metal phase transition in
V02. Based on measurement of the amplitude and duration of the
photoresponse pulses to and At as functions of E and S, an analy-
sis is made of the shape of these two pulse responses. It is
shown that measurements of amplitudes and decay times of pulses
A9 and At can be used for simultaneous determination of s and E
of pulsed radiation.

The strong change in coefficients of reflection R and light transmission t. and

in the electrical resistance 9 accompanying the semiconductor-metal phase transition
in vanadium dioxide [Ref. 1], and the feasibility of optically inducing this phase
transition [Ref. 2] enable the use of V0: for determining the parameters of optical
radiation [Ref. 3. 4]. However. although higher sensitivity was attained in Ref. 3
than for conventional pyroelectric sensors. the principle of controlling a "string"
of metal phase that was used in that research is inconvenient because of the small-
ness of the effective sensing area. The method used in Ref. 2 to record laser
intensity from measurement of the change in R during the phase transition is limited
to the case of short pulses (10" s or less) during which the relaxation of heat

in the substrate can be disregarded. The pulse energies 3 measured in Ref. 2 were
of the order of the latent heat of the phase transition in thin V02 layers.

In this paper we will investigate for the first time the feasibility of simultaneous
determination of two parameters of laser radiation--energy E and cross sectional
area of the beam S-—by recording either the amplitudes of responses with respect

to electrical resistance A0 and light transmission At, or their decay times To and
7t accompanying an optically induced phase transition. In doing this. the require-
ments for focusing of radiation are less severe than in Ref. 3, and the range of
measurable energies is shifted toward higher values than in Ref. 2. The relaxation
of heat into the substrate in our case enables registration of laser pulses with

13

FORIDFFRJAI.USE(NULY
lili¢lﬂﬂCJAl.lElt(lHLY

r. s ,
‘0

at"! rel. units 41"? r 1. units

120 0 w

00 1.0

    

a
a m In an 5.m' 0 m on we N
Fig. 1. Maximum values of response Fig. 2. Transmission signal decay time
with respect to electrical resistance Tt (l-lo) and electrical resistance decay
Anna): (1) and with respect to light time To (5) as dependent on pulse energy
transmission Atm" (2. 3) as dependent E for area 8-2.43 (1). 10.6 (2), 18.5
on the area of irradiation S on a (3). (05.0 (4) and 10-50 Ill2 (5)

wavelength A- 1.06 um for pulse energy
8-660 (1, 2) and 470 ml (3)

duration of 10"3-10'2 s. which gives the capability of working with cw radiation
saurces as well when the appropriate modulators are used.

The V02 specimens were thin epitaxial layers (0.2-0.5 um) produced by precipitation
from a vapor-gas mixture of voc13-coz-uz-Ar on single-crystal sapphire substrates.
Specimen diameter was 30 an. substrate thickness 0.3-0.1: m. The jun) in M!)

at the phase transition was by a factor of 10", the zone of "smearing" of the phase
transition ATt= 3 K, and the width of temperature hysteresis A'i‘u- 0.5 K. For mea-
surements of p and An, point metallic electrodes were sputtered on diametrically
opposed edges of the specimens. The wavelengths A of the pulsed radiation were
0.69 and 1.06 um. We point out that the given method is suitable for any .\< 1.2 pm
(in the vicinity of strong absorption in V0;). The duration of laser pulses 11, was
10" s. E-loO-700 mJ. s- 2-50 In . In the measurements, the V0; specimens were
thermostatically held at 3 K (30.! K) lower than the temperature of "onset" of

the phase transition. Heat exchange conditions were such that the initial state
of the specimen after completion of a laser pulse was restored by heat exchange
with the ambient medium in a time of ~100 a. An AL—107A light-emitting diode with
radiation maximum close to x-0.85 um was used to record the response with respect
to At. There was at least a five-fold jump in : during the phase transition on
this wavelength. The diameter of the readOut beam in the plane of the specimen
was ~0.8 m. Radiation with any A in the range of 0.7 um<A<6 am can be used

for "readout", where the jump in t during the phase transition exceeds a factor

of 2. and the substrate is transparent. me angles of incidence of the recording
and "readout" beam on the specimen were ~10° and 0‘ respectively. The measured
pulse and the pulse responses 60(1) and At (1) were recorded on an oscilloscope
with a relative error of amplitude measurements of :52.

ll.

”OFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was found as a result of the measurements that there is a considerable difference
in the shape of pulse responses with respect to resistance (80(1) and with respect

to transmission At(r): '39- Ann“ was reached in time 18 10"3-10'z s (depending

on E and S). and the fall time 10 was 0.1-1 3; (st-IAt'Mx was reached in r: 10’ 40“
second, and fall time T: was 1-5 s. We point out that since there was a noticeable
change in o with ‘1' not only during the phase transition, but also within the limits
of the semiconductor phase, 1' was defined as the time of fall-off of A0 to a speci-
fied level of 25 kn (for Ag” -250-300 kn) with relative error of 210-121. On

the other hand. since the change in t(’r) took place only in the zone of "smearing"
of the phase transition, wt was taken as the time for At to a certain fraction

of At"lax (Vac). the relative error for r: being 25-72. Curves for Apm". Atw

and To, ‘t as functions of B and S are shown in Fig. 1 and 2.

Now let us turn to discussion of the principal results. Since the substrate is
transparent for the wavelengths that we have chosen. the radiation energy is ini-
tially absorbed in the V02 film, and then transmitted to the substrate after a
characteristic time to- hz/r =10"2 s (r is the coefficient of thermal diffusivity
of the substrate. and h is its thickness). Since this time is commensurate with
1p and the size of the irradiated region was always greater than h. the teaperature
of the film and substrate becomes equal during the action of the pulse. and when
t> 1], the response pulse shape should be determined by the diffusion of heat along
the substrate (since the thickness of the V02 film is much less than h, the role
of the pulse shape at 1') IP reduces to indication of the substrate temperature).

The actual dependences 9(1‘) and t(T) [Ref. 1] of the investigated V02 films in

the vicinity of the phase transition can be approximated by piecewise-linear func-
tions. 1. e. at T1<T<Tz p.t-y'l‘ (y is a coefficient that is different for p and
t; T; and T2 are the temperatures of "onset" and "completion" of the phase transi-
tion) and o. t- const at T>T2 and T< 1'1. In view of the narrowness of At". the
temperature hysteresis can be disregarded here. Let us denote the changes in p and
t during the phase transition by do and 6;. Let us arbitrarily break down the
irradiated film area into three regions 5;, s; and S; in which T>'i‘2. T1<T<Tz
and T<Tg respectively. Then the change in transmission during irradiation can

be written as

Al-6.$,+6'.S,Ib.. (l)

where b,--6,(T§';‘—Tl)i(T,—T,). Here Tng is the maximum temperature of the film at
the given instant in region 52, the coefficient k2>l is introduced to account
for the way that temperature in region 5; depends on the x coordinate in the plane
of the film (the quantity k2 -2 for a linear function 'l‘(x)).

Since the temperature To of thermostatic control of the specimen is close to T1.
we can assume (disregarding heat transfer to the ambient space) that all the energy
E is concentrated in regions 1 and 2. In this case

. 11"”—1‘ rm-r
b..c'r(1‘=_r'+ “k. 2)s'+._52_..—'.s.]. (2)

where c is the heat capacity of the substrate; It; plays the same role as k; in (I);

1"?!” is the maximum temperature in region 81. Expressing 52 from (2) and

 

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'OF1WC1A1.lﬂiE(MQLY

substituting in (l). we readily see that the quantity At increases with decreasing
5;. At 51-0. At- Atnx~35t/[c(Tz-T1)] is determined only by the energy in the
pulse, and is independent of the irradiated area and T"*. This explains the wide

interval of S over which the quantity At'3* does not depend on S (see Fig. l).
The reduction in At (from At”3x) at large 5 is due to drainage of heat from $2 to 83.

For the response with respect to resistance we can write

(3)
d S: (Zl'J—ST’ lrvfm‘

where 1,. Z; are the linear dimensions of regions 5; an
#3:). Substituting 82 from (2) in (3) we can see that An in contrast to At de-
creases with a reduction in $1 (at least at small 31). This shows that the maximum

value of Ac is reached at $1“) (me>T2). i. e. prior to At”. For this reason,
10<Itc. The maximum An depends on the value of T'ax, and hence on the initial

area of irradiation. Thus the given simple arguments enable
only the difference in the shape of responses At(r) and Ap(r). but also to explain

the behavior of the curves shown in Pig. 1 and 2.

A"~6pll+69. lglk‘.

Taking consideration of the fact that there is a segment of At“3*(s) o
is independent of 5. measurements of the dependences of Atmax and Apmax on E and S
can be used for simultaneous determination of the B and s of light beams. Vapori-
zation of the V02 film is observed at high radiation densit . This shows up as

a steep drop in Atmax and Ap“3* as S decreases for 5‘110 mm on Fig. 1. As a result
of meaSurements of the dependences of 10 on B and 5 it was established that like

the case of Atmax(s) in the interval s-10-as mmz. 19 was independent of S, and

was determined only by B. which shows up as coincidence of curves rp(B) for dif—
ferent S (see Fig. 2). 0n the other hand, ‘t depends on both E and S. This dif-
ference in the behavior of to and Tr may be due both to the different definition

of To and r; in our experiment, and to the above-mentioned differences in the nature

of the description of responses with respect to p and t. These data are certainly
be used as well as mea—

of practical interest since measurements of To and r; can
surements of Atmax and Apmax for simultaneous determination of E and S. The former

ble in view of the great simplicity and accuracy of determining

method is prefers
time intervals. Here the value of E is first determined from to (for the response

with respect to An), and then S is determined from this E from
(l-h) on Fig. 2. It has been established that threshold sensitivity with respect

2 for registration with respect to A0, and 0.21 J/cm2 for regis—

to E is 0.1a J/cm
tration with respect to At, and the maximum permissible energy of the registered
rmining

energy is 3b chm2 (at E3 31: Jim1 the material vaporizes). The error of dete
E within these limits is no greater than $101. Our measurements of S ranged from

no to 50 m2.
REFERERCES

l. Hokerov. V. 6., Rakov. A. V., FIZIKA rvsanoco TELA. Vol 10. 1968. p 1556;
Vcrleur. H. H., Barker. A. 8., Berglund. C. N.. PHYS. REV., Vol 172. 1968,

p 788.
Z. Roach, W. R.. Balberg, J., SOLID STAIE COHHS. V01 9. 1971, p 551.

16

FOl:0FFKJAl.USE(HVLY
FIMlCHNHCJAl.USElNVLY

3. Jelks. E. S., Walser, R. 11.. Neal, H. H., APPL. PHYS. LETTS. Vol 26, 1975,
p 355.

lo. Senskov, K. 1., Kazaryan. H. A., Hokerov, V. 6., Pen-ash. G. 6., Petrova. A. 6.,
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 5. 1977. p 625.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 maz'", 'vatovaya elektronika", 1981

6610
C80: 1862/242

17

FOR 0m“. USE ONLY
lﬂﬂl OFINCIAI.IISI1(MULV

UDC 621.373.826.038.825.b
LASER SCREENS MADE OF SINGLE-CRYSTIL ZnSe AND ZnTe FILMS GROWN ON SAPPHIRE
Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 6(108). Jun 81 pp 1380-1382

[Article by A. V. Dudenkova, A. S. Nasibov. E. A. Senokosov. s. D. Skorbun. Yu. H.
Popov, A. N. Usatyy and V. H. Tsaran. Physics Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev. USSR
Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Losing is realized on single-crystal ZnSe and ZnTe films
grown on sapphire with longitudinal electron-beam excitation.

At the present time, the process of making semiconductor laser screens for cathode
ray tubes consists of a number of technological operations: growing single crystals.
making disks from these crystals up to 50 an in diameter with subsequent chemical

and mechanical polishing. application of reflecting coatings and cementing to a
transparent backing [Ref. 1]. 0f considerable interest is the possibility of simpli-
fying the technology of asking laser screens by growing a single-crystal semicon—
ductor film directly on a transparent substrate such as sapphire. In this case.

the reflective coatings that form the optical cavity are applied to the surface

of the semiconductor film on the side where the electron beam is incident on the
backing.

A promising semiconductor material for laser screens that radiate in the blue region
of the spectrum (l a (.50 nm at T-I 80 K) is ZnTe. At present there are a number

of reports on production of single-crystal layers of ZnSe on sapphire backinga

(e. g. Ref. 2-4). These reports note a high degree of perfection of the epitaxial
layers. effective radiative recombination in the region of 445-450 nm. and also
laser emission with transverse electron-beam excitation (Ref. 4]. Material of

much higher quality is required to get lasing with longitudinal electron-beam exci-

tation.

This article is the first to report attainment of lasing with longitudinal electron-
beam excitation of a laser screen in which the active element was epitaxial layers
of ZnSe and ZnTe grown on thin sapphire backings (300 and 500 um thick).

The single-crystal layers of ZnSe and ZnTe were grown by a quasi-closed volume
technique [Ref. 5]. The substrates were sapphire crystal plates of various orienta-
tion. The grown layers of ZnSe 20-50 um thick and 20-50 mm in diameter had quasi-
parallel orientation relative to the substrate with retention of the following
epitaxial relations: (lll) ZnSe parallel to (0001) A110; and (111) ZnSe parallel

to (2110) A1303 0

18

ROI<0ﬁlHCJAI.llﬂB(HVLY
FINI(HHH(JAI.USEGDNLN

l. rel. units A

1

‘10 A-ua

“a “J O.” A, run

Fig. l. Cathodoluninescence spectra
of single-crystal ZnSe films grown
on sapphire

The surface morphology of the ZnSe layers
depended to a great extent on the orientation
of the substrates. Layers grown on sub-
strates (0001) had a smooth surface showing
growth figures in the shape of triangles
or hexgons formed as a result of superpo-
sition of several triangles. For ZnSe layers
on substrates (2110) A1103 a typical feature
is growth in steps with dimensions that “a: quash. nm
reach 0.1-0.5 mm.
Fig. 2. Spectrum of stimulated

x-ray and electron-radiographic studies emission of a laser screen based
and investigation of the spectra of photo on a film of ZnSe on sapphire;
and cathodoluminescence showed that the Bo . 75 Rev, 1- 100 Alan , T- 80 K.
grown layers have a high degree of crys- Thicknesses of the film and sap-
tallinity, with a quantum radiation yield phire plate 40 and 300 um respec-
approaching that of massive single crystals tively

[Ref. 6]. The cathodoluminescence spectra

of such layers (Fig. l) at low excitation levels (energy of excitation electrons
[-10- 20 keV. pumping current density j<1 A/cm’. T-80 K) show lines of emission
of a free exciton (A) and its phonon repetitions (A-L0, A-ZLO).

In making the laser screen the surface of the film was nechanically polished to
get a mirror surface, and then the resultant destroyed layer was etched away by

a polishing etchant. The finished thickness of the investigated ZnSe films was

18 and 40 pm. A silver reflective coating (RI-I922) was applied to the semicon-
ductor film. and a multilayered dielectric mirror (kg-IBOX) was applied to the
sapphire. Excitation was realized in the television mode by an electron beam with
50- 75 keV and diameter on the target of 10 pm. The laser screen was attached

to the sapphire window of a nitrogen cryostat.

Lasing was observed at a current density of about 90 A/cm’. Removal of the reflec-
tive coating applied to the sapphire increased the threshold to 200 A/cm’. Pig. 2

19

F0!‘0'FKJA1.USB(MULY
Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬁ(1Al.U8£10NlY

shows the spectrum of stimulated emission of the laser screen. The distance be-
tween modes corresponds to a compound cavity, and maximum intensity is shown by

the modes that are simultaneously the fundamental of the epitaxial layer and the
cavity formed by the mirrors. The compound mode makeup and the considerable in-
crease in the threshold upon removal of the reflective coating from the sapphire
show that lasing took place in the cavity with external mirror.

Similar results were found on laser screens made from single-crystal ZnSe Films
grown on sapphire (Jnﬁ 90 A/cmz), x- 531 nm; width of the spectrum at m1:—
amplitude AA-0.96 nm. Emission power on the lasing threshold ~50 m").

A reduction in the thickness of the sapphire to 50-100 um or an increase in the
diameter of the electron beam to [00 um should reduce the lasing threshold several
times. Practical use of such a technique for making laser screens necessitates

an increase in active element diameter to 50 mm, improvement of semiconductor layer
homogeneity. and a higher quantum yield.

REFERENCES

l. Basov, N. 6., Bogdankevich. 0. V., Kamenev. V. H., Papusha, V. P., Pocher-
nyayev. I. M.. Naaibov. A. S.. Pechenov, A. N., DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK 8858,

Vol 205, 1972, p 72.
2. Ratcheva, T. H., Dragieva, PHYS. STAT. SOL., Vol A 29. 1975, p 579.
3. Stutius, V., APPL. PHYS. LBTTS, Vol 33, 1978, p 656.

4. Dudenkova. A. V., Popov, Yu. H.. Senokosov, B. A.. Skorbun, S. 0., Usatyy.
A. N., Tsaran. V. H.. KRATKIYB SOOBSHCHBNIYA P0 FIZIKE, FIAN, Vol 4, 1978.

p 3.

5. Senokosov. B. A., Usatyy, A. N.. Tsaran. V. H.. Tsirulik. L. 0., in: "Fiziche-
skiye protsessy v geterostrukturakh i nekotorykh soyedineniyakh A236" [Physical
Processes in Heterostructures and Some A’s‘ Compounds]. Kishinev. Shtiintsa,
I974, p 85.

6. Dudenkova. A. V., Popov, Yu. H.. Senokosov, B. A., Skorbun, S. 0., Tsaran,
V. H.. "Tezisy dokladov XXVII soveshchaniya po lyuminestsentsii (kristallo-
fosfory)" [Abstracts of Reports to the Twenty-Seventh Conference on Lumines—
cence (Crystal Phosphors)]. Ezerniyeki, Latvian SSR. 13-16 Hay, 1980. p 203.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovays elektronika”, 1981

6610
C80: [862/242

20

FOI<0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FLUID DYNAMICS

UDC 532.1353532.526
BOUNDARY LAYER OF A BODY OF REVOLUTION IN A DRAG-REDUCING POLYMER SOLUTION

Moscow IZVBSTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: HEKHANIKA ZHIDKOSTI I GAZA in Russian No 3,
May-Jun 81 (manuscript received 8 Aug 79) pp 60-48

[Paper by v.3. Amfilokhiyev, V.V. Droblenkov. 0.1. Kanevskiy and N.P. Nazayeva.
Leningrad]

[Text] The reduction of the viscous resistance of solids moving in a
drop liquid by means of dissolving certain long molecular chain polymers
in it must be recognized as one of the most promising methods of de-
creasing resistance at the present time [1]. Since the major effect

of the introduction of polymers is a sharp reduction in turbulent fric-
tion. it is natural to make use of a semi-empirical turbulence theory
for the calculation of flows of weak polymer solutions. One of these
theories [2] was successfully applied to the calculation of the bound-
ary layer at a flat plate [3] and a current with a pressure gradient
near the flat contour (4].

A possible method of calculating an axially symmetric boundary layer
is presented in this paper for the case of the notion of a solid in
weak polymer solutions with a constant concentration. The method is
based on the utilization of the velocity profile and a system of in-
tegral equations which most completely take into account the effects
of the transverse curvature of the streamlined surface. The compu-
tational scheme makes it possible to accOunt for a change in flow
conditions in the boundary layer.

1. One of the major features of the calculation of an axially symmetric boundary
layer is the necessity of taking into account the transverse curvature of the stream-
lined surface. and related to this, the finite thickness of the layer as compared to
the local cross-sectional radius of the solid of revolution. It is insufficient to
calculate the axially symmetric boundary layer as a thin layer, i.e., with the as-
sumption that 6 << R", where 6 is the boundary layer thickness and RV is the cross-
sectional radius of the solid. especially in the case where a polymer solution flows
around the solid. and where the calculation errors which follow from the assumption
that 6 << Rw can substantially distort the gain predicted through the use of poly—

mers. For this reason. it is expedient to handle the calculation of the boundary
layer of a solid of revolution as a "thick" one, for which one can use either partial

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

differential equations for the boundary layer, or integral relationships. From a
practical viewpoint, the integral equations are more attractive, first of all be-
cause of their economy, and secondly, because of the fact that in their application,
no data is needed on the fine turbulent mechanisms, and only a successful approxi-
mation is needed for the profiles of the longitudinal components of the averaged
velocity. At the same time, it has been demonstrated for a plane boundary layer

[5, 6], that if the family of these profiles is specified as a multiparameter family,
the results are not inferior in terms of precision to those obtained by means of

differential techniques, while accounting for the introduction of polymer additives
into the £10., causes no fundamental difficulties [3. la].

The integral method of [7] is adopted in the following for the calculation of the
boundary layer on a body of revolutionaround which the polymer solution flows,
where this method is based on a three parameter family of profiles for the longi-
tudinal component of the averaged velocity, which has the form:

(1. 1) Uh" x" In (v'Y/v) +IH-x"l|(X) m rm) +/( rm.)

Here, U is the longitudinal averaged velocity, v* - er7p is the dynamic velocity,

Tu - r"(X) is tangential stress at the streamlined surface. X is the longitudinal
coordinate which coincides with the meridian line circling the solid, 0 is the fluid
density, r I 0.6 is the first constant of turbulence, Y is the transverse coordinate
normal to the meridian line circling the solid, 3 is the second constant of turbu-
lence or the parameter which takes into account the influence of the polymers," is the
Coles function, f is a function which takes into account the influence of the trans-
verse curvature of the streamlined surface and v is the kinematic fluid viscosity
coefficient.

It can be seen from formula (1.1) that the first two terms take the form of the usu-
al logarithmic law, justified in the region near the wall for practicallyanyturbu-
lent boundary layer, while the third term reflects the special features of turbulent
intermixing in the outer region, where the Coles parameter n(x) makes it possible
to take into account the influence of the longitudinal curvature of the solid and
the external pressure gradient. To facilitate the calculations, the form of the
function W(Y/6) was simplified as compared to the usually employed cosine curve [8]:

(1.2) W()'/6)-6(Y/6)*—'.(r/n)'

The approximation (1.2) used here satisfies the boundary conditions “(0) - H'(0) -
- W'(1) - 0, "(1) = 2 and is in sufficiently good agreement with experimental data.
The form of the fourth term of the right side of (1.1) was determined from various
considerations in [8, 9];the proposed functionsweredifferent in form, but yielded
close results numerically. Since the form of both functions is rather complex [8],
a simple parabolic approximation is used instead of them:

( l . 3) I ( YIR.) -/1 x" ( $713.)“

which when A . ~0.46 practically coincides with the curves of [8, 9]. The match

of this approximation to the experimental data for gradient-free. axially symmetric
flow was confirmed in [7] by means of comparing the results of experiments on long-
itudinally streamlined cylinders [10].

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By substituting expression (1.2) and (1.3) in formula (1.1), and converting to
dimensionless quantities, we obtain:

(1") um"-x" In‘(mu. lie y) +B+ IIx"[6(y/6.)'—4 (ﬁlm’H‘
+Ax“(y/r.)-'
6,-6/L. y-Y/L, z=X/L. r.-=RJL
m—v‘lU., u=-U/U.. (Ir-Uh)... Rc-v.L/v

Here, I. is the length of the solid, v. is the unperturbed flow velocity, 05 -
1150:) is the velocity at the outer boundary of the boundary layer.

Expression (1.4) defines the dimensionless family of profiles of the longitudinal

averaged velocity in a boundary layer containing three dimensionless parameters:
610:). ﬁx) and Mat).

The following are integrated to determine these parameters: the momentum equation,
the mass capture equation and the law governing the resistance, which follows from
expression (1.4). The integral momentulrelationship is used in a form which con-

tains integral areas and is suitable for a thick, axially smetric boundary layer:

C.
:10. +_‘_$(0,‘+201”)—r.w'
d: Us d1

om] (i—u)RdY. o“- I u( t-umdr

(1.5)

 

O
«ye-ow}. eat-0"”). RwR.+YmsB

Here, 0* is the displacanent area (per radian of the angular cylindrical coordinate),
s“ 13 the area of loss of momentum, R is the radial cylindrical coordinate, 8 is the

angle betveen the axis of the solid of revolution and the tangent to the line circling
it at the meridian.

The integration of the differential continuity equation over the thickness of the
boundary layer, or the utilization of the equality of the fluid mass entering and
leaving a section of the boundary layer of length dx, gives a mass capture equation
which has the following form for an axially sy-netric flow:

I
' .‘lU.(U—0') I-‘m— 1‘-

(1 . 6) I! '0”. (M M Us
x
0 == IIMI'I‘ If.b+0,56‘ cos b. If.-R.+6 cos p
, .

Here. a is the boundary layer area, R5 is its outer boundary radius and V6 is the
transverse averaged component of the velocity at the boundary of the layer.

The processing of the experimental data of [11] made it possible to establish the
fact that the right side of equation (1.6) can be replaced by a mass capture func-
tion in form found in [8], proposed for a plane boundary layer, if the argunent of
this function is computed not in terms of the thicknesses, but rather in terms of
the areas of the boundary layer:

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(In/(IX — VJ U A -I'.'(II,) -(),().‘$06 (11,—3) "'-“’

(1'7) II.—(0.—0.‘)/0.“, 0,-0/1.’

Taking (1.7) into account, equation (1.6) can be written in the form:
(1.3) dlu.(n.—0.’)]/dz-£un

The law governing the resistance is derived from the velocity profile (1.4) and
can be written in differential form as follows:

 

l I (16. dﬂ 1 u do)
_ + .— _ __ _.. _
(1.9) ( (5' 35.",3'" dz +2 .2 +( (o + u' )7:-
I (In. 116..“ (1'. (”3
I.- — —I_—— -x m—
In 1’! 3:." (1: dz

In the absence of polymers, the last term disappears, since in this case, B - coast.-
- 4.9.

The Runge—Kutta method was used to integrate the systan of three ordinary different-
ial equations (1.5), (1.8) and (1.9). The calculations were performed on a DESK-6
digital computer programmed in “SOL-60 and a Yes-1022 computer programmed in PORT-
RAN. The initial conditions for the systa of differential equations were derived
using one of three procedures:

1. If the boundary layer was assumed to be turbulent, starting with the critical
bow point, then at a distance along the axis of Z - 0 to 0.2, its characteristics
were determined just as for a flat plate with the corresponding Reynolds mnber.

2. If the boundary layer was calculated assming that the change of flow modes oc-
curs at a conditional laminar-turbulent transition point, then the momentum contin-
uity condition 8L - 91- was used at this point, where the subscripts L and 1' cor-
respond to the laminar and turbulent portions. The laminar section was computed

by the conventional single paraneter technique, while the transition cross-section
was defined either as the cross section where an agitator is located,

or on the basis of the empirical formula of [7]:

noun-exp(44.9—14.111), Rc”-Uod"lv, ”-45%"

(1.10) . .
a... _[u—um'. au-j u(i—u)d}'

Here, the double subscript LT indicates the transition cross-section, 6* is the
displacement thickness and 6“ is the momentum loss thickness. Formula (1.10) is
justified for a degree of free turbulence of e - 0.3 - 0.71. The systan of the
following transcendental equations was solved to determine the initial values of
5LT: Hu- and um: 91* - of (61), ll - 6*]6“ and (1.4) for the case where y - 61 and
u - u.

3. If the boundary layer was calculated taking into account the laminar, transition
and turbulent flow regions, then the characteristics of the laminar layer were de-
termined using the method of L.G. Loytsyanakiy, while the parameters of the transi-
tion region were determined on the basis of the distribution of the intermixing

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coefficient using the procedure proposed in [12]; following after the center of the
transition region, where the intermixing coefficient was taken as 0.5, a cross-
section was chosen in which the momentum lore area of the laminar boundary layer
calculated from the critical bow point matched that of the turbulent boundary layer
which was calculated from the transition onset point.

hJE
3;; r

 

Figure 1.

It must be noted that for all three variants of the determination of the initial
conditions, the characteristics of the turbulent portion of the boundary layer
differ slightly from one another if the laminar-turbulent transition occurs far

away from the bow extremity of the solid, something which almost always occurs at
Reynolds numbers of practical interest.

The rcsults of calculating the boundary layer of the solid of revolution described in
[11]. in the case where an ordinary viscous liquid flows around it. were compared
with the experimental data of [11] for Re - 1.262 - 106 in Figure 1. Curves l, 2
and 3 correspond to the dimensionless characteristics of the boundary layer, 62 -
10251, 92 - 103e"/rw and 92 - 1039'1"*/r‘,. Curves 11 and 12 take the form of exten-
sions of curves and 3. drawn to a scale of 1:10. Curve 4 corresponds to the dis-
tribution of the local coefficient of friction Cj - Ztk/pU I 2u2, where c - 103Cf.
Experimental points 5, 6, 7 and 8, which are given in the ata of paper [11]. cor-
respond to these same characteristics. As can be seen from the comparison made
above, the results of the calculations are in good agreement with the measurement
data, practically right out to the very tail end extremity of the body.

If the boundary layer is calculated as a thin one, i.e.. the assumption that 6 <<
<< RU is used. then 6*Ru must be substituted for 0*. 6"]!" for 8** and GR"’ for e

in equations (1.5) and (1.8), while one must set f(Y/Ru) - 0 in expressions (1.1).
(1,4) and (1.9) (this can be done by formally setting A - 0). The results

of the calculation of the local coefficient of friction and the boundary layer
thickness, performed with these asamptions for the same body of revolution, are
shown in Figure 1 (curves 9 and 10). The use of such simplifications leads to the
fact that the agreement with the experimental data in the region of the tail extre-
mity of the body becomes worse. Thecitedresults confirm the expediency of taking
into account the finite thickness of the axially symmetric boundary layer.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. When calculating the boundary layer of a solid of revolution in a polymer solu-
tion, equations (1.5) and (1.8), which essentially take the form of the laws of
momentum and mass conservation, do not change. In equation (1.9), the last term

de/dx i 0, since the parameter 3, included in the velocity profile (1.4), is not
a constant in a polymer solution.

Several semi-empirical theories exist at the present time, in which relationships
are proposed for B as a function of the properties of the polymer and the charac-

teristics of the polymer-solvent system. In the simplest of them. and apparently,
the first one to appear. it is proposed that B be treated as a sum [13]:

I; - IL: .\I.'. (ILI-u‘cmsl)
(2.1) r‘~'.r ': .\I;‘=U. II'>I'.': All-a In (NAIR)

Here. 80 - 4.9 (for a tube, 5.5), AB is the "polymer increment"; the coefficient
a depends on the kind and concentration of the polymer, while V0 is the threshold

dynamic velocity, starting at which the presence of polymers in the solution be-
comes effective. We obtain from formula (2.1):

(2 . 2) {III/(Irn-ahnu.) "(Mould/d1

Expression (2.2) should be substituted in (1.9), and relationships (2.1) substi-
tuted in (1.4). The values of o and v3 should be determined experimentally. For
example, {gr a solution of “SR-201 polyethylene oxide with a mass concentration

of c - 10 they are equal to V0 I 0.023 mlsec and o - o(c, H) - 4.2 - 4.5 (it was

assumed in the calculations that o - 4.343; M is the molecular weight of the poly-
met).

A more sophisticated theory to account for the polymer increments was developed in

[l - 4]. In this case. one of the possible and simplest approximations of the
parameter 8 has the form [14]:

(2. 3) Il- s.xl«"" 3.9, Ful --bnn‘.tg[1.7(u'/v.'-1)],
ll=nll,37 ill-cl]: ”,2 MP”)

As can be seen from the formulas cited here, it is not necessary with this theory
to determine the two parameters from experiments, since the first of them, b -

b(c, H), similar to a in Meyer's correlation of (2.1), is computed from the uni-
versal function (2.3), while:

'k

(2.4) v0 - nn'°'89

where D depends only on the type of polymer. The application of (2.4) to “SR-301
polyethylene oxide (n - 1.37 . 1o“ m/aec) yields v3 - 0.0246 m/sec, which is almost
no different than the experimental value given above. The use of (2.3) yields a
value of b = 0.49.

It should be noted that the structure of expressions (2.3) is more reasonable than
that of relationships (2.1). Using formulas (2.1), it turns out that at high rates
of motion (v* + c). the polymer effect increases without bound (3 # I). The use

of formulas (2.3) when v + a leads to a value of P a F, - 0.235. i.e., there is

no increase in the velocity that can lead to a reduction in the resistance of more
than that corresponding to B - 17.3.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Differentiating expression (2.3) with respect to 3, taking into account the fact

that v - «my... yields:
ﬂ ‘- __§.976bF"- ‘(u./v.‘) d
(2.5) «L: 1+[I,—~7(wu.(u-lu.’) —1)]‘d? _("’"‘)

Attention is drawn to the fact that using Heyer's correlation, the increment added
to differential equation (1. 9), besides the variables u and u , contained only the
constant parameter a, while in accordance with the theory of 1 - 4], the added
increment contained the additional ratio v..lvo related to the rate of travel. The
influence of this added component is rather complex. but when v. . 0, it turns out
that dB/dx + 0, i.e., the impact of polymers present in the flow in the case of the
transition to a resistance law in differential form for very high velocities, is
primarily taken into accOunt solely through the initial conditions, in which the
undifferentiated resistance function plays a part. It is not precluded that such

a result is obtained only by virtue of the form of the proposed approximation (2.3).
In order to avoid the "disappearance" of dB/dx at large values of v.,* in the denom-
inator of expression (2.5). there should be a linear function of v./v°, rather than
a square law. One can arrive at the desired result if the arctangent in the second
of the formulas of (2.3) is replaced by the logarithm:

(2'6) nrctg [i 7(v‘lv. ‘-1)]za In (u‘Iu.')

For a range of variation of the argument v*/v; - l to 10, good agreement is obtained
between the left and right sides of expression (2. 6) when a - 0. 9‘5. In this case,
strict equality occurs when v*/v* - a. 4. Using this value, one can choose the co-
efficients of the linear expression with which it is desireable to replace the
square law in the denominator of formula (2.5). As a result, one can derive:

dB 8.976bF"-‘ (L'./v.‘) (1

(2'7) 7;: 1.1-9.826lmu.(v-/a.’)-II Jim”)

It can be seen that when v. + 0 (v*+ al»), expression (2.7) automatically changes
over to a form analogous to (2.2). This is responsible for the possibility in the
case of using Meyer's correlation of not seeking out a each time experimentally,
but rather determining its value analytically by means of the parameters of the
theory of [1 - lo]:

(2.8) m - 0.:913bl’ 1-9.2b

'For the example considered here, formula (2.8) yields a I 4. 48. The threshold
value of the dynamic velocity for both theories can likewise be calculated from
formula (2.1.).

-1.6

The calculations of the boundary layer of the solid of revolution described in [11)
were carried out for the case of streamline flow around it by a golution of

”SR-301 polyethylene oxide with a molecular weight of H = 3 . 10 at a concentra-
tion of c - 10' in two variants: using Meyer's correlation and based on the theory
of [1 - 4]. All of the calculations were performed for two variants of the speci-
fication of the initial data:

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure k.

1. L - 1.578 a, v. - 0.913 I/sec, Re - 1.262 - 106
2. L - 3.2 u, v. - 15.0 n/sec, Re - 3.057 - 107

The results of calculations of the dimensionless integral areas of the boundary
layer and the coefficient of local friction are given in Figures 2 - 6, where the

designations are analogous to those of Figure 1. In these figures, curves 1 cor-
respond to streamline flow around the solid by an ordinary viscous liquid,

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

curves 2 are for calculations using Meyer's correlation and curves 3 are calcula-
tions based 02 the theory of [l - la]. The solid curves apply to a Reynolds number
of 1.262 ° 10 , while the dashed curves are for Re - 3.057 ~ 107; curves ’0, 5 and
6 take the torn of extensions of curves 1, 2 and 3 on a scale of 1:10.

 

velocity of the body. Thus, the overall coefficient of frictional resistance falls
off by approximately 202 when the solid is subjected to streamline flow by a pol -

Iner solution, as compared to streamline flow of the solvent when Re - 1.262 ' 10 ,

and when Re - 3.057 - 107, the decrease is 502. The nature of the distribution

the results obtained for a flat plate [3]. In the case of a smaller Reynolds num-
ber, somewhat of a divergence is observed between the results of calculations using

various correlation formulas. which take into account the influence of polymer addi-
tives on the flow characteristics. when Re - 3.057 - 10

on both theories yield very close results. Because of the definite divergence of

The profiles of the longitudinal conponent of the averaged velocity determined from
the calculation results are shown in Figure 5. The profiles were plotted for a
cross-section with a dimensionless abscissa of z - 0.662 in coordinates of 0 -

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

3.

5.

9.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 IBLIOGRAPHY

Sedov L.I., Vasetskaya N.c., Ioselevich V.A., "0 raschetakh turbulentnykh
pogranichnykh sloyev s malymi dobavkami polimsrov" ("On Calculations of Turbu-
lent Boundary Layers with Small Amounts of Polymers Added"], in the book,
"Turbulentnyye techeniya" ["Turbulent Flows"], Moscow, Nauka Publishers, 1970,
p 205.

Vasetskaya N.G.. Ioselevich V.A., "0 postroyenii poluempiricheskoy teorii
turbulentnosti slabykh rastvorov polimerov" ["On the Construction of a Semi-
empirical Theory for the Turbulence of weak Polymer Solutions"], IZV. AN 8583,
14th [PROCEEDINGS OF THE USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES, FLUID AND GAS MECHANICS],
1970, No 2, p 136.

Vasetskaya N.G., Ioselevich V.A., "Polimernyye dobavki v pogranichnom aloye
ploskoy plastiny" (“Polymer Additives in the Boundary Layer of a Flat P1ate"],
NAUCH. TRUDY INSTITUTA MEKH. MGU [SCIENTIFIC PROCEEDINGS OF THE INSTITUTE OF
MECHANICS 0F MOSCOW STATE UNIVERSITY], 1976, No 32, p 178.

. Ioaelevich V.A., Pilipenko V.N., "0 turbulentnom techenii zhidkosti a polimernymi

dobavkami v pogranizhnom sloye s prodol'nym gradiyentom davleniya" [“On the Tur-
bulent Flow of a Fluid with Polymer Additives in a Boundary Layer with en Arbi-
trary Pressure Gradient"], DOKL. AN SSSR [REPORTS OF THE USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES]
1973. Vol 213, No 6, p 808.

"Computation of Turbulent Boundary Layer", 1968, Proc. APOSR-IPR Stanford Confer-
ence, Ed. Kline S.J., Morkovin M.V., Sovran G.. Cockrell 0.3., 1969, Vol 1.

. Levkovich, Khodli, Khorlok, Perkins, "Semeystvo integral'nykh metodov dlya

rascheta turbulentnogo pogranichnogo sloya" ["A Family of Integral Methods for
the Calculation of a Turbulent Boundary Layer"], RAKETNAYA TERENIKA I KOSMONAVTTKA
[ROCKET ENGINEERING AND ASTRONAUTICS], 1970, Vol 8, No 1, p 51.

Amfilokhiyev V.B., Droblenkov V.V., Mazayeva N.P., Shklyarevich A.I., "Raschet
eksperimental'noye iasledovaniye tolstogo osesimmetrichnogo turbulentnogo
pogranichnogo sloya" ["The Calculation and Experimental Investigation of a Thick
Axially Symmetric Turbulent Boundary Layer"], in the book, "Abstracts of Reports
to the All-Union Scientific and Engineering Symposium on Questions of Improving
the Propulsion Qualities and Operational Characteristics of Domestically Produced
Ships of the Future". Leningrad, Sudostroyeniye Publishers, 1978, p 5.

. Fedyaevskiy K.K., Ginevskiy A.S., Kolesnikov A.V., "Raschet turbulentnogo

pogranichnogo sloya neszhimayemoy zbidkoati" ["The Calculation of the Turbulent
Boundary Layer of an Inconpressible Pluid"], Leningrad, Sudostroyenie Publishers,
1973, 256 pp.

Rao C.N.V., "The Law of the Hall in a Thick Axisynnetric Turbulent Boundary
Layer", TRANS. ASHE, SERIES 3., JOURNAL APPL. MECE., 1967, No l. p 237.

Hillmarth w.w., Uinkel R.E., Shsrma L.K., Bogar T.J., “Axially symmetric Turbu-
lent Boundary Layers on Cylinders: Mean Velocity Profiles and "all Pressure
Fluctuations", J. FLUID. MECH., 1976, Vol 76, Pt. 1. p 35.

30

IHDR OFINCJAL USEZCNHLY
11.

12.

13.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Patel V.C.. Nakayana A., Damian R., “Measure-eats in the Thick Axisyunetric
Turbulent Boundary Layer Near the Tail of a Body of Revolution", J. FLUID MECH..
1974, Vol 63, Pt. 2, p 345.

Droblenkov V.V.. Kanevskiy 0.1., "0 postroyenii netoda rascheta ploakogo
pogranichnogo sloya v slabykh rastvorakh polinerov s laminarnoy, perekhodnoy i
turbulentnoy zonani techeniya" [”On the Formulation of 3 Computational Tech-
nique for a Plane Boundary Layer in Weak Polymer Solutions with Lalinar,
Transition and Turbulent Flow Regions"), 12V. AN SSSR. MZhG, 1977, No 3, p #2.

Meyer H.A., "A Correlation of Frictional Characteristics for Turbulent Flow of
Dilute Viscoelastic Non-Newtonian Fluids in Pipes“, AIChB JOURNAL, 1966. Vol 12,
No 3, p 522.

Vasetskaya N.G., Ioselevich V.A., Pilipenko V.N., "Mekhanicheskaya destruktsiya
polimernykh nolekul v turbulentnon potoke" ["The Mechanical Destruction of
Polymer Molecules in a Turbulent Flow"], in the book, "Nekotoryye voprosy
mekhaniki sploshnykh sred" ("Sane Questions of the Mechanics of Continuous Media"]
Moscow, Moscow State University Publishers, 1978, p 55.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Mekhanika zhidkosti i gaza",

1981

8225
C50: 8154/1532

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFHKJAl.USE(MVLY

LASERS AND HASBRS

UDc 621.371:538.566:551.Sll.6
pnopAcArxon or LASER BEAM IN TURBULENT ATMOSPHERE

Novosibirsk RASPROSTRANENIYE LAZERNOGO PUCHKA V TURBULENTNOY AIMOSPBRB in Russian
1981 (signed to press 18 Feb 81) pp 2-8

[Annotation, preface and table of contents from book "Propagation of a Laser Beam
in a Turbulent Atmosphere", by V. L. Mironov. Institute of Physics of the Atmosphere.
Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo “Nauka"]

[Text] This book examines the physical principles of the influence that spatial
localization of a field of wave beams has on processes of fluctuations of laser
emission during propagation in a turbulent atmosphere. Methods are given for ap-
proximating the solution of the wave equation for the statistical moments of the
beam field based on spectral expansions.

A theoretical and experimental investigation is made of the influence that spatial
localization of the wave field has on the patterns of turbulent broadening of the
angular dimension, distortions of spatial coherence of the field. fluctuations

of intensity and phase. and random refraction of laser beams. An examination is
made of methods of determining parameters of atmospheric turbulence by transillu-
mination of the atmosphere with a narrow laser beam. Results are systematized
for the first time on fluctuations of laser emission accompanying lidar location
in a turbulent atmosphere.

The book is addressed to specialists in the field of wave propagation, and also
to developmental engineers specializing in atmospheric optical laser systems.

Preface

The atmosphere has a considerable influence on propagation of optical waves. At-
mospheric gases and aerosols are chiefly responsible for energy attenuation of
optical radiation, whereas fluctuations of the index of rrfraction of atmospheric
air that arise with turbulent intermixing of layers with different temperatures
lead to considerable random distortions of the field of coherent optical waves.

The timeliness of research on processes of fluctuations of laser emission in the
turbulent atmosphere is dictated by the start that has been made on using laser

optical systems intended for operation under terrestrial atmospheric conditions.
In fact. the information capacity of optical communication lines, spatial and

32

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NULY
IIIICHWNCJAl.lEﬂE(M§LY

temporal resolution of lidars. the accuracy of geodetic laser instruments and other
technical characteristics of laser optical systems can be evaluated only with con—
sideration of fluctuations of a field of optical beams. 0n the one lxand. the
results of investigations of the field of a laser beam are used for calculating

the limiting possible technical characteristics of laser instruments with operation
in the atmosphere. 0n the other hand. they are necessary in the process of utili-
zation of laser equipment under a variety of weather conditions. The latter circum-
stance is due to the considerable variations in technical characteristics of laser
optical systems as a result of changes in meteorological conditions. so that in
some cases the very feasibility of using them is determined on the basis of oper-
ative forecasting of the fluctuations in the field of the laser beam.

Questions of fluctuations of laser emission in a turbulent atmosphere have been
studied especially intensely over the last decade. This problem is a component
part of the broader scientific field of radio physics--propagation of electromag-
netic waves in randomly inhomogeneous media—whose fundamentals have been formu-
lated in papers by eminent Soviet scientists A. H. Obukhov. s. M. Rytov, V. I.
Tatarskiy and L. A. Chernov. Results of investigations of fluctuations of optical
waves in a turbulent atmosphere have been generalized on certain stages in several
surveys and monographs. Early surveys and a monograph by V. I. Tatarskiy give
mainly the results of theoretical and experimental studies of weak fluctuations

in the field of optical waves in a turbulent atmosphere. where the relative disper-
sion of intensity fluctuatic s is small compared with unity. All major conclusions
on the principles governing field fluctuations are formulated here for the simplest
types of waves—-planar and spherical. The method of geometric optics and S. H.
Rytov's method of smooth perturbations were the principal working methods in theo-
retical studies of weak fluctuations of the field of optical waves.

The development of lasers has brought up fundamentally new problems in the area

of propagation of optical waves in a turbulent atmosphere. The small angular di-
vergence of laser emission has enabled transmitting the energy of optical waves
over great distances in the terrestrial atmosphere with ease. At the same time,
the high spatial coherence of laser radiation has made it possible to produce col-
limated and focused spatially bounded wave beams at a considerable distance from
the source without difficulty. In studying the process of propagation of laser
emission. a problem has arisen on the one hand of so-called strong fluctuations

of the intensity of the optical wave (relative dispersion of fluctuations exceeds
unity) that are caused by multiple scattering on inhomogeneities of the medium.

0n the other hand. it has become necessary to study the influence that the diffrac-
tion parameters of wave beams responsible for their original angular divergence
have on processes of fluctuations of laser emission in a turbulent atmosphere.

The solution of these problems is reflected in more recent surveys and monographs.

The tasks that have been formulated have required first and foremost the develop-
ment of fundamentally new methods of the theory of wave propagation in randomly
inhomogeneous media with simultaneous consideration of multiple scattering of waves
by inhomogeneities in the medium. and diffraction of the wave beam by the radiating
aperture. The next stage in solving the problem of fluctuations of laser emission
in the turbulent atmosphere was solution of specific physical problems and theo—
retical investigation of the patterns of field fluctuations under different con-
ditions of propagation in the atmosphere and beam diffraction parameters.
FOI‘OFF1C1AI.UEEIMNLY

As a consequence of using different kinds of hypotheses and assumptions made in
constructing the theory of multiple scattering and in describing the statistical
properties of the field of the index of refraction in the turbulent atmosphere.
the solution of physical problems of this kind are always only an approximate de-
scription of real processes of fluctuations of the field of the laser beam in the
atmosphere. Therefore. experimental verification of the major conclusions of ap-
proximate theories is an absolutely essential research stage. Of course. the part
played by experimental studies is not limited to checking the main relations of

a theory. in particular. it was experiments that first revealed the fundamentally
new phenomena of saturation of relative dispersion of strong fluctuations of inten-
sity. and saturation of focusing of laser radiation. that were later theoretically
substantiated.

The results of theory and experiment cannot be compared without access to means

of on-the-spot measurement of atmospheric turbulence. 0n long transmission paths
(from a few hundred meters to tens of kilometers) the determination of parameters

by meteorological sensors that measure characteristics at isolated points become
either less informative when a limited number of sensors is used. or else too expen-
sive and inconvenient for practical use if the sensors are to be placed along the
laser beam. In this connection it becomes necessary to develop methods of de-
termining the turbulence parameters by using the laser beam itself through measure-
ments of the distortion of the light field. One of the advantages of these methods
is that they give the integral characteristics of turbulence along the transmission
path. At the same time, they permit reconstruction of the spatial distribution

of these characteristics by methods of solution of inverse problems of optics of
atmospheric turbulence. We can conclude from this that development of laser methods
of determining turbulence parameters is an essential component part of studying
fluctuations of the field of a laser beam in a turbulent atmosphere.

Methods of the theory of laser beam propagation. results of theoretical and experi-
mental studies of the patterns of optical wave field fluctuations. laser methods

of determining optical parameters of atmospheric turbulence. systematized infor-
mation on the statistical characteristics of fluctuations in the index of refraction
in the aggregate make up the physical foundations of engineering prediction of
fluctuations of the field of a laser beam in a turbulent atmosphere. which for
practical purposes is the most important result of physical studies.

This monograph presents the results of theoretical and experimental investigations
that encompass the above-mentioned components. and that are devoted to the study of
the influence that the diffraction parameters of wave beams have on processes of
fluctuations of laser radiation in a turbulent atmosphere. This problem has been
only partly studied in one previous monograph.

The first chapter contains background required for the presentation on turbulent
fluctuations of the index of refraction in the atmosphere. and methods of the theory
of propagation of electromagnetic waves in the optical band in a turbulent medium.
The second chapter is devoted to exposition of methods of approximate solution

of the stochastic wave equation in a turbulent medium. Chapters three through
seven contain the results of investigations of angular broadening (chapter 3).
coherence distortions and phase fluctuations (chapter 4), weak fluctuations of

the logarithm of amplitude (chapter 5). intensity fluctuations (chapter 6) and
random refraction (chapter 7) of laser beams in a turbulent atmosphere. The eighth
chapter examines laser methods of determining parameters of the process of turbu-
lent micropulsations of the index of refraction.

36

ROI<OFFKJA1.US£(NNLY
FOItOFHKJAl.USE(MULY

Section numbers in the book are made up of the ordinal number of the chapter and

of the given section. For example §l.2 is the second section of the first chapter.
The formulas have their own ordinal numbering in each section. which is retained
within the confines of that section. In cross references. the number of the formula
is made up of the number of the section and of the formula. For example the no-
tation (2.1.3) indicates the third formula of section one of chapter 2. To facili-
tate reading of the text, the section number is placed at the top of each page.

The monograph has been written from results of the author's research done at the
Institute of Optics of the Atmosphere. Tomsk Affiliate. Siberian Department of
the USSR Academy of Sciences. including work done jointly with colleagues of the
Institute of Physics of the Atmosphere, USSR Academy of Sciences. and the Buryat
Institute of Natural Sciences. Buryat Affiliate, Siberian Department of the USSR
Academy of Sciences. The book also contains a detailed analysis of the results
of research prior to the author's investigations and predetermining their formu—
lation. In addition, wherever possible a comparison has been made between the
results given and published research on the pertinent problem.

I am deeply grateful to all my coauthors. without whose cooperation it would have
been impossible to study the complex problem of fluctuations of the field of a

laser beam in the turbulent atmosphere. The author also thanks K. S. Cochelashvili.
V. Ye. Zuyev, A. S. Gurvich. M. V. Kabanov. S. H. Rytov. V. I. Tatarskiy. V. I.
Shishov and I. G. Yakushkin whose advice and constructive criticism to a great
extent determined the direction and results of the author's research.

Contents page
Preface 5
Chapter 1: Propagation of Laser Radiation in Turbulent Atmosphere (Survey) 9

1.1. Statistical characteristics of optical inhomogeneities of atmospheric air -
1.2. Approximate model of altitude dependence of the structural character-

istics of fluctuations of the index of refraction 17
1.3. Methods of the theory of propagation of optical waves in a turbulent

medium 22
Chapter 2: Phase Approximation in Spectral Expansions of Solution of the

Stochastic Have Equation 35

2.1. Phase approximation of the Huygens-Kirchhoff method in problems of

laser beam propagation in a turbulent atmosphere -
2.2. Approximate solution of stochastic wave equation with expansion of the

field with respect to plane waves 51
2.3. Phase approximation with series expansion of the field of a beam with

respect to spherical and plane waves 56
2.h. Approximate solution of a stochastic wave equation in problems of

lidar ranging in a turbulent medium 60
Chapter 3: Turbulent Broadening of a Laser Beam 67
3.1. Focusing of a laser beam by a ring aperture 68
3.2. Average intensity of an asymmetric laser beam 71
3.3. Laser beam broadening on oblique transmission paths 73
3.6. Average intensity of a reflected laser beam 78
Chapter A: Coherence and Phase Fluctuations of the Field of a Laser Beam 85
4.1. Turbulent distortions of spatial coherence of a laser beam field 86
6.2. Spatial coherence of the field of a reflected laser beam 95

35

INJI10FFICIAI.IISICNVLY
Ftﬂl(lﬂHC1Al.UEIZ(MNLY

4.3. Average diffraction rays in a turbulent medium
4.4. Phase fluctuations in spatially bounded laser beams
Chapter 5: Heak Fluctuations of the Logarithm of the Amplitude of a Laser

Beam
5.1. Dispersion and spatial correlation of fluctuations of the logarithm of
amplitude
5.2. Time spectra of fluctuations of the logarithm of amplitude
5.3. Averaging effect of annular reception aperture
5.4. Fluctuations of the logarithm of amplitude when a spherical wave is re-

flected from a point reflector

Chapter 6: Fluctuations of Intensity of a Spatially Bounded Laser Beam

6.1. Dispersion and spatial correlation of fluctuations of laser beam
intensity

6.2. Measurement of the coefficient of spatial correlation by a variable-
diameter aperture

6.3. Time spectra of intensity fluctuations

6.4. Influence of internal turbulence scale on dispersion of strong fluc-
tuations of intensity of a collimated beam

6.5. Dispersion and spatial correlation of fluctuations of intensity of a
reflected laser beam

Chapter 7: Random Refraction of Laser Beams

7.1. Dispersion of random displacements of a laser beam

7. 2. Correlation of displacements of spatially separated laser beams
7.3. Time spectra of random displacements of a laser beam

7. 4. Random displacements of the image of a lidar target in the focus of

a reception telescope

Chapter 8: Determining Turbulence Parameters by Transillumination of the At-

mosphere Hith a Laser Beam

8.1. Determination of parameter Cn and internal scale from the distribution
of intensity of the image of a laser source

8.2. Laser method of determining parameter Cn based on scattering of light
by atmospheric aerosol

8.3. Determination of altitude dependencea of parameter C“ from fluctuations
of the logarithm of amplitude of the field of a laser beam

8.4. Phase optical measurements of internal turbulence scale

8.5. Determination of turbulence spectrum in the ground layer of the atmos-
phere from measurements of fluctuations of the phase of a field of
optical beams

Conclusion

References

Index of Abbreviations and Symbols
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1981.

6610
050: 1862/231

36

FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(HNLY

99
103

105
107
121
126

128
132

135

146
152

159
165
171
173
183
192
198
201
204
210
213
219

221
225
228
243
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.375.8
HIGH-POWER PULSE LASER

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEMII "All SSSR: SERIYA FIZICHESKAYA in Russian Vol 145. No 6.
Jun 81 pp 989- 994

[Paper delivered to the Tenth All-union Conference on Coherent and Nonlinear Optics.
Kiev, 14-17 October, 1980. by V. V. Apollonov. F. V. Bunkin. Yu. I. Bychkov. I. N.
Konovalov. V. F. Losev. C. A. Hesyats. A. M. Prokhorov. V. P. Tarasenko. K. N.
Pirsov and S. M. Chesnokov. Physics Institute ineni P. N. Lebedev. USSR Academy

of Sciences. Institute of High-Current Electronics. Siberian Department. USSR Acad-
emy of Sciences]

[Text] The development of powerful lasers with active volume of tens and hundreds
of liters is a timely problem as such lasers are widely used for studying the inter-
action of radiation with matter. There are reports in the literature on exciler
lasers and C02 lasers with energy of 102-10“ J (Ref. 1-6]. Usually laser radiation
in the UV and IR bands of the spectrum is produced on different facilities since
considerably different conditions of excitation are required.

This paper describes a powerful universal laser facility that can produce emission
in both the IR and UV regions of the spectrum. and results are given on studies
of stimulated emission on molecules of CO; (A- 10.6 um). Xe!” (A~0.35 um). XeBr*
(1-0.28 um) and XeCl* (1‘0.308 um).

The laser facility consists of a pulse voltage generator supplying an accelerator.
a laser chamber. pulse voltage generators supplying the laser gap. main and resote
control panels. a synchronization system. a system for evacuation and mixture prep-
aration. The mixture could be excited by an electron beam with density up to

8 Alma or by an electron-beam stabilized discharge. The laser chamber was designed
for a pressure of up to 2.5 atm. and the active volume could be varied over a wide
range. We did experiments with an active volume of 50 (20x 20x 125 cm). 28 (20x
10x 11.0 cm), 12 (12x 8x 125 cm) and 7 (10x 5x 140 cm) liters. The accelerator

was supplied by an 8-stage pulse voltage generator with LC correction. and the

gas chamber was supplied by three S-stage pulse voltage generators with LC correc-
tion connected in parallel. All pulse voltage generators used 1K-100/0Jo capaci-
tors. and the LC correction circuit used Dm-100/0.l capacitors. The impact ca-
pacitance of the pulse voltage generator of the accelerator was 0.08 111’. and of

the pulse voltage generators of the laser gap-4.21. uF; wave impedance and pulse
duration could be varied by changing the total inductance of the pulse voltage
generators. and the inductance of the LC correction.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

0 kv ‘ng
o a
.m[ : 8 mg:
I,“ a: r 5 I
0 I. ll
1 5

0 1 I: 59118 0 8 h 6' (“B

Fig. l. Oscillograms of voltage (1) and current (2) of the ac-
celerator. the voltage pulses across the gap (3) and the current
through the laser chamber (b) and voltage pulses (5). Mixture
C02:N2:He- 1:2:2, pressure p - 2 atm. charging voltage of the
accelerator pulse voltage generator 01- 50 kV. other parameters
as follows: a) correction inductance L1- 32 uh, inductance

of the pulse voltage generator L2- 101 uﬂ; b) L2- 5.1 uB. L1-
1.“ MI; c) 1.2 - 101 uh, 1.1- 32 pH, charging voltage of pulse
voltage generators feeding the gap, U; - 58 kV. Va- 50 liters;

d) L2 .101 ull, L1 - 32 ull. U; - 52 ltV, Va- 12 liters

Fig. 1 shows oscillograms of the electron beam current behind the grid. and the
voltage across the vacuum diode for two modes of operation of the accelerator.

The use of LC correction gave close to square-wave beam current pulses. Screens
were used for focusing the electron beam. The vacuum in the accelerator was no
worse than 10"” mm Hg. The electron beam was coupled out through aluminum foil

or Mylar film. All pulse voltage generators used dischargers with dry air blasting,
enabling attainment of high firing stability, :20 as. as well as synchronization
of the discharge current pulse in the gas chamber relative to the beam current.
The voltage pulse was fed to the laser chamber with delay relative to the beam
current of 0.3 us, and as a result the discharge took place at constant beam cur-
rent density and electron energy; the latter is important for increasing discharge
stability since it gets rid of the lowbenergy part of the electrons formed on the
rising and falling sections of the accelerating voltage.

In the most powerful CO; lasers known in the literature [Ref. 3-5] that are excited
by a non-sel f-maintained discharge with duration of 10'6 3. controlled by an electron

38

POI! OWGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

beam. pumping has been done under unmatched conditions, the energy reserve in the
accumulator being much greater than the energy introduced into the discharge. As

a result. when the excitation pulse has been completed a residual voltage remains
across the electrodes of the laser chamber. and because of the possibility of dis-
charge contraction this limits the attainnent of high field strength in the gas
gap and precludes high energy inputs. The use of matched conditions in pumping

a CO; amplifier with characteristic excitation time of ~10" [s] was first reported
in Ref. 6. However. no data were given on the output energy characteristics of

the radiation, and the specific energy inputs did not exceed 0.2 J-cm".

The use of pulse voltage generators with LC correction in the proposed laser pro-
vides effective transfer of energy from the accumulator to the discharge in the
matched mode. Realization of matching of the excitation system and discharge gap
does not require exact satisfaction of the equality Rz-p (R; is the load resistance.
a is the wave impedance of the supply system) since the reduction in the power

of the energy input does not exceed 101 for 0.7Sp<Rz< 2p. The important thing
is that as R1 changes from 0.759 to 20. the voltage across the plasma changes from
0.47Uo to 0.7600. 1. e. by changing the plasma resistance. for example by varying
the beam current density. we can get an electric field strength in the plasma that
corresponds to maximum laser efficiency. when a laser with active volume of 50
liters is used. the plasma resistance is Rl- 3.8 (2 for mixture cozzﬂzlie- 1:2:2

at a pressure of 2 atm.

CID‘

0,05

   

a 6 a In . a: a: 0,7 _
n: U '4 J-cm

Fig. 2. Dependence of total radiation energy on input energy

for active volume Va- 50 liters (a) and dependence of specific

radiation energy on specific input energy for Vat 12 liters (b).

Mixture C0;:N2:He-l:2:2. pressure p-2 atm (l. 2, 3) and 1.2
arm (/4). Output window ICRS (l, 3, lo) and NaCl (2).

Oscillogrnms of the voltage pulses across the plasma. the discharge current and
the radiation pulse at a charging voltage of 02- 58 W are shown in Fig. 1c, and
the dependence of the total radiation energy on the energy stored in the pulse
voltage generators that feed the discharge gap is shown in Fig. 2a. Maximum radia-
tion energy was 3 kJ, efficiency ~27}. In the central part of the output window
the energy density reached 15 J-cm".

To study the feasibility of high energy inputs under matched conditions. the volume
of the laser was reduced to 12 liters (8x 12x 125 cm). Plasma resistance in this

39

F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OF‘WCJAI.USE¢DNLY

case was 2.5 Q. Oscillograms of the discharge current and radiation pulse are

shown on Fig. 1d. Since the input energy in the second half-period does not exceed
IOZ. pumping conditions can be taken as matched. The amplitude value of the voltage
across the plasma was 136 kV. accordingly B/pl'8.5 kV'(cm-atm)'1. and the energy
inputs were up to 0.6 J‘(cm-atm)'1. Dependences of radiation energy on energy

input for mixture pressure of 1.2 and 2 atm are shown in Fig. 2b.

Optical cavities with output windows of NaCl and KRS were used. Maximum radiation
energy from a volume of 12 liters was obtained on a mixture of C02:Ng:ﬂe- 1:1:2

and amounted to 1.8 kJ. The radiation energy on mixtures 00;:szﬁe1-1:3:2 and

1:1:1 was lower by a factor of 15. In operation on a mixture without helium

C02N2- 1:2 the radiation energy decreased in comparison with the radiation energy
on a mixture of CO;:N2:He- 1:2:2 at the same working pressures. Diluting the C02:Nz
mixture with helium withOut changing other conditions also increased the radiation
energy. Let us note that as the energy inputs increased. the duration of the first
peak of the radiation pulse decreased. and its power increased (Fig. 1). At output
energy density >15 J/cm’ the output window of the cavity was damaged.

This facility was also used to study lasing on molecules of XeF*. Xe3e* and XeCl*.
In these experiments the working pressure of the mixture was 2 atm. active volume Va
was 28 liters for the XeF and Kent lasers and 7 liters for the Xecl laser. The
active volume for lasing on Xe61* molecules was reduced to attain higher pumping
powers. The interelectrode gap was reduced to improve the homogeneity of ionization
of the gas mixture in the discharge gap since mixtures for lasing on excimer mole-
cules use gases with higher specific weight at higher pressures than in the C0;
laser. The working mixture consisted of argon, xenon and one of the halide carriers:
“Fa. Cthnrz or cc1.. The optical cavity was formed by a flat aluminum mlrror

with protective coating. and a plane-parallel quartz plate. A low-inductance ca-
pacitor C. usually equal to 3 uF. was connected to the anode. The inductance of

the discharge circuit was 155 n“.

Fig. 3 and b show curves for specific radiation energy 0 and specific energy H
transferred to the gas by the beam and discharge as dependent on the initial elec-
tric field for mixtures of Ar:Xe:NP3. Ar:Xe:czF~Brz and Ar:Xe:cclu at different
beam current densities. The maximum specific radiation energy on molecules of
XeF* was 0.9 J/liter (total energy 25 J). on XeBr*--0.32 J/liter (total energy

9 J). and on XeCl*—-0.6 J/liter (total energy 3 J). A distinguishing feature of
the given mode of excitation of excimer molecules is intense processes of gas

Qt J/Z H. J/Z

Pig. 3. Radiation energy (1.
3. 4) and energy input to the
gas (2) as dependent on electric
field strength for XeF* molecules:
1--in mixture Ar:Xe:NF3- 1000:10:1;
2-4--in mixture Ar:Xe:NP3- 2000:
10:1. Parameters: 1--beam current
density 5- 3 Alma. beam duration
1" 1.2 us. C-6 111"; 2. lo--j -1.2
A/cmz. r- 1 us; 3--j- 3 A/cmz,

r - 1.2 us

 

40

llﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂCJAl.USE!0NLY
Fig. lo. Radiation energy (1. 3. lo) and energy input to the gas

(2, S) as dependent on electric field strength for molecules

of XeBr* (a) and XeCl* (b): curves 1, 2-m1xture Ar:Xe:c;?.Br2-

6000:100:l, j- 3 Alcmz, 1 - 1.2 us; curves 3-5-Ar:Xe:cc1.- 2000:
50:1. 3-6 (3, 5) and a (a) A/cmz, 1-1 us

amplif ication, enabling attainment of a ratio of five for the discharge—to-beam

Let us note the peculiarities of excitation with gas amplification. In the case

of a non—self—maintained discharge, the discharge current pulse copies the electron
beam current. and the energy input to the gas from the discharge under these con-
ditions is comenaurate with the energy input to the gas from the electron beam.

The radiation pulse in this case is a bell curve. and its delay from the onset

of the current pulse may exceed 150 ns. With an increase in the charge voltage.

and accordingly in the voltage across the discharge plasma. the discharge current

is determined not only by the intensity of the electron beam. but also by the ex-
tent of gas amplification processes. Under these conditions. the discharge is
volumetric for a time. and then contraction sets in. The duration of the volumetric

stage may exceed the duration of the electron beam pulse.

Efficient energy transfer from the storage element to the volumetric discharge
requires satisfaction of two conditions: first. pulse supply to the gas vessel
must be such that voltage is removed before .the instant of discharge contraction.

of the plasma. The resistance of the plasma in the case of excitation by a discharge
with ionization multiplication decreases during pulping, and therefore complete
matching can be realized only by using a stripline vith variable wave impedance.

Let us note that contraction in mixtures of inert gases with halides is much dif-
ferent from that in mixtures typical of C01 lasers. The channels that are formed

in excimer mixtures have comparatively high resistance. and may exist simultaneously
with the volumetric discharge for a considerable time (-40" set longer).

We made an attempt to get the maximum duration of the radiation pulse on the XeP"

molecule on the described facility. At a beam current duration of 5.10 us and current
density 3- OJ A-cm'2 in a mixture of Ar:Xe:N?3- 1100:S:l we attained a radiation

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

pulse duration of 5.5 us. However, a reduction in pumping power led to a consider-
able reduction in radiation energy because the gain was unsaturated. Maximum radia-
tion energy at a pulse duration of 5.5 us in these experiments was ~l J.

Thus a universal laser systen has been developed that enables variation of excita-
tion conditions over a wide range, and that can use different gas mixtures to get
powerful emission pulses in the IR and UV regions of the spectrum.

The authors thank B. H. Koval'chuk and V. I. Hanylov for assistance in making the
pulse voltage generators. and V. A. Yaashchikov for helping with the experiments.

REFERENCES

l. Hoffman, J. H.. Hays, A. 11.. Tisons. G. C., APPL. PHYS. LETTS.. V01 28. 1976.
p 538.

2. Rokni. H.. Hangano. J. A., Jacob, J. H., Hsia, J. c., 1383 J. QUANT. ELBCTRON..
Vol 03-14. 1978. p 464.

3. Orishich. A. H., Ponomarenko, A. 6., Posukh. V. 0., Soloukhin. R. 1., Shala-
mov, 5. P., PIS'MA V ZHURNAL TEKHMICHBSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 3. 1977. p 39.

4. Bychkov. Yu. I.. Karlova. Ye. K.. Karlov. N. V., Koval'chuk. 8. M.. Kuz'min.
G. P., Kurbatov. Yu. A., Hanylov. V. 1.. Hesyats. G. A., Orlovskiy, V. H.,
Prokhorov. A. M., Rybalov, A. H., PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHBSKOY PIZIKI. Vol 2,
[976. p 212.

S. Adanovich. V. A.. Baranov. V. Yu.. Bevov. R. K.. Samkovskiy, Yu. 3.. Strel'-
tsov. A. P., PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHBSKOY PIZIKI. Vol 4, 1978. p 988.

6. "Status Report on Laser Program at LASL (u)" LA-SZSl-PR, 1972.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Seriya fizicheakaya". 1981

6610
050: [862/244

42

FOR 0i1ﬂClAl.lEI!(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.375.826
INVESTIGATION OF GASDYNAMIC LASER USING ACETYLENE COMBUSTION PRODUCTS
Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 6(l08), Jun 81 pp 1202-1207

[Article by Yu. N. Bulkin. B. A. Vyskubenko. G. A. Kirillov. s. B. Kormer.
V. M. Linnik. Yu. V. Savin and V. D. Urlin]

[Text] The paper describes A gasdynamic laser based on combus-
tion of a mixture of cznz-oz-uz. Experiments and calculations
give the temperature and pressure dependences of the gain as

well as the total and specific powers of radiation in a com-
bustion chamber at pressures up to 70 atmospheres. Mathematical
modeling of the experimental facility gives the losses associated
with vibrational relaxation. heating of the cavity mirrors and
entrainment of stored energy by the gas flow.

1. Introduction

Active research is now in progress to develop different kinds of gasdynamic lasers.
of particular interest among such lasers are those based on combustion of hydro-
carbon fuel [Ref. 1-5]. The use of acetylene or benzene gives optimum compositions
of working mixtures at fairly high combustion temperatures. Ref. 6 gives the result
of measurements of the gain in cw gasdynamic lasers based on products of combustion
of a benzene-air mixture at combustion temperatures up to 1700 K and pressure

po = 30 atmospheres. Experiments with acetylene-air mixtures at po 5 20 atmospheres
are described in Ref. 3. The authors of this work established that at the ampli-
fication-optimum stagmtion parameters (pa - 5-10 atm, To - [Jo-1.7 RR) the gain

was 8010'3 cm". Maximum specific lasing energy output was 7.8 J/g at po-r6.3
atmospheres. The power and specific energy output of lasing obtained in this work
are limited to the region of low stagnation pressures. Considering the necessity
of optimizing gasdynamic lasers not only with respect to specific energy output.
but also with respect to radiation power, as well as the fact that the used gas
may be exhausted into the atmosphere. it is of interest to study the operation

of a gasdynamic laser based on combustion of acetylene at higher stagnation pres-

Our paper is a report on optimization of a laser using products of combustion of

a mixture of Czﬂz-Oz-Nz in the region of stagnation pressures up to 70 atmospheres.
The gain, power and specific lasing energy Output were measured as functions of
the composition and stagnation parameters of the working medium in a quasi-cw

63

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gasdynamic laser. Two-dimensional profiled nozzles were used in the experiment
with different heights of the critical cross section and Mach numbers. The investi-
gated gasdynamic laser was optimized with respect to finding the region of stag-
nation parameters with near maximum specific energy output and lasing power.

The gain and the power of stimulated emission of the gasdynamic laser were calcu-
lated in a one dimensional model in the geometric optics approximation for a plane-
parallel optical cavity. The mathematical model was analogous to that used in

Ref. 6-9.

2. Description of the Experimental Facility

The experimental facility is described in general outline in Ref. 9. The pulsed
combustion chamber was a steel cylindrical vessel with volume V- 45,500 cc and
length of 1.6 m. The fuel mixture admitted to the chamber was ignited by an elec-
tric discharge. The resultant pressure pulse was recorded by an inductive pressure
sensor. The gas temperature T(t) in the combustion chamber and the flowrate C(t)
of gas through the nozzle were calculated by a method described in Ref. 9. Both
the composition and pressure of the initial fuel mixture were varied in the ex-
periments. The concentration of acetylene and oxygen in all experiments was chosen
on the basis of the stoichiometric ratio 1:2.5. The acetylene concentration in

the mixture was varied from 3.6 to 6.02. The nozzles used with critical cross
section height h*- 0.0lo and 0.08 cm had geometric degree of expansion AIM-35.8;

a nozzle with h*-0.025 had A/A*- 75.6. The width of all nozzles was 17 cm. The
profile of the supersonic part of the nozzle was found from the method of charac-
teristics for a gas with constant adiabatic exponent without consideration of via-

cosity.

The gain was measured by a conventional arrangement using a single-mode electric-
discharge C0; laser (transition 9(20) of band 00'1-10’0) with stabilized power
supply. The reference and amplified signals of the emission were registered by
photoresistors.

Lasing experiments were done using hemispherical resonant cavities arranged in
series along the gas flow, the axes of these cavities being 4.5, 8.5 and 12.5 cm
away from the critical cross section of the nozzle. The opaque mirrors (copper-
coated glass) had a rectangular cross section of 401:00 mm and radius of curvature
of 10 m. The flat output mirror measuring 40x [20 mm made of BaFg with dielectric
coating was comon to all three cavities. and had reflectivity r: 931 at A: 10.6 pm.
The leading edge of the first hemispherical cavity for all nozzles was 2.5 cm away
from the critical cross section. The mirrors were located close against the gas
flow. The pulse energy and instantaneous radiation power were measured by calo-
rimeters and photoresistors. The optical measurement system was designed for mea-
suring the energy and shape of the radiation pulse separately in regions A‘~9.5
and 10.6 um corresponding to P—transitions of bands 00°l-02°0 and 00°l-10°0 of

C02 molecules.

3. Results of the Experiment and Calculation. and Discussion

The results of measurements of the power and specific energy output of radiation
as a function of pressure and temperature in the combustion chamber are shown in

‘6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Curves for normalized radiation p
No (broken lines) and specific en
output N* (solid lines) as a func
of stagnntion pressure pa for a n
of 6.52 can: and nozzles with h*-
(a), 0.04 (b) and 0.025 ea (c) (c
of combustion products CO;:B;O:N2
5.6:86.22 at 10- 1.5 (l). 1.7 (2)
(3) and 2.! kK (4)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

Mixture

>--o,—N,[||] I 0.00' H I l7.0| 1.4 | 4-3 I 66.7

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

the figure and Table l. The characteristic of radiation power of the gasdynamic
laser was the normalized emission power No"N/Souc» defined as the ratio of the
generated radiation power to the axes of the output cross section of the nozzle

(or nozzle cascade). The introduction of such a specific characteristic enablea
comparison of different gasdynamic laser facilities with respect to their attainable
emission power level. For a gasdynamic laser of a specific type with known emission
power. this characteristic enables evaluation of the necessary overall dimensions

of the nozzle unit. Of course such an estimate requires correction of the emission
power with respect to possible variation of the cavity efficiency (in connection
with a change in length of the active part and the type of cavity) and losses of
stored vibrational energy in the wakes of the gas flow (with a change from a mono-
nozzle to a nozzle cascade).

As can be seen from the figure, despite the short length of the active part of
the cavities (17 cm). a mixture containing &.51 acetylene gave maximum specific
energy outputs exceeding those obtained in Ref. 3. Curves for “*(po) for nozzles
with h*- 0.04 and 0.08 cm have characteristic optima due to two factors. At low
gas pressures in the combustion chamber there is a small concentration of active
particles in the cavity region, which reduces the efficiency of the cavity that
is used. with an increase in pressure there is a rise in the relaxational losses
of vibrational energy stored in the mixture as the gas expands in the nozzle.

1. e. there is a reduction in both nozzle and cavity efficiencies. As the gas
temperature increases in the combustion chamber at constant pressure. all the in-
vestigated nozzles show an increase in both the specific energy output and the
radiation power. This is due to the fact that in the investigated temperature
region with increasing To the increase in vibrational energy stored in the gas

at the nozzle intake predominates over the increase in the vibrational relaxation
rate as the gas expands in the nozzle. Comparing the specific energy outputs for
nozzles with a similar profile of the supersonic part (see the figure. a, b), we
can see that in the region of p.:.4o atm, as was anticipated [Ref. 10]. it is pref-
erable to use nozzles with a lower height of the critical cross section. The use
of a nozzle with large aperture A/Aﬁ- 75.6 and h*-0.025 cm, as can be seen from
Fig. c. gave a fairly high energy output (-8 J/g) at my: 70 atm and To-2.l RR.
In this connection. no noticeable increase was observed in N* in the region of
low stagnation pressures. which is apparently due to low cavity efficiency. It
can also be seen from the figure that the optima of specific energy output and
normalized power lie in different regions of po. Nevertheless. in the region

of stagnation parameters po- 40 atm. To- [.9 Rx for the nozzle with h*I-0.04 cm.
and po : 70 atm. To - 2.! Rx for the nozzle with h*-0.025 cm one can get fairly
large normalized radiation power at specific energy outputs of ~701 of the optimum
values.

When mixtures were used that contain 3.6 and 6.01 acetylene in the initial state.
the maximum specific energy output and normalized radiation power were lower than
for the mixture with 4.51 acetylene (see Table 1). For the first mixture this

is due to the low combustion point of the fuel mixture; for the second. it is due
to the the less than optimum copmposition of the working mixture after combustion.
For comparison. Table 1 gives the energy characteristics of gasdynamic lasers de-
scribed in other research. It can be seen that the maximum specific energy outputs
obtained in our work are greater than the known values observed with ignition of
acetylene [Ref. 3) and carbon monoxide [Ref. 111. The maximum normalized radiation

‘6

IW)R 0i1ﬂC1AI.l£SEi(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 2
'ncr. |'(M.5un).lrw~|o.omn. £(M.sul). enwm um. Nozzle
Ina % 96
J J nar.v:ters

 

 

 

    
  
    
   
   

          

6.0

   

5.3 08.5

Note. Composition of initial mixture 6.52 czuz; Pucx is the
pressure of the initial mixture in the combustion chamber.

TABLE 3

1.9 '48.4 | 37.6l
[.7 I39.0|23.6|
1.9 |4o.o|31.o|
1.1 |33.o|2o,o|
l.9 l33.s|ze,o|

  

30

Q0

 

Note. 3 is the stored vibrational energy at the inlet to the
cavity; "pen are the losses of stored energy due to relaxation
in the cavity; N3 are losses of energy in the cavity mirrors;
N" is the vibrational energy remaining in the gas flow; k1-
is the calculated gain at a distance of 4.5 cm from the critical
corss section of the nozzle; 1:, are the experimental values of
the gain.

powers found in our research are about double the values obtained in Ref. 3. and
coincide with the data of Ref. 11.

Investigation of the spectral composition of the radiation gave some interesting
results. Considerable instability of the emission pulse shape was seen in the
first lasing experiments with identical initial conditions. Since the sensitivity

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Ge-Au photosensors that were used was not the same in the 9-11 um band.
this suggested a complex nature of the spectral composition of the radiation.
Table 2 shows the results of some typical experiments. It can be seen that the
percentage of lasing energy on 1-9.5 um increases if the reflectivities of the
output mirror on 1- 9.5 and 10.6 um are close, and if a nozzle with large aperture
is used. In the former case. this is a consequence of the fact that the storage
factor of the cavity 0- 1/1. In the latter case, the observed behavior can be
attributed to a reduction in the competition of band transitions 00°1-10'0. 00'1—
02°0. since the density of radiation with 1- 10.6 um inside the cavity is low.
and besides, level 02’0 is effectively deactivated as a consequence of the high
concentration of water in the mixture.

Results of mathematical modeling of the investigated gasdynamic laser are reflected
in Table 3. The calculation was done for a nozzle with h*- 0.04 cm and composition
of working mixture cozzﬂzomz- 9.2:6.6:86.21 which corresponds to an initial fuel
mixture with 10.51 acetylene. assuring complete combustion. Our paper compares

the results of calculation and experiment with respect to gain and the specific
energy output of emission. As we can see from Table 3 and figure c. the results

of calculation and experisent are in satisfactory agreement. For some stagnation
parameters. Table 3 enables evaluation of the principal losses of stored vibra-
tional energy in the gas as it moves through the cavity. For example for stag-
nation parameters po- 30 atm, To- 1.9 kit the efficiency of the nozzle nc-loox.
cavity efficiency np- 21.9%. losses in the mirrors 8.62. losses to relaxation of
vibrational energy inside the cavity ”pen' 18.52. and 51% of the vibrational energy
was carried off by the gas flow. The resultant data imply that a further increase
in the spedific energy of the radiation requires priaarily an increase in cavity
efficiency. e. g. by increasing the active part of the cavity.

REFERENCES
l. Tulip. J., Seguin. 11.. APPL. PHYS. LBTIS, Vol 19. 1971, p 263.

2. Kozlov. c. 1.. Ivanov, V. IL. Korablev, A. 8.. MAL RSPBRIHBNTAL'NOY I
TBORETICHESKOY FIZIKI. V01 65. 1973. I) 82.

3. KOZLOV. G. 1., IVANOV, V. 11., KORABLEV. A. 8.. SELEZNEVA. I. 1L. ZHURNAL EKSPERI-
MBITAL'NOY I TEORETICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 68. 1975. p 1647

lo. Ktalkherman. M. 6., Hal'kov. V. H.. Petukhov. A. V.. Kharitonova. Ya. I..
FIZIKA GORENIYA I VZRYVA. Vol 12. 1976. P 578.

5. Shmelev. v. “Hymns“ N. Ya., Hargolin. A. 1).. xvmova ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 1.
1974, p 1711.

6. Losev. S. A.. MAKAROV. V. 1., KVANTOVAYA ELMONIKA. Vol 1. 1975. p 1633.

1. Losev. s. A.. Makarov. v. 1.. ZHURNAL PRIKLADNOY HBKHANIKI I rtxnhlcazsxov
r121x1, No 8, 1975. p 3.

8. Losev. S. A.. Hakarov. V. 1., KVAN‘I‘OVAYA BLEKTRONIKA. Vol 3, 1976. p 960.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. Vyskubenko, B. A.. Denenyuk, Ye. 1., Yerenin. A. 0.. Kirillov. G. A.. Kola-
byanin, Yu. V.. Korner. S. 3., Ladagin, V. K" L1nn1k, V. H., Nitochkin. N. A..
Urlin. V. D.. KVANIOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA. Vol 5, 1978, p 10.

10. Losev. s. A.. "Gazodinanichesklye lazery" [Gaadymic Lasers]. Moscow, Nauka,
1977.

11. Gerry. E. 1., LASER Focus. No 6, 1970. p 27.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

6610
C50: 1862 I242

199

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.378.33

CHEMICAL DF LASER WITH DIFFRACTION RADIATIOR almanac:
Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 6(108). Jun 81 pp 1208-1213

[Article by V. P. Borisov. S. D. Velikanov, V. D. Kvachev, S. B. Kormer. H. V.
Sinitsyn. G. V. Tachayev and Yu. N. Frolov]

[Text] An investigation was made of the feasibility of achiev-
ing diffraction diverence of the radiation of a pulsed chemical
1)? laser with flashlamp pumping when the planar cavity was re-
placed by an unstable cavity of telescopic type. Under optimum
working conditions of the laser with unstable cavity. radiation
divergence of 80.53- 70 urad. practically at the diffraction

limit. was obtained at fairly high energy efficiency (~60!) as
compared with the similar laser using a planar cavity. It is

experimentally shown that by appropriate "misalignment" of the
unstable cavity, the radiation energy distribution in the far

zone can be measured without using auxiliary focusing elements.

1. Introduction

One of the interesting peculiarities of chemical lasers is the capability for bring-
ing about conditions under which inhomogeneities of the working medium will be
comparatively small. which creates certain prerequisites for getting the diffrac-
tion divergence of emission (Ref. 1].

One of the most promising and widely used methods of getting small divergence of
laser radiation is to use an unstable cavity of telescopic type [Ref. 2. 3].

In this paper we study the problem of effectiveness of using an unstable cavity in
a pulsed DP chemical laser with optical initiation to get the diffraction diver-
gence of radiation.

2. Formulation of the Experiment
The experiments were done on a pulsed 1)? laser with working mixture of F;:Dz:SPs:02

- 22:7:22:7 mm Hg. The radiation of such a chemical laser occupies the spectral
range of 21.6-10.2 um.

The chemical laser cell was a quartz tube with inside diameter of 7.2 cm and length
of 70 cm with windows of Cal’z. Diaphragms on the ends of the cell with inside

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

diameter of 7 cm reduced the influence that bright reflections from the walls of
the cell have on laser radiation.

Optical initiation of the chemical reaction was by a xenon flash lamp with design
analogous to that described in Ref. 10. Power supply to the lamp was from a capaci-
tor bank with capacitance C- 3 u? at voltage v- 20 kV.

An experimental study was done on the inlluence that the magnification ll of the
unstable cavity (14- fllfz. where f1, f; are the focal lengths of the concave and
convex mirrors of the unstable cavity) has on the parameters of stimulated emission,
and a comparison was also made with the parameters of a laser with planar cavity.

The planar cavity consisted of a flat copper mirror and a flat Call; plate separated
by a distance of ZP- 180 cm. The unstable cavity of telescopic type consisted
of spherical concave and convex copper mirrors.

The optical arrangement of the experiments is shown
in Fig. 1. Emission energy was recorded by 'l'PI calo-
rimeter l. The time parameters of the lasing pulse
were registered by gold-doped germanium FSG-22-3A
photoresistor 2, the signal being sent to an 58—2
oscilloscope .

 

The radiation divergence of the chemical laser ChL
was measured by Ragul'skiy's wedge 3. using a method
described in Ref. 5. To do this, the radiation of Fig. 1. Optical arrangement
the chemical laser was focused by spherical mirror of experiments

I: with focus f- 11 m on screen 5 made of black photo-

graphic paper. Placed in the path of the convergent beam was mirror-reflecting
Ragul'skiy's wedge 3 with semitransparent mirror having transmission T-SOZ. In

the experiments with the unstable cavity. the dynamic range of recordable intensi-
ties in the far zone was about 2000.

When the planar cavity was used, the focusing mirror with f- ll 1:: was replaced
by a mirror with f- 1.5 m. and the range of recordable intensities was 4000.

3. Results of the Experiments, and Discussion

The main purpose of our experiments was to study the feasibility of getting dif-
fraction divergence of chemical laser radiation.

Let us estimate the value of H of the unstable cavity necessary for attaining this
goal. The radiation of a laser with ideal unstable cavity and homogeneous working
medium should have diffraction divergence [Ref. 2, 3]. In the presence of inhomo-
geneities of the active medium, the divergence of radiation of a laser with unstable
cavity will be greater than the diffraction level ed1f=2.4-A/d; (where A is the
wavelength of laser emission, d, is the diameter of the working part of the con-
cave mirror) by the amount [Ref. 3]

ou - mama-1m. (1)

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where la, Vn are the length of the active medium and the gradient of its index
of refraction.

Based on the defined value of inhomogeneities, we can estimate the maximal: value
of H at which the radiation divergence will differ but little from the diffraction
value:

0d“) 108“. (2)
From (1) and (2) we get
n> (1- 8.3ZaVnd1/A)“. (3)

0n the other hand, it is known that the diffraction divergence of radiation is
formed mainly by the rays that make the maximum number of passes W inside the
unstable cavity before leaving it [Ref. 6]:

: In ‘1 112”!) (4)

There is no distortion of diffraction divergence when saturation of the gain of
the active medium is attained after a number of passes I>Mx.

It follows from Ref. 1 that in this case it is necessary that

”lull < In (‘Expil‘ I4) 0 (S)

where a is the gain of the active medium.

From formulas (a) and (S) we can determine the possible values of H for getting
the diffraction divergence:

2a1,|n [cf/(21h)

In (“Kidd—2°". ' (6)

M)exp

Thus to get the diffraction divergence we should use an unstable cavity with mag-
nification H that satisfies the stronger of conditions (3) or (6).

In the experiments. the concave mirror of the unstable cavity had a focus fl- 200 on.
To estimate Vn we can use the results of Ref. 1 since that research also used a sys-
tem of initiation of the chemical reaction, composition of the working mixture
and other conditions of experiments similar to ours. Therefore we will assume

that during lasing Vn<5-10'° cm‘l.

According to our measurements. the gain of the active medium on 0.015 cm". At
ralues of d1- 7 cm. x- 3.9 um. Ell-200 cm and Za' 70 cm. we get M>2 from formula
(3), and M? 5.5 from formula (6).

Thus under the conditions of the experiments the condition H) 5.5 must be met to
attain the diffraction divergence of emission of the investigated laser.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 1

Conditions and averaged results of investigation of chemical lasers

lzuna I g
N J , z 0.08-
eq *1“, Epl mrad

 

"dur' I‘del'
“3 | “a

cavity
type

 

 

 

   

unatab14 8.0 I 10 l 4.0 0.07 I 1.5 l 1.0

Note. ‘dur' tdel are the duration and delay of the lasing pulse.
TABLE 2

Theoretical (th) and experimental (ex) dimensions of diffraction rings in the
far zone of the laser. and distribution of radiation intensities and

energies with respect to these rings
1'33". | 1"“.
I 6”" eex"re1. unit r3. ' 1'

M
Ring ' and and r un its Bth’ 8ex' 1
l l 0.111 0.12 1 | cs 40

 

 

 

    

2
8 3 0352 |0.ss 0.0021 0006 | 2 2
4 I 0.090 0.00 0.0027 | 0.005 4 | 3

S3

UNOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For experimental verification of the conclusions drawn above. unstable cavities
were used with magnifications H- 2.5, 4 and 8 and equivalent Fresnel numbers
Ne -lO-20.

Q

Table l gives the averaged results of experiments with planar and unstable cavities.

In the entire investigated range of magnifications of the unstable cavity 14- 2.5-8,
the intensity distribution in the far zone had the form of concentric rings typical
of Fraunhofer diffraction.

Fig. 2 shows the distribution of lasing energy
with respect to angle for lasers with unstable
cavities (M- 2.5-8) and with a planar cavity.
The radiation divergence of the laser with an
unstable cavity is less than that of a similar
laser with planar cavity by about an order of
magnitude. With increasing M. the divergence
decreases from 0 .SE'°°16 mrad at H-2.S to
0.07 mrad at H-g. The results of measurement
of the divergence of a laser with planar cavity

 

4
enable us to estimate An in the investigated a 0.2 ll 8’ mrad
mixture in the lasing process [Ref. 8]: Fig. 2. Lasing energy dis-
tribution with respect to
An: egllpl8la'S-10'7, (7) angle for lasers with un-

stable and planar cavities
Which agrees with the results of Ref. 1.

The studies showed that the use of an unstable cavity in a chemical laser as com-
pared with a planar cavity results in a reduction of total lasing energy. Although
energy losses increase with increasing H from l5! for H- 2.5 to 401 for H- 8. the
axial luminance of the emission 8 increases. reaching 105. 125 and 180 times the Bpl
for M- 2.5, ’4 and 8 respectively.

The method of calculation of Fraunhofer diffraction on an annular aperture [Ref. 9]
was used to interpret the resultant distributions of radiation intensity of the
laser with unstable cavity in the far zone.

Table 2 gives experimental and theoretical results of determination of minima of
the intensity in the diffraction pattern in the far zone. and also the distribution
of intensities and energies with respect to the rings.

Comparison shows coincidence of the calculated and experimentally determined po.
sitions of minima of the diffraction pattern for all investigated values of K.

As we can see from Table 2, with increasing H there is an improvement in the
correspondence of energy distribution with respect to diffraction rings as deter-
mined from the experiments and calculated for an empty ideal unstable cavity.

At H= 8, this agreement is quite good, which confirms the conclusions.

To verify whether there are appreciable wings in the radiation distribution with
respect to angle, a number of experiments were done in which the radiation energy
was measured simultaneously in angles of 61 -l and 62 -10 mrad by using

51:

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
IIMROFFKJALIIREONIY

TABLE 3

Parameters of chemical laser with "misaligned" unstable cavity
(H38, f1'200 cm. fz-ZS cm)

 

¢" l A ‘ Elas' 3 l tdur- “3 Tdelt "3
0 l 00 l 4.0 I 7.5 7.0
5 | 80.8 4.0 7,4 l 7,0

l0 “.4 3.8 l 7,3 6.9

30 l5.|2 3.9 l 7.4 6.9

50 l 8.56 l 3.8 l 7.4 I 7.0

calorimeters. It was established in these experiments that the radiation energy
in the given angles is the same. proving the absence of wings with appreciable
energy in the radiation pattern of the investigated chemical laser with unstable
cavity beyond the limits of an angle of l mrad. This is further evidence that

the energy distributions with respect to angle that are shown in Pig. 2 completely
characterize radiation divergence.

Analysis of measurements of the time parameters of the lasingpulse showed that
pulse duration Tdur decreases by about 1 us with a change from planar to unstable
cavity. with increasing H. pulse duration decreases somewhat (see Table l).

Lasing pulse delay ‘del relative to the beginning of initiation of the reaction
showed almost no change in any of the experiments.

In a series of experiments with a high-speed streak camera an investigation was
made of the time behavior of divergence of a chemical laser with unstable cavity.
Black photographic paper was used as the radiation recorder. It was found by this
technique that the radiation pulse of a laser with unstable cavity (at H-‘b and 8)
consists of regular intensity spikes with period coinciding with the round-trip
time of a light quantum through the cavity Trt' 21 /c (the photoresistor-oscillo—
graph technique does not resolve these spikes). I is was also confirmed by experi-
ments in which the distance between mirrors of the unstable cavity was changed.
This same spike behavior of lasing was observed in Ref. 10. where an investigation
was made of an HP laser with unstable cavity.

An interesting feature of the unstable cavity is the capability of measuring small
radiation divergences with good precision without additional focusing elements

by "misalignment"of the unstable cavity. When this is done, the radius of curva-
ture of the convergent wave is defined by the expression [Ref. 5]

R=/,+uz—r;)/A +5, (8)

55

IN)! OIWWCJAI.IEIE(HULY
FORiofFKJAl.USE<0NLY

where A is the amount of mismatch of the cavity. 6 is a corrective term that is
very small (dell) at H< 10.

By using this cavity detuning technique in several experiments. a lasing far zone

was found that is no different in energy distribution from that found conventionally
by focusing mirrors (see Fig. 2).

As we can see from Table 3. with a change in radius of curvature of the surface

of the radiating front from 8 to 80 m. the energy and time parameters of the radia-
tion did not change within the limits of measurement error. Thus when the unstable
cavity is intentionally detuned the major parameters of the laser remain practically
unchanged, and the far zone of the radiation can be obtained on a screen located
at a given distance R (see (8)) from the output mirror of the cavity.

4. Conclusion

An investigation is made of the feasibility of getting diffraction divergence of
the radiation of a DP chemical laser with flashlamp pumping by using an unstable
cavity of telescopic type.

The theoretical estimates showed that an unstable cavity with magnification 14> 5.5
must be used in this laser to get emission with divergence close to the diffraction
limit.

Unstable cavities with H- 2.5-8 were studied. It was experimentally shown that
as H increases. the radiation divergence decreases, reaching a value of 80.53-
70 urad. which is almost the diffraction limit. Although in this case the energy
losses are 402 as compared with a chemical laser with planar cavity. the axial
luminance of the radiation increases by a factor of 180.

It was discovered as a result of the experiments that the lasing pulse with an
unstable cavity at M- 6 and 8 consists of individual spikes with recurrence rate

1’ = ZZPIC.

It was shown that laser radiation can be focused at a given distance by appropriate
detuning of the unstable cavity. This causes no noticeable distortion of the
diffraction distribution of energy in the far zone; when this is done there are

no appreciable changes in the radiation energy or time parameters of the pulse.

REFERENCES

l. Zykov. L. 1., Kirillov, G. A., Kormer. s. 3.. Nikolayev. V. D., Sukharev. S. A..
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 4, 1977. p 1336.

2. Siegman. A. 5., PROC. 1333, Vol 53. 1965, p 277

3. Anan'yev, Yu. A., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTROHIKA, No 6, 1971. p 3; USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH
NAUK, Vol [03. I971. p 705.

h. Batovskiy, 0. M.. PRIBORY l TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA, No 2. 1973. p 171.

S6

FOI.OIFICIA1.IEIICNNLV
7.

8.

9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ragul'skiy, v. v.. Fayzullov, r. s.. ormu I symosxopm. V01 27, 1969,
p 707.

Zenskov, K. 1.. Isayev. A. A., Raul-yen, H. A., Petraah, G. 6., Rautian, S. 6.,
KVANTOVAYA ELEK'I'RO‘NIKA. Vol 1, 197b, p 863.

Isayev. A. A.. Kazaryan, H. A.. Petrash. G. 6.. human. 5. 0., Shelagin. A. FL.
KVANTOVAYA BLEK‘I'RONIKA. Vol 6. 1977, p 1325.

Kit-111w. G. A., Kormer. S. 3., Kochenuov. G. 6., Kulikov. S. H.. Nikolayev.
V. 0.. Sukharev, S. A.. Urlin. V. 0.. KVANTOVAYA mam. Vol 2, 1975,
p 666.

Born. H.. Wolf, 3.. "Osnovy optiki" [Principles of Optics]. Moscow, Nauka.
1970. PP 1469-1053.

10. Simonis, G. J., APPL. PHYS. Lms. V01 29. 1976, p 62.

COPYRIGHT: Izdacel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

6610

C80:

1862/2lo2

57

FOIOFI'ICIALUSIONLY
INJR<OFIICIAI.INSEZCIULY

UDC 621.375.826
STIMULATED EMISSION 0H 18.6 no IN C02 GASDYNAHIC LASER WITH ELECTRIC-ARC HEATING
Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 6(108), Jun 81 pp 1312-1315

[Article by D. G. Bakanov. A. A. Vedeneyev. 8. Yu. Volkov. A. l. Demin, A. A. In-
fimovskaya, Ye. M. Kudryavtsev. A. I. Odintsov and A. I. Pedoseyev]

[Text] A report on activation and investigation of a coz-Ar
gasdynamic laser (x- 18.6 um) with pulsed electric-arc heating
of the working mixture. It is proved by measurement of the wave-
length (18.3820.04 um) that lasing occurs on the Q-branch of
transition 0310-10°0. The maximum energy in a pulse with dura-
tion of about 20 ns was ~0.06 J at stagnation parameters in the
prechamber of To - 1000 K. po - 10 atm for mixture cozmr- 1:2.

In accordance with the theoretical data, the energy in a pulse
decreased smoothly with change in CO: concentration. According
to estimates, the power density inside the cavity was ~3 kH/cm .
and the specific energy output from the flow was ~10 J/g.

The suggestion of development of a thermal gasdynamic laser on transitions between
levels of paired modes of CO; was formulated in Ref. 1. 2. Ref. 1 was the first
report on attainment of stimulated emission on the transition (0310-10°0) with
wavelength of 18.4 um ina COz-Ar gasdynamic laser inplemented by shock tube. This
same paper proposed a mathematical model of such a laser in which the process of
vibrational relaxation is described in terms of the total energy of paired modes
v1. v2. In subsequent theoretical and experimental research an investigation was
made of the way that initial pressures and temperatures and the composition of

the working mixture influence the extent of inversion and the gain [Ref. 3, b].
and the anticipated lasing power was calculated [Ref. 5. 5]. It was shown that
the COz-Ar gasdynamic laser on x- 18.4 um has advantages over the cog-N2 gasdynamic
laser on A- 10.6 um in higher efficiency (22) and the possibility of a reduction
in the temperature of gas heating. However, until recently the experimental study
of the lS-nicron co; gasdynamic laser has been based on a facility using a shock
tube and having a comparatively short active region (9 cm). Therefore we have

had no clear idea of the outlook for realization of such a gasdynamic laser with
more convenient methods of thermal excitation than heating in a shock tube. This
paper is a report on attainment of quasi-cw lasing on a transition with A-18.b pm
in a gasdynamic laser with electric-arc heating of the gas mixture. Preliminary
results are given on the investigation of characteristics of such a gasdynamic
laser.

58

FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(HNLY
FOR!DFFKJAL.USEZONLN

The experiments were done on a facility (Ref. 6]
used previously for studying a 002 gasdynamic
laser with emission wavelength of 10.6 pm. The
facility was altered only in the parameters of
the nozzle and Optical cavity. A diagram of the
setup is shown in Fig. l. The gas was heated

by a powerful pulsed electric discharge from ca-
pacitor bank I; the discharge with duration of
~0.1 ms was initiated by electric explosion of

a fine wire. Immediately before energizing the
discharge. prechamber 2 of the gasdynamic laser
was filled with the working mixture of gases by
high-speed solenoid valve 3. The pressure in
the prechamber was registered by piezoelectric Fig. 1. Diagram of the ex-
sensor a. A specially shaped single nozzle was perimental facility

used with critical cross section 0.1 mm in height

and degree of expansion of 150. The nozzle terminated in a channel of fixed cross
section connected to a vacuum chamber. Cavity 5 was placed immediately beyond

the nozzle outlet at a distance of 3.5 cm from the critical cross section; the
length of the active medium was about 40 cm. The cavity was formed by two mirrors
with f- 100 cm (6. 7) with gold reflective coating. In the center of the mirrors
were 0.5 an holes for coupling out the emission.

 

The lasing wavelength was measured by a monochromatorin the Ebert arrangement con-
sisting of a diffraction grating of 50 lines/mm (8) and spherical mirrors with

f- 50 cm (9. 10). The first collimated the radiation leaving the optical cavity.
and the second focused the been reflected from the grating on output slit 11 with
a width of 0.5 mm. The radiation was registered by a variety of receivers. In
the investigation of the lasing spectrum. inertial semiconductor bolometer 12 was
used, which had an identical fairly high sensitivity over a wide spectral region.
The bolometer signal was sent to an oscilloscope. A copper cone polished on the
inside was placed in front of the bolometer for purposes of collimation. The sys-
tem was calibrated with respect to high-order diffraction maxima of the radiation
from helium-neon laser 13 (AI 0.6328 um). Linear dispersion in the plane of the
output slit of the monochromator was 0.05 um/mm. The emission wavelength of the
gasdynamic laser as measured by this system was 18.38: 0.04 um, enabling us to
assign it with confidence to lines of the Q-branch of the vibrational transition
(o3‘o-10°0) of the co; molecule.

The radiation energy in the lasing pulse was determined by an IMO-2 laboratory
meter. A rapid-response photosensor based on Ge-Zn cooled by liquid nitrogen was
used to study the pulse shape. Fig. 2 shows oscillograms of the gas pressure in
the prechamber, and of the lasing pulse; the latter was obtained by a Ge-Zn sensor.
The total lasing pulse duration was about 20 ns. The maximum lasing power is dis-
placed relative to the maximum of the pressure pulse. This shows that optimum
conditions for stimulated emission correspond to pressures and temperatures of

the gas in the prechamber that are lower than those at the beginning of the working
cycle. The maximum output energy of the lasing pulse of 0.04 J was obtained for

a mixture of COz:Ar- 1:2 at initial values of the pressure and temperature of the
gas in the prechamber of Po - 10 atm, To - 1000 K. In this case. the power at the
maximum of the lasing pulse was about 3 H.

59

F0l‘0FFﬂJAI.USE(HNEY
FORloliﬂCJAI.lEIE(NVLY

0n Fig. 3. the experimental dependences
of lasing pulse energy on relative €05
content in the mixture are compared with
theoretical curves for the gain. The 2
calculations were done by simultaneous

Pout' rel. u.

  
   

1

z8

solution of one-dimensional equations a: of
of gas dynamics and the relaxation equa- '
tion for the total energy of modes v1, 1 £0
v2. in accordance with a method given

in Ref. 1. 3 with consideration of the 45 a:
nozzle profile used in the given facility.

The experimental and theoretical results 0 an an an 80 aup%
agree fairly well. which confirms the
correctness of the mathematical model.
The reduction‘in gain and lasing power

at high CO, concentrations in the mixture
can be attributed on the one hand to re-
duced cooling of the gas in the nozzle . __ _
due to a lowered adiabatic exponent. and :2" itisgocgndgtions'. 151 N 1.22:3; K
on the other hand to a relative increase ° ’ --P° atm, o

in the role of processes of VT-relaxation of paired modes of CO; [Ref. 3].

Fig. 3. Gain (calculated curves) and
lasing power (experimental points) as
a function of the relative content of
C0; in the mixture for the following

let us note that the attained output power (-3 H) does not in the least character-
ize the energy capabilities of the given laser since the parameters of the optical
cavity were not optimized. Overly small dimensions of the beam holes in the mirrors
precluded efficient caupling of the radiation out of the cavity. Actually, in
experiments done with a mixture of coz-Nz-He at flow parameters near optimum the
measurements of lasing output power in the 10.6 um region were even somewhat less
than 3 H. This is indirect evidence that the two types of gasdynamic lasers are
comparable in power. An estimate of the power density inside the cavity with con-
sideration of the output beam hole of the mirror gives I~ 3 kH/cmz. If we take

a reasonable value for the beam cross section inside the cavity (s~ l cmz) and
assume that the cavity losses per pass lie in a range of 0.02-0.05. we can get

a rough lower estimate of the lasing power taken from the flow of P1as"60‘15° H.
An estimate made with consideration of the gas flowrate (-10 3/8) shows that the
specific energy output from the flow under the given conditions is ~10 J/G.

In conclusion, we note that this research marks the first realization of an 18-
micron gasdynamic laser with pulsed electric-arc heating of the working mixture.
This facility is closer to a model of a cw gasdynamic laser than that based on

a shock tube [Ref. 1]. Products of dissociation of CO; and other contaminants
formed in the electric discharge initiated by an exploding wire have no decisive
detrimental effect on the operation of the laser. The results show that a cw gas-
dynamic laser with steady-state electric-arc heating is suitable for producing
radiation with wavelength of 18 um.

The next step in research should be optimization of the profile and dimensions
of the nozzle. the composition and parameters of the working mixture. and also

improvement of the optical cavity. To do this, we are planning diagnosis of super—
sonic flow parameters and gain measurement. The comparatively long optical path of

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR m1. USE ONLY

this facility gives us hope that lasing might be attained on some other transitions
of the C02 molecule as well (Ref. 1. 3]. and also on transitions of other molecules
met. 7].

Just as important is the fact that the comparatively small overall dimensions.

the relative simplicity of the construction and utilization of the facility enable
its use for studying the capabilities for utilizing coherent emission with wave-
length of 18 pm in science and engineering.

The authors thank A. H. Prokhorov for support in the work.

1.

REFERENCES

Vedeneyev. A. A.. Volkov. A. Yu.. Denin. A. 1.. Logunov. Ye. IL. Kudryavtsev.
Ye. H.. Sobolev. N. N.. PIS'MA V ZRURNAL WICHBSKOY PIZIKI. Vol 1.1. 1978.

p 681; Preprint of Lebedev Physics Institute. USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow,
[978. No 68.

Konyukhov. V. K.. Fayzulayev. V. N.. KVARIOVAYA ELEKTRWIKA, Vol 5. 1978. p 2586.

Vedeneyev. A. A.. Volkov. A. Yu.. Gonenyuk. Yu. V.. Demin. A. 1.. Kudryavtsev.
Ye. H.. Poluyan, V. P.. Preprint of Lebedev Physics Institute. USSR Acadeny
of Sciences. Moscow. 1979. No 20.

Brunne. M.. Zielinski. A.. Hilewski. J.. Volkov. A. Yu.. Denin. A. 1.. Kudryav-
tsev. Ye. 11.. in: "Proc. Int. Conf. on Lasers". Ed. by V. J. Corcoran. McLean.
VA. USA. STS Press. 1980. Pp 5510-561

Volkov. A. Yu.. Demin. A. 1.. Kudryavtsev. Ye. IL. Brunne. H.. in "Gas-Flaw
and Chemical Lasers". Ed. by J. Hendt. Rhode-Saint-Genese. Hemisphere Publ.
Corp.. 1979. pp 249-252.

Odintsov. A. 1.. Fedoseyev. A. 1.. Bakanov. D. 6.. PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHBSKOY
FIZIKI. Vol 2, 1976. p 1105.

Volkov. A. Yu.. Denin. A. 1.. Gonenyuk. Yu. V.. Kudryavtsev. Ye. M.. Poluyan.
V. P.. Preprint of Lebedev Physics Institute. USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow.
1980. No 60.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika“. 1981

6610

050:

[862/242

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OIIICLALIHIE(HVLY

UDC 535.853.31

FEASIBILITY OF USING LIQUID METAL HEAT-TRANSFER AGENTS P08 COOLING THE ELEMENTS
0F HIGH-POWER OPTICAL SYSTEMS BASED ON POROUS STRUCTURES

Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 6(108). Jun Bl pp 1328-1331

[Article by V. V. Apollonov. P. I. Bystrov. Yu. A. Broval'skiy. V. P. Concharov
and A. H. Prokhorov]

[Text] A theoretical investigation is made of the heat and thermo-
deformational characteristics of laser mirrors based on metal
fiber structures cooled by liquid alkali metals (Na-R coolant

of eutectic composition). The given estimates confirm the out-
look for using liquid metal heat transfer agents to cool the
heat-stressed elements of high-power optical systems with minimal
heat distortions of the mirror surface.

It was pointed out for the first time in Ref. 1 that the threshold of optical de-
struction of mirror surfaces based on porous structures can be further increased

by using liquid alkali metals and their alloys as coolants. The outlook for using
liquid metal heat—transfer agents to cool the elements of high-power optical sys-
tems is dependent on the feasibility of attaining a high coefficient of heat exchange
in the porous layer by a favorable combination of thermophysical properties of

liquid metals. This relaxes the requirements for heat conduction of the material

of the porous structure. which opens up the possibility for using new structural
materials in the reflectors with a low coefficient of thermal expansion and poor

heat conduction.

Of particular interest for purposes of cooling laser mirrors is the use of eutectic
alloys of liquid metals that have a low melting point (for example Na-K alloy with
melting point of -|1°c). The use of liquid metal coolants will enable convective
cooling of reflectors at temperatures close to the that of final adjustment of

the mirror surface.

Ref. 2 generalizes processes of heat and mass transfer in porous structures with
a decisive effect on the temperature fields and hydraulic characteristics of the
reflector cooling system. On this basis a method was developed for predicting
the heat and thermodeformational characteristics of laser reflectors enabling de-
termination of the optimum type and parameters of the structure to ensure removal
of the required heat flows for permissible distortions of the mirror surface.

62

INJI<0IIIC1AI.IEHB(HVLY
Ft”!(lﬁﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂE(ﬂVLY

Taking our lead from Ref. 2, let us consider some results of theoretical estimates

of the heat and thermodeformational characteristics of laser reflectors cooled by
eutectic alloy Na-K.

within the framework of the assmptions made in Ref. 2. the equation of heat ex-

change that describes temperature distribution with respect to thickness of a
porous layer can be written as

dzt ha

$17-$89“ -t1-), (1)
where he is the coefficient of heat exchange between the material of the structure
and the coolant. In view of the lack of data in the literature on heat exchange
of liquid metals in a porous layer. we will use known data on heat exchange of
liquid metal coolants in bundles of triangular arrays of fuel elements in nuclear
reactors as the lower estimate of the coefficient of heat exchange in a porous
structure. According to Ref. 3. the following relations will be used to calculate
heat exchange of liquid metals in regular arrays of fuel elements:

in the cells of close-packed bundles (s/d- l)

Zlu-Nuz+ 0.0403(1- 1/f‘1.'2"ae' _‘+1.15)Pe°"5; (2)

in cells of separated bundles with l.0<s/d< 1.2

_ 3.67 _ 1 ' m1.
"“ “ul+90(s/d)’l {[(8/d)”-l]/6+7—l.24c+l.lS}Pe ’ (3)

in cells of separated bundles with l.2<s/d<2

Nu - Nul+ 3.67m!"2 meld)“ . (4)

where m1-0.56+ 0.19 s/d-OJ/(a/d)". mz-0.56+ 0.19a/d. uu. Pe are the Nusselt
and Péclet numbers.

. I" ,- 6'3 1 - 3.6
"LIZ L7.55[8/II (c/d)”(87a"a7a-o..li ][ (B/d)1'(l+2.5€l'l‘)+3-2

is the Nusselt number for laminar flow. s/d is the relative spacing of the fuel
elements in the array. c- lat/Ac is the ratio of heat conduction of the fuel ele-
ment cladding material to the heat conduction of the coolant. Relations (2)-(lo)
are valid for E> 0.01. l<Pe<14000. Assuming correspondence between the hydraulic
diameter of the array of fuel element bundles and the hydraulic diameter of the
porous structure of the reflectors (da- dp) and between the diameter of the bundle
of rods and the diameter of the wire (for a metal fiber structure). we can get

the following relation for felt structures: da-dsﬂv/(l-l'lv).

Formulas (2)-(6) apply to the region of stabilized flow of liquid metal coolant

in cells of rod bundles where there are practically no overflows of the stream
between cells. Therefore. using these relations to calculate the heat exchange

of liquid metals in a porous structure where there is actually additional turbuliz-
ing of the flow by the matrix of the porous material will give an understated value
of the coefficient of heat exchange.

63

FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLV
M OFFICIAL US: ONLY

Fig. l. Holograms of thermodefor-
national characteristics of families
of reflectors based on Ietal fiber
porous structures of molybdenum
cooled by Ila-K heat-transfer agent
in the zone of injection (a) and
runoff (b) of the coolant at
ds-ZO (l), 50 (2), 100 (3) and

200 um (lo)

 

 

Fig. 2. Nomograns of themodefor-
national characteristics of fanilies
of reflectors based on metal fiber
porous structures of Invar cooled
by Na-K heat-transfer agent in
the zone of injection (a) and runoff
(b) of the coolant at ds-ZO (l).
50 (2). (100 (3) and 200 no (lo)

 

66

non MGM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Based on the method of Ref. 2, equations (2)-(l.) were used to calculate the heat

and deformational characteristics of laser mirrors made on the basis of metal fiber
porous structures of various materials with cooling by Ila-K alloy. It was assmned
that the coolant inlet and outlet system was made in the form of uniformly alternat-
ing holes. The distribution of the heat load over the mirror surface was taken

as uniform. The hydrodynamic characteristics of the flow in the porous layer were
calculated from generalized relations given in Ref. 2.

As an example, Fig. l. 2 show the results of numerical calculations of the thermo-
deformational characteristics of a family of reflectors cooled by eutectic heat-
transfer agent Na-K. It was seemed that the porous structures of the reflectors
were made of molybdenum and Invar felt structures. The mean diameter of a fiber
and the volumetric porosity of the structure were varied over ranges of 20<ds<
200 um and 0.l< nv< 0.9. The curves of Fig. l. 2 are envelopes of the working
thermodeformational characteristics of a family of reflectors and are plotted under
condition of constant coolant pressure differential in the reflector at a maximum
temperature of the cooled surface equal to 100°C as in Ref. 2. Let us note that

in the case of liquid-metal cooling. this limitation is not decisive (as for example
in the case of water cooling). The range of working temperatures for liquid metals
can be considerably expanded. resulting in a corresponding increase in the heat
loads that can be removed.

Fig. 1 shows that deformation of the optical surface in the zone of coolant runoff
as calculated with consideration of heating of the coolant in the porous layer
considerably exceeds the deformation in the injection zone, H2>H1. The limiting
heat flux densities for the investigated family of reflectors were: in the zone

of coolant injection q; >20 I‘ll/cmz . in the outlet zone (11- 6. 6 kid/cm2 , with H;-

0.3 um. The minimum level of deformation in the zone of coolant outflow for a flux
drain of 14.2 kH/cmz is lip-0.12 um. which is considerably below the threshold of
optical breakdown of the reflectors of 002 lasers.

The thermodeformational characteristics shown in Fig. In for a family of reflectors
show the potential capabilit ms of liquid-metal cooling. The considerable differ-
ence in the curves is due to the influence of warming of the heat-transfer agent

in the porous layer as a consequence of the relatively low heat capacity of the
alloy Na-K. and therefore the degree of perfection of the flow part of the cooling
system is decisive in developing reflectors of this class.

Analysis of the theoretical results of Pig. 2 shows that the use of a porous struc-
ture made of materials with a low coefficient of thermal expansion (Invar fibers)
considerably reduces the thermal deformation of the mirror surface in both the
inlet and outlet zones (by a factor of 3-1:) when liquid-metal cooling is used.

The maximum heat loads that can be removed from the mirror surface to keep the
temperature at a level of [00°C in this case are: q1>20 ltW/cm2 . qz- 3.5 kH/cm’
[see Ref. 2]. The thermodeformational characteristics of a reflector based on
lnvar fibers in the region of minimum deformation of the optical surface (Fig. 2b)
and the point Wm" are characterized by defomtion H2 - 0.02 pm with heat flux
drain of 2. l. kW/cm’.

The behavior of the curves of Fig. l. 2 reflects the particulars of heat and mass
exchange with convective liquid-metal cooling of reflectors. The famin of envelopes

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of thermodeformational characteristics enables determination of the optimum param-
eters of a metal fiber porous structure that ensure drainage of the necessary heat
fluxes from the reflector at admissible values of distortion of the mirror surface
which can be used to develop requirements for designing the cooling system.

In conclusion. let us note that because of the lack of reliable data on convective
heat exchange of liquid metals in a porous layer. the heat and deformational char-
acteristics of mirror surfaces given as an example in Fig. l, 2 should be treated

as estimates only. However. these results do show the good outlook for using liquid
metals to cool optical elements based on metal fiber structures. The use of liquid-
metal cooling in combination with porous structures made of materials with rela-
tively low coefficient of thermal expansion opens up fundamentally new capabilities

in the development of high-precision reflectors with a high threshold of optical
destruction.

REFERENCES

I. Apollonov, V. V.. Barchukov. A. 1., Borodin, V. 1.. Bystrov. P. 1., Goneharov
v. F. et 31.. PIS'MA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 4. 1978. p 1193.

2. Apollonov. V. V., Bystrov, P. 1., Goneharov. A. H.. Prokhorov, A. M., Khomich.
V. Yu., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONLKA. Vol 6. 1979, p 2533.

3. Subbotin. V. [.. lbragimov. H. Kh.. Ushakov, P. A. et al.. “Gidrodinamika i
teploohmen v atomnykh energeticheskikh ustanovkakh (osnovy rascheta)" [Hydro-
dynamics and Heat Exchange in Nuclear Power Facilities (Fundamentals of Calcu-
lation)l, Moscow, Atomizdat. 1975.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovsya elektroniks", 1981

6610
CSP‘ l862/2h2

66

FOR OFFKJAl.lEﬂE(MNLY
FOR Oil'KIMI. Us}. 0N|.\

UDC 621.375.82
CO; LASER RITE RADIATION ENERGY 0F 3 k3 EXCITED UNDER HAICHED CONDITIONS
Moscow KVANTOVAXA ELEKIRONIKA in Russian V01 8. No 6(108). Jun 81 pp 1331-1336

[Article by V. V. Apollonov. P. V. Bunkin. Yu. I. Bychkov. I. N. Konovalov. V. F.
Losev. G. A. Hesyats. A. M. Prokhorov. V. P. Tarasenko and K. N. Pirsov. Physics
Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev. USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] The article gives the results of investigation of a CO:
laser with pulsed feed to the gas vessel under matched conditions.
A total radiation energy of 3 kJ is obtained at a mixture pressure
of 2 atm and active volume of 50 liters. Hith excitation of

an active volume of 12 liters. the energy input to a mixture

of C02:N2:He- 1:2:2 was 0.6 kJ/(Z-atm). and the radiation energy
was ~80 J/(l'atm).

In the most powerful laser systems known in the literature that are excited by

an electron—beam-stabilized discharge. the discharge is supplied from a capacitive
aCCumulator connected to the laser gap [Ref. 1. 2] or from a pulse voltage gener-
ator [Ref . 3. lo]. In the former case. the energy stored in the accumulator is
much greater than that fed to the discharge. and as a result a high voltage re-
mains across the electrodes after completion of the excitation pulse for an ex-
tended time (as compared with the duration of the excitation pulse). The advantage
of this unmatched mode of operation is that the voltage across the electrodes of
the gas gap does not change appreciably during pumn3ng. However. the residual
voltage across the electrodes of the laser cell restricts the attainment of high
field strength in the gas gap due to discharge contraction. and precludes high
energy inputs. particularly in mixtures with low helium content. When a pulse
voltage generator is used for gap supply in known facilities [Ref. 3. 4]. only

a part of the stored energy is input to the gas during the action of the electron
beam. which limits the overall efficiency. and results in residual voltage across
the electrodes.

The use of unmatched conditions for pumping a co. amplifier with characteristic
excitation time of ~1 us was first reported in Ref. 5; however, the specific energy
inputs in that research did not exceed 200 J/liter. and no data were given on the
output energy characteristics.

The purpose of our research is to study the feasibility of high specific energy
inputs and large energy outputs in pulses of -l us duration in the matched mode
of excitation of a 002 laser.

67

FOI‘OFFKJAL.UEE(HULY
“DR (WIM‘IAI. I‘Sb' “Nl\

a“ v
’R::::: b
‘Ul

m c
'1 V

i

I.”
I! re). . units

F“???

  

I

I 2 6 has 45 w as
Fig. l. Oscillograms of accel- Fig. 2. Dependence of overall
erator voltage (a) and current radiation energy on input energy
(b) pulses, voltage pulse across with active volume of 50 liters
the gap (c), current pulse (a) and dependence of specific
in the cell (d, e) and radiation radiation energy on specific
pulses (f. g). Charging voltage input energy in an active volune
of pulse voltage generators of 12 liters (b). Mixture
supplying the cell 58 kV, mixture c02:N2:He- 1:2:2. pressure
C0,:Nz:ﬂe- 1:2:2, pressure p-2 (1-3) and 1.2 atm (4); win-
p- 2 atm, active volume 50 dows of KRS (1. 3. b) and NaCl (2)

(c-e) and 12 liters (f. 8)

The laser system was made up of a gas cell, power supply and electron accelerator.
The active medium was excited by a non-aelf-maintained discharge. The maximum ac-
tive volume of the chamber was 50 liters (20x 20x 125 cm). The laser chamber per-
mitted operation at a pressure of up to 2.5 arm. Experiments were done in an active
volume of 50 liters. and also with a reduction in active volume to 12 liters (8x 12
x 125 cm). The electron accelerator provided a current density of the electron
beam in the gas chamber of about 0.5 Alcmz. and accelerating voltage in the vacuum
diode of about 300 kv. Oscillograms of the accelerating voltage across the vacuum
diode and the current of the electron beam in the gas chamber are shown on Fig.

1a. b. A distinguishing feature of the selected mode of laser operation was that
the electron beam pulse duration was double the duration of the current discharge.
The discharge in the chamber was delayed relative to the beam current by ~0.3 us.
Thus the discharge took place at constant beam current density and electron energy,
which is important for improving discharge stability as it gets rid of the low-
energy electrons formed on the rising and falling segments of the accelerating
voltage.

68

I!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(lhl.llli(lVLY
IN)R()FFKHAL USEZONLY

We used LC correction in the pulse voltage generator feeding the vacuum diode.
giving a near rectangular pulse shape (see Fig. lb).

The supply to the gas chamber was from a pulse voltage generator in the Marx system
consisting of three parailei branches of five stages each. The pulse voltage gener-
ator used lK-100/0.4 capacitors, and the LC correction circuit used lHN-lOO/0.l
capacitors. The equivalent capacitance of the pulse voltage generator was 0.24 uF.
characteristic impedance 0- 3.3 Q; at a charging voltage of 11- 58 kV, the energy
stored in the pulse voltage generator reached 10 kJ. Dry air~blasting of the dis-
charge gaps in the pulse voltage generator ensured stable operation (:20 ns), and
enabled pulse synchronization of the discharge current in the gas chamber and the
beam current.

The following equation can be written for the discharge current of the given elec-
tric circuit:

1(t) - (Uo/wL) exp (- lit/2L) sin wt. (1)

where m= (L/C-R2/4L2)5 is the frequency of oscillations of the tank circuit;

R is the resistance connected in the tank. In the given case. R is the resistance
of the discharge plasma which can be considered linear and constant in time to

a good approximation since the el ctron beam does not vary during discharge. The

matched-load condition is R- (LC) "0. and (1) implies that the discharge current

pulse has the following parameters:

cp- mic/3)"; cm- 2n(Lc/27)‘i; ‘n' [uo/(Lc)”l exp («ls/3). (2)
where 00 is the open-circuit voltage of the pulse voltage generator. tP is current
pulse duration at the base, tm is the time to attainment of maximum current. In is
maximum discharge current.

There is practically no need for exact satisfaction of the equality RIIp since

when 0.759<R<20 the reduction in peak power is only 10%. Let us call attention
to the fact that as R varies from 0.7Sp to 29, the voltage across the plasma varies
from 0.47Uo to 0.7609. This circumstance must be taken into consideration to maxi-
mize laser efficiency. In the described laser with maximum active volume of 50
liters for mixture C02:Nz:ﬂe- l:2:2 at pressure of 2 atm the plasma resistance

was R- 3.8 D. For charging voltage u- 58 kV. oscillograms of the voltage across
the plasma. the discharge current and the radiation pulse are as shown in Fig.
lc-e. The dependence of the overall radiation energy on the energy stored in the
pulse voltage generator is shown in Fig. 2a. The distribution of radiation energy
in the cross section of the output beam was uniform, the energy density reached

15 J/cmz. Damage to the output window was observed. The overall radiation energy
reached 3 kJ. and efficiency reached ~27Z. The radiation energy was measured by
scanning an [KT-1M calorimeter with the sapphire window taken out of the sensor
head over the cross section of the laser beam.

To determine the feasibility of attaining high energy inputs in matched operation,
the active volume was reduced to 12 liters (8x 12x 125 cm). Hith the SO-liter

volume, this could not be done because of the limited energy reserve of the pulse
voltage generator supplying the gap. In this operation. the plasma resistance fell

69

Flll(”ﬂﬂ(JAl.USE‘0NLM
INJR‘OFWNCIAI.IISEZ(HVLV

to 2.5 u. Oscillograms of the discharge current and radiation pulse for this case
are shown in Fig. If. g. The energy input in the second half-period does not exceed
102. and therefore the operation can be considered practically matched. The ampli-
tude value of the voltage across the plasma was 136 kV (E/p-8.5 kV/(cm-atm)).

and the maximum energy inputs exceeded 0.6 kJ/(Z-atm). Fig. 2b shows the dependence
of radiation energy on energy input at mixture pressures of 2 and 1.2 atm. and

also for different resonators using NaCl and KRs output windows. The maximum radia-
tion energy obtained in a volume of 12 liters was 1.8 kJ. He point out that lasing
efficiency decreases with an increase in energy inputs. which is in agreement with
the results of Ref. 3.

Thus our research has experimentally proved the feasibility of attaining high spe-
cific energy inputs in a large volume in matched operation.

REFERENCES
1. Yu. I. Bychkov, Ye. K. Karlova, N. V. Karlov, B. M. Koval'chuk, G. P. Kuz'min.
Yu. A. Kurbatov, V. I. Manylov, G. A. Heayats, V. H. Orlovakiy, A. M. Prokhorov,
A. M. Rybalov, PIS'MA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FlZIKl. Vol 2, 1976. p 2l2.

2. V. A. Adamovich. V. Yu. Baranov, R. K. Bevov. Yu. V. Suakovskiy, A. P. Strel'-
tsov. PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKDY FIZIKI. Vol 6, 1978. p 988.

3. C. Cason. G. J. Dezenberg. R. J. Huff. APPL. PHYS. LETTS. Vol 23. 1973, p 110.

4. A. H. Orishich. A. G. Ponomarenko. V. G. Posukh. R. I. Soloukhin. S. P. Shela-
mov, PlS'MA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 3. [977. p 39.

5. Status Report on Laser Program at LASL (u) LA—SZSl—PR. July—December. 1972.
COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". l98l

66l0
CSO: 1862/242

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IKIICHWWC1AI.USE(HNLV

UDC 621.378.6

CONVERSION 0? CO; LASER EMISSION T0 0.5 "I REGION 1“ NONLINEAR CRYSTALS
Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian V01 8. No 6(108). Jun 81 pp 1361-1363

[Article by S. A. Andreyev. N. P. Andreyeva. I. N. Hatveyev and S. H. Pshenich-
nikov]

[Text] An investigation is made of conversion of 002 laser radi-
ation to the 0.5 um region in a two-stage arrangement: first

the emission of the CO; laser was converted to the near infrared
region in crystals of the intermediate infrared range. and then

to the visible range in a lithium iodate crystal; the same YAG
laser radiation was used in both stages. With different crystals.
conversion coefficients of 8-14! were obtained. enabling reliable
registration of radiation in the intermediate infrared range

with sensitivityequivalent to that of a photomultiplier with
quantum yield of 1-21.

One way to make C0; laser emission visible is conversion to the optical band in
nonlinear crystals pumped by a pulsed ruby laser [Ref. 1]. In this technique.

the converted emission falls in the 0.65 um region. where the most sensitive photo-
sensors (photomultipliers) have a quantum yield of 1-3:. However, this method

of registration has a number of disadvantages: in the first place the resistance
of current nonlinear crystals such as proustite and silver thiogallate to ruby
laser radiation [Ref. 2] limits the coefficient of conversion of the converter

to the 8-101 level; at a higher coefficient of conversion. and hence greater pumping
power, the operation of the converter becomes unstable and unreliable. In the
second place. the converted emission falls on the slope of the spectral curve of
the most efficient multislit photocathode, which limits the equivalent quantum
yield of the converter-photosensor system on the 0.2-0.3! level. In the third
place. the proximity of the frequencies of the converted and pumping radiation

does not permit effective spectral separation. In the fourth place. the frequency
of arrival of information received by such a sensor is limited by the pulse recur-
rence rate of the ruby laser. and in practice does not exceed 10 Hz.

More promising is a double conversion circuit where the radiation of the C0; laser
is first converted to the 0.97 um region in crystals of the intermediate infrared
range, and then to the 0.5 um region in crystals of the near-infrared band, the
radiation of the same YAG laser being used to pump these crystals. The two-stage
conversion arrangement with focusing of pumping proposed in Ref. 3 gives a high
conversion coefficient, and is quite effective for reception of one-dimensional
signals.

71

FOR10FMKJAI.USE(NNLY
a; El Fig. 2.

Fig. 1. Diagram of the nism (dependence of angle a on 0)
experimental facility for crystals of Ag3Ass; (1), Agcasz
at Aa-10.6 pm, A -l.0614 um (2).
and Lilo, at ‘3' .967 um. Ap-
1.06b um (3)

Curves of vector synchro-

In this paper we examine a two-stage conversion scheme without
which enables its use for image conversion. A diagram of the experimental facility

type use or eoo was realized, while tangential interaction of type ooe was realized
in the crystal of the near infrared hand (L1103). To accomplish this. the planes

interaction of type eoo was realized, and the plane of synchronism of the crystal
coincided with the plane of synchronise of L1103. The optical delay around the

ring from the near-infrared crystal to the intermediate-infrared crystal and back
to the near-infrared crystal was less than 1 ns. 1. e. considerably shorter than

The signal radiation source was a stabil

at 1.06 um). The pumping laser was Q-switched with pulse recurrence rate of 12.5 Hz.
the converted radiation (AI-0.967 um) went via reflective mirrors 6, 7 and 35-12

:ilter 8 for eliminating 10.6 um radiation to crystal 2. which was lithium niobate
fthe most effective crystal). The recording system enable”

. registration of both
he signal after the first conversion (A-*0.967 um) by image-converter tube 9.

72

FIHICNHH(IAI.IEIE(HVLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

and the signal after the second conversion. either visually or by photomultiplier
10. Polarization direction rotator 11 was a quartz plate 1.3 cm thick with a wedge-
shaped plate for exact control of the angle of rotation of the direction of polari-
zation. The optical axis of the quartz plate coincided with the axis of the pump-
ing radiation.

The geometry of the nonlinear crystals was determined by a computer as follows:

for AgGaSr-e-w'. ¢-0°. o-0°; for Ag3A983no-0°, 0-20". ¢-0°; for 1.110;—
0-29°10'. a-O'. a-18" (in air); for ZnGePz--0-82°56'. o-IoS". o-O’; for
chazs.--e- 61°34'. o-O‘. u-0°. Here 0 is the angle between the optical axis

of the crystal and the direction of pumping radiation. a is the angle between pump-
ing and signal wave vectors as read out toward the optical axis; 6 is the azimuthal
angle in the XY-plane. Computer calculations for the interaction of 10.6 and

1.06 pm in ZnGePz and HgCazs. are given in Ref. 4. S. Fig. 2 shows vector synchro-
nism curves for crystals of AgGaSz. Ag3As53 and Lilo; calculated by an analogous
method.

The power coefficient of conversion of the two-stage arrangement "+'Pcon/Ps was
determined by a direct method through measurement of the emission power P; of the
C0; laser by an IMOwZ power meter. and converted radiation power Peon (AI-0.5 pm)
by a calibrated photomultiplier. The measurements gave the following results:

for chazs. n+-202; for Ag3As53 n+- 82; for AgGaSz n+-162; for Znsz n+- 62.

The pumping power density lay in a range of 0.5-1.2 HH/cm (depending on type of
crystal). was far from the admissible limit. and ensured stable operation of the
converter throughout the experiment (a few cycles in 0.5-1 hour). No deterioration
of the optical characteristics of the crystals was observed. The completed experi-
ments showed that the double conversion arrangement gives a sensitivity in the
intermediate infrared range equivalent to that of a photomultiplier with quantun
yield of 1-22.

REFERENCES

1. Voronin. E. 8.. Divlikeyev. H. 1.. Il'inskiy. Yu. A.. Solomatin. V. 8.. Badi-
kov. V. V.. Godovikov. A. A.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. No 1. 1971. p 151.

2. Andreyev. S. A., Barashkov. H. 8.. Hatveyev. I. N.. Pahenichnikov. S. H..
Umnov. A. F.. 'Tezisy dokladov devyatoy Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po kogerentnoy
i nelineynoy optike" [Abstracts of Reports to the Ninth All-Union Conference
on Coherent and Nonlinear Optics]. Moscow. 1978. Part 1. p 196.

3. Voronin. E. 8., Solomatin. V. 8.. Shuvalov. V. V.. '11219y dokladov vos'moy
Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po kogerentnoy i nelineynoy optike" [Abstracts of
Reports to the Eighth All-Union Conference on Nonlinear Optics]. Tbilisi.
Hetsniyereba. 1976. Vol 1. p 186.

4. Andreyev. s. A., Andreyeva. N. P.. Hatveyev. I. N.. Pshenichnikov. s. H..
Ustinov. N. D., KVANTOVAYA ELEKIRONIKA, Vol 6. 1979. p 357.

5. Andreyev. S. A.. Andreyeva, N. P.. Badikov. V. V.. Matveyev. I. N.. Pahenichni-
kov. S. H., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 7. 1980. p 2003.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

6610
080: 1862/242 73

FtHICNﬂﬂKJAi.USE(NVLY
INDR OFIHCJAl.lﬂ5Ei(HVLY

UDC 621.373.826.038.823

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 6(108), Jun 81 pp 1366-1368

[Article by N. A. Bulavin. A. A. Ionin. I. B. Kovsh, I. V. Kochetov. V. G. Pevgov

and B. M. Urin, Physics Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev. USSR Academy of Sciences.
Moscow]

[Text] A theoretical investigation is made of the way that the
lasing characteristics of a pulsed electroionization CO laser
using pure carbon monoxide depend on the fraction n of pumping
energy that is expended directly on heating the gas. A com-
parison is made with the results of theoretical research. It

In Ref. 1, experimental research was done on stinulated emission in a pulsed electro-
ionization C0 laser using pure carbon monoxide. showing that its efficiency (~31)

in contrast to that of electroionization lasers based on mixtures of CO-Nz and
CO-Nzeﬂe. is almost an order of magnitude lower than the calculated values [Ref. 2].
The discrepancy, as noted in Ref. 1, may be due to the fact that the numerical
calculation of Ref. 2 (with which the experimental data were compared) used an
overstated value of the efficiency 7 of vibrational excitation of co molecules

by electron impact (7 is the fraction of pumping energy expended on excitation

of vibrational levels of CO molecules). Such an overstatement leads to under-
estimation of the heating of the working gas mixture during the pumping pulse as

a consequence of direct transfer to heat of the fraction n- l-‘y of the excitation
energy, and accordingly to an overstatement of the lasing efficiency.

In this article, a quantitative evaluation is made of the way that the energy.

time and spectral characteristics of radiation of a pulsed electroionization CO

laser using pure carbon monoxide‘depend on the quantity n, and calculated data

are also compared with experiments. To get the theoretical values of the laser
parameters, the system of equations of vibrational kinetics was solved simultaneously
with equations for intensities of stimulated radiation and gas temperature. The
calculations were done by a method developed in Ref. 2, 3 for the conditions of

Ref. 1: particle density N-0.5 Amagat unit. initial gas temperature 'l'- 100 K.

75

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USEINNLY
FOR(NNW(]AI.USE(NNLY

 

cw
go M
3m >110
N 3
z 3
"’50 an
{a t
g n
:7 0 '
‘” mm x” “" a A: a: z

01“. J/(Z-Amas-t)

Pig. 1. Radiation energy area as

a function of specific energy in-

put 01“: l. 2--calculation at

n: 6 (l) and 202 (2); 3—experi-
ment [Ref. 1. S]

Fig. 2. Theoretical dependence
of efficiency of pulsed electro-
ionization co laser on n

gun current density 18" IS mA/cmz. pumping pulse duration tp- 30 us, threshold gain
I‘ - 0.6 m". The energy input level changed in accordance with the initial value
of the normalized field strength in the discharge BIN. which was varied over a
range of (0.9-1.5) '10-“ V-cm ; during pumping the quantity BIN decreased by a
factor of approximately 1.5. The dependence of the radiation energy on the energy
contributed to the discharge was calculated in two variants. In the first. the
fraction n of pumping energy expended directly on heat was assigned as a function
of 2/" calculated in Ref. lo on the assumption that the gas is heated due to rota-
tional excitation and elastic losses of electron energy. According to Ref. lo in
the given range of E/N. n- 5-72. In the second variant. the calculations were
done for a set of fixed values of n in the range of 5-301.

Fig. 1 shows theoretical and experimental [Ref . 5] curves for radiation energy

as a function of specific energy input. It can be seen that an increase in the
amount of energy going to heat leads to a considerable reduction of efficiency

and improves agreement with the experiment. This is also implied by Fig. 2. which
gives the theoretical dependence of efficiency onn (Qin' 300 J/(lomgat). 11,- 20 us.
r- 0.05 In"1 and other conditicns the same). The theoretical data show that lasing
should not arise at all at n) 0.3 even at a very high value of reflectivity of

the output mirror (~9OZ for an active region 1 m long).

Since lasing was observed on pure CO in the experiment. it can be concluded that
n<0.3 in the investigated range of 3/“. However. this conclusion contradicts the
results of Ref. 6. where BIN-10"” V-cln2 for pure C0 gave n=O.S. Therefore.

we feel that the question of the value of n for carbon monoxide remains open; ad-
ditional experiments must be done on determining the efficiency of vibrational
excitation of CO in an electric discharge.

An increase in the fraction of energy expended on heat leads to an increase in
the time of the delay Idel of the lasing pulse relative to the pumping pulse (Pig. 3)
since in our temperature range the rate of VV-exchange decreases with heating. and

7S

MWLIISEONLY
FOI:0FFHJAI.USE(NVLY

‘del’ “5

 

a
01“. J/(l-Amagat) b
Fig. 3. Delay time Tdel as a function of ’
Q1“. Notation as in Fig. l
consequently so does the rate of formation 7" N "'00-'14
of inverse population. The departure of c
the experimental curve [Ref. 1. S] from Fig. 6. Emission spectrum of the
calculated behavior at r|=61 also confirms pulsed electroionization C0 laser
the fact that n>61. at Qin'400 J/(Z-Amagat): a. b—
calculation for n: 6 (a) and 20%
Comparison of the emission spectra of the (b); c-experiment [Ref. 1. S]

pulsed electroionization C0 laser using

pure carbon monoxide as calculated for different values of n at fixed specific
energy input (Fig. 6) shows that an increase in the fraction of energy going di-
rectly to heat noticeably shifts the spectrum into the long-wave region, better
agreement with the experiment being observed for the spectrum calculated for high
values of n (in the experiments of Ref. 1. 5. the rotational structure of the vi-
brational bands was not resolved. and therefore in the calculation the energies

of the radiation on separate rotational transitions were summed for each vibrational
band).

Thus the assumption of a greater degree of heating of the active medium of the
pulsed electroionization C0 laser than previously predicted theoretically in the
excitation process leads to better agreement of theoretical and experimental curves
for efficiency of stimulated emission. delay time and radiation spectrum for pulsed
electroionization C0 lasers using pure carbon monoxide. Comparative analysis of
the calculated and measured characteristics of the pulsed electroionization CO
laser shows that for BIN: urd‘ War2 the efficiency of vibrational excitation

of CO molecules by electron impact n3 852 (in any case no less than 70-80%).

REFERENCES

l. Basov, N. 0.. Danilychev. V. A.. Ionin. A. A.. Kazakevich, V. 5., Kovsh, I. 3.,
Poletayev. N. L.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 6. 1979. p 1208.

2. Basov. N. 6.. Dolinina, V. 1., Suchkov. A. F.. Urin. B. H.. Preprint of Lebedev
Physics Institute. USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow, 1976. No l.

3. Konev. Yu. 3.. Kochetov. 1. v.. Pevgov. v. 6., zuumw. mecnzsxov nznu.
Vol 1.9. 1979. p 1266.

76

FOI.OFIIC1AI.IEHE(HVLY
INIICHﬂﬂCJAI.USE(HVLY

6. Konev. Yu. 3., Kochetov, I. V.. Harchenko. V. 8.. Pevgov. V. 6.. Sharkov, V. F..
Preprint of the Institute of Atomic Energy. Moscow, 1977. IAB-ZBIO.

S. Ionin. A. A.. Candidate's Dissertat1on, Lebedev Physics Institute, USSR Academy
of Sciences. Moscow. 1977.

6. Lender, Ya. 1.. Henakhin. L. P., Ul'yanov. K. N.. TBPLOPIZIKA VYSOKIKH TEMPERAIUR,
V01 18. 1980.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Radio 1 avyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

6610
C50: 1862/2h2

77

INDI10UIICIAL.UBIINULV
FORfﬂﬂﬂClALllﬂEONLY

OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

HAVE FRONT SENSOR BASED ON TALBOT EFFECT

Leningrad ZHURNAL TEKHMICHESKOY FIZIKI in Russian Vol 51, No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript
received 25 Apr 80, after revision 26 Feb 81) pp 1&32-1438

[Article by A. S. Koryakovskiy and V. H. Harchenko. Physics Institute imeni
P. N. Lebedev, USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] A wave front sensor based on the method of multibeam
interferometry is considered that has a number of advantages
over conventional wave front sensors. A simple algorithm is
developed for processing the resultant interference patterns.
Phase distortions are measured with precision of ~s-10-’x.

l. A necessary component of active optical systems [Ref. 1. 2] is the wave front
sensor. The requirements for wave front sensors are formulated in the survey

of Ref. 2.

This paper analyzes the feasibility of developing a wave front sensor using the
method of interferometry worked out in Ref. 3, 6 and based on the Talbot effect
[Ref. 5, 6]. From the standpoint of spatial resolution and admissible range of
measurement of phase distortions. such a wave front sensor has several advantages
over those described in Ref. 2. An algorithm is developed for calculating the

shape of the wave front.

An optical diagram of an interferometric wave
front sensor is shown in Fig. l. A wave with

a planar or parabolic front is directed toward
a two-dimensional periodic grating (with geom-
etry satisfying the conditions of Ref. 6) lo-
cated in plane 2-0. It is further assumed
that the lattice periods along the X and Y

axes are identical and equal to p. Then the
radiation passes thorugh a medium characterized
by the function of phase distortions ¢(x1, y,)-

or(x;. yl) - 61(11. y;) in plane 2- 2;, where

Fig. l. Optical diagram of an ¢r(x1, y;) and ¢1(x1. y;) are the phase ad-
interferometric wave front sen- vances in the investigated medium and in the ref

sor based on the Talbot effect erence medium (of given form) respectively;
y; is the coordinate along the Y; axis perpen-

dicular to plane (X1. 2). Intensity distribution is recorded in plane z-Iz“ that

 

78
FOR OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coincident with the plane of reproduction of the field. In the case of an initial
planar wave and ¢(x1.y1)-0. zn- ZpZN/X, where A is wavelength, N- l. 2,... is
the number of the plane of reproduction. and radiation to each point of the plane
of reproduction is from region «lump of the grating; 2H1+ l is the amber of spa-
tial harmonics (diffraction orders) that take part in image formation; H1 is de-
termined primarily by the geometric parameters of the grating. For example, for
a sine-wave amplitude grating Iii- l. and for a rectangular grating with trans-
mission factor rect (x/q) tomb (x/p) [Ref. 7], where q is the size of an opening.
H1 is very large and is limited by wavelength H1<p/l. Actually, H1 is limited
by introducing a spatial filter or by the sensitivity level of the reception equip-
ment. since the intensity :5 the harmonics 1m falls with increasing In. For example
for the above-mentioned rectangular grating

. . mo

70":5'M’T47.‘ (1)

where o-q/p. m-il. :2...., and 1., is the intensity of the zeroth harmonic. Since
in practice we are dealing with gratings of finite dimensions 2a. reproduction
will take place in region Ix}, ly|<a-2H1:lp. disregarding diffraction by the
aperture.

2. If an optically inhomogenet us medium is placed between the grating and the
plane of reproduction. the reproduction pattern is distorted as a consequence

of the fact that the spatial narmonics acquire different phase advances upon pas-
sage through different regions of the medium. The optical quality of the medium
can be judged from the distortion of intensity distribution.

In the general case Mxhyl) can be found fron solution of the inverse problem
of reconstructing the phase distribution from the lcnown intensity distribution
[Ref. 8].

Let u(x,, y1) be the distribution of the field in plane 2- z; of the object. Then

immediately behind the object the distribution will be u (2",. y.)e"“n-'-.l. Prom mea-
surenent of the intensity distribution in the plane of observation. we find
Iue(x. y)I; a method of successive approximations is used to get Mm. y,). Ac-
cording to Ref. 7, the field u(x, y) can be represented as a Fourier transform

 

i ‘9
of the function "(:r‘. y,)e"'"--'-le """0H m. where k-2r/l. U2: ”(1:1, y1) be an
arbitrary zeroth approximation of the unknown function, then

1'

 

(“(1 -a,) 5' a 3“,» "
"dz. vbme ”'" ’Hnm mlx

.l as
X ew.u..y.)¢"('k"|) ('I'WIIe“ H‘N‘ﬁl I .80”) dﬂdI’l'

Leaving the phase factor in uo(x, y), we replace the amplitude part by lue(x. y)|,
and t ind by inverse Footie: transformation o,(s,,y,)g"n_(t_uw, This cycle is re-
peated until we get the steady-state solution ¢n(x1, ya) a ¢n+1(x1, yl). where n
is the number of the iteration. The number of steps n depends on how close the
¢o(xl.y1) is to the a:tual value of Mn, y,).

e

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the given interference technique the number of measurement points is determined
by the parameter (bani/p)2 i lO“-10‘ (p/2H1 is the dimension of a minimum structure
of the image), and the problem of finding 9(x1, an) is laborious and time-consuming.

3. It was shown in Ref. 3. to that the reproduction effect takes place also in
cases of simple optical inhomogeneities such as a plane-parallel plate and a wedge,
and in the case of a parabolic lens is accompanied by a change of scale. 1. e.

the intensity distribution remains discrete and contrasty. slight disruption

of optical homogeneity of such media leads to displacement of contrasing cells

in the plane of reproduction. In this connection, it makes sense to use the dis-
pla-.ement of images of individual cells in the plane of registration as measured
parameters. and to develop a simplifiedbut precise algorithm for quantitative
processing of the resultant interference patterns. This automatically does away
with the difficulties involved in photometric measurement of resultant intensity
distributions since in this case the phase distortions are converted to displacement
of the contrasting images of points with respect to X and Y. To make the distorted
reproduction pattern sharp enough for measurement. certain conditions must be

met with regard to the parameters of the grating and Mn. y;). To find these
conditions. let us expand 00:1, y;) in a series with respect to derivatives in

the vicinity of the point (xi, yi):

am y.) = shi- v£)+ 91% (z, — 2;) +
+‘—’“f,—';ji(y. — y;) + n (,1, y.). (2)
where

O ' I. I I. am-l I. I 0" '- ,)
"“v v0= Er.["-"%-.-'i<=x-w + —i=rJ-’—..—”' x

x (1.-==i)"“(v. — m + . - . +Wu. — gar].

Here the first term of the second metber describes the constant phase shift in
the vicinity of (xi. yi) that displaces the plane of reproduction along the Z
axis by 1- “xi. y{)/k. and the second term is the slope of the wave front that
shows up in displacement of images of the cells in the vicinity of point (xi, y{)
by an amount

_3Y(3'- v') ’1'"! , __ (3'. W) '1'"
53—f5'h—'—,~. Ay—g-erT. (3)

These two types of distortions are distinguished by the fact that they introduce
phase shifts that are the same for all spatial harmonics, and hence do not affect
the contrast of the reproduction pattern. Therefore in the given case the condition
of image contrast will be met if the displacement l of the reproduction out of

the plane of registration is less than the depth of field of the reproduction,
which is found as the distance from the position of reproduction where the advance
of'the Mi-th harmonic changes by a relative to the zeroth harmonic. From this
condition, using the results of Ref. 3. lo. we get

9<2«(pIM.1)’. (4)

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL NSF "NIX

If we take into consideration that usually (p/H1A)2- 103-10“, condition (4) is
met over a wide range.

The quadratic term of expansion (2) and the terms of higher order describe dia-
tortions that introduce phase shifts in the vicinity of the point (x'. y') of
the expansion that depend on the number of the harmonic. blurring the pattern
of reproduction in plane 2". Since radiation arrivesat point (x', y') in the
lane of observation from the section of the investigated object lxl-txil.
yI-yi'l <2H1Np(l- 21/2“), the contrast will be preserved if in this region

R (310 VI.) < *‘ (5)

We note that distortion of the wave front due to the quadratic term of (2) shifts
the reproduction pattern without blurring it, and changes the scale [Ref. 3. la]

 

1 __ 1 1_ ,__ q——x+x
"“‘_i—-{-i——h+7' P—P-ﬁ—l. (6)

where f is focal length. This enables the method to be used for studying the
optical quality of lenses and parabolic mirrors. In this case 9(x1.y1) is the
deviation 0,0“. yl) that characterizes the actual object away from the quantity
assigned by the object with focal length 01' (x§+y§)/2£.

Thus by selecting the type of grating (p. M1) and the position 21 of the investi-
gated medium, we can get a contrasting distribution of intensity in registration
plane 2“ by satisfying inequality (5).

From the dependence of the position of the plane of reproduction on p we get the
condition for precision (periodicity) and alignment of the grating. Assuming
that the pattern in the plane of registration is not blurred if displacement of
the plane of reproduction due to imprecision of the period Ap is less than the
depth of field defined above, we get

Ap< leIMEN. (7)

Incl inatinn of the grating at angle 8 leads to a change in the effective period
p’ -pcos 8: p(l-62/2). Then from (6) we get the condition for alignment
8 : l/Hi/ﬁ.

1.. The initial material for getting quantitative information on phase distortions
of the investigated medium is an interference pattern that is a set of contrasting
images of the grating cells shifted relative to the undisturbed initial positions.

The algorithm for processing the interference pattern is as follows: I) the po-
sition of points of measurement of the function of phase distortions of the in-
vestigated object ¢(x1. 1) is given by projections of transmitting cells of the
grating on the object (xi, yf). where 1. 31-0, 1. 2.... 2a/p; 2) at each point

(x‘, yf). ¢(x1. yl) is represented as a series (2). and since the interference
patterns are obtained under condition (5). we can limit ourselves to constant

and linear terms of the expansion; 3) from the displacement of images of the grating
cells in the plane of registration zNsz. Ays (Fig. l), in accordance with (3). we

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI(JFIWC1AI.lﬁﬂE(NﬂLY

de ermine 360th 379/331. 3¢(x§.y§)/3y1; 4) beginning with an arbitrary point
(J3 Y§°), we find over the entire aperture 2a

m". y:):=9(:i. ”Haw—(3" m +-—M""' m].

08; 08'
m1. yr')=9(z:. m+v’:[—"-"-”‘.,‘, ’+”“.;.,,"°"].
9'21". y:”)=-i-{9(3{". y:)+5[L'—L",‘,'; ' ’4'-

+-4—~=';;-.~""]+m anew—“saws; "’n- (a)

In most cases errors by a constant phase shift due to arbitrary selection of
¢(x}°. y§°) play no part since we are usually interested in the behavior of
Mn. yl) rather than in its absolute value.

The error on one step will be 2R(p/2, 0). If it is assumed that the unknown
¢(x1. y;) is a sufficiently smooth function. the main contribution to the error
will be from the Quadratic term of expansion (2), and in accordance with (5)
2R(p/2, 0) SI/I6H1N2. It may happen in practice that it is impossible or unneces-
sary to meet condition (5). Then error 211 can be estimated from the modulation
of the image in the plane of registration due to phase mismatch of harmonics.

If the intensity distribution in the cells of the plane of registration a“ is
modulated with period T. this means that the m- plr-th harmonic is out of phase.
1. e. R[(2p/r)Np(l - 21/2“). 0] - n. and consequently the error on one step is
28(p/2, 0) - (“/16N2)(1lp)2. Thus the sharpness of the interference pattern is
an index of accuracy of determination of Mn. y;).

The accuracy of determining 0(x1. y;) can be improved if it is averaged at each
computational point (x‘. yf), i. e. if we take the average value between those
obtained in calculation by different routes, e. g. as is done in (8) 9(31“. v:")=
(914-9012. where m is obtained tron «=1. m) by mum. v1)»9(=.‘”.v:)-vh(‘1“-Vi")-
and 02 is obtained by route 9(1}, m):>p(c{. “‘05:; y,(s{", vi"). Averaging can be done
with respect to three, four or more values of Nag“. m"), obtained from different
trajectories of computation. or for example around a ring 9(21. y;)-.o(z{“, m)»

mi". yr') ~ 9(21. W)» 9(21. In).

 

‘1

Fig. 2. Diagram of facility for measuring wave front distortions
5. The facility for measuring wave front distortions shown in the diagram of
Fig. 2 is an example of realization of the described method. Radiation of lie-Ne

laser 1 is expanded by eyepiece 2 with spatial filter 3 placed at the focus. 0b-
jective lens 5 is set so that its central part received the incident beam so as

82

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to reduce the intensity differential over the cross section. Two-dimensional
periodic grating A is placed in the divergent beam, enabling variation of the
period of distribution in the plane of registration by longitudinal displacement
of the grating. The spacing a can be varied by relative displacement of two iden-
tical gratings superimposed on each other. The intensity distribution is regi-
stered by photographic plate 6 in the plane of reproduceion, the position of this
plane being defined by formula (6). Objects to be studied can be placed anywhere
between grating h and registration plane 6.

As an illustration of the possibilities of the method. measurements were made

of the distortions of a wave front by inhomogeneities modeled by a glass plate.
0n the interference patterns of Fig. 3 [photo not reproduced] the unperturbed
distribution is shown on the left, and the distribution distorted by optical in-
homogeneities of the plate is shown on the right. The photographs were obtained
for the same region of the plate (the period of distribution on the object was
1.3 m. N- l) with grating spacings 01.0.15, 02-06. In the former case. the
number of harmonics of comparable intensities is greater than in the latter case
[for example for 0,. according to (1). 13/103 0.5, and for 02. 11/19: 0.hl], and
more blurring of the image is observed as a consequence of violation of condition
(5). The one—dimensional nature of inhomogeneities introduced by the plate simpli-
fies processing of the interference pattern. reducing this procedure to a one—
dimensional problem. The interference pattern of the second photograph can be
interpreted as follows.

In the center of the photograph (in the vicinity of the 17-th line from the bottom)
the images of the squares are blurred. i. e. in this area R(x1) is large, and

the period of distribution is smaller than in the undistorted left part. indicating
a focusing convexity in the relief of the plate. In the region of the 8-16—th
lines, the images of the squares are fairly sharp. R(x1) is small, and displacement
of the lines in case of the period of the image equal to the undistorted value
indicates an optical wedge in this region. In the upper and lower parts of the
photograph the image is blurred. and the period of the distribution is greater

than the undistorted period. which is an indication of a defocusing concavity.

For numerical processing of the interference pattern in this photograph. the dis-
placements sz of the squares. where Z is the number of the line. were measured
relative to the left part that had not been subjected to the action of the investi-
gated plate. which to some extent eliminated the influence of nonideality of optical
components of the system. Derivatives were found by the formula 30(x1)laxl-
2n(AxZ)/Az*. where z*- zosi-zss- (zoszsslf). zos is the distance from the object

to the objective lens. :5; is the distance from the objective lens to the plane

of registration. f is the focal length of the objective lens. Considering that
¢(x,)= LL(x1)(n- l)-2n/l, where n is the index of refraction of glass. AL(x1)

is the change in thickness of the plate along X1, we find AL(x1)(n-l) (Fig. 5).

It can be seen that the resultant relation coincides with the qualitative study

of the interference pattern Outlined above. The accuracy of measurement of Ax;

was 0.1:mn. which in the given measurement system corresponded to 8010'1 l.

The third photograph of Fig. 3 [photo not reproduced is the interference pattern
of a fairly smooth section of the plate, the region x1-x{l [see (5)] being re-

duced by a factor of [.7 as compared with the preceding case. The change in the
phase front of the plate is shown in Fig. 6. In the given case, the initial

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAL.USEZONLN

Pig. 6. Change of phase front
in glass plate as a function of
x1. obtained from processing
interference patterns 2 (upper as;
scale) and 3 (lower scale) of

Fig. 3 [not reproduced]

2'01

001

 

0 5 101.uu

interference pattern is fairly contrasty. which enabled measurement of Ax with
accuracy of 20 um. and accordingly the accuracy of determining AL(x1)(n-l) was
4-10' A.

Ifonlythe curvature of the wave front is of interest. the measurements can be
done with respect to the distorted right-hand part of the interference pattern.
In this case Ax; is measured to within an unknown constant that corresponds to
a fixed optical wedge over the aperture.

6. This wave front sensor based on the method of multibeam interferometry has
certain advantages over conventional sensors. The optical system of the wave
front sensor is analogous to that of the Hartmsnn sensor (Ref. 2], is simple.

and is easily realizable. However. the sensitivity of the wave front sensor to
phase distortions is considerably higher (Ref. 4]. and the accuracy of measurement
increases with their reduction. A wave front sensor with grating of small size
enables investigation of a medium with large apertures. The spatial resolution
defined by the parameter 4H1Np(l-z It" may be considerably higher due to the
capability of reducing the lattice period. The range of phase distortions that
the wave front sensor registers is determined by the condition of contrast of

the intensity distribution in the plane of registration (5). and may amount to
many wavelengths. Studies have shown that the wave front sensor is not very sen-

sitive to nonuniformities in illumination of the aperture.

The wave front sensor is especially convenient in use as an indicator of wave
front distortions. for example in systems of aperture probing or sharpness enhance
ment (Ref. 2]. It is less sensitive to perturbations of equipment by vibrations
than other interference wave front sensors.

The capability of real-time use of the wave front sensor is determined by the
rate of computer input of information on intensity distribution in the plane of
registration. which depends on the reception device. and by computing time. The
data processing algorithm developed in this paper is simple and permits rapid
computation of the shape of a wave front.

In conclusion the authors thank A. H. Prokhorov for useful discussion.
REFERENCES

l. Bakut. P. A.. Ustinov. N. D.. Troitskiy. I. N., Sviridov. K. N., ZARUBBZH-
‘ NAXA ELEKCTONIKA. No 3, 1977. p 55.

86

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Hardy. J. IL. PROC. 1853, Vol 66. 1978. p 651; TRUDY IIER. V01 6. 1978, p 31.
3. Koryakovskiy. A. S.. Marchenko. V. IL. PIAN Preprint No 89. Moscow, 1979.

1.. Koryakovskiy, A. 5., Harchenko, V. IL, KVANTOVAYA ELBKTRONIKA, Vol 7. 1980.
p 1048.

S. Deckers, Ch. NOW. REV. OPTIQUB. Vol 7. 1976, p 113.
6. Montgomery. H. D.. JOSA. V01 57. 1967. p 772.

7. Goodman. J. IL, "Vvedeniye v Fur'ye optiku" [Introduction to Fourier Optics].
"Hit", Moscow. 1970 [New York, McGraw~Hill Book (20.. 1968].

8. Bakut. P. A” Troits'dy. I. N., Denim A. A" Safronov. A. N.. ZARUBBZENAYA
RADIOELEKTRONIKA, Nu II. 1978. p 3.

COPYRIGHT: Izdacel'stvo "Nauka". "Zhurnal tekhnicheskoy fiziki". 1981

6610
C50: 8164/1798-A

85

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
iful(lﬂﬂC1Al.lEﬂi(lﬂLV

UDC 621.3.038.8
FEASIBILITY OF MAKING AN ABSORBIRG CELL FOR A- 1315 nm
Hoscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 6(108). Jun 81 pp 1315-1319
[Article by 0. B. Danilov. A. P. Zhevlakov and T. L. Yachnev]

[Text] It is experimentally shown that a concentration of unex-
cited iodine atoms of (2-5)-1017 cm" can be obtained on the
pyrolysis phase of photolysis of perfluoroalkyl iodides. The
velocities of pyrolysis and compressional waves are measured

in a thick layer of pcrfluoroalkyl iodide. It is found that

the velocity of the pyrolysis wave is much greater than that

of the compressional wave. The authors discuss the feasibility
of constructing a pulse absorption cell for A- 1315 nm in which
the absorbing medium is produced by a pyrolysis wave.

At the present time the amplification stages of a photodissociation iodine laser
are decoupled by using an absorbing cell [Ref. 1. 2] that works on the transition
I(52Pyg-52Py5). Unexcited iodine atoms are produced by thermodissociation of
iodine molecules 1;. The cell is placed in a thermostat with temperature of ~800°C.
The working temperature of the iodine atoms was ~1017 cm". Since the absorbing
transition is the inverse of the stimulated transition 1(52Py§-52P;§) and the
widths cf the lines of both are made equal, the iodine absorbing ce 1 should work
with renuction of the cross section of the luminous flux of the preceding amplifi-
cation stage. A weak point of the thermal absorbing cell is the windows that are
rlways in contact with iodine. which reduces their radiation strength. An absorb-
ing cel; in which unexcited iodine atoms are for-ed upon flash photolysis of per-
fluoroalkyl iodides is free of this disadvantage. The photolysis region in the
absorbing cell can be localized at any distance from its windows, and therefore

the dimensions can be selected in accordance with the admissible requirements for
radiation loading. A pulse absorbing cell has been used for decoupling the master
laser and amplifier [Ref. 3]. However. Ref. 3 contains no data on the transmission
factors and operating conditions of the absorbing cell that would help us to under-
stand whether such a cell can be used for decoupling powerful amplification stages.

In photolysis of perfluoroalkyl iodides. a concentration of iodine atoms of 1017
per cc or more is difficult to achieve on the pre-pyrolysis stage of photolysis
even when a strong quenchant of excited iodine atoms 1* is used because of rapid
recombination of iodine atoms with radicals CP3, Cng [Ref. 4]. But such a con-
centration of iodine atoms is easily realized on the post-pyrolysis stage of

86

FOI10FFKJAI.USE(NULY
FIHICHHWCJAI.IEHZCMVLY

on one transition F- 3- F-lo. According to Ref. 6 the half-width of the emission
line of such a photodissociation laser is 0.0015 cm". The half-width of the ab-
sorption line was calculated from the data of Ref. 7. Conformity to Bouguer law
was verified by varying the length of the absorbing medium. The experiments were
done on mixtures of CF31. n-Cngl with air and Xe. The oxygen of the air. a strong
quenchant of 1*, prevented amplification of the transilluminating signal on the

I'm 1%)] ”1"”, J The time dependences of concentration of iodine

“ 2 atoms for different mixtures (curves 1-5) are

‘0 , given on Fig. 1. This figure shows that with

‘0 J photolysis of mixtures of CF31. n-Cngl with

In ’ air we can get concentrations of iodine atoms
of about (2-5)'1017 cm'3. The region of fast

.0 5 formation of iodine atoms corresponds in time
to the region of intense photolysis Inst. 8].

5 The concentration of iodine atoms is 6-10“ cm"

‘ on the pre-pyrolysis stage of photolysis. which

2 lasts for the entire pumping pulse in a mixture

5 of n-C,FyI:air:Xe- 1:5:20 (pn.c’P7I - 20 m Hg).

5Q Passage of a nanosecond pulse through the ampli-
0 am an an «M c. ya fier is accompanied

by the appearance of a pede-
stal (pre-pulae) that is longer than the part

Fig. 1. Time dependences of the pulse in which the main energy is concen-
of the concentration of unex- trated [Ref. 2]. The transilluminated absorbing
cited iodine atoms in the cell should maximally attenuate the radiation
following mixtures: CF,I:air of the pro-pulse. superluminescence and lumines-
- 15:75 (1), 30:75 (2). comes of the preceding amplifier (weak signal)
C;P,I:air- 15:50 (3). 30:50 and should pass the radiation of the main pulse
(4) and C3F71:air:Xe- [5:75:300 (strong signal) with minimum losses. For ef-
mm Hg (5); 6--pumping pulse; fective decoupling of amplification stages by
standard error of measurements an absorbing cell. the absorption linewidth should
of concentration of iodine be no narrower than the amplification line of
atoms for curves 1-6 is $202. the preceding stage. It is known (Ref. 3] that
and for curve S--401 the amplification line is intentionally broadened

by adding large concentrations (~101’ cm") of
buffer gas to suppress self-excitation of the amplifier. It is not advantageous
to use such a method of line broadening in the absorbing cell as it leads to a
reduction in the concentration of iodine atoms. It is suggested that the widths
of the absorption and amplification lines be matched by applying an inhomogeneous
longitudinal magnetic field on the absorbing cell. Broadening of the absorption
line of the absorbing cell by the magnetic field enables us to use a relatively
low concentration of the working mixture. This is important since a reduction
itll(ﬂﬂﬂC1Al.lﬂiE(ﬂdlY

 

Fig. 2. Construction of an absorbing cell

magnetic field. The working mixture is admitted to the chamber with bell mouths 6
as far as vacuum gate a. and the rest of the absorbing cell is evacuated. Opening
the gate gives rise to a rarefaction wave at the gasdvacuum interface. this wave
moves through the gas at the speed of sound c. and the gas begins to escape into
the vacuum. The velocity of the gas boundary is u- [ZICY- 1)]c. where y is the
adiabatic exponent [Ref. 9]. To eliminate the influence of both processes on the
operation of the cell. it is necessary to locate the gate at certain distances
both from the pumped region of the gas (1;. see Fig. 2) and from the focal plane
of the input lens of the absorbing cell 5 (22). Let us estimate the lower limit
of the values of 1‘, lg, after assigning the shutter opening time t3. At tg-Il ms
(Ref. [0]. c-160 m/s, u-2.2 km/s. we get Z1- 16 cm. 22-220 cm. Firing of pump-
ing lamps 2 located in illuminator 3. establishment of the magnetic field and trans-
mission of the monopulse through the absorbing cell up to input lens 7 of the fol-
lowing stage all take place before arrival of the gas in the region near the focus
of lens 5 to preclude optical breakdown there. In determining the parameters of
the absorbing cell. we begin with the premise that the pressure of the working
mixture must ensure the necessary concentration of iodine atoms on the one hand.
and must ensure resistance of the medium to optical breakdown on the other hand.

A concentration of iodine atoms of ~6-1017 cm" can be obtained from a mixture

of CFglzoz- 1:1 (chJII-ZO mm Hg). Assuming that the breakdown threshold for this
mixture is the same as for air (~250 GH/cmz) [Ref. ll], we find that at a pulse
duration of 1 ns a beam can be sent through the absorption region with energy den-
sity c- 250 J/cmz. 0n the gas-vacuum interface, the admissible energy density

is certainly greater than 250 J/cmz. For subsequent estimates. let us take the
energy density of the signal incident on the absorbing cell as cIISO J/cmz. An
absorbing medium in a magnetic field that is inhomogeneous lengthwise of the medium
has a nonuniformly broadened absorption line. The problem of calculating the satu-
rated coefficient of absorption of such a medium transilluminated by a nanosecond
radiation pulse has not yet been solved (Ref. 12]. For estimates of the weak-
signal and strong-signal transmission coefficients of the absorbing cell. let us
assign the length of the pumped region (120 cm). and assume that its central region
with length of 20 cm is in a magnetic field “:00. In the absence of a magnetic
field. the absorption line is uniformly broadened. According to Ref. 13. for the
main pulse (11' 1 ns). the pre—pulse (12>‘r1) and the superluminescence signal

at a gas pressure in the absorbing cell of 40 mm Hg we have the relation “2‘“: e
AV81(:AVLOI (Av1,2 s1,Lor are the halfdwidths of the main pulse. pre-pulse. super-
luminescence signal and Lorentz absorption line respectively). The strong-signal

88

F0!‘0PFNJAI.U§E(HHLY
I‘llf”ﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬁﬂﬁ(lﬂLY

transmission coefficient of the given segment of the medium is

T; - l -hvhl/[(l+81/sz)el.

where hv is the energy of a quantum of incident radiation, N is the concentration
of unexcited iodine atoms, 1 is the length of the absorbing medium, g1. g; are
the statistical weights of the ground and excited states of the iodine atom. He
will assume that the rate of intermixing of sublevels of the hyperfine structure

1-4
of the ground state vm>1"'1. At “-4.10” cm". 1-30 cm. g1- 2 gr. -2(., 82'8F.3'7
i-l

and c- 50 J/cm’. T;>0.99. Considering that the weak—signal transmission T3 is
determined b Bouguer law. and taking the absorption cross section °ab equal to
5.8010"‘ cm (Ref. 15]. we get T2: 10". Let us note that in the phototropic
filters used in photodissociation lasers for these same purposes [Ref. 15] at the
present time. values of Tl'and T2 that are close to those obtained above are not
simultaneously realized.

The region of the absorbing cell medium that is located in the magnetic field is
necessary only for suppressing the luminescence of the preceding amplification
stage. Assuming that over the entire length of the absorbing cell the minimum
cross section of absorption of iodine atoms is realized in a magnetic field of
0—8000 oersteds (oabI-9-IO'2° cm2 [Ref. 14]). ensuring the equality Avgos- Avlun.

we get an upper limit for the coefficient of absvrption of the luminescence signal
of ~10'z. When the entire length of the working medium is taken into consideration,
T1 decreases to 0.97. It should be noted that in a pulse absorbing cell, the values
of the coefficients T1. T2 may vary over rather broad limits due to the capability
of changing the length and concentration of the absorbing medium.

Simultaneous pyrolysis of the working gas throughout the active volume of a pulse
absorbing cell for a vessel diameter of 30-100 mm and working gas pressure of

30 mm Hg is impossible because of the large cross section of absorption of the
pumping light by the perfluoroalkyl iodide molecules. Sufficiently intense pumping
in the medium of such an absorbing cell should give rise to a pyrolysis wave [Ref.
16] with velocity determined by the time of readiness of the vessel for operation,
and a gasdynamic perturbation wave [Ref. 17] that leads to disruption of the opti-
cal homogeneity of the medium. The velocities of both wavesweremeasured in a
cylindrical chamber 175 mm in diameter with flashlamp on the axis. This lamp had
an outside diameter of 70 mm. and the length of the interelectrode gap was 1 m.
The lamp input energy was about 48 kJ. Duration of the half-period of the dis-
charge current was hO us. The chamber was placed in a planar optical cavity.
Time—scan photography of the radiation field in the near zone showed a lasing
cutoff wave on the field pattern. propagating from the surface of the lamp to the
wall of the vessel. This wave arose only in the pure rerfluoroalkyl iodide. and
was not present in a mixture of the iodide with buffer gas (SP5) during the pumping
pulse. On this basis. the effect was identified with the pyrolysis wave. The
gasdynamic perturbation wave (compressional wave) in a mixture of Cgryl-SF; showed
up well on the field pattern of radiation in the near zone. and had the form of

a pronounced narrow zone of absence of lasing. but with lasing retained in the
region between the compressional wave and the lamp surface. Fig. 3 shows Rt plots

89

IVIICNNNCIAI.IEHE(M'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of pyrolysis and compressional waves. It can be seen
that the pyrolysis wave (curve 1) arises prior to the
compression wave (curve 2) and works through the entire
active space of the chamber. The velocities of the
pyrolysis and compressional waves under the conditions
of the experiments were 1.2 and 0.3 km/s respectively.

I, D!

 

Q‘NHO

The resultant data danonstrate the feasibility of an
20 w ‘0 us absorbing cell with working vessel 100 m in diameter.
In such an absorbing cell the diameter of the region

Fig. 3. lit-diagram of of the absorbing medium undisturbed by the compression
pyrolysis and compres- wave V111 be 70 I. when the pumping that 13 used 18
sional waves: 1"9031-‘11 external with respect to the vessel of the absorging

. 23 m “8; 2--mixture of cell. A cell with such an aperture can be used to
c3F7I:SI-‘6 - 23:92 mm Hg; decouple the target unit from the last amplification
R- 0 corresponds to the stage of a powerful nonopulse photodissociation laser
lamp surface; the broken [Ref. 2]-

line denotes the wall of

5.

9.

the chamber The authors thank S. A. Tul'skiy for assistance with
the experiments on observation of the pyrolysis wave.

REFERENCES

Gaydash. V. V.. Yeroshenko, V. A., Lapin. s. 6.. Shcmyakin. V. 1.. shurygin.
V. K.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 3. 1976, p 1701.

Hohla. K., "High Power Lasu: and Applications". Ver. Springer. 1978.

Brederlov. 6., F11. Ye.. Fuss. V.. Khola. 11.. Fol'k, 11.. KVANTOVAYA ELEK-
TRONIKA. Vol 3, 1976, p 906.

Yershov, L. S.. Zalesskiy. V. Yu.. Sokolov, V. N.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA,
Vol 5. 1978. p 865.

Belousova, I. 14.. Gorshkov. N. 6.. Danilov, 0. 3.. Yachnev. I. l... ZHURNAL
TEKHNICIIESKOY FIZIKI, Vol (.0. 1970. p 1562; Belousova. I. 11., Danilov. O. 3.,
Gorshkov. N. 6., Zalesskiy. V. Yu., Yachnev. l. I... ZHURNAL BKSPBRIMEETAL'-
NOV 1 TEORBTICHESKOY FIZIKI, Vol 65, 1973. p 517.

Belousova, I. 11., Kiselev, V. 11., Kurzenkov, V. N.. OPTIKA I SPBKTROSKOPIYA.
Vol 33. 1972. p 210.

Borovich. B. L., Zuyev. V. S., Katulin. V. A.. Hikheyev, L. D., Nikolayev,
P. 11., Nosach, 0. Yu.. Rozanov. V. 3.. "Intense Radiating Discharges and 0p-
tically Pumped Gas Lasers". Moscow VINITI. 1978; Babkin, V. 1., Kuznetsova,
S. V.. Haslov, A. 1.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 5, 1978, p 495.

Zalesskiy. V. Yu.. Kokushkin. A. 11., Yachnev, I. I... ZHURNAL TBKHNICHESKOY
FIZIKI. Vol 47. 1977, p 2123.

Zel'dovich. Ya. 8.. Rayzer. Yu. P.. "Piziks udarnykh voln i vysokotenpersturnykh
gidrodinamicheskikh yavleniy" [Physics of Shock Haves and High-Temperature
Hydrodynamic Phenomena]. Moscow. Nauka. 1966.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i‘llCﬂﬂﬂCLALlliB(ﬂVLY

l0. Isakov. S. N.. USSR Patent. No 696605. BYULLBTBN' IZOBRETEIIIY. No ’07, 1976.

ll. Rayzer. Yu. P., "Lazernaya 1skra 1 rasprostraneniye razryadov" [Laser Spark
and Propagation of D1scharges]. Moscow, Nauka. 1974.

12. P111pov1ch, V. A., Kovalev. A. A.. “ORG s prosvetlyayushch1n1sya f1l':ran1"
[Lasers With Phototroplc F11ters]. Minsk. Ranks 1 tekhn1ka. I975.

13. Kharkevich, A. A.. "Spektry 1 analiz" [Spectra and Analys1s]. Moscow-Leningrad.
GI'I'I'L. 1952 .

1h. Hohla,K.. "Photochem1schcr Jodlaaer", Max-Planck Inst. P1asmaphys.. Garch1ng.
Mun1ch, 1971; Bobrov. B. D., Kiselev, V. H.. Gren1sh1n. A. 5., KVANTOVAYA ELEK-
TRONIKA, Vol lo, 1977. p 619.

IS. Batashev. S. P., Gal'pern. H. G., Katulin. V. A., Lebedev, 0. L.. Luk'yanets.
Ye. A.. Hekhryakova. N. 6., H121n, V. H.. Nosach. V. Yu., Petrov. A. P.,
Petukhov, V. A., KVANTOVAYA BMW, V01 6. 1979. p 2652.

16. Zalesskiy. V. Yu., ZHURNAL EKSPBRIHENTAL'NOY I TBORETICEESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 69.
1975. P 513.

17. Belousova, I. H.. Danilov, 0. 3.. $1n1tayna, I. A.. Spiridonov, V. V.. ZHURNAL
EKSPERIMENTAL'NOY I TEORSTICHESKOY FIZIKI, Vol 58. 1970. p 1481.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Rad1o 1 avyaz'". “Kvantovaya elektron1ka". 1981

6610
C50: [862/242 ' END -

91

IIIICHHHCIAI.UBE(NULY