FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10002
22 September 1981

USSR Report

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS

(FOUO 8/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERV!CE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10002

22 September 19:

USSR REPORT

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS
(F000 8/81)

CONTENTS

CRYSTALS AND SEMICONDUCTORS

Lithium lodate: Crystal Growing, Properties and Applicst ions. . . . . 1
LASERS AND MASERS

Electron Beam-Controlled Copper Vapor Laser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.

Physical Processes in Generators of Coherent Optical Radiation. . . . 7

Optical Resonators and the Problem of Laser Emission Divergence. . . 15
NUCLEAR PHYSICS

Linear Induction Accelerators..................................... 116

Intense Steady-State Electron Beans: Extraction Into the
Atmosphere and Investigation.................................... 12‘.

OPTOELBCTRONICS

Radio Holography and Optical Data Processing in Microwave
TechnologyOOIIOI.0.00.0...OIOQOOOOOOOOOIDIOOOOCUOOCOIOIOOOOIt... 136

Three Channel Electra-Optical waveguide Comtator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142

- a - [III - USSR - 21H SST FOUO

a-An Ava—- -— nut-.-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CRYSTALS AND SEMICONDUCTORS

UDC $68.5+537.3ll.33
LITHIUM IODATB: CRYSTAL GROWING, PROPERTIES AND APPLICATIONS

Novosibirsk IODAT LITIYA: VYRASHCRIVANIYE KRISTALLOV. IKE SVOYSTVA I PRIHENENIYB
in Russian 1980 (signed to press 23 Oct 80) pp 2-5

[Annotation. preface and table of contents from book "Lithium Niobate: Crystal
Growing, Properties and Applications" by Klavdiya Il'inichna Avdiyenko. Sergey
Vasil'yevich Bogdanov (general editor), Stanislav Hikhaylovich Arkhipov. Boris
Ivanovich Kidyarov, Viktor Vasil'yevich Lebedev. Yuriy Yevgenevich Nevskiy, Vladimir
lvanovich Trunov. Dmitriy Vasil'yevich Sheloput and Rozaliya Hikhaylovna Shklonskaya.
Institute of Physics of Semiconductors. Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1200 copies, 125+ pages]

[Text] Data are given on the physicochemical properties of lithium iodate. and
the technique for growing crystals in the hexagonal modification. Results are
given from studies of the actual structure and defects of crystals, the influence
of various factors on their optical, piezoelectric and other physical properties,
generation of the second harmonic of laser emission and parametric conversion of
infrared images to the visible range. An examination is made of the application
of lithium iodate crystals in devices of nonlinear optics. acousto-optics and
acousto-electronics.

Por scientists and engineers engaged in growing and using crystals in applied
physics. and also for undergraduate and graduate students. Figures 61, tables 28,
references I90.

Preface

Among the large number of piezoelectric and nonlinear optics crystals of halogenate
compounds with physical properties under intense study in recent years. the most
widely used in applied physics have been crystals of hexagonal modification of
lithium iodate (a-Lith).

The properties of lithium iodate crystals were first described in 1969 by (Nat) and
(Hauszyul'). Practical interest in these crystals stems from the fact that their
effective nonlinear optical coefficients are comparable to those of lithium niobate,
and at the same time. lithium iodate presents no problems involving optically in- '
duced inhomogeneities, which are a severe restriction in the use of lithium niobate.
Therefore, lithium iodate crystals are used as effective laser radiation frequency-
doublers in intracavity generation of the second harmonic. In particular, the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

second harmonic of the yttrium—aluminum garnet laser used to pump the first indus-
trial light generator was stimulated in a lithium iodate crystal. This material
was chosen because of its resistance to optical radiation. In subsequent years

a great deal of research was done on detailed investigation of different physical
properties of lithium iodate crystals. and their extensive possibilities were noted
for practical application in laser physics. acousto-electronics and acousto-optics
as a piezoelectric and nonlinear optical material.

The use of such materials. that have a high conversion efficiency and a wide relative
transmission passband. considerably improves the working characteristics and ap-
preciably expands the frequency range of various optical, acousto-electronic and
acousto-optical devices. for example for delaying and processing radio signals,
modulators, laser emission deflectors.

This book attempts a systematic exposition of the set of problems relating to crys-
tal growing. investigation of physical properties and the use of lithium iodate
crystals in devices of nonlinear optics. acorsto-optics and acoustoelectronics.

In the description of physicochemical properties, and primarily optical and piezo—
electric properties, attention is turned to their connection with production tech-
niques, purity of the initial materials. specially introduced dopants and structural
perfection. In addition to analysis of Soviet and non-Soviet research dealing

with lithium iodate. the main part of the book presents materials of original re-
search done by the authors from 1970 through 1978.

We hope that this publication will stimulate the investigation of other interesting
properties of lithium iodate crystals, and will promote more extensive use and
development of new technical devices in applied physics and their introduction

in the national economy.

The book was written by researchers at the Institute of Physics of Semiconductors

of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences K. I. Avdiyenko. (chapters
1 and IV), s. V. Bogdanov (chapter 111), B. I. Kidyarov (preface. conclusion, chap-
ter II). V. V. Lebedev (chapter V). Yu. Ye. Nevskiy (chapter VI), V. I. Trunov
(chapter V), D. V. Sheloput (preface. chapter V1), and researchers at Novosibirsk
Rare Metals Plant 5. H. Arkhipov and R. H. Shklovskaya (chapter I). The authors
thank their colleagues in the work for useful advice and technical assistance in
preparation of the manuscript. Critical comments should be addressed to: 630090.
Novosibirsk, 90. pr. Nauki. l3. Inatitut fiziki poluprovodnikcv 50 AN SSSR. kand.
fiz.-mat. nauk K. I. Avdiyenko.

Contents page
Preface a
Chapter 1. Physicochemical properties of lithium iodate 6
1. Crystalline structure -
2. Phase diagrams and thermodynamic properties 12
3. Production of lithium iodate 17
Chapter II. Growing lithium iodate crystals 20
l. Crystallization of lithium iodate from melts. and phase trans-
formations a- B - y-LiIO; -
2. Investigation of principles governing crystallization and growth
of lithium iodate crystals from an aqueous solution 24
2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6610
C50:

Chapter

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

111. Electric. dielectric. piezoelectric and acoustic properties
of lithium iodate crystals
Description of physical properties of hexagonal crystals

2. Specific electrical conductivity
3. Permittivity
4. Piezoelectric properties of u-LilO,
5. Acoustic properties of o-LilO; crystals
1V. Defects in lithium iodate crystals and their effect on physical
properties
1. inhomogeneities in o-LilO; crystals
2. Optical properties of u-LiIO; crystals and their dependence on con-
ditions of growth
3. Piezoelectric properties of lithium iodate crystals as dependent on
growing conditions
V. Nonlinear-optics properties of lithium iodate
1. General concepts
2. Nonlinear-optics susceptibilities in an o-LilO; crystal
3. Stimulated emission of second optical harmonics in an o-Lilo, crystal
5. Parametric conversion of infrared radiation to the visib band
5. Angular and spectral characteristics of parametric conversion of
infrared images
6. Infrared image conversion in a critical vector synchronism (CV8)
system
VI. Use of lithium iodate crystals in acousto-optics and accusto-
electronics devices
1. Ultrasonic converter based on lithium iodate plates
2. Ultrasonic delay lines based on u-LiIO; plates
3. Acousto-optical devices based on o-LiIO; single crystals

Conclusion
References

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1980.

1862/186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LASERS AND HASBRS

ELECTRON BEAM-CONTROLLED COPPER VAPOR LASER

Leningrad PIS'MA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI in Russian Vol 7. No 7. 12 Apr 81
(signed to press [8 Mar 81) pp 427-430

[Article by I. M. Isakov. A. C. Leonov and A. N. Starostin, Moscow Physicotechnical
Institute]

[Text] The independent variation of field strength and electron concentration
required for optimum conditions of gas laser operation is impossible in a self-
maintained discharge. The use of an electron beam-controlled discharge is more
convenient in this sense. In this case. the field strength will now be determined
by the electron concentration set up by the time the discharge is activated by

the electron beam (or more precisely by the ratio between the resistance of the
discharge gap and the internal resistance of the excitation oscillator) rather
than by the conditions of breakdown. Such experiments have been extensively done
for example in the initiation of excimer lasers. He have been the first to use

a method of this kind for excitation of a laser based on dense copper vapor.

9 g Fig. 1. Diagram of the in-
stallation: l--electric
discharge generator; 2--ex-
ploding wire generator; 3--
voltage pulse generator; 4-
laser chamber; 5--exploding
conductor; 6--vacuum diode;
7--grid electrode; 8—-sepa-
rative film; 9--output window

 

Copper vapor with density of (1-3)'10" cm" was produced in our experiments by

the method of electrical explosion of conductors [Ref. 3]. A diagram of the in-
stallation is shown in Fig. l. The electron source in our experiments was a vacuum
diode with cold cathode fed by a lZ-stage Marx generator with output capacitance

of 0.83 nF. The generator was based on KlS—IO ceramic capacitors, and was placed
together with the divider and dischargers in a cylindrical jacket filled with nitro-
gen under a pressure of 4—8 atmospheres.

A beam of electrons with energy of 100-300 keV and current density of 10-20 A/cmz
was coupled into the chamber through a window measuring 6x 21 cm covered with Mylar

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

film 25 um thick. The absence of any part subject to heating in the installation
enables the use of ordinary sealing of the separative film. Beam current duration
was 100 ns. The current density and pulse shape were measured by using an elec-
tron collector with signal recorded by the 12-7 nanosecond meter. The beam energy
beyond the output window was measured by the method of foils. Beam homogeneity
and divergence were monitored from the glow of a UFD-89 luminescent x-ray screen.
The discharge was excited by a Blumlein generator based on striplines with total
capacity of 13.5 n? made from foil-covered glass Textolite 1 mm thick. Interelec-
trode distance was 10 cm.

Excitation by electron beam. electric discharge and a combined method were studied
separately in our work. In all cases the delay between explosion of the conductor
and the excitation pulse was 600 us.

In the first version, the cavity used in the research was formed by flat dielectric
mirrors with refiectivities R~ 992 and 672 on a wavelength of 5105 A. Lasing energy
was ll uJ for copper vapor density of 3-10" cm". The reason for such low lasing
energy was due to the fact that the laser in all probability was working in near-
threshold conditions. This is clearly evident from the dependence of lasing energy
on vapor density and reflectivity of the output mirror (Fig. 2a). A situation

of this kind is due to the small energy contribution of the beam to the active
medium. According to estimates [see for example Ref. 2]. the amount of this contri-
bution is -600 uJ/cm3 at a vapor density of 3°10“ cm".

10 Z) J0 60
t. as

 

Fig. 2. Lasing energy as a function of output mirror re-

flectivity: l—-N- 10 ° cm"; 2--N-3-10” cm"; I)—

oscillograms of voltage across the discharge without beam
action (1), and with the beam (II)

Upon excitation by an electric discharge the maximum lasing energy was considerably
higher and amounted to E- 5 mJ at a charging voltage of 25 kV. The output mirror
was a quartz plate without any coating. Increasing the reflectivity in this case
only reduced the lasing energy. Laser pulse duration was 20 ns.

Upon a transition to combined excitationthe energy of the laser pulse increased

to 10 mJ despite the fact that the beam energy absorbed by the copper vapor was
much less than the energy contribution from the discharge (~2 J). Lasing duration
also increased to 30 ns. Let us note that the discharge pulse was delayed relative
to the beam current by 1 - 60-80 ns.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An investigation of the current-voltage characteristics of the discharge showed
that the pulse shape of the discharge current and of the voltage across the dis-
charge gap changes with a transition to the combined method (Fig. 2b). Just as

was assumed. there was a considerable reduction in the amplitude of the voltage
across the discharge since the medium already had considerable conducrivity by

the time of arrival of the exciting pulse. According to estimates [Ref. 2] the
electron concentration at beam parameters of Ub" 200 keV and 1b' 20 A/cm" may reach
3'1013 cm" at N-IIOJ' cm". It has been pointed out previously (Ref. 3] that

in the case of short-pulse excitation of copper vapor lasers using a Blumlein line.
the high voltage across the discharge gap at the instant of the main energy contri-
bution reduces lasing efficiency. On the other hand, a reduction in the voltage
across the discharge makes for more optimum conditions of inversion formation.

Let us note that although laser efficiency was doubled over the case of pure dis-
charge excitation. the actual gain is even greater since lasing efficiency with
respect to the energy investment in copper vapor was tripled due to a reduction

in efficiency of energy transfer to the discharge by a factor of 18. Based on
measurement results we can conclude that the proposed excitation arrangement may

be quite useful for large volumes of copper vapor or high-density vapor. The vapor
density in our experiments was limited by the energy storage of the explosive capaci-
tor bank.

In conclusion. the authors express their sincere gratitude to I. Brchka and
A. N. Steklov for assisting with the experiments.

REFERENCES

l. I. H. Isakov. A. G. Leonov. ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKDY FIZIKI. Vol 50. 1980. p 126.

2. V. A. Danilychev. 0. M. Kerimov, I. B. Kovsh, TRUDY FIAN. Vol 83, p 147.

3. I. M. Isakov. A. G. Leonov. "Tezisy dokladov na Vtorom Vsesoyuznom seminare
po fizike gazovykh lazerov" [Abstracts of Papers to the Second All-Union
Seminar on Physics of Gas Lasers], Uzhgorod, 1978. p 65.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pis'ma v Zhurnal tekhnicheskoy fiziki", 1981

6610
C50: [862/196

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.378.001

PHYSICAL PROCESSES IN GENERATORS 0F COHERENT OPTICAL RADIATION

Moscow FIZIKA PROTSESSOV V GENERATORAKH KDGERENTNOGO OPTICHESKOGO IZLUCEENIYA in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 12 Aug 80) pp 2-5, 634-639

[Annotation. preface and table of contents from book "Physics of Processes in Gener-
ators of Coherent Optical Radiation: Lasers, Resonators, Dynamics of Processes".

by Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences Lev Vasil'yevich Tarasov. docent.
Moscow Institute of Electronic Machine Building. Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'".

4000 copies. 440 pages]

[Text] The book deals with the physics of processes in lasers. Three groups of
problems are considered: methods of producing inverted active media. formation
of the radiation field in the resonator, and the dynamics of processes in lasers.
The choice of material reflects the current level of development of laser tech-
nology. A systematic examination is made of methods used in the theory of lasers.
various approaches and approximations.

The book is intended for scientists and engineers working in the field of laser
technology. and also for instructors and students in institutions of higher edu-
cation. Figures 226, Tables 14. References 295.

Preface

Generators of coherent optical radiation include two groups of devices. The main
group is lasers. The second group includes generators of optical harmonics, para-

metric light generators and so on. This book is devoted to the physics of processes
in 1asers.*

The writing of a book that reflects the current level of laser technology from

a physical standpoint is topical in view of the fact that lasers are being more
and more extensively used both in research and in different areas of the national
economy. There is a continuous rise in the number of engineers and researchers
engaged in the field of laser technology and related areas.

It has been the author's intention for this book to handle two jobs: first. to
systematize and expand the reader's notions of the physics of processes in lasers.

*Generators of optical harmonics and parametric light generators will be the
subject of another book by this author.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to acquaint the reader with the latest advances and directions; secondly. to pro—
vide the reader with information that might be of help in improving the facility
for future use of the special literature. The author has tried to reflect the
current level of development of laser technology. and at the same time to provide

a systematized examination of methods used in the theory of lasers. to discuss
different approaches and approximations. In doing so, the author has attempted

to produce a book that would be not only of definite interest to scientists and
engineers. but might also serve as a scientific and procedural basis for developing
special academic c0urses and textbooks.

The book examines three groups of problems: methods of producing inverted active
media. formation of the radiation field in the optical cavity. and the dynamics
of processes.

in examining methods of producing inversion in active media. the first chapter
discusses the principles and peculiarities of operation of lasers of different

types: solid-state. dye. photodissociation. gas-discharge. electron-beam controlled.
gasdyramic. chemical and plasma lasers.

The second chapter analyzes the role of the resonator in formation of the radia-
tion field of the laser. gives the fundamentals of the theory of onen resonators.
The author uses the geometric optics approximation. the Fox-Li iteration method.
the gaussian beam model. the A300 la . Consideration is taken of the apertures
of mirrors. the presence of a lens or diaphragm within the cavity, misalignment

of components in the resonator. Cavities of different geometries-—both stable
and unstable--are examined. In the case of active resonators the author discusses
effects of the heat lens. frequency pulling and "hole burning." Consideration

is given to problems of longitudinal mode selection and also to the physics of
waveguide resonators and film lasers with distributed feedback. '

The third chapter begins with a survey of different modes of stimulated emission

of the laser. including modes of active and passive Q-switching of the cavity.
longitudinal and transverse mode locking. load modulation. Balance equations
(Statz-de Mars equations and their modifications) are introduced. analyzed and

put to extensive use. These euqations are used as a basis for examining different
aspects of the dynamics of single-mode lasers: transient processes that lead to
damped emission power pulsations; undamped power pulsations that show up in the
presence of weak modulation of losses. generation of giant pulses with instantaneous
Q-switching. The electro-optic and scousto-optic methods of active Q—switching
are compared. A detailed analysis is made of processes in lasers with phototropic
filters. Longitudinal mode locking is discussed with the use of both spectral

and temporal approaches. A temporal description based on fluctuational concepts

is used in considering self-mode locking in a laser with phototropic filter. The
temporal approach is also used to describe acousto-optic mode locking in a laser
with uniformly broadened amplification line. Methods of studying ultrashort light
pulses are discussed separately. The appendices examine Hermite polynomials. Jones
matrices. singular points of a two-dimenional dynamic system and other questions.

This book is a logical continuation of the author's previous work ”Fizicheskiye
osnovy kvantovoy elektroniki" [Physical Principles of Quantum Electronics] (Moscow.
Sovetskoye radio. 1976). giving the general physical picture of the interaction

of optical radiation with matter.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The author is sincerely grateful to V. G. Dmitriyev, V. R. Kushnir. V. K. Novo-
kreshchenov, Ye. A. Shalayev. V. N. Morozov. V. A. D'yakov, V. V. Nikitin, Yu. N.
Pchel'nikov, A. H. Amel‘yants, A. A. Solov'yev and V. F. Trukhin, who read the
manuscript of the book and offered constructive comments and wishes. The author
thanks A. N. Tarasova for assistance in preparing the manuscript for printing.

Contents page
Preface 3
Chapter 1: METHODS OF OBTAINING INVERTED ACTIVE MEDIA

1.1. Some General Problems 7

Inversion of the active medium as a necessary condition of lasing (7). Quantum
yield and efficiency of the laser (8). Condition of inversion for the four-level
model (10). General principles of creating inversion (11). Mechanisms of popu-
lation of levels (12). Mechanisms of dapopulation of levels ([3). Classification
of lasers with regard to pumping methods (15). Some problems that arise in con—
tinuous lasing; collisional lasers (15). Advantages of pulse pumping; lasing on
self-limited transitions (18). Lasers based on dissociating molecules (20).

1.2. Optical Pumping. Solid-State Lasers 21

Specific properties of optical pumping (21). Conditions of realization of steady-
state inversion in optical pumping (23). Solid-state lasers; problems of realiza-
tion of optical pumping. working laser designs (26). The ruby laser (28). YAC:Nd
laser (30). Optical pumping by semiconductor laser or LED (33).

1.3. Organic Dye Lasers 3“

Organic dyes (34). Optical pumping of dye lasers (36). Scheme of levels and main
transitions (37). Tuning lasing wavelength; selective cavities (38). The problem
of expanding the tuning range of lasing wavelength (40).

1.4. Gas Lasers with Hide-Band Optical Pumping 41

The problem of optical pumping of gaseous active media (41). Photolysis lasers
(42). The iodine photolysis laser (43). The problem of direct conversion of solar
energy to laser emission (44).

1.5. Pumping by Self-Maintained Electric Discharge in Rarefied Cases 44

Types of gas-discharge lasers (44). Electric discharges used in gas-discharge
lasers (46). The argon laser (47). Mechanism of inversion in the argon laser
(48). The helium-neon laser (51). The copper-vapor laser (52). Carbon dioxide
molecular laser (53). Inversion mechanism in the C02 laser (54).

1.6. Electron-Beam Controlled Lasers 57

The problem of increasing pressure in the gas laser (57). The electroionization
pumping method (58). Electron-beam controlled C0; laser (60). Use of different
active media (60). Ionization methods (61).

1.7. Gas—Dynamic Lasers (Thermal Pumping) 62

Thermal methods of creating inversion (62). Gas—dynamic C0; laser (64). Inversion
mechanism in the gas-dynamic C0; laser (64). ways to improve the efficiency of
gas-dynamic lasers (67).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. 8 . Chemical Lasers 68

Chemical reactions; initiation and acceleration of reactions (68). Chemical and
laser length of a chain (70). Lasers with :‘irect and indirect formation of in-
version (72). Chemical laser based on a fluorine-hydrogen mixture (73). Hydrogen
sulfide chemical lasers (76). Chemical lasers based on electronic transitions of
molecules (75).

1.9. Plasma Lasers (Recombination Pumping) 75

Recombining plasma as an active laser medium (75). Fundamental problems of creat—
ing a recombining plasma laser (77). The "open" two-level model of a plasma laser
(78). The problem of depopulating the lower working level (79). Pulsed plasma lasers
(81). Plasma lasers using rigid ionizers; the reactor-laser (82). Plasmadynamic
lasers (83). Plasmachemical lasers (86).

References 85

Chapter 2: FORMATION OF THE RADIATION FIELD IN THE LASER CAVITY
2.1. Condition of Stimulated Emiuion 90

Necessity of increasing the initial gain over the coefficient of losses (90).
Initial gain for optically allowed and forbidden transitions (93). Dependence of
initial gain on pumping rate (96). Frequency dependence (96).

2.2. The Optical Cavity and Laser Radiation 97

Optimum coefficient of useful losses (97). Resonant frequencies (99). Modes of
the optical cavity (101). The role of the optical cavity in the laser ([03).
Passive and active cavities (109).

2.3. General Remarks on Open Resonators 109

Impossibility of using volumetric resonators in the optical range (109). The open
resonator (111). Cavity Q (112). Q due to transmission of the output mirror (116).
Q and modes of the open resonator (116). Diffraction losses; Fresnel mater (116).
Major parameters of a passive resonator formed by two mirrors (119). The geometric
approximation (120).

2.6. Lens Waveguides and Open Resonators (Geometric Optics Approximation) 123

The lens waveguide and the open resonator (123). Condition of stability for the
lens waveguide (125). Stable and unstable open resonators; stability diagram (127).
Light beam transmission matrix (130). Light beam transmission matrix for a round
trip of the cavity (135).

2.5. Detuning of the Open Resonator 137

Hisalignment of optical component (137). Resonator with misaligned optical com-
ponent (139).

2.6. Analysais of Open Resonators Based on the Fox-Li Iteration Method.
Equivalent Resonators 161

Kirchhoff-Huygens diffraction integral (161). The Pox-Li integral equation (163).
Transverse modes of the open resonator (166). Resonator formed by two spherical
mirrors (165). Confocal resonator (169). Accounting for the aperture of cavity
mirrors (151). Equivalent resonators (156). Resonator equivalent to a cavity with
internal lens (155). Irised Cavity (159).

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2 . 7 . Gaussian Beams 162

Spatial form of the gaussian beam (162). Propagation of gaussian beam in free
space (164). Radius of curvature of a surface of constant phase (166). Principal
relations (169). Complex parameters of gaussian beam (168). Gaussian beam as a

solution of a parabolic equation (169). Generalization to nodes of higher orders
(170).

2.8. Transformation and Matching of Gaussian Beams ' 171

Transformation of gaussian bean in free space (172). Lens as a phase corrector
(172). Transformation of gaussian beam in lens (173). Transformation in a lens
system (175). ABCD law (175). Transformation of gaussian beam in square-law medium
(178). Matching of gaussian beams (180).

2.9. Gaussian Beams in Stable Resonators 182

Self-reproduction of gaussian beam upon reflection from a spherical mirror (182).
Gaussian beam in resonator (large mirror apertures) (183). Remarks on considera-
tion of the mirror aperture (186). Phase shift for the gaussian beam, and resonant
frequency spectrum (189). Application of the ABCD law to examination of the field
in the cavity (190). Indefiniteness of the caustic of a confocal resonator with
unbounded mirror apertures (192). Confocal resonator with finite mirror apertures
(194). Irised confocal resonator (195).

2.10. Unstable Resonators 197

Homocentricity of beam coupled out of an unstable resonator (197). Losses in an
unstable resonator according to the geometric optics theory (199). Application
of the ABCD law to unstable resonators (203). Accounting for diffraction on the
edge of a mirror (208). Advantages of unstable resonators (210).

2.11. Principles of r‘requency Selection 212

Different types of frequency selection (213). Use of wide-band absorbing filters
and dispersion elements (214). General cements on longitudinal node selection
(216). Interference methods of selection (217). Resonators with anisotropic elements
(219). Nonlinear-optics method of frequency selection (221).

2.12. Effects of "Hole Burning" and Frequency Pulling 222

Homogeneous and inhomogeneous broadening of spectral lines (222). Saturation of
amplification in homogeneous and inhomogeneous broadening of lines; the "hole
burning" effect (224). Specifics of analysis of gain saturation with inhomogeneous
broadening of a transition line (227). Frequency pulling effect for cases of
homogeneous and inhomogeneous broadening (228).

2.13. Heat Lens 230

Heat lens effect (230). Thermoelastic stresses; thermal distortions of a cavity
(232). Focal length and principal planes of the heat lens (234). Accounting for
the heat lens in laser systems (236).

2 . 11o . Waveguide Resonators 238

Waveguide resonator; waveguide nodes (238). Number of waveguide modes in a reso-
nator (240). Half-waveguide cavity (241). Advantages of waveguide resonators (2102).

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.15. Optical Radiation in a Thin-Film Waveguide. Distributed Feedback 244

waveguide modes in a thin film (245). Number of waveguide modes in film (249).

Field distributioin in waveguide modes (249). Method of input and extraction of
radiation for a thin-film waveguide (252). Operating principle of prism-film coupling
element (254). Distributed feedback (256). Distributed-feedback film lasers (257).
Film lasers with periodic structure as a cavity reflector (259).

References 259

Chapter 3: DYNAMICS OF PROCESSES IN THE LASER
3.1. General Information on Modes of Laser Operation 266

Causes of unsteady lasing (266). Free lasing mode (268). Mode of stimulated emis-
sion of giant pulses in active Q-switching of the cavity (270). Mode of stimulated
emission of giant pulses in passive Q-switching of the cavity (273). Longitudinal
mode locking (275). Transverse mode locking (277). Cavity-dumped operation (279).
Generation of a pulse sequence in lasers with continuous pumping (281). Using
negative feedback to produce microsecond pulses (283).

3.2. Approximate Equations for Describing the Dynamics of Processes in
Lasers (Balance Equations) 286

Differential equation for luminous flux density (286). Differential equations for
inverse population density (287). Complete system of partial differential balance
equations (290). Averaged balance equations (rate equations) (291). Ststz—de Hars
equations (293). Comparison of Statz-de Mars equations and the system of averaged
balance equations (295). Inverse population threshold density and the lasing con-
dition (297). Dimensionless form of recording Statz-de Mars equations (298).
Accounting for the contribution of spontaneous emission to field intensity (299).
General remarks on the method of balance equations (300). The laser as a dis-
tributed self-oscillatory system (302).

3.3. The Free Losing Mode. Regular Damped Pulsations of Radiation Power 304

Pre-lasing stage (304). transient processes that accompany the onset of lasing
(306). Phase portrait of a free-lasing solid-state laser (310). Determination of
the structure of the laser phase portrait (313). Analysis of pulsation pattern
based on balance equations (314). Remarks on free lasing in the multimode laser
(316).

3.4. Laser with Unsteady Resonator. Undamped Fulsations of Radiation
Power 317

Balance equations for a laser with periodically varying Q of the cavity (317).
Low-amplitude pulsations (319). Comments on the feasibility of realization of un-
damped high-amplitude pulsations (321). Periodic Q-switching with uniform motion
of a reflecting plane (322). Periodic Q-switching upon heating of the active ele-
ment (323). Nature of undamped pulsations in the free lasing mode (324).

3.5. Active Q-Switching of the Cavity 325

Opticomechanical Q-switching (325). Blectro—optical Q-switching (326). Acousto-
optical Q~switching (330). Acousto-optical and electro-optical Q-switching (com-
parison) (333). Modulation of useful losses (335).

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIC 1A1. USE ONLY

3.6. Mode of Emission of Giant Pulses with Active Q-Switching 335

Principal time stages (335). Balance equations; instantaneous Q-switching (338).
Phase portrait of the laser in instantaneous Q-switching (339). Analysis of the
stage of linear development of lasing (342). Energy characteristics of the giant
pulse (343). Duration and shape of the giant pulse (345). Mode of stimulated
emission of giant pulses for different Q-switching times (346). Comments on the
development of a pulse in the direction transverse to the cavity axis (349).

3.7. Lasers with Phototropic Filter 350

The phototropic filter (350). Differential equation for averaged luminous flux
density (353). Complete system of balance equations for laser with phototropic
filter (355). Steady—state solutions of the system of balance equations (357).
Instability of the initial steady state. and the condition of self-excitation of
generation in a laser with phototropic filter (359). Soft and hard excitation of
lasing (360). Stability (instability) of steady states in the case of soft excita-

tion of lasing (362). Modes of stimulated emission of a laser with phototropic
filter (364).

3.8. Mode of Stimulated Emission of Giant Pulses with Passive Q-Switching 365

Conditions of stimulated emission of giant pulses in a laser with phototropic
filter (365). Development of the giant pulse (367). Balance equations; analogy

with the case of instantaneous Q-switching (369). Comparison of modes of [stimu-
lated emission of giant pulses in active and passive Q-switching;] combined Q-
switching (371). Natural selection of transv.r;e modes in passive Q-switching (374).

3.9. Longitudinal Mode Locking (Generation of Ultrashort Light Pulses) 375

Essence of the idea of longitudinal mode locking (376). The non-selective cavity
(378). Active mode locking (380). Passive mode locking (self-mode locking) (381).

The combined method of mode locking (383). Methods of reducing the relaxation time

of phototropic filters (384). Influence of the effect of self-focusing of light (385).

3.10. Measuring the Duration of Ultrashort Pulses 387

Major directions in the development of methods of studying pulse structure (387).
Method using generation of the second harmonic (388). The two-photon technique
(389). Complete and incomplete mode locking and the problem of time measurements
(391). Method based on measuring the structure of the signal spectrum (393).

3.11. Analysis of Longitudinal Self-Mode Locking in a Laser with Photo-
tropic Filter Based on Fluctuationsl Concepts 394

Qualitative description of the physical picture (394). Spectral and temporal de-
scription of mode-locking (397). Initial profile of the radiation field (399).
Index of nonlinearity (402). Transformation of the profile of the field when
radiation acts with the filter on the stage of phototropism (402). Feasibility
of mode locking in the case of stimulated emission of the second harmonic (404).
Conditions or complete self-mode locking (405).

3.12. Time Description of Active Longitudinal Mode Locking in a Laser with
Uniformly Broadened Amplification Line 406

Formulation of the problem; principal assumptions (406). Change in the light pulse
as it passes through the active element and the modulator (408). System of

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

differential equations describing the process of establishment of mode locking
(409). Comments on phase (electro-optic) and amplitude (acousto-optic)modesyn-
chronizers (411).

References

Appendix 1. Hermite polynomials

Appendix 2. Gaussian beam in free space

Appendix 3. Stable and unstable spherical waves in the unstable cavity
Appendix A. Jones matrices

Appendix 5. Singular points of a two-dimensional dynamic system

Subject index
COPYRIGhT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". 1981

6610
050: [862/216

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I‘SF. OVIA

UDC 539.1
OPTICAL RESONATORS AND THE PROBLEM OF LASER EMISSION DIVERGENCE

Moscow OPTICHESKIYB REZONATORY I PROBLEHA RASKHODIHOSTI LAZERNOGO IZLUCHENIYA in
Russian 1979 (signed to press 29 Oct 79) pp 135-154, 172-188, 220-301

[Excerpts from book "Optical Resonators and the Problem of Laser Emission Diver-
gence" by Yuriy Alekseyevich Anan'yev, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 4,000 copies, 328
Pages]

[Excerpts] Section 2.6. Angular Radiation Selection Procedures

In this section an analysis will be made of the efforts to decrease the diver-
gence of laser radiation with planar or stable resonators (or resonators simi-
lar to them; see below) which have been made at different times and with varying
degrees of success. The majority of these methods are now only of historic in-
terest; however, some of them are used even today.

Efforts To Solve the Divergence Problem on the Basis of Resonators Hith Small
Diffraction Losses. In a number of papers a study has been made of the possi-
bility of creating resonators from mirrors with aspherical surface, the shape of
which is selected in such a way that the diffraction losses in the lowest mode
are just as small as for stable resonators, but they increase with the trans-
verse index faster than for stable resonators. This theoretically facilitates

the achievement of unimOdal oscillation. Some systems of this type are
presented in Figure 2.22.

The resonators depicted in Figure 2.22, a, b, were made from dihedral reflec-
tors, the angle between the flat faces of which is I - a in the former case, and
n/Z - o in.the latter case (u << 1). The effect of the first type of reflector
on a narrow light beam to a certain extent is similar to the effect of a concave
mirror; some "fine focusing" of the beam is realized. The reflector of the sec-
ond type only adds "inversion" of the beam cross section to this effect; there-
fore resonators of these two types are equivalent to each other in the absence
of aberrations. It is possible to see that the transverse dimensions of the
light beams correSponding to individual transverse modes increase in them with
the transverse index faster than in stable resonators, which ensures greater se-
lectivity for reflectors of finite dimensions. The properties of these resona-
tors are described in more detail in [120, 121].

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2.22. Some types of resonators with aspherical mirrors} a, b--resona-
tors with dihedral reflectors [120, 121]; c—-resonator with cen-
tral "indentation" [122]; d--resonator proposed in [123].

Figure 2.22, c, depicts a resonator in which the eigenvalue spectrum is still
more radically rarefied. The dimensions of the central section of the left-hand
reflector--the "indentation r-can be taken so that they will be equal to the di-
mensions of the basic mode spot formed by this section and the right-hand mirror
of a stable resonator. Then the losses of this node will be small; broader
beams corresponding to other modes will go beyond the limits of the central sec-
tion and scatter quickly in the peripheral part of the resonator. This must
lead to significant increase in the losses.

At first glance it may seem that an analogous effect is achieved by simple irising
of the stable resonator. However, in the latter case as we have seen in

Sections 2.1, 2.2. the high-order mode field begins to be confined inside the
resonator by edge diffraction (theedge of the diaphragm has the same effect on the
light beam as the edge of a mirror); in the resonator depicted in Figure 2.22, c,
the diffraction on the edge of the "indentation“ turns out to be significantly
attenuated as a result of the presence of halation. Vaynshteyn [3] indicated

the possibility of using a similar procedure; the effort at practical implemen-
tation in the optical range (in the example of a helium-neon laser) is described
in [122].

Sometimes proposals for a different plan are encountered in the literature.
Thus, in [123] the properties of the resonator depicted in Figure 2.22. d, were
analyzed. With a strictly defined fora of the components of its reflectors, the
equation for finding the natural oscillations has only one solution. However.
in [123] a study was made only of the equation of an enpty resonator made up Of
infinite mirrors; consideration of the edge effects and the introduction of an
active medium should change the situation sharply--nothing may remain of "uni-
modality." In addition to everything else it is unclear how such reflectors
would be made with the precision required in the optical range.

In contrast to the last-mentioned version. the possibility of using the resona-

tors depicted in Figure 2.22, a-c, is unquestioned. However. they are all char-
acterized by the same deficiency as the ordinary stable resonator itself: under

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISI'. OVI.\'

conditions of unimodal oscillation it is possible to make effective use of
only a very small volume of the optically uniform medium (it is sufficient to
point out that in the mentioned experimental work [122] the depth of the "inden-
tation" was ~x/10). Therefore the devices with aspherical reflectors are not
able to compete with the stable resonators which are simple to make and align.

It must be noted that for cross section dimensions of the active medium not ex-
ceeding several millimeters, unimodal oscillation can be achieved using
both stable and planar resonators. in particular, it is appropriate to note the
successful method of empirical selection of the optimal parameters of the reso-
nator near the "stability" boundary used for the first time in [126] and also
used successfully in a number of subsequent experiments. The method is based on
the application of a combination of plane and concave spherical mirrors, the
distance between which L varies near a value equal to the radius of curvature of
the concave mirror R. For L - R (or in the case of the presence of an active
element of length l with an index of refraction no, for Le uiv - L - 1(1 -

l/no) - R) a so-cailed semiconcentric resonator is realize: which is equivalent
to the planar resonator and thus is at the "stability" limit (Section 1.2). For
shorter lengths, the resonator is stable; it is important that for L : R small
variations in the distance between the mirrors lead, as it is easy to see, to

significant simultaneous variation of the diffraction losses and spot dimensions
of the fundamental and other transverse modes. This makes it easy to select the
optimal combination of them from the point of view of the output characteristics

of the laser. Obviously, when this choice is made empirically, the "Lenticulsr-
ness" of the sample is automatically taken into account if it exists, and so on.
a”...

4’ -

if

44 ..n

a:

[ _--_ _.._ ..
w m; m 41 Ill

    

Figure 2.23. Results of experiments in oscillation selection in a resonator
close to a semiconcentric resonator [128].

Figure 2.23 shows a standard graph for use of the indicated method borrowed from
[28], where this method is discussed in great detail. The graph was obtained in
experiments with a helium—neon laser; the ratio L/R is plotted along the x-axis.
the line L/R - 1 is the "stability" limit. On approaching it from the left, the
diffraction losses increase, the total oscillation power P decreases slowly,

then the number of transverse modes present in the oscillations are reduced. At
the point noted by the arrow, only the lowest mode TEMOO remains. The resonator
length corresponding to this point can also be considered optimal: further

movement toward the stability limit and transition to the region of instability

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I‘SF. ()Vl.\

located to the right causes only a sharp decrease in power and then cessation of
oscillation.

All of this is good, however, only in the case of lasers with small cross sec-
tions of the active medium for which the problem of radiation divergence ln gen-
eral is not acute. As for the lasers of primary interest to us which have a
large exit aperture, for them the application of stable resonators leads, as has
already been noted more than once, to oscillation on higher-order modes with a
broad radiation pattern. Nevertheless, efforts have been renewed many times to
solve the problem of divergence even in this case. In Chapter 5 there is a
brief discussion of the conversion of light beams corresponding to the high-
order modes to narrowly directional light beams by the methods of holographic
correction. A search was also conducted for simpler methods; from the work in
this direction there are some interesting papers (for example, [125]), but their
practical significance is low. Therefore hereafter we shall limit ourselves to
the investigation of the methods of angular selection (decreasing the angular

divergence of the radiation) in planar resonators which has received signifi-
cant development in its time.

Lasers With Planar Resonators and Angular Selectors. For constriction of the
radiation pattern of a laser with planar resonator it is necessary in the gen-
eral case also to decrease the number of modes in which oscillation is realized
and, what is usually even more important, the deformations of these modes. The
number of modes is determined primarily by the ratio between the diffraction and
nonselective losses. Therefore for angular selection in the hypothetical case
of an ideally uniform medium where the mode deformations are small, it is neces-
sary to try to increase the differences of the diffraction losses.

In the presence of aberrations of any type, the most important problem turns out
to be decreasing the mode deformations; in accordance with perturbation theory
(Section 2.5). for this purpose it is necessary to increase the differences of
the eigenvalues of the operator P, including the phase corrections.

Making this remark of a general nature, let us proceed with investigation of the
specific methods of angular selection.

In order to obtain the desired effect usually additional elements called angle
selectors are introduced into the resonator. They are essentially filters, the
transmission of which depends sharply on the direction of propagation of the
radiation. Historically, the first type of angle selector was a system of

two confocal lenses and a diaphragm with a small opening placed at their common
focal point [126. 127]. A concentric resonator with a diaphragm in the central
plane [128, 129] (Figure 2.24. b) is entirely identical to a planar resonator
with such a selector (Figure 2.24, a). The operating principle of such a selec-

tor is obvious. Instead of a diaphragm a passive shutter can be used: part that
clears first then acts as an iris aperture [130].

The effect of the selector based on the Fabry and Perot etalon [131. 132] is
based on the fact that the transmission of the etalon depends not only on the

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. l)‘il.\'

wavelength, but also the direction of propagation of the radiation. Inasmuch as
for inclined incidence of the beam, this relation becomes sharper, the etalon is
installed at an angle to the resonator axis (Figure 2.24, c). For realization
of angular selection in both directions it is necessary to use two etalons.

Probably the method of selection based on using the dependence of the reflection
coefficient at the interface of two media on the angle of incidence had the
greatest popularity. Near the critical angle of total internal reflection, the
indicated relation is especially sharp; therefore these angles of incidence are
used. In order to eliminate the selective effect it is possible to make the

light undergo multiple reflections (Figure 2.24, d). In the 1960's a large num-
ber of versions of selectors of this type [133-160] grouped under the general head-
ing of total internal reflection selectors were proposed.

Let us consider the mechanism of the effect of the selectors on the angular di-
vergence. From very general arguments it is clear that the presence of a fil-
ter, the transmission of which depends on the direction of propagation of the
radiation is primarily felt in the magnitude of the losses of individual trans-
verse modes. The phase corrections are determined for fixed configuration of
the resonator in practice only by the number of angles of distribution of the
amplitude with respect to cross section (that is, the transverse mode index),
and in the presence of a selector, they must vary insignificantly (see Section
2.2 for the similarity of phase corrections in open and closed resonators). The
results of strict calculations [141] confirm this obvious conclusion.

Let us present the data for the idealized case of a Gaussian selector, the shape
of the passband of which is intermediate between the shapes of the bands of real
selectors presented in Figure 2.24, and it is described by the formula g2(¢) -
exp[-(¢/Ao)2] (Figure 2.25; see [161]); o is the angle between the direction of
propagation of the radiation and the rmonator axis; do is the passband width,
g2 is the transmission with respect to intensity. If we consider that the
transverse modes with the index m correspond to values of 9 2 :(m + 1)9d1ff/2
(see Sections 2.2, 1.1; ediff = A/Za), the magnitude of the losses introduced by
the selector follow directly A(263) - (m + l) (ediff/2A¢)2 (this same result was
obtained in [1A1] by a stricter procedure).

Let us now trace how the magnitude of the angular divergence of the radiation
must vary with the passband width of the selector.

In the absence of aberrations the role of the selector reduces to variation of
the conditions of competition of the modes (Section 2.4) by increasing the loss
differences. The losses introduced by the Gaussian selector turn out to be
greater than the diffraction losses in an ideal empty resonator on satisfaction
of the condition ZAO/9diff < (82/XL)3/“. Inasmuch as for lasers with large
cross section a2/AL - N >> I, the angular divergence in the given idealized case
can decrease sharply even for comparatively greater width of the selector pass-
band. Estimation shows that to achieve the unimodal conditions with an ideal
active medium it is sufficient to use a selector with do several times greater
than Odlff/Z.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY

2 I 5 | 5 {

’ 1'- Q??? I —-—;—0—-- '
I
J I I J

b ( _-_/.::___;__}_

’ I

f r _ ’
c—i- H —- f—

2 I

2

Figure 2.24. Diagrams of lasers with angle selectors: 1-act1ve sample;
2--plane mirror; 3--spherical mirror; 6--diaphragn with hole; 5--
lens; 6--Fabry and Perot etalon; 7--plane-paralle1 plate.

 
  

/

’II'
47—3/4 _. . . . |.. .21-
-I -J 51’ -I I I Z J I
r/Ar

Figure 2.25. Shape of the passband of different angle selectors: Gaussian
selector (dash-dot line), the selector based on the Fabry and
Perot etalon (dotted line) and the ideal selector (solid line).

This possibility is based on the fact that the losses introduced by the given
type of selector are even noticeable for d << A9 (see Figure 2.25). Among real
selectors, only the selector based on the Fabry and Perot etalon (see Figure

2.24, c) has this (quadratic) form of the function 3(0). The selectors with an
opening (Figure 2.24, a, b) and the total internal reflection selectors (Figure

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.24. d) have a passband with shape approaching a rectangle (“ideal" selectors
according to the terminology of [141, 142]). In this case, just as should be
expected, the presence of a selector is felt noticeably in the value of the
losses only for the modes, the indiccs of which are close to the value of
2A¢l0d1ff [161]; therefore the selectors of the given type can decrease the
amount of angular divergence only to a value approximately equal to A0.

In the presence of noticeable aberrations the basic function of the selector
must be to decrease the deformations of the oscillation with the highest Q. Let
us remember that the mode deformations themselves can be interpreted as the re-
sult of the presence of induced oscillations in the modes of an ideal resonator
(see the preceding section). Beginning with this fact, it is easy to see that
in order to decrease the mode deformations the losses introduced by the selector
must turn out to be larger in magnitude not only than the diffraction losses,
but also the phase corrections in the empty resonator. Hence, it follows that
for noticeable aberrations (that is, in practice always) only selectors with

sufficiently narrow passband, independently of its shape, can turn out to be
useful.

When using angular selectors, just as in the case of angular selection by in—
creasing the length of the resonator which will be considered a little later,
not only the angular radiation characteristics are of interest, but also the en-
ergy characteristics of the radiation. The possibility of decreasing the width
of the radiation pattern without significant gain in radiation power is con—
nected with the magnitude and the nature of the aberrations. This relation is
exhibited most clearly when investigating the shape of the scattering index of a
coherent light beam.

L relative units l.relative units

" ’ V/‘dur
J]

 

Figure 2.26. Radiation patterns after single passage of the light through the
active medium: a--light dispersion on microinhomogeneities; b-low-

order wave aberrations as a result of the presence of macroinhomo-
geneities.

Figure 2.26 contains a schematic representation of two radiation patterns of a
light beam after single transmission through an active sample (at the entrance
to the sample the wave front is planar). These patterns directly characterize
the angular divergence of the beam at the exit from the laser system using the
given sample as the final amplifier (of course, if a well-collimated beam is fed
to its input).

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first of them (Figure 2.26, a) pertains to the case of weak light dispersion
on nicroinhomogeneities. The greater part of the energy of the light passing
through the sample (on the order of l - ”dis, the presence of secondary diffrac-
tion peaks is neglected) is concentrated in the central core having diffraction
width. The remainder of the radiation is distributed in a comparatively wide
range of angles.

Figure 2.26, b, corresponds to the presence of low-order wave aberrations (refraction
on macroinhomogeneities). Primarily the most central core of the pattern

expands, the axial luminous intensity decreases significantly. From the Rayleigh

number it follows that the core width begins to exceed the diffraction limit no-
ticeably when the aberrations exceed Ala.

It is obvious that the effort to realize angular selection will lead to essen-
tially different results in the cases of Figures 2.26, a, and 2.26, b. The light
dispersion on the microinhomogeneities does not prevent achievement of the
diffraction limit; the power of the generated radiation in this case, if the
pumping intensity is sufficiently high, decreases insignificantly (the effective
losses increase by approximately Ddig [26]). In the case of Figure 2.26, b, an
effort to constrict the angular divergence to less than the width of the central
core of the scattered light indicatrix is coupled with unavoidable significant
energy losses.

‘ﬂie experimental data correspond quite well to the above-discussed arguments.

First of all, it must be noted that when using all types of angle selectors a
decrease in angular divergence and an increase in the axial luminous intensity were
actually observed. Nevertheless, the ansle SEIECCOTS have “0‘ found broad 8P'
plication. The reason for this lies both with the high requirements on the pre-
cision of their manufacture and alignment and a number of specific deficiencies
characteristic of each type of selector.

The basic deficiency of systems with a diaphragm (see Figure 2.21., a, b) is un-
desirable concentration of the radiation in a small section of the cross section.
in lasers of comparatively low power this leads to rupture of the diaphragm or
electric breakdown near its surface (see, for example, [129]). Angular selec-
tion using the Fabry and Perot etalons is greatly complicated as a result of the
presence of a large number of transmission peaks; therefore no one has followed
the example of the authors of [131, 132] who were able to realize it in low-
power ruby lasers. Only total internal reflection selectors have found some ap-
plication in powerful pulsed lasers, but even they in the final analysis disap-
peared from the scene as a result of the extraordinary requirements on the pre-
cision of manufacture and alignment and also the degree of finish of the working
surfaces.

Angular Selection of Laser Radiation With Planar Resonators by Decreasing the
Number of Fresnel Zones. If we do away with ansle 891e¢¢°r3o 1‘ remains only
to increase the selective properties of the planar resonator itself by decreas-
ing the number of Fresnel zones N. This can be achieved by reducing the cross
section or by increasing the length of the resonator.

22

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A significant decrease in the active cross section by irising the resonator, of
course, must lead to a corresponding drop in the output power, and therefore
cannot be considered among the efficient selection procedures. Some movement in
this direction is still possible. The fact is that a light beam always broadens
somewhat on passage through a planar resonator (as a result, diffraction losses
appear). If we use an exit mirror with cross section only somewhat less than the
cross section of the active element, the latter will still be completely filled

by the iriaed beam. It only remains to use the radiation exiting from the laser
through a narrow circular zone around the mirror as the useful signal along with
the radiation passing through the semitransparent exit mirror. Thus, it is pos-
sible to decrease N somewhat, almost without relinquishing output power. This
procedure was described for the first time in [153]; the name of diffraction yield
of radiation was attached to it. The same method was used with slight modifica-
tions in [1&4]; the given direction reached a logical conclusion in the laser de-
scribed by Kalinin et al., the reflection coefficient of the exit mirror of which
decreased smoothly from the center to the periphery [165]. In all of the enumera-
ted cases, just as should be expected, an increase in the degree of directionality
and a decrease in the sensitivity to the misalignment of the mirrors were observed
(as a result of a decrease in the total or effective size of the exit mirror),

but with intense pumping the angular divergence significantly exceeded the dif-
fraction limit.

Let us note that lasers with mirror transmission that is variable with respect to
cross section are a clear example of systems having extraordinary dependence of the
mode structure on the excitation conditions. In the case of uniform distribution

of pumping slightly exceeding the lasing threshold, the field configuration of the
individual types of oscillations will be close to the configuration predicted by

the theory of the corresponding empty resonators 1146]. If the amount the threshold
is exceeded is large, then as a result of the competition of the transverse modes
the distribution of the gain with respect to cross section approaches the loss
distribution, and the structure of the individual modes will become similar to the
structure in lasers with ordinary mirrors.

A much more radical decrease in N without reduction of the working volume can be
achieved by a simple increase in the distance between mirrors. This method of
angular selection is the most natural and, in addition, very effective: here, in
contrast to the case of the application of angular selectors, not only the losses
increase, but also the phase corrections, which leads to a rapid decrease in the
mode deformation. In addition, it is simpler by far to vary the length of the
resonator than to introduce a selector and change the paosband width; therefore
the given method of constricting the radiation pattern has been studied most
systematically.

The most important result of numerous studies was solid establishment of the fact
that on variation of L within very broad limits the angular divergeni7 of the
radiation varies with a high degree of accuracy proportionally to L“ 2---indeed
the theoretical estimates based on any models pertaining to mode deformations and
to multimode oscillations (Sections 2.4. 2.5) lead to the same relation! This
relation has been exemplified by lasers of the most varied types: a ruby laser
(the resonator length was varied by approximately 15 times) [147].

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘OR OFFICIM "Sf 0\l.\

a neodymium glass laser (~15 times), a fluorite laser with samarium (~103

times) [26], and an alkyliodide mlecule photodissociation laser (~30 times)
[148]. The following is characteristic. 1f the medium has a compurat ively high
amuunt of optical nomuiimrmitr. increasing the length of the resonator above
some limit is accompanied by quite rapid decrease in power to complete cessation
of oscillation, although it may still be far to diffraction divergence. As a
reSult, the axial luminous intensity.initially increasing with resonator length,
goes through a peak, the position and height of which depend on the degree of
optical nonunifomity of the medium. This fact was noted for the first time by
Sventsitskaya and Khazov in [11.7] (in this paper, the method of representing data
on the. angular disrribution of radiation in the form of the dependence of the
proportion of the beam energy included inside the axial cone on the angle at the
apex of this cone, see Figure 4.1., 6.7, which has acquired deserved popularity
was introduced). 1!. is or interest that when the sharp lasing power drop
begins, the angular divergence begins to decrease with an increase in L even
faster than L" ’7 [168]. This is explained by the fact that as a result of a
sharp increase in the threshold, the lasing begins to be localized in indi-
vidual sections of the cross section with the largest gradient of the index of
refraction [147, 148]—-the "effective" value of An decreases.

As the optical uniformity of the medium increases, it is possible to come closer
and closer to diffraction divergence without noticeable loss of power (it is
true in this case the requirements on the necessary precision of alignment of
the resonator increase). Finally, when the medium is so uniform that AL < Alla,
the diffraction limit can be reached. For this purpose the distance between the
mirrors must be usually so large that N exceeds 1 somewhat. Herein lies the ba-
sic deficiency of the given selection method: for lasers in the visible range
even with diameters of the active elements only 5-8 mm. the required

resonator length is several meters. If we consider that for maintenance of the
same N the length must increase proportionately to the square of the linear di-
mensions of the working cross section, it becomes clear that in the case of
powerful lasers it is entirely unreasonable to solve the problem by a simple in-
crease in distance between the mirrors. It is also necessary to consider that
for short lasing pulses long length of the resonator is in general unacceptable
inasmuch as the pulse development time increases together with the length.

The way out of the indicated difficulty consists in using resonators that have
short actual length, but equivalent to the planar resonator with small N. This
method of angular selection is of definite interest not only from the practical
point of view, but also from the procedural point of view; therefore let us
discuss it in somewhat more detail.

Plane Resonators of Long [Effective Length. in Figure 2.27 several versions of
devices of this type are presented. The first of them was used to decrease the
angular divergence in 1963 [169], but correct notions of its properties

were still not developed at that time. Using the methods discussed in Section
1.2, the corresponding analysis will be performed without special difficulty.
However, we shall not consider the beam matrices of these resonators as a whole,
but we shall use a more obvious procedure which will also be useful hereafter to
consider unstable resonators.

21.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE O\'L\'

A comon characteristic of all resonators equivalent to the planar resonator
(including the ones depicted in the figure) is the fact that in the geometric
approximation all of the beams normal to the surface of one of the terminal mir-
rors, on passing through the resonator, are incident normally on the surface of
the second terminal mirror and follow back along the same path. Accordingly,
such resonators can be broken down entirely into sections, each of which is
bounded by a pair of parallel planes or concentric spheres. The boundaries of
the edge sections are the terminal mirrors themselves; the intermediate thin
lenses can be considered, as usual, phase correctors, passing through which

leads only to the corresponding change in curvature of the wave front (see Fig-
ure 2.27).

The result of passage of the light through these sections in the wave approxima-
tion can be calculated by using the apparatus of beam matrices or directly from
the Huygens-Fresnel principle. Here it is expedient to give the distributions
of the complex amplitude directly on the surfaces bounding the sections and in
dimensionless coordinates r/a, whereZa is the difference between the edge beams
in the geometric approximation (thus changing the scale on transition to the

sections with another beam cross section). Then it is possible to arrive at the
following simple laws.

0n passage thrOugh a type I section (plane boundaries) 2a wide and L long, the
complex distribution of the amplitude is transformed just as on passage through
a section of the same type 2ao wide and Leff = Lag/a2 long (this is understand-
able--the number of Fresnel zones N is the same in them). The passage through
the type II section with light beam width in the geometric approximation at the
entrance and exit Surfaces Zn, and 2a2 is equivalent to passing through a type I
section of width Zao and length Leff - La2/a1a2; as a result of variation of the
cross section. only an additional amplitude factor a1/a2 is acquired (see also

(1.23)); the general phase multiplier exp(ikL) plays no special role in our
investigation.

By this procedure, the passage through all of the :ype I and II sections reduces
to passage through the corresponding distances of type I sections of the same
width 2a0. Inasmuch as passage through several such sections, in turn, is
equivalent to passage through a section of total length, the Leff defined in
this way for all type I and II sections can be simply added.

It is easy to demonstrate that passage through the type III sections with en-
trance and exit widths of Zal and 2a2 is equivalent to returning a distance

Leff - Lag/ale; in a type I section; inversion of the beam and variation of the
amplitude in the ratio al/a2 also occur. Therefore the effective lengths of

the type III sections are subtracted from the total sum (the growth of the angu-
lar divergence of the radiation caused by this on introduction of the type III
section into the system was observed experimentally, and it was explained in
[115]). If we also consider the extraordinary energy concentration at the con-
striction points, it becomes obvious that the presence of such sections inside
the resonator, as a rule, is undesirable.*

* In powerful amplifiers, on the contrary, such sections then called "optical
relays" sometimes are specially introduced, for a decrease in Leff helps to pre-
vent self-focusing [330].

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'SF. ()VIN

 

    

Figure 2.27. Resonators with long effective length: a--resonator described in
[169]; b-d--planar resonators with telescope located inside them;
e--resonator with telescope and nonresonant feedback; l--active
element; 2--partially reflecting plate; 3——diffuser.

Thus, all of the systems depicted in Figure 2.27 are equivalent to planar reso-
nators with easily calculated effective length (let us note that if such a reso-
nator is used as the Fabry-Perot interferometer, the angular distance between
rings in it will be determined by this effective length). For the case of Fig-
ure 2.27, a, Leif is equal to Lzao/az + Ll; for Pi ure 2.27, b, L3 - Lzao/az +
Llaglag; for Figure 2.27, c, L3 + Lzaolaz + LlaSIag. The width of the equiva-
lent resonator Zao is selected in all cases equal to the beam width on the ex-
treme right section where the active medium must be placed. It is obvious that
the presence of sections with small beam cross section leads to a sharp increase
in the effective length; the effective value of the parameter N decreases corre-
spondingly (in the case most advantageous from this point of View in Figure

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.27, c, it is um - [(AL3/a3) + (ALzlaoaz) + (ALI/3914). If such a section
occupies the greater part of the length of the system, the effective length of
the resonator turns out to be si nificantly greater than the actual length, ap-
proximately in the ratio of aﬁ/ag. This leads to a gain in the amount of the
angular divergence by ao/a2 times (let us note that in the case of Figure 2.27,
b, c, the ratio ao/az is equal to the multiplicity of the telescope formed by
the lenses). In the final analysis this gain is achieved as a result of concen-
tration of the entire light flux in small sections, but nevertheless the in-
crease in the radiation density here is not so large as in the case of selectors
with a diaphragm (Figure 2.24, a, b). In addition, for attenuation of this un-
desirable effect it is possible to use the fact that the radiation flux incident
on a totally reflecting mirror of a planar resonator is less than the flux inci-
dent 07 the semitransparent exit mirror with reflection coefficient R' by

(R')'1 2 times (Section 1.6). Thus, in order to decrease the radiation flux in
the sections with a small cross section it is sufficient to realize the energy
yield from the opposite (right) end of the resonator. The reflection coeffi-
cient of the exit mirror R' must be selected as small as possible [1&8]. This

choice becomes possible when using active media with sufficiently large amplifi-
cation coefficient.

He have given so much attention to the methods of angular selection in lasers
with planar resonator primarily because there are situations where it is not
possible to get along without a planar resonator. Thus, pulsed lasers exist in
which the excitation occurs nonsimultaneously in the different parts of the res-
onator cross section. In such cases the use of unstable resonators which are
now a commonly recognized means of achieving small divergence is impossible--
lasers with unstable resonators operate satisfactorily only under condition of
simultaneous and not too nonuniform excitation of the entire operating volume.
Planar resonators with small N can turn out to be more advantageous than unsta-
ble rcsouators also in the case of the presence of noticeable light dispersion
with indicatrix of the type depicted in Figure 2.25, a-—as we have seen, it does
not prevent achievement of minimum divergence in planar resonators

with large L (or Leff), but can have a sharply negative effect on the parameters
of lasers with unstable resonators (Section 4.1). For these reasons, both the
system depicted in Figure 2.27, c, and the angular selection system entirely
equivalent to it with a mirror telescope (Figure 2.27, d) proposed by one of the
authors of [148]--Danilov--at the end of the 1960's are sometimes used at the
present time. The version of such systems with nonresonant feedback [118] (Fig-
ure 2.27, e) which can be used for enormOus amplification in the active medium
is also of noticeable interest. The nonresonant coupling makes the laser in
practice nonmisalignable and sharply increases the stability of its operation
under the conditions of optical nonuniformities which are variable in time.

Multistage Lasers. There is another truly universal method of obtaining nar-
rowly directional emission which, although it is not a resonator method, on the
basis of its traditionalness it deserves mention in this chapter. This method
consists in using a master oscillator and a number of subsequent amplification
stages. The master oscillator can be low-power and have low efficiency, the
achievement of unimodality under such conditions presents no difficulty. The
emission of the laser is directed toward a telescopic system which increases the

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

light beam diameter and then, to amplification stages with gradually

increasing cross section. Hatching telescopes are again placed between the am-
plifying stages. Gradual expansion of the beam cross section theoretically also
keeps the density of the amplified radiation at a level that is not too high and

reduces angular divergence.

The use of almost all of the active material when operating in a purely amplify-
ing mode has obvious advantages from the point of view of divergence of the ra-
diation--indeed here there is no multiple transmission of light with respect to
the same nonuniformity leading to accumulation of aberrations as in the planar
resonator (Section 2.5). In spite of this fact, only powerful monopulse lasers,
primarily solid-state lasers, are now being made multistage.

 

Figure 2.28. Example of a multistage system [129]: l--active element; 2-
telescopic system; 3--angular selector of the master oscillator
with diamond diaphragm; 4--semitransparent mirror of the master
oscillator based on a prism with Brewster angle; S--shutter.

One of the first systems of this type assembled by the simplest "classical" sys-
tem is depicted in Figure 2.28. Modern lasers for experiments in the field of
laser thermonuclear fusion appear immeasurably more complex--they consist of a
minimum of six parallel channels (for comprehensive illumination of the target),
and they contain a truly enormous number of active rods, elements for splitting
and reduction of the light beams. "decouplers" between the stages for separa-
tion of superluminescence. and so on. However, the main thing is that quite
different factors determine the radiation divergence: as a result of extraordi-
narily high radiation density in the amplifying channel nonlinear processes develop
leading to expansion of the radiation pattern and, in the final analysis, to
self-focusing of the radiation inside the active material which is disastrous
for such devices. Therefore the control of these processes acquires a decisive

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

role: In order that they not develop, the above-mentioned "optical relays" and
other spatial filters are installed between the stages, which determines the
angular divergence of the output radiation. Thus, the breakdown of the system
into a set of stages here essentially pursues highly specific goals.

This situation is quite characteristic--the application of multistage devices
turns out to be justified only in certain special cases and also when it is de-
sirable to achieve record output parameters with universality of the device.
Actually, in this way it is possible to obtain radiation density in the entire
exit aperture close to the rupture threshold of the optical materials. The mas-

ter oscillator is a small part of the system, and for mode changing it can sim-
ply be replaced by another one.

In the most frequently encountered cases where although not record, but very

close to record parameters are required in combination with simplicity, modest
size and weight characteristics, and so on, the lasers "MC“ are made "1th a

single-oscillator system and one version or another of an unstable resonator
take first position. We shall now proceed with a discussion of these lasers.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. Elements of the Theory of Unstable Resonators
Section 3.1. Some Initial Information

Brief Historical Survey. In 1965 the article by Sigmen [4] was published which
established the beginning of the entire field of quantum electronics. This ar-
ticle discussed the possibility of the practical application of unstable resona-
tors with large diffraction losses.

At that time the idea that resonators with large diffraction losses must have
high selective properties began to win general recognition. This was promoted
to a high degree by the explanation of the nature of multimode lasing presented
by Tang and Statets (Section 2.4), from which it followed that in order to de-
crease the number of simultaneously excited transverse modes it is necessary to
increase the differences of the diffraction losses (and not their ratios as was

first assumed). The loss differences can be large obviously only when the
losses themselves are large.

It was known that the transition from stable resonators to planar resonators is
accompanied not only by an increase in volume of the lowest modes, but also an
increase in the diffraction loss differences; both promote the achievement of
lasing on a small number of the lowest transverse modes. The results of a few
theoretical works (for example, [105]) also indicated that on passing through
the stability limit and proceeding deep into the instability region the losses
of the lowest mode continued to increase; this made it possible to hope that the
losses of the other modes grow still more rapidly, and the selective properties
of the resonator improve.

However, the transition to the instability region must, it would appear, also be
accompanied by highly undesirable phenomena, above all, an increase in the
threshold and corresponding reduction of the lasing power. In addition, numeri-
cal calculations have demonstrated that as a result of the growth of the field
amplitude on the edge of the resonator and amplification of the edge diffraction
the field distribution in the resonators with weakly convex mirrors is much more
"cut up" than in the planar ones. What happens with field distribution with an
increase in the curvature of the convex mirrors was unclear: by analogy with the
planar misaligned resonator it seemed that it should become entirely unfavorable.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, in [150] when going into the Instability region, a sharp decrease in the
lasing power and an increase in the angular divergence of the radiation were ob-
served. In [124] which was already referenced in Section 2.6, the transition to
unstable resonators was accompanied only by a sharp decrease in the lasing power;
the graph borrowed from [124, 28] and presented in Figure 2.23 could not point

to the idea of the expediency of the application of unstable resonators with
large diffraction losses.

Against this background Sigmen's article stood out sharply. The precariouaness
of the basic objections to the application of unstable resonators with large
losses was demonstrated in it. The primary point of the paper was investigation
of them in the geometric approximation. It led to results already known to us
according to Section l.2--a set of two spherical waves propagated in opposite
directions converting into each other on reflection from the end mirrors can be
found in an unstable resonator. The geometric investigation was strengthened by

from the geometric solution. The fact is that although the peripheral part of
the light beam is sharply disturbed by diffraction. as a result of significant
expansion of the beam cross section on passing through the resonator, it then

passes by the mirrors and the field distribution in them has little distortion.

Sigmen also pointed out that in the case of unstable resonators with large dif-
fraction losses it is expedient to realize diffraction output of the radiation,
that is. use that part of the beam which bypasses the exit mirror as the useful
signal (see also Section 2.6). Here it is possible to replace the semitranspar-
ent exit mirror by a totally reflecting one, thus leaving the total losses and
the lasing threshold on the same level as in planar resonators. The adoption of

these measures Should help to avoid a sharp drop in the radiation power which pre-
viously appeared to be unavoidable.

Of course, all of these arguments needed comprehensive checking. It was even
unclear whether the unstable resonators with large diffraction losses are actu-
ally selective; Sigmen himself stated the fear that the losses for the lowest

gence of the radiation (see Chapter 2) is in general not discussed in this or
all subsequent papers by Sigmen. It was investigated in 1968-1970 [152, 153];
it was only after this that the advantages of the unstable resonators with large
diffraction losses in narrowly directional lasers were clearly recognized.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section 3.3. Edge Effects and the Natural Oscillation Spectrum

Equivalence of Unstable Resonators and the Interrelation of the Solutions for
the Various Types of Them. In the diffraction approximation the field distribu-
tion of unstable resonators, just as resonators of other types, is described by
the eigenfunctions of a svstem of two integral equations relating the fields on
the mirrors using the Huygens-Fresnel principle. For resonators with one-sided
radiation output, when one of the mirrors is quite large and is totally re-
flecting (see Figure 3.3, a-d), it is possible to use the integral expression
(1.24) or (1.24a) permitting a single equation to be compiled containing only
the field distribution function on the other mirror.

If we go from field distribution on the exit mirror to the distribution on the
equiphasal surface of the diverging wave of the geometric approximation (see
above, Section 3.2), the desired equation acquires an especially obvious form
[157]. Actually, substituting in (1.24a) U(X, Y) - x(X, Y)exp[inNequ1v(X2 +
Y2)] (by which the indicated transition is realized) and considering that AD +
BC - (M + l/M)/2. we obtain the following integral equation:

 

 

Wu. H ~“""?“ "" .1' 3' w {WI (X' - ir)’ . (12)

I (Y' .}})'“x,.(x'. Y')d.\"dY'.

Let us write out the analogous equation for the two-dimensional case which will

basically be considered; here we shall consider that the exit mirror has a peak

reflection coefficient p(x) which is variable with respect to cross section; the
phase factor exp(21kLo) will be omitted:

1.1"”) p/Nli f p. (X'MxpllnNM(.\" -‘ %)1|1.(X’)(IX'. (13)

Here, just as in (12). Ym is the eigenvalue. X 5 x/a is the dimensionless coor-
dinate: 2a is the characteristic size of the mirror; the parameter “equiv used
on making the transition to the new reference surface is, as before, related to
N and N by the expression “equiv = (N/2)(M - l/M); finally, pl(x) E 0(ax); for
the case of a finite totally reflecting mirror

_ 1. |.\‘|<I.
l'l('\) E". |’\-'>'.

The equation for the symmetric resonator has the same form (Figure 3.3. e)* un-
der the condition that the reflection coefficient of both of its mirrors is de-
scribed by the same function pl(x).

* In this case the value of vm. just as H (see Section 3.1), pertains to pas-
sage through the resonator not at the bottom, but to one side.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI’. ONLY

nxus, all unstable resonators with one-sided radiation output equal to N and H
(or H and Nequ1v) and the same law of variation of the reflection coefficient of
the exit mirror are equivalent to each other (for the special case of totally
reflecting mirrors this result was obtained already in Section 1.2). Horoovvr.
the eigenfunctions and the values lor the resonators in which any two parameters
out of three (N. N. Ne uiv) are negative can be expressed in terms of the eigen-
functions and values of the resonator with the same with respect to absolute
magnitude but positive parameters (it is true that for this when H < 0 it is
necessary that the condition p(-x) = p(x) be satisfied--indeed on changing the
sign of H, the influence of only symmetrically distributed aberration sources
can remain invariant; see Section 3.2). Let us demonstrate this in the example
of resonators with N > 0, M < 0, "equiv < 0 (these include, in particular, the
confocal resonator depicted in Figure 3.3, c). On making the transition from
(13) to the complex conjugate equation, replacing X' under the integral sign by
-X' and using 01(-X') = pl(X') and M - -|M] we obtain

_1l':xo('\') __. '/'E f... (Ty-xv linN|M|(X'-' r;Ti).|Xq-x’)dxl

(the * indicates, just as everywhere, complex conjugation).

It is known that the eigenfunctions of Such resonators are symmetric (Xe) or
antisymmetric (x3). Substituting the expression xg.a(-X') - :xg,a(x') in the
latter we obtained equations distinguished only by the factor for y and for the
rest coinciding entirely with the equation of the resonator having the parame—
ters N, IHI. In the final analysis we have

V50 (N, — I A,” H 33 [1534”, [M D.
lg. (Iv. - I A, I. x) H x:..(N' I A, I. 4‘),

For resonators with N < 0, M > 0, "equiv < 0 (as an example we can use the sym-
metric resonator made of two sharply concave mirrors)

?(-|NI.M)=-?‘(INI.M). x(—|NI. M. X)=x°(INl. M. X)-

Finally. for N < 0. M < 0, "equiv > 0 (for example, the confocal resonator made
of concave mirrors in which a mirror with large R is used as the exit mirror)

1...(---INI. --IM|) - 111..-(INI. lMl).
l(--INI. _l."l. x) =—. l‘lNL III'I, X).

From the presented formulas it is obvious that for all types of unstable resona-
tors with identical N, M and "equiv with respect to absolute magnitude, the
eigenvalues are distinguished by phase factors, but they coincide with respect
to modulus; thus, all of them have identical diffraction losses. The eigenfunc-
tions recorded on the equiphasal surface of the diverging wave of the geometric
approximation turn out to be complex-conjugate for resonators with “equiv < 0

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with respect to the eigenfunctions of resonators with “equiv > 0. Inasmuch as
the transition from the indicated reference surface to the surface of the mir-

rors is realized by multiplication by exp(inﬂequ1vxz), the distributions on the
mirror surface are also complex-conjugate.

All of this permits us hereafter to limit ourselves to :he investigation of any
one type of resonator. We shall illustrate everything in the example of a reso-
nator made up of two identical convex mirrors (Figure 3.3, e; N > 0, H > 0,
“equiv > O), limiting ourselves, as a rule, to the investigation of the two-
dinensional case and departing from this rule only when the transition to three
dimensional leads to a qualitative change in the oscillation spectrum.

Unstable Resonators with Completely "Suoothed" Edge. Initially, following [151,
154], let us consider the properties of such unstable resonators for which the
edge diffraction effects are insignificant. From the general arguments it is
clear that this occurs in the case where the reflection coefficient of the mir-
rors, and with it also the field amplitude, smoothly decrease toward the edge of

the system. From the materials presented in Section 3.2, it also follows that
the field distribution of the fundamental mode in such resonators must be described

well by the formula for the opticogeometric approximation (5) which satisfies
equation (9). The relation between the equations of the diffraction approxima-
tion (13) and the opticogeometric approximation (9) is quite obvious. Actually,
the factor explinNN(X' - X/M)2] for large values of X' - X/H oscillates rapidly.
Therefore if the product plx is a slowly variable function of X' the magnitude
of the integral in (13) is in practice determined only by the behavior of this

function in the vicinity of the point X/H (see also Section 1.1). Expanding it
near this point in a Taylor series

humor) =o.({r)x(%‘7)-u-(x'—-,7 }? mm:

and limiting ourselves to the terms written out, after integration we immedi-

ately obtain (9) with the aberration function F(X) - 01(X/H)/pl(0) (in the case
of an empty resonator K 5 1).

In order to discover what the mode spectrum of unstable resonators with smoothed
edge is, let us consider their properties in the diffraction approximation in

the example of a resonator with Gaussian distribution of the mirror reflection
coefficient:

9(3) ‘3 “PI—23mm. PI (X) In oxp(—2X').

This case is especially interesting in that the mirrors with Gaussian distribu-
tion p can be considered to have an ideally smoothed edge: As a result of re—
flection of the light beams from them with an amplitude having Gaussian or uni-
form distribution, the Gaussian beams are generated, the far-field pattern of
which does not have additional peaks. In addition, for resonators with such
mirrors there is an exact analytical solution [3]. when the transverse dimen-
sions of the mirrors and the diffraction losses are not too small (more

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

precisely. on satisluction of the condition "Nequivm - 1/?!) >> 1), after tran-
sition to the normal coordinates this solution acquires the form [1511*

u.(x)~ u.(2) II.(2p/— my... %), m = 0,1. 2. .. ., f - equiv (14)
-+—'- (15)
1" ”(nt) .0

where u (x) - exp(-[2/(M2 - 1)][x2/a21), Hm(t) - (-1)"exp(t2/2) x (d'n/dt'“) x
exp(-[t [2]) are Hermite polynomials. Inasmuch as H0(t) - l. the function u
directly describes the field distribution of the lowest mode; it is easy to see
that it satisfies the opticogeometric equation (9) and can be found using for-

”.(J') "(5;)I’(ni,i)”' mp(- if]; fig-u.) - "-‘I’("ﬁz_—';;i)-

Now let us consider the Hermite polynomials. All of them contain the term t”; in the
first two polynomials it is unique (Ho(t) - l, H,(t) - t); the rest, in addition

to it, also contain the terms of lower orders (R2(t) - t2 - l, H3(t) =- t3 ~ 3t.

and so on). These additional terms play a significant role only for small val-

ues of the argument Hm; from (16) it is obvious that this occurs in the investi-
gated case of large Nequiv only on the small central section of the resonator

cross section. Thus. the first two modes on the entire resonator cross section,

nator less uniformly. With an increase in the transverse index m the zone of
larger amplitude shifts away from the center. The equiphasal surfaces of the
modes with m - 0. l naturally coincide with the surface of the spherical wave of
the geometric approximation (Figure 3.10, b). In the wave fronts of the higher-
order modes near the center of the mirrors noticeable deviations from the spher-
ical shape are observed-~it turns out that the Hermite polynomials contain, in

number of papers, including [151, 156], the dependence of the field on time

exp(iut) was used and not exp(-iut) as in the present publication (as a result,
the sign on 1 changes everywhere).

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless, the most Interesting for us now is not the specific form of the
solutions in the resonator with Gaussian mirrors, but the fact that in expres-
sions (14), (15) the form of the distribution p(x) essentially determines only
the factor uo(x) common to all eigenfunctions (inasmuch as “equiv ~ a2, the
value of the argument Hm does not depend on a). It is also remarkable that the
eigenvalues in accordance with (15) do not depend on the sizes of the mirrors
and coincide with the eigenvalues which were obtained by formal methods in ref-
erences [158, 159] for resonators with mirrors of infinite dimensions.

We have already seen that within the framework of the opticogeometric approxi-
mation the isolation of the factor describing the field distribution of the funda-
mental mode for any form of aberration function F(x) reduces the corresponding
equation to the equation of an ideal resonator (see the transition from (9) to
(9a)). By analogy it is possible to propose that in the diffraction approxima-
tion the eigenfunctions have the form (14) not only for Gaussian mirrors, but

also in the general case of many unstable resonators with well-smoothed edge.

The field distribution of the fundamental mode no which figures in (14) here must be
considered using (5); the eigenvalues must be equal to the following (see (11))

v. -= momma/m“ "’- (15.1)

h h N
\ g “-0 §

relative units

Amplitude,
&
N

 

 

Phase,
.radians

M
I

l’

. . ....L -. ._..|_.._-J

l-
U 1.9 ll .r/al
5)

h
'E

Figure 3.10. Field distributions of the lowest modes in a resonator with
Gaussian mirrors (M - 2, nNe “1V - $0): a--amplitude distribu-
tion: b--phase distribution (the origin is the spherical wave of
the geometric approximation).

Then it will be obvious that these arguments formulated in [151] are basically

true: however, it is still necessary to become familiar with the properties of

resonators, themirrorsof which have regular geometric shape with sharply out-
lined edge.

36

FOR OFTWCJAI.USEIDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unstable Resonators With Sharp Edge. As we have already mentioned in Section
3.1, in Sigmen's first paper [4] he stated the argument that in unstable reso-
nators with large losses the edge diffraction must influence only the peripheral
part of the beam immediately exiting from the resonator. Hence, it follows that
the field discribution on the mirrors (or with one-sided output, on the output
mirror) and the magnitude of the losses must not noticeably depend on the edge
effects; the analogous conclusion regarding the prOperties of unstable resona-
tors with large losses can also be found in Vaynshteyn ([3], problem No 8 for
Chapter 4). However, precise machine calculations performed by Sigmen and Ar-
ratun [157] by the iterative method demonstrated that the picture of the prop-
erties of unstable resonators with totally reflecting mirrors of finite dimen-
sions is far from simple. it was discovered that the field distribution for
oscillations with the least losses does not differ too strongly, but neverthe-
less. noticeably, from the predictions of the geometric approximation (Figure
3.11). It turned out that the nature of this distribution and the magnitude of
the losses depend in a complex way on the transverse dimensions of the mirrors,
revealing explicit periodic dependence with variation of "equiv for fixed H.

The typical form of the relation calculated in [157] for the losses as a func-

tion of he “1v is presented in Figure 3.12, a (the procedure used made it pos-
sible simu taneously to find the losses of the two highest 0 modes).

N
e a:

u
Q

h
\A

Amplitude,
relative units

  

_l.._._l___ 1.. ..- .1. -- l
I #‘ 44 at A7 (I
..“/.I

Figure 3.11. Amplitude distribution of modes with least losses near the degen-
erat ion point in the resonator with sharp edge (M - 1.86,
“equiv = 5) [157]. Curve 1"Ncqutv S 5: (:us1‘ II'-Nequ1v 2 So

The work by Sigmen and Arratuu was a significant contribution to the theory of
unstable resonators with a sharp edge; in particular, the parameter Ne uiv was
introduced here. however, the physical meaning of this parameter rema ned un-
clear; in addition. when interpreting the calculated data the authors of [157]
erroneously considered that the lower "wavy" line GHJ ... corresponds to one
mode of the lowest order, and the V-type branches ACE, CHD and EJF ..., another
symmetric mode. In reality. as was indicated in [152] and confirmed by the re-
sults of the latest machine calculations [160, 161] the apparent periodicity of
the variation of the losses is caused by the fact that as Nequ1v grows, the
types of oscillations having the highest Q-factor alternately exchange places
(similarly to how this occurs in Figure 2.21). This exchange takes place near

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the integral values 0: "equiv for which the modes turn out to be doubly degen-
erate with respect to losses (but not with respect to frequencies). Let us note
that the configurations of the fields of two adjacent modes near the degenera-
tion point are presented in Figure 3.11.

In Figure 3.12, b, c, a more complete picture of the behavior of the natural
oscillations of a two-dimensional resonator [160] and a three-dimensional reso-
nator with circular mirrors [161] is depicted. it is obvious that in the final
analysis there are a small number of modes. the losses of which vary with "equiv
quasiperiodicaliy so that these oscillations alternately become the highest Q.
in the three-dimensional case these laws are also maintained for large "equiv at
the same time as in the two-dimensional case, beginning with a defined value of
"equiv. the curves cease to intersect-~the degeneration of the modes with re-
spect to the losses is removed.

Without going into a detailed analysis of these phenomena, it is possible di-
rectly to draw the conclusion that the edge effects in unstable resonators are_
still manifested although only the central and it would appear, almost undis-
turbed part of the beam as a result of diffraction is incident on the exit mir-
ror. In order to understand the cause of this, it is necessary to consider that
as a result of diffraction, in addition to the undistorted reflected wave. an
additional wave also appears, the fictitious source of which is the edge of the
mirror (see Section 2.2). Although the amplitude of the additional wave de-
creases'sharply with remval from the direction of the reflected wave (Figure
3.13), some part of the radiation scatters also at large angles, including in
the direction opposite to the direction of the incident wave (noted in the fig-
ure by the dotted arrows). This radiation gives the beginning of the converging
wave, the properties of which were investigated in detail in Section 3.1. bet
us remember the basic characteristic feature of the converging wave: at the
same time as the intensity of the basic wave decreases on a single pass through
the resonator by H or M2 times, the radiation pertaining to the converging wave
remains entirely inside the resonator for many passes. As a result, the con-
verging wave, in spite of its negligible intensity near the edge of the system
where it is formed, is amplified as it approaches the resonator axis to such a
degree that it has a significant influence on the entire field structure.

The discussed picture. although primitive, nevertheless permits understanding of
the role of the parameter Ne “1‘, [156]. For this purpose let us return to Fig-
ure 3.9. In Figure 3.9 the aotted line depicts the equiphaaal surface of the
diverging wave moving in the direction of the mirror for the presently investi-
gated case of an ideal resonator (the medium is absent or uniform). It is easy
to see that this surface is equiphasal also for a converging wave moving away.
from the mirror. Therefore the radiation of the diverging wave incident on the
edge of the mirror and then forming the converging wave passes between the equi-
phasai surfaces of these waves a total distance Nequivk. Thus. on variation of
New“ by one, the phase difference between the diverging wave and the converg-
ing wave occurring as a result of edge diffraction varies by 21!. which also
leads to quasiperiodicity of the properties of unstable resonators.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gasses. I?

e”

Ener

 

5
N
N
E.
\

&

 

 

.1 [I ."4 .
.LI-LL1‘:L'IL—l—l—L-l——-
I 1.4 .5 rs 7:71"

C equiv

Figure 3.12. Losses and eigenvalues as a function of “equiv: a--losses in the
two-dimensiona1 resonator. M - 1.86 [157]; b--losses in the two-
dimensional resonator, M - 3.3 [160] (the dotted line is used to
plot the losses for the lowest resonator mode with smoothed edge);
c-the eigenvalues in the three-dimensional resonator with spheri-
cal mirrors, H I 5, the azimuthal mode index is equal to zero
(there is no dependence on the azimuthal angle) [161].

Let us note that it is possible always to determine "equiv by the distance be—
tween the equiphasal surfaces of the diverging and converging waves near the
element bounding the beam cross section in the resonator, whereas the definition

of N quiv given in Figure 3.9 sometimes makes no sense. This occurs primarily
in ring cavities and also in systems in which the beam cross section is limited

not only by the exit mirror. but by the iris placed at a noticeable distance from
it. '

A more careful investigation of the properties of unstable resonators with a
sharp edge can be made by the analytical methods of Vaynshteyn similarly to how
this was done in Section 2.2 for the case of a planar resonator. We shall

39

FOR‘OFINCJAL.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

became unmvwhnt familiar with the mathematical aspect of the question in the
following section where there is a discussion of the properties of resonators

with central beam hole: the solution in the geometric approximation is in

general absent there, and it is not possible to get along without the Vaynshteyn
approach. Now we only note that as a result of considering the interference ef-
fects the radiation scattered by edge diffraction inside the resonator turns out
to be distributed not with respect to all, but with respect to a number of dis-
crete directions. Just as in Section 2.2. one of them corresponds to the wave
"reflected" from the edge, and the rest, to the "transformed" waves; only inas-
much as the angle of incidence of the initial wave on the edge of the mirror a
(see Figure 2.7) is very large here, among the "transformed" waves there are

waves WhiCh are scattered not only at angles larger than the “reflected" one (that)
is, with 0 > a), but also at smaller angles (0 < o). A comparison of Figures 3.13
and 2.7 shows that in the case of unstable resonators, when a divergent wave is
incident on the edge, the wave that is "reflected" from the edge is indeed
convergent. The approximate calculations made by Lyubimov et al. [162. 163]
demonstrated that the above-described complex laws actually are explained by
interaction of the fundamental wave with the "reflected" wave and the one or two
"transformed" waves closest to it. The radiation scattered in other directions
quickly exits from the resonator, and therefore plays no significant role.

 

Figure 3.13. The formation of scattered waves during edge diffraction.

Subsequent foreign publications in which the Vaynshteyn methods were still used
(see, for example, [164]) do not add anything theoretically new to the results
obtained in [162, 163]. .It must be noted that in a case or unstable resonators
such calculations. especially considering at least one "transformed" wave. re-
quire extraordinarily awkward calculations and in the final analysis it is not
possible to get around a machine solution of the systems of transcendental equa-
tions. Therefore their results are very difficult to see and are not clear. In
addition, later it will be obvious that the problem of classification of the na-
tural oscillations in unstable resonators, in general, and in those with a sharp
edge, in particular, is primarily of academic interest. In practice only the
nature of the behavior of the modes with the least losses turns out to be impor-
tant, and it is entirely clear from the results of references [157, 152, 160,
161] in which the numerical iterative method was used (see Figure 3.12). There-
fore we shall consider this problem in more detail and proceed to a discussion
of the properties of real systems.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Specific Nature of Edge Effects Under Actual Conditions. The resonators with
significant cross sectional dimensions and not too small IMI - 1 are of the
greatest interest from the point of view of the problems of divergence of the
radiation; obviously for them INequivl >> 1 is satisfied. The specific nature

of the diffraction effects in such resonators primarily consists in the fact

that the fundamental diverging wave is incident on the edge of the mirror at a-com-
paratively large angle a defined by the geometry of the system (see Figure 3.13).
From the radiation scattered as a result of diffraction only that part remains

in the resonator which is deflected from the reflected beam at angles exceeding

a. He have already seen that even in this part of the radiation the primary

role is played by the converging wave corresponding to the angle of deviation 20.
It is easy to show that the values of a and "equiv are related by the expression
a - Nequivxla. In real resonators of powerful lasers “equiv uSually varies from _

several tens to many thousands (see Chapter A); here the angles 2a reach several
degrees.

At the same time it is known that the intensity of the diffraction scattering of
light at large angles depends strongly on the nature of the edge of the mirrors
[165]. The above-enumerated theoretical papers in which the effects of the mode
degeneration with respect to losses, and so on were observed essentially pertain
to the hypothetical case where the edge of the mirrors is ideally sharp and pre-
cisely outlined along a straight line or curve with center on the axis of the
resonator. Such a model is entirely admissible when we are talking, for exam-
ple, about the lowest modes of planar resonators which correspond to small an-
gles of incidence of radiation on the edge of the mirror. For unstable resona-
tors it is impossible to neglect the natural "blurring" of the edge and imper-
fection of the mirror outlines; both of these factors lead to attenuation of the
diffraction scattering of the light at large angles and, consequently, to a de-
crease in the intensity of the converging wave. If this decrease is signifi-
cant, the degeneration with respect to losses is removed and the eigenvalues ap-
proach the values predicted by formula (15).

Let us estimate what the deviations from the ideal conditions should be in order
that the intensity of the converging wave decrease sharply. This is done most
frequently for the case where the mirror reflection coefficient decreases from
one to zero not discontinuously, but over the extent of a zone of finite width d
(a similar situation occurs. in particular. when using mirrors with multilayered
interference coatings). Actually, significant variation of the amplitude of the
beam reflected from the mirror at the characteristic dimension d indicates that
in the expansion of the amplitude in a Fourier series there are components pres—
ent with spatial frequencies of ~l/d. Inasmuch as the angular distribution of
the radiation is the Feurier type of distribution in the near zone (Section 1.1).
these components correspond to the angles of inclination of ~x/d. Hence it fol-
lows that in order that the light be scattered primarily at angles less than

2a - 2Nequ1VA/a, it is necessary to satisfy the condition d > do 5 a/ZNequ1v
[151]. Let us note that the situation here is entirely the same as in radio
engineering where a decrease in the steepness of the pulse front is accompanied
by the corresponding constriction of the signal spectrum.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A more careful calculation of the decrease in intensity of the scattered waves
can be made as follows. Let us break down the entire "smoothing" zone in a
series of sections Ax wide each. Replacing the "smooth" function p(x) by a

step function, we obtain the set of "steps" of height -(dpldx)Ax. Each "step"
obviously generates edge waves with relative amplitude —(dp/dx)Ax (see Section
2.2). Adding them in the far zone considering the phase relations and replacing
the summation with respect to all "steps" by integration. we find that the in-
tensity of the edge waves scattered at an angle w is proportional to

an]!
no” ._ 3"“,(1 211+!)X $11.": “06];
1-1!)

let us note that 8(w) is the angular spectrum of a source of width d with ampli-
tude distribution -(dp/dx). if we consider that for d + 0 the value of 8(6) + 1.
it becomes clear that replacement of the sharp edge by a smoothed edge causes a

decrease in the amplitude of the radiation scattered at an angle w by l/IB(¢)I
times.

The estimates made using these relations in [166] demonstrated that the parame~

ter do introduced above is actually the critical width of the "smoothing" zone,

on achievement of which the diffraction "reflection" from the edge turns out to

be significantly attenuated. With a further increase in zone width, the inten-

sity of the converging wave continues to decrease rapidly (in some cases experi-
encing pulsations; the specific form of the dependence of l/IB(2e)I on d/do na-

turally is determined by the law of decrease of p inside the zone).

in the same paper [166], Sherstobitov and Vinokurov performed the corresponding
calculations for two-dimensional resonators made of cylindrical mirrors with
comparatively small “equiv- The calculations were performed by the numerical
method of Fox-Lee; the "smoothing" of the edge was introduced by direct assign—
ment of the form of p(x). It was found that smoothing does entail elimination of
degeneration of the lowest modes with respect to losses. As an illustration Figure
3.14 shows the losses of the two lowest symmetric modes as a function of "equiv in
the resonator in which 9 decreases to zero in a region of width ~do by a linear
law. It is obvious that the degeneration is completely removed, and the losses
are close to the losses in a resonator with ideally smoothed edge (dotted lines).
The field distribution of the basic mode no in this case is excellently de-
scribed by the formula (5); the distribution of the second mode, although not so
good, still satisfactorily coincides with the resalts of the calculations by
formula (14) with substitution in it of the same uo (see Figure 3.15).

Let us note that in general on making the transition to the higher-order modes,
the effect of the converging wave regularly increases and for elimination of it,
a greater and greater degree of smoothing of the edge is required. This is easy
to understand if we begin with the field distribution in the resonator with
ideally smoothed edge and introduce the partially smoothed edge of a disturbance
leading to the formation of a converging wave. The initial field of the high-
order modes is comparatively high on the periphery of the resonator and small on
its axis (see Figure 3.10). Therefore with an increase in the transverse index,

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the one side, the initial intensity of the converging wave increases, and on
the other, its influence on the field structure in the central part of the reso-
nator increases. Hereafter we shall not touch on the problem of higher modes,
but limit ourselves to analysis of behavior of modes with the least losses.

Figure 3.14.

Figure 3.15.

I” _.m—..H"Z"Tﬁ:=‘#

 

|
I
I
I.
I
I
L
i-
I

Losses of two lowest symmetric nodes as a function of “equiv in a
resonator with partially smoothed edge [166]; the dotted lines are
the values of the losses in the resonator with completely smoothed
edge; M = 3.3.

I
I
I
I
I

    

relative units
Phase. radians

Amplitude.

 

Field distributions of the lowest symmetric modes in a resonator
with partially smoothed edge for N - 3. 3, Neq uiv : 4 [166]: a--
amplitude distribution; b--phase distribution (the origin is the
spherical wave of the geometric approximation). The solid lines
represent the machine calculations. and the dotted lines, the cal-
culation by formulas (lb), (5).

Thus, for removal of the degeneration of the lowest modes of the two-dimensional
unstable resonators with small Neq uiv slight smoothing of the edge is sufficient

(let us remember that for large Neq uiv the degeneration in the two-dimensional
resonators is absent even without any smoothing). This conclusion can be

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

directly generalized to the case of a three-dimensional resonator with spherical

rectangular mirrors, for in such resonators, as we have seen many times in Chap-
ter 2, the variables are easily separated.

In resonators with circular spherical mirrors the edge effects are manifested
significantly more strongly: Here, in contrast to the three-dimensional resona-
tors with cylindrical mirrors, a simple increase in "equiv in the presence of a
sharp edge does not lead to removal of the degeneration of the lowest modes (see
Figure 3.12). The reasons for this consist in the fact that the density of the
converging wave increases as it approaches the center more sharply for spherical
mirrors than for cylindrical mirrors (it is known that the diffraction structure
at the center of the pattern is expressed more strongly with diffraction on a
circular hole than on a slit of the same transverse dimension). In references
[163, 338], the Vaynshteyn method was used to show that for removal of the de-
generation in resonators with circular spherical mirrors it is necessary to de-
crease the amplitude of the converging wave by comparison with the case of a
sharp edge by approximately e 1n(2nNequ1V)/1n M times. This corresponds to a

not so small width of the smoothing zone: for the most favorable decreasing
law

(1- a)!!!

[I to“) -:-;--—é ‘ Mp(‘.. §)(II|IGIII)

In
I

it will be (do/u) ll + lniln(2nNequ1v)/ln M , in the case of a linear law
and laws close to it [166] it reaches ~0.5do ln(2:Ncqu1V)/ln M. Nevertheless,
for large "equiv this is only a small portion of the total size of the mirrors.

Finally, the time has come to see what relation the case of the resonator with
partially smoothed edge discussed by us has to the properties of the real sys-
tems. The parameters of solid-state lasers described in the following chapter
correspond to the widths of the smoothing zone required for removal of the de-
generation of the lowest modes by losses 0.1-1 mm; this blurring of the edge oc-
curs quite frequently.

There are other factors which can lead to attenuation of the influence of the
edge effects. Thus, for the smallest misalignments of the resonator the values
of “equiv measured from different sides of the system axis begin to differ from
each other; these differences also arise as a result of the influences of aber-
rations (see Figure 3.9). Finally, the edge of the mirrors can be inexactly
outlined. All of this leads to the fact that the waves beginning in different
sections of the mirror loop arrive at the axis with different phases and there-
fore are mutually extinguishing (it is known that using the diaphragm with un—
even edge, it is possible completely to blur the diffraction pattern far from
the boundary of the geometric shadow). The meaning of the parameter do here be-
comes entirely clear: For variation of the distance from the axis to the edge
within the limits from a — do/Z to a + do/Z the value of "equiv varies by one.
the phase difference between the diverging and converging waves. by 2!.

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘FK'IAI. “SI-l ONLY

Everything that has been stated together with certain other results of the
above-enumerated experiments suffices for drawing the following basic conclu-
sion: The degeneration of the lowest modes of real resonators with “equiv >> 1,
as a rule, is absent, and if necessary it can be reliably prevented by using
such simple measures as the application of a bevel to the edge of the mirror
(for more information about the suppression of edge effects by this method see
[3]). the application of a serrated iris, and so on. Of course, we are talking
only about cases where the degeneration is caused by diffraction on the edge of
the mirror and not light dissipation in the active medium or on interfaces

(the effect of the light dissipation will be briefly considered in Section 4.1).

The removal of the degeneration with respect to losses is accompanied by the
fact that the field distribution begins to be described with a high degree of
accuracy by the formulas of the opticogeometric approximation (it is only neces-
sary to consider that manifestations of diffraction remain in the peripheral
part of the beam leaving the resonator with small smoothing of the edge). The
applicability of the opticogeometric approximation in turn indicates that the
operation of the laser will be reliably realized on one transverse mode. Actu-
ally, the condition of steady-state lasing on the fundamental mode has

the form 1 a K(O)p(0)/IM|P - 1 (see (11), (15a)). Hence it follows that the am-
plification coefficient of the medium on the system axis for any intensity and
distribution of the pumping in the free lasing mode is equal to [HIP/p(0),

which in accordance with the same formula (15a) is appreciably less than the am-
plification coefficient required for excitation of the other modes. Thus, the
lasing regime can cease to be unimodal only in the presence of such large dis-
turbances that the formulas (14), (15) become inapplicable even for the lowest
modes. A special case of such disturbances is, as we have seen, the presence of
an ideally sharp and exactly outlined edge of the mirrors.

All of these problems pertaining to edge effects in unstable resonators are of
unquestioned cognitive interest. However, from the practical point of view in
itself the problem of degeneration of the modes with respect to losses is not so im-

portant as can be demonstrated. From the numerical calculations performed in [157,

153, 162] and other papers, it follows that for small Ne uiv the degenerate modes
correspond in practice to the same angular radiation disiribution, especially in

the case of nontransparent mirrors, although only the outer part of the beam
will exit from the resonator (see also Figure 3.11). With an increase in "equiv,
the fields of the highest Q oscillations, independently of the presence or ab-
sence of degeneration, differ less and less from the spherical wave field of the
geometric approximation undergoing single diffraction on the mirror aperture.

In addition, even for an ideally sharp edge if “equiv is sufficiently large

these differences are of an almost irregular nature (Figure 3.16). Thus, degen-
eration cannot be essentially felt in the angular divergence of the radiation,
and it is undesirable only when constructing single-frequency lasers.

If the transverse dimensions of the cross section of the active medium are so

small that “equiv cannot exceed a few units, for achievement of the single-
frequency lasing it is possible to select, in accordance with Sigmen's recommen~
dations [167], resonator parameters such that "equiv will be close to the

a half-integer. In this case the difference of the losses of the two highest

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Q modes turns out to be comparatively large even for a sharp edge (see Figure
3.12). It is only necessary to consider that the field distribution in the
resonators with small "equiv: as a rule, is highly nonuniform, which prevents

the achievement of the maximum high output parameters of the lasers (for more
information see Sections 1.4, 4.1).

its
it"s:

A
\

Amplitude,
relative u
.§
~V

Elsa

 

Phase.
radians

Figure 3.16. Amplitude and phase distribution of the basic mode of a two-dimen-
sional resonator for Nequiv = 30. H = 2.38 [166].

In conclusion let us note that the above—discussed arguments were basically
stated in [151, 154], and with minimum corrections, they are confirmed by the
results of the numerical calculations in [166, 163, 338]. Thus. the problem of
suppression of nonuniformity of the field distribution occurring as a result of
the edge diffraction, first acquired urgency and found theoretical solution as
applied to the problem of optical resonators. Some time later the same problem
arose for the creators of powerful laser amplifiers. The fact is that when the
density of the amplified radiation approaches the self-focusing threshold occur-
ring under the effect of any factors the nonuniformity of the distribution can
lead to the fact that at any point this threshold will be exceeded, and the ac-
tive element damaged- One such factor can be edge diffraction; for suppression
of its effect, the same procedures in essence were used as were discussed in
[151] (the so-called anodizing of the aperture).

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF UNSTABLS RESONATORS
§ 6.1. Unstable Resonators in Pulsed Lasers with Free Lasing

The basic result of using unstable resonators usually is expected to be the achieve-
ment of small angular divergence while maintaining the same energy characteristics
of the laser as in the case of using planar or unstable resonators. It is

perhaps simplest of all to do this for pulsed lasers using large volumes of active
medium that are not too nonuniform. Actually, in the case of pulsed excitation
usually high amplification coefficients are achieved; as will be obvious later,

this permits the application of resonators with quite large magnification H, which
without any of the contrivances of the type described at the end of the preceding
chapter have low sensitivity to the effect of optical nonuniformities. If the operating

cross section of the active zone is large, the values of “equiv also turn out to be

large; therefore the edge effects almost have no influence on the mode structure
and have no negative effect on the directionality of the radiation.

Selection of the Type of Resonator and Its Parameters. The most important factors
which determine the angular divergence of the radiation were investigated in the
preceding chapter. Therefore now we shall primarily discuss the problems pertain-

ing to the energy characteristics of lasers with unstable resonators: in the'case
of large volumes of the active medium, the problem of efficiency acquires pri-

mary significance. As for the efficiency of the lasers during their operation

on a single transverse mode, unstable resonators here have explicit advantages over
resonators of other types. Actually, it is known that the maximum efficiency of a
laser is achieved usually when the laser radiation distribution in general
features repeats the pumping distribution (5 1.4). In planar resonators and,
especially in resonators with stable configuration the field of one mode cannot uni-

formly fill a sufficiently large cross section, the correlation between the forms
of distribution of the lasing and pumping fields is very weak (thus, in S 2.5

it was noted that the amplitude aberrations in a planar resonator primarily cause-
not amplitude, but phase distortions of the wave fronts). Accordingly, in lasers

with such resonators usually the multimode oscillation mode is realized with large
angular divergence of the radiation (55 2.3. 2.4).

Unstable resonators provide incomparably more favorable conditions for achievement
of high efficiency in the presence of single-mode oscillation. With a uniform

active medium and mirrors with reflection coefficient constant with respect to
cross section, the field distribution of the lowest mode is close to H-type. If
the inverse population is nonuniform, then, as was noted in [152], in accordance
with formula (5) the 1831“: field acquires a similar nature of distribution.

‘7

INJR OFTNCJAI.lﬂﬂ5(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, for realization of the indicated prerequisite it is necessary that a num-
ber of conditions be satisfied. First of all, of course. it is necessary that the
lasing radiation fill the cross section of the active zone well over its entire
length. If this is not so, the output power of the laser decreases, frequently
more sharply than in accordance with the proportion of the used volume: the region
in which the medium is excited, and the lasing radiation is absent, is a powerful
source of luminescence and, as a result of amplification of it (so-called super-
luminescence [32]) it can significantly decrease the inverse population in the re-
maining volume.

0n the other hand, it is necessary to see that the lasing radiation does not hit

the sidewalls of the active element or the cell in which the lasing is realized.

In addition to decreasing the efficiency of the system, this can lead to an increase
in angular divergence of the radiation as a result of the influence of the scattered
light.

Thus. it is necessary that the configuration of the beam propagated to the exit
mirror exactly coincide with the configuration of the active element (the beam

propagated in the opposite direction has less volume for one-way output). This
imposes restrictions on the type of resonator used.

Most frequently, the active zone has a cylindrical shape. In this case the beam
going to the exit mirror must be at least close to parallel. If M exceeds one by
very little, the given condition is more or less observed even when using the
simplest resonator made up of a planar and convex mirrors (see Figure 3.3,a), the
beam cross section in which on the path from the plane mirror to the convex mirror
increases by 2H/(M + 1) times. However, with large losses to radiation, it becomes
necessary to use the asymmetric confocal systems depicted in Figure 3.3.c,d. The
transverse dimension of the exit mirror must be In] times less than the cross sec-
tion of the active element. Here, its shape should obviously be similar to the
shape of the cross section of the active zone (from reading the theoretical papers
it appears that it must be circular or square; in reality, this is not so at all).

A confocal resonator made of concave mirrors is less sensitive to aberrations (53.2);
in addition. for the same IHI and distance between the mirrors it has (IHI + 1)]
(IHI - 1) times larger value of Inequivl than the telescopic one. On the other

hand, it also has a very large deficiency: the center of the spherical wave re-

flected from the exit mirror is inside the resonator (Figure 3.3,c). As a result,
the beam following from the exit mirror fills the resonator cross section worse
than in the telescopic one; however, it is still more important that the beam den-
sity at the focal point reaches an extremely large value and can easily exceed
not only the rupture threshold of the solid active medium, but also the threshold
of formation of breakdown in the gas. For the indicated reasons. in the majority
of practical applications the theoretical resonator proposed in [185, 152] is used.

Then the question arises of selecting the optimal magnification M. From the point
of view of diminishing the effect of large-scale optical nonuniformities it is
desirable that M be as large as possible. For this purpose it is expedient to »
destroy other sources of losses to radiation and use completely reflecting mirrors.
Then the admissible value of H is determined by purely energy arguments. In order -
to understand what these arguments are. let us consider the dependence of the
output power of a laser with telescopic resonator on M. Just as in § 1.6, we

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shall limit ourselves to the analysis of the simplest case where the pumping is
uniformly distributed with respect to the volume of the active medium having a
cylindrical shape, the interference phenomena between the radiation fluxes following
in opposite directions do not appear, and the relation between the amplification
coefficient and the total radiation has the form of (1.33). Introducing the radia-
tion density in dimensionless units 9 5 mi, letusrewrite (1.33) in the form

"MI |- 9+ -l- n"). ’ (1)

(a)
Key: a. amplification
where 0+ and p- are the flux densities to the exit mirror and in the opposite di-
rection, respectively (Figure 4.1).

 

Figure 4.1. Radiation fluxes in a laser
with telescopic resonator.

It is easy to see that inside the region I which is filled by the fluxes in both
directions, the inverse population and the flux density itself vary only along the
length 2(0+ < z < L), and these values are constant with respect to cross section.

'rnen for 0+ and p in the indicated region the obvious relations are valid:

0" (z) 9* (0)911)“ Ikn(z’)- 0.] dz'l.
O

o- (z) = o- (0)er [— inhum— o.l at] (—’_-)'.
O

(2)

where 00 is the coefficient of inactive losses; the factor [zo/(zo — z)]2 describes

the decrease in the density of the diverging spherical wave on going away from an
imaginary center :0 coinciding with the common focal point of the mirrors.

Equations (1) and (2) must be solved jointly with respect to 0+ (z) and p (2) con-
sidering the boundary conditions 0 +(0) - p (0) and p +(L) - p" (L). Finding the
exact solution in analytical form is impossible. For a roximate solution it is
convenient to use the fact that according to (2) lb (z)p'(z) - p(0)zol(zo - z).

inasmuch as the sum 9 + g is with an accuracy to several percentages equal to
2/pr 9 up to values of p and p differing by two or three times (larger differ-
ences in practice do not exist) it is possible by the cortesponding substitution
to convert equation (1) as follows:

49

IWDR 0F1WC]AI.USE§(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kn = k:.n + 29(0)z./(:.— xn--. ' (la)

The substitution of (1a) in (2) with subsequent integration leads to the equation
for determination of 0(0):

. u | (0+:u__ IIM+a.L
2117.9(°)'“%r6371'7 " 7—-

”L

where M - zo/(zo - L), as always, is the magnification of the resonator.

Finding 9(0). it is possible by using (2) to calculate the distribution p+(z) in the
region I. when the part of the radiation flux remote from the axis (r > a/H, 2a is
the diameter of the active element) intersects the boundary between the regions and
goes into zone 11 where p— - 0, further amplification of the flux is easily consi-
dered by the corresponding formula for the amplifying mode [186]. which is a direct
consequence of the radation transport equation:

0. on

Key: n. out b. amplification

where p is the flux density at the entrance to region II; pout is the flux density

at the exit from the resonator as a function of the distance i traveled by the flux
in this region (see Figure 4.1). It is obvious that the value of i, and with it
also pout' increase with an increase in r.

Figure 4.2 shows the graphs of the density distributions of the radiation leaving
the resonator calculated in this way. As is obvious from Figure b.2, with an in-
crease in H the radiation density at the laser exit decreases, but the width of the
radiating zone (a - a/M) naturally increases. For some value no the power of the

outgoing radiation will be maximal. Pt

[tuna

    

_L
I 42 ll (5 din“

Figure 6.2. Density distribution of outgoing radiatian with respect
to cross section of the active element for the case k L - 3.0,
00L - 0.12 and different values of H9"?

Key: a. relative units

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The effectiveness of the energy conversion and the resonator X introduced in § 1.4
can be calculated as the ratio of the number of lasing photons leaving the resona-
or f I dS (integration is performed over the area of the exit aperture) to the

(3)
total number of acts of filling out the inverse population in the volume of the
oscillator f P dv. Inasmuch as in the case of a four-level medium with uniformly

(V) pump
broadened line and unpopulated lower level of the operating transition Ppump - kglp/a
(see § 1.1.), we obtain x - (5“ 0”“),(S k,.-dv . In particular, for the case of a
( I (V) .

circular cylindrical element with uniform pumping

- 2
.\ ,_.m "p,;)(r)rdr.

1! a!"
(b)
Key: a. out b. amplification

Figure 4 3 shows the efficiency of the resonator X calculated using the last

formula as a function of the value of H for a number of values of cab and k0 aan (let

us remember that in the case of a four-level medium the ratio Romp/o0 is the amount

the lasing threshold is exceeded in the absence of losses to radiation, that is,
for H = l). The data for a telescopic resonator are compared with the data pertain-

ing to a planar resonator with the same total losses and losing threBhOIG (the
reflection coefficient of the output mirror R' is UK2 ).

From Figure 4.3 it follows that the efficiency of the energy conversion in a tele-
scopic resonator in the given case is somewhat less, but it is very close to the
efficiency in the corresponding planar resonator. Thus. for a laser with a tele-
scopic resonator, the formulas of § 1.6 can be used under the condition of replace-
ment of R' in them by l/Mz. in particular, for cab that is not too large, the value
of X can be determined using the expression

Xz In” (1-1nM+a.L)'

 

 

in n 'i' 0.)! get: (3)
the optimal magnification of the resonator, by the formula
In Mme 0.1.(1/1: /o.— 1), (to)
Key: a. opt
finally, the maximum value of x. just as in the case of a plane resonator is
approximately equal to
Xmar~ (I — V0,!“ «2.). (5)

The above-discussed analysis was performed in reference [187], being the first
example of calculation of the energy characteristics of lasers with unstable reson-
ators. Later, more complex cases were investigated which require very awkward
machine calculations (we shall touch on the methods of performing these calculations

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in § 4.2). Thus, in [188] calculations were made of the efficiency for nonuniform
distribution of the pumping with respect to cross section and large excesses
over the threshold; it turned out that the formulas (3)-(5) remain in force under
the condition of substitution of the value of kamp averaged over the cross section

in them. Analogous laws occur, as is known. also in the case of planar reson-
ators.

   

l' -‘(’-'- ..‘ J .4_
u- “) .'
/"”\- =/ a
p." It \c_, .1?“ a...
a:
ll
l'.‘

a' 7:;- «I: am“ ”a it"‘zz'v 3%?

Figure 4.3. Efficiency of the resonator with telescopic (solid curves)

and plans; (dotted curves) resonators as a function of the values of

1/” and R', respectively, for kampL - 2 and 3.

Key: n. amplification

This similarity of behavior of the telescopic and planar resonators of course is no
accident. Its causes consist in the fact that the nature of filling of the cylin-
drical active element with lasing radiation in these two types of resonators with
identical losses to radiation is not so strongly distinguished as it appears at
first glance. Actually, with equality of the losses in the medium, identical mean
values of the amplification coefficient are established; consequently, the mean
radiation densities approximately coincide. Then, along the path from the "blind"
mirror to the exit mirror in a planar resonator, the radiation density increases by
l/v’iT times (§ 1.4), in the telescopic resonator. by M times, that is, in the same
ratio. Hence it is obvious that 3+ in these two resonators has similar values in
the entire volume of the active medium. As for the radiation traveling in the
opposite direction (9'), in the telescopic resonator its distribution is less
favorable: although the total radiation flux is approximately the same as in the
planar resonator it is distributed not with respect to the entire cross section,
but only with respect to part of it: worst of all is the filling near the exit
mirror. As a result. the total density p + p. is distributed over the active vol-

ume in the case of a telescopic resonator somewhat more nonuniformly, which leads
to insignificant decrease in the efficiency.

Thus. the telescopic resonator insures an efficiency which is close to its maximum
value defined by formula (5) if we select the radiation losses 1 - 1/H2 such as
the optimal planar resonator would have. Moreover. the value of x in the vicinity
of its maximum varies very slowly with H, and the variation of H within known
limits is not related to a significant reduction in the efficiency of the system.
This can be used so that when selecting M the arguments connected with divergence
of the radiation are considered. For reduction of the divergence. it is, as a
rule, expedient to use resonators with the largest possible M. here the sensiti-
vity of the resonator to the aberrations decreases (5 3.2); in addition, the ring

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at the exit will become less narrow. However. it is necessary to proceed to values
of M significantly exceeding 2 with great caution. First of all. from 5 3.3 it
follows that single-mode lasing with uniform field distribution is achieved
most reliably for large Nequiv' If the transverse dimensions of the active element

are given, N reaches a maximum for M . 2. A futher increase in H. in spite

equiv

of some increase in curvature of the mirrors causes a decrease in "e as a re-

quiv
sult of a fast decrease in the transverse dimensions of the exit mirror.

Extremely large values of H can be disadvantageous also in the presence of light
dispersion, especially at angles close to 180° (usually all possible interfaces are
sources of this light dispersion). It is easy to understand the reason

for this if we consider that with an increase in M the proportion of the radiation
participating in the "regular“ feedback channel decreases, and the light intensity
mixedwith itas a result of dispersion of the basic flux remains unchanged; thus,
the role of the light dispersion increases.

The proper choice of the resonator parameters even in the case of uniform active
medium still does not guarantee that a high axial luminous intensity will be obtained.
From the information presented in the preceding chapter it is clear that for this

to occur, it is necessary to exclude the formation of converging waves with notice-
able initial intensity. In the case of a telescopic resonator, the purely converg-
ing wave is formed. as is easy to see, with partial reflection of the basic wave

from the plane interfaces perpendicular to the resonator axis; therefore the inter-

faces existing in the laser (for example, the end surfaces of the rod) must be in-
clined noticeably.

Results of Experiments with Neodymium Glass Lasers. The above-discussed arguments
about the choice of the type and the parameters of an unstable resonator and also

a signficant part of the concepts developed in Chapter 3 regarding the properties
of unstable resonators were developed during the course of experimental studies of
neodymium glass resonators [5, 152, 189. 153, 190, 191. 1968, 192-197], and they
were confirmed by the results of these studies. In the example of lasers of the
given type a most detailed comparison was made between the characteristics of the
lasers with planar and unstable resonators; in practice all of the new versions of
the systems based on unstable resonators were tested and studied for the first time.
Let us discuss the basic results of the experiments pertaining to the lasers with
the simplest two-mirror resonators discussed in this section.

For a diameter of the neodymium rod of 10 mm and length of 120 mm, the application
of an unstable resonator led only to a twofold gain in axial luminous intensity by
comparison with the case of a planar resonator [152]. In the greater part of the
subsequent experiments, a highly efficient laser based on a rod 45 mm in diameter
and 600 mm long which was described in [198] was used. It served as a prototype
for the series manufactured COS—1001 lasers and various versions of them. Here the
axial luminous intensity on replacement of the planar resonator by an unstable one in-
creased by tens of times. The angular divergence of the radiation measured by the
half intensity level decreased from 2' to 15-20"; with respect to the half energy
level, from 5' to 40" (Figure 4.6. curve 1) [152]. Let us note that this situation
is quite characteristic: the larger the laser. the greater the effect from us-

ing an unstable resonator in it. The achieved gain in divergence also increases
with an increase in optical uniformity of the active medium; in this respect the
investigated laser was entirely satisfactory.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

—l—l—L._l_l__l_l_J-.’
0 2 I f I a 7'

yzyuw (b)
Figure 4.4. Angular distribution of the emission of a solid-state
laser with telescopic resonator [152]: I -- resonator without inter-
faces perpendicular to the axis; II -- a coated glass plate was in-
stalled inside the resonator perpendicular to the axis. The propor-
tion of the energy included in the cone with apex angle ¢ is plotted
on the y-axis.

Key: a. energy. relative units
b. angular minutes

In the experiments with rods 45 mm in diameter the mirrors were totally reflecting.
The losses to emission were equal to the optimal transmission factor for the case

of planar mirrors, and they amounted to ~75! (M - 2). The use of a telescopic
resonator insured approximately the same radiation energy as in the case of a planar
resonator. In the case of a planoconvex system of mirrors, the output energy dropped
by 1.5-2 times as a result of worse filling of the active element with the lasing

radiation. After these experiments with large losses to emission, only telescopic
resonators began to be used everywhere.

Subsequently, the output energy of an emission of a laser of the given type was
brought to 4500 joules, and with series installation of two active elements in one
resonator with M - 5, to 8000 joules [194]. The angular divergence of the radiation

was: with respect to 0.5 intensity level, ~40"; with respect to half energy level,
about 1'30".

Let us note the following important fact. In order to realize small angular diver-

gence, in the case of a telescopic resonator it turned out to be necessary to in-
cline the ends of the active element by 2-3° with respect to the resonator axis,

which made it possible to avoid the converging waves generated by Fresnel reflection.
The necessity for taking such measures was proved by the following demonstration
experiment: a glass plate with coatedsurfaces wasinstalled strictly perpendicular
to the axis in a telescopic resonator with active element. the ends of which were
inclined; the residual reflection of the coated surfaces did not exceed 0.31. This
turned out to be sufficient that the lasing pattern changed strikingly, and the ‘
angular divergence of the radiation increased so much that it approached the value
characteristic of a planar resonator (curve II in Figure 4.&) [153]. The corre-
sponding photographs are presented in Figure 4.5. a, b [photos not reproduced].

56

FOR OFFICIAL use oniv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The mechanism responsible for poor directionality of radiation in such

cases was studied in [197, 336]. It turned out that on introduction of a third
planar mirror into the telescopic resonator, "spurious" modes appear which corre-
spond to closed beam trajectories. Many passes through the active medium go with
one reflection from this mirror. Therefore the "spurious" modes even for the
smallest reflection coefficients of the planar mirror have lower excitation thres
01d; than the fundamental mode of a twoqmirror resonator. Inasmuch as these modt: in
addition, are characterized by high nonuniformity of the field distribution. some
of them are excited immediately with all of the sad consequences following from
this. And this is no surprise: in § 3.3 we encountered the situation where the
presence of even a negligibly weak converging wave generated by edge diffraction
leads to degeneration with respect to losses. Therefore the e.forts sometime made
to influence the lasing mode (in particular, lower its threshold) by artificial
initiation of converging waves obviously always must lead to an increase in diver-
gence of the radiation [336].

However, let us continue the discussion of the properties of lasers with "normal"
unstable resonators not having sources of converging waves. Among the discovered
peculiarities of such lasers, high stability of their output parameters is remark-
able, including the form of the angular distribution of the radiation. Such
phenomena characteristic of lasers with planar resonators as variation of the an-
gular distribution from pulse to pulse, a gradual increase in angular divergence
during aging of the active element, and so on were not observed. This property of
lasers with unstable resonators is to one degree or another inherent in all systems
with spherical mirrors. and it is frequently connected with their small critical-
ness with respect to the alignment precision.Astheexperiments have demonstrated,
small rotations and shifts of the mirrors in the transverse direction cause only
small changes in the beam direction. The magnitude of these variations corresponds
completely to the predictions of the geometric approximation. The form of angular
distribution is essentially distorted only for such large rotations of the mirrors
that the axis of the resonator tightly approaches the flat surface of the sample
[152] (an analogous cycle of studies for the case of a CD2 laser was performed
later in the paper by Krupke and Suya [199]).

also in accordance with the geometric approximation. the displacements of one of
the mirrors in the longitudinal direction cause variation of the curvature of the

wave leaving the resonator. In the case of a telescopic resonator it is possible
to use this means of focusing the beam at a given distance d >> L from the laser,
increasing the distance between the mirrors by comparison with the distance L for
confocal location of them by the amount ~(H + l)L /(H - l)d (focusing at the dis-
tancc d ~ L is also possible, but it is accompanied by a decrease in the output
power as a result of "tapering" of the light beam in the active element).

in reference [152], a study was also made of the spectral and time characteristics
of the emission of a neodymium glass laser with unstable resonators. There were
no special differences from the characteristics of lasers with planar mirrors:

the same random spikes, approximately the same integral width of the spectrum; only
the duration of each spike turned out to be somewhat less, and the average time
interval between them increased.

The reduction in duration of the spikes arose from the fact that the oscillations
in unstable resonators are set upsomewhat faster than in planar resonators. The

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

main reason for this is the presence of some mechanism of forced "spreading" of the
emission over the cross section. We shall discuss this question in more detail at
the end of this section when we are talking about lasers for which the rate of
establishment of the oscillations plays the decisive role. As for the spectral
distribution of the radiation, for planar and unstable resonators it is essentially
the distribution of the radiation intensity between modes with different axial in-
dices (see 5 2.4). Near the axis of an unstable resonator the same interference of
two counterflows and the formation of standing waves occur as in a planar resonator.
Therefore the mechanism of the spatial competition of the axial modes in resonators
of both types is identical in spite of the fact that in the unstable resonator the
peripheral part of the active element is filled with radiation propagated in only

one direction (see also the discussion of the problem of spectral selection in
ring cavities in § 3.5).

The observations of the time expansion of the spatial distribution of the emission
[152, 153. 1921 demonstrated that during lasing, insignificant shifts of the center
of symmetry of the angular disribution of the emission take place. In addition,
the angular distribution also in individual spikes differed from the distribution
for the ideal emitter. As a result, the integral width of the angular distribution
with respect to time for the investigated lasers noticeably exceeded the diffrac-
tion limit. Obviously, this was a consequence of thermal deformations of the
resonator, the vibrations of the samples, and so on. Taking measures against the
effect of these factors led to a decrease in the radiation divergence.

In particular, the results of experiments with a laser based on an active element
of great length and with rectangular cross section are indicative [192]. During
the pumping pulse the sample underwent noticeable mechanical vibrations along the
small dimension of the cross section. Accordingly, the center of gravity of the
angular distribution completed complex oscillatory movement in the same direction;
the divergence of the radiation with respect to this direction was four times
greater than the diffraction limit, and it amounted to ~2'20". The replacement of
the concave mirror by a dihedral prism with convex surface turned into the resona-
tor and an edge parallel to the large dimension of the cross section led to com-
plete correspondence to the ideas developed in § 3.5, almost total

stabilization of the direction of radiation. The angular divergence decreased in
this case to 1'. If a telescopic resonator made of two prisms was used, the de-

gree of stabilization of the direction was somewhat less, and the divergence was
~l'10“. ‘

Extraordinarily high selective properties of unstable resonators with large Fresnel
numbers were fully manifested in the test experiments performed in [190]. The
manifestations of optical nonuniformity of the medium and other similar causes were
completely eliminated here. A two-dimensional unstable resonator with H - 2 made
of totally reflecting mirrors, one of which was planar and the other, convex cylin-
drical (Figure 4.6), was used. The active element, just as in the preceding case,
was a rectangular parallelepiped, the location of the flashlamps insured high
uniformity of distribution of pumping in the direction of the large dimension of
the cross section. The curvature of the wave front emitting from the resonator
was compensated for by an additional lens.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 4.6. Diagram of a laser with rectangular active rod and two-

dimensional unstable resonator: a) symmetric, b) asymmetric exit of

the radiation (the crosshatched rectangles on the right depict the
exit beam cross section).

Two methods of exiting this radiation from the laser were tested which are illustra-
ted in Figure 5.6, a, b; “equiv was ~1700 and ~7000, respectively. In the former

case the integral angular distribution of the radiation with respect to pulse time
along the direction in the plane of the figure coincided almost with the Fraunhofer
diffraction pattern on two rectangular openings (Figure 6.5, c Iphoto not reproduced];
the long extent of the pattern with respect to the second direction is connected

with the fact that in this direction the resonator was equivalent to a planar
resonator; in addition. the compensating lens was not cylindrical as should be,

but spherical). The band contrast is very close to one, which indicates high

spatial coherence of the radiation (let us note that the distance between two

beams leaving the resonator was ~120 mm).

Noticeahle deviations from the results of the diffraction at the exit aperture of
the laser and when using the system depicted in Figure 4.6, b with exit of the

radiation in the form of a single beam in one direction from the axis of the reso-

nator were not detected. As a result of increasing the aperture width. in this
case the divergence was less than in the first case, and it was 2" or 1-10'5 rad
(Figure 5.5, d [photo not reproduced]).

After performing these experiments the thesis that unstable resonators with large

"equiv with uniform medium provide single-mode lasing with diffraction angle of

divergence of the radiation could be considered proved. It was only left to estab-
lish whether departure of the divergence of the radiation of real lasers from the
diffraction limit is a consequence of such prosaic causes as imperfection of the
elements of the resonator, optical nonuniformity of the mediul.orthe "high-order
modes" sometimes mentioned in the literature are at fault here. According to § 3.2,

the wave front of a light beam which is the fundamental mode of an unstable resonator
is formed in it just as on transmission of the beam through a multistage amplifier

(Figure 3.6). Therefore the best answer to the stated problem can be given by

direct experimental comparison of the divergence of the radiation of a real laser
with an unstable resonator with divergence at the exit of the multistage amplifier

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(see 5 2.6) constructed from analogous active elements. This comparison was under-
tak- in [195] .

The basic results of [195] are presented in Figure 4.7. Curve 1 corresponds to the
angular distribution at the input of the final stage of amplification. curve 2,

at the output of the multistage system. The data for the laser with telescopic
resonator are plotted using x's; it is obvious that the multistage system in its
"pure" form insures somewhat less divergence of the emission. However. if we cover
the central part of the exit aperture of the multistage system so that the beam
acquires the same circular cross section as in the case of a telescopic resonator

the divergence of the radiation of the devices of both types comes close to
coinciding (see curve 3).

 

' J hiya)

Figure 4.7. Angular distribution of the radiation energy (the propor—

tion of the energy in a cone with apex angle o is plotted on the y-

axis): 1 -- at the entrance of the final stage of a multistage system;

2 -- at the exit of a multistage system with circular aperture; 3 -

annular exit of the radiation; x -- telescopic resonator, O - multi-
stage system with annular diaphragm.

Key: a. energy, relative units
b. angular minutes

Attention is attracted by the fact that the differences between curves 2 and 3
cannot be explained by purely diffraction phenomena: the halfwidth of the angular
energy distribution as a result of diffraction of the plane front in a circular
opening was 5" more under the conditions of [195], and in the annular opening, a
total of &" more. Obviously these differences were caused primarily by the fact
that the optical uniformity of the central part of the pumped neodymium glass

rod is higher than its periphery (information about the nonuniformity induced in
such cases is presented in [200]); therefore the addition of the central part to

the annular exit aperture also causes a noticeable decrease in the divergence.

Prom Figure 4.7 it is obvious that preliminary stages and the final amplifier in the
given case make similar contributions to the total radiation divergence with re-
spect to magnitude. From the materials of § 3.2 it follows that for a telescopic
resonator used in [195] with H - 2 the distortions of the wave front coming as a
result of large-scale nonuniformities before the last pass through the active rod
and directly in this last pass are also similar with respect to magnitude. The
analogy between the multistage system and the telescopic resonator is quite obvious
here.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘FK'MI. “SI-2 ONLY

Thus. carefully made unstable resonators are actually capable of insuring the

same radiation divergence as multistage circuits (considering obvious corrections
connected with the differences in the exit apertures). As will be obvious in §4.3,
by using these resonators amplifiers can be constructed which provide enormous ampli-
fication of the weak signal in one standard active element (considerable work is
required, in particular. in devices consisting of many channels synchronized by a
single master oscillator). At the same time, the experience of [1951 demonstrated
that the problems pertaining to energy efficiency are solved on the basis of un-
stable resonators much more simply than when using multistage systems (as a result
of a significantly smaller number of elements in the optical system of the device).
Therefore the sphere of application of the awkward multistage systems primarily re-
mains the rare cases where for the sake of achieving record radiation parameters
any means are considered justifiable.

The entire research cycle discussed above which was performed in the example of
pulsed neodymium glass lasers with free lasing permitted sufficiently complete
discovery of the possibilities connected with the application of unstable resonators
in their simplest version. This cycle was preceeded by a total of two articles with
reports on experiments with similar resonators. The first of them is the initial
paper by Sigmen [4] which we have mentioned many times and in which, in addition to
the formulation of a number of the most important theoretical arguments (§ 3.1),

the preliminary results of studying a ruby laser with unstable resonator are also
discussed; the second is the paper [201] on experiments with a pulsed argon laser

having a discharge tube 7 mm in diameter. In both cases it was impossible to ob-
tain any positive effect from transition to the unstable resonator.

Gas Pulsed Lasers with Unstable Resonators. Problem of Setting up the Oscillations.
Subsequent foreign publications about the application of unstable resonators in
pulsed lasers began to appear only in 1972 [202, 203], and they pertained to the
case of C0 lasers. No new information about the properties of unstable resonators
was contained in these papers, and nothing special was presented on a purely tech-
nical level. Actually, among several of the first experiments the highest output
parameters were achiexed in [203]: for a pulse energy of 3.5:foules, tbs radiation
divergence was ~2'10' radians, and the brightness was ~2'10l watts/(cm -steradian).
For comparison we mention that in Soviet lasers with telescopic resonator based on
neodymium glass long begore this the smaller angular divergence was "mastered" with

an Output energy of ~10 joules, and in 1971-1972 there were already lasers with
brightness of ~10 ' watts/cmz-steradian) [204. 205].

Beginning with that time. unstable resonators began to be used also with invariant
success in lasers of almost all types. It is sufficient to mention, for example,

the creation of an electroionization laser with a pulse energy of 7500 joules [206].
However. the results of experiments with metal vapor lasers are of the greatest cogni—
tive interest (207]: the specific peculiarities of these lasers forced a new look

at some theoretically known properties of unstable resonators. The fact is that

the amplification coefficient of the medium is extraordinarily high here; on the
other hand. the population inversion here exists for such a short time that during
this time the light travels through the resonator only a few times. Since low diver-
gence is desirable at all costs, it is of primary importance for the optical cavity
to be capable of rapidly isolating the fundamental mode from noise radiation.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

The problem of establishing oscillations in optical resonators was first encoun-
tered in 1961 by Fox and Lee [9]: the iterative calculations that they performed

to a significant degree simulate the processes occurring in real lasers; the initial
field distribution written into the iterative procedure plays the role of the
"nucleating center," the source of which in real lasers is spontaneous emission.
Then Fox and Lee noted the obvious relation between the rate of establishment of
steady oscillations and the differences in the losses of the individual modes:
actually. during the time of passage of the light through an empty resonator the
intensity ratio of any two modes varies by (1 - A1)/(1 — A2) times. where A1 and A2

are their diffraction losses. Obviously the intensity ratio will vary in the same
way also in the presence of a medium with uniformly distributed amplification coef-
ficient kamp with respect to volume (the eigenvalues of the integral equation of the

resonator turn out to be multiplied by the same coefficient exp(kamp£) in this case,

(see 5 1.3). If the medium was uniformly excited at the time of beginning of deve-
lopment of lasing from the noise "nucleating center." the situation will be main-

tained until the lasing power builds up to such a degree that saturation level is
reached.

Hence it follows that the more the losses of the individual modes differ. the faster
the generation of certain modes against the background of the others will occur; in
particular, the oscillations in unstable resonators must be set up much faster than
in plane, and especially stable cavities. For these reasons the rate of
establishment of the oscillations in the most unstable resonators increases with an
increase in IHI.

Although all of these facts were well—known, the problem of calculating the time
required for the diffraction directed beam to form in an unstable resonator from
spontaneous emission was clearly stated only in [207], and it was gradually solved
in [207-209]. It is true that the authors of the indicated papers for some reason
considering the given situation exceptional tried to get around using the known
results and methods of the theory of optical resonators, even such generally used
ones as the introduction of the equivalent resonator. Accordingly, for this quite
simple problem they obtained a very complex solution, making, in the course of the
matter, an entire series of erroneous statements (for more details see [210]). In
particular, their advice to select the resonator parameters so that the converging
beam will expand to the former cross sectionai dimensions invariably in an integral
number of passes is meaningless. Therefore it is better to discuss a significantly
simpler solution to the same problem presented in [210].

Let the active medium have the cross section 2a X 2a and be placed inside a tele-
scopic resonator (Figure 4.8). Let us follow. for example, the fate of the nucle-

ated radiation which at the initial point in time is emitted near the convex mirror
in the direction of a concave mirror. He shall take the spherical equiphasal sur-
face of the diverging wave located on the convex mirror, the center of curvature

of which is at the common focal point of the mirrors as the reference surface. The
complex amplitude of the nucleation field of one of the polarizations on this refer-
ence surface can be represented in the form of the series

u(:, y) .-= granny: Irnl—E—)cxp (In! —:—-), k,l - 0. t i, :g 2,

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

—-'——
.'

 

——__¢—
I

c)

Figure 4.8. Transmission of spherical waves through a telescopic
resonator: a) one of the "diverging" waves; b), c) transmission of

diverging waves with centers of curvature near the zone 2a wide (5)
and outside this zone (c) over an equivalent line.

This series corresponds to the set of spherical waves with randomly distributed
amplitudes ukI' the mean value of which can be calculated beginning with the power

of the spontaneous radiation for a solid angle (A/Za)2. The centers of curvature
of these waves lie in the focal plane and are shifted from the common focal point
of the mirrors in two directions a distance kAf2l2a. iAf2/2a. where f2 is the focal

length of the convex mirror, k and 2 are the wave indices. The centers of curva-
ture of the waves, the radiation of which completely covers the concave mirror,
fills a zone 2a X 2a in size (see the figure); the number of such waves, conse-
quently, is equal to (be /Af2)2. As the figure shows, some of the radiation of

waves lying near this zone also reaches the range of the laser; however, it very
quickly leaves the confines of the optical cavity entirely. Therefore, except
for the very earliest sta es, the number of waves taking part in the process of

lasing onset is (daz/lfz) , i.e. the spontaneous emission falling in a solid angle
of (2a/f2)2.

Row let us trace the behavior of the waves; this is entirely possible within the
framework of the geometric approximation until the divergence tightly approaches
the diffraction limit. Obviously after the first reflection from the concave mir-
ror part of the cross section of each wave equal to UN2 remains inside the reson-
ator; the waves themselves go from spherical to planar with propagation directions
inclined with respect to the axis at angles of (k/M)(A/2a); (£/H)(A/2a). The width

of'the entire range of angles, that is, the total divergence of the emission is
44 I
070-177}: Zen/Ml, After each subsequent passage through the resonator, the amount

of radiation remaining in it decreases by M2 times. The slopes of all the beams,
and with them, also the total angle of divergence, decrease by H times.

Thus, after n passes through the resonator, the proportion of t e radiation of all
of the waves entering into the "nucleating center" equal to l/H n remains in it,

61

FOR OFFIC’ ‘.L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the total "geometric“ divergence is 2a/an2. The number of passes no during

which the "geometric" divergence decreases to AIZa and thus the formation of the
diffraction diverging beam the basic mode) is completed, is defined by the expres-
sion 2a/( ofz) - A/Za or H 0 - 4a /(Af2). By this time the proportion of primary

"nucleating" radiation equal to l/Mzno - (Af lloaz)2 remains inside the resonator.
It is easy to see that this proportion corresponds to the radiation intensity which
initially pertained on the average to one wave.

In spite of the primativeness, the given analysis leads to the same quantitative
results which were obtained in [207-209] using somewhat more complex manipulations
with the "compressing waves." Using these results, it is entirely possible to un—
dertake specific calculations of the kinetics of such lasers. However. the most
important conclusion can also be drawn without performing such calculations. From
the above-presented relations it follows that the time of formation of a diffrac-
tion-directional beam with fixed dimensions of the resonator decreases slowly and
monotonically with an increase in M (inasmuch as n = In [&(M - l)a2/AL]/ln M).
Thus, the thesis that to obtain the smallest possigle divergence it is necessary,
considering the stipulations made on page 53 to use unstable resonators with the
largest possible magnifications, has received another, quite weighty substantiation.

This entire concept was checked experimentally in [207]. When using a telescopic
resonator with M - 6 in a copper vapcr pulse laser, the calculated time required for
fundamental mode lasing turned out to be greater than the time during which

the radiation density inside the given laser could grow from the noise density

to the saturation level. As a result, the integral divergence with respect to the
pulse duration exceeded the diffraction limit by almost an order. For H I 200 (I)
this limit was reached. it is true. at the price of a sharp drop in radiation power
as a result of the extraordinary rise in the lasing threshold. Probably for inter—
mediate " it would be possible to achieve both small divergence and sufficient
radiation energyl).

5 5.2. Unstable Resonators in Continuous Lasers

Survey of Experimental Papers. Somewhat later than in pulsed neodymium glass lasers,
unstable resonators began also to be used in continuous gas lasers. Among the
first publications only one short, but exceptionally interesting article [2111
stands out which to a great extent anticipated the future development of the reson-
ators of gas dynamic lasers; we shall return to this paper later. As for other
studies in 1969-1973. their subjects were low-pressure electric discharge 002-
lasers [199, 212, 213] and chemical lasers [214. 215]. The early paper by

Krupka and Suya [199] is isolated here. In this paper a telescopic resonator was
used in practice for the first time; as a result of the carefulness of the experi—
ment and the high optical uniformity of the active medium the authors were able

to observe the diffraction structure of the distribut on in the far zone with full
width of the central peak on the order of 1' (3.5°10 radians)2.

 

1This was done in the recent experiment [332].

2In this paper an analysis was made for the first time of the consequences of mis-
alignment and variation of the curvature of the mirrors in two types of confocal

unstable resonators.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH-TCIAL USE ONLY

the majority of researchers, in accordance with the recommendations of Sigmen [167].
have carefully selected the resonator parameters so that Ne uiv will be close to a

half integer. no article contains data indicating that this choice actually
is useful from the point of view of angular divergence of the emission.

  

of the active zone and resonator
of a powerful gas dynamic laser [211]: l - planar mirrors, 2 - con-

vex exit mirror, 3 -- external concave mirror, 4 - exit beam.

Key: 3. flow

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tests were run on a gas dynamic laser in [211] with resonators of two types. The
first type was a stable resonator made of two large metal mirrors, in one of which

a system of many holes 1.5 mm were made, the total area of which was on the order

of 62 of the total area of the mirror. This procedure does not withstand any criti-
cism from the point of view of divergence of the radiation (5 2.5), but it permits
realization of a resonator with given small losses to emission, and, as the
experience of [211] shows, it can be used for experimental optimization of the
energy characteristics of the laser. With this resonator the output power was 55
kilowatts. '

The second type resonator is depicted in Figure 4.9. .It was formed by four mirrors
and was already unstable. One of the mirrors was convex. it served as the output
mirror. and accordingly was smaller in diameter than the others. The beam passing
near it fell on the additional concave mirror and was focused on the hole in the
wall of the cavity through which it was taken outside. The use of a system with
three passes through the active medium permitted, in spite of small amplification
per pass, operation of the laser with magnification of the resonator H - 1.6; the
output power was 30 kilowatts.

An almost twofold reduction in lasing power by comparison with the case of a stable
resonator indicates that the achievement of the maximum efficiency of energy con-
version in the gas dynamic laser resonator is not such a trivial problem as for
pulsed lasers. It is necessary to consider that such a resonator consists, as a
rule, of seve .l carefully aligned (or even equipped with an automatic alignment
system. see [217]) cooled mirrors and is, together with the fastenings. the align-
ing slides, and so on, a quite complicated device. It is part of a still more
complicated engineering structure which is the fast-flow laser as a whole. Inasmuch
as the purely empirical selection of the optimal resonator under such conditions
becomes too thankless, the theoretical methods of analysis have been widely de-
veloped. the investigation of which we shall proceed with.

Methods of Calculating the Efficiency of Flow Lasers. It is necessary to distin-
guish two cases immediately. Whereas the fast-flow laser operates in the frequency
mode where the excitation of the medium is realized by individual, periodically re-
peating pulses. the procedure for calculating its energy characteristics does not
differ in any way from the procedure for calculating the efficiency of the re onator
0f_2rd1nary pulsed lasers. Actually, one pumping pulse lasts. as a rule, 10' to
10 seconds; the medium during this time can travel such a short distance that it
can be considered stationary during the pulse (the flow velocity in the frequency
lasers usually does not exceed 100 m/sec. In pulsed lasers, as we know from 51.6,
the state of the active medium in any elementary volume of it under the given
pumping conditions is uniquely defined by the density of the lasing radiation pass-
ing through this volume. This makes it possible to talk not only about the
efficiency of the laser as a whole, but also about the efficiency of energy con-
version in any part of its volume, which significantly facilitates the understand-
ing of the basic laws (§ 1.4). The local nature of the dependence of the amplifi-
cation coefficient on the radiation density leads to significant simplification
also of the quantitative calculations of lasers with unstable resonators. First,
the equations describing the state of the medium themselves are simple in this case.
Secondly, it is very easy by using the threshold condition to find the radiation
density on the axis of the resonator before finding the distribution in the entire
volume (see 5 4.1), which greatly accelerates the convergence of the ordinarily
used iterative procedure.

6d

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-I ONLY

In continuous-action flow lasers the situation is quite different. The concept of
local efficiency here cannot exist in general: the previously excited active me-
dium flows through an entire beam of generated radiation, and the number of atoms
reacting with the beam can be calculated only beginning with knowledge of the radi-
ation distribution as a whole. It is also more difficult to calculate the radiation
density in advance on the system axis inasmuch as the inverse population on the

axis depends not on this density, but on the entire history of the medium reaching
here, in particular, the field density on its entire path.

Similar laws occur also in the case of side optical pumping of in uced Raman scat-
tering lasers frequently called Raman [combination] lasers or VKR -converters[218].
0n the other hand, the amplification coefficient of the lasing radiation on the
combination frequency is proportional to the pumping radiation density on the in-
itial frequency. 0n the other hand, the attenuation of the pumping radiation on
passage through the medium is almost wholly determined by its interaction with the
generated radiation -- without lasing, the primary pumping radiation is poorly
absorbed by the medium. It is easy to see that the pumping light density in Raman
lasers is. from the point of view of resonator theory, the complete analog of the
inverse population density in flow lasers; the residual absorption in the Raman
laser medium corresponds to a decrease in the inverse population down stream with

respect to the gas as a result of spontaneous relaxation of the active medium of
the flow laser.

In 1968 Alekseyev and Sobel'man [219] pointed out that the application of a planar
resonator in a Raman laser with side pumping is fraught with highly unpleasant
consequences. Inasmuch as the amplification coefficient near the edge of the
resonator from the side of which the pumping is realized. usually noticeably pre-
dominates over the losses on the combination frequency in the mirrors and the.me-
dium, the lasing radiation density here turns out to be extraordinarily high (if
its growth does not prevent the beginning of lasing on subsequent combination fre-
quencies, for which the radiation on the first combination frequency is itself
pumping). At the same time, with an increase in the density of the converted
(Raman) radiation, the attenuation coefficient of the primary radiation increases
-- the region of powerful lasing screens the remaining volume from the pumping ra-
diation. Thus a tendency shows up for the lasing region to contract into a very
narrow zone, and this is difficult to eliminate. Analogous phenomena must occur

also in flow lasers although usually not in such sharply expressed form (we shall
discuss the causes of this somewhat later).

In the case of an unstable resonator, independent development of lasing on the peri-
phery of the converter or the flow laser is impossible, for the lasing radiation
must come from the central section of the cross section. Extraordinary growth of
the lasing radiation density on the axis of the system is impossible, for it causes
rapid growth of the density also on the periphery, which leads to a decrease in

the amplification on the axis. As a result, the regime turns out to be self-
balanced; the lasing radiation fills the resonator cross section, its density is
established on a level such that the number of pumping quanta reaching the axis in
the Raman laser or excited atoms in the flow laser insures exact satisfaction of
steady state conditions.

 

ﬁrhe first letters of the Russian words that mean induced Raman scattering].

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These arguments are formulated in [156]. and they were confirmed by the experimental
data of the above-noctrd reference [211] (the nonuniformlty of the intensity distri-
bution observed there with respect to cross section of the unstable resonator did
not exceed i501). In all of the subsequent theoretical papers devoted to estimation
of the efficiency of the continuous lasers, a study ls made of the self-balanced
lasing regime on the lowest transverse mode.

it is true that in the experiment of [220] with defined resonance, a mathematical
model of a flow laser was proposed from which it follows that the lasing regime must
be not steady, but autooscillatery with an oscillation period on the order of the
drift time of the gas flow through the resonator zone. if this model were correct,
the autooscillations would be characteristic of even a broader class of lasers than
the authors of [220] themseiVes proposcdl. However, the medium was considered
single-component in [flu]. the speed of light was considered infinite, and the
geometric approximation. Valid. rvcu under the conditions where the properties of
the medium vary sharply oVer the extent of small sections of the resonator cross
section near its axis. Judging by the results of [221], it is sufficient to do away
with the proposition of single-component mixture so that the trend toward the auto-
oscillations will decrease shdrply (and in real lasers. as a rule, mixtures are
used which contain more than one component). Consideration of the fact that for the
light to pass through the resonator takes a finite time is extremely important and
must also lead to damping of the oscillations (from the papers at the beginning of
the 1960's devoted to the kinetics of solid-state lasers it is known that neglect-
ing this fact usually leads to absurd results). Thus. the deep autooscillation
mode is hardly widesprtnd. As for the ordinary and unavoidable oscillations of
intensity caused by fluctuations of the resonator Q-factor. and so on, they can
hardly lead to significant departure of the energy parameters of the laser averaged
over a large time interval from the calculation results in the quasistationary
approximation (see § 1.4).

to 1:591: the calculation of the efficiency of a laser operating in the steady
state moue in the general case reduces to finding a self-consistent combination of
distributions of the ampllflculfnu coefficient and the lasing field. The equations
describing the dependence of the amplification coefficient distribution on the ex-
citation conditions and the lasing field depend on the peculiarities of the medium
and are quite different. As for the lasing field distribution, for it it turns out
most frequently to be sufficient to use the geometric approximation. Actually, we
have already discussed the causes by which it is possible to neglect the effect of
the edge diffraction in lasers with large ”equiv (5 3.3). The consideration of

large-scale nonuniformities of the active medium does not require diffraction
approximation (3 3.2). MorrOVer. if the medium is not too nonuniform, it is possible
also to take the path of the beams the same as would Occur in an ideal resonator.
hence, it follows that weak optical nonunifornity of the active medium, just as the
edge diffraction, can in general not he consivered in the energy calculation. 0n

the other hand, inasmuch as the angular divergence of the radiation depends primar-

ily on the phase distribution at the laser output, and the nonuniformity of

._———_._—___.

. At the end of the indicated article, on additional factor is erroneously introduced
to describe the phenomena of amplification saturation. at the same time as conside-
ration of these phenomena is already built into the initial equations.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the intensity distribution influences it weakly, the amplification saturation
phenomenon must be felt little in its magnitude; this conclusion follows from the
materials of E 1.1 and is confirmed by the results of sometimes undertaken specific
calculations (for example, [222]). Therefore the width of the radiation pattern
can be estimated in the first approximation without calculation of the energy
characteristics of the laser.

In order to find the self-consistent solution most frequently an iterative method
is used. The simplest iterative procedure used in the 1960's to study the pheno-
mena of amplification saturation in planar and stable resonators [100, 90, 109]
consists of the following. An initial field distribution (usually uniform) is
taken; this distribution is substituted in the equations of the medium; the latter
are solved, and the spatial distribution of the amplification coefficient is found.
Then the new field distribution is calculated as a result of single passage of the
initial beam through the resonator with the active medium. The newly obtained field
distribution is substituted in the equations of the medium, and so on. As applied
to the calculations of lasers with unstable resonators in a weakly nonuniform medium
performed in the geometric approximation, the given procedure can be written as

follows: F-H(')=/I"-(')I. ll-ulI")=l"'-~(")"«('/”I. where P is the aberration function
calculated considering the distribution of the amplification coefficient (see §
3.2), and the index denotes the number of the iteration. The calculations are
quite tedious, for although only the field distribution at the exit mirror u(r)
figures in the above formulas, for the calculation of F(r) it is necessary to deal
with the amplification coefficient distributions (and, consequently, the field dis-
tribution) in the entire volume of the laser.

As was noted above, the convergence of the iterative procedure can be accelerated
significantly by preliminary calculation of the radiation density and inverse
population on the resonator axis. In the case of lasers considered in the preced-
ing section, it was sufficient for this purpose to consider the conditions on the
axis itself. Later it will be obvious that this problem is also solved for flow
lasers, it is true, using more complex calculations. The data obtained on the
magnitude of the field under the state of the medium on the resonator axis are used
in the subsequent calculations; here the condition of stationarity of the regime
turns out to be automatically satisfied in all phases of the iterative procedure.
Finding the amplification coefficient distribution next, this makes it possible for
us to not limit ourselves to single ”transmission" of the beam through the reson-
ator with the medium and to find the steady state field distribution corresponding
to the given picture of the state of the medium. The iterative procedure acquires

the form F..u(r) =/[“-(')I. f‘"'(’) E""(0)pd")F»("’”)"‘n("/M').... where u(O) is the
previously found field amplitude on the axis. As a result, the volume of the cal-

culations is reduced noticeably, especially for complex mathematical models of the
medium. The calculations of pulsed lasers with nonuniform optical pumping mentioned

in § 4.1 [188] and the calculations of gasdynamic lasers discussed below were
performed by approximately the same method.

Other procedures are also used which permit reduction of the volume of the calcu-
lations both when finding the field distribution by the giVeu parameters of the
resonator and state of the medium and for calculations of lasers as a whole.
Although the authors of each of these procedures present very convincing arguments
in its favor, it is now difficult to determine which of them is actually more

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl-‘K'Ml. USE ONLY

effective. Therefore those who desire to familiarize themselves in more detail with
the method of the calculations are referred to numerous corresponding articles
[222-227, 188, 156]. and so on); at the same time we shall limit ourselves to the
fact that we shall explain some peculiarities of the calculations and the behavior
of flow lasers in the example of gas dynamic lasers with two-mirror telescopic
resonator investigated in [188, 228]. All of the basic laws here are the same as

in the case of resonators of the type depicted in Figure 4.9 (if, of course, we
compare lasers with identical amplification not on the beam width, but on the entire
path from one terminal mirror of the resonator to another). Lasers with resonators,
the axis of which is “broken" not across, but along the direction of the gas flow
behave differently; we shall not consider them.

Simplest Model of a Gas Dynamic Laser Medium. Procedure and Results of Energy Ca1-
culations of Gas Dynamic Lasers with Twin-Mirror Resonator. In the overwhelming
majority of gas dynamic lasers the inverse population is created, by the proposal
of Konyukhov and Prokhorov [229], by adiabatic expansion of a gas mixture consist-
ing primarily of C02 and N2. These two components also play the primary role in
the lasing process. C0 molecules are characterized by a comparatively short
oscillatory relaxation time; the laser transition is also realized in them. Fast
loss of the oscillatory energy reserves in this component is frequently compensated
for by resonance transmission of excitation from the N2 molecules on collision
with them.

The relative molar concentration 1 - c of the second component of the mixture is
larger than the first (c) and the majority of the total oscillatory energy reserves
is concentrated in the second component, N2, which is. therefore, a type of energy
"reservoir.“ As a result of the long natural oscillatory relaxation time of the
molecules of the second component, the energy from this reservoir is consumed pri-
marily for excitation of molecules of the first component.

Although the atoms located on a quite large number of oscillatory levels of both
components participate in the operation of the laser in one way or another, Konyu—
khov [230] proposed limiting ourselves to a system of a total of two equations for
description of the relaxation processes of the medium occurring in the resonator
zone. These equations. being reduced to the maximum convenient form for calcula-
tions of the resonators, have the form [188]

an.» h—u—cu a
la: "El—L—l —;:——(P"+P")”|.
a, (s, s) eh. -- (l — c) III i'

is " """"F"""_'1:‘

 

 

Here k1 is the amplification coefficient of the laser radiation; it is proportional

to the oscillatory energy reserves in the first component (the population of the
lower laser level is considered equal to zero, which usually does not lead to large

errors), k is the value having dimensionality (but not meaning) of the amplifica-
tion coefficient and characterizing the oscillatory energy reserves in N2; 0* and 0',

just as in the preceding section. are the densities of the lasing radiation fluxes
directed in opposite directions in the corresponding units; the designations of

the coordinates are presented in Figure 6.10; h1, h2 are the distances during the
time of passage of which by the flow of mixture oscillatory relaxation of the

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLV

individual components will occur in the absence of resonance energy exchange;
finally, h is the distance during the time of passage of which the processes of
resonance energy exchange, neglecting processes of other types (oscillatory re—
laxation, induced emission), cause relaxation of the ratio of the energy stored in
the components kllk2 to the equilibrium value of ~c/(1 - c) (it is considered that

on collision of two different molecules the probability of exchange of excitation
does not depend on which of the molecules is excited before collision). Let us
note that as a result of the fact that the energy exchange between the components
is realized with finite velocity (h f 0), the total oscillatory energy reserve in
the medium cannot decrease too rapidly with as high a density of the generated
radiation as one might like. This should attenuate the manifestations of the
mentioned trend toward "constriction" of the radiation in the case of a planar

ISBOI'ISIOI.’ .

 

Figure 4.10. Diagram of a telescopic resonator in a flow laser.
Key: a. flow

It is possible to demonstrate that the transition from the density of the output
radiation 9+ in the adopted units to the resonator efficiency x defined as the

ratio of the number of quanta of output radiation to the total number of excited
molecules at the entrance to the resonator should take place according to the formula

X = 5 9+ was {5 uk. m + km: a)",

where the first integral is taken with respect to the exit optical aperture of the
resonator. and the second with respect to the flow cross section surface at its

entrance to the resonator.

In spite of simplicity of the given model, its application insures satisfactory
precision of the energy calculations of the gas dynamic laser in a defined range

of variation of composition and parameters of the gas mixture [231]. In the greater
part of the specific calculations Performed with its help, the results of which
will be discussed below. the following initial data standard for gas dynamic

lasers were used: mixture composition 152 002. 83.52 N2, 1.5! H20; gas flow

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

velocity 1500 m/sec; gas pressure in the vicinity of the resonator 0.1 atm. tempe-
rature in the flow 350 K. These data correspond to the following values of the
parameters which figure in the equations of the medium: c - 0.15. h - 0.1 cm, h =
4 cm. h - 250 cm. Let us also present the value of such an interesting charac—
teristic of the active medium of the flow laser as the length H on which independent
relaxation of the excitation is realized in the absence of the lasing field. As is
known, any multicomponent mixture, the energy exchange rate between the components
of which significantly exceeds the rates of the remaining processes, has such a
unique relaxation length. For our medium this condition is satisfied (h << hl’ hz);
the total relaxation length is H = [(c/hl) + (l - c)/h2]’1 = 25 cm.

At the entrance to the resonator the active medium wﬁs considered excited uniformly
over the flow cross section and in equilibrium (kg/k2 - c/(l - c)), the total magni-

tude of the application coefficient of the entrance to the resonator koL varied from
0.3 to 0.6 (L is the flow width of the medium). For maximum energy pickup for the
location of the mirrors depicted in Figure 4.10, their shape obviously must be

rectangular. which was assumed in the calculations. The reflection coefficient of
each mirror was considered to be 982.

The calculations were performed for resonators both made of cylindrical mirrors and
made of spherical mirrors. In the first case the calculations were not too compli-
cated inasmuch as all of the distributions are essentially two-dimensional. now~
ever, the resonator made of cylindrical mirrors can insure angular selection only
with respect to one direction. In the case of spherical mirrors which in prac-
tice is more important the calculations are greatly complicated: the gas flow

alternately intersects the planes passing through the axis of the resonator at
different angles to the direction of motion of the flow, and the solutions in these
planes turn out to be dependent on each other. Therefore when constructing the
solution in the entire volume it is necessary in all steps of the iterations to
manipulate the total three—dimensional field distributions and amplification co-
efficient distribution. The only exception is one plane passing through the reson-
ator axis on which the solution can be found without constructing distributions in
the remaining volume -- the plane in Figure 4.10. The solution of the correspond-
ing two-dimensional problem permits the field on the resonator axis to be found
immediately. which greatly facilitates subsequent calculations.

It also turned out to be convenient to divide the resonator by the axial plane
x - 0 into two parts having in the general case different lengths 2 . £2. (see Fig—
ure 6.10) and to proceed with calculations of the distributions in the right-

hand side only after the solution on the left-hand side has been completely con—
structed.

For optimization of the resonator. its magnification H, the widths of the left and
right-hand sides 11 and 12 were varied. In addition to the effectiveness of the

resonator X, for each version the values of the relative losses characteristic of
flow lasers were also calculated ~- relaxation in the volume xrel’ removal from

the resonator x and absorption in the mirrors X - l - x - X - X . Let
rem mir rel rem

us remember that x is the ratio of the number of quanta leaving the laser in
the form of useful radiation to the total number of excited molecules entering the
resonator at the same time; the relative relaxation and removal losses are

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fractions of this total number loat as a result of the processes of deactivation
by collisions and as a result of removal of excited molecules that have incom-
pletely interacted with the radiation from the resonator; the meaning of xmir is
entirely clear.

 

Figure 4.11. Efficiency of the left-hand side of the resonator
X", the rﬁlativc relaxation losses in its volume, xie and the removal
from it xrem as a function of the length of the lefE-hand side 21 for

h - 1.33: curves 1, 2, A -- for REL - 0.6, 0.5 and 0.4, respectively.
1 i
Key. a. xrem b. Xrel

Let us proceed with the investigation of the results of the calculations pertaining
to the case of the resonator with spherical mirrors. The relations are presented
in Figure 4.11 [oi the Efficiency of the left-hand side of the resonator x1 and

relative losses x X as a function of the width of this part with respect to

. rem’ rel
the flow 21. As is obvious from the figure, with a decrease in £1 the losses to

relaxation are reduced approximately proportionally to 21 at the same time as the
losses to removal vary slowly; as a result, the efficiency x; increases. The
meaning of these laws becomes clear if we consider the following peculiarity of

the solution for the left-hand side. On the axial plane x - 0 separating the left
and right sides of the resonator, the distributions and densities of the field and,
what is especially important, the amplification coefficient turned out to be quite
uniform in all of the calculated cases. Thus, over the extent of the left-hand
side of the resonator the amplification coefficient with respect to the entire flaw
cross section decreases from the initial value of k? approximately to the threshold

value k: . (In H - In R‘)/L (R' is the mirror reflection coefficient). It is
necessary to add to this that for the selected mixture the energy exchange be-
tween components was so fast that the present radiation field cOuld not signifi-
cantly disturb the equilibrium ratio between the number of excited molecules CO
and N2. Hence it follows that the losses to removal from the left- and side of
the resonator for any width must in the given case be close to kllkl.

0n the other hand, the less the width 11 becomes, the greater the fields must be

insuring such a decrease in the amplification coefficient. This leads to an in-
crease in the role of the induced radiation processes by omparison with the role

of the relaxation processes, that is, to an increase in x as a result of a de-
crease in xrel'

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGJFFNHAI.USE10NLY

Now let us proceed to the right-hand side. As we have seen. the state of the
medium at the entrance to it can be considered in the first approximation uniquely
defined by the resonator losses. Therefore the only parameter which depends on
the conditions in the left-hand part of the resonator subject to variation when
investigating the right-hand part remains the radiation flux density on the axis
9(0. 0); this makes it possible significantly to reduce the number of variants

of the calculations of the right-hand side.

The construction of the solution in the right-hand side offers the possibility of
calculating 1:5 efficiency X“ defined as the proportion of the excited molecules
"processed" into outgoing radiation left after passage through the left-hand side.
The results of the calculations X“ for M - 1.33 and three values of 0(0, 0) are
presented in Figure 4.12. It is obvious that the dependence of X" on 22 differs

with respect to nature from the similar dependence for the left-hand side: with
an increase in l . the efficiency first increases rapidly. then more and more
slowly and. fine 1y. it reaches an extraordinarily gently sloping maximum. This
is explained by the fact that on passage of the active medium through the right-
hand side of the resonator the oscillatory energy reserve of the molecules is

_ completely exhausted; as a result of a decrease in field density down stream this
process takes place more and more slowly. The maximum efficiency is achieved
when the amplification in the medium becomes so small that it compares with the
losses on the mirrors. of tours. it is possible in practice to limit ourselves
to a significantly smaller width of the right-hand side, losing very little in
efficiency, and on the other hand gaining significantly in size of the mirrors.
For the above-indicated parameters of the medium, the value of 2 . 15 cm (see

[228] and also Figure 4.12) can be used which is also used in thz subsequent cal-
Culations.

 

Figure 4.12. Efficiency of the right-hand

side of the resonator as a function of its

length £2 for H - 1.33 and three different
9(0. 0)-

Now it is possible to proceed with investigation of the properties of the eaonator1T

as a whole. In Figure 4.13 we have the relations for its efficiency X - X + xﬁemx

as a function of the magnification M and width of the left-hand part for £2 = 15 cm.

It is obvious that the given relation coincides with respect to nature with the
analogous function for the left-side only (see Figure 4.11). This is also under-
standable: for small M and 11. 0(0. 0) increases, and as a result the efficiency
not only in the left-hand side, but also the right-hand side increases, and to-
gether with them, the efficiency of the resonator as a whole. The growth of X
with a decrease in a and £1 continues in the entire investigated range of parame-

ters. slowing only in the case of 12L - 0.6 for 11 - 3 cm and H ~ 1.3; at this time

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 already reaches 602. it makes no special sense to investigate the region of
still smaller values of M and i : for ordinary sizes of the active zone of a gas

dynamic laser the geometric approximation ceases to be valid there, and therefore
the direction of the radiation must become worse.

Thus. in order to achieve high efficiency of energy conversion it turns out to be
sufficient to select a total resonator width which is not too much less than the
relaxation length of the medium (let us remember that H . 25 cm), the width of the
left-hand side is selected approximately an order less, and the resonator losses
such that the threshold value of the amplification coefficient is approximately
half the value at the entrance to the resonator. This choice has quite clear mean-
1n8 and may fail to give the desired result only in case of inadequate energy
exchange rate between the components of the mixture. Actually, then the total
oscillatory energy reserve will not be able to keep up with the gain reduction

in the presence of the field, and the losses to removal must increase.

In [228] a series of the corresponding calculations were made for mixtures with the

compositions 52 C02. 902 N2, 51 HfDand szcoz. 902 N2, 21 820; in both cases the

value of koL was 0.8, the pressure was taken equal to 0.05 atm, and the remaining
parameters were the same as in the above-investigated case. The energy exchange
rate between the components for these mixtures was noticeably less (primarily

as a result of reduced pressure). The calculations demonstrated that for analogous
selection of the position of the axis and the dimensions of the mirrors, the
efficiency on the order of 0.6-0.7 was achieved only when the threshold value

of the amplification coefficient was less than the input value by 3 or 4 times.
From the procedural point of view the following is networthy. Although the ampli-
fication coefficient in the plane x - O is as before close to threshold, the con-
tent of the excited molecules N here also depends on the field density.Inasmuchas.
in turn, in the entire indicate plane the field density is close to 0(0, 0), the
value of 9(0, 0)evenfor mixtures with small energy exchange rate remains the

only parameter subject to variation for calculations of the right-hand side.

Problem of the Formation of Uniform Field Distribution with Respect to the Flow
Laser Resonator Cross Section. The above-investigated example is quite typical;
it is clear from it what arguments must be and are being taken into account when
selecting the resonator for a fast-flow laser. It is also obvious that even the

  

m‘xl

 

_'l_\i__l;3‘——l—c- .
J t J I: 51],!!! ‘2 H I, g I,
a) 0

Figure 4,13, Efficiency X of a resonator as a whole as a function
of its parameters with a length of the right-hand side i = 15 cm:
a) dependence of the magnitude of X on the length of the left-hand

side for H = 1.33; b) the value of X as a function of parameter M

[or 11 - 3 cm.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

simplest unstable laser made up of spherical mirrors with accurate selection of
its parameters can entirely insure satisfactory efficiency of the energy conver-
sion. However, for practical applications it ls almost as important to have more
or less uniform distribution of the radiation intensity with respect to cross sec-
tion (otherwise the local thermal loads of the mirrors and angular divergence of
the radiation will increase). Although with uniformity of field distribution in
the unstable resonators of this type things go better than in planar resonators,
they are not sufficiently good. Thus, in Figure 4.1a we have the intensity distri-
bution on a concave spherical mirror (curve 1) for the very case where efficiency 0f
60% (kgb = 0.6, 2 - 3 cm, H - 1.3) was achieved for a mixture with a pressure of
0.1 atmosphere. here the graph is also plotted for a two-dimensional resonator
(curve 2) forthe same parameters of the medium. losses and position of the axis
(let us note that under these conditions it has approximately the same efficiency).
From the figure it is obvious that the field distribution is quite nonuniform,
especiallv in the more important case of spherical mirrors (in the diffraction
approximation a sharp distribution "peak" can smooth off somewhat, but the total
nonuniformity will Still he Clearly noticeable). A more favorable form of dis-
tribution is observed only in versions with low efficiency, primarily with exces-
sively large N when the field inside the resonator turns out to be insufficiently
intense. This type of situation obviously occurred in the above-described experi-
ments using a gas dynamic laser [211]. which is indicated by the low efficiency of
the resonator with satisfactory uniformity of distribution.

lib”
4:5

     

—-———————=’—

4115311151“:

Figure 4.14. Field density distribution in a concave mirror: 1 --
for spherical mirrors, M . 1.3; 2 -- for cylindrical mirrors. H - 1.69.

The use of moltipass systems of the type depicted in Figure 5.9 permits a sharp in-
rrcasv in N. As a result of the complication of the system, a noticeable positive
effect is achieved. in particular, the compactness of the exit aperture increases,
and its filling factor Y increases (see §§ 1.1, 3.6; Figure 1.3, a b corresponds

to the single pass and one of the possible versions of multipass systems). How-
ever, it is still not possible to achieve a combination of high efficiency with
high uniformity of the field distribution here.

In order to solve this most important problem it is possible to consider the prism
resonators investigated in § 3.5 in which the effect of wave aberrations of odd
order was significantly attenuated by comparison with the ordinary telescopic reson-
ater. The effect of the amplification coefficient gradient directed across the

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

axis is identical to the influence of the gradient of the index of refraction
\wedge) and the wave phase, and it must be attenuated to the same degree.

It is true that in the far infrared range where the greater part of the flow lasers
operate. transparent total internal reflection prisms analogous to those used in
‘solid state lasers are hardly realizable. However, for low magnifications H which
are characteristic of the flow lasers with single-pass resonators. the application
of a confocal resonator becomes mandatory inasmuch as satisfactory filling of the
operating cross section with lasing radiation is also achieved in a resonator made
up of planar and slightly convex mirrors (see also 5 4.1). Replacing the planar
mirror by a dihedral 90-degree reflector made up of two planar mirrors. we obtain
the desired resonator. For equalizing the intensity distribution. the edge of the
reflector must be oriented obviously perpendicular to the plane of Figure 4.10.

This possibility was investigated experimentally in the example of the flow-type

CO -laser of comparatively smaller power in reference [232]. The systems discussed
abgve were tested (Figure 4.15, a, b); for convenience of selecting the optimal
parameters of the resonator. the convex mirror was not spherical, but cylindrical
with regulated curvature [233] so that the unstable resonator would be two-dimen-
sional. For the same purpose the radiation was coupled out by two auxiliary mirrors,
the position of which could be adjusted. The preliminary recordings of the radia-
tion patterns of the amplification coefficient with respect to the resonator cross
section [234] demonstrated that the medium in the given laser relaxes quickly, and
the conditions are quite typical for continuous flow systems.

P

     

b) c) d)

Figure 4.15. Unstable resonators in the flow-type lasers: a) resonator
made of planar and convex mirrors; b), c) resonator made of a corner
reflector and convex mirror; b) symmetric; c) asymmetric radiation output;
d) various versions of the type of projection of the exit aperture on
the plane perpendicular to the resonator axis; the axis passes through
the point 0, the line PP' is perpendicular to the plane of the figure;

a) to c).

Key: 1. flow

The results of the experiments turned out to be highly hopeful. When using

the system depicted in Figure 6.15. a a tenfold decrease in intensity downstream
was observed inside the generated beam. Thedifferences between the intensities and
the left and right halves of the resonator with corner reflector (Figure 4.15, b)

did not exceed 251. Another interesting possibility is connected with the appli-
cation of the corner reflector: in order to increase the compactness of the exit

75

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aperture it is sufficient to resort to asymmetric output of the radiation. In the
case of a three-dimensional resonator this is done using an output mirror, the
possible versions of the shape and arrangement of which are explained by Figure
4.15, d. In the two—dimensional resonator it is possible simply to remove one

of the two output mirrors (Figure 5.15, c). Then the radiation which was incident
earlier on this mirror and immediately left the resonator now makes an additional
pass through the resonator and leaves from the opposite side. The width of the
output zone approximately doubles, the radiation distribution in the far zone be-
comes more favorable.

From the results of the experiments and rough estimates [232] it is also possible
to draw some conclusions relative to the energy characteristics of the flow lasers
in which an unstable resonator with corner reflector is used. If we select magni-
fication M and the width of the left-hand side the same as in the case of an ordi-
nary resonator, tho average radiation density here will remain as before; the
efficiency of the left-hand side almost does not change. As for the right-hand
side. its width in the systems with beam "inversion" is automatically close to the
width of the left and. as a rule. falls far short of the optimal width

of the right-hand side of the ordinary resonators. However, as a result of much
greater radiation density the efficiency of the right—hand side also remains
approximately on the former level. Thus, it is possible to hope that resonators
with corner reflectors will permit insurance of the same efficiency of energy
conversion as ordinary resonators with noticeably less width of the operating zone
and greater compactness of the exit aperture.

The confocal unstable resonators made of two concave mirrors must have similar
properties (see Figure 3.3, c), where "inversion“ of the light beam is also realized.

However, their use in many cases can cause undesirable phenomena at the common
focal point of the mirrors where the radiation density reaches an enormous value.

0n the other hand, the great prospectiveness of the application of unstable reson-

ators investigated in § 3.6 with field rotation in continuous-action lasers is
unquestioned. The quite recently published results of the corresponding experi-
ments [235, 333] completely confirm the correctness of the arguments discussed in
this regard in § 3.6. The introduction of the operation of rotation of the cross
section actually cardinally egualizes the intensity distribution in the near zone.
Sensitivity to astigmatism decreases so much that the latter is weakly manifested
even when the corner reflectors forming the linear resonator include spherical
mirrors, the angles of incidence of the light on which are, therefore. “/4.
Finally, the use of a sectionaloutput (see Figure 3.28) instead of annular not only
increases the compactness of the exit aperture, but also leads to a significant de-
crease in divergence of the outgoing radiation without reducing its power.

It only remains to mention that sometimes reports appear in the literature and
resonators, the elements of which have the shape of a surface differing sharply
from spherical - conical, toroidal. and so on (see, for example, [236]). The
possibility of obtaining a small angular divergence of the emission in this way
still is far from obvious and we shall not analyze properties of such systems.

§ 4.3. Unstable Resonators in Lasers with Controlled Spectral-Time Radiation
Characteristics

Simplest Types of Lasers with Control Elements. For many practical applications
it is necessary that the stimulated emission have not only small divergence, but

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

also given time-spectral characteristics. Their achievement usually is insured by
the fact that the corresponding control elements are located inside the resonator.

The first publication on the creation of a monopulse laser with unstable resonator
belongs to the year of 1969 [189]. This was a solid state neodymium-doped glass
laser; a passive shutter covered the entire cross section of the active element.
The output energy was ~20 joules, the peak power was ~1.5'109 watts, the angular
divergence with respect to 0.5 intensity level was ~-4"(2-10's radians), but a sig-
nificant part of the energy went to the "tails" of the angular distribution as a
result of light dissipation in the shutter liquid. As a result of rapid "spread"
of the emission over the cross section of the unstable resonators the pulse dura-
tion turned out to be noticeably shorter than when using a planar resonator.

Subsequently, monopulse lasers with unstable resonators have always been constructed
by one of two circuits depicted in Figure 4.16; here the shutter does not cover the
entire cross section of the active element, but only the exit mirror. This leads
to significant improvement of the output characteristics: the peripheral part of
the beam running "to the exit" from the laser. bypasses the shutter and does _
not undergo additional absorption and dispersion in it [204]. In addition, possi-
bilities are created for controlling the radiation flux having larger area using

a small shutter. If we consider that the optically improved fast-acting shutters
usually have small aperture, the prospectiveness of using such systems to construct
spikeless, monopulsed and other controlled-Q lasers becomes obvious. Thus. at the
beginning of the 1970‘s highly improved monopulse Eeodylium-doped glass lasers were
built with radiation brightness of ~1017 watts/(cm -steradian) [204, 205]. Let us

also note the achievement of the quasisteady lasing mode of an analogous laser in '
[237].

 

Figure 4.16. Diagrams of lasers with modulated Q-factor: l - resonator
mirror. 2 -- additional mirror. 3 - active sample, 4 - shutter

The entire resonator cross section or its exit mirror can be covered, of course,

not only by the shutter. but also the spectral selector. It is necessary. however,
when installing any controlling elements to deal with the specifics of unstable
resonators which impose restrictions on the types and methods of placement of these
elements. First of all it is necessary to take steps to prevent

the occurrence of a converging wave. If the resonator is telescopic, the flat
surfaces of the controlling elements must be also inclined with respect to the

resonator axis just as any other interfaces (see 5 4.1; in the light of this fact
Figure 4.16 is provisional).

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another important characteristic of unstable resonators complicating the problem
of controlling their emission is the fact that the introduction of a small optical
wedge does not lead to sharply exceeding the lasing threshold. just as in a planar
resonator, but it causes only a shift of the optical axis. As a result, it is
necessary to depart from a number of traditional methods of control based on the
application of an optical wedge which varies in time.or depends on the wavelength.
Thus, the placement of a dispersion prism inside an unstable resonator leads not
to spectral selection of the emission, but only to the fact that the radiation
spectrum will be expanded in the corresponding direction -- in the far zone instead
of one spot the spectral distribution image appears. Efforts to modulate the Q-
factor using a rotating prism can hardly lead to good results.

Thus, in monopulse lasers with unstable resonators it is necessary to use predomi-
nately passive or electrooptical shuttersl; for spectral selection primarily the
Fabry and Perot etalons are suitable, on passage through which the value does not
change its direction. However, even here it is necessary to consider the fact that
in any linear, unstable resonator, not a plane wave, but a spherical wave will be
propagated in at least one of the two opposite directions. Under these conditions
the introduction of the etalon will not cause intensity modulation with respect to
the resonator cross section except in the case where the angular width of the maxi-
mum transmission of the etalon will exceed the angle of opening of the spherical
wave. The angular width of the maximum transmission of the etalon in turn is equal
to the angular distance between adjacent rings divided by the number of interfering
beams N which depends on the reflection coefficient of the working surfaces of the
etalon. As a result, we arrive at the following condition imposed on the magnitude
of the etalon base t [196]:

:4 i "M M.
iWisde n—JW' (6)

where D is the diameter of the transverse cross section of the active element; H
and L are the magnification and the equivalent length of the resonator; it is the
angle between the normal to the etalon surface and the resonator axis; finally,

do - (H w l)D/HL is the angle of opening of the diverging beam in the telescopic
resonator (when deriving (6), the inequality ¢ >> A6 which usually is satisfied was
considered to be valid).

Multiple beam reflection in an inclined etalon also leads to some “blurring“ of the
position of the resonator axis, which in turn can cause an increase in the radiation
divergence. The corresponding calculations indicate that the condition of smallness
of this increase by comparison with the diffraction angle again reduces to formula
(6). Inasmugh as the etalon base determines the width of the region of its disper-
sion (AX - A l2t), consequently the expression (6) limits the minimum width of the
spectrum reached in the laser with direct placement of the selecting etalon in the
telescopic resonator.

 

1Self-Q switching of unstable resonators described in [238] and a number of

subsequent papers is realized only in the smallest lasers and leads to output
parameters which are hardly recorded even for this class of laser. .

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lasers with Three—Mirror Resonator. Further improvement of the methods of con-
trolling the emission of lasers with unstable resonators is connected with the

idea formulated and experimentally substantiated in [153] of the effect on the
central section of the resonator cross section, from which the radiation "spreads."
For normal course of the beams this section is the analog of the master oscillator,
and the remaining part of the cross section. a multipass amplifier. In order to
realize this idea. it is sufficient to make an opening at the center of one of

the mirrors and install an auxiliary mirror behind it; the control elements of
very small size can be conveniently placed in the narrow "appendix" formed in this
way. This three-mirror resonator and the scheme equivalent to it without an open-
ing in the mirror are depicted in Figure 4.17.

1i --—c—
(, -_ ...(u

Figure 4.17. Diagrams of resonators with
radiation control in the central section of
the cross section.

The possibility of efficient radiation control using the given procedure is limited
by the fact that, as follows from the materials of § 3.4, a laser with unstable
resonator is capable of lasing even with a completely shielded central section of.
the cross section. Therefore. if in the "appendix," for example. the shutter and
the axial section are "blocked" at a given point in time and the lasing threshold
increases insignificantly, independent lasing which is not controlled. will de-
velop in the remaining volume. hence, it is clear what important practical sig-
nificance the nature of the dependence of the lasing threshold on the dimensions
of the covered central segment of the cross section has.

The results of the measurements of this relation performed in [191, 168, 193, 196]
turned out to be entirely in correspondence to the theoretical representation
developed in 5 3.4. In the ease of two-dimensional resonators the threshold in-
creases with an increase in hole sizes (more precisely, the slit width) extraordi-
narily sharply. Thus. the shielding of the central section ~3 mm wide has approxi-
mately tripled the threshold intensity of the pumping of the laser described in

5 4.1 based on a rectangular large active element with resonator made of planar and
cylindrical mirrors (Figure h.6) [168). Therefore the control of the radiation
chdrﬂclrrlsticﬁ of lasers with two-dimensional unstable resonators is realized
without special difficulty. In particular, the use of the simplest disc modulator
has made it possible in cnnVert the mentioned laser to the regular "spike" mode
with repetition of these spikes from 25 to 50 kilohertz [168]. In reference [193]
special selection of the radiation of the same laser without a noticeable decrease
in its output power was successfully produced by the introduction of the Fabry and

Perot etalon into the 'appendix."

Lsers with resonators made of spherical mirrors behave entirely differently. Their
lasing threshold increases very slowly with the size of the central circular

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

opening. Thus. in a laser with uh'liVi' neodymium doped glass element 45 m in dia-
meter and a telescopic reson-‘Itnr with magnification: M = 2 for a hole diameter in

the concave mirror of it an. the pumping threshold intensity increased by 1.3 times;
for a diameter of 8 nun, it approximately doubled by comparison with the case where
the hole was absent. Even the presence of a hole with a diameter of 20 mm and almost
reaching the diameter of the convux mirror (22 mm) caused only a triple increase in
the self-excitation threshold [19!].

 

‘ ._l-
m: J m :0 Jo a 5“}: (b)

Figure 10.18. Losses of the lowest modes as a function of the size

of the coupling hole in a three-dimensional resonator with circular
mirrors (H- ‘l 60). The dots represent the experimental

data; 1 -- the caiguiation for the case of a sharp mirror edge; 2 --
analogous calculation in the presence of' '"smoothing of the edge
(IRrefll decreased by four times).

Key: a. energy losses, 2

b' \equiv

In Figure 10.18, the data on the dependence of the losses of the lowest mode on the .

size of the coupling hole calculated by the results of experimental observations
and by formulas from § 3.6 in [168] are compared. As is obvious from the figure,

the experimental points lie noticeably above curve 1 obtained on substitution of
the value of the coefficient of diffraction reflection from the edge Krefl calcula-

ted by the formula Eor an ideally sharp edge (3. 25) in expression (3. 24). In order
to achieve comparison of the calculated and the empirical data it is necessary to
decrease the value of IR efli substituted in (3. 24) by four times (curves 2). For

this decrease ereEll in the given case there was sufficient "smoothing" of the

edge (see 5 3.3) in a zone ~0.l mm wide, which, apparently, are curved in the
experiment.

inasmuch as the shielding of the small axial section here only causes an insigni-
ficant increase in the self-excitation threshold, the possibilities for controlling
the radiation turn out to be more limited than in the case of two-dimensional

. :sonators. In particular. it is explicitly impossible, when placing the control-
ling elements only in the "appendix" to realize monopulse lasing or a lasing mode

close to it. If the operating transition line in broadened nonuniformly, the
specrrai selection of the radiation is also complicated. Actually, in the loop

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of this line with intense single-frequency lasing a "trough" arises, and the
amplification coefficient on the side frequencies becomes noticeably larger than
on the frequency at which lasing occurs. Therefore the isolation of one frequency

using the selector in the "appendix" cannot prevent self-excitation of the lasing
on the side frequencies in the remaining volume.

Nevertheless the problem of spectral selection in unstable resonators with spherical
mirrors frequently can be solved even in the case of a nonuniformly broadened line.
According to [196] it is necessary to try to install one etalon having a small base
directly between the primary mirrors of the resonator so that it covers the entire
operating cross section. The purpose of this etalon must be to isolate the band,

the width of which does not exceed the width of the "trough" in the line contour. If
this can be done without violating condition (6). for further constriction of the
spectrum it is possible to use the “appendix."

The favorable situation actually occurred when performing the experiments described
in [196] with a neodymium-doped glass laser with the active element 45 mm in diame-
ter and 600 mm long. The telescopic laser had magnification of H - 2; the output
power without spectral selection was 500 joules per pulse. The preliminary con-
striction of the spectrum from the width usual to neodymium lasers equal to several
nanometers, to a value of ~0.5 nm was carried out using an etalon having a base of
only 0.05 mm. Insmuch as all of the conditions were satisfied which were initially
discussed, the introduction of this etalon did not cause any changes in the form of
the angular distribution (its width with respect to the 0.5 intensity level was
8'10“5 radians). Here the output power dropped to 400 joules. Subsequent introduc-
tion of the etalons with bases appreciably larger than in the first one into the
I‘appendix" caused only further decrease in the width of the spectrum, reaching, in
the final analysis, 0.003 nm; not only the radiation divergence, but also the out-
put power remained constant.

The following is of interest. In these experiments the width of the opening beyond
which the "appendix" with additional etalons was located and amounted to a total of
31mm. The overlap of this small section of the cross section exceeded by only 102
the self-excitation threshold of the entire laser. In the central section taken
separately, the lasing threshold, considering all of the introduced etalons, uncon-
ditionally would be higher. This demonstrates that the above—mentioned division
into the "master oscillator" and "amplifier" is purely arbitrary inasmuch as the
radiation control of the "amplifier“ is realized when the self-excitation threshold
of the latter was below the threshold in the "master oscillator." The fact is that,
as the experiments demonstrated, with the"oscillator"and "amplifier" spatially
combined in the three-mirror system, the radiation arrives not only from the first
to the second, but also as a result of diffraction, from the second to the first.
This increases the radiation density in the “appendix" especially for a small dia-
meter of the appendix, and the role of the "appendix“ turns out to be quite large.

The uniform part of the line broadening that determines the width of the "trough"
was rather extensive in the silicate neodymium glass used in Ref. 196, which made
it easier to pick out the precontraction etalon without violating condition (6).
It might not be possible to pick out such an etalon in lasers based on media with
a narrower uniform broadening band. Hhat to do in such cases is still unclear; it
is possible that it remains only to do away with the linear and resort to the uni-
directional annular resonators for which condition (6) loses its force.

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ending with three-mirror resonator lasers, let us note that if there is too much
absorption in the "appendix," its role can be significantly strengthened by place-
ment of an additional small—cross section active element in it. It would appear
that it is possible to achieve an analogous effect on introducing a special de-
flector (or orienting one of the interfaces perpendicular to the resonator axis)
to produce a convergent wave that "overflows" to the center. but this leads

to a sharp increase in the radiation divergence (see [196] and also 5 4.1).

External Signal-Controlled Lasers. Now let us proceed to another method permitting
the use of the special role of the central segment of the cross section of an un-
stable resonator. This method was proposed in 1969 [239], and it consists in the
fact that radiation from an external source is input to the laser with unstable
resonator through the central coupling hole. The properties of such a laser depend
decisi\;ly on the relation between the amplification of the medium and the losses
of the resonator with the coupling hole. If this relation is such that self-
excitation of the system does not occur in the absence of an external signal, we
are dealing with a "pure" amplifier capable of operating in the slave mode and
thus, suitable for effective amplification of powerful short pulses and other
purposes. If the self-excitation threshold is low and turns out to be exceeded.

it is more correct to talk not about an amplifier, but about a laser controlled by
an external signal. Let us first consider the latter case.

The control of laser radiation by an external signal is a well-known method of
obtaining the given spectral-time characteristics. This method was used success-
fully in planar resonators (see, for example [260~263]), where the "nucleating cen-
ter" from an external source was introduced, as a rule, immediately over the entire
cross section of the resonator. Inasmuch as in unstable resonators the radiation
quickly "spreads" from the central region, for such effective control here it is
obviously sufficient to introduce a beam from an external source only into the re-
gion which permits us to b) on with quite low power of it. Unfortunately, a com-
parison of the results achieved in practice obtained when using planar and ustable
resonators is almost impossible inasmuch as these results pertain to entirely
different cases. For planar resonators. a study was primarily made of the spectrum
control mode of a giant pulse by injection of the "nucleating center" at the
beginning of its development. As for unstable resonators, for them the control of
the spectral-time characteristics of the emission was still realized only under
conditions close to quasistationary although the possibility of controlling mono-
pulse lasers also raises no doubt.

in order to obtain the same output power for a controlled laser operating in the
quasistationary mode as for an ordinary laser it is obviously sufficient to use an
unstable resonator for it with the same M and introduce radiation with the same

density into the coupling hole which is developed inside the standard lasers with-
out the coupling hole. However, for more reliable control it is expedient either

to increase the density of the controlling signal (which both in the pulsed and in
the flow lasers leads to a decrease in amplification on the axis) or noticeably

increase H or, finally, do both. Then the system with the supplied external signal
turns out to be significantly below its self-excitation threshold, which improves

its controllability -- in essence, the amplification mode occurs. It is only
necessary, by increasing M1, to see that this does not lead to a large decrease in
the output power. This may occur especially quickly in flow lasers with low
amplification. As for pulsed lasers using highly amplifying media, the parameters
of their resonators can. as a rule. vary entirely "painlessly" within the broad

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

limits, especially in the presence of a quasistationary controlled signal (we shall
discuss the causes for this somewhat later).

Let us touch on the problem of selecting the size of the coupling hole. The losses
of resonators made of spherical mirrors and the radiation density required from an
external source to prevent self-excitation depend very slightly on the dimensions

of the hole. Hence, it follows that the required control signal power is in the
first approximation proportional to the area of the hole. Therefore it is advan-
tageous to use quite small holes; however, they must not be so small that the reson-

ator axis can go beyond their limits as a result of alignment errors, vibrations.
and so on.

Beginning with these arguments, the parameters of an unstable resonator were selec-
ted for the first laser of the given class built in [191]. This laser, just as in
many experiments described above, was built on the basis of an active element made
of neodymium-doped glass 45 mm in diameter and 600 mm long. The telescopic reson-
ator had magnification of H - 5 instead of the usual H - 2; the diameter of the
coupling hole was determined by the precision of the alignment and it was 3 mm. The
external master oscillator operated in the mode of random radiation "spikes" which
is usual for solid-state lasers; its output power was more than two orders less than
the output power of the basic laser which was several hundreds of joules for a pump-
ing pulse duration of ~1.5 milliseconds. Although the presence of intervals between
the "spikes" does not at all promote control reliability. complete synchrony of the
"spikes" at the output of the master oscillator and the system as a whole was ob-
served.

In [191], the requirements on the required accuracy of mutual alignment of the ex-
ternal oscillator and the control laser were also discovered, and it was demon-
strated that they are not at all extraordinary: The admissible magnitude of the
angle between the direction of the beam from the external oscillator and the

axis of the powerful laser was in the given case 51'.

One and a half years later a report appeared on work of a similar nature

in the field of COZ-lasers: under the effect of a weak signal introduced in the
axial section with frequency corresponding to one of the rotational transitions of
the C02 molecule, a powerful laser with unstable resonator began to generate on this
frequency although without the input of the external signal it operated on another
rotational transition [2&6]. In the same paper the argument was stated of the
possibility of feeding the control been not to the central but to the peripheral
section of the cross section so that a converging wave amplified as it approached
the axis was formed. Using this procedure, the required spectral characteristics
probably can be obtained, but there will hardly be small divergence of the radiation
simulataneously with this.

Now let us discuss one of the most remarkable peculiarities of pulsed lasers with
unstable resonators operating under the effect of radiation from an external source.
We are talking about the extraordinarily weak dependence of their output power on
the resonator parameters and the control signal intensity if the latter was pre-
sent. In this respect the results of the calculations of the energy characteristics
of a controlled laser the parameters of which are typical of powerful neodymium-
doped glass lasers performed in [2&5] are indicative. The diameter of the coupling
hole in a concave mirror of a telescopic resonator was taken equal to the diameter
of the convex mirror or less than it by H times so that the beam from the external

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

source during its expansion to filling the exit aperture completed three or five
passes through the medium, respectively (if the given laser was not capable of
self-excitation in the absence of an external signal it would be a "pure" three or
five-pass amplifier). The value of M varied from 2 to 20 (M - 2 corresponded to
the optimal value of the magnification calculated by formula (4) for an ordinary
laser constructed on the given active element).

The calculations demonstrated that as H increases with fixed power of the external
signals falling within reasonable limits, the efficiency of the controlled laser
decreased monotonically, but noticeably more slowly than the efficiency of ordinary
lasers. This is understandable: when H is so large that the lasing in an ordi-
nary laser is completely curtailed, the laser with coupling hole operates as a
multipass amplifier, and on supplying the external signal it has a finite output
power frequently commensurate with maximum.

The efficiency of a controlled laser depends still less on the power of the exter-
nal signal. it is sufficient to present the following data: in the entire
above-indicated range of variation of M, the variation of the controlling signal
power by more than three orders did not lead to a decrease in the efficiency below
the level equal to 40% of its maximum value. This also has a simple explanation:
it is known that the relative fluctuations of the power at the output of any laser
amplifier operating in the quasistationary mode is always significantly less than
the relative power fluctuations at its input as a result of amplification satura-
tion. Here. as a result of the presence of several radiation passes through the
medium, the given effect appears still more rarely.

The results of [245] permit some conclusions to be drawn which pertain to the
properties not only of controlled but also ordinary lasers with unstable resonators.
It happens that any disturbance on the central section of_the cross section strongly
reduces the losses of an empty resonator, and with than, the lasing threshold of

the corresponding laser. Thus, the presence of even weak small-scale nonuniform-
ities easily leads to the formation of local "stable" resonators near the axis

with all of the consequences following from this [246]. It can be demonstrated

that a significant reduction in the threshold arising from such causes must cause

a significant increase in the lasing power. However, in reality the variation of
the conditions on the small axial section can sharply influence the output power
only in the case where the laser was quite close to the lasing threshold before
this. if the threshold is greatly exceeded, the output parameters have little sensi-
tivity to variations of the radiation density on a small segment of the cross sec—
tion independently of whether these variations were caused by the influence of

local disturbances or the radiation is supplied, as in a controlled laser. from

an external source.

Multipass Amplifiers. In conclusion, let us briefly discuss the "pure" multipass
amplifiers, the unstable resonators of which have such large losses that the
self-excitation does not occur even in the absence of an external signal. Most
frequently these amplifiers are constructed on the basis of a telescopic resonator;
then they are called (at least in Soviet literature) telescopic. The possible
versions of telescopic amplifiers are presented in Figure 4.19. As a result of the
presence of several passes through the medium, one such amplifier is capable of

replacing several single-pass amplifiers with telescopes between them (see 52.6,
Figure 2.28) [239].

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

C)

Figure 4.19. Telescopic amplifiers: a) multipass, b) three-pass,
c) two-pass amplifiers; in the last amplifier the hole in the mirror
is replaced by an absorbing screen.

As a rule. amplifiers with unstable resonators are used in the intermediate stages
of powerful monopulse lasers (e. g. [267, 248]; simple single-pass amplifiers are
often preferred for the final stages, as they have greater radiation strength
through elimination of the output mirror and concomitant radiation in the reverse
direction). Therefore, the important thing here is not so much efficiency as it
is the weak-signal gain. which preferably should be maximized.

The amplification of the weak signal in the n-pass amplifier is equal to K“, where

K is the amplification on one pass of the active medium. Therefore for the given
K it is necessary to strive for the largest possible n; this promotes the achieve-
ment not only of high amplification but also satisfactory energy efficiency of the

device.

If K is small, multipass systems of the type depicted in Figure 4.19, a can be used;
let us begin with them. He shall consider that the radiation is fed through the
coupling hole in a concave mirror as depicted in the £15375; here n is odd, the
beam cross section expands inside the amplifier by “(n- times. Hence it fol-
lows that n - l + 2 ln (D/d)/ln H. where d and D are the beam diameter at the input
and the output of the amplifier, respectively. In order to obtain a large n it is
obviously necessary to use a resonator with the lowest possible magnification H and
minimum coupling hole diameter d.

Inasmuch as the self-excitation threshold of a laser with small coupling hole is
almost equal to the lasing threshold of an ordinary laser which is achieved for K =
M, the least admissible value of H is equal to K. As for the diameter of the coup-
ling hole, it is limited from below, as we have already pointed out, by the pre-
cision of the alignment. The latter, it is true, depends not only on the overall
dimensions of the resonator. but also on H, but for the large N characteristic of
the amplifiers this relation is very weak. Therefore we shall consider the
minimum hole diameter fixed and equal to do.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the maximum n is “max - 1 + 2 1n(D/d0)lln K. Here amplification of the weak
signal is achieved by Knmax - K(Dld0)2 times [269] (exactly-the same Power trans-

formation coefficient occurs also in controlled lasers operating in the quasista-
tionary mode [191]). From the condition “max 3 5 we obtain the criterion of
applicability of multipass systems: K.i Jﬁldo.
For large K three-pass systems can be used (Figure 4.19 b) insuring a general 3.911-
fication coefficient K3. Inasmuch as here H = D/d, even without considering the
increase in the threshold as a result of the presence of the coupling hole, self-
excitation should not begin until K - D/d. If we consider that the coupling hole
diameter is no smaller than the convex mirror diameter and if necessary can be made as

shown in the figure larger than the convex mirror diameter (at the price of insig-
nificant decrease of output power), the admissible value of K increases ass result of

a corresponding increase in the self-excitation threshold to values on the order of

(D/d)1'S to 2 [269]. Hence it folloYs that the criterion of applicability of three—
pass systems has the form K 5 (D/do) '5

In essence the two-pass system does not contain a resonator (Figure 4.19, c) and can
be used for K as high as one might like. In order better to "decouple" the two-pass
amplifier with the master oscillator, it is expedient to create a hole in the con-
cave mirror with diameter equal to or somewhat larger than the diameter of the in-
put beam (holes for the analogous purpose not in the concave mirror but in the_con-

vex mirror can also be made in the case of the systems depicted in Figure 6.19, a,
b).

As all these estimates show, if the ratio D/do is sufficiently large, extraordinar-
ily high total amplification coefficients of the weak signal can be achieved in a
wide range of variation of the amplification in one pass. Let us consider an
experiment: in reference [269] indirect measurements were made of this parameter
in the case of a powerful three-pass neodymium-doped glass amplifier; they led to
a value of 2-105.

It is necessary, however, to consider that the amplification of any laser amplifier
depends exponentially on the excitation energy stored in it, and it decreases
extremely rapidly with depletion of the latter (a different, still sharper de-
pendence is observed only in regenerative amplifiers). For example, it is suffi-
cient that the inverse population be cut in half and the amplification coefficient
of the weak signal will become equal to the square root of its initial value (under
the conditions of [269], 5.50102). Therefore when feeding a pulse with energy

sufficient for removal of a significant part of the stored inverse population to
the amplifier input, the amplification at the end of the pulse will become very
small, and the pulse energy ratio at the output and input turns out to be much less
than the initial amplification coefficient of the weak signal (hence it is obvious
that the role of the latter should not be overestimated).

In spite of this fact, the telescopic amplifiers do not in practice provide large
amplifications even in the case where they are measured with respect to the pulse
energies. Thus, in [247]. a pulse with an energy of 0.12 joules was fed to the
input of the three-pass neodymium-doped glass amplifier; the output power was 15
joules. In [248] the analogous amplifier had an output power of 18 joules for an

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

energy at the input of 0.03 joule (600 fold amplification with respect to eneISY).
Let us again emphasize that in all the experiments with telescopic amplifiers
(just as with controlled lasers) small divergence of the radiation characteristic
of lasers with unstable resonators was observed.

In conclusion, let us note one deficiency of multipass systems which consists in
the following. If the telescopic amplifier is assembled, for example, by the

five-pass system, then thanks to the diffraction, the scattering of the light at
the interfaces, on nonuniformities, and so on, some part of the radiation reaches

the limits of the exit aperture. completing only three passes with respect to the
active medium, and some, even a total of one pass. Thus, the scattered light

arrives at the output of the amplifier before the basic flux. If we consider that
the first "lots" of the radiation are subject to especially large amplification,

this scattered light can turn out to be not so weak by comparison with the basic
signal.

This deficiency can complicate (but not make impossible) the application of tele-
scopic amplifiers in specific lasers for research in the field of thermonuclear
fusion. There, the admissible radiation power incident on the target before the
arrival of the basic pulse is extremely low. It is true that it not excluded that
these phenomena are not so dangerous as it appears: the scattered radiation

theoretically has a quite different radiation pattern and can simply not hit the
target.

There are times when it may also be undesirable that part of the output cross sec-
tion of telescopic amplifiers is covered by the convex mirror and not filled with
radiation, which is detrimental to uniform exposure of the target in laser-driven

fusion. However, even though telescopic amplifiers may not be used in such cases,
in many other applications they may be extremely useful.

We conclude with this very interesting example of the use of unstable resonators
for the construction of amplifying systems with unique properties. The materials

of this chapter indicate that the most varied problems of laser engineering can be
successfully solved using such resonators.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFFKJAI.USEIDNLY

CHAPTER 5. OPTICAL NONUNIFORHITY 0P ACTIVE MEDIA AND METHODS OF CORRECTING HAVE
FRONTS

In the preceding sections of the book we are talking primarily about the search
for optical systems that permit realization of the limiting energy and angular
characteristics of laser emission for the given properties of the active medium.
When such systems are found, the following result depends only on these properties.
If the medium is optically nonuniform. the maximum small divergence of the radia-
tion at the laser output in the general case is unattainable; it is only possible
to decrease the effect of some of the simplest types of aberrations if their exis-
tence can he predicted in advance (see. for example. 5 3.5). Therefore simultan-
eously with improvement of the optical systems - and on a much larger scale --
studies were made of optical nonuniformities of various active media, and efforts
were made at a comprehensive decrease in the these nonuniformities. At the same

time, a persistent search was made for the universal methods which would permit us
to obtain narrowly uirectional radiation also with arbitrarily nonuniform active

medium. A brief discussion of the experiments on this level will be the EUBJECC
of this chapter.

The most important cause of optical nonuniformity of active media is the fact that
the process of excitation of the medium is always accompanied by the dispersion of
a significant amount of energy in it which is spent on heating the medium, the
formation of shock waves in it, and so on. The nature of the nonuniformities de-
pends on the peculiarities of the medium and the method of its excitation; their
value increases quickly with the laser power.

As for high-power gas lasers, the methods of excitation of certain gases and the
types of induced optical nonuniformities are extremely varied. In pulsed electric
discharge lasers the active medium at the time of occurrence of discharge is heated

intensely. its subsequent expansion is accompanied by the formation of shock waves;
nonuniformities caused by nonuniformity of the discharge itself are added to this.

In pulsed chemical lasers nonuniformities can be manifested which are caused by
nonsimultaneity of the occurrence of the reactions in the entire volume of the

active medium, and so on.

The sources of aberrations of optical channels of high-power continuous-action gas
lasers are highly varied. The thermal deformations of the mirrors, phase distor-
tions in the windows used for output of the radidation from the resonator are
added here to the specific phenomena occurring on transmission of light through
fast gas flows (scattering on turbulent pulsations, and so on). In powerful flow
lasers operating not in the continuous. but in the frequency-periodic mode,

88

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE1ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

powerful sound waves caused by “pulsating" energy input are superposed on the
already complex gas flow pattern.

This entire enormous complex of various phenomenon has still been studied very

little, and it is almost impossible to classify the data available in the literature.
Only one thing is clear - the most favorable situation is the one with optical non-
uniformities in low-pressure gas lasers.

The situation is entirely different with regard to the problem of optical nonuni-
formities in solid-state lasers. The excitation method in practice in all types of
them is the same -- optical pumping - therefore the deformation pattern of the
resonators is not distinguished by special variety; in addition. it is quite simple.
If it is considered that the systematic work in this area started in the first half
of the 1960's, it is no surprise that for a number of types of solid-state lasers
the given problem has already been solved to a significant degree.

In the example of solid-state lasers it is quite obvious how large a variety of
procedures there are which can be used to decrease the resonator deformations; at
the same time what difficulties are caused by the solution of the problem of induced
nonuniformities even in such a comparatively simple case is highly instructive. We
shall limit ourselves to this example.

5 5.1. Theoretical Deformations of the Resonators of Solid-State Lasers

Origin and Magnitude of Thermal Aberrations in the Presence of Circular Active Rods.
In 5 2.3 we have already mentioned the thermal deformations of a resonator which
occur as a result of nonuniform heating of the active element by pumping radiation.
These aberrations are for the majority of types of solid-state lasers one of the
main obstacles on the path to achievement of diffraction divergence of radiation,
and for the most widespread glass lasers, they are in practice the only obstacle.

In the single pulse mode, the thermal deformations are a consequence of nonunifor-
mity of distribution of heat release with respect to the volume of the sample,
which occurs even when using the most modern illumination systems. In particular.

for standard active elements of circular cross section, in the best case more or
less sxisymmetric pumping distribution can be achieved. The nonuniformity of dis-

tribution with respect to radius is in practice always present. Its nature is de-
termined in the final analysis by two opposite factors. One of them is attenuation
of the pumping radiation on approaching the axis as a result of absorption in the
medium, the other one is "fine focusing" of this radiation on the axis as a result
of refraction on passage of the active element through the cylindrical side surface.
Depending on which of these factors predominates. the pumping radiation density on
the axis can be both less than and greater than the density on the lateral sarface
[47, #8].

The heat release process in the medium takes place with almost zero lag:
therefore the thermal deformations build up smoothly during a single pumping pulse,
reaching imposing values in the case of high-power lasers (see, for example. [200]).

Together with the deformations, the radiation divergence also increases by the end
of the pulse.

As was noted in the same § 2.3, the thermal deformations of the resonators of con-
tinuous and frequency lasers are especially large. The thermal flux in the

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quasistationary mode here has entirely defined direction .. from the axis of the
element to its lateral surface, through which heat removal is realized. Therefore
the steady-state temperature distribution in lasers of this type is of a quite
regular nature even with noticeable nonuniformity of heat release. On going away
from the axis the temperature decreases approximately by a quadratic law. The

total temperature gradient with respect to the cross section usually approaches
close to the limit after which the rupture of the material by the thermal stresses

begins; in the majority of lasers of this type this limits the power of the pumping
radiation introduced into the active element and. with it, the output lasing power.

Let us consider the phenomena occurring on transmission of light through a nonuni-
formly heated active element of circular cross section. He shall consider the
temperature inside the element dependent only on the distance to its axis: T(r,
¢. 2) - T(r). In order not to deal with awkward tensors, we shall limit ourselves
to the case of isotropic material. which glass also is.

The thermal deformations of the resonator are a consequence of the dependence of the
index of refraction of the medium on the temperature and on the magnitude of the
thermal stresses occurring in the active element:

n(1'.ou.o.)"n.+B(T—T.)-I‘C.ou +C.a... (1)

vhere T and n are the average temperature of the medium and the index of refrac—

0 0
tion corresponding to it; B - dn/dT is the thermal coefficient of absolute variation
of the index of refraction in the absence of stresses; C1 = anlaa” and 62 3 3n/3dl

are the so—called photoelastic constants [250]; allsre the normal stresses on the
polarization direction, oi is the sum of the normal stresses with respect to two

other directions (the normal stresses are the diagonal elements of the stress ten-

sor; the positive sign is assigned to the tensile stress). As applied to
our case

nn,(r)=rn.1-ﬁ[T(r)—-1}|l-(}a., L(;(n.1-a,,). (1a)

where nr ¢ is the index of refraction for light polarized in the radial or tangen-
D

tial directions. respectively; or, a¢, 02 are the radial, tangential and longitu-
dinal stresses.
Elasticity theory leads to the following expressions for the distribution of the

thermal stresses inside a rod of unlimited length for axisymmetric distribution of
the temperature [251]:

 

G, -— “ff-HIT. — Tr, (r)|.
a, .-.. 5% lr,+ 13:3,) — 21(r)l. (2)

o. -—- ,"—_"—,|r. -- urn.

Key: a. average

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCMI. USE ONLY

Here a is the coefficient of thermal expansion, B is the Young‘s modulus. u is the

Poisson coefficient which fluctuates within the limits of 0.25 to 0.3 for the
majority of materials; To is the average temperature of the rod; Tave(r) -

'

-3;j T(H)Hdﬂ is the average temperature of the medium in the zone of radius r

r
0

adjacent to the axis.

The substitution of (2) in (la) leads to the known formulas for variations of the
index of refraction inside the circular cylindrical active element first published
in [70, 71]. Let us write out these formulas in the form in which they usually are
used at the present time:

mm ,. n. 4 mm — m i own — r... MI. (3)

where p- [3 — 51%;.“ (C. + 36.). Q— 5%“)! " C.) are the laser thermal optical

constants introduced in [200]. From (3) it follows that the value of P character-
izes the variations of the index of refraction average with respect to both polari-
zations, Q characterizes birefringence. As will be obvious later. these two constants
remain meaningful and are sufficient for complete description of the resonator de-
formations also in the important case of active elements with strongly elongated
rectangular cross section uniformly illuminated from both lateral surfaces.

The expediency of introducing new thermal optical constants arose from the follow—
ing causes. Before lasers, optics dealt primarily with parts free of large inter-
nal stresses; their temperature could slowly vary with time, remaining, however.
approximately identical throughout the entire volume. If the light beam travels a
distance 1 through such a part, on variation of the temperature of the entire part
by AT the optical length of path inside it varies by A(n£) - nAT-u2 + lAT-B. In-
asmuch as the path traveled by the beam outside the part decreases in this case by
Al, the total increment of the optical path is A(n2) - A2 - WkAT, where H ' B (n -
l)a is the thermal optical constant which was used earlier in optical instrument
making [252].

In order not to return again to the question of thermal optical constants, let us
note that already at the beginning of the 1970's some researchers preferred to be
guided by the values not of P and Q, but H when selecting the optimal composition
of the neodymium glass (for example. [253, 254]). This was frequently caused by
the fact that for many laser glasses the numerical values of H and P are close to
each other, and frequently by the fact that the authors [253] created a procedure
for measuring w simpler and more convenient than the procedures developed in [200,
255, 256] for direct measurement of P and Q. However, numerous specific data [256,
257] indicate that the correlation between H and P on variation of the compositions
of the glasses turns out to be not at all ideal. Therefore now in almost all of

the papers devoted to the creation of the so-called athermal glass, only P and Q
are used as the criterial thermal optical constants (for more details see [258]).

Let us continue the investigation of thermal deformations of resonators with circu-
lar cylindrical elements. Formula (3) describes the variations of the index of re-
fraction inside an unlimited long rod. It is necssary to consider the possible
role of the edge effects in real rods of finite length. This problem is nontrivial
and is a source of numerous errors; therefore let us discuss it in somewhat more
detail. 91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nature of the distribution of the longitudinal normal stresses and edge effects
in problems of this type is explained by Figure 5.1. Let us first imagine that a
rod of length t having flat ends in the unheated state is part of the freely sup-
ported (unreinforced) monolithic rod of unlimited length (Figure 5.1, a).

Now we shall heat the entire infinite rod uniformly over the entire length; for
determinacy we shall consider the temperature monotonically decreasing on going
away from the axis. From the arguments of asymetry it is clear that any cross sec—
tion perpendicular to the axis which was planar in the unstressed rod of unlimited
length remains planar also on axisyumetric heating of it. The two isolated cross
sections separated by a distance 1 do not constitute an exception. Hence. it
follows that in the given case all of the layers of the rod located at different
distance from the axis acquire the same relative elongation along the z-axis corre-
sponding obviously to the average heating temperature. For cold layers this elon-
gation is excessive, and for hot layers. it is insufficient, from which we have the
distribution pattern 02 depicted in Figure 5.1, a described by formula (2).

 

Figure 5.1. Distribution of longitudinal normal stresses and edge

effects in an active element with sxismmaetric temperature distribu-

tion: a) circular cylindrical rod of infinite length; b) rod of
finite length.

Let us make sections through the isolated cross sections and thus produce our rod
of finite length. Before this. a system of forces depicted in Figure 5.1. a was
applied to both ends of the rod from the outside. which kept them flat in spite of
nonuniform heating. Now these forces are removed and the ends are deformed. The
magnitude of the deformations obviously will be the same as if we applied the same
system of forces in the opposite direction (Figure 5.1, b) to each end of the

unstressed rod. The results of these forces from each side is equal to zero;
therefore in accordance with the Saint—Venant principle which is known in elasticity

theory [251]. they are capable of causing noticeable deformations only in the sec-
tions directly adjacent to the ends, the length of which does not exceed the rod

diameter D. As a result. the total picture of longitudinal deformations of the rod
acquires the form provisionally depicted in Figure 5.1, b (in reality, in addition
to everything else not only the ends are distorted, but also the sections of the
lateral surface of the rod adjacent to them). The cross sections which were flat
in the unheated rod remain flat also after nonuniform heating of it over the extent
of almost the entire length. Only small sections near the end freely expand in

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accordance with their individ.mi temperature. Therefore the difference A2 between
the lengths of the rod ohtuirrd for neasurcments along the axis and along the

generatrix (Figure 5.1. b) is not nLLI. as can be demonstrated, but a many times
smaller value ~uD AI where AT is the total temperature gradient.

Although the conclusivu obtaizt; with the help of elasticity theory and confirmed
by direct measutetedﬁr that :h- ngmLL; uf sag of the ends is nearly independ-

ent Of i and is very snail. was ruai1sned in 1966 [74] it was not possible at that
time completely to do Rhn‘ Ulzh sue invalid ideas of thermal deformations. As an
example let us mention the nape; !2391 In which the estimate of the sag of the
ends and analysis of th. coeSrqu.nce< “allowing from this were performed beginning
with the formats A; - a i. dpfatcully, the same error prompted the authors of
(253) to inciudc the tens u(n u I)u.§ shich should not be there in the initial
formula for the resomunr da-é‘ “tun-ms.

it is pussible t\ .c: u; :ne lu1uii9- lhv stress and strain pattern in a rod of
finite Length diiicrs F.ha the hd'lvrn in an Infinite rod only in small sections
of length1near thu and“ cf the so. where the state of material is less stressed.
If we consider that the mean variatinna of the optical path on transmission of
light through cue unstreﬂ"ed and thermally stressed parts are described by constants
w and P that are not too different with respect to magnitude, it becomes clear
that the edge effects in the given situation play a special role. Actually, in
reference [200], they were not manifested noticeably even for llD ~ 4. Thus, the
deformations of the resonator with axisymmetrically heated rod of length 1 can be
found by simple multiplication of the equality (3) by t. Then. however, we deal
with the case where analogous edge effects will play a larger role.

Consequences of aberrations and Efforts to COIIGCt Them. From formula (3) it

follows that for any form of T(r), except the trivial T(r) - const, changes also
take place in the average index of refraction for two polarizations of the index of
refraction and birefringence. What the presence of an index of refraction gradient

leads to. we already know from Chapters 2-6. For quadratic dependence of T on r which
is characteristic of the frequency and continuous lasers, the average index of refrac-
tion is also a quadratic function of r -- a powerful thermal "lend'is manifested. If
this lens is in no way compensated for, the angular divergence of the radiation

turns out to be very large. 0n introduction of the corresponding quadratic phase
corrector into the resonator. the divergence decreases [54, 260].

This lens-like nature of a specimen is frequently observed also in the single

flash mode. Its compensation naturally has the same effect on the angular diver-
gence [261, 262]. However, the possibilities of this method of controlling the
thermal "lenses" she i not be overestimated. Actuall , the dynamic correction

of any distortions. including arbitrary "lenticularity' is a very difficult prob-
lem. Technically complicated correction methods which will be discussed in the
next two sections have been developed only in very recent times, and they will be
used obviously only in highly critical cases. If we are talking about compara-
tively sinple means. it remains only to place the previously selected corrector
inside the resonator, adjust the resonator, considering the subsequently manifes-
ted "lenticularity" (this is what was done, in particular, when creating the
monopulse master oscillator in [129]). and so on. In this situat10n any variations
of the thermal regime of the active element and pumping conditions are sufficient
for compensation to be disturbed. Satisfactory correction in the powerful single
pulse mode of free lasing where the magnitude of the deformations changes

93

FOI’OFTTCIAL USEiJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

significantly under the effect of the pulse is highly problematic. One of the many at
tempts to create an element capable of compensation for a thermal lens coming dur-
ing the pulse was undertaken in [263). This element was a mirror that absorbs

a small portion of the lasing radiation incident on it in its mass and undergoes,
therefore, thermal deflection. The mirror was successfully tested outside the
resonator. but no special applications were found.

Double refraction also leads to highly unfavorable consequences. It is known that
the results of transmission of planopolarized light through an isotropic medium,
the optical axis of which is perpendicular to the direction of propagation essen-
tially depends on the mutual orientation of the optical axis and the plane of the
initial polarization. If they are parallel or perpendicular to each other, the
light remains planopolarized. In all the remaining cases the polarization becomes
elliptic -- a second linear component appears, and, as is said, the beam depolarizes.
In a circular rod with axisymmetric temperature distribution. the local optical
axes of an anisotropic nedium as a result of the stress effect are directed along
the radii. Therefore the depolarization with respect to passage through this ele-
ment takes place in all s'ctions of the cross section except the ones adjacent to
the two straight lines passing through the axis of the element, one of which is
parallel to the polarization plane of the initial beam, and the other is perpen-
dicular to it (Figure 5.2. a).

if the resonator contains elements realizing the complete or partial polarization

of the radiation, the double refraction leads to the highly characteristic "cross"
pattern of the distribution of the polarized components with respect to the cross
section. This picture was investigated theoretically and experimentally in [266,
265] for the case of weak double refraction in planar and telescopic resonators

(in a telescopic resonator it turned out to be more favorable). However. even with-
out detailed investigation it is clear that the depolarization of such resonators
leads to a reduction in the lasing power inasmuch as the radiation of the newly
appearing polarization component is output in one way or another from the resonator,
making no contribution to the useful signal. In the case of large-scale double
refraction the degree of depolarization and power losses become xlgnifitant (las-
ing can even be curtailed). It is possible to avoid this, using the system pro-
posed in [266], the meaning of which reduces to the fact that the resonator for
emission of undesirable polarization "is blocked" -— this radiation returns, not
reaching the part of tue optical system which contains the shutter and the output
mirror (Figure 5.2. b).

Even in cases where double refraction does not lead to power losses (in particular,
in the absence of polarizers), a number of undesirable effects still remains both
in theoscillatorsand in the amplifiers. In particular, the natural oscillations
of the resonator with axisymmetric anisotropic medium cannot have a pclarization
state identical with respect to the entire cross section. As a rule, this leads to
a sharp decrease in the spatial coherence of the generated radiation; in the best
case the laser begins to operate on nodes. the direction of the polarization of the
radiation of which in each segment of the cross section is oriented along the radius
or tangentially [267, 268]. From 5 2.2 it is known that such polarization states
are obtained only as a result of superposition of higher-order modes than zero

(see Figure 2.16). In laser amplifiers the double refraction even in the single
pulse mode can lead to nonuniform distribution of the radiation intensity with
respect to cross section [269, 270]; it prevents the creation of highly efficient
multipass amplifiers "decoupled" with respect to polarization [271].

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY

~} -r:"T_—+~:%'m Ill—Ii?

\ .5 .“ 1 I

<11] -=w--E1Hr~

<4. =' A41}-
4,

Figure 5.2, Birefringence in lasers based on circular active elements
with axisymmetric temperature distribution: a) direction of local
optical axes inside the active element (the zones are croashatched in
which the plane-polarized light with the direction of polarization in-
dicated to the side by the large arrow does not undergo depolarization);
b) the resonator for the plane-polarization radiation laser in which
double refraction does not lead to energy losses; c) diagram of the
double-pass amplifier with compensated double refraction; d) diagram of
an analogous laser; 1 -— active element in the form of a circular cylin-
der, 2 -- completely reflecting mirror, 3 -- output mirror (stacked),

4 - 018" prism (radiation of one polarization passes without losses,
the other is reflected from the diagonal splicing plane), 5 - tetra-
hedral reflecting prism, 6 -- quarter-wave phase plate, the principal
direction of which is 45° with the plane of the figure, 7 - polarizer
(conventional representation), the principal plane of which makes an angle
of #5“ with the plane of the figure, 8 -- electrooptical shutter.

All of these phenomena greatly complicate the construction of single-mode laser
systems with small radiation divergence. Therefore the efforts to completely avoid
the consequences of double refraction are of unquestioned interest, realizing 90—

degree rotation of the polarization plane on the path between the two identical
active elements. Then the radiation having r-polarization in the first element

will have o-polarization in the second element, and vice versa. Obviously, the
phase shifts between the different polarization components in the two active ele-

ments are compensated for here, and the manifestations of double refraction

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

disappear [272]. It is possihle to achieve the analogous effect also for one
active element, rotating the polarization plane on the path from the element to
the mirror and back (which can be achieved, for example, using a 45-degree Faraday
rotator of the polarization plane installed between the element and the mirror).

A detailed analysis of the possible diagrams of two—pass amplifiers and lasers

with compensated double refraction, two of which are presented in Figure 5.2, c. d,
was performed in [273]. The experiments performed there demonstrated, on the one
hand, that when using these systems. the double refraction actually does not lead

to such a sharp decrease in power as in ordinary lasers; on the other hand they
demonstrated that the required accuracy of all of the optical elements and their
mutual orientation here are far from simply achieved. In addition, the compensation
of the double refraction still turns out to be incomplete inasmuch as the beams
pass through the active element nonparallel to its axis as a result of the presence
of the same thermal aberrations.

Let us mention such a characteristic method of compensation of the thermal deforma-
tions as the creation in the active element of the correspondingly selected pre-
liminary stresses by quenching it [276], and let us proceed to the efforts to
decrease the deformations themselves.

Different Methods of Decreasing the Resonator Deformations. The most natural method
of decreasing the thermal deformations of the resonator is the adoption of all
possible measures to insure the maximum uniform temperature field with respect to
the active sample. In the single pulse mode the decisive role is obviously played
by uniformity of the pumping distribution with respect to the volume of the active
element. Inasmuch as ideal uniformity is still not achieved, sometimes a tempera-
ture gradient is created in the active element which is inverse to the gradient
occurring as a result of pumping. This can be achieved, varying the temperature of
the coolant in time according to a given law [275] or heating the sample by an
additional pumping pulse and waiting a defined time until the required temperature
distribution is established in the cooling process [271]. In frequency lasers
operating in a series of pulses, obviously it is best of all to cool the active
element only in the gaps between the series, offering it the possibility of being
freely heated during the series itself, which insures the minimum temperature
gradients with respect to cross section [276].

From this list alone, the necessity for more radical methods of eliminating thermal
deformations is clear. Actually, such methods exist. One of them consists in the
fact that the lateral surfaces of the active element are made planar. and the light

flux passes through the sample inclined to these surfaces and undergoes total
internal reflection on them. here each ray of the parallel beam crosses through
all of the layers of the sample with different temperature and index of refraction,
which leads to equalization of the optical paths, that is. the absence of thermal

deformations.

Thegenerationof radiation beams experiencing reflections from the side walls of
the active elements of rectangular and octagonal cross sections was first observed
by Vanyukov, et 31.. in 1963-1961. [18]. The different systems of lasers and
amplifiers with total internal reflection in the active element were subjects of
lively discussion in 1965-1968 [277,139,140]; two of them borrowed from [139,140]

are presented in Figure 5.3. It is true that the creators of these systems pri-
marily pursued the goal of using sharp dependence of the reflection coefficient on

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the angle of incidence near the critical angle of total internal reflection for
angular selection of the radiation (see 5 2.6, Figure 2.26, d), but it turned out
that the problem of thermal deformations is also solved simultaneously 140].

. {..

Figure 5.3. Diagrams of lasers with total internal reflection in the
active element: a). b) diagrams proposed in [139, 140], respectively.

Finally y, in 1970 attention was again attracted to this area by the papers of Mikael-
yan and D yachenko [278], who did not try to use the mentioned dependence of the
reflection coefficient on the angle of incidence, but were only interested in the
problem of thermal deformations. They classified the resonators which they called
wave guide resonators and demonstrated the possibility of eliminating the thermal
deformations experimentally. However, lasers of this type did not become wide-
spread as a result of difficulty of manufacturing the active elements, complexity
of their cooling and other similar causes.

The method consisting in transmission of plane-polarized light through active
elements again inclined with respect to the plane side surfaces but at the Brewster
angle so that the light is not reflected, but on the contrary, passes through the
surfaces almost without losses turned out to be more vital. This method is used
when constructing frequency lasers (for example, [279]) and also powerful output
stages of the monopulse lasers [280, 281]. In the frequency lasers the elements are
in a coolant, the presence of which decreases the Brewster angle and reduces unavoid-
able loeses on transmission of the light through the surfaces to an extraordinarily
small magnitude. This, in turn, creates the possibilities for placement of a large
number of active elements in one resonator to which the form of thin disks is
assigned (Figure 5.4, a). Small thickness of them implies a sharp decrease in the

temperature gradients and promotes an increase in the uniformity of the pumping
distribution.

In the terminal amplifiers of monopulse lasers the cooling or immersion liquids are
not used as a result of the low self-focusing threshold characteristic of them.

Therefore such amplifiers are capable of operation 0017 in 31081e'P0180 modes.
There is a positive side here - the thermal loads for small, and

the thickness of the active elements can be made sufficiently large; thus, in
[281] it was 30 mm. This permits us to limit ourselves to a moderate number of
elements. The diameter of the light aperture here usually is very large and fre-
quently reaches 200 mm [281]. Therefore it is necessary to realize the pumpings
through the same lateral surfaces through which the amplified radiation is

97

FOR4DFFKJAI.USE(M‘LY
FOR OFIWCJAL.USE4DNLY

transmitted and locate the element so that they do not shield each other from the
pumping source (Figure 5.4, b). In spite of its unique characteristics, the disc
amplifiers are used only in exceptional cases as a result of enormous dimensions
and large labor consumption of manufacture.

4 4’ [lg/ﬂ.
4/51/51; '/

I47.

    
       

 

Figure 5.4. Diagram of the arrangement of the active elements: a)
disc elements in the coolant (frequency laser); h) flat plates in the
air (monopulse laser).

in the resonator and amplified channels lies in a somewhat different area. It was
first stated by Spitzer [71]; it pertains only to loss lasers and reduces to the
fact that the thermal deformations can be significantly decreased by the selection
of the glass composition. The fact is that the variations of the index-of refrac-
tion as a result of the temperature gradient itself and the stresses arising here
in practice are always in opposite directions - in the formula for P the terms
with dn/dT and 3n/80 are subtracted from each other (8 < 0. C1 + 3c < 0). This
is easily explainable: a decrease in the index of refraction with increase in
temperature is connected to a significant degree with reduction of the density of
the medium, and the thermal stresses always prevent redistribution of the density
in the nonuniformily heated part (see Figure 5.1 and the comments to it). At the
same time the thermooptical properties of the medium depend, of course, not only
on its density (which is indicated at least by the presence of double refraction),
and there is a certain possibility of independent variation of some of the parame-
ters entering into (1), (3). The thermal coefficient of the index of refraction

B can vary within especially broad limits, and P also with it.

The experiments in this area quickly led to impressive progress in the field of
neodymium glass lasers. Over the course of several years an entire series of so-
called athermal laser glasses appeared in which one linear combination or another
of thermooptical constants P and Q reduce to zero. In order to understand what the
developers of laser glasses are striving for. let us return to expression (3).

The optimal version is. of course, equality of P and Q to zero. In this case the
thermal deformations must be absent for any form of T(r). In recent years it was

actually possible to create glass in which P and Q are extremely small at room
temperature [282] (the stipulation with respect to the temperature arose from the
fact that the constants P and Q themselves are slowly varying functions of it [283],
and athermalnesa is insured only in a narrow temperature range). However, such

98

FINICMHW€JAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFINCJAL USE(MVLY

response can be achieved only for phosphate glass having much lower chemical
stability and thermal strength than the most widespread silicate glasses. As for
silicate glass, in different types of it, the value of Q is in practice the sale;
only P is subject to variation.

If Q f 0 the thermal deformations cannot be avoided for arbitrary form of T(r).
When the temperature distribution is of a regular nature, some possibilities
appear in this respect. In particular, for quadratic dependence of I on r charac-
teristic of frequency and continuous lasers. formula (3) acquires the form

‘ n... =- n. + PAT/2 — (p :h QIZ)AT(r/s)',

where AT is the total temperature gradient between the axis and the side surface,
and a is the radius of the rod. Hence it follows that for P i Q/2 - 0 the thermal
deformations for the r or ¢ polarization radiation are absent [284]. For frequency
lasers P - Q/2 usually approach zero; the divergence of their radiation actually is
sharply reduced as this value is decreased (see, for example, [257]). However, as
has already been_pointed out, double refraction in circular active elements pre-
vents plane-polarized radiation lasing; therefore the maximum small divergence still
remains unattainable.

Lasers Based on Active Elements of Elongated Rectangular Cross Section. From every-
thing that has been discussed it follows that even defined possibilities for con-
trolling thermoelectrical characteristics of glass do not permit complete solution
of the problem of thermal deformations in lasers based on traditional active ele-
ments of circular cross section. It is also obvious that the primary causes of

all of the difficulties here are the following: 1. The form of the stress dis-
tribution near the circular element in the general case does not repeat the form of
the temperature distribution (see (2)); therefore exact compensation for the vari-
ations of the index of refraction caused by its dependence on temperature and on
the stresses it is possible only for certain specific forms of T(r). 2. Local
optical axes of the anisotropic medium from which the circular axisymmetrically
stressed rod consists are oriented along the radii and their directions are there-
fore different in different sections of the cross section which prevents plane-
polarized radiation lasing.

 

Figure 5.5. Active element in the
form of a flat plate.

The origin of both of these phenomena is organically connected with the circular
shape of the cross section, and on variation of the type of symmetry of the cross
sections they can disappear. Actually, let us consider the optical properties of

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

glass plate bounded by the planes 1 - is and heated synmntrically with the plane
x - 0 (Figure 5.5). Obviously the local optical axes inside this plate together
with the temperature gradient have the same direction in the entire volume. In
addition. from elasticity theory it is known that the shape of the stress distri-
bution in the absence of external forces here completely repeats the form of the
temperature distribution [251]:

o. u- o. ‘o. =o. -;1_‘—,.tr.— run.

where T.=—:-5T(z)dz- is the average temperature. Substituting these formula in

I
(1) and considering that the light is propagated through the plate along the z-axis,
we obtain the following relations [200]:

n...- no+(Pi:Q)[T(z)- m. a.)

where n‘ y is the index of refraction for light polarized along the x and y-axes.
9

respectively, n0 is as before the index of refraction in the medium without stresses

at a temperature of To.
Hence the obvious conclusion follows immediately: if the plate made of glass with

P + Q - O or P - Q - O is used as the active element, the deformations of the
resonator for plane-polarized radiation with one of the two directions of polari-
zation must be absent for any temperature distribution. Let us only remember that
this distribution must always remain symmetric with respect to the x - 0 plane; if
this is not so, the plate will bend, and for description of the resonator deforma-
tions. a much more complex expression is required in which U will figure in addition
to P and Q.

It remains only to discuss the edge effects and the polarization characteristics of
the generated radiation. Let us begin with the simpler problem of edge effects.

In exactly the same way as in the case of a circular cylinder. the width of the region
adjacent to the edges of the plate inside which the stressed and strain pattern
differs significantly from the pattern in an infinite plate does not exceed the plate
thickness (which is confirmed by the results of the corresponding calculations
[285]). However, here in contrast to the circular elements, this region borders

the plate on all four sides (crosshatched in Figure 5.5). whereas the zones adjacent
to the ends of the element do not play a special role (for the same reasons as for
circular rods). the situation is somewhat different with regard to the zones ad-
jacent to the sides - the light passes crosswise through then. and the effect

turns out to be significant along the entire length. Hence it follows that for

large temperature gradient the radiation passing near the sides will deviate sig-
nificantly from the rectilinear direction and will not make a contribution to the
central peak of the radiation pattern. Thus, from the point of view of thermal de-
formations it is desirable that the thickness of the plate determining the width of
the edge zones be as small as possible; on the other hand, as the thickness de-

creases, the vibrations of the active element [192] and its heating at pumping time
increase.

100

$03 OFFICIAL USI1(”'LY
FOI.0FFHJAI.USE!DNLY

Now let us discuss the problem of the polarization of the generated radiation. In-
asmuch as for Q i 0 the resonator deformations can be reduced to zero only for
plane-polarized radiation with completely defined direction of polarization, it is
necessary in sale way to achieve a situation where the laser will operate on this
radiation. Double refraction is not dangerous in this case: the required direction
of polarization is parallel or perpendicular to the direction of the optical axis
of the medium. The data of [264] and subsequent experimental papers indicate that
certain other theoretically important reasons which could cause the decrease in
power in the case of intraresonator polarization selection of the radiation are
absent in the case of neodymium glass lasers.

Thus. the transition to elements with strongly elongated rectangular cross section
permits the use of comparatively simple means to avoid thermal deformations with-
out lowering the lasing power. Even the use of a polarizer is not mandatory in
this case: it is possible to select conditions such that the "harmful" polarization

component will be suppressed automatically. Let us explain this in the example of
the single pulse mode.

In the case of symmetric two-sided illumination of the planar element, the minimum
pumping density always falls to the central plane (x - 0); in the single pulse
mode, the temperature obviously is normal at the pumping time. Let the composition
of the glass be such that P - Q a 0; inasmuch as usually Q > 0, P + Q in this case
also turns out to be positive. Prom formula (4) it follows that in this case for
radiation polarized along y, the index of refraction gradient is absent, and for
the other polarization component the element is equivalent to a scattering lens.

In planar or telescopic resonators this necessarily leads to an increase in losses;
therefore the x-component can be present equally with the y-component only at the
very beginning of the pumping pulse until a noticeable temperature gradient appears.

Spontaneous polarization of the laser emission with planar active elements must

occur under certain other combinations of conditions and be actually observed in
practice [286].

In spite of individual hopeful experiments with planar active elements to 40-206-600
mm3 in size [192], lasers of this type still have not become especially widespread.
The reason for this is that for now for the majority of solid state lasers an

effort is being made to consider the possibility of Q-switched operation. The
large-cross section planar active elements are not too suitable

for monopulsed lasers -- this configuration is highly unfavorable from the point of
view of superluminescence which plays an extraordinarily important role in the
"Slave" operating mode. As for glass lasers with high output energy in the free

lasing mode, the procedure discussed above for constructing them obviously is
optimal [19“].

In conclusion, let us briefly touch on the problems of thermal deformations of the
liquid laser resonators. The value of dn/dT here is very large and as a result of
the absence of static stresses is not compensated for any way; therefore the varia—
tions of the index of refraction turn out to be very large. The always available
mixing of different layers of liquid leads to the fact that the temperature field
is unstable. and the nonuniformities are irregularly distributed with respect to

volume. For these reasons small angular divergence of the powerful liquid lasers
almost unattainable. Therefore the liquid media are widely used only in

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

small lasers with tunable frequency, on the angular divergence of the emission of
which as a rule special requirements are not imposed.

§ 5.2. Phase Correction of Wave Fronts. Dynamic Holography and Induced Scattering

Inasmuch as in the optical channels of lasers usually all possible nonuniformities
are present, even an insignificant decrease in which frequently is extremely com-
plicated, there is a natural effort to find methods permitting insurance of high
output characteristics even when such inhomogeneities are present. A brief dis-

cussion of research for this purposenmkes up the content of this and the follow-
ing sections.

Optical-Hechanical Correction Systems. Let us begin with the possibilities which
are related to purely mechanical displacements of certain elements with respect to
the channel. First of all, the systems for automatic adjustment of laser resonator:
which are gradually entering into practice deserve attention. Their function is
adjustment of the mutual arrangement of the mirrors in order to optimize any laser
parameter. Without going into the technical details. let us only discuss the most
theoretical problem of selecting a parameter, the magnitude of which is subject to
optimization.

The output parameter of the laser which is quite "sensitive" to

the resonator geometry and at the same time most simply controlled is its power.
Therefore it is easy to create a self-adjustment system which maintains the maxi~
mum high level of output power. However, this operating algorithm can be far from
always used: the pursuit of an insignificant gain in power can easily become
enveloped in the large fluctuations in the position of the resonator axis, and,
along with it, also the direction of the generated radiation. In addition. cases
are possible where the shift of the resonator axis leading to an increase in power
is accompanied not only by "drift" of direction, but also other undesirable con-
sequences. we encountered one such example in § 4.2 - as the resonator axis of
the flow laser approaches the point of entrance of the flow of medium into the
resonator which is advantageous from the point of view of efficiency, the nonuni-
formity of the radiation distribution with respect to cross section of the lased
beam and. consequently, the divergence increase sharply. Finally, it is necessary
not to forget that the systems based on measuring output power can realize adjust-
ment of the resonator only some time after lasing has started. Therefore for the
overwhelming majority of pulsed lasers such systems are disadvantageous. It is
also difficult to use them for certain continuous-action lasers, at the time of
starting of which frequently such large misalignments occur that the laser in
general does not begin to lase without resonator tuning.

For all these reasons, the most efficient operating algorithm for the autoadjust-
ment systems is maintenance of the resonator axis in the given position. It is

possible to deal with this problem by using the radiation of a low-power external
source which will permit adjustment of the laser without beginning of its lasing.

A system for autoadjustment of unstable resonators investigated in the already-
mentioned paper [217] was constructed by the same principle; the radiation of the
auxiliary helium-neon laser is input to the resonator here along its axis through
a small opening in the center of one of the mirrors. Undergoing multiple reflec-
tions, this radiation then "spreads" over the entire cross section. If the
resonator was misaligned. the intensity distribution with respect to cross sec-
tion turns out to be asymmetric, which is used for generating the error signal

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

putting the corresponding automation circuits into operation. The system described
in [217] permits insurance also of satisfactory precision of adjustment of the
errors (~5") and "capture" of the initial misalignment (S'-7') in a sufficiently
large range of angles. The application of an auxiliary laser and the receivers of
its radiation operating on a frequency differing from the frequency of the basic
laser permits possible interference caused by the lasing process in the latter to

be avoided. The system with introduction of the auxiliary laser through the central
opening is also convenient in that this radiation passes through the adjusted reson-
ator on the same path as the generated radiation; therefore it can be used so that
the radiation will be directed at the measuring devices and so on visually or auto-
matically.

A further step in improving the methods of mechanical automatic tuning of lasers is
the application of the so-called adaptive optical system. Linnik's idea [286]
about the possibility of autocompensation of phase distortions of the wave front
caused by a turbulent atmosphere and interfering with the observation of remote
objects marked the beginning of this area of study. The typical method of solving
this problem by the methods of adaptive optics consists in the following: one of
the elements of the optical channel of the transceiving system, for example. the
mirror objective of the shaping telescope is made up of many more small mirrors
having the possibility of insignificant translational displacements. By using
these displacements, compensation of the large-scale phase distortions is also
insured.

When creating such devices it is most complicated to deal with the generation of
error signals. Let, for example, the problem of the formation of a beam with di—
vergence as small as possible be solved. The recording and analysis of the form of
the intensity distribution in the far zone with invariant arrangement of the indi-
vidual parts of the composite mirror still do not permit judgment of which of their
displacements are needed to improve this form. Actually, the same distribution in
the far zone can be observed for different forms of the wave front; thus, in § 1.1

we are dealing with the fact that the beams distinguished by the sign of the cur-
vature of the spherical wave front had identical divergences.

In order to obtain the required information about the deviation of each individual
mirror from its optimal position corresponding to the maximum axial luminous intensity
of the devices as a whole, it is simplest to use the following fact. The dependence
of total 3x131 luminous intensity F on the coordinate of one of the mirrors x measured
along the axis perpendicular to its surface is depicted in Figure 5.6. If this

mirror undergoes oscillations with of amplitude h much shorter than a wavelengthnears
its optimal position :0, the axial luminous intensity as is obviOus in the figure, re-

mains almost constant. If the average position of the mirror is shifted to any point
x1 noticeably remote from x0, the magnitude of the axial luminous intensity begins to

fluctuate with the same frequency as the mirror. The relation between the phases
of these two fluctuations will obviously depend on the direction from optimal that
the average mirror position is shifted.

Now, leaving only one of the mirrors stationary, let us force each of the remaining

ones to oscillate with its individual frequency and let us carry out spectral
expansion of the time dependence of the axial luminous intensity. Obviously, the

presence in this expansion of components with frequencies equal to the frequencies
of the oscillations of individual mirrors will indicate that the positions of the

103

FOR OFFNJAI.USEGDNLY
FINICHWWC]AI.USE¢JNLN

f3
/

      

 

'i
0
HES.
':::ll
'lvl,
{'1'3.
:‘:l::
':'!13
i i ' I '
:}:H’
l':':
I'lll:

.NL—M

i_._J_
q .q a

Figure 5.6. Axial luminoas intensity as a function of the position
of one of the parts of the composite mirror.

given mirrors are subject to adjustment. The phase relations provide information
about the direction of the required shifts.

This principle was also proposed and realized in the known papers [287. 288]. In
the first of them an adaptive system of seven elements was manufactured and success-
fully tested; in the second, a system of 18 elements. Later the possibilities of
adaptive optics were unconditionally expanded. Instead of the set of individual
mirrors now single flexible mirrors are beginning to be used -— this corresponds

to the transition from "step" approximation of the given phase distribution to more
improved approximation using continuous functions. The number of independently
adjustable parameters will also increase; familiarization with [334] gives a suffi—
ciently good idea about the paths of development of adaptive optics.

In spite of all of these prospects it is difficult to count on broad application of
adaptive optics directly in the laser resonators: the creation of a low-inertia
adjustable mirror capable of operating under high beam load conditions is a highly
complicated problem. In addition, the small phase aberrations and unstable reson-
ators, as we have seen in Chapters 3, 4, cannot lead to either multimodal lasing or
to large reduction in the output power, and they only cause phase distortions of
the wave front of the generated radiation which can be entirely compensated for
also outside of the resonator. Therefore the optimal location of the complex
adjustable mirrors is the exit of the shaping system where the density of the
radiation usually is many times less than the density inside the oscillator. As
for resonators. among their mechanical correction devices probably only the simp-
lest satoadjustment systems have become widespread which can be supplemented by
very useful and not too complex systems for automatic compensation of the second-
order wave aberrations which are variable in time (lenticularity).

Other methods of conversion of the wave front form are also of great interest. The
most universal and common of then is obviously holography.

Holographic Correction Principles. Usually two mutually coherent light beams
participate in the recording of the hologram depicted in Figure 5.7. a. In the
case of standard use of holography for recording the image of real objects one of

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

 

Figure 5.7. Problem of holographic corrections: a) recording of a
thin hologram; b), c) reproduction of one of the beams on illumination
of a hologram by the others; d) beams and three-dimensional hologram.

these beams -- I - is the light scattered from the object illuminated by the co—
herent radiation; its wave front has a complex shape which carries information
about the image of the object. The beam 11 - the reference beam - has a regular,
for example, planar shape of the wave front. when the hologram, which is an
imprint of the interference pattern between these two beams is made and then
illuminated by the reference beam itself II, the light scattered from it in the
direction of one of the diffraction orders has, as is known, the same structure as
the been I has during the recording, that is, as before, it is the carrier of all
of the information about the image of the object (Figure 5.7, b). however, the
light beams of I and II are theoretically entirely equivalent. If the hologram is
illuminated not by the reference beam, but by the object beam 1 the light scattered
in the corresponding direction will have the same structure as been II has during
the recording, that is, it will have regular (planar) shape of the wave front.

The given process is also depicted in Figure 5.7. c.

This property of a holograph also provides the basis for holographic methods of
correcting the wave front of the wave emission first realized by Soakin, et a1.
[2891. The functions of the object beam of I here are performed by the laser ra-
diation, the shape of the wave front of which is subject to correction. The co-
herent reference beams 11 with flat wave front can be formed, for example, from
part of the same emission transmitted through an angle selector.

when using holography to decrease the convergence of the laser

emission, the decisive role is played where the density of the

efficiency of conversion - the fraction of the power of the beam illuminating the
hologram which pertains to the required diffraction order. The lowest effi—

ciency not exceeding a few percentages occurs for thin amplitude holograms which
are obtained on ordinary processing of thin-layer photographic material. Bleach-
ins converts the metallic silver to a transparent compound with a different in-
dex of refraction than for the emulsion gelatin, and the hologram is converted
from an amplitude hologram to a phase hologram -- the peaks and the minima of the
recorded interference pattern on the hologram made correspond to sections of
different optical thickness. The efficiency of thin phase holograms can theore-
tically approach 302; such holograms were used when investigating the possibilities
of the given correction method used by the same group of authors in 1969-1972 [289-
291 .

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among the other results contained in the mentioned papers. the realization of

phase correction of the radiation of the helium-neon laser generated on one trans-
verse mode of the stable resonator TEMO [290] deserves to be noted. Before cor-
rection, the lasing beam had a flat equ phasal surface in the hologram zone and
just as the radiation of any nonzero mode of a stable resonator. it had sign-
variable amplitude distribution (see § 2.1). It is possible to interpret the
change in sign of the amplitude as a phase shift by n; as a result of the holo-
graphic correction such phase shifts dissppear. and the wave front becomes genuinely
planar (although the amplitude distribution naturally remains nonuniform). Under
the conditions of [290] this has led to a fourfold decrease in divergence, and the
axial luminous intensity increased noticeably although the energy efficiency of the
conversion was a total of ~lOZ [29111.

No less interesting experiments were performed with a ruby laser operating in the
ordinary "spike" free lasing mode [291]. Here the gain in the divergence turned
out to be still more significant. The possibility of realizing the correction it-
self in the free lasing mode which is more frequently multimodal when using a
planar resonator is, generally speaking, connected with two facts. First. in the
case of an optically nonuniform active medium the general distortion of the wave
front caused by aberrations of the resonator characteristic of different trans-
verse modes can prevail over the differences in the shape Jf the wave fronts of the
individual modes (which, probably. occurred also in [29l]‘. Secondly, although the
spatial field distributions can vary from spike to spike, the peaks of these dis-
tributions naturally do not coincide; therefore the overlap of the holograms re-
corded by the radiation of the individual "spikes" is only partial. however. par-
tial superposition of the holograms must lead to a reduction in energy efficiency
of conversion; under the conditions of [291] it was a total of 32.

The successful performance of the individual experiments could not free the given
method of holographic correction of the serious deficiencies organically inherent

in it. The use of thin-layer photographic materials alone immediately imposes ri 1d
restrictions on the vork1ngwavelength and on the admissible radiation flux densit es
and. finally, the energy efficiency of conversion. It is still more important that
the correction using the previously manufactured holograms 15 generally possible
only in rare cases where the laser operates under exceptionally stable conditions.
and the shape of the wave front of the generated radiation remains the same.

All of this dictates the transition to dynamic volumetric phase holography based on
reversible changes in the index of refraction of certain nonlinear media in the
radiation field; as a result of the presence of the known Bragg condition, the
light incident on the three-dimensional hologram is scattered predominately in one

diffraction procedure. and the efficiency of conversion can theoretically reach
100%.

All of the subsequent studies in the given field have proceeded along this path.
The system which is used for correction by the methods of dynamic three—dimensional
holography is depicted in Figure 5.7, d. The volumetric interference between two

 

1Having high energy efficiency, although less elegant. the procedure for realizing
the correction in such cases with the help of a stationary phase plate was de-
scribed after several years in [292].

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coherent light beams leads to the fact that a holographic phaselatticeisformedin
the nonlinear medium consisting of alternating layers with different index of re-
fraction. Ifsuchalatticeisfixed in some way and then illuminated by one of the
beams participating in the process of its formation, as a result of reflection
from the latticeit acquiresxhe structure of the second bean entirely similarly to
how this occurs in the case of a thin hologram (see Figure 5.7, a-c). Reflection
takes place without loss of intensity if the absorption in the medium is quite low.
thelattice issufficiently duck(the number of its periods along the direction of
the incident beam must be significantly greater than one), and the condition An/n<<
4 sin2 9 is satisfied [293, 294], where An is the modulation amplitude of the in-
dex of refraction. 29 is the angle between the initial beams (see Figure 5. 7, d).
The meaning of the last condition reduces to the fact that the reflection from one
lattice period taken separately must be quite small; only then does the three-
dimensionol nature of the lattice acquire a genuinely important role. Otherwise
the light. just as with a thin lattice will be scattered also in other directions.
Hereafter we shall consider that the conditions of three dimensionality are satis-
fied, and the scattering of the light in other directions is absent.

Now let us consider a real situation where both light beams exist simultaneously
together with the three-dimensional hologram created by them. As a result of the
interaction of each of these beams with the hologram, scattered (or, if one likes,
reflected from the hologram) radiation appears. However. inasmuch as the shape of
the wave front of the scattered radiation coincides with the shape of the wave
front of another beam, the structure of the initial two beams remains unchanged;
only redistribution of their intensities can occur.

The idea of the dynamic holographic correction is connected with this redistribu-
tion: if it actually occurs, the possibility appears for transmission of the energy
of a powerful light beam, the shape of the wave front of which is subject to cor-
rection, to a reference beam with small initial intensity and plane wave front.

This method of obtaining (more precisely, amplifying) narrowly directional irradia-
tion is obviously applicable when the shape of the wave front of the powerful beam
varies in time; it is only necessary that these changes be sufficiently small

during the lattice relaxation time.

Conditions of Realizing the Process of Holographic "Transfer" and Its Energy Effi-
ciency. "Transfer" on Thermal Lattices. In spite of the apparent " ransparency"
of the above-discussed idea of using dynamic holography, in reality it is not so
simple. A more careful analysis indicates that under steady conditions and in an
isotropic nonlinear medium redistribution of the energy between beams of identical
frequency does not occur whatever the initial ratio of their intensities [295].
The reason for this is the following. Strictly defined phase relations exist be-
tween any of the two light beams and the radiation scattered in its direction as a
result of interaction of the second beam with the volumetric hologram. These re-
lations depend on how the holographic lattice is arranged relative to the inter-
ference pattern between the beams. Under the above indicated conditions the posi-
tions of the lattice and the interference pattern coincide - the extrema of the
index of refraction are matched with the extrema of the total field intensity. It
turns out that in this case the scattered radiation is phase shifted by n/Z with
respect to the radiation of the beam to which it is added, and therefore it does
not cause a change in its intensity. The phase shift and together with it the
result of the interaction of the beans with the hologram, becomes different only
when the holographic lattice is shifted for certain reasons by a fraction of a
period in the transverse direction with respect to the interference pattern.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Initially we shall consider the hypothetical case where the radiation absorption
in a nonliear medium is absent. For derivation of the corresponding equations let
us represent the total field of two beams in the form

E (r) a .4, exp (1hr) + A, exp (liar),

where A1 and A2 are the complex amplitudes of beams I and II, RI and k2 are the
wave vectors of these beams where k1 - k2 - k0 - Zane/A where no is the index of

refraction of the nonlinear mediun in the absence of a field. The index of refrac-
tion in the presence of the two beams will be considered equal

n =- no[i +¢|A. oxp(lk,r)+ AzoprhmoxpM) I’]. (5)

The value of the index of refracti n averaged with respect to the lattice period
obviously is nmean - noll + n(IA1| + IAZI )l, and the modulation amplitude An -

ZIMlAZI' The introduction of the factor exp (16) in one of the terms in the

right-hand side of (5) leads, as is easy to see, to the fact that the holographic

lattice described by this formula is shifted with respect to the interference pat-
tern by a fraction of a period equal to 6/211; the direction of the shift for 6 > 0
is show in Figure 5.7. d by the dotted arrow. If the conditions are steady state,

and the medium is isgtropic, 6 - 0; then the formula for n acquires a standard
form n - no(l + alBI ).

The calculation of the interaction of light Beams with a nonlinear medium reduces
to the solution of the wave equation V B + k B - 0 considering the dependence of
k2 on the radiation field. Inasmuch as the terms with a. play the role of a small

correction in the formlss for n. the following approximate formula is valid for
2 2 2
k - k0(n/n0) :

1.4 2: km -|- 2¢|A.oxp(m.r) .1." 11,0“. (1hr) expﬂﬁ) m.

Substituting this formula and the expression for E in the wave equation, as a re-
sult of the calculations analogous to those discussed in the known paper by Kogel'-

nik [296] by the theory of three—dimensional holograms we obtain the following
differential equations relating A1 and A2:

gﬁgg. Jam. — u.) + aw dul’e-‘I'H to). (a)

where 2. 2 are the distances along the directions of propagation of beans I and II,
respectively.

The equations obtained have obvious meaning. The first terms in their right-hand
sides are identical and do not depend on the lattice shift parameter 6; they

describe the phase incursion occurring as a result of the fact that the average
index of refraction the.“ in the presence of a field differs from no. The origin of

the latter is explicitly related to the reflection from the lattice. This is

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indicated primarily by the presence of the "shift" factor exp (tic). In addition,
inasmuch as An ~ IAIAZI. the amplitude of the radiation scattered in the direction

of beam I must be proportional to IA1A§I, and in the direction of the second beam
IAEAZI; this dependence is also contained in (6).

From equations (6) it follows that for 6 - 0 the scattered radiation leads only to
additional phase variations which turn out to be greater for the less intense beam.
When 6 i 0 (the lattice is shifted) in addition to the imaginary terms real terms
also appear in the right-sides of (6). Accordingly, the intensity of one of the
beams begins to decrease as it is propagated and the other, to increase - so-
called energy "transfer" takes place. The direction of the "transfer" is defined
only by the sign of the product a sin 6 and does not depend on the relation between
the intensities of the interacting beams; therefore the energy of one of them can
be transferred entirely to the other.

We have succeeded in drawing this optimistic conclusion after the authors of [29‘]
only because, just as in [294], we introduced the lattice shift purely formally,

not analyzing the natural situations in which it could really occur. Nevertheless,
it will be seen later that the "transfer" will be realized in its classical version
(the interacting beams have the same frequency) primarily in the presence of sig-
nificant linear absorption in the medium. The corresponding theoretical analysis
was performed in [297]. In the case of linear absorption (that is, when the
absorbed power is proportional to the field intensity) the term -U/2 is added to

the right-hand side of each equation of system (6) where o is thezabsorption soeffi-
cient. After transition from amplitudes to intensities I1 I IAII , 12 3 IAZI the

system acquires the form

' Fun:
’3‘":

I o

.1: 1 2kg!“ alnd—u. (7)

Hereafter. for determinacy we shall consider that a < 0 (which is characteristic
of the thermal lattices investigated later) and sin 6 > 0. In this case the beam
I is the donor, and the second is amplified. From (7) it is obvious that - all
sin 6 has the meaning of the amplification coefficient in a medium for a sec d
beam in the presence of the first. The density of the amplified beam increases
while the condition 11 > I0 I o/(Zkolnl sin 5) is satisfied.

it follows immediately from this that for maximum use of the energy of the donor
beam it is desirable that its density decrease in the zone of interaction of the
beams to a value of 1 . 1n the most favorable case where the densities of the two
beams at the entrance to the medium 1'1, 1'2 are constant with respect to cross

section. this condition can be satisfied by using the flat layer of the medium (Fig-
ure 5.8), the thickness of which must be correspondingly selected. In Figure 5.9,
a, b, the data obtained by solution of the system (7) on the optimal thickness of
the layer of medium for the cases depicted in Figure 5.8, a, b when the beams

enter into the layer from one or different sides are presentedl. Although for the
same 1'1, 1'2 the optimal thickness of the layer in these two versions does not

coincide, the attained density of the amplified beam 12 max turns out to be the same;

 

1The calculations for the second of these cases were performed by V. D. Solov'yev.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the data on it are presented in Figure 5.9. c. It is obvious that high energy
efficiency of the "transfer" (on the order of 501 or more) can be achieved only

 

Figure 5.8. Geometry of the interaction of beams during "transfer"
in a flat layer of medium: a) one-sided incidence of the beams on
the layer; b) counterbeams.

 

Figure 5.9. Optimal thicknesses of the layers of the medium and maximum

attainable density of the amplified beam during "transfer": a), b)
dependence of the thickness A: of the layer of medium in the initial

values of the beam densities I' . 1'2 in the diagram in Figure 5.8,
a, b, respectively; c) dependence of the maximum attainable density

of the amplified beam I2 max 1'1. 1'2.

Key: 1. opt

when the initial density of the donor beam emceeds to by at least several times;
the initial density of the amplified beam also must not be too small.

Such is the theory of the interaction of beams with the holographic phase lattice
created by them in the quasistationary mode in general outlines. Now we shall
discuss the causes of the lattice shift with respect to the interference pattern
required for energy "transfer."

In individual cases the shift occurs as a result of a natural anisotropic medium
in which the hologram is created. The classical example of this is described in
the well-known paper by Shtebler and Amodeya [298] devoted to the investigation of
phase lattices in a lithium niobate crystal. 0n illumination of this material

110

FOI_0FFK]AI.USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

charge carriers are relaeased in it, which is the cause of local changes in the
index of refraction. As a result of anisotropy of the given material, the drift of
the free carriers here is directed in an entirely defined direction which also
causes a shift of the lattice recorded in the presence of two coherent beams. The
authors [298] observed noticeable redistribution of the beam intensities. It is
true that they used the given phenomenon not for correction of the wave front, but
for discovery of the previously unknown sign of the free charge carriers which can
be established by comparing the direction of the energy transfer process with the
direction of conductivity of the given crystal. This phenomenon can hardly be
exemplary of the dynamic correction - the setup times here are tens of seconds.

In the general case of an isotropic medium a defined lattice shift can be obtained
directly during interaction of the beams. obviously continuously shifting the medium
in the direction perpendicular to the lattice planes. The shift must appear as a
result of unavoidable inertia of the processes of recording and erasing it. Later

it will be seen that it is possible to obtain the desired result in practice
using this procedure only when using such comparatively slow recording mechanisms
as thermal recordings. According to [297] let us consider this version.

For the geometry of the interaction of the beams depicted in Figure 5.8, a, the
density of the thermal power dissipated as a result of absorption in the medium is

6111+ 12 + 2/1112 cos(2ﬂx/A)], where A - A/Zn sin 8 is the period of the interfer-

ence pattern, and the remaining notation was as before. The origin of the coordi-
nates is matched with one of the peaks of the interference pattern (it is possible
to neglect its small distortions along the Y and Z axes in the given investigation).
A simple analysis shows that in the case of stationary medium the dependence of the

temperature on x in the presence of such peak release sources has the form T - T

-l 2|” ’s—X(—) cos (2") with setup time of the spatial modulation 1 ~a%(ﬁ)’,

where Tmean is the mean temperature of the medium slowly increasing with time. K is
the coefficient of thermal conductivity, c is the heat capacity and p is the density
of the medium. This leads to the occurrence of the phase lattice with modulation

0 A ' do -
amplitude An 5 2y Iii—.7(F)||ﬁ.-l.

If the medium is shifted continuously along the x-axis with a velocity V, the lattice
setup time remains as before; its stationary position turns out to be shifted by-

- (A/Zﬂ)arctg UT, the depth of the “°d“1§‘%°“17§ the temperature and the index
of refraction decreases in the ratio (1 +m , where w ‘ ZnV/A. A comparison
of these data with (5) indicates that the parameters of the "transfer" theory under

the investigated conditions assume the values

-1. -
“4‘59???" +W) '. humm-

As the velocity of the medium increases, 6 increases, approaching the o timal value
of n/Z from the point of view of the "transfer," and on the other hand To I decreases

rapidly. From (7) it follows that the intensity of the energy transfer process
from beam to beam is defined in the final analysis by the value of In sin 6|. This

value reaches the maximum equal to'Z?77(5;) r7%-. for w I III; thus, the optimal

0
111

FOR OFTNC1AI.USE‘0NIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

speed of the meium in V0 ' ('é‘xg =‘1’1-rjsin0. The density of the "donor" beam
for which the amplification of the second beam as a result of "transfer" compensates
for its absorption in the medium; for V0 is equal to

1,:- 41m sin‘ 0/ (Hg; D (8)

All of the relations derived above are also valid for the case of "counter" beams
(Figure 5.8, b) except here the index of refraction is not modulated along the
x-axis. but along the z-axis; movement of the medium must be realized in the same
direction.

Relation of the Idea of Dynamic Holography to the Phenomena of Induced Scattering.
Lasers Based on Various Forms of Induced Scattering. Finally the time has come to
explain what the logical development of the idea of holographic correction has led
us to. For this purpose it is sufficient to compare two facts. First, when in-
vestigating the above-described "transfer" process in the coordinate system which
is stationary with respect to not the interference pattern but the medium, the in-
teracting beams acquire a defined frequency difference as a result of the Doppler
effect. Its magnitude, as is easy to see, is m, which explains why in this coor-
dinate system the interference pattern is shifted at a velocity -V. Secondly. as
follows from (7), the differential amplificaiton coefficient of the radiation with
respect to beam II does not at all depend on its intensity and-is completely deter-
mined by the density of beam I. Therefore when the latter has sufficient power
that the "transfer" process takes place. in its presence not only the specially
formed radiation is subject to application, but also the randomly scattered or
"noise" radiation of proper frequency and direction.

The phenomenon consisting of the fact that on illumination of the proper medium by
a powerful coherent beam amplification of the radiation takes place with frequency
usually somewhat shifted with respect to the initial frequency is, as is known.
called induced scattering of light. A specific amplification mechanism was de-
scribed above connected with variation of the index of refraction as a result of
heating of the medium during absorption of light. This type of induced scattering
is actually known. It was discovered in 1967 and since that time has been called
induced thermal scattering (ITS) [299, 300]. In accordance with the above-pre-
sented calculations, the maximum amplification of the scattered radiation occurs
on a frequency shift with respect to the initial frequency in the antistokes di-
rection (that is, larger) by mo. The ITS threshold on this frequency is defined by

the formula (8); for other frequencies the threshold increases proportionally to
lo sin dlmx/Iu sin 6] - l/2(m + llurt).

The “transfer“ observed in [298] in lithium niobate pertains to the phenomena of
induced scattering on conduction electrons in semiconductors [301]. On the other
hand. all types of induced scattering permit analogous "holographic" interpretation
and are distinguished only by the mechanisms which cause variation of the index of
refraction and shift of the phase lattice with respect to the position of the in-
terference pattern. The reason for the shift almost always is movement of the in-
terference pattern with respect to the medium as a result of the difference in
frequencies of primary and scattered radiation (the source of the "neucleating"
photons with shifted frequency for spontaneously occurring induced scattering which
occurs predominately in the forward and return directions, usually is the scattering

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

on the random dynamic fluctuations of the index of refraction). The fact that for
ITS the frequency of the scattered radiation is shifted with respect to the initial
in the direction opposite to the usual shift direction for induced Handelstam-
Brillouin scattering on hypersonic waves (IMBS) and induced Raman scattering (IRS)

are explained simply by the fact that the nonlinearity parameter a has different
signs in these cases.

Thus, the dynamic holographic correction reduced to the well-known idea of solving
the problem of divergence by constructing radiation converters based on induced
scattering - no other is given. Our corrector on the thermal hologram in the
moving medium is none other than the ITS amplifier with frequency shift compensated

as a result of the Doppler effect. Supplementing this amplifier by feedback - a
resonator - obviously we can construct the analogous laser.

For ITS, the frequency shift is so small that it actually is easy to compensate,
shiftingthelnedium: according to the estimates of [297] if in the diagram in Figure
5.8, a the medium is a liquid of the type of an organic solvent, the required speed
of its movement is a total of ~10 cm/sec. If the shift is compensated, it is
possible to use the part of the initial beam transmitted through the shape: as the
amplified. The first experiments with an amplifier of this type are described in
[302]; the source of primary radiation split into two interacting beams was a
single-mode ruby laser operating in the "spike" mode of free lasing. With a total
lasing pulse duration of ~600 microseconds. the lattice relaxation time was ~100
microseconds, which, in turn, significantly exceeded the time interval between
individual "spikes"; therefore for the extent of the greater part of the pulse the
lattice was in practice quasistationary. The highest energy efficiency of “trans-
fer" was achieved for the initial ratio of the beam intensities of 10:1; after
passage of a liquid moving at a speed of 8 cm/sec, this ratio became equal to 1:3,
and the amplified beam power was about 502 of the total power of the initial beams.

High inertia of the thermal processes permits observation of the phenomenon of non-
steady "transfer" predicted in [303] and consisting in the fact that for short-
term interaction of the beams the energy transfer to the weaker one takes place
even if the medium is stationary. This has the following explanation: when the
unshifted lattice begins to be recorded and the scattered radiation appears, it,

in accordance with (6), leads to additional phase incursions of the initial beams.
As has already been noted. for a beam with lower intensity this incursion turns out
to be larger; as a result, the interference pattern, while the processes of setting
up the thermal lattice are taking place. moves through the medium which causes
"transfer." The direction of the displacement is such that the weak beam is sub-
jected to amplification. As applied to the problems of correction of the wave
fronts this phenomenon was experimentally studied in references [302, 304, 305,335].

Although the papers studying the "transfer" on the thermal lattices turned out to
be highly useful for understanding the possibilities of dynamic holography, it is
not possible now to count on the fact that by using this process we will decrease
the divergence by the radiation of real lasers. Here the mechanism of recording

the lattice itself is unfavorable. The heat release required for its formation has.
in addition to everything else, a negative effect on the optical quality of the
medium. As a result of unavoidable nonuniformity of heating of the medium. varia-
tions of the index of refraction averaged over the lattice period appear; in the
liquids, in addition, light scattering begins on the formed gas bubbles and so on.

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All of this, in turn. leads to an increase in the divergence of the beam itself into
which the energy is “transferred." The effects of this type begin to be manifes-
ted in practice by comparatively small energy levels of the beams [335].

Now let us proceed to other types of induced scattering. For ITS the energy
"transfer" to a weaker beam with the same frequency is achieved without special
difficulty even in the quasistationary mode. In the presence of IHBS and, in
particular, for IRS everything looks somewhat different. The frequency shifts here
are not so small, and the possibility of compensation for them using the Doppler
effect is for a number of reasons for the most part speculative. It is already
sufficient that in the former case the medium should be shifted at the speed of
sound in it, and in the latter case, many times faster. Therefore by using the
given forms of induced scattering having lower thresholds in the majority of media
than ITS, it is possible to construct only lasers and amplifiers of radiation

with shifted frequency. Nevertheless. the "transfer" with splitting of the

initial beam into the donor and amplified beams is realizable and in this case the
required frequency shift of the later anplified beam can be obtained using the same
induCed scattering. When using this system [306] conversion on INBS was obtained
with transfer on the order of 801 of the donor beam power to the amplified beam.

As a result of the conversion, the axial luminous intensity increased by more than 3
orders.

As for the IHBS and IRS lasers, their properties are quite well-known. These lasers
have, of course. many specific peculiarities distinguishing them from standard in-
verted medium lasers. First of all here although the primary radiation frequently
is called pumping radiation as before. theoretically different requirements are
imposed on its coherence - the sources of the pumping of lasers based on induced
scattering usually are other lasers with spectral radiation selection. Complex
phenomena arise as a result of the fact that in the case of induced scattering the
theoretical role is played only by the magnitude of the frequency different Aw,

but not the exact absolute values. Therefore when the density of the converted ra-
diation itself begins to exceed the induced scattering threshold, lasing is
excited on a frequency 26w from the initial frequency. and so on. Finally, as
already been mentioned in § 6.2. with respect to the nature of the interrelation
between the excitation and the generated radiation fields the converters based on
induced scattering more resemble flow lasers than standard lasers with a stationary
medium.

In spite of all their peculiarities, the induced scatteringlasersare, of course,
the nost genuine lasers. The principles of the selection of the type and parame-
ters of the resonators remain the same as in ordinary lasers; the resonator defor-
mations exist exactly the same, including those caused by heating of the medium.
Being the basic, theoretically unavoidable source of heating, the Stokes losses

in the IRS and [H35 lasers are much less than in the ordinary lasers which gives
rise to the prospectiveness of this entire area. At the present time a number of
experimental papers have already been published in which the conversion of the
radiation with the help of Inns and, in particular, IRS. has led to a decrease in
the divergence (a broad bibliography exists. in particular, in [218, 306]). It is

not appropriate to enumerate all of them; let us only mention one interesting area
of research.

In 1973 when studying the properties of the IRS converters [307] and Inns conver-
ters [308] with pumping by the radiation of multimode lasers, it was possible to

116

FOR OFFKJAL.USE13NLY
FOR OFHCIAI USE ONLY

observe significant amplification of narrowly directional light beams without sig—
nificant variation of their spatial structure. The nontrivislness of the situation
consists in the fact that the multimode pumping field is nonuniform and actually
divided into a large number of randomly distributed spots with respect to volume,
the characteristic dimensions of which are defined by the parameters of coherence
and the geometry of the illumination. The theoretical analysis of the conditions

of the effect of a large number of small nonunifornitiesfwas performed in
references [309, 310]. The first purposeful experiment checking this model was
described in [311).

COPYRIGHT; "Nauka" Glavnaya redaktsiya fiziko-matemsticheskoy literstury, 1979

10,845
(280: 1862/ 192

115

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NUCLEAR PHYSICS

UDC 621.386.64
LINEAR INDUCTION ACCELERATORS

Moscow LINEYNYYB INDUKTSIONNYYE USKORITELI in Russian 1978 (signed to press
21 Apr 78) pp 2-10, 264- 2&5

[Annotation, preface and table of contents from book "Linear Induction Acceler-
ators", by Yuriy Petrovich Vakhrushin and Aleksandr lvanovich Anatskiy, Atomizdat.
1730 copies, 268 pages]

[Text] The book presents elements of the theory and engineering of new powerful
relativistic electron beam generators-linear induction accelerators. The work-
ing principle of linear induction accelerators is described. the theory is given
as well as the results of development of the accelerating system. the bean shaping
and transport systems; designs of existing accelerators and those under develop-
ment are examined, and their future is evaluated. Although the book is devoted
to linear induction accelerators. some of the problems that are considered have
wider applications; for example pulsed magnetic reversal of ferromagnetics and
accelerating voltage pulse shaping can be used in the development of pulse trans-
formers in the nanosecond range, and systems for tailoring nanosecond current or
voltage pulses

The book is intended for engineers and scientists engaged in the development and
application of electrophysical facilities; it may also be of use to undergraduate
and graduate students in institutions of higher education that specialize in elec-
trical engineering.

Figures 167, tables 10, references 20b.
Preface

In this book the authors have attempted to present the elements of the theory and
engineering of new powerful relativistic electron beam gnerators--linear induction
accelerators. Interest in this question is due to the ever increasing use of
intense electron beams in science and engineering: in research on controlled nu-
clear fusion, new efficient methods of accelerating charged particles. low—loss
long-range energy transmission. high-power electronics and so on.

Although the book is devoted to linear induction accelerators. some of the problems
dealt with have wider applications. For example. the materials of chapters 2 and

3 may be used in developing pulse transformers for the nanosecond range. and systems
for tailoring nanosecond current or voltage pulses.

116

"Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In preparing the manuscript. the authors used mainly work done with their partici-
pation at the Scientific Research Institute of Electrophysical Apparatus imeni

D. V. Yefremov [NIIEFA] in connection with developing and making linear induction
accelerators for various parameters. In addition. the book uses materials published
in the Soviet and non-Soviet literature, most of them dealing with description

of the construction of linear induction accelerators. The book summarizes the
developments in this field of accelerator technology over the past decade. The
authors hope that the book will attract the attention of workers in science and
technology. which in turn will further the development and use of these effective
generators of intense relativistic electron beams.

Chapters l. 4, 5 and 9 were written by Yu. P. Vakhrushin. chapters 7. 8 and the

appendix were written by A. I. Anatskiy. and chapters 2, 3 and 6 were written jointly
by both authors.

The authors thank the reviewers for constructive comments that were taken into
consideration in preparing the manuscript for print.

Introduction

In Ref. I. devoted to the future of science. Academician H. A. Markov noted that
side by side with the development of high-energy physics is the development of
physics of beams of relatively low energy. but high intensity. These powerful
beams have nearly limitless possibilities for practical application in engineering.
medicine and the national economy. In particular. a broad scientific vista is
opened up by the use of intense relativistic electron beams. This vista covers

the production of plasma with heating to thermonuclear temperatures. new collec-
tive methods of ion acceleration, amplification and generation of electromagnetic
microwave radiation in the optical and x-ray bands. creating high pressures. study-
ing solid-state phase transitions and properties of materials and so on [Ref. 2].
For these purposes. the beams must have the following parameters: electron energy

0.2-306Hev. beam current 103-l0s A, pulse duration 5-500 ns. and beam energy
10 -10 J.

To produce such beams. many laboratories around the world have developed and are
now operating accelerators of intense electron beams [Ref. 3]. But they have limits
on pulse recurrence rate and efficiency. However. as work with intense electron
beams makes the transition from the field of research into the area of industrial
application (for example to produce an ion beam with high average current by using
a collective-field accelerator [Ref. 6], to produce intense x-ray bursts [Ref. 5].
to make a powerful industrial microwave oscillator [Ref. 6, 7] and so on). acceler-
ators become necessary that not only produce electron beams with the required
parameters. but that have high efficiency. and are capable of operating at a pulse
recurrence rate of tens and thousands of hertz. It is also obvious that these
relativistic electron beam generators must be simple to use and reliable in opera-
tion.

These requirements are met in large measure by linear induction accelerators. The
idea of developing such an accelerator was proposed by A. Bouwers as far back as

1923 (Ref. 8]; however, forty years elapsed before practical realization became
feasible as technology reached a level where the necessary accelerating fields

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

could be produced in acceleration of an intense beam of charged particles. The
first accelerators of this type were made in the United States in the early sixties
under the direction of N. Christofilos (Ref. 9] in connection with work on thermo-
nuclear fusion, and in the Soviet Union [Ref. 10] under the direction of V. I.
Veksler in connection with realization of the idea of an effective method of ac-
celeration called "collective-ion acceleration." Fig. 1.1 [photo not reproduced]
shows the U. S. Astron accelerator. and Fig. [.2 [photo not reproduced] shows the
Soviet LIU-3000 accelerator.

Operation of the first accelerators showed that this quite simple method of ac-
celeration enables highly efficient production of relativistic electron beams with
high recurrence rate and with good reliability and repeatability of beam parameters.

Many laboratories around the world are doing intense research on linear induction
accelerators, developing theory and methods of design, improving construction.
This work has given rise to a new field of accelerator technology [Ref. 11-13].
Right now. a considerable number of accelerators with various parameters are in
different stages of development and construction. Some of them are shown in
Table I.l [Ref. 13].

A laboratory of linear induction accelerators was set up at NIIEPA in 1968 for
producing accelerators to meet the requirements of science and industry. The re-
search done at this laboratory has been the basis for this book.

Chapter 1 describes the working principle of the accelerator and defines the limit-
ing ranges of parameters that accelerators of this class can have. Chapter 2 ana-
lyzes problems of design of the ferromagnetic induction system. Although in the
first approximation the induction system can be represented as a series circuit

of single-turn pulse transformers, the very first experiments showed that the theory
that had been developed for pulse transformers of the microsecond range could not
give satisfactory results when applied to the induction system. Therefore a theory
of pulsed magnetic reversal is proposed for calculation. Chapter 2 presents the
fundamentals of this theory as applied to calculation of the induction system.
compares theoretical results with experimental data obtained by studying a large
group of magnetically soft alloys and ferrites at pulse durations of 500, 250 and
150 ns typical of linear induction accelerators. These data enabled selection

of ferromagnetics in relation to the requirements to be met by the accelerator.

In chapter 3 an examination is made of problems of shaping the accelerating voltage
pulse with consideration of the peculiarities of the ferromagnetic induction system,
which are due to the nonlinear law of behavior of the magnetic reversal current
during a pulse, and the necessity of accounting for the time of commutation of

the thyratrons and the dissipative inductances of the accelerating system. This
chapter also describes the shaping arrangements that are most preferable for

linear induction accelerators. including designs that were proposed in the process
of developing the accelerators at the institute [NIIEPA].

In accelerator design. the problem arises of the spatial distribution of the ac-
celerating field. its relation to the dimensions and construction of the induction

system. This is covered in chapter 5, where expressions are derived that relate
the accelerating field to the dimensions of the induction system. and experimental

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kuaxﬂu

.: oucouuaam

.3552 an 35:09;

.nononuconwa cu nzbso mu oeuauoao auauam: auuduuam ozu nous: an nouoauuan 0£u mo 03Hu> 0:8:

capaauoumn<

n.o

NV

cm
a

O”

AC
on

any
00
on
n:
ma
A3

uooxmoaasa
.ouuuan mo

hucoavoum

con own nn.o
on coon n
On 00“ n.o
ooog
In con ~.o
Annualwauuv
ou coon N
A88
cu ooo~ van
we con _n~.e
com com N.<
com cmn on
cn~ cow Am.~vn
can own n.n

a: .unra <
uaHu no .uzwnuau
cowumuan Econ

 

uncuunanuuu< couuuavcm yucca;

~.H mAn<H

«mm:
.vaumauawa

.-

umm:
.3bunoz

«mm:
.>ox.uagx

1mm:
.zouwox

ammp
.oupsn

.<.m.=
.aouoxnon

.<.m.=
.ouoahu>«q

:
“mm:
.dcﬁﬂa

I<OmOD
.ouoauo>«a

ouuw
wcwvuaam

 

#:0annn.OI=HA
«*000nxnlbua

«¢om\m.OI=HA

:onuuuun nanoam
heuuuoauoom down
suave“ unocwa conulcouu

vuaawm

neuooﬁcu <¢m
AcoHuuauun:Ouou nauuuv

nouuoncu couuu<
«conwxonlong

«aooonlang
Acouuuauumzooou anemonv

Snow?“ .3an

nauanuauuu<

 

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and theoretical results are given that were found in the development of plans for
making such a system worked out at NIIEFA. In particular. data on the resistive
accelerating tube can be used in developing not only linear induction accelerators.
but powerful low-inductance resistors as well.

The reliable operation of a high-current accelerator in general. and of linear
induction accelerators in particular would be impossible without effective solu-
tion of the proelem of containment of the radial dimension of the beam. especially
in frequency operation, since the energy content of the beam is so great that

even relatively small losses could damage the integrity of accelerator components
adjacent to the beam. In some cases. beam quality must meet severe requirements
that can be satisfied only by proper selection of the focusing system. Practice
has shown that an effective focusing system cannot be made apart from the design
of the induction system. Therefore. chapter 5 covers containment of an intense
beam within given dimensions. and gives data on the structure of powerful elec-
tron beams. In the process of research, considerable experience has been acquired
in the construction and experimental investigation of linear induction accelerators.
These topics are covered in chapter 6. In writing this chapter. materials were
used that were obtained in developing Soviet accelerators in the laboratories of
our nation, and also materials published elsewhere. Some of the proposals that
have been made during work on the development of linear induction accelerators

can be used in other areas of accelerator and pulse technology. of interest in
this regard is a design for a pulse transformer that can transmit very short voltage
pulse fronts. And the data from experimental studies of the operation of linear
induction accelerators will no doubt be of interest to engineers involved in de-
veloping and using not only linear induction accelerators, but other accelerators
of intense relativistic electron beams.

Chapter 7 gives information on the system of accelerator control. which is of
interest to engineers who design and use high-current accelerators.

Chapter 8 gathers together the material that has been published on the construc-
tion and experimental study of different varieties of linear induction accelerators.
In particular. a design is given of a linear induction accelerator in which the
magnetic reversal current is commutated by the relativistic electron beam itself.
The accelerator designs described in this chapter have not yet come into extensive
use, but future widespread use of some of them cannot be ruled out.

Chapter 9 examines the future of induction accelerators. 0n the basis of this
material in combination with published data on analysis of the paths of develop-
ment of science and technology. possible fields of application of linear induction
accelerators in the near future are suggested.

The appendix presents the characteristics of magnetic reversal of the most widely
used magnetically soft materials. and describes the conditions under which they
were found.

It should be pointed out that the book does not reflect the technological experience
of developments in this area. although the production of industrial facilities

of the linear induction accelerator type has necessitated the mastery of new tech-
niques for making the major components of the accelerator. In particular. a tech-
nique has been developed for winding and annealing large-size cores from tape with

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thickness of 10 um. Special facilities have been developed for winding cores with
two tapes.

3.

5.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

REFERENCES

Markov. H. A., "The Future of Science (Coming Generations of Elementary Parti-
cle Accelerators)", USPEKHI PIZICHBSKIKH NAUK, Vol 111, No 4. 1973, p 719.

Bogdankevich, L. S., Rukhadze, A. A., "Problems of Intense Relativistic Elec-
tron Beams. (Report to a Scientific Session of the Department of General
Physics and Astronomy and the Department of Nuclear Physics of the USSR Acadely
of Sciences)", USPEKHI PIZICRESKIKH NAUR, Vol 107, No 2, 1972, p 327.

Vallis, 6., Zauer, D., Zyunder, D., Rosinskiy, S. Ye., Rukhadze, A. A., Ruth-
lin, V. 6., "Injection of Intense Relativistic Electron Beams into Plasma and
Gas", USPEKHI FIZICHBSKIKH NAUK. Vol 113, No 3. 1975, p #35.

Chuvilo, I. V., Kapchinskiy, I. M., Roshksrev, D. T. et a1., "High-Current
Collective-Ion Accelerator", ATOHNAYA ENERGIYA, Vol 37, No 3, 1976, p 223.

Isukerman, V., Tarasova, L., Lobov, 8., "New X-Ray Sources", USPEKHI FIZICHBSKIKH
NAUK, Vol 103, No 2, 1971. p 319.

Kapitaa, P. L., "Elektronika hol'shikh noshchnostey" [High-Power Electronics.
Collected Papers], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo AN SSSR, 1962.

Nation. J., Gardner, C. "Experimental Study of Microwave Emission of an Intense
Relativistic Electron Beam", ATOMNAIA TBKHMIKA ZA RUBEZHOH, No 12, 1971, p 23.

Bouwers. A., "Elektrische Hachstspannungen", Berlin, 1939. p 83.

Christofilos, N. 8., Hester, R. E., Lamb. W. A. S. et a1., "High-Current Linear
Induction Accelerator for Electrons", REV. SCIENT. INSTRUH., Vol 35, No 7,
1966. p 886.

Anatskiy, A. 1., Bogdanov, 0. 8.. Bukayev, P. V., Vakhrushin. Yu. P. et al.,
"Linear Induction Accelerator". ATOMNAYA ENERGIYA, Vol 21, No 6, 1966. p 439.

Vakhrushin, Yu. P., "State and Prospects for Development of Linear Induction
Accelerators" in: "Razrabotka i prakticheskoye primeneniye elektronnykh
uskoriteley. Tezisy dokladov vsesoyuznoy konferentsii (5-7 sentyabrya 1972 3.,
Tomsk)" [Development and Practical Application of Electron Accelerators. Ab-
stracts of the All-Union Conference (5-7 Sep 72, Tomsk)]. Tomsk, Izdatel'stvo
Tomskogo universiteta, 1972, p 37.

Vakhrushin. Yu. P., Matora. I. H.. "Linear Induction Accelerators-~New Gener-
ators of Intense Relativistic Electron Beams", USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK.
Vol 110, No l, 1973, p 115.

Vakhrushin, Yu. P., "Sil'notochnyye lineynyye induktsionnyye uakoriteli (LIU)
s ferromagnitnoy induktsionnoy aistemoy" [High-Current Linear Induction

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Acceleratc's (LIA) with Ferromagnetic Induction System]. Preprint NIIEPA.
V-OZAA. Leningrad. 1975.

Contents

Preface
Introduction
References

Chapter 1: HORKINC PRINCIPLE AND PARAMETERS OF LINEAR INDUCTION ACCELERATORS
1.1. Working principle
1.2. Parameters of linear induction accelerators
References
Chapter 2: PULSED MAGNETIC REVERSAL OF THE PERROMAGNETIC INDUCTION SYSTEM
2.1. Theory of pulsed magnetic reversal
2.2. Characteristics of pulsed magnetic reversal of magnetically soft
alloys
2.3. Characteristics of pulsed magnetic reversal of magnetically soft
ferrLtes
2.6. Efficiency of the induction system and selection of ferromagnetic
References
Chapter 3: SHAPING THE ACCELERATING VOLTAGE PULSE
3.1. Equivalent circuit of accelerating system
3.2. Relation between electromagnetic and structural parameters of the
induction system
3.3. Peculiarities of the pulse system
3.6. Transformation of accelerating voltage pulse shape
References
Chapter A: SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF ACCELERATING FIELD
4.1. Electric eddy field in system with sectionalized accelerator tube
4.2. Electric fields in induction system with resistive accelerator tube
References
Chapter 5: FOCUSING AND STRUCTURE OF RELATIVISTIC ELECTRON BEAM
S.l. Peculiarities of electron beam accelerated in linear induction
accelerator
5.2. Focusing the electron beam by a longitudinal magnetic field
when the cathode is shielded
5.3. Structure of non-laminar electron beam when the cathode is
shielded
5.6. Structure of non-laminar electron beam when the cathode is
unshielded
References
Chapter 6: CONSTRUCTION OF LINEAR INDUCTION ACCELERATORS AND SOME EXPERI-
MENTAL RESULTS
6.1. Major characteristics of operating linear induction accelerators
and those under construction
6.2. The accelerating module
6.3. Electron source and beam transport system .
6.6. Some experimental results obtained on accelerators
References
Chapter 7: PARTICULARS OP THE CONTROL SYSTEM
References

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pale

10
11
11
16
19
20
20

37

68
53
59
62
62

66
78
95
101
104
104
113
120
121

121
122
129

135
140

153

163
155
167
178
188
192
199
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 8: VARIETIES 0P LINEAR INDUCTION ACCELERATORS
8.1. Accelerators with ferromagnetic cores in the accelerating system
8.2. Accelerators without ferromagnetic cores in the accelerating

component

References

Chapter 9: THE FUTURE OF LINEAR INDUCTION ACCELERATORS

References

Appendix. Characteristics of magnetically soft materials

COPYRIGHT: Atomizdat. 1978

6610
cso: 1862/219

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.386.6G9+539.l72.2

INTENSB STEADY-STATE ELECTRON BEAMS: EXTRACTION INTO THE ATMOSPHERE AND INVESTI-
GATION

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEMII NAUK SSSR: ERERGBTIKA I TRANSPORT in Russian No 3.
Hay-Jun 81 pp 3-13

(Article by V. H. Iyevlew and A. S. Koroteyev]

[Text] An intense concentrated steady-state electron beam in the atmosphere or

in dense media can be used to solve a number of scientific and engineering problems
such as creating highly efficient plasma generators for studying magnetogasdynamic
processes and heat exchange at high temperatures and for simulating working pro-
cesses in plasma power facilities. high-speed drilling and cutting. electron-beam
welding in the atmosphere, realization of some promising plasma-chemical processes

[Ref. 1, 2] and so on.

 

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the facility: l--working part; 2--system of electron
beam extraction; 3-housing of acceleration tube; 4-saa feeder; S--electron gun
control tank; 6--high-voltage cable; 7--source of high voltage

The problem of getting such beams has been reduced primarily to solution of the
following major problems: development of high-intensity steady-state electron
accelerators, methods of testing and handling them. transportation of the high-
intensity electron beam from vacuum to a region at atmospheric pressure.

The following problems have been of fundamental importance:

126

FOR'0FFK]AI.US£(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Assurance of stability of the transported beam. During motion of a high-current
electron beam there is the danger of arisal of various kinds of instabilities due
to energy exchange between the beam and the plasma that arises on its path.

2. Choosing and implementing a method of electron been focusing that ensures high
accuracy and stability of the beam guide with confinement of the beam on the path
and prevention of electrons from reaching elements of the structure.

3. Minimizing energy losses during beam transportation. and at the same time making
compact and economic systems for bringing the beam from vacuum to a region at atmos-
pheric pressure.

The satisfaction of these conditions in turn has required solution of the problea
of the most effective gasdynamic flow part of the system of electron beam trans-
portation through a system of lock chambers and development of high-efficiency
magnet systems for controlling and stabilizing the electron beam with specially
selected field configuration.

A schematic diagram of a facility for producing a concentrated electron beam in
atmosphere is shown in Fig. 1. This facility includes: a high-voltage transformer
made in a common module with a rectifier; an extensible electron tube; a system

for beam transportation from vacuum into the atmosphere. Let us consider the major
components of the facility in more detail.

High-Current Electron Accelerator. The direct-action high-current electron accel-
erator with extensible tube operates in the continuous state with rated power of

up to 5 MR and energy of accelerated particles up to 500 keV. The high-voltage
source is a transformer-rectifier module that consists of a three-phase high-voltage
transformer and rectifier cells made up of semiconductor diodes shunted by a me-
chanical gating device. Following the transformer-rectifier. the voltage goes
through a high-voltage cable to the extensible electron tube. To reduce overall
dimensions. the housing of the high-voltage source. the electron-gun control tank,
the housing of the acceleration tube and the feeder that connects the control tank
and the tube housing are filled with sulfur hexafluoride (insulating gas) that

has high electrical strength. The acceleration tube is made on the basis of an
evacuated cermet envelope with spaced accelerating electrodes; an indirectly heated
lanthanum hexaboride cathode is used. The accelerator is described in detail in
Ref. 3, 4.

By the time our work began. the maximum power of steady-state electron accelerators
had reached 20 kw.

Increasing the power level required not only the creation of a new class of steady-
state electron accelerators with appreciably higher parameters, but also a method
of handling them and the corresponding test equipment. The first part of the state-
ment needs no explanation. The essence of the second part is to determine where

the electron beam is to settle in developing high-power accelerators, what the
target should be like to be capable on the one hand of receiving the power of the
electron beam for a long time. and consequently without being destroyed, while

on the other hand it does not affect the operation of the accelerator itself. Such
difficulties have not come up in the operation of accelerators with power of several

125

FORtOFFﬂﬂAl.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

k". or even a few tens of RR because following the accelerator the beam could be
distributed by scanning systems developed especially for these purposes over a
surface of the separating membrane between the zone of acceleration and the atmos-
phere such that it could be cooled from energy release as a consequence of inter-
action of the electron beam with the material of the output diaphragm. Then after
the beam had been coupled out into the atmosphere it could either strike a target
or simply relax in the atmosphere without having any effect on the operation of
the accelerator.

The density of energy release per unit of surface of the diaphargm through which
the electron beam passes is

(:3 AeodN/E-s.

Here Ac are the losses of energy in the material referred to the unit mass mean
free path. p and d are the density and thickness of the diaphragm material. N is
electron beam power, and S is the cross sectional area of the electron beam.

619-217

II

[M 4
I3
[2
II

 

Fig. 2

This quantity must be less than qcoolnthe heat flux density that must be removed
by the coolant. Since the quantity S is limited by strength considerations. the
power of the beam that can be transported through the diaphragm is limited as well.
Estimates show that the process of extraction through the diaphragm becomes practi-
cally unrealistic at a beam power of more than 100 kw.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A second possible variant is to let the beam settle on a target in vacuum after
distribution over a surface such that the density of the thermal action can be
offset by intense cooling. 1. e. over a surface that corresponds to the condition
S>qu (q is the density of the heat flux from the beam to the target).

However. when a target is bombarded by an intense electron beam. considerable x-ray
and ultraviolet emission arises. affecting the electric strength of the accelerating
gap and structural elements in the electron accelerator. and processes near the
cathode. and thus makes the operation of the accelerator during tests different

from its operation in routine use. which is of course inadmissible.

Pig. 2 shows a version of a target that is free of these deficiencies. The target
is a component part of a stand that consists of high-current steady-state electron
accelerator 8 that is to be modified. its power supply 10. working chamber 3. magnet
systems 7 and II and vacuum system 14. The working channel is equipped with upper
cover I cooled by water 2. and with side walls, and has optical observation tubes
and provisions for motion picture recording 4 with special protection. The dimen-
sions of the working chamber permit accommodation of various sensors of the measure-
ment system and will withstand reception of electron beams with power of up to
10.000 k". The electron beam enters the channel through an aperture in bottom
cover 6. Acceleration tube 9 and the entire channel for beam transport in the
chamber are in a longitudinal magnetic field. The magnetic system terminates in
solenoid 7. which together with the system of magnetic electrodes 5 and 6 that
protect the working space from the magnetic field sets up an axial-radial magnetic
field in the beam transit region at the inlet to the chamber. Interaction of the
electrons with this field causes expansion of the beam. and consequently reduces

the density of the heat flux incident on the reception cover of the target chamber.
Magnet systems 7, 11 can change the diameter of the surface exposed to the electron
beam over a wide range (from 2 cm to 1.5 cm).

The gas released from heated and electron-bombarded surfaces is evacuated from
working chamber 3 by a diffusion pump. Even after an experiment of only a few
seconds duration under conditions with high beam power, the pressure in the chamber
rises from the initial ~10" Pa to (5-10) 10" Pa. which is much higher than the
.permissible press-r: fur uulmal operation of the acceleration tube. Tn prevent
the pressure from increasing in the acceleration tube as well. it is separated
from the working chamber by prechamber 13 and molecular overflow tube 12 located
on the axis of rotating solenoid 7. The gas leaking into the prechamber is evacu-
ated. which enables maintenance of a working pressure close to 10" Pa steadily

in the acceleration tube. The lower pressure also acts as a shield (except for

a small cavity in the molecular overflow tube) against bremsstrahlung and ultra-
violet radiation. This target enabled us to develop a high-current electron ac-
celerator for a power of up to S H".

System for Coupling the Electron Beam out of Vacuum Into a High-Pressure Zone.

A system of transfer chambers was used for extraction of high-intensity concen-
trated electron beams. w. E. Pauli was the first to develop a system of dynamic
pressure stages consisting of an intermediate chamber and two stages designed for
extracting a beam with size measured in fractions of a millimeter [Ref. 5]. This
system was subsequently developed and improved by s. T. Sinitsyn and A. H. Trokhan,
who suggested substituting a cryogenic system for the pump evacuation system for
diagnostic lowbcurrent electron beams [Ref. 6]. The devices considered in all

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cases were for coupling out low—current electron beams of small diameter (less
than a millimeter), and as a rule into a region at lower than atmospheric pressure.

Calculation of the trajectory of motion of electrons with consideration of energy
release caused by ionization losses and scattering has shown that beam transit
through transfer chambers requires openings between stages of several millimeters
(~6-8 mm). In the classical system of dynamic pressure stages (sequential transfer
chambers with evacuation), maintaining operability of the stages with deep vacuum
when the openings are of these dimensions requires a large number of vacuum units.

The entire system of transfer chambers has

the following appearance. The gas (see Fig. 3)
from the working chamber. which may have pres-
sure even higher than atmospheric. goes through
a nozzle into the first lock and is ejected

into the atmosphere under the action of excess
pressure (about 5-10" Pa). The gas is evacuated
from thesecond stage by a supersonic gas ejector
that brings the pressure in the stage to about
10' Pa. Between the second and third stages

is the gasdynamic gate-~a transverse supersonic
steam nozzle. The supersonic jet of super-
heated steam will not pass the overflowing

gas from the second stage to the third. and
maintains the operation of the vacuum stages
constant regardless of external conditions.

The steam condenses (or more precisely it de-
sublimes) on the walls of the chamber of the
third stage. which are cooled by liquid nitrogen.
The pressure in the stage is maintained at a
level of 10-100 Pa. The next three stages.

   

Fig. 3. Transfer chamber system: Fig. 4. Initial section of under-
l--intake pipe; 2. 3. 6. 8. 9. expanded jet: l-free boundary of
lO--transfer chambers; 4--steam jet; 2--hanging shock; 3-centra1
nozzle; 5--vacuun valve; 7--de- shock (Mach disk); low-reflected
Sublimator-cooler; 11--focusing shock
solenoid
128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

like the third stage, are cryogenic pumps cooled by liquid nitrogen that are con—
nected in addition to a vacuum exhaust system with relatively low productivity
for expelling only the uncondensed gas that enters the stage along with the steam.

Between the working section and the first transfer chamber is the supersonic nozzle
and an adapter for intake of the gas leaking into the first lock (see Fig. 3).
Proper selection of the place of installation of this intake. as well as of the
intake into the second transfer chamber. considerably reduces overall dimensions

and the energy inputs to the transfer chambers. The fact is that two flow regions
are formed on the initial section of an underexpanded jet (Pig. 6): I-a central
region where flow is independent of ambient pressure. and corresponds to discharge
of the supersonic jet into vacuum from a tapered nozzle, and II--a peripheral region
(compressed gas flow region). When the degree of underexpansion is increased beyond
four. ten percent or less (depending on the degree of underexpansion) of the entire
flowrate of the gas passing through the critical cross section of the nozzle flows
through the cross section situated in front of the Mach disk in the central region
(see Fig. 4). Therefore. in order to reduce the amount of gas flowing to subse-
quent locks. to reduce energy lossesof the electron beam and to reduce the overall
pressure of the gas entering the reducer pipe. the intake of this pipe is located

in the central zone of the underexpanded jet. The installation of fast-acting
remote—controlled vacuum valve 5 prevents atmospheric air from entering the third
transfer chamber during preparation of the system for testing. or inleakage of

steam as the steam nozzle is being brought up to working parameters.

 

0 II M

Fig. 5. Diagram of system for measurements and for controlling the beam position:
l--nozzle washers; 2--sectoral sensor; 3-desublimers; 4--solenoids of the ac-
celeration tube; im-microtarget for tube conditioning; 6--envelopc of the acceler—
ation tube; 7--cathode; 8. l3. la--moving-coil solenoids for adjustment of beam
position; 03-06--precipitation sensors on the tubes of the lock solenoides; H3-H6-—
precipitation sensors in cooler channels; 9--funnel for tube evacuation; lO-sec-
toral sensor; ll--valve of isolating vacuum gate; 12——tubes of the lock solenoids;
l5--control washer; l6--beam pickup sensor

A tracking magnetic field is used for focusing the electron beam. and ensuring
high precision and stability of transport with bean confinement on a given path.
The use of a tracking magnetic field gives high precision and reliability in trans-
porting an electron beam over great distances, increases the electrical strength

of the acceleration channel, and enables variation of the beam diameter on the

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

path. The latter capability results from the fact that the beam is magnetized

on the path, and during its motion the condition Brz- idem is satisfied. In par-
ticular, changing the induction 3 of the magnetic field enables a reduction in
beam diameter d in the throats of the transfer chambers by local intensification
of the field through the addition of focusing solenoids (see Fig. 3).

The magnetic field is set up by specially designed miniature solenoids that sur-
round the electron tube and the entire transportation channel. The system for
coupling out the electron beam is equipped with a system for measurements and for
controlling the beam position (Fig. 5) with provisions for monitoring and correct-
ing the position of the beam during passage along the electron channel of the fa-
cility, which is particularly important because of a relatively long channel of
variable cross section and the possibility that the geometric and magnetic axes

of the system may not coincide. The beam position is corrected by pairwise-connected
deflecting moving-coil solenoids with continuous current control. Beam position

is monitored by sectoral sensors.

A distinguishing feature of the arrangement for checking the coverage of the elec-
tron channel of the facility is the capability for simultaneous observation of

the readings of measurements of current and temperatures on the screen of a cathode-
ray oscilloscope for each of three sets of sensors, which considerably facilitates
correction of beam position with a change in working conditions or after modifica-
tions of the working section. There is also a system for synchronous recording

of major parameters of the beam transit, and accelerator operation with digital
printout of the results.

As has already been pointed cut. electron beam transportation involves the poten-
tial danger of arisal of instabilities due to energy exchange between beam and
plasma. In this connection, consideration should be given in the first instance

to the possibility of development of waves of perturbations of electron concen-
tration in the plasma produced by the beam with phase velocity of the wave approxi-
mately equal to the velocity of the particles in the beam. (This is the reso-
nance condition for energy takeoff.) Analysis shows that the distribution of pres-
sure along the electron beam transportation channel must be chosen to minimize

the extent of the most dangerous zones (from the standpoint of the possibility

of arisal of instabilities). making them coincide with the throats of the transfer
chambers. Stable transportation of the electron beam was ensured by a p"oper1y
chosen law of variation in the pressure and magnetic field along the path.

Some Results of Experiments Hith Concentrated Steady-state Electron Beams. In-
creasingthe range of propagation of a concentrated electron beam.

It should be expected that as an intense concentrated electron beam travels through
the atmosphere. its range will increase considerably over that of the electrons

of low-current beams, since the energy release on the path of the beam should lead
to a rise in temperature and reduction in density of the medium. Another signifi-
cant factor may be the focusing influence of scattering of electrons from the den-

ser (less heated) ambient gas.

As an example, Fig. 6 shows experimental data on the range of propagation of a
concentrated electron beam in the atmosphere. The limits of the beam were deter-
mined by registration of bremsstrahlung.

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 6

The maximum mean free path of an electron in air at pressure of 9.840~ Pa, tem-
perature of 300 K and energy of 200 Rev is approximately 30 cm. It can be seen
from the data of Pig. 6 how the range of an electron been under these same con-
ditions increases as a consequence of heating of the gas and reduction of its den-
sity along the path. Estimates show that the beam density on the path corresponds
to a temperature of the heavy gas component close to 3000 K.

Visual observations of the height of the flare produced by the electron beam agree
satisfactorily with the results given by bremsstrahlung.

An increase in the range of action of a concentrated electron beam has great prac-
tical significance since this makes it realistically usable for such technological
processes as welding and cutting in atmosphere. high-speed drilling and cutting

of rocks.

Energy efficiency of destruction of materials under the action of an
electron beam. The problems of technological utilization of electron beams are
responsible for the great interest in investigation of the particulars of destruc-
tion of materials under the action of concentrated beams. In this article we cannot
go into any detail in discussing the physical and mechanical aspects of this inter-
esting and complicated phenomenon. We will only point out one interesting result

by way of formulation of the problem.

A concentrated electron beam in falling on the surface of a material heats matter
in the zone bounded by the beam dimensions and the depth of penetration of elec-
trons. If the rate of heat release is lower than the rate of energy removal as a
consequence of heat conduction, heating will take place with formation of s hemi-
spherical (or nearly so) molten region. And vice versa, if the rate of energy
release is much greater than the rate of energy removal (which corresponds for
practical purposes to an energy flux density qz 10‘-107 W/cmz), the material is
intensively melted and vaporized and in part is also split off because of the
thermal stresses that arise. Under the action of excess vapor pressure. the prod-
ucts of destruction are expelled from the zone of energy release and, what is ex-
tremely important. the products of expulsion contain matter not only in gaseous
form, but also in the liquid and even the solid phase.

131

FOR OFT!(1A1.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us introduce into consideration the energy equivalent of action defined as
h- q/m, where q is the energy flux density per unit of surface. and m is the mass

flowrate per second of the products of destruction.

As a consequence of the concept presented above. it is to be expected that the
value of this equivalent will in the case of action of an electron beam on matter.
be the lower (other things being equal). the greater is the concentration of energy
in the melting zone. and the higher the electron energy, since this increases the

depth of penetration.

       

m5

In? I I '
a a q. kw/cm2

Fig. 7

Fig. 7 shows experimental values of the energy equivalent of action of an electron
beam that confirm the assumption stated above. Of interest is the fact that the
quantity h is much less than the heat of vaporization. which indicates an appre-
ciable fraction of at least a liquid phase in the products of destruction. From
this we get the practically important recommendation to the effect that it is more
advantageous from the standpoint of energy expenditures to machine a material with
highly concentrated electron fluxes (and preferably at higher energies) that pene-
trate to a certain depth. than for example with high-temperature plasma jets or
laser radiation that act only on the surface of the material being destroyed. Of
particular advantage is modulated action. since the electron beam is more effective
at instants when the channel has been cleared of the vapor of the destruction prod-
ucts. as otherwise a certain amount of beam power is expended on additional heat-
ing of the products of destruction. Experiments have shown that the frequency

of ejection of matter fluctuates from [02 to 105 Hz, depending on beam parameters.
and the way that the material is being machined by this beam.

Propagation of an electron beam in a magnetic field. An experimental
study has been done on the propagation of an electron beam in air in a longitudinal
magnetic field. The results show as expected that a longitudinal magnetic field
reduces beam scattering in the transverse direction. In studying relaxation of

a comparatively low-current beam with power of about 10 kw and energy from 300 keV
to 1 MeV as the magnetic field was varied from 0.7 T to 1.4 T, it was found that
the behavior of beam radius as a function of magnetic induction is close to linear
with dr/dB- -0.35 cm/T at a depth of penetration into matter of pat-0.250 g/cnz.

It was established in the same experiments that the change in beam radius with re-
spect to depth of the target in a constant field B- Ifr is dr/d(px)I-8 cm/g/cmz.

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless. we may speak of so-called channeled propagation of the electron beam
with a considerable degree of arbitrariness even for beams with power of more than
1000 kw, since scattering causes rather appreciable widening of the channel formed
by the beam-heated atmosphere. For example. experimental data on the distribution
of electron concentration in the beam (by registration of bremsstrahlung) show
that the beam expands "faster" than lines of force. This result agrees satisfac-
torily with the theoretical picture of relaxation of an electron beam in a longi-
tudinal magnetic field.

It is also of interest to note that experimental studies of the energy distribution
of electrons over the relaxation zone in a longitudinal magnetic field show that
the electron spectrum increases in hardness along the radius in the direction of
the beam axis.

Experiments on electron beam welding in atmosphere. The extensive appli-
cation and advantages of using electron-beam welding in vacuum are well known,
particularly in welding parts of large thickness. However. the region of appli-
cation of electron-beam welding is limited by the volume of vacuum chambers. and
productivity is determined chiefly by the process of evacuating the chambers. It
is natural that the increasing overall dimensions of welded structures and the
use of materials that do not necessarily require "vacuum shielding" in welding
would bring abOut conditions for intense development of electron-beam welding
methods for use under atmospheric conditions.

The feasibility in principle of realizing this technique is known from research
at the Institute of Electric welding imeni Ye. 0. Paton. the (Gereus) Company in
Rest Germany. Westinghouse in the United States and others.

We did experiments on welding with a concentrated electron beam with power of up

to 50 k" coupled out into the atmosphere with helium shielding using aluminum alloy
specimens moving at a rate of 100-160 m/hr relative to the beam. The conventional
arrangement of argon-jet shielding of the molten bath that is extensively used

in welding is inadvisable when melting metal by an electron beam extracted into

the atmosphere because of the high density of argon that leads to additional losses
of electron energy upon traversing the gas gap and to an increase in beam cross
section. These factors are detrimental to the formation of the molten zone, par-
ticularly at low rates of transportation of the workpieces.

Strength tests of welded seams. metallographic studies of weld structure and mea-
surements of the microhardnesa for three levels of cross sections of seams have

shown that the given technique can be considered quite effective, especially for
welding items of large overall dimensions with great thickness of the components

to be joined.

It has also been established that by proper choice of welding conditions it is
possible to produce high-quality welds (at least for aluminum alloy parts) even
without using special inert-gas shielding of the molten bath. This is done by
changing to increased speeds of transportation of workpieces and to a high level
of energy release. leading to the formation of a weld under conditions of active
vaporization of metal from the surface of the melt. Radiograms of a weld made
at a rate of 160 m/hr without shielding of the bath confirm absence of defects
of the blister and pore type, as well as absence of inclusions in the seam.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Using electron beams to produce high-purity plasma. An investigation

was made of the feasibility of using electron beams to generate plasma streams

of high purity. In studying high-temperature heat exchange. magnetogasdynamics.

and also for various engineering applications. use is made of high—temperature
plasma flows that are produced by heating working fluids, usually in electric-

arc plasmotrons. The working fluid always contains a certain amount of impurity
due to destruction of the electrodes; moreover. due to specific effects inherent

in an electric discharge. the flow is characterized by some pulsation of parameters.
Plasma generators based on the use of electron beams are free of these deficiencies
[Ref. 7]. A diagram of such a plasma generator is shown in Pig. 8. From the elec-

 

Fig. 8

tron source following the system of extraction into a high-pressure zone. the beam.
accelerated to an energy of several tens or hundreds of kev (the required energy

is selected as a function of the density of the medium being heated), is injected
through inlet 6 into working chamber 1 and forms a zone of energy release 2, heat-
ing the gas therein to a high temperature. Gas flows through intake 5 into col-
lector 3. and then through the porous wall into chamber 1. The gas flows radially
in the greater part of the chamber. The heated gas flows out through nozzle 6.

The described system has been successfully used for heating air to temperatures

of several thousand degrees at pressures up to 2 HPa. The heated gas contained

no impurities and showed no fluctuation of parameters. This system should be par-
ticularly effective at a power level of several tens of megawatts and at high pres-
sures.

Conclusions. 1. The authors have demonstrated and realized the feasibility of
selecting a law of change in pressure and magnetic field along a system of transfer
chambers enabling extraction of an electron beam into the atmosphere with low losses
without development of instabilities.

2. The use of several stages with an intake nozzle in the zone of minimum pressure,
replacing air with components that condense or freeze out on cryogenic panels in
combination with a magnetic control system can give small and highly economic sys-
tems for extraction of concentrated electron beam.

3. The mean free path of a concentrated electron beam is greater than that of elec-
trons in low-current beams. This is primarily due to heating of the medium by
energy released on the path.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Scattering of the electron bean in the transverse direction upon relaxation
in the atmosphere is appreciably reduced by an external longitudinal magnetic field.

5. Destruction of materials by highly concentrated electron beams that penetrate
to a certain depth in a material is energetically advantageous.

6. The use of concentrated electron beams enables the realization of new high-
efficiency technological processes and devices. and in particular the implementation
of electron-bean welding at atmospheric pressure. and development of high-efficiency
low-temperature plasma generators.

7. The general recommendations on methods of generating concentrated electron beams
and coupling then out into dense media can be used in solving specific technologi-
cal problems.

REFERENCES

l. Abramyan, Ye. A.. "Outlook for Using Relativistic Electron Beams in Industrial
Technology". VESTNIK AKADEMII NAUK SSSR. No ll. 1979, p 57.

2. Rykalin. N. N.. Zuyev. l. V.. Uglov. A. A.. "Osnovy elektronno-luchevoy obra-
botki materialov" [Principles of Electron-Beam Machining of Materials]. Moscow.
Hashinostroyeniye. 1978. 237 pages.

3. Gaponov. V. A.. "Vypryamitel' na napryazheniye 500 iv 1 tok nagruzki 10 A" [Rec-
tifier for Voltage of 500 kV and Load Current of 10 A]. Novosibirsk. Preprint.
Institute of Nuclear Physics. Siberian Department. USSR Academy of Sciences.
76-11, 1976. 19 pages.

4. Iyevlev. V. H.. Koroteyev. A. 8.. Koba. V. V.. "Experimental Facility for Gener-
ating a Concentrated Beam of Relativistic Electrons in the Atmosphere". IZVESTIYA .

SIBIRSKOGO ODTELENIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. OTDBL TBKHNICHESKIKH NAUK. No 3. 1977.
p 52.

5. Pauli. w. 3.. PHYS. LEITSCNRIFT. Vol 21, No 1. 1920. p ll.

6. Trokhan, A. H.. "Coupling Electron Beams out of Vacuum Into Gas Through a Gas-
Dynamic window", ZNURNAL PRIKLADNOY HEKHANIKI I TEKHNICNESKOY FIZIKI. No 5.
1965. p 108.

7. Koroteyev, A. S.. "Elektrodugovyye plazmotrony" [Electric Arc Plasnotrons].
Noscou. Mashinoatroyeniye. 1980. 176 pages.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "lzvestiya AN SSSR, Bnergetika 1 transport". 1981

6610
cso: 8146/1589

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OPTOELECTRONICS

UDC 621.395
RADIO HOLOGRAPHY AND OPTICAL DATA PROCESSING IN MICROVAVE TECHNOLOGY

Leningrad RADIOGOLOGRAFIYA I OPTICHESKAYA OBRABOTKA INFORMATSII V HIKROVOLNOVOY
TEKHNIKE in Russian 1980 (signed to press 21. Oct 80) pp 2-6. 181-183

[Annotntlom preface and article abstracts from book "Radio Holography and Optical
Data Processing in Microwave Technology", edited by Associate Member of the USSR
Academy of Sciences L. D. Bakhrakh and Candidate of Technical Sciences A. P. Ku-
rochkin. lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", 2150 copies. 184 pages!

[Text] This collection examines questions of the use of holography and optical
data processing in microwave technology: methods and equipment for visualizing
microwave fields and imaging objects; holographic method of determining the param-
eters of antennas in the near zone; problems of constructing acousto-optical devices
for processing radio signals and the peculiarities of operation of such devices;
investigation of correlational optical recognition of cosmic images.

Preface

The papers in this collection cover the following topics: holographic methods

and equipment for visualizing microwave and acoustic fields, and also for producing
images of objects exposed to waves in the microwave range; various aspects of the
holographic method of determining the parameters of microwave antennas in the near
zone; optical processing of signals of antenna arrays; problems of constructing
acousto-optical devices for radio signal processing.

Articles by A. V. Avrorin et a1. and by L. I. Bayda et a1. deal with constructing
high-speed equipment complexes designed for producing microwave and acoustic holo-
grams and images.

The paper by A. S. Klyuchnikov and P. D. Kukharchik investigates a new type of
display for holograms in the millimeter and submillimeter bands--films of various
liquids.

The article by O. V. Bazarskiy and Ya. L. Khlyavich is devoted to analysis of a
generalized criterion for evaluating resolution of radio holograms.

Results of experimental research on correlational optical recognition of cosmic
images are given in the article by A. I. Balabanov et al.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The articles by A. G. Buday et a1. and by Yu. V. Sysoyev are devoted to development
of a holographic method of determining the parameters of antennas in the near zone.

The next group of articles deals with different aspects of optical processing of
signals of antenna arrays and sources of radio emission. Tho theoretical articles
by A. Yu. Grinev et al. are devoted to signal processing algorithms and evaluation
of the parameters of radio-optical antennas of systems of different configurations.

A hybrid opticodigital system for processing signals received from pulsars is pro-
posed and studied by N. A. Yesepkina et al.

The collection concludes with articles by Ye. T. Aksenov et a1. and by s. V. Kulakov
devoted to acousto-optical devices for data processing based on nonlinear acoustic
interaction. and to the investigation of the influence that shock waves and non-
linearity of light modulators have on the parameters of acousto-optical correlators.

The editors hope that the papers included in this collection will attract the
attention of specialists and bring about further improvement and more extensive

practical application of methods of holography and optical data processing in micro-
Have technology.

UDC 778.6:536.6
REAL-TIME LONG-HAVE HOLDGRAPHY

[Abstract of article by Avrorin. A. V., Breytman. B. A., Volkov. Yu. K., Votentsev.
V. N., Gruznov. V. H.. Kopylev. Ye. A., Korshever, I. 1.. Kotlyakov, H. 1., Kuz-
netsov. V. V. and Remel'. I. 6.]

[Text] An investigation is made of questions of developing rapid-action devices
for recording long-wave holograms and reconstructing images in the centimeter band
of radio and acoustic waves. Results that are given from experimental studies

of discrete holographic systems show that the use of certain methods of processing
and digital reconstruction of images gives close to the limit of spatial resolution.
close to a single wavelength. An examination is also made of schemes of setting

up matrix systems for registration of acoustic and microwave holograms. A descrip-
tion is given of a specialized computer system to control multichannel devices

for collecting information and reconstructing images. Hays are pointed out for
increasing the speed of the systems.

UDC 621.396.671
ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT FOR RECORDING AMPLITUDE-PHASE DISTRIBUTIONS 0F ACOUSTIC FIELDS

[Abstract of article by Bayda. L. I. (deceased). Belash, G. P.. Belyayeva. A. 1.,
Kachanov. Ye. I. and Yurkov. Yu. V.[

[Text] An investigation is made of the particulars of construction of measurement
devices that operate under conditions of the near field of acoustic antennas. Dia-
grams are given of electronic measuring devices that process signals with a wide
dynamic range. and an examination is made of the pecuiliarities of their operation

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

and of the sources of errors that limit measurement accuracy. Attention is given

to the development of matching devices for interfacing a measurement device with

a computer to enable machine processing of the measured amplitude-phase distribution
of a near field. Results of experiments are given on obtaining one—dimensional
holograms of different types of antennas. It is shown that the given near-field
measurements have independent significance for analysis of the particulars of an-
tenna characteristics.

UDC 621.396

INTERFERENCE-HOLDGRAPUIC METHODS OF VISUALIZING HICROHAVB FIELDS
[Abstract of article by Klyuchnikov. A. S. and Kukhsrchik, P. D.,]

[Text] An examination is made of a method of visualizing microwave fields in the
millimeter and submillimeter bands by using displays based on thin liquid films.
The proposed displays do not require thermostabilization or sensitization. enable
repeated use of the recording medium. and extend the range of application of micro-
wave holography. Based on the developed display. a technique is proposed for visu-
alizing the spatial polarization structure of diffraction emitters of different

shapes.

UDC 621.382.049.77

RESOLUTION OF RADIO HOLOGRAHS AND HAYS TO IMPROVE IT
[Abstract of article by Bazarskiy. 0. V. and Khlyavich. Ya. L.]

[Text] Based on the theory of statistical solutions. a generalized Rayleigh cri-
terion is constructed that accounts not only for the diffraction limitations of
forming apertures. but also for the signal-to-noise ratio in the image. and the
probability of making the correct decision on the number of resolvable sources.

The conditions of resolution of extended sources are found that ensure both separate
observation and exact reconstruction of dimensions. An analysis is made of the
possibilities for increasing the resolution of forming apertures beyond the classi—
cal Rayleigh limit based on analytical continuation and compression of the spatial

spectrum.

UDC 621.396.671

RECONSTRUCTION OF AN ANTENNA RADIATION PATTERN FRO“ NEAR-FIELD MEASUREMENTS ON
A CYLINDRICAL SURFACE

[Abstract of article by Buday. A. 6.. Bulkin. V. H.. Kolosov. Yu. A.. Kremenetskiy.
S. 0., Kurochkin. A. P. and Litvinov, 0. 5.]

[Text] An examination is made of problems of measuring the near field of an antenna
on the surface of a cylinder. and also realization of an algorithm for converting
the near field to the far field. The authors discuss the results of numerical
modeling of the problem of reconstructing the radiation pattern of an antenna with
large electrical dimensions and low level of side lobes.

138

FOMIOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 62l.396.67.012.12

PROBLEMS OF REALIZING THE RADIO NOLOGRAPNIC METHOD OF DETERMINING ANTENNA RADIATION
PATTERNS

[Abstract of article by Sysoyev, Yu. V.]

[Text] A method is proposed for quantitative evaluation of the required degree

of orthogonalization of channels of correlational measurement systems for the radio
holographic method of determining antenna radiation patterns. The author gives

the results of an experimental study of random errors in measurement by this method.
Capabilities are demonstrated with regard to a graphic program package in FORTRAN
(GRAFOR) for constructing planar projections of antenna radiation patterns.

UDC 621.396.677.b9

PLANAR RADIO-OPTICAL ANTENNA ARRAYS
[Abstract of article by Grinev, A. Yu., Voronin. Ye. N. and Kurochkin. A. P.]

[Text] An examination is made of the energy. accuracy and dispersion character—
istics of linear and planar antenna arrays with coherent-optics signal processing
based on various space-time light moculators. A [design] is proposed for an optical
processor that has a number of advantages (in particular. it eliminates ambiguity
of direction-finding for two-band signal input to the processor). Estimates are
made of the diffraction efficiency of the processor. the influence of the pupil

of the modulator channels. and also the effect of the mutual influence between

them.

UDC 621.396.677.49

NONPLANAR ANTENNA ARRAYS WITH FORMATION OF RECEPTION BEAMS BY METHODS OF COHERENT
OPTICS

[Abstract of article by Grinev. A. Yu. and Voronin, Ye. N.)

[Text] Methods are described for synthesizing coherent-optics processors of non-
planar antenna arrays that operate in the parallel scanning mode. In addition

to the general approach. special cases are examined: piecewise-plane. cylindrical
and annular antenna arrays. An investigation is made of effects that are detrimental
to the pattern-forming properties of the processors. and methods of eliminating

them are pointed out.

UDC 523.86:53b.535

HYBRID OPTICODIGITAL SYSTEM FOR PROCESSING PULSAR SIGNALS

[Abstract of article by Yesepkina. N. A.. Bukharin. N. A.. Kotov. B. A., Kotov.
Yu. A. and Mikhaylov, A. V.]

[Text] The paper gives the results of an experimental study of a pilot model of
an acousto-optical correlator with time integration. It is shown that use of such

139

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a device for processing pulsar signals eliminates the influence of dispersion of
the interstellar medium. and could improve parameters of existing radiometers.
Used as multielement photosensora with storage in the investigated processor were
bit lines of charge-coupled devices and the auxiliary buffer memory of the Blak-
tronika-IOO computer.

UDC 523.84

MEASUREMENT OF THE COORDINATES OF REFERENCE POINTS OF A TERRAIN. AND DETERMINATION
OF SHIFTS IN CLOUD FORMATIONS BY USING AN OPTICAL HETERODYNE CORRELAIOR

[Abstract of article by Balabanov. A. 1., Korbukov. G. Ye.. Feoktistov. A. A. and
Tsvetov, Ye. R.]

[Text] The paper gives the results of experimental studies on the feasibility

of using an optical heterodyne correlator to measure the coordinates of reference
points of a terrain and shifts of cloud formations in satellite photographs of
the earth's surface. It is shown that under condition of preliminary approximate
correlation of geometric distortions, fragments of images of the terrain can be
tied in by correlational recognition with an error much less than the size of an
element of resolution. Shifting of cloud formations is well defined by correla-
tional comparison of images obtained by geostationary satellites with an interval
of 30 minutes.

UDC 536/535.241:621.37l
ACOUSTO-OPTICAL DATA PROCESSING DEVICE BASED ON NONLINEAR ACOUSTIC INTERACTION
[Abstract of article by Aksenov. Ye. T., Yesepkina, N. A. and Shcherbakov, A. 8.]

[Text] An examination is made of the feasibility of developing a new class of
acousto-optical devices that use nonlinear interaction of elastic waves. Results
are given from an experimental study of pilot models of such devices based on lead
molybdate and gallium phosphide crystals that realize displacement, convolution,
correlation and controllable delay of signals. The studies were done on frequencies
of 80-500 MHz, using cw and pulsed signals. With electric power input up to 0.5 w,
the relative efficiency of the device reached several percent.

UDC 621.317.757

INFLUENCE THAT ATTENUATION 0F ELASTIC WAVES HAS ON THE OUTPUT SIGNAL 0? AN ACOUSTO-
OPTICAL DEVICE FOR CORRELATION ANALYSIS

[Abstract of article by Kulakov. S. V.]
[Text] An investigation is made of the influence that attenuation has on signal
shape in an acoustic light modulator. and on the output signal of an acouato-optical

device for correlation analysis. Relations are given for selecting the medium
of acousto-optical interaction with respect to admissible error energy.

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.317.757

INFLUENCE THAT NONLINEARI‘I'Y 0F ACOUSTIC LIGHT MDUIA'I‘ORS HAS 0“ CORRBIATIONAL
PROCESSING OF NARROW-BAND SIGNALS

[Abstract of article by Kulakov, s. V. and Bragina. L. 1’.)

[Text] An investigation is made of nonlinear deterministic models of an accusto-
optical device for correlational processing of narrow-band input signals and
Ramon-[Nat] and Bragg diffraction nodes.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "Hanks", 1980

6610
CSO: 1862/203

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢DFFKJAI.USEZONLY

THREE CHANNEL ELECTRO-OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE COMMUTAIOR

Leningrad PIS'MA V ZRURNAL TBKRNICHESKOY PIZIKI in Russian Vol 7. No 7. 12 Apr 81
(signed to press 18 Mar 81) pp 418-421

[Article by I. G. Voytenko and V. P. Red'ko. Mogilev Department. Institute of
Physics, Academy of Sciences BSSR]

[Text] Devices for commutation of a light beam over individual channels are an
inseparable part of a fiber-optics communication line. Switches based on the elec-
tro-optical effect that have maximum speed and simplicity of design are the most
promising for this purpose. Devices based on striplines are most attractive at

the present time [Ref. 1].

This paper gives the results of an experimental study of an electro-optical commu-
tator that switches light in a waveguide over three independent channels. The
waveguide was made by thermal diffusion of tungsten oxide into a lithium niobate
Y-cut. The diffusant was sputtered by the rf-method in an atmosphere of argon

and oxygen directly from a tungsten oxide target. The thickness of the sputtered
layer was ~200 A. The waveguide was formed for an hour at a temperature of 940°C.
The waveguide could support only the TB mode with effective index of refraction

of ne-2.203l on a wavelength of 0.6328 um. Commutation of light in the waveguide
was accomplished by a system of aluminum electrodes separated by a 5 um gap. Each
pair of electrodes was 0.8 mm long. The electrodes were applied to a planar wave-
guide passing into a stripline S um wide that was interrupted on a 0.8 mm section.
This section was covered by the electrodes. Effective excitation of the stripline
was accomplished by using a horn transition going from 50 to 0.5 an over a length
of 2.5 mm. To reduce losses due to the influence of the metallic electrodes, a
buffer film of $102 2000 A thick was sputtered on the waveguide surface [Ref. 2].
A diagram of the commutator is shown in Fig. 1.

In the absence of a controlling voltage. the light passed freely beneath the elec-
trodes and was introduced into the stripline section. Electrodes l and 2 were

at an angle of 8- 2.2° to the direction of propagation of the light beam. Hith
application of potential difference V to electrodes 1. the index of refraction

of the crystal in the interelectrode gap decreased due to the linear electro-optical
effect, and the light beam was reflected in the plane of the waveguide in the direc-
tion of channel A. Thanks to the symmetry of the device. an analogous effect is
produced for the beam that is deflected by electrodes 2 in the direction of channel
C. The change in the index of refraction under the effect of the electric field

for the TB mode can be calculated from the formula [Ref. 3]

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 1. Diagram of a three-channel waveguide counutator: l. 2, 3-electro-optical
cells; A--non-waveguide region; 5--planar optical waveguide; 6--light bean

' v

where ne is the effective index of refraction of the waveguide mode. r33 is the
electro-optical coefficient. d is the width of the gap between electrodes. An
electric field of opposite polarity was applied to electrodes 3. In this case
a region was induced in the interelectrode gap with elevated index of refraction

and waveguide properties. and the light propagating in the stripline appeared at
the output of channel 8.

The effectiveness of light reflection in a device of this kind depends appreciably
on the angle of incidence of the optical been on the electro-optical cell. Assum-
ing that the distribution of the electric field in the interelectrode gap can be
considered uniform, the critical angle of incidence on the reflecting cell is found
from the relation [Ref. 4]

o.§-ac.w-?'.g¢,,g.) .

For a lithium niobate Y-cut the quantity ne- 2.2031. t3:"30.8‘10-1° cm/V. A voltage
of 46 V is required for total internal reflection through an angle of 2.2° and

d- 5 un. In our experiments. 1001 reflection occurredst a voltage of 50 V. The
discrepancy of the results to all appearances can be attributed to disorientation

of the electric field in the interelectrode gap with the z-axis of the crystal.

To lower the control voltage. it is necessary to reduce the angle of incidence

of the light beam or the width of the gap between electrodes.

1/. ’5
war
u Fig. 2. Switching efficiency as a
function of the amplitude of the

m , controlling voltage (in volts):

3 l-channels A. C; 2--channel B
15
n w :0 n ‘0 .MV

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In devices of this kind the controlling voltage amplitude must be the same to switch
the channels with assurance of equal intensity at the output of each of the channels.
Fig. 2 shows the switching efficiency as a function of the controlling voltage

for channels A and B. It can be seen from the figure that the curves behave approxi-
mately the same in the interval from 23 to 35 V. At a voltage of 27 V the curves
intersect. and the switching efficiency for channels A, B and also for B. C. becomes
equal at 651. Such a mode of commutator operation is the optimum.

One of the main parameters of switches in optical communication lines is the modu-
lation interference at the output of the device. It can be seen from the design

of the device that such interference can arise only in channel 8 when the efficiency
of deflection to the other channels is less than 1002. In this case the magnitude
of the interference is determined by the node of the substrate and by the depth

of penetration of the modulating field into the substrate. when a prism device

is used for coupling out the radiation. the mode of the substrate is weakly coupled
and has practically no effect on operation of the commutator. Under the conditions
of our experiment the interference was calculated by the formula 1013 1/10, and

was ~16 dB. where I is the intensity of the light in relative units at the output
of channel 8 when cell 1 or 2 is switched on. and cell 3 is switched off, and In

is the intensity of the light at the output of channel 3 when cell 3 is switched

on and cells 1 and 2 are switched off. Decoupling between channels was determined
with the conmmtators working in the optimum mode.

REFERENCES

1. Hitsunaga Kazumaso. Hasuda Hasamitsu. Koyama Jiro. 0PT. COHHUN.. Vol 27, No 3,
1978. p 361

2. Masuda, H. and Koyama. J., APPL. 0PT., Vol 16, 1977, p 299‘.

3. Schmidt, R. V., Kaminow. I. P.. APPL. PHYS. LETT., Vol 25, No 8, 1974, p 458.
4. Tsai Chen. 8., Kim Bummmn. IEEE J. QUART. ELECTRON, V01 14. No 7, 1978. p 513.
COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pis'ma v Zhurnal tekhnicheskoy fiziki", 1981

6610
C80: 1862/196 - END -

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY