H”! OFFK’IAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10323
12 February 1982

Translation

SPEECH. EMOTIONS AND PERSONALITY

Ed. by

W. Galunov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION seavuce

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10323

l 2 February 1 982

SPEECH, EMOTIONS AND PERSONALITY

Leningrad RBCH', EMOTSII I LICHNOST' in Russian 1978 (signed to press
19 Jul 78) pp 1-198

[Proceedings and reports of an all-union symposium, 27-28 February
1978, edited by v.1. Galunov, Order of Lenin USSR Academy of Sciences.
Scientific Council on Integrated Problems of Human and Animal physiol-
ogy. and the Combined Scientific Council on the Integrated Problem
”Physical and Technical Acoustics,‘ 500 copies]

CONTENTS

Annotation...”.u...u...occ.on...n...o...-.cc.c..........................¢. 1

Speech, Emotions and Personality: Problem and Prospects
(V. I. QILIIOV).............o...........n.....onaooo.....o..o.o...... 2

The Problem of Classifying hotional States in Light of the Information
Theory of Emotions
(P. v. simov)..ttleosoIOOOOOIOOOOIOIOCCOIOCOOOOOOCIIUOOOIOOOOCQOOO. 11

Linguistic Invariability and Individual Variability
(L. V. Bondarko. V. G. Shchukin)..................................... 16

Extralinguistic Simals and the Properties and States of the Individual
(V. 101. mnemv)“................................................... 22

Using Symmetrical Biologically Active Points to Ibnitor (images in
Human P9"-hophysiological State
(A. S. Abduakhacbv, V. I. Galunov).. 32

Analysis of Voice as a Source of Infomtion on Properties of the
Speaker
(Va 1- Alekseyev. ct alo)os:osssssssope-swoon.«possess-osuccesses-sac 36
The Semntic Space of Ideas Associated With Emotionally (blored

Speech .
(Ye. F. Bazhin. G. A. Krylova). 42

- a - [I - USSR - M FOUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'UK Ufl‘lLIAL UDI‘. Ul‘bl

A Package of ‘Deats To Study Perception of Emotional Speech
(A. v. Beakadatov, et al.)............tll.COO-‘0’..IIIQOCQIQCCOIQIIOC

Analysis of the Variability of the Phlodic (hntours of Speech
(A. Vs Beskada‘ov. Vs Is mmov)...“~..............uuo...no...”

Simificanoe or Prosodic and Spectral Parameters of Spoken Signals
Expressing Different Emotional States
(L. P. nlokhma’ T. c. mma)..UC....IIIIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOCODOO

Information (bntent of the 'riubre Characteristics of Speech
(A. P. Varfolomyev).....oun.non..................................

The Significance of Personal hanings To Pealization of the Physical

Characteristics of a Spoken Statemnt (According to clinical
Observations)

(Ye. N. Vinarskaya, et s1.)..........................................

Speech hoognition System Recognizes Speakers by Voice
(T. K. vintayw.’ at all)..'DOOCOOOOOOOOO.‘IOO'...OODOCOIOOIOOIOIIIIOD

Emotionality of the Personality as Related to Psychophysiological and
Speech (harscteristics

(N. v. vitt’ L! V. L. Bl Yemlayeva-Im8)00000UOOOCOOIOOOOOOOOOCOD

Variability of Speech Tewos
(L. '1'. Vygonnaya)....................................................

Ritual Correlation Between Personal and Speech (harscteristics in an
Emtionally Tense S.‘.tuation

(So So mhgudu. Co Va N1kolayev‘)oosoosssooooossoolossosooososesoeo

Using Speech Quaracteristics To Monitor Emotional State in children
(V. Io Gallium, ct ‘10)0seooosloso.toolsosttlessoososOssossososoossos

Effect of Individual and Emotion-Dependent (Images in Parameters of
the Articulatory Tract on Guaracteristica of the Spoken Signal
(Vs Is CalmOV. at 81.)..............................................

Pormant Frequency as an Index of Voice Individmlity

(V. B. citlin)loI000soeases.Iooomsosesooasoeesesoosaassesses-eases...

Effect of Different Emotional States on Change in the Spectrum of
English Vowels

(Te 60 mmna)snassess.so.no..-eossooooooooeoooseooooassseasons-oases

v

Acoustic Organization of Speech as One of the mans of Its Emotional
Coloration

(A. P. Zhuravlev)....................................................

Using Speech Characteristics To Evaluate Individual Personality
Features
(I. S. Zsmaletdinov, R. B. Bogdashevskiy)............................

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

107

51

56

65

68

7/0

77

89

96

100

103

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Acomtic maracteriatica of the Phonetic Hord in Different lypea of
Emotionally Organized mu

(Ls Vs n‘mmton’ He Vs mm)sesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeoeeeeeeeee

Wnamics of hotional Tension in a Situation Involving an Anticipated
Outcome of kriable Probability

(Se Le zy.1n)eeeeeeseeeeeeeeOeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeo

Perception of Spoken Information on a Noise Background by Listeners
in a State of Sensory Manotony

(He Ne 11.1113. I. "a mohchi‘flﬁim)..o.o..oo.........................

Analysis of the Pmdamntal Tone of Impersonated Speech
(N. P. Kazantseva, et al.)..........................................

Possibility of Studying motionally (blored Speech by the Segsenmtion
hthod

(Ne Ge nwshnaya)eeeeeeeeeeeeeeesseeseeeeeeeeeesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees

Evaluation of Speech by Listeners Experiencing Different States
(Yu. A. K.ty81n)0IOIOIOOOOOOOOOOOCOOIOOI...000.00....OOCCOOIOOOCOOOO

Sore Factors Defining the Accuracy of a Listener's Evaluation of
Emtional States

(1‘. V. Korneva).....................................................

Using the Semantically Contrasting Pairs Bbthod 'Do Evaluate
Professional Qualities of an Actor's Voice
(A. Ne Kmit‘yn. Vs Ie I‘m‘ov)eeesseeeeseeseeeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Determination of Emotional States on the Basis of Semntic and
Temporal Characteristics of Speech
(He Vs Who. 8). Is MM“M¥O)...........”co-o....o-oooo.........

Recognition of Operator State by Masking Guaracteristics of the Spoken
Signal

(Vs Ge ubedev)...........~........o.......o.......-.......oau...o...

A Ibvice hasuring Emotional Animal—Inhibition
(V. Kh. hnerov, et a1.).............................................

Information Content of the Emotional Characteristics of Speech
(Va LI hu‘hch‘m).In.IOOOOIOOOOIOOOOOOOOIICOIOOOOOOOO000......00....

Characteristics of Acoustic Resources for Expressing Emotions in Vocal

Speech, and Some General Aspects of the Problem of the Language of
Emotions

(Vs Pa mmmv)eeseeeeeseseeeeeeeeeeeseeesseeeeseseeeeeeeeesseeseseee

Renate Control of Operator State in (bnnection with the Objectives of
Expert Certification
(V. I. Wmikov. et a1.)............U............I......0.00......00

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Variability of the Averaged Spectrum of Vowel Sounds in Quiet, lbrml
and loud Speech

(A. V. NMDOV).u...-u...--...........o..o.....a.......--o...o...¢...

Possibilities for Evaluating Intensity of a Speaker's Emotional unsion
on the Basis of Ganges in Characteristics of His Speech
(8. L. mem)000.00.0...Io...Ion.0.0.0...CUP-0....IIIIOIIOOIOOIOOIOOO

Some Plovehsrts for Analysis of the State of an Individual on the
Basis of Guaracoeristics of His Speech

(Be [an m.enk°. at ale)ooosso...oosssoesooooosossosssass-son...cocoons!

Sone Characteristics of Emotional Whispered Speech
(8. A. "milky“. at “0,000.0...ODUOOCOIOCOCUDOCOODIIIIICC-0.0.00.0...

(harscteristics of human Speech Behavior in Stressful Conditions
(v. A. Popov. e: a1.)IIIOOOIOOIII....00...OIOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOIOCIO0.0...

‘lhe Role of Verbal Presentation of Material in One hthod of Disposing
the Emotional Gnaracteristics of an Individual

(1. A. Popov‘)ooooooo-ooosoosseosossosooosssooosoooosososoosoasoooossso

Couponents of the Temporal Emotive marsctsristic
(R. K. Poupova)0......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...OOOODOOOOIOIOOIOOOOIOOOIIO.

A lithod of Subjective Analysis of Emotionally Colored Speech
(L. V. sut'yeva)...’0.l|00|..I000......-OII000......000000000.0.0.0...

A bthod for Describing Individual Properties of Voices Buployins
Analysis of Spoken Signal Spectrum and Bands
(v. D. serdyukov).00000000000O... UCOOOIOOOOOOOOOIUQOIOOIODIOIIOIOOOOI.

Analysis of the Variability of Vowel Pornant “position Associated
with mange in Palate Shape
(A. I. hruov. e: ‘10).OOIOOOIOO0...00....IIOOOOOOUIOOIOOOG0.0.0.000...

Son Results of hsearch on Intonationsl (harsctetistics of Principal
Stressed Vowel. Sounds of Emotional Speech

(V. L. Talbkin)no..-......u............ooo..n....oo-oo.ooo..o.......

Analysis of Adaptive hchanism of the Articulatory Organ Oontrol
System
(A. A. Fedomv. at do)...assessoesososooooossoosssooooooeeooooossssoon

An Alprithm for hcognizing Bmtionsl States of Speakers on the Basis
of Stressed Vowel Sounds

(H. V. leov. ct all)0.000000000000000.0.0.0.00...oslsoosssooosooooloo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

158

162

165

169

173

177

181

1810

187

192

194

199

202
FOR 0511C1AL USE‘MVLY

ANNOTATION

This collection contains the abridged texts of reports and communications presented
at the all-union symposium "Speech, Emotions and Personality“ held in Leningrad in
February 1978. The symposium was convened on the initiative of the speech sections
of the USSR Academy of Sciences Scientific Council for Complex Problems of Human
and Animal Physiology and the USSR Academy of Sciences Scientific Cbuncil for the

Complex Problem “Physical and Technical Acoustics." The symposiun's convocation was
elicited by growth in interest toward problems associated with analyzing variability

of spoken communication arising under the influence of the individual features of

the speaker and changes in his emotional state.

Reports dealing with the following directions were discussed at the symposium:

the dependence of speech characteristics on the personality properties of the speaker;

the dependence of vocal manifestations of emotion on the personality characteristics
of the speaker;

simulation of emotional and individual variability of speech.

FOR'OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
I‘Vlt we a swans. we. vs I...

SPEECH, snorxons AN!» PERSONALITY: smears AND PFOSPEC‘I'S
V. I. Galunov

Researchers in linguistics have traditionally been interested only in the first
element of the classical three-element formula: “What is being said?, when is it
being said by?, In what state is it being said?’ However, interest in the two other
aspects of the spoken signal has noticeably increased in recent years. here are
two reasons for this: First, a number of applied problems have arisen associated
with the need for defining the personality and the state of the speaker on the basis
of his spoken signals: second, most experts in spoken comunication have recognized
the inseparability of the three indicated aspects of the spoken signal, and the need
for analyzing the latter, in all the conplexity of this indivisible trinity, even
when confronted by a classical problem which might appear to be siapleuautomatic
recognition of speech. What is meant by indivisible is that as a rule both semantic
information and information about the speaker's individuality and his state are en-
coded by the same parameters of the spoken signal.

This paper examines the complex of problems facing researchers attespting to establish

a relationship between the characteristics of the spoken signal and the speaker's
personality and state.

The motive and Indicative Function of the Speech System

The first problem, of course, is to accurately word the task itself, to realize that
which we wish to find. Let us attenpt to do so by starting with the sufficiently
general scheme of comunication represented in Shannon's well known Scheme (see
Figure 1). In the case of spoken connunication, the information source is said to
be some central cerebral mechanisms shaping the content and structure of a statement,
the encoding unit is the articulatory system that transforrs a statement into acoustic
form through the movements of speech forming organs, the decoding unit is the organ
of hearing, which translates the acoustic signal into a neural code "comprehensible”
to the brain. and the information receiver is once again represented by central
mechanisms responsible for comprehension of the meaning of speech, mechanisms which
extract behaviorally useful information from this code. From the standpoint of en-
suring maximum resistance to interference for the spoken coununication system and
simplicity of the speech decoding system, it would be desirable to make the encoding
system constant--that is, anke the articulatorytracts of all people identical, and
to ensure constancy of these characteristics with respect to time in everyone. Ob-
viously, this is not so in fact. 'lhe parameters of the speech forming system vary

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
within broad limits both from one person to another and in a given person depending
on a number of causes, particularly his psychophysiological and emotional state.
Presence of just this variability alone is enough to bring about individual and
emotional peculiarities in speech. It is clear in this case that within the framework
of the comunication model examined here, in which the main goal of the communication

system is to transmit semantic information, individual and emotional features mani-
fest the-selves only as additional variations in semantic parameters.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. ----- :.-:..~- :7:..‘:_:.':;-' (3)
1:.Muo-umx ' Koau mute ' '—-
3 «Won-“II"ml " ycwg‘mo 1"] ,Kf": 2:31]
Finn-8;; _. —l-l CINIK_ E
:I yctpolrno . ml 9“!!ou
- _ 747 - — (5)
Figure 1
Key:
1. Information source 4. Decoding unit
2. Encoding unit 5. Information receiver
3. Conuunication channel
: Enema-I cpcn
'u h u — -e — ————— -l
\ - -
u-‘c-I-so‘) — - —(—Jl —- — -— (4,
._ .. .- ———- I

 

. . _
I mrouuur ' Koanp nomee ' "—_.
:lmwnpumuu ”i yet no i— l Kam real I
I — --————-—- l '

 

 

_ _._.(§)_l_ _ -(QIL I..- _.

E :nﬂou you“ _ I '

 

ﬂ eunar .

 

 

 

\ ll m m “ ml pumice .
.‘t._..._1'.‘:.-_'_—_—_:T:'-
Figure 2
Key:
1. Environment 4. Comunication channel
2. Information source S. Decoding unit
3. Encoding unit 6. Information receiver
Let us examine a model of greater .xmuunxlly. Following uuhler (i), let us add the
environment to Shannon's communication scheme (see Figure 2). this addition is not
as primitive as might appear at first glance. Besides introducing the “environment,“
we implicitly presuppose isolation, from this environment, some object connected with
the information source, the range of action of which is not reducible exclusively

to the information contained in communications but includes a broader complex of
behavior. The concept of information receiver is broadened in similar fashion as
well. Such broadening permits us to examine communication not only in its technical
and organizational but also its functional plane--that is, to analyze why communica-
tion might occur, given sufficiently general hypotheses concerning the interaction of
the communicating partners between themselves and with the environment. It would be
impossible here to provide a detailed analysis of this system and to examine all
functions of a communication system which may be discerned within the franewprk of
the latter (concerning this topic, see (2-3)). we will examine only three functions
of interest to us from the standpoint of the topic at hand. The main function of a
communication system is to transmit information about the environment. This of course
is the main function, and in Shannon's scheme, in which everything except the ideal
(:hat is, not varying and not having any functions other than coummnication) informa-
tion source and receiver are defined as the environment, this is also the sole function.
The second function is emotive--thc function of transmitting information about the
internal state of the source. The third is the indicative function, indicating the
individuality and the group or social status of the participants of communication.
Clearly within the framework of the topic at hand, we are mainly interested in the
emotive and indicative functions. But we cannot simply ignore the informative func-
tion, since all processes associated with realization of the emotive and indicative
functions proceed on the background of processes supporting this main function.

It should be noted that the two functions of interest to us are supported in three
ways. First, through verbal expressions ("I do not feel well," "I am happy," ”My
name is Ivanov," ”I am your chief" etc.). Second, by nonverbal sounds (laughter,
weeping, groaning etc.). Third, by variation of speech parameters (changes in loud-
ness, in the characteristics of the principal tone, in rhythm and pitch, in the
structure of the statements etc.). He should probably exclude the first way from our
examination right away, since it is fully identifiable as the means for realizing

the informative function, and it may be analyzed successfully within the framework of

the classical methods of linguistics, automatic speech recognition and so on. The
second of these ways is characterized by a rather narrow functional range, and it
would probably elicit only limited interest. Thus our main attention should be con-
centrated on the third way of supporting the emotive and indicative functions; it will
be the main topic of discussion below.

There is one more rather fine distinction between two levels in the support of emotive
and indicative functions. These two levels can be seen more clearly in the emotive
function. The first level is represented by changes in speech parameters that are
realized by the speaker and which yield to his control (practically all such para-
meters can intentionally transmit indications of excitement, calmness, dissatisfaction
and so on). certain situations may require certain style of speech in order to re-
alize the emotive and indicative functions (an "entreating" or "commanding" voice).
The second level is represented by realization of these functions through uncontrol-

lable changes in speech characteristics. clearly these two levels overlap to a
significant extent, but they also possess their separate elements (4). As a rule

the level of controllable manifestations is beyond the interest of researchers

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dealing with applied problems. However, it should be considered that in extreme

conditions a normally controllable system supporting one of the functions may also
go into action automatically.

Thus examination of the communication schemes adopted here leads to a rather narrow
problem: analysis of uncontrollable changes in the structure of spoken communica-
tions supporting the emotive and indicative functions of the communication system.
Returning to the initial scheme, we should make two more remarks of methodological
nature. First, differences in both the coding system (anatomical and physiological
features or changes in the speech forming system) and in the information source itself
(which would basically lead to change in the structure of a statement and not in its
acoustic characteristics) can serve as a source of individual and emotional variv
ability of speech. This allows us to define two pathways for analyzing variability,
ones which may be called biophysical and psycholinguistic. Second. two approaches
to analyzing the relationship of speech to emotional and personality characteristics
are possible. The first boils down to initially analyzing the variability of speech
and subsequently searching for individual and emotional characteristics eliciting
this variability. The second boils down to initially isolating the personality or
emotional characteristics of interest to the researcher and then searching for their
correlates in speech.

The Alphabet of Emotional States

One of the fundamental difficulties the researcher encounters in analysis of the
emotional variability of speech is the absence of a satisfactory theory of emotions.
The researcher in linguistics faces the problem of determining what it is he wishes
to find reflected in a Spoken signal--a problem outside his competency. h purely
pragmatic approach is possible in principle: A list of states and the means of their
formation can be given from without, and then the linguist solves the purely applied
problem. Clearly the research would suffer in the generality of its application.
Nevertheless we could try to draw up a more-general list of states using some parti-
cular conception. One such general and promising conception is P. V. Simonov's
theory (see the present collection). We will examine two other approaches that also
permit us to draw up sensible lists of states.

The first is associated with the well known classification of emotions suggested by
Hundt (5), who characterized states in relation to three sets of properties: positive-
negative. arousal-inhibition, anger-fear. This old conception has recently enjoyed
support among authors using the so-called method of the semantic differential or.

in other words, the method of semantically opposite pairs (6). It has been found
that upon its perception, every stimulus is evaluated on tne basis of a limited
number of affective characteristics. According to Osgood there are three such
characteristics (general evaluation, activeness, strength), ones which are in full
agreement with Hundt's system. He distinguish four independent characteristics.

1) general evaluation ("good-bad”), 2) activeness ("active-passive“). 3) degree of
domination ("suppressive-subordinaLe,” "strong-weak"), 4) degree of predictability
("commonplace-odd," "stable-changeable"). The capability of the sensory system for
determining the values of these characteristics of all stimuli may be called its
evaluation function. In principle we can hypothesize that emotions are a certain
subjective behavioral equivalent of a general evaluation of a life situation in

the given moment, or simply of an evaluation of internal state. In this case we can

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
now draw up the final list of states. Thus in our fourbdimensional model the extreme

states on the individual axes would be as follows, given that the states assume
neutral values on the other axes:

l. Pleasure-repulsion,

2. arousal-inhibition,

3. anger-fear,

4. Interest (attention)-indifference.

This list may be lengthened in due course by considering different combinations of
the values of the evaluation function in relation to all four dimensions.

The second approach to compiling the alphabet of states is for practical purposes

a generalization of the purely pragmatic position in which the list of emotions
subject to analysis is determined by the applied problem facing the researcher.

Is there some way to represent all such problems and correspondingly list all states
that are of interest from a practical point of view? It may be hypothesized that
all emotional states having significance in practical life should be contained in a

dictionary. On this basis we examined a dictionary of the Russian language, and we
wrote down all terms which define emotional state to one degree or another. There

were more than 500 such terms in all. Obviously most of them were synonomous.

An analysis of a thesaurus produced 22 sets of terms defining different states.

Each of these sets could be represented by a most typical and most widely used word:
1. indifference, 2. calmness, 3. concentration, 4. tension, 5. tiredness, 6- anxiety,
7. doubt, 8. embarrassment, 9. excitement, 10. inspiration, 11. frenzy, 12. joy
(pleasure), l3. grief, 14. dispair, 15. anger, l6. fright, l7. shock, 18. depression,
19. aggressiveness, 20. satisfaction. 21. revulsion, 22. melancholy.

As with the list of states obtained by the first method, this list is somewhat ex-
tensive from a practical point of View, but on the other hand it probably covers

all states of interest to the researcher. To conclude, here is an abbreviated list
of emotions which from the author's standpoint represent all states of interest in
the applied aspect: 1. joy, 2. grief, 3. excitement, 4. depression, 5. rage, 6. fear,
7. apathy, 8. the norm.

classification of Personality Characteristics

Given the great amount of confusion about the problem of classifying personality
characteristics, the researcher in linguistics is in a somewhat better position
here than with emotions (perhaps precisely owing to this excessive confusion). First

of all it is clear that a speaker's identification by voice depends on a number of
anatomical and physiological features of the speech forming system of the given
individual, features which are typical of him alone and which make it possible to
distinguish him from all others. Because in this case the matter boils down to
studying just the spoken signal and the means of its generation, the researcher in

linguistics remains within his element. On the other hand it is obvious that the
spoken signal also reflects a number of group characteristics, though once again
associated basically with the anatomical and physiological features of individual

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

groups (based on sex, age and so on). The obvious list of such group characteristics

is not very long, though it would be difficult to imagine a definite procedure by
which it could be compiled.

There is a rather vast literature on the psychology of the personality. Irrespec-
tive of that classification of personality traits which we would decide to adopt,

it would be rather difficult to expect these traits to be reflected in the spoken
signal, except for those associated with emotionality, and even more likely with the

emotional reactivity of the speaker (such as, for example, general activeness,
inpulsiveness, emotional activeness and so on, as defined by Guilford (7)).

Concluding this section, we should note yet another reason why researchers in
linguistics show little interest in a classification of individual personality traits.
The fact is that the principal applied problems associated with analysing the indivi-
dual characteristics of speech are associated with identifying the speaker as such--
that is, with determining which concrete individual uttered a particular passage of
speech (this is true of criminology, systems limiting access to documents and
facilities on the basis of speech patterns, military intelligence and so on (8)).

It is only recently that problems requiring quick testing of group psychological
traits of the personality have come into being.

The Model of Emotional States, and Their Control

One of the principal stages of research on the emotional variability of spoken
signals is selection of a sufficiently convenient experimental model simulating
manifestation of emotional reactions in natural conditions. This choice becanes
necessary when it is practically impossible to record speech accompanying naturally
experienced emotions. An emotional state model should: be based on a broad range
of subjects so as to ensure sufficient statistical significance; ensure acquisition
of the required speech reactions; provide a possibility for obtaining a broad spec-
trum of emotional states; permit current evaluation or control of the state of the
informant.

These requirements are satisfied most simply in the model provided by acting. Of
course, we do need to mention some negative traits of this model right off. First of
allwhen reflected by an actor, all states, even the lost emotional ones, proceed on
the positive background of an actor's inspiration. Owing to this the model would
produce the rest authentic results when positive emotions are involved. Moreover
rather than experiencing an emotion, an actor more than likely simulates some traits
of its manifestation in ordinary life, or he may even use a certain stereotype to
symbolize an emotional state. This makes it difficult to distinguish controllable
from uncontrollable variations in the spoken signal (specifically, they are all con-
trollable for the actor). Whether or not purely specific traits, inherent only to
theatric speech and performing an emotive function, are present in an actor‘s simula-
tion of emotion is not very clear. No such traits have been revealed as yet. The
sensory system of the audience may be influenced by music or color as supplementary
mans for deepening the emotional state simulated by the actor. The model of emo-
tions induced in a hypnotic state is very close to the acting model. Today this is
one of the most promising models. Application of stimuli to specific body points
used in acupuncture may be combined with hypnotic suggestion in order to reinforce
the latter, or this may even be done independently.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I"!!! VI 0 even... vea— en‘s.-

Oonsideration of persistent shifts in emotional states observed in the psychiatric
clinic is a separate direction. Unfortunately this model possesses two significant
shortcomings. First of all it is rather difficult to obtain a broad spectnn of
emotional states from a single patient within a suitable time frame. Second,

side-effects of drugs upon the speech behavior of subjects. ones which are difficult
to control, are practically always present.

Concluding this review of models of emotional states, a little should be said about
so-called "natural“ states. Rather often. researchers studying applied problems

use states arising in situations that are either identical or sufficiently close

to practically inportant ones (for example firing an ejecting seat, experiencing
accelerations in a centrifuge, parachute jumping and so on). When analyzing and
using the results of such studies, we must always remember the intense influence
factors dependent on purely physical accelerations and a nuber of other incidental
factors have on speech production. This influence makes it practically impossible

to use the obtained data beyond the limits of the narrow situation under study, though

in relation to the latter the resulting data are highly significant and most valuable
for practical purposes.

Control of the speaker's state is a separate problem. Here we to look at the nodels
presented above, we would usually find that the state of the speaker is determined
by a purely subjective method by the director, the hypnotist or the psychiatrist.
There is interest in obtaining additional physiological or biochemical data describing
the speaker's state. But unfortunately the data that have been obtained pertain to
only one of the dimensions--"inhibition-arousal." Nonmodal activation of the ascend-
ing ieticular system manifests itself as desynchronization of the EEG. Arousal of
the sympathetic nervous system manifests itself in the 6R, in growth of arterial
pressure, in dilation of the pupils, and in respiratory activity, pulse, muscle

tone and skin temperature. Correspondingly, this same scale correlates with release
of epinephrine and norepinephrine, and it may be tied in with the appropriate bio-
chemical analyses. Unfortunately the other dimensions of emotions are not reflected
by any physiological indicators that have been discovered thus far. Analysis of
electrophysiological indicators at special points of the body may offer certain
promise in this area. In principle, however. we can assert today that the spoken
signal is one of the most informative indicators of emotional state.

No Approaches to Analyzing the Relationship of Speech Parameters to Individual
and Emotional Characteristics'

Going on to the problems of speech. we will return to the two approaches, mentioned
at the beginning of this paper, to seeking relationships between speech parameters
and the individual and emotional characteristics of the speaker. We will examine.
as an example, the relationship between speech and emotional states.

 

"the problems to which we now turn, ones which are associated specifically with
speech. are given a rather cursory examination, and only in the methodological
aspect. since the concrete results of speech research are the object of analysis of
most non-review reports presented at the symposium.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The lirst approach bruins with analysis of atatOJ and changes in the body elicited
by changes in emotional state, and ends with the spoken signal. As was noted in

our discussion of physiological control of states, it is rather difficult to describe
change in biophysical characteristics in the presence of changes in state. This
makes analysis of possible changes in a speech signal much more difficult. however.
we can list a number of rather obvious factors that may influence speech formation.
First of all if emotional states deviate from the norm, we might expect destabiliza-

tion of the generation of spoken messages. At the psycholinguistic level (as defined
above) this should lead to a certain regression (primarily a simplification) of the
structure of statements, to use of simple, habitual syntactic structures that are
easily made automatic. An extreme manifestation of such destabilization might be

the arisal of speech failures, of mistakes in granmmtical and syntactic formulation
of statements. At the biophysical level. destabilization of the mechanism responsible
for controlling speech formations manifests itself as growth in the scatter of the
values of the typical parameters of individual sounds. A shift in the mean values

of these same parameters may in principle be associated with presence of a particular
emotion in the speaker, but an increase in scatter may probably be expected with any
deviation of state from the norm. We can also examine subtler processes influencing
the characteristics of the spoken signal and allowing us to treat, as suspicious,
parameters such as formant width, the frequency of the principal tone and the
characteristics of the melody curve of the principle tone, the relationship between
the high frequency and low frequency parts of the integral spectrum and so on (see
(9))-

The second approach to seeking the relationship between characteristics of the
spoken signal and the speaker's state begins with analysis of the variability ex-
hibited by the parameters of the spoken signal, and ends with revelation of the emo-
tional factors responsible for this variability. That is, in the first stage we
determine the limits for the variability of individual speech parameters, and only
after this do we reveal whether or not this variability is associated with fluctua-
tions in state. This approach is more exotic, and it is hardly ever encountered

in research having a narrow practical orientation, though in principle examples of
its successful use can be cited (10).

All that has been said about analysis of the emotional characteristics of speech may
also be repeated in relation to analysis of the relationship between speech and

individual and personal characteristics.

In conclusion we should point out one more direction of research in which active
work has been done in recent years: analysis of the mechanisms responsible for
perception of emotional and individual characteristics of speech. This research
direction is attracting attention for two reasons. First of all the perception
mechanisms and the corresponding distinguishing characteristics that are revealed
may be used to develop automatic recognition systems. Second, in a number of
practical cases it would be permissible to use auditory experts to determine the
emotional state or personality of the speaker. However, before we can sanction the
use of such experts we would have to learn the possibilities of the human auditory

system.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

8.

10.

CV” ”I‘I‘IDORU ”$3 ”I‘ll.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Buhler. H., “Sprachtheorie,” Jena, 1934.

Jakobson, 11.. "Linguistics and Poetics," in Sebeok, Th. (Editor). "Style in
Language,“ N.-J.. 1963, pp 350-377.

Sebeok, 'I‘h. A., “The Informational Mdel of language,“ in Garvin, P. (Editor),
"Natural Language and the Computer." N.-J., 1963. pp 47-63.

Galunov, V. I., and Tara sov. v. I. , "Natural Manifestations o: Emotional States
and Investigation of the Characteristics of the Spoken Signal," in 'Rech' i
emotsii" [Speech and motions], Leningrad, 1975. pp 55-61.

Vundt, v., "Osnovy fiziologicheskoy paikhologii" [Principles of Physiological
Psychology], St. Petersburg, 1874-1881.

Osgood, Ch., Suci. 6., and Tannenbaun, P., "m Measurement of Meaning,“ Urbana,
1957.

Guilford. J. P., ”Factors and Factors of Personality," PSYCHOL. BULL, Vol 82,
No 5, 1975, pp 802-814.

Beeh, 3., Neuberg, E. P., and Hodge, D. C., “An Asaessmnt of the ll‘echnology of
Automatic Speech Recognition for Military Applications,"IBEE TRANS” ASSP-25,
No 4, 1977, pp 310-321.

ca1unov, V. I., Koval', s. I... and Tanpel', I. 3., ”Effect of Individual and
‘Emotion-Dependent Changes in Parameters of the Articulatory Tract on Character-
istics of the Spoken Signal." in the present collection.

Beskadarov, A. v., and Galunov, V. 1., "Analyus of the Variability of the
Melodic Contours of Speech,“ in the present co1lection.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IKHIOFFNJAL.USE(NHLY

THE PROBLEM OF CLASSIPYING EMOTIONAL STATES IN LIGHT OF
THE INPORHASION THEORY OF BHOTIONS

P. V. Simonov

1. Definition of emoticns as a phenomenon of higher nervous (mental) activity:
According to the information theory of emotions (Simonov, 1964) emotion is an active
state of a system of specialized brain structures stimulating the subject to change
his behavior in the direction of minimizing (weakening, interrupting, preventing)

or maximizing (intensifying, prolonging, repeating) this state. The quality, degree
and sign of an emotion are determined by the need for its satisfaction and the pre-
dicted probability (possibility) of its satisfaction on the basis of inborn and pre-
viously acquired experience. Consideration is given in this case to how well per-
fected the organism's habits are, the energy resources of the organism, and the time
necessary and sufficient to perform adaptive actions.

Information theory is valid in relation to the genesis of all emotional states, in-
cluding the emotional tone of sensations. For example. an evaluation of food as
being pleasant arises only when a hunger stimulus (a need) is integrated with afferen-

tation from the mouth cavity signaling impending satisfaction of this need. To a
sated subject. the same afferentation can elicit the negative emotion of revulsion,
and an avoidance reaction.

The probability of goal attainment (need satisfaction) may be predicted at both the
conscious and the unconscious level, for example through action of the mechanisms of
intuition. In the latter case probabilistic prediction of goal attainment concludes

with an emotional "presentiment" of the closeness of a solution or of the hopelessness
of searching in the given direction.

2. The way emotions differ from other phenomena of higher nervous activity must be
analyzed in connection with the fact that the terms "emotion," "motivation," "drive,"
”instinct” and so on are often used as synonyms. Many authors prefer to refer to
"emotional behavior." "motivational-emotional arousal," 'the emotional-volitional
sphere" and so on. We now adhere to the following working definitions:

Need--selective dependence of living organisms on environmental factors significant
to self-preservation and self-development; a source of activeness of living systems;

the inducement and goal of their behavior in the surrounding world. Three basic
groups of needs can be distinguished in man:

11

FORtOFFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY
cues u...-..-.. -0... an...-

muturial-hiological: for food, clothing and shelter, for self-preservation of the
individual and the species. for perpetuation of the line and so on:

social needs in the strict sense (inasmuch as all human needs are socially mediated)--
that is, the need to belong to a social group, to occupy a certain place within it,

to enjoy the respect of its members, to correspond with ethical standards accepted

by the given commmnity and so on;

needs of the cognitive-creative type, so-called ideal or spiritual needs. satisfaction
of which leads to positive emotions, produced by the process itself of learning about
and transforming the realities surroun{.ng man.

an important objective indicator of the quality of needs is the "goal postponement“
parameter as defined by P. H. Yershov (A. S. Hakarenko's "personal perspectives”).
Satisfaction of material-biological needs (hunger for example) cannot be postponed for
a time of any major length. Satisfaction of social needs is limited to the human life
span. Ideal goals may be attained in the remote future. The individual set of needs
and the hierarchy they assume make up the "core" of the given individual's personality.
its most significant characteristic. It is namely the sphere of needs and the emotions
arising on their basis that make up the "zone of overlap" in which research on brain
activity in the natural sciences makes its most intimate contact with the complex of
humanitarian sciences.

Motivation--a physiological mechanism activating engrams, stored in the memory, of
important objects that are capable of satisfying a need of the organism, as well as
engrams of those actions which are capable of leading to satisfaction. In order that
a motive could be transfbrmed into outwardly realised behavior. real signals heralding
the appearance of target objects must be present. Bngrams themselves may not serve

as the triggering stimuli of behavior; otherwise the subject would be living in a
world of hallucinations and illusions. The mechanisms of motivation promote selec-
tivity of contact with the environment, as dictated by the needs important at the
given moment.

Behavior--a form of a living organism's function which changes the probability of
contact with the object of need satisfaction.

Hill--activity motivated by the needtosurmountan obstacle, by a need that is relative-
ly independent and supplementary to the motive which first initiated a particular
behavior. The inborn “freedom reflex" described by I. P. Pavlov is obviously the
phylogenetic precursor of will. Reactions to “internal interference" (competing
motives for example) and participation of the consciousness, which perceives freedom
as a conscious necessity, are typical of the activity of volitional mechanisms in man.
Deviation from this recognized need is perceived by the subject as 'nonfreedom." and
it activates the mechanisms of volitional effort. will can serve as an indicator of
a need which has held a dominant position in the structure of the given personality
for a long period of time and which determines the choice of actions in a conflict
situation, if any one of the subdominant needs generates an emotion that is stronger
than this dominant need.

Consciousness [soznaniyel--knowledge [snaniye] which an individual can share with
another individual (compare with the words so-chuvstviye [equivalent to 'sym-pathy"),

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
su-pereznivaniye [equivalent to "sharing of. experience"), so—deystviye [equivalent
to "co-operation") and So-trudnichestvo [equivalent to ”ool-laboration"])

forms of higher nervous (mental) activity would best be subdivided into the subcon-

‘ --its rationalistic nature and its
rigid dependence upon tor-er individual and group experience. The superconsciousness

promotes arisal of hypotheses contradicting formerly known hypotheses, while the con-

on a foundation of four basic states: pleasure-revulsion, joy-grief, confidence-

fear. cheerfulness-anger. The specific features of the need impart qualitative
uniqueness to the emotion.

When two or more needs are important simultaneously, each may generate its own emo-
tion depending on the situation and on the probability of satisfaction. In such a
case we arrive at mixed forms of emotions. observed so frequently in real life.

is supposedly incapable of explaining the genesis of states such as "My sadness is
elevating, my sorrow is sweet" rests on a misunderstanding. 'lhesc critics forget
that coexistence of several needs often generates an entire range of emotions, each

(melancholic) type of nervous system has a special relationship to the fear reaction.
the strong, unrestrainable type (choleric) has a special relationship to rage, the

sanguine type is related specifically to positivu emotions, and the phlegmatic type
is not generally prone to tumultuous reactions, though like the former ne tends

potentially toward positive emotions. In distinction from melancholic sadness.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00050R000600030032-8

ova. -.......

ouau
.533 .333 3233
$093 Canon . mono
£352.36...“ .93.: . seesaw
. 093.363 . :o« 9500 . moo—360.322
5.3.30
unusuuumlu 5383.3: 3053.0
00:33:00
«no—:59 ~ anonvuon
tuoono . cons . «no: >0.“ . «no:

1.3358 £9519 named-"om Ammo: 5.3.300
uoonno on» new .3030 a...» noonno 23
ocuaomnuum mcaaonoum uo con—3030.“

.ocuusoludm 55.9.38 9:339 .913qu
30.32. 38oz

 

Aooma .>o:oawm. «couuo< mo ouauaz on» can coauouuaﬂuam

mcuuouuau
. 3:150»
. :Oquoounauammuo

8:303 .35

84500.3 . noduaounm

uooﬁno 0&9 5M3

GOAUOUHUUCH UUUuCOO

DOOGUHODQ

so“:

noduoﬂuuum
mcuuquu
0:» 308nm

coauoauuuamm um

>uﬂﬂdnanoum oz»
we :0.“ 0259.6

«an «0 >uﬁdwnan0um

0.3 .0002 05 no oguqcma: as» :o mains—ammo 25395 uo nodunuauqmmmﬁu

WOWQOHU¢H

Hana—m

m0m00NOCH

uooz on» no

ooauacom:

[4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030032-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

choleric grief always borders on anger, while choleric joy borders on cheerful
aggressiveness, on ardor.

Although the fundamental emotions listed above may arise in the course of satis-
faction of a need belonging to any of the three basic groups, fear is most typical
of the biological needs associated with self-preservation, anger is most typical
of social motivations, and the need for cognition and creativity definitely tends
toward positive emotions.

Concluding this brief outline, it is my hope that the suggested classification of
needs and emotions would be useful to the study of the emotional and personality
characteristics of speech.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l‘vn Use-Lana. 00b Una.-

LINGUISTIC INVARIABILITY AND INDIVIDUAL VRRIABILITY
L. v. Bondarko, V. G. Shchukin

The social nature of language presupposes mandatory presence, invariability and
stability of the units forming a language system. These properties are precisely
what make communication amng people of the same linguistic collective possible,
communication not only at the mment of a concrete act of spoken comnication but
also through the retention and transmission of all intonation in this language.
However, we know that the utterance of language units in speech often fails to satis-
fy any of these requirements: Research on living speech, conducted especially in-
tensively in recent years, has shown that the more the units of analysis are broken
down, the more obvious it becomes that their properties correspond little to the
initial concepts based on the study of that which linguists refer to as a language
system. Changes in a language system in time may be explained mainly by failure to
comply with the principles of mandatory inclusion, invariability and stability.
Naturally the main element within which these principles are violated is the spoken
activity of each individual speaking in the given language.

In this connection we are forced to raise the question as to how realistic is the
specific object of linguistics-"the abstract, homogenous speech collective, all
the members of which speak in the same way and learn the language instantaneously“
((1) , p 100). From a linguistic point of view it would be isportant to determine
precisely what characteristics of individual speech activity cause change in the
language system and what conditions promote such change.

In this connection the idiolect (that is, the individual's system of speech resources)
is to us, on one hand, a realization of the language system inherent to the given
individual and, on the other hand, a cause of change in this system. Of course,

the variability inherent to an idiolect far from always leads to such changes. It
all depends both on the frequency with which a certain deviation is encountered and
on its causes. From the standpoint of the frequency with which it is encountered,

we can refer to four different types of variability:

l. Intra-idiolectic variability.
This type of variability is characterised by presence, in the idiolect, of variants

of linguistic units used occasionally, irregularly, in addition to other variants of
these same units.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TIHR()F3WCJAI.IJSEI(NVLY

2. Inter-idiolectic variability.

This type of variability is characterized by presence, in the idiolect, of regularly

used, stable variants of linguistic units distinguishing this given idiolect from
other idiolects.

3. Group variability.

Group variability comes into existence when the variants of linguistic units common
to the idiolect of representatives of the same group do not agree with the variants
of the same units in the idiolects of representatives of another group. As a rule

this type of variability reflects differences between groups, each of which is homo-

geneous in one regard or another. The homogeneity of such groups may be based on
the territorial factor (identical dialect and similar regional characteristics), the

social factor (social variants), age-related and occupational factors (age-related
characteristics and occupational jargon) and so on.

4. Mass variability.

Mass variability comes into existence when a variant enjoys broad dissemination in
the speech of different strata of the population irrespective of age, occupation,
territorial affiliation and so on.

The frequency itself with which variants are encountered depends on a large number
of factors. Being extralinguistic by nature, these factors generate different forms
of variability. Let us examine some of these factors from the standpoint of their
mutual relationships with the language system and with the types of variability.

The division of the causes of linguistic changes into internal and external, which
we encounter in special studies devoted to this issue ((2), pp 197-313), is not always
justified in research on these causes in application to the idiolect: Realization of
potential changes under the influence of external factors is essentially possible

only in the event that internal factors do not oppose such realization.

The most general and universal factor is the desire for economy of effort in speaking.
This factor should be interpreted broadly, to include not only the tendency to
economize on the energy of pronunciation (3) but also the desire to express identical
or close meaning by single form, the desire to limit the complexity of spoken connmmi-
cations and so on ((2). pp 241-250). This factor operates in the speech of every
speaker, and the extent to which this economy manifests itself is regulated in many
ways by linguistic factors: Thus, the high variability of reduced vowels in modern
Russian is a result of "smoothing"of thecharacteristics of these vowels in unstressed
syllables,of their convergence with the characteristics of “neighboring“ consonants
("stopping short" in the articulatory movements necessary to achieve the “needed"
rank. highness and labilization). Such mowing 18 aproduct of the properties of the
Russian language system, in which only two degrees of highness (open-close) are
functional in relation to unstressed syllables, and the rank of unlabilized vowels

is defined by the hardness-softness of the preceding consonant.

The next group of factors includes those associated either with arisal of new con-

cepts or with the borrowing of words from another language to represent previously
known concepts. They characterize not so much the speech behavior of the speakers

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a we. we 0 .~.~-.. vuh v. s...

(as is the case of the first factor) as the situation in which the speaker may find
himself. The next group is made up of factors associated directly with the personality
of the speaker--his sex, age, social status, education and occupation.

The effect of these factors on the characteristics of the idiolect have been dis-
cussed in sufficient detail in the linguistic literature. It might appear that these

should be called specifically external factors, but even here the limitations imposed
by internal factors on their influence is obvious, as is the influence of these ex-
ternal factors on internal ones.

The territorial affiliation of the individual, which is responsible for arisal of
dialectal deviations in his idiolect, may be characterized as an external factor,

especially if we broaden this concept such that territorial affiliation could also
be taken to mean possible bilingualism, and not just presence of dialectal features.

The phenomena of speech pathology: which doubtlessly influence some characteristics
of the idiolect and which may become widespread, also have special significance.

This factor will be discussed in greater detail a little later.

The list of factors influencing the forms of speech variability is far from exhausted
by those discussed here, inasmuch as our objective is not to systematire the factors
but to systematize speech variability phenomena in relation to language.

Let us now examine the way in which the types of variability are brought about by
these factors.

Intra-idiolectic variability, which we defined as irregular usage of different
variants of linguistic units, is caused by almost all of the factors listed above,
and in this case all we can say is that the influence of these factors varies and
that the factors themselves interact with one another; thus the influence of terri-
torial differences may depend on the sex of the speaker: Women retain dialectal
traits in speech more consistently than do men, who consequently exhibit greater
intra-idiolectal variability: higher education reduces intra-idiolectic variability
associated with territorial affiliation, but it may increase the weight of factors
associated with arisal of new concepts or words, and so on.

Inter-idiolectic variability is caused by the presence, in the given idiolect, of
stable variants of units inherent only to the given idiolect. Arisal of these
stable differences may be associated with axy at the factors.

Group variability, which characterizes not the individual idiolect but a certain
group, is caused primarily by factors such is sex and age, social status and occupa-
tion, territorial affiliation and education.

Mass variability, which for practical purpoues characterizes the majority of the
bearers of the given language (that is, it :2 represented in almost all idiolects),
may be described as the highest stage of speech: we would rightfully expect at this
stage that a phenomenon inherent only to speech would achieve the status of a lin-
guistic phenomenon, and thus restructuring of the language system would occur.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
risal of

armed Social
anceets Sex £92 Status
+ + + (4-)
+ + + +
+ + + +
run urraLaIu. vac. Vl‘...

As was said earlier, the influence of the idiolect on the language system may be
represented as a combination consisting of different types of variability, character-

responsible for this variability. Such a classification may take the form of a

table allowing us to account for participation of different factors in formation of
different types of idiolectic characteristics (see table above).

As we can see. participation of different factors is almost always possible. This
table should be interpreted in two directions: first, by establishing correlations

between different factors, and second, by differentiating the factors in relation to
different levels of language. This can be clarified with examples.

1. Speech pathology, which participates in formation of inter-idiolectic and group
differences, may also stimulate changes in mass speaking styles. Thus pronunciation
of single-focus fricative consonants with a lisp, typical of (ahchiptsovyye) (forceps?)
children and persisting in the pronunciation of adults, may lead to corresponding
changes in mass speaking style, inasmuch as it is supported by both the tendency

for economy of pronunciation effort and the absence of the corresponding functional.

contrast in Russian language. However, it would be difficult to believe that speech
pathology may have a broader influence at the phonetic level, or that it may be

2. Reduction of unstressed vowels in inflections leads to indistinguishabllity of
the grammatical forms of a word. This is a realization of the tendency toward
economy of effort, and it is permitted by the Russian language system, in which
grammatical information on a word may be deduced from the structure of the sentence
in which it is used (4). In anumber of cases however, this phenomenon, which
characterizes the segmental composition of a word, may be the cause of stress

changes penetrating through the idiolect into the language system: The impossibility

of distinguishing between the forms “mom " and " intopn" promotes arisal of
the plural form "mopﬁ" (5).

Systematic description of the idiolect as a language realization and as a source of

change in language presupposes analysis of the influence of different factors both
from the point of view of the frequency of their occurrence (the type of variability)

and from the point of view of their single or multiple influence upon different
levels of the language system.

B IBLIOGRAPHY

l. Labov, U., "The Study of Language in Its Social Context," in ”Novoye v
lingvistike" [Advances in Linguistics]. 7th Edition, Moscow, 1975.

2. ”Obshcheye yazykoznaniye" [General Linguistics), Chapter 111. Language as a
Historically DevelOping Plenomenon, Nauka, Moscow, 1970.

3. Hartine, IL, "Printsip ekonomii v foneticheskikh izmneniyakh. Problemy

diakhronicheskoy fonologii‘ [The Principle of Economy in Phonetic Changes.
Problems of Diachronic Phonology), Moscow, 1962.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bondarko, L. V.. and Vcrbttskaya. 1.. IL, "Phonetic Characteristic: of Un-
stressed Inflections in Modern Russian Language," v. I... No 1, 1973.

Gorbachevich. K. S.. "Phonetic Prerequisites of Some Stress Changes in Modern
Russian Language," V. I... No 6, 1975.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
r00! Urn-luau. use unu

EXTRALINGUIS'I‘IC SIGNALS AND we PMPERTIBS AND STATES OF THE INDIVIDUAL
v. Kh. Manerov

I. Introduction

It is a universally recognized premise that spoken commication is a process in
which resources at the linguistic and extralinguistic levels interact in complex
fashion. But despite the fact that the latter have attracted the attention of
scholars since antiquity, attention has always been focused on symbolic or verbal
oomunication. It was not until our century, and especially in its second half,
that systematic research was started on the extralinguistic resources of coununica-
tion. Today, if we consider only the acoustic extralinguistic signals reflecting
the states and properties of the individual, we can name several hundred papers
devoted to this problem. However, this abundance of publications has not produced a
qualitative change in our understanding of the essence of the phenomena of extra-

linguistic oonmnmication. This is associated with the lack of research generalizing
the numerous but dissociated facts obtained, moreover, by representatives of different

sciences. Exclusions in this aspect are the works of V. I. Galunov and the monograph
by Nosenko (1).

his paper provides a definition of the problem based on ananalysis of both the
results of my own work and published data collected by psychological and psycho-
linguistic studies. I was interested in changes contributed b] the emtions, ex-
pressed intentions and individual characteristics of the speaker to the acoustic and

phonetic structure of a spoken stateuntuchanges which do not themselves lead to
change in the objective and logical content of the statement but produce informa-

tion of another sort: information about the speaking individual (the comnunicator).

0n the other hand I was also interested in how perception of these acoustic phenomena
is affected by the characteristics--the properties and states of the perceiving sub-

ject, the recipient.

An external analysis scheme developed within the framework of the systems approach
to analysis of complex systems was employed. Such a systems approach is close to
optimum in application to extralinguistic communication, since the overall picture
of this conplex, multicomponent phenomenon must be based on a large quantity of

poorly structured, fragmentary data.

22

NR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. The Analysis Scheme.

An example of successful application of the systems approach to social phenomena
can be found in Kagan's work (2). The author suggests the following basic cosponents

of systems analysis: 1. Structural component analysis, 2. functional analysis,
3. historical analysis.

The subsequent discussion will follow this scheme, and the content of the analysis
will be interpreted within the framework of these three dimnsions.

1. Structural Component Analysis

The task of structural component analysis is to reveal the components of the system
and their mutual associations. While linguistic comication occupies the central
and most important place in human comunication in general, extralinguistic acoustic
oomunication. which is facultative in relation to the former, occupies an inter-
mediate position, being in a sense a shell separating the core-~linguistic communica-
tion-~from other forms of conmunication, to include visual, tactile and so on, forming

in their sum total the system of human comnication. Because extralinguistic and
linguistic comunication are relatively independent of one another, this shell can

be isolated as a special system.

let us imagine the siuplest communication situation involving two communicants
alternating their roles as cosmunicator and recipient, and an acoustic signal trans-
mitting the content of the process of comunication in a case where the linguistic
content is fixed or eliminlted.

In principle. component analysis of the system in relation to all three conponents
of this situation is possible. At the level of the conunmicator the analysis must
include all potential forms of information enbodied within the signal, and thus it
must concern itself with the classification of emotional states, expressed intentions
and individual manifestations. However, because little research has been conducted
on these fundamental problems, for the moment this approach would be extremely un-
wieldy and difficult to carry out. A more attractive approach would be to reveal
only those components of the system which, being encoded in the acoustic envelope of
the signal, are perceived and interpreted by recipients with sufficient effective-
ness. The entire inventory of extralinguistic acoustic signals was classified on
the basis of the following criteria: oontrollable--uncontrollable, non-speech--
quasi-speech. regular--situational. mcontrollable and partially controllable
signals include acoustic phenomena that can be classified as emotional non-speech
sounds (groaning, laughter. weeping, sighing and so on). Partially controllable
signals also include the emotional tone of speech. Controllable signals are acoustic
resources for expressing the attitudes, intentions and desires of the speaker, and
descriptive acoustic resources. Non-speech phenomena are those acoustic signals
which do not interfere with speech sounds. These include the emotional sounds men-
tioned above, and the noises produced by the body's physiological functions. Quasi—
speech phenomena pertain to the emotional coloration imparted to the acoustic struc-
ture of speech. The emotional and expressive acoustic phenomena listed above can

be classified as situational phenomena.

23

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
run Uri-luau. use mun

In what way are the extralinguistic signals listed above perceived and identified
by the listener? In the case of emotionally colored speech, experiments performed
with the purpose of identifying such signals can provide a direct answer to this
question. Research conducted by many authors has shown that the principal emotions
(fear, anger, joy, grief) and the state of astonishment can be encoded by acoustic
resources quite adequately. The recipient is also able to determine the intensity
of each of the principal emotions--that is, for example, he is able to make a differ-
entiation between vitality, joy and ecstasy. Thus at this level the system is
discretely continuous: Qualitatively different emotions fall into a discrete
series, and within the limits of each of the members of the series, continuous
change in intensity is possible.

There is a subsequent stage of analysis possible. involving a search for components

at the second level-~that is, inspection of the internal structure of acoustic ex-
pressions of the principal emotions. A highly convenient tool of analysis in this
case is the methods of multidimensional psychological scaling, particularly the method
of the semantic differential. when the data acquired as a result of such inspection
are subjected to factor analysis, we find that the principal emotions form the
foundation of a geometric model with inhibition-arousal serving as the principal
dimension (4).

In terms of their internal structure, these factors are components at the second
level of human perception. Thus fear can assume characteristics such as trembling,
gasping, constrained and plaintive; anger may be dull, sharp or stark, and so on.

It should be noted that second-level components fall within the first-level sub-
system together with weight factors, and the correlations they exhibit are statisti-
cal in nature.

Perception of 25 sounds uttered by actors simulating 25 different states was studied
in experiments with non-speech emotional sounds. It turned out that listeners were
capable of correctly identifying all of the principal emotions by ear (astonishment
and emotionally colored reactions such as pain and suffering). The method of the
semantic differential resulted in factors similar to those obtained for the emotional
coloration of speech. Thus at the level of the recipient, the components of the
system of emotional non-speech sounds and the system of emotional colorations of
speech are highly similar.

The question as to the structural components of the system of expressive acoustic
phenomena has not been studied sufficiently. It is illuminated to some extent in
Tseplitis' book (5), in which the author did of course use different terminology.
However, if we assume that this system is composed of expressions of relationships
such as tenderness. contempt, embarrassment and so on, volitional phenomena such as
orders, requests and complaints, and descriptive phenomena, our experiments con—
cerned with identification of such expressions simulated by an actor provide an
approximate answer to the structure question. He found that the group of listeners
was incapable of correctly and unambiguously determining most of the emotional ex-
pressions contained in standard phrases out of context. Thus tenderness is identi-
fied as pleasure and joy, and an order is perceived as perturbation and anger. Thus
these signals are identified in the terms of emotional expressions.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-Z ONLY

As far as the components of the system of individual colorations of voice are con-
cerned, experimental research conducted by Voier (6) and Galunov by the method of
the semantic differential, applied to the reading of standard phrases, showed that
this system also has a discrete-continuous structure with four or five of the
following discrete qualities (1,6): l) articulatory activeness-passiveness of
the speaker, 2) voice volume and dimensions, 3) timbre, 4) general tone evaluation.

The fifth quality (dimension), which did not appear for all authors, is usually
associated with the pitch of the speaker's voice.

continuous change of the corresponding quality is possible within the limits of
each of these dimensions, and if we assume that the human ear can distinguish seven
gradations in each of the four or five dimensions, an extremely rough estimate of
the number of distinguishible shades of vocal tone would be from several thousand
to 15,000 variants.

However, a person perceiving certain features of a voice is capable of using them to
reconstruct some of the details of the speaker's appearance. Addington's work answers
the question as to what the components of this appearance are. Using different
variants of voice tone during reading. the author obtained the following data by

the method of the semantic differential (7):

Perception of Male Voices Perception of Female voices

1. Appearance (fat, old-- 1. Introversion--communicativeness
lean, young) Sullennees--happiness

2. Passive--active 2. Passiventss--activeness
Depressed--happy 0bedience--aggressiveness

3. Social and physical 3. Nonemotional--emotional
status 4. Polish--vulgarity

4. Peace-loving--cruel Prosperity--poverty

5. General evaluation (bad--good)

The results of our research are contained in (8). Each of the component-factors
breaks down into second-level components, which may have to do with both sound and
personality. Thus the negative evaluation factor is applied to nasal sound, which

is assoeiated in women with "stupidity, homeliness." In men, tension in the voice
is associated with "old age, nervousness, callousness," and so on. It would be

interesting to note that a speaking male is perceived to a greater extent in rela-
tion to his physical attributes, while social characteristics are more important in

the perception of a woman's personality on the basis of her voice.

2. Functional Analysis

Functional analysis presupposes examination of the function of extralinguistic
acoustic resources of communication. In the first phase we analyze the external
function of the system in comparison with other communication resources. R. Yakobson
lists six principal functions of verbal communication: intellectual, expressive,
conative, factual and so on, depending on which element of a text is said to be most
significant. Many of these functions can obviously be performed by extralinguistic
resources: this is especially true of the expressive (emotive in our definition) and
conativc functions.

25

FOR10FFNJAI.USEZONLY
IVA \na nuns. was; so"...

In living spontaneous speech, the functional load is constantly alternated between
linguistic and extralinguistic signs; moreover the informativeness itself of the
latter is situational in nature as well. Thus for example, verbal resources usually
play the dominant role in neutral situations, while in a situation of extreme emo-

tional arousal of the speaker, when he is capable only of uttering unintelligible
sounds, their role is reduced or eliminated.

Shibutani (9) mentions another class of situations in which extralinguistic signals
assume priority. These are situations that standardize verbal resources (for example
at a first meeting). In these cases extralinguistic signals induce real but conceal-
able emotions and attitudes in the communicants, and make a significant contribution
to the ”first impression" phenomenon.

A comparison of the effectiveness of acoustic and nonacoustic extralinguistic signals
(see (10)) would reveal that signals produced by facial expressions have an advantage
over intonational signals in terms of transmitting the attitudes of the communicants.
It cannot be doubted that facial expressions and acoustic resources are inferior to
verbal resources in terms of the accuracy with which the particular emotion is repre-
sented, but they do have their advantages as well. Experiments have demonstrated
their greater resistance to interference in comparison withspoken signals, the
directness of their expression, associated with the limited possibilities for volun-
tary control of signals at this level, and their capability for eliciting emotions,
their ‘contagiousness." This provides the grounds for some researchers to believe
that real attitudes may be expressed in conmmmication only by nonverbal means.

Extralinguistic signals (a smile, an affectionate intonation) are resources of avert-
ing or softening aggressive behavior.

Another important feature of extraiinguistic emotional signals is that they are
a motor expression of internal states, and they create a dynamic picture of the
function of a certain center of activity and ensure a more-sensitive reaction.

In psychology, an external expression of emotions, including an acoustic expression,
is interpreted as an instinctive reaction. Many authors feel that the capability

for perceiving expressions is a phylogenetically confirmed capability, for the
realization of which mastery of linguistic communication is not mandatory.

There are several theories on perception of expressive movements: the inference
theory, the role theory and the empathy theory (see (11)). The last theory, which
belongs to T. Lipps, appears to be most plausible to us in application to this form
of perception. The theory is based on three basic premises:

1. Perception of an emotional expression elicits emotional reactions within the
recipient himself.

2. These reactions arise owing to realization of the need for motor imitation of
another's expressive movements.

3. The emotional reaction of the recipient is ascribed by the latter to the subject
being perceived.

26

INJR‘OFTWCJAL.USEZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

These premises of Lipps' theory make plausible the suggestion that the actual emo-
tional state and emotionality of the recipient have an influence on the way extra-
linguistic signals are perceived. Several studies taking this direction have been
published in the literature, and the overall but unconfirmed conclusion they lead to
is that the recipient has a tendency to project his own state upon the communicator
(12). We arrived at a similar result in our research, in which students experiencing
anxiety just before taking a test had to evaluate the state of speakers on the basis
of the emotional coloration of their speech (13). There are data, however, indi-
cating that it is possible to project one's state having a "minus“ sign. In this
case recipients arethe least sensitive to states similar to the ones they themselves
are experiencing at the time.

At the level of the human mind, the content of which is mediated by verbal experience,
perception of nonspoken signals is dependent upon this experience and upon the person-
ality of the communicant as a whole.

However. there are also significant differences at the level of the nonverbal animal
mind. Harler (15) notes that some animals are able to generate expressive movements
well, but they perceive them poorly. Others on the other hand are good recipients
of state signals and poor transmitters of such signals. It is interesting that these
authors revealed similar groups in an experiment with people. Various researchers
have mentioned that signals of state are perceived more successfully by sensitive,
subservient subjects (14). There are data indicating that individual experience has

an influence on reception of emotional signals. Ramishvili (16) writes that blind
subjects are able to deduce the state of a speaker from the coloration of his speech

more successfully than sighted subjects.

In our experiment we wanted to follow the process of forming an impression of the
speaker, and arrive at a description of this process. By interviewing subjects who
had to describe the appearance and internal make-up of the speaker on the basis of
the way the latter read a standard text, we were able to distinguish two extreme
strategies. Having listened to the speaker's voice, some subjects fashion his visual

appearance, and on the basis of this appearance they attempt to fashion his personal
characteristics. Other subjects take an analytical route: They single out different
characteristics of the voice and associate them one at a time with personality
characteristics. Insufficient information about the speaker forces the recipient

to make extensive extrapolations. Thus, hearing emotional tones in the voice, he

may interpret them as a manifestation of a permanent quality of the communicator--
his emotionality. while in reality they may be a situational phenomenon. A listener
attempting to evaluate the personality of a speaker often employs metaphoric elements,
transferring properties of the voice to properties of the possessor of this voice.
Thus a person with a voice having a pleasing timbre is also assessed positively in
terms of his appearance, while active articulation creates the impression of a person

who is energetic in general.

Inasmuch as voice characteristics afford a possibility for considerable arbitrariness
in the interpretation of the speaker's properties, such an interpretation often carries
more information about the listener than about the speaker. In this case the voice
may perform the role of a unique Rorschach ”inkblot.‘

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a on we a ovula- uvu was...

without a doubt the voice also carries information of greater objectivity: The
pitch of the voice, for example, particular features of articulation and timbre, and
the hollowness-clarity of the voice provide indications of the speaker's age.
General characteristics such as the psychodynamic features of the individual that
make up the basis of his temperament (sctiveness and emotionality) are represented

rather fully in the voice. As we had seen earlier, these characteristics are partially
represented by those criteria-factors which listeners use to evaluate the personality

of the speaker. 0n the whole, however, individual voice characteristics cannot serve--

we agree with A. a. Bodalev in this regard--as dependable indicators of the personality
as a whole (ll).

3. Historical Analysis

The next direction of analysis presupposes examination of the historical roots of
the phenomenon--its origin and development. Without a doubt this topic requires
special and lengthy analysis. We will cite only the raw data used in such analysis.

C. Darwin (17) is the author of the first theory of expressive uovements which, in
particular, compares the external expression of the principal emotions in man and
higher animals and proves the existence of a phylogenetic relationship between them.
Without a doubt this general premise is valid in relation to the resources of acoustic
expression of emotions. Confirmations of Darwin's theory can also be encountered in
modern studies. Man's experimentally proven capability for identifying the state of
animals through auditory perception of their acoustic signals is such a confirmation,
though of course indirect (18). References to the capability of animals, especially
domestic ones, of sensing the state of an individual are often encountered in the
literature (19). All of this attests to presence of similar factors in the external,
and particularly the acoustic expression of the principal emotions of man and higher
animals. however, if this is valid in relation to non—speech sounds, how do matters
stand with the emotional coloration of speech? Experiments involving identification
of the emotional state of a speaker on the basis of stressed syllables or even vowels
extracted from a passage of emotionally colored speech show that these elements trans-
mit a significant amount of information on the state of the speaker. At the same
time. these elements are also the result of interference between phonetic and psycho-

physiological processes. A number of researchers have noted, in relation to both
vocal and conversational emotionally colored speech, presence of the "audible smile"
phenomenon, or tearful, plaintive intonation, sighs of annoyance or moans of pain
directly within the structure of the spoken statement (20,21). Moreover the factor
structure of listeners' evaluations based on emotionally colored phrases of standard
content is also similar according to our data (22). Therefore there are grounds for
assuming that the emotional coloration of speech is a derivative phenomenon of emo-
tional non-speech sounds. The question as to the presence of non-speech emotional
sounds in speech is extremely interesting. On one hand they are present in speech in

their first-existing form and in the form of emotional coloration of speech. a: the
other hand, if we assume the position of many scientists who believe affective sounds

to be among the raw material for creation of language, they are present in language
in transformed, removed form. It would be interesting to find their traces in the

phonemic content and in the nonemotional intonation of language, and in particular
to try to examine the phenomenon of phonetic symbolism from these positions.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As far as expressive acoustic resources are concerned, their inventory is diverse,

and it includes phenomena existing at different planes, ones which may have different
historical roots. The one thing that is sure is that they all have a later origin

in comparison with emotional resources. There is almost no mention of the evolution
of expressive acoustic resources in the literature. This question is touched upon
only in Bubrikh's work (23). From this author's point of view we can distinguish
three stages in the development of language: The first is typified by visual-objec~
tive thinking and by speech having a signaling function. In the second stage thinking

assumes a visual-descriptive nature, and representational and expressive resources
come into being.

Discussing the problem as a whole, we can assert that man typically uses more-ancient
acoustic resources when emotionally aroused--that is. his speech typically undergoes
acoustic primitivization, using E. L. Nosenko's term as he applied it to the semantics
and syntax of speech in stressful conditions.

3. Conclusion

Two points require consideration in the conclusion. First of all the initial scheme

of analysis, which contains three basic dimensions, should be supplemented by a
fourth dimension associated with semeiutic analysis of extralinguistic signals,
inasmuch as the system under discussion here is a communication system. But this
approach has not been fully worked out yet in application to such signals, and it
still requires extensive work prior to its implementation.

The second point is associated with the problem of determining the type of emotional
state on the basis of the acoustic characteristics of speech. The characteristics
which researchers have at their disposal still do not germit determination of the

type of state; nor do they even permit differentiation between positive and negative
emotions. Despite the fact that some authors have reported the possibility of making

such a diagnosis, the characteristics they suggest are contradictory (24,25).

We suggest another approach to solving this problem based on the considerations dis—
cussed above concerning the nature of the emotional coloration of speech. In the
first stage of this approach we would need to subject the acoustic correlates of

an external expression of emotions (emotional sound) to meticulous analysis, and in
the next stage we should seek these characteristics in a spoken signal having an

emotional coloration.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Nosonko, E. L., "Osobcnnosti rechi v sostoyanii emotsional'noy napryaznennosti"
[Characteristics of Speech in a State of Emotional Tension], Dnepropetrovsk, 1975.

2. Kagan, M. 8., "Chelovcchaskayadeyatel’nost' (Opyt sistemnogo analiza)" [Human
Activity (An Experiment in Systems Analysis)], Moscow, 1974.

3. Galunov, V. 1.. ”Speech, Emotions and Personality: Problems and Prospects,“
in this collection.

29

FOR 0F1ﬂ(]Al.USE¢0NLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

run II. 0 0‘0““ WI: VI‘AII

Manemv, V. 101., "Investigation of the Spoken Signal to Deter-ine the Individual's
motional State." Candidate Dissertation abstract. Leningrad. 1975.

'l‘seplitis, L. K. . "Analiz rechevoy intonatsii' [Analysis of Speech Intonation] ,
Riga. 1974.

Voier, w., “Perceptual Bases of Speaker Identity." .1. ACOIBT. BS. AMER” Vol 36.
No 6. 1964.

Addington, D. . ”Voice and Perception of Personality," N. Y. . 1968.

Alekseyev, V. I., Manerov. V. 101.. end Ustinovich. Ye. An “Analysis of Voice
as a Source of Intonation of Properties of the Speaker," see this collection.

Shibutani. ‘r., “Sotsial'naya psikhologiya' [Social Psychology]. Moscow. 1969.

Hortensson. C.. and Serena. K. K.. "Advances in Commication Research," N.¥.,
Harper, 1973.

Bodalev, A. 5., "Vospriyatiye cheloveka chelovekon“ [Perception of Man by
Man], Izd-vo LGU. Leningrad. 1965.

Kvasovets. S. V. . "Opyt izucheniya emotsional‘nykh sostoyaniy. Probleuy
neyropsikhologii" [Experience in Studying Emtional States. Problems of Neuro-
psychology]. Moscow. Nauka. 1977.

Il'in, Ye. P.. Manerov. V. Kh., Katygin. Yu. A.. and shatalova. ‘1‘. IL. “Effect
of Protesting Arousal on Evaluation of Speech 'nond' [in press).

Korneva, '1'. V., ”Some Factors Defining the Accuracy of a Listener's Evaluation
of Emotional States," see this collection.

Marler. in Krames, 1... et a1. (Editors), “Nonverbal Oomunication.“ N.Y.-nondon.
1974. x, p 202 (Vol 1, “Advances in the study of Comunication and Affect'].

Ramishvili, D. , “K prirode nekotorykh vidov vyrazitel'nykh dvizheniy" [The
Nature of Some Forms of Expressive Movement], Metsnireba. Tbilisi, 1976.

Darvin. Ch.. "Vyrazheniye dushevnykh volneniy" [Expression of Spiritual Agitation].
St. Petcrsburg, 1996.

Gershuni. G. V.. Bogdanov. B. V., Vakarchuk. 0. Yu., Mal'tsev, V. P., and
cherniqovskaya, T. V.. “Hanan Identification of Different Types of Acoustic
Signals unitted by Monkeys.‘ FIZlowGIYA GleVEKA, Vol 2, No 3, 1976.

borcnts. K.. "Kol‘tso tsarya Solomons" [King Solomon's Ring]. Moscow. 1977.

Murozov. V. P., “Diofizicheskiye osnovy vokal'noy rechi" [Biophysical Principles
of Vocal Speech]. Leningrad, 1977.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kotlyar, G. H. , ”Analysis of Acoustic Resources for Expressing Emotional States

in Vocal Speech,“ Candidate Dissertation Abstract. Leningrad, 1977.

Manerov, v. 101. , ”Analysis of Emotional Non-Speech Sounds,“ (in press).

Bubrikh. D. V., "Origin of Thinking and Speech,” in Anisimv, A. 17., "Istoricheskiye
osobennosti pervobytnogo myshleniya" [Historical characteristics of Primitive
Thinking]. Nauka, Leningrad, 1971.

Blokhina, L. P., and Gomina, '1‘. 6., ”significance of Prosodic and Spectral Para-
meters of Spoken signals Expressing Different Emotional States," see the pro-
ceedings of this synposium.

Taubkin, v. 1..., "Identification of the Emotional State of a Human Operator Using
Spoken Signal Parameters," Candidate Dissertation Abstract, Museum, 1977.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'VI UI‘I'I\ URI: VOL Ul‘hl

USING SYIHBTRICAL BIOMGICALLY ACTIVE POINTS TO
IONI'I'OR (JIMES IN um PSYOIOPHYSIOIOGICAL STATE

A. s. Abduakhadov, V. I. Galunov

The goal of our study was to develop a method for objectively monitoring the psycho-
physiological state (PPS) of an individual. An analysis of the available data would

show that traditional objective physiological indicators such as pulse, respiration,
BEG. GSR and so on are not sufficiently informative when it comes to determining a
nunber of psychophysiological states (PPS's). Thus there is interest in studying the
biologically active skin points (BASP's) used in acupuncture therapy to elicit change
in psychophysiological state (1). Ours is an attempt to study the characteristics
of bioelectric reactions (Ball's) of biologically active skin points (BASP's) in the
presence of different positive and negative emotional states.

Research Methods

The research was conducted on 10 healthy subjects 21-31 years old in a comfortably
appointed soundproof room. To simulate emotional states of different signs, the sub-
jects were asked to act out or. for practical purposes, autosuggest negative and
positive emotional experiences. Thus realistic emotional states were produced without
their active motor component.

BER's were recorded with a lG-channel "Al'var" electroencephalograph (GDR) using non-
polarizing (platinum) electrodes with a diameter of 2 am. The inter—electrode distance
was 3 m. Synnetrical general-action BASP's (designated Gi-ll by international con-
vention) and symmetrical inactive points on the palms of both hands were the object

of research. A cardiogram was recorded in parallel.

The timing of the experiment was as follows: First we recorded the initial BER of
symmetrical BASP's and inactive points, the cardiogram and the pulse (15 minutes).

After a little while we recorded the physiological parameters indicated above for 10
minutes, during which the subject imagined a negative emotional situation accompanied
by the appropriate state (fear. melancholy). during the time he remained immersed in

this state (10 minutes) . and during his emergence from this state (20 minutes). Follow-
ing this. the entire course of the experiment was repeated with the subject imagining

a positive emotional situation accompanied by joy and pleasure.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The PPS indicators noted above were then compared with the particular state and with
the properties exhibited by synnetrical BASP's. The coefficients of asynmetry (K35)
of the parameters of symetrical BASP's and of symmetrical inactive points in the
presence of different emotional states were calculated using the formula:

A-B
K33 " A+B'

where A--parameters of points on the left hand, B--on the right hand.

Msearch Resul t:;

The BER recorded from syumetrical BASP's in response to voluntarily induced emotional
states of different signs may be described as a slow oscillatory process having a wide
frequency range (from 0.2 to 2 Hz) and an amplitude range from 50 to 900 uv.
BBR's recorded from syumetrical BASP's (61-4) in response to the different emotional
states studied are described below.

Complete emotional rest was adopted as the initial state. In it, BER's recorded from
symmetrical BASP's were unstable in amplitude, asynchronous, irregularly arising
oscillations consisting of primary biphasal components lasting about 1 sec and
secondary, negative monophasal late cosponenls lasting 3-4 sec. In all cases, poten-
tials of significantly higher amplitude were recorded from the right Gi-4 point.

When the subject was in a state of emotional relaxation (probably similar to a state
somewhere between drowsiness and sleep) the potential oscillations exhibited a ten-
dency toward synchronization. Oscillations recorded from the right 61-4 point were
biphasal in shape, with the amplitude of the primary components being 400-800 uv and
their duration being 1 sec. The primary oscillation was followed by a secondary mono-
phasal negative oscillation with an anplitude of about 200 uv and a duration of 3-4
sec. Biphasal oscillations of irregular shape lasting 1 sec and having a lower ampli-

tude (300-500 uv) were recorded from the left Gi-d point. The secondary component,
which had a duration of 2—3 sec, had a rounded peak.

The nature of the BER potential oscillations changed dramatically in amplitude and
frequency when the subject imagined a state of fear. The oscillation frequency of
potentials recorded from symmetrical BASP's was greater than normal. 0n the background
of a general increase in frequency, statistically significant asymmetry of this indi-
cator was observed, expressing itself as a higher oscillation frequency at the left
Gi-4 point in comparison with the right. Later on, as the subject emerged from his

negative emotional state, the frequency of BBR's recorded from symuetrical points
gradually fell. It should be noted that in addition to this, we recorded low ampli-

tude monophasal negative oscillations with a duration of 1 sec and secondary long-
lasting positive oscillations (2 see) from the right 61-4 point.

At the left Gi-4 point, amplification of the frequency characteristics of the BER is

also accompanied by change in the amplitude of the potentials. They acquire an
approximately sinusoidal biphasal shape. Secondary slow oscillations disappear.
alternation of oscillations of average size with shorter, asymetrical oscillations

is observed .

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I V" vs a e\ nee. e-vu u- I..a

The changes described above in BER's recorded from symmetrical BASP's assume a
different form when we proceed to a positive emotional state (joy). Amplification
of the frequency characteristics of BER's recorded from symmetrical BASP's can be
noted; however, this increase is expressed to a lesser degree than with a negative
state. The asymmetry of BER frequency characteristics was predominantly right—sided.
Arisal of two-component oscillations, with an initial fast negative component and a
late biphasal positive-negative slow component (4-5 see) was noted at the right Gi-4
point. At the left 61-4 point the oscillations were biphasal, positive-negative and
slow; their shape was irregular, and their duration was 3-4 sec.

Thus these data reveal differences in the frequency and amplitude characteristics
of BER's recorded from symmetrical Gi-4 BASP's in responsetoemotional states of
different signs.

The changes indicated above in BER's recorded from symmetrical BASP's correlate with
the dynamics of electric resistance (total resistance, to include its active component
and its capacitive component) recorded in similar experimental conditions. They also
agree in part with the dynamics of pulse changes occurring in the corresponding states.
Pulse grew faster with positive and negative states, and decreased in the emotionally
relaxed state.

The high effectiveness of using BASP's having general restorative action to detect
emotional states of different signs can be demonstrated by comparing BER's recorded
from biologically active and inactive points on the skin. Our experiments showed that
the size and shape of the electric potential and the asymmetry exhibited by the dyna-
mics of amplitude and frequency characteristics recorded from symmetrical BASP's are
significantly more precise indicators of psychophysiological state than are similar
characteristics recorded from inactive points, for which the electroenencephalographi-
cally recorded BER's either do not change at all in response to similar situations,
or they fluctuate insignificantly about the zero point.

Considering our present knowledge of the mechanisms responsible for the work of BASP's,
it may be hypothesized that amplification of the amplitude and frequency character-
istics of BER's recorded from symmetrical BASP's of general tonic action in response
to emotional states of different signs reflects nonspecific activation of the central
mechanisms of the states examined here. Asymmetry of BER indicators recorded from
symmetrical BASP's probably reflects activation of cortical mechanisms of the studied
emotional states, and it may be associated with functional lateralization of positive

emotions in the left hemisphere and of negative emotions in the right hemisphere (2).

The thus the research permits the following conclusions:

1. Biologically active points that cause change in psychophysiological state when
affected in a certain way may also serve as a source of information on state.

BER's and the resistance to electric current recorded at BASP‘s of general tonic
action are promising indicators of qualitatively different changes in emotional
state.

3. The amplitude and frequency characteristics of BER's recorded from symmetrical
BASP's differ in relation to emotional states of opposite sign.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Asymmtry 1n the dynamics of Lhu amputudu and frequency characteristics of BER's
recorded from symetrical BASP's is the principal indicator of emotional states
differing in sign.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. chzhu Lyan', "Rukovodstvo po sovremennoy chZhen'-tszyuterap11" [Handbook of
Modern Acupuncture Therapy], Mascow, Hedgiz, 1959.

2. Gazzaniga, H. S., "The Bisected Brain," NJ. 1970.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ANALYSIS OF VOICE AS A SOURCE OF INFORMATION ON PMPERTIES OP THE SPBAKZR
v. I. Alekseyev, v. Kh. Hanerov, Ye. A. Ustinovich

Being a means of communication, speech is a system of signs organized in a particular
way. The principal sign of this system is the word. Thus speech is traditionally
studied as a means of verbal coumunication. But recently researchers have shown
increasingly greater interest in parameters of speech having to do with nonverbal
communication. Acoustic phenomena (prosodic characteristics, sonorousnesa, pronun-

ciation) which accompany speech and which may bear information supplementing the
meaning of a statement are now becoming an object of study.

A researcher studying perception of these acoustic phenomena is able to distinguish
a group of speech elements that are constant characteristics of speech formation
which a listener can use to form an idea as to the age, education, appearance and
the psychophysiological and characterological features of the speaker. In other
words this group of speech parameters generates an impression about the speaker--
that is, it has an impressive function. Voice has special significance among these
parameters. Our study was devoted to the influence of vocal characteristics on
the listener's resulting impression of the speaker's properties.

Psycholinguistic studies of voice characteristics (4,5,6) distinguish the following
descriptive qualities of speech sounds: pitch, loudness, speed, rhythm, timbre,
mlody, sonorousness, intensity. The impression an audience develops about the
speaker influences the content of his message--that is, together with other factors
it predetermines the effectiveness of mass media. It was for this reason that
scientific investigation of the role played by these speech characteristics in

formation of an impression about the individual features of a speaker began with the
development of radio broadcasting. Thus the first experiments were conducted in this

area by the British Broadcasting Company in 1931 (3).
A researcher addressing this problem must answer the following questions:

1. What impressions does the speech of a speaker induce in his listeners?

2. How is the speaker's voice described, and what characteristics used in its eval-
uation are correlated with opinions about the speaker?

3. How do opinions about the speaker, arrived at as a result of listening to his
speech, correlate with data obtained by other means (for example with personality
inventories)?

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4. What physically recorded parameters of a Spoken signal predetermine the opinion
of a speaker?

Thus four sets of data must be compared: the physical description of the spoken
signal, its subjective description (the voice), opinions about the speaker's proper-
ties and the psychophysiological indicators of the speaker's individual features.

Our research dealt with probleas associated with the first two groups. Voice evalu-
ations and opinions about speakers based on such evaluations can be obtained by the

well known method of semantically opposite pairs suggested by C. Osgood (l), which
is broadly employed today in research on auditory perception.

Psycholinguistic studies that have made use of this method (2) show that the ”field
of meanings" is determined by two systems of evaluations. The first system, re-
ferred to by Osgood as affective, contains three factors: evaluation, strength and
activeness. The second system is formed out of denotative characteristics, and it
reflects the physical properties of the object. Inasmuch as the objective of our
work was to isolate those vocal characteristics which predetermine opinions about the

properties of the speaker, denotative evaluations are of the greatest importance to
us. In addition to characteristics used in the affective evaluation (good-bad, strong-

weak and so on), the list of characteristics intended for voice evaluation included
terms describing the voice qualities listed above--three or four terms for each

quality. For example high-low, loud-soft, fast-le and so on. In all, the list
consisted of 36 pairs of adjectives.

The second list we used in the listening sessions consisted of S4 characteristics
describing different properties of the speaker. It included some indicators of
appearance (tall-short, thin-fat) and age, and terms standing for emotional, voli-
tional, intellectual and characterological features (emotional-unemtional, anxious-
serene, smart-stupid, willful-unwillful) . In this case each of these features was
described by approximately the same number of terms.

Subjects referred to these two lists as they listened to tape recordings of speech
excerpts by five male speakers. The excerpts, each about 2 minutes long, were frag—
ments of undirected speech. mring the recording sessions, the speakers were asked
to speak freely about some interesting event in their life.

Subjects listened to the recordings in groups. In all, 60 persons listened to each
voice. The instructions did not limit the listening time, and they required the
subjects to pay no attention, to the extent possible, to the content of the excerpts.

Ten evaluation intercorrelation matrices were obtained on treating the results:

five matrices (36*36) of voice evaluations and five matrices (54X54) of evaluations

of the speaker's individual properties. They were subjected to factor analysis by the
main factor method. The calculations were performed with an “-22 computer. In addi-
tion we obtained combined matrices of voice evaluations and evaluations of individual

characteristics of the speaker. These matrices were compiled on the basis of evalu-
ations of five voices listened to by 20 audiences. Thus we subjected (54Xl00) and
(367-100) matrices to factor analysis. As a result we obtained the invariant factor
structures of evaluations shown in tables 1 and 2.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHI. ‘18 e an IRA. t-ua. u-sua

Table l. Invariant Factor Structure Obtained Through Factor Analysis of Cbnposite
Matrices of the Evaluations of Individual Features of the Speaker
(Characteristics With Maximum Heights Are Shaun)

 

 

Factor Characteristics Height
1 Decisive-vascillating +0.73
stern-gentle +0.71
Fearful-fearless -0.7l
Conpliant-conpetitive -0.7l
willful-unwillful +0.70
Delicate-hard -0.70
Confident-unconfident +0.68
Inperious-quiet +0.68

II slow—fast +0.82
Gay-depressed -0.8O
Hurried-slow -0.80
Passive-active +0.78
woeful-joyful +0.76
Energetic-inert +0.76
Introverted-ccnummicative +0.75

III conscientions-irresponsible +0.67
Serious-flippant +0.66
Rough-delicate -0.64
Intellectual-primitive -0.64
Smart-stupid +0.61

IV Lean-stout +0.60
Pat-thin -0.55

short-tall +0.50

Age +0.50
Stalwart-dwarfish +0.47

Old-young -0.43

v Anxious-serene +0.47
Nervous-calm +0.44
Relaxed-taut -0.44

The first factor that was isolated by factor analysis of the combined matrix of
evaluations of the individual properties of the speaker included the characteristics
decisive-vaseillating, delicate-hard, purposeful-spontaneous, willful-unvillful.
These characteristics describe volitional qualities of the individual, and the
factor may be defined as firmness or strength.

The second factor includes the characteristics passive-active, woeful-joyful, slou-
fast, inert-energetic, quiet-talkative. This can quiet definitely be interpreted
as an activeness factor.

The third factor of this invariant structure brought together the characteristics
conscientious-irresponsible, serious-flippant. smart-stupid. This can probably be
interpreted as the intelligence factor.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 2. Invariant Factor Structure of Vbice Evaluations

Factor
I

 

II

III

IV

VI

VII

Characteristics

Fluent-stumbling
Uniform-nonuniform
Rhythmlcal-nonrhythmical
Tense-relaxed
Free-constrained

Squeaky-deep
Hrgh—low
Thin-thick
Bright-dark
Past-slow
Sharp-dull

Rich-dry

Bad-good

Deep-cold
Hollow-full
Unpleasant-pleasant

Dull-clear
Honotonous-modulated
Huffled-dearening
Unpleasant-pleasant
Bright-dull
Hearse-clear

Loud-soft
Mobile-inert
Fast-slow

ﬂurried-unhurried
Harsh-mild

Distinct-inarticulate
Comprehensible-incomprehenslble

Nasal-non-nasal

Height

0.83
0.76
0.50
-0.47
0.40

0.80
0.74
0.74
0.63
0.62
0.61

0.67
-0.66
0.69
-0.59
-0.57

0.76
0.72
0.69
0.53
-0.51
0.42

-0.60
-0.58
-0.56
-0.48
-0.40

0.75
0.81

0.51
O VII we a swans. UH“ an...

The invariant factor structure of voice evaluations, shown in Table 2, contains
seven factors. The first factor combines characteristics describing the rhythm of
speech and its intensity. This means that the "intensity" characteristic is deter-
mined by the rhythmical pattern of speech. The second factor may be interpreted as
the voice pitch factor. The third factor includes characteristics describing timbre
(rich-dry, warm-cold), and valuational characteristics. The fourth factor may lost
likely be interpreted as a sound fullness factor. The fifth factor basically in-
volves speech rate evaluations. The sixth and seventh factors contain the largest
number of characteristics, with the sixth most probably characterizing the recording
quality. It can be noted that evaluations having to do with loudness did not compose
a single factor, instead falling within the fifth and sixth factors.

The next step in the analysis was to obtain correlations between voice evaluations
and evaluations of the individual properties of the speaker. Characteristics having
the maximum factor weights were selected out of the factor matrices of evaluations
of the first speaker. In all we selected 52 characteristics, which we subjected to
correlation analysis (20 reflect voice qualities while 22 describe individual charac-
teristics of the speaker). The most significant coefficients were obtained for
correlations between the following characteristics:

Fluent-stumbling, woeful-joyful 0.40
Past-slow, energetic-inert 0.43
Pull-hollow, willful-unwillful 0.54
Deep-squeaky, willful-unwillful 0.53
Dull-clear, fearful-fearless 0.43
Hoarse-not hoarse, willful—unwillful 0.54

The following conclusions can be made:

1. The invariant structure of voice evaluations consists of five basic factors that
may be interpreted as rhythm, rate, timbre, pitch and fullness.

2. The invariant structure of evaluations of individual properties of the speaker
includes five factors: Activeness, will (firmness), intensity, intelligence and
appearance.

3. Fast Speech creates the impression that the individual is active and energetic.

A low, dull, full voice is associated with a person who is purposeful, willful and
decisive. Rhythmical speech is evaluated as a sign of an elevated mood.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Osgood, C. 2., Suci, G. H., and Tannenbaum, P. 8., ”The Measurement of Meaning,"
Urbana, 1957.

2. Tzeng, 0., and May, W.. “More Than E.P.I. Semantic Differential Scales," INTER-
NATIONAL JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGY, Vbl 10, No 2, 1975.

3. Dear, T. H., ”Voice and Personality," N. York, 1931.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Voier, w. 0.. "Perceptual Bases'o: Speaker Identity," JASA, V01 36, No 6.
1964.

Addingcon, D. 0L, "Voice and Perception of Personality,“ N. York, 1968.

tax-mam, R. , “Die Deutung den Sprechaus drucks,‘ Bonn, 1960.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fun we a swans. you Una-a

THE SBMANTIC SPACE 0P IDEAS ASSOCIATED um amount! (”101130 8PM
Ye. P. Bazhin, G. A. Krylova

Speech occupies an important place in the communicative function belonging to ex—
pression. Speech is one of the sources of information indicating presence of a
certain emotional state and an emotional relationship. It is commonly accepted (1)
that this information is contained in three levels of speech: acoustic-phonetic,
lexical-grammatic and semantic. Researchers are especially interested in the first
level--that is, one having to do with almost direct transmission of so-called affec-
tive language contained in emotional intonation--in changes in the physical
characteristics of the voice that are perceived and decoded by the listener. The
task of searching for and discovering concrete prosodic characteristics bearing in-
formation on emotional state is in general a solution to part of the theoretical
problem of man's perception by man. In the applied sense, on the other hand, the
objective of this task is to develop an automatic system for recognizing emotions
on the basis of the 890k"! signal.

This problem was studied in our previous work from the standpoints of both finding
the objective correlates of emotional states in the melody of voice (2,3) and deter-
mining the possibilities ofexpert(listener) evaluation-~that is, identification--of
the emotional color of speech (4). To a certain extent these two approaches are
opposites of one another: Thus on one hand we employed instrumental analysis based
on analyzing purely physical characteristics, while on the other hand we studied

the capability for communication associated with psychological features of a given
individual as a personality. This paper describes an attempt to find something
thatvmuldbring these two approaches closer together, something that could serve as
a link between them. one such linking tool, we believe, is language, and namely its
semantic wealth, which is used, among other purposes, for transmission of information
on emotional state.

The immediate objective of our work was to reveal the uemantic space of Russian
language containing terms describing the emotional characteristics of voice and
speech. The fullest and most reliable source of such terms is creative literature,
in which the ideas of the author, his philosophy and his outlook on the world are
expressed by means of various descriptive resources, to include character descriptions
or expressions. A character description sometimes provides a direct indication as to
whether or not a certain emotional state is inherent to the hero, and it may indicate
the attitude of the narrator (the author) toward that state. Manufacturing an emo-
tion-inducing situation by means of his creative imagination, the author serves as

a unique sort of transformer, translating his ideas about the way the speech of his
heroes Bounds into specific terms, the adequacy, clarity and completeness of which

42
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NULY
define the artistic expressiveness of the work and promote transmission of the de-
sired information, making it understandable to a large number of people (readers).
In other words the objective of the author is to transmit acoustic characteristics
at the verbal level, to place them in semantic space in such a way that they could
be decoded--understood and felt. In this sense each writer acts as an experimental
psychologist on one hand, reconstructing the behavior of people in different situ-

ations, and on the other hand he is a linguist-philologist, having an abundant lexicon
at his disposal.

Our method required the study of the creative works of 16 Russian and Soviet writers
(I. Bunin, N. Garin-Hikhaylovskiy. N. Gor'kiy, P. Dostoyevskiy, A. Kurpin,

N. Leskov, D. Mamim-Sibiryak, K. Paustovskiy, s. Sergeyev-Tsenskiy, A. Tolstoy,

L. Tblsoy, I. Turgenev, K. Fedin, A. Chekhov, h. sholokhov and I. Erenburg). Three
excerpts from the works of each writer were analyzed. Each excerpt contained a
standard number of characters-~200.000; in all. we studied 48 such excerpts with a

total volume of 960,000 characters. Expressions used to describe voice and speech
were extracted from the text. For the convenience of analysis these expressions

were given in adjectival form, for example ”loud,“ “languid,” and so on.

Table 1 contains the text analysis data. We can see from the table that the number
of times different writers make references to the color of voice and speech varies
broadly. A certain trend is evident, however: For about half of the authors
analyzed this number did not exceed 250-270, while for the rest it was significantly
higher. Consequently the frequency with which references are made to voice and
speech in standard excerpts from creative works of like genre may vary.

A similar situation was also revealed on analysis of the terminological structure
of these references--that is, the writer's lexicon (see Table 1). Here the differ-

ence was rather large--69 terms for N. Leskov and 237 for A. Kuprin.

 

Table 1

Ratio of
No. of

References
No. of No. of to No.

writer References Terms of Terms
1. 1. Bunin 270 147 1.84
2. N. Garin-Mikhaylovskiy 239 108 2.21
3. M. Gor'kiy 605 171 3.53
4. F. Dostoyevskiy 236 128 1.84
5. A. Kuprin 719 237 3.03
6. N. Leskov 168 69 2.43
7. D. Mamin-Sibiryak 379 134 2.82
8. K. Paustovskiy 410 148 2.78
9. N. Sergeyev—Tsenskiy 220 121 1.81
10. A. Tolstoy 558 142 3.92
11. L. Tolstoy 159 85 1.87
12. I. Turgenev 267 118 2.26
13. K. Pcdin 536 202 2.65

[continued on following page]
43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Va He IAL van VIVIaI

 

14. M. Sholokhov 521 185 2.85
15. A. Chekhov 306 109 2.8
6. I. Erenburg 371 118 3.14

373 139 2.61

There is another interesting indicator in Table l: the ratio between the total
number of references to voice and speech encountered in a text, and terminological
diversity--that is, the total number of terns used by a writer. This indicator
illustrates the average frequency with which some tern is used throughout the
entire analyzed text-~that is. 600,000 characters. As we can see from the table,
the size of this indicator increases as the number'of referencesinthe text to
voice and speech increases, while on the other hand it decreases as the lexicon
becomes relatively less rich—-that is, as relatively fewer terns are used to define
the characteristics of voice and speech.

 

no m M M .00 “I no, No l -

Figure l

x axis--number of references in the text to different characteristics
of voice and speech. Y axis--nunber of different terms used to de-
scribe voice and speech. l--I. Bunin, 2--N. Garin-Mikhaylovskiy,
3--H. Gor'kiy, 4--P. nostoyevskiy, 5--A. Kuprin, 6--N. Leskov,

7--D. Mamin-Sibiryak, 8--K. Paustovskiy, 9c-N. Sergeyev-‘rsenskiy,
10--A. Tolstoy, ll-L. ‘l‘olstoy, 12--I. ‘mrgenev, l3--K. Pedin,

14--H. Sholokhov, lS--A. Chekhov, 16--I. Erenburg.

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0!"?! mm. USE ONLY

The laws revealed by analysis of the texts may be visualized in Figure l, in which
the total number of references in the text to voice and speech are plotted on the

X axis and the number of terms (definitions) describing voice and speech is plotted
on the Y axis. We can see from the figure that between these indicators there exists
a dependence that would best be described as 1inear--that is. as the number of
references to voice and speech increases, the number of terms eupdoyed--that is,

the terminological diversity--grows as well.

The total number of different terms referring to voice and speech encountered in
texts written by the 15 analyzed authors was 611. Analysis of the semantic content
of these terms, heed to describe voice and speech (we used a 16-volume modern

Russian language dictionary published by the USSR Academy of Sciences), showed that
it (this content) may be divided into three basic categories.

The first included terms describing the acoustic-phonetic characteristics of voice

and speech directly: for example “whining, melodic, shrill,“ and so on. We revealed
150 such definitions, making up 25.5 percent of the total number of terms.

The second category contained terms metaphorical in nature, for example"urbane. thick.
reedy, oily" and so on. These totaled 45--that is, 7 percent.

And finally, the third and largest category contained terms used by the authors
to provide relatively direct information as to the presence of a concrete emotion:
“hopeless, anxious, elated, melancholy, angry" and so on. We discovered 416 such
terms--that is, 67.5 percent.

The next stage of analysis involves more-detailed classification within each of the
categories of terms isolated above. Thus for example, six different factors were
revealed in relation to acoustic-phonetic terms directly characterizing voice and
speech (terms in the first category): intensity (60 terms)--that is, 40 percent of
the total number of 150 terms, pitch (24-16 percent), speed (l9-lS.4 percent),
rhythm (lo-12.6 percent), timbre (lo-6.7 percent) and distinctness (l4-9.3 percent).

The terminological lexicon resulting from this sampling procedure was also subjected
to analysis from the standpoint of the frequency with which individual terms were
used. By studying weightfactors we were able to arrive at a "mandatory" set of
terms--that is, one common to all writers; obviously, this would also be a unique
sort of semantic summary of Russian-language terms used to describe voice and speech.

0n the other hand this terminological lexicon (containing 611 terms) permitted us
to reveal clusters of synonyms, within which we determined, by analysis of weighted
evaluations, the central terms and the distances by which they were separated from
their synonyms. This in turn allowed us to represent these laws in the form of
three-dimensional concept models for key terms such as, for example, “loud,“ “joy-
ful" and so on.

In general the obtained data provide an impression of the semantic space of Russian
language. within which key concepts describing voice and speech are located as
individual points surrounded by synonymous terms, ones which obviously emphasize

certain shades of meaning. This material will be used in the future to develop a
specialized semantic differential that could be used to compile a terminological

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run \u‘l'uadl. use. onus

lexicon for voice, this time expressing concrete emtions--melancholy, joy, anger
and so on.

The research method we used, which is essentially one of the variants of content
analysis, appeared sufficiently adequate and promising to us. And in fact, we are
dealing with writers whose works possess remarkable realistic strength of descrip-

tion and influence upon the reader's imagination. It is not difficult for us to
imagine the visual picture of the heroes of I. Bunin, L. 'nolstoy or P. Dostoyevskiy--

their appearance, voice and manner of speaking. ITherefore we can assume that the
terms used by these authors are a unique source of information on ideas about
emotionally colored voice and speech typical of man in general.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. zhinkin, ﬂ. 1., 'Hekhanizmy rechi' [Speech Mechanisms], Hosoow, 1958.

2. Bazhin, Ye. P., Galunov, V. I.. Gorskiy, G. D.. Manerov, v. 101., and
Khvilivitskiy, 1‘. Ya., “Analysis of Prosodic Characteristics of the Speech
of a Speaker Experiencing Different motional States.“ in “Mali: 1 sintez kak
vzainn-obuslovlennyye metody eksperimental'nykh foneticheskikh issledovaniy"
[Analysis and Synthesis as Mutually Dependent Methods of Experimental Phonetic
Research]. Minsk, 1972.

3. Bazhin, Ye. 9., Galunov, V. 1.. Gorskiy, G. D., and Manerov, v. 101., “Objective
Diagnosis of anotional State in the Psychiatric Clinic on the Basis of Speech,"
in "Rech' i emotsii" [Speech and Emotions], Leningrad. 1975.

4. Bazhin, Ye. P., Vuks, A. Ya., and Koriyeva, ‘1‘. V., "Possibilities for Recognizing
motions on the Basis of an Isolated Spoken Signal,“ in "Psikhologicheskiye
problemy psikhogigiyeny, psikhoprofilaktiki i meditsinskoy deontologii"
[Psychological Problems of Mental Hygiene, Preventive Psychology and Medical
Deontology], mningrad, 1976.

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A PACKAGE 0? TEES TO STUDY PERCEPTION 0P EMOTIONAL SPEECH
A. V. Beskadarov. L. I. Vasserman, I. M. 'l‘onkonogiy

Study of the emotional coloration of speech has recently been attracting the

interest of specialists in different fields. On one hand it is an object of interest
of researchers working on systems intended to monitor operator states. On the other
hand the emotional coloration of speech is being subjected to detailed study in
psychiatry, neurology, medical psychology and so on. Researchers attempting to
determine the state of an individual on the basis of his speech are encountering
certain difficulties in doing so. They are associated primarily with the absence

of informative characteristics that would allow reliable differentiation between
emotional states.

'lhe role played in communication by speech formed out of the words of a concrete
language is universally recognized. The characteristics of such languages are

being studied in numerous linguistic, psychological and sociological research pro-
grams. But the significance of the language of emotions and of other paralinguistic
forms of spoken comunication continues to be significantly outside the field of
view of the researchers, though these nonverbal forms of comunication play a signi-
ficant role in the individual's activity, in his recognition of a situation. in
decision making and in evaluating the results of action and behavior. From our
point of view emotions are among the simplest and most meaningful languages used

by the human brain as it receives, stores and transmits information. This language
is apparently limited to about 20 key concepts which the individual can use to
arrive at a rough assessment of most situations and results of action. This signi-
ficantly limits the number of classes of such situations that need to be identified,
and it significantly facilitates and abridges information processing by the human
brain, especially when frequently encountered, repeating events are involved. A
significant advantage of this language is its genetic substrate-~the possession of
the same language of emotions by all people. It is a unique Esperanto permitting
comunication of one person with another, of a mother and a child in the first days
of its life, of people of different nationalities. It also facilitates commication
between people using conventional verbal language by imposing a general value judg-
ment on events being described by verbal messages.

however, the information which we possess from research on human emotions is highly

limited, even in regard to identification of emotions on the basis of facial ex-
pressions and voice characteristics. This article describes a method aimed at

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run 9. I agent- we. Vl‘h.

studying these indicators in patients suffering local brain lesions. since the
study of patients with focal pathology may provide significant help in gaining an
understanding of the cerebral mechanisms of emotional language. In order that other
forms of nonverbal speech could be studied as well, the method was supplemented not

different emotional states were suggested under hypnosis. Our lexicon of emotional
states included only five basic ones, encountered most frequently in the clinic and
characterized by concepts describing positive and negative emotions on a more-general
plane, without isolating the different variants of the states, analysis of the per-
ception of which is an independent problem that was not within the objective of our
work. These five types of emotional states included: 1. Normal. 2. Alarm.

3. Joy. 4. Melancholy. 5. Anger. The speech tests used in this method for
studying perception of emotional. intonational and individual characteristics of
speech are described below.

Test 1: Identification and paired comparison of emotional states (based on material
gathered in the clinic).

There are two parts to this test: 1) Identification of emotional states, 2) paired
couparison of emotional states.

a) Identification of emotional states: One sentence, "It was an early spring," was
chosen as the starting material. It was tape-recorded while read by patients ex-
periencing different emotional states. The procedure begins with a training series
intended to teach the patients how to recognize and name emotional .states on the
basis of voice characteristics (the recording of each state is repeated three times).

random order. The subject was first given a training series and then the principal
series. On listening to the principal series, he had to recognize and name the
appropriate emotional states.

b) Paired comparison of emotional states: Following preliminary training, in this
experiment the subject was asked to successively compare two stimuli. In his response
he had to declare whether the paired emotional states were different or identical.

The experimental sentence was the same as in the first part: "It was an early spring.
The training series consisted of the following seven pairs: 1) normal-normal,

2) alarm-alarm. 3) joy-joy, 4) melancholy-melancholy, 5) anger-anger, 6) normal-

joy, 7) anger-melancholy. of course. it would not have been suitable in this experi--
ment to use training pairs consisting of all five states.

The principal series was based on 30 pairs of comparisons recorded in random order.

It was unsuitable to include a large number of comparisons because this could tire
the patients. On being presented each pair of stimuli. the subject had to say
whether both stimuli were uttered in the same or in different emotional states.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Test 2. Identification and paired comparison of emotional states (actor simulation
and suggestion under hypnosis).

This test made use of spoken material obtained: 1) by recording the words spoken

by an actor (actor simulation) and 2) by recording the words of a speaker under
hypnosis.

a) Actor simulation: An actor read the sentence ”This is so simple that I have to
say it" in one of the states he was asked to simulate: 1) Normal, 2) anger,

3) melancholy, 4) joy. 5) alarm. The design of the experiment was the same as
with test 1 (paired comparison). The training series consisted of four pairs of

stimuli: l) Normal-norm -, 2) melancholy-melancholy, 3) normal-melancholy, 4) joy-
alarm. The principal series consisted of thirty pairs.

b) Suggestion under hypnosis: There were two parts to this test: a) paired compari—
son of emotional states, b) identification of emotional states. One of the states
indicated above was suggested to the speaker. who then uttered the control sentence

"This is so simple that I have to say it." The training and principal material used
for paired comparison was arranged in the same order as with actor simulation.

'vest 3: Identification and paired comparison of different intonational structures.

The experiment required analysis of seven different intonationai structures based on
the same sentence: "Horny bathed Man'ya.‘ here is a sample of the training text
offered to the subject for emotion identification:

. Mormy bathed Man'ya (neutral advisory intonation).
Mow bathed Han'ya (logical stress on the first word).
Mommy bathed Man'ya (logical stress on the second word).
Mommy bathed Man'ya (logical stress on the third word).
Monmy bathed Man'ya? (questioning intonation).

Momy bathed Man'ya! (exclamatory intonation).

. Monmy bathed Man'ya. .. (incomplete intonation).

3835855
dO‘m'waH

These structures were arranged in random order in the principal text.

Porwiredcomparison, the subject was offered a training sample of five pairs of
stimuli, and he was asked to respond whether the stimuli were the same or different
(the pause between pairs was 5 seconds). There were 30 pairs of stimuli in the
principal text, with the nunber of pairs of identical stimuli being equal to the
nunber of pairs of different stimuli.

Test 4: Identification and paired comparison of individual characteristics of
pronunciation .

The ODJOCtiVe of this test is to reveal the particular way subjects perceive
different voices in a sanple and their capability for distinguishing different
voices presented in pairs.

In this test 15 male speakers uttered the control phrase "Everything was blanketed

by dark clouds." The subjects are not acquainted with the voices of these speakers
prior to the experiment. The training text consists of five pairs of stimli (two

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR UH-lt'lAI. USE ONLY

pairs of identical voices and three pairs of different voices). In the principal
series the subject is required to successively listen to 30 repetitions of this
sentence, and venture a conclusion as to the similarity or dissimilarity of two
similar repetitions--that is, the similarity or dissimilarity of each successive

stimulus in relation to the previous one. 'lhe subject used the symbol '2' to denote
similar stimuli and ”-" to denote different stimuli.

This method was applied in a preliminary experiment to 11 patients with local
lesions of different divisions of the cerebral cortex. The impression is that
recognition of emotional, intonational and individual characteristics of speech

in the tests is associated in a number of cases with focal pathology of the temporal
divisions of the cerebral cortex, and predominantly in the right hemisphere of
right-handed patients. Incidentally this research has only just begun, and more

observations will have to be accmulated before the results could be summarized and
analyzed.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANALYSIS OF THE VARIABILITY OF THE HEIDDIC MURS OF SPEECH
A. v. Beskadarov, V. I. Galunov

A large amount of applied problems have recently.been found that can be solved
Successfully by the methods of factor analysis. In our work we had the possibility
to examine one of these methods, namely a conputsr program method of isolating main
factors. we used this method to detect individually variable parameters at the
prosodic level (the melodic outline of speech) , associated with analysis of different
emotional states reproduced in the speech of an actor (the so-called "actor model“) .

Basically, factor analysis reveals the concealed laws of numerous measurements
through analysis of correlation (or covariate) matrices. It is based on the assump-
tion that observed variables may be expressed through concealed independent para-

meters or factors. In other words analysis of variations in some phenomenon can
reveal the concealed laws of these variations.

1. Materials and Methods

In our experiments we used a tape recording of a single test sentence ("3T0 Tax
npoc‘ro, Vrro xoqe'l'ca cxasa’rb" [Eto tak prosto, chto khochetsya skazat';

This is so simple that I have to say it!) spoken by an actor. The speaker was
instructed to utter this sentence in one of 44 prescribed states (normal. arousal,
languor. joy and so on) . Correspondingly. 44 melodic contours were obtained by
processing the oscillograms. Then we selected out the frequencies of the fundamental
tone of vowel sounds within the test sentence (ll frequencies) (see Table l).

The material in Table l was subjected to factor analysis in two variants: 1) factor
treatment of the characteristics of emotional states (a 44x44 correlation table)

and 2) factor treatment of the frequencies of the fundamental tones of individual
vowel sounds (ll‘ll correlation table).

The first variant of treatment revealed four spectrums connected with the real data
on emotional states. All of the states conditionally fell into four classes corres-
ponding to meaningful factors, which were labeled: 1) "Relaxation" factor (14 emo-
tional states), 2) "alarm" factor (18 states), 3) "aggressiveness“ factor (6 states),
4) uncertainty factor (2 states). There were one or two states in each class which,
generally speaking, were not suited to the label characterizing that class (thus

the states of joy, tension and inspiration were such an exception in class 1). It
may be concluded that factor treatment of the test sentence in relation to different

51

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run an. o es una- as”. v- cans

Table 1. Frequencies of the Principal ‘none in the Phrase ”This is so simple That
I Have to Say It” for Speaker H. (In 44 notional States)

   

206 I96 236 Normal

:95 zoo-225 Concentration
196 240 Relaxation
240 as Confidence
295 no Arousal
2l0 246 knew:

§§§§§§§§§
§

220 Tension
290 295 295 an Perturbation
330 306 320 346 Frenzy
260 206 222 291 Inspiration
II 11033033044023” 26639031!) 270301 Joy
'2 230 296 200 212 272 296 300320 3I2 307 295 Delight
l3 2l0 236 240 200 250 2l6 270 246 220 220 266 Tinidity
N 220 230 240 206 2|6 2|5 270 260 226 230 280. Embarrassment
"I I90 I96 no 265 I60 no 260 236 225 216 236 Uncertainty
"v 201 2|0 201 2|0 2|6 202 I90 2|6 202 |96 2|6 Doubt
'7 246 220 222 262 I00 I91 237 220 226 212 236 Disenchantment
"' lﬂommmm2n2wmmmm Insult
"' 700 220 326 261 I96 230 200 230 242 221 240 Displeasure
:0 IN 232 246291 196 220 302 260 246 262 211 Revuision
1' 21o 3l0 350 300 225 290 :m 290 296 306 320 Asgmsslveness
3.‘ 250 3I2 330 305 300 3|1 366310 320 306 330 Angel:
7' W 300 332 202 2:2 2m m 312 332 321 332 Indignation
-" 700 201 240 360 216 MO 341 231 2|7 2|0 261 Surprise
25 250 245 212300 206 253 200 270'241 266 212 Confusion
20 205 302 340 4|0 3|0 306 310 320 200 296 360 Amazement
21 200'2I2 240 26."- 220 200 260230 2|0 2|2 231 Shock
28 2!" 230 246 260 222 201 .120 245 220 220 246 Relief
2‘) 220 245 200 300 220 2I6 261 230 2” 220 236 Pleasure
30 I76 I00 2602I5 I11 I90 241 220 I90 I90 222 Satisfaction
3| 2") 222 245 266 240 230 266 240 235 250 270 Anxiety

32 200 2l7 225 246 240 2I5 267 240 232 230 246 Fear

33 275 3"! .100 350 282 260 326 296 295 290 326 Terror

34 225 225 220 2qu mo I90 240 227 206 [90 2|0 Hoe

35 206 2|0 2|0 240 105 I66 260 200 no I70 I70 Melancholy

36 200 200 200 I60 I30 I10 2” I00 I60 I10 I16 Depression

31 200 225 3‘5 206 200 200 260260 2|0 2|0 220 Suffering

38 250 306 310 MO 290 200 346 3l0 305 300 3l0 Repair

30 250 210 226 366 320 300 362 ms 320 3I6 32o Irritation

40 .100 360 332340 200 320 346 330 336 3l2 340 Resentment

4| 207 307 305390 210 296‘3163l0 325 330 260 Hatred

42 270 260 265 240 NO 200 240 230 2|0 200 226 Tenderness (variation 1)
43 220 235 235 260 I65 2|0 266 230 226 220 240 Tenderness (variation 2)
44 2|" 220 2.15 200 I15 206 290250 225 206 I72 Love

 

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristics (states) produces an approximate breakdown of the mass of data into
several classes containing similar states.

The second variant of treatment involved analysis of the succession of vowel phonemes
in the test sentence. He attenpted to reveal certain correlations between the re-
vealed factors and the character of the melodic contours of the phrases analyzed.

and to establish certain types of controlling influences which would form the melodic
contour of the sentence in each individual pronunciation. Factor analysis in relation
to sound revealed two factors. the first of which was found to be correlated with
stressed vowels in the phrase. the second being correlated with stressed vowels. In

other words the computer program of factor analysis did establish certain laws in
the formation of the melodic contour of a statement.

Conclusions: Factor analysis in relation to emotional states revealed four classes

of states; their comparison with spectrographic data showed that these classes are
typified by different degrees of unevenness and range of the fundamental tone (high

for factors I and III, low for factor II) and differences in the location of the
first melodic rise--namely at the vowel "a" in ”Tax npocro. .." for factor III. and
at the first vowel ”0" in ”*rax npocwo...” for factor II)-

II. Investigation of Factor Loads and Analysis of Semantic Content in a Study of
Speaker Individuality

Materials and methods: The initial sentence “Mama Marla Maine" [Mama myla Hanyu;
Mama bathed Man'yal was pronounced by 26 speakers (24 stated it once, one stated it
29 times, and another speaker stated it 35 times). The speakers uttering this
sentence were not asked to read it in the same way. Therefore they read the sentence

differently each time, while remaining within the framework of a given type of communi-
cation. Comparison of the factor loads and the real melodic contours revealed four

basic patterns for the melodic contour of the control sentence.

Twpe I was characterized by a relatively even melodic contour, one with no sharp
rises and falls throughout the entire sentence. Type II was characterized by pro-
nounced type I and II melodic rises separated by a not very large fall. The type III
melodic contour differs from the type II contour in that the fall between the types
I and II melodic rises is very significant, while in comparison with the type I

melodic rise. the type II melodic rise appears more “massive“ than is the case with
the type II melodic contour. The type IV melodic contour is characterized by a

clearly pronounced descending melodic pattern.

Factor analysis in relation to segments of the test sentence revealed the samelaws for
formation of the melodic structure and the “responsibility" carried for this procms:
by the individual factors indicated in part I of this communication.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a 0-9 M. . audios. vva— vain-O

SIGIIFICANG OF PMSODIC AND SPECTRAL PM 0? SPOKEN
SIGNALS EXPRESING DIFFERBJT MIMI. STATE

1.. P. Blokhina, '1‘. G. Gomina

Isolating from an emotionally colored spoken signal the acoustic parameters bearing
information on a given emotional state, and determination of the significance of
each of these parameters is one of the central problem of research on emotionally
colored speech.

Up until now, this problem has mainly been attacked from the standpoint of acoustic
analysis of prosodic characteristics (1-5). Attempts at spectral analysis of eso-
tionally colored spoken signals have been undertaken in a much lesser quantity (6-9).

Our research objective was to determine the significance of individual acoustic
parameters (prosodic and spectral) in spoken signals expressing different emotional
states by applying the analysis-synthesis-analysis method.

We used English-language material for our intonographic and spectrographic analysis
of emotionally colored speech. We selected emotional states falling within the
classes joy, anger, fear and melancholy in cowarison with neutrally colored speech,
which we referred to as normal. This report discusses the results of the synthesis
stage and of stbsequent listener analysis.

A two-syllable nonsense signal simulating primary and secondary syllables in experi-
mental sentences uttered by English speakers was used as the aaterial for synthesis.
The experimental material was synthesized at the 1.8? [not further identified] of the
First Moscow State Pedagogical Institute of Foreign Languages imeni H. mores. The
synthesizer was part of a complex of apparatus intended for primary analysis and
synthesis of speech. fashioned out of an "Ural-14" computer complex. The umber of
temporal intervals in the programs: was 45. The TMHT. parameter is described by a five-
digit code (from 5 to 160 msec with a spacing of 5 msec). For is described by

an eight-digit code (from '78 msec to 50 msec with a spacing of 78 msec). Parameters
P1, P7, P3 are described by a seven-digit code with variations in the following
ranges: ZOO-1.470 Hz, SOD-3,040 Hz, LOGO-6,080 Hz. Parameters Facnr 1"“), PW“,
are described by a four—digit code in the following ranges: 600-2,400 Hz, 1.000-
l,050 Hz, LOGO-9,950 Hz. The amplitude parameters of all types of formants are
described by a two-digit code. The synthesizer can work with {our asplitude values:

“Or “min! “med! “max-

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The program fed into the synthesizer was written on the basis of conclusions made

as a result of instrumental analysis of the experimental material contained in
statements made by 11 speakers. The synthesis program was written with a consider-
ation for only those emotional state characteristics which were most common--that is,
those which were noted among all or most speakers. (In view of the limited techni-
cal possibilities of the synthesizer we were unable to include in the program a
number of acoustic characteristics isolated in the course of spectral analysis).

In comparison with normal. the following characteristics were found to be the most

common: For the state of joy--expansion of range and a rising-falling contour for
the char [frequent-v of the fundamental tone}: the vocal saturation of phrases;

shifting of spectral energy into the high frequency range; expansion of the spectrum
of stressed and unstressed vowels, and higher intensity of stressed vowels at high
frequencies; for the state of melancholy--narrowing of range, and a falling contour
for the ChOT; consonant saturation of phrases; shifting of spectral energy toward
lower frequencies, narrowing of the spectrum of stressed vowels: for the state of
anger--expansion of range and a falling contour for the ChOT; consonant saturation
of phrases, shifting of spectral energy into the high frequency range, expansion of
the spectrum of stress vowels, and growth in their intensity; for the state of fear
[sic; the word “anger" was probably intendedl--expansion of range and a rising con-
tour for the ChOT, consonant saturation, shifting of spectral energy into the high
frequency range, expansion of the spectrum of stressed vowels, and growth in their
intensity; for the state of fear--expansion of range and an ascending contour for the
ChOT, consonant saturation, shifting of the energy spectrum into the high frequency
range, insignificant expansion of the spectrum of stressed vowels.

The program was written for the neutral state and for each of the emotional states

named above. The program written for the neutral state was subjected to change in
stages. The first stage entailed variation of the frequency characteristics of the

signal with all of the rest of the parameters remaining unchanged. In the second
stage the changes in the ChOT were supplemented first by modification of the length
of consonant sounds and then modification of the length of vowel sounds. In the
third stage the high frequency components of the vowel spectrum were introduced
(during simulation of intense emotions), after which their amplitude was ’ncreased
by one order of magnitude. Each separate modification of the initial program
corresponding to a normal state was recorded on ferromagnetic film. Thus we ob-

tained: a) signals in which only one of the prosodic or spectral characteristics

was varied; b) signals with variations in prosodic characteristics (ChOT and length);
c) signals with modifications of spectral characteristics; d) signals with simul-
taneous variations in prosodic and spectral characteristics. The model of a parti-
cular emotional state was a summational signal including both prosodic and spectral
modifications typical of the given emotional state. Synthesized signals were
analyzed by means of a spectrum analyzer with the purpose of testing the adequacy of
spoken signals to program-simulated signals. Analysis of the obtained spectrograms
indicated thatthesimulated and synthesized signals were identical, making it possible
to go onto the next stage of the research-~listener analysis.

Two series of listener analysis were conducted, with seven experienced listeners
lurticipating. The same listeners participated in both analysis series. The

second series was conducted with the purpose of checking the reliability of data
obtained in the first series. Comparison of the results of the two series demonstrated

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Ul‘l‘ﬂ-IAL UJI‘. Ul‘hl

their sufficiently good match. The instructions required the listeners to perform
two tasks: 1. classify a nonsense stimulus in relation to the following character-
istics: a) neutrality-emotionality, b) positive emotion/negative emotion. c) intense
emotion/weak emotion. At first this test was performed as the subjects listened to
complete models of emotional states, and subsequently while listening to signals in
which certain acoustical parameters were modified. Each emotionally colored non-
sense stimulus was paired with an emotionally neutral nonsense stimulus, the pause
between them being 2 seconds. 2. Determine emotional state on the basis of the
nonsense stimulus provided. In this case the subjects listened only to the complete
models of the emotional states and the normal recording.

The results of listener analysis permit the following conclusion, tentative for the
moment.

In the first half. all listeners without exception were able to distinguish the
normal stimulus from stimuli simulating emotional state. Judging from the responses

of the listeners they were able to distinguish strong from weak emotional states
and positive from negative emotional states rather easily (see Table 1).

As is obvious from this table, the listeners are able to classify joy and melancholy
with sufficient adequacy. The most difficulty occurred in identification of signals
simulating anger and fear. In general the listeners confidently related these
signals to strong and negative emotions. but separation of the latter from one
another was a complex task. Thus the signal simulating anger was identified as
anger by 57 percent of the listeners and as fear by 43 percent. The signal simu-
lating fear was classified as fear by 31 percent of the listeners and as anger by

69 percent. These difficulties in identifying these models compelled us to conduct

one more series of listener analysis, in which signals simulating fear and anger
were presented to the listeners in pairs.

The listeners were told that two successive signals they were to hear belonged to
different classes--one to anger and the other to fear. The task of the listeners
was to classify the presented signals appropriately. In this stage of analysis

80 percent of the listeners correctly evaluated the synthesized signals presented
to them.

One interesting fact that should be noted is that signals with modified spectral
characteristics (expansion of spectrum and growth in the intensity of vowel formants)
whicndid not undergo corresponding change in their prosodic parameters were classi-
fied by the listeners as manifestations of weak negative emotions (caution, mild
anger, reproach), though according to the results of spectrographic analysis these
spectral modifications were typical of emotional states such as anger, fear and,

to the greatest degree. joy. In all probability the spectral modifications typical
of the state of joy cannot by themselves (without participation of prosodic
characteristics) transmit this emotional state. Moreover we should also consider
the still inadequately high technical possibilities of the synthesizer we used,
making it impossible to simulate finer modifications of the spectrum.

An analysis of the listener responses revealed parameters promoting adequate identi-
fication of the corresponding emotional states. The principal parameter in identi-
fication of joy is the ChOT (its contour and range). When only the frequency
contour was modified (narrowing of the range and depression of the frequency level).

56

FOR OFIWCJAI.USE()NLY
Data From Listener Analysis (Percentages)

‘1 Emotional Intense weak Positive E
_ State Emotion Emotion motion g
100 100 - 85

100 20 80 -
100 65 35 8

100 100 - -
a 0“ Us a evens. van v. sue

the listeners were able to classify this zone only as a negative emotion (anxious
remorse, caution, fear, reproach, displeasure). mitional increase in the length
of consonants and vowels per-itted the listeners to establish the meatsrship of
the given signal to the melancholy class with sufficient reliability.

Table 2. tc/tv Ratio Within Syllables (in Relative (hits)

 

State Pirst Syllable Second Syllable
Anger 2 . 88 4
Fear 3 . 56 S . 11

Although auditor analysis of the emotional states of "anger” and "fear“ was con-
ducted in special conditions, we can still isolate the dominant parameters parti-
cipating in identification of these emotional states (though this conclusion re-
quires further testing more 80 than do the others). These parameters include the

frequency contour typical of the given emotional states: Rising in the presence
of fear and falling in the presence of anger, together with an increase in the length

of the first consonant and a decrease in the length of the second consonant coupled
with a simultaneous decrease in the length of vowels. Redistribution of the length

of a consoth and a vowel within a syllable may be significant in this case (see
Table 2).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Vitt, N. V., ”Expression of Emotional States in Speech Intonation," Candidate
Dissertation, mscow, 1965.

2. Uldall, 3., "Attitudinal Meanings Conveyed by Intonational Contours,“ LANGUAB
AND $98804, Vol 13, 1958.

3. Lieberman, Ph.. and Hichaels, 8., “Some Aspects of Fundamental Frequency and
Envelope Amplitude as mlated to the Emotional Content of Speech," JASA, Vol 34,
No 7, 1962.

4. Bonner, M. R., "Changes in the Speech Pattern Under Emotional 'nension,” 1112
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOIDGY, Vol 52, No 2, 1943.

5. Fairbanks. G., and Pronovost, 91., ”Vocal Pitch During Simulated motion,“
SCIENCE. Vol BU, 1938.

6. Williams, C., and Stevens, K. , "Emotions and Speech: Some Acoustical Correlates,"
JASA, Vol 52, No 4, 1972.

7. Nikonov, A. V., and Popov, V. A., “Structural anaracteristics of the Speech of
a Human Operator in Stressful Conditions," 'Rech' i emotsii" [Speech and
Emotional, leningrad. 1975.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
B. Prolov, M. P., and Taubkin, v. 1... "Influence of a Speaker": notional State
on Some Parameters of the Speech signal," in "Rech' i emtsii," Leningrad,

1975.
9. Tishchenko, A. 6., “Dynamics of Fomnts in the Spectrum of Audible Speech as

an (bjective Indicator Distinguishing Positive Pm Negative muons,"
mMIOIESKAYA RIGIDGIYA I MEDI‘ISINA, No 5, 1968.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a uses see a eu use. yua- v. ....

mmmnou WENT OF THE TIHBRB CHARACTERISTICS or SPEECH
A. P. Varfolomyev

Despite the fact that the overwhelming majority of works describing the system of
prosodic characteristics of speech make mention of its timbre, the question as to

timbre as an element of speech (and all the more so of language) possessing a certain
information content for practical purposes remains open. As a rule we see the term
"timbre of voice“ used, and not “timbre of speech." And when discussion of the
timbre of speech is found to be unavoidable, authors are compelled to limit them-
selves to general statements as to the possibility of expressing the emotional
properties of speech through timbre, forming a subtext and so on. the fact that

a listener‘s consciousness associates the timbre of the speaker with his emotional

and mental state has been mentioned more than once (1,2).

We did not come across any attempts at classifying the tiubre of speech in relation
to the particular content it may express. The universally known classification of
voices (alto, soprano, tenor and so on) is hardly applicable to the timbre of
speech, since it does not correlate with any semantic elements of the speech act.

He obviously cannot base a classification of the timbre of speech on how content
descriptions of timbre group together and contrast with one another. Instead,

such a classification should be arrived at by seeking the laws governing change in
the timbre of speech in connection with the change in its information content. It is

not our objective here to arrive at such a classification, because to record changes
in the timbre of speech, we must first of all find a means of describing the informa-
tion content of timbre--that is, a means of accounting for the semantics of a
speaker's timbre within a certain excerpt of speech.

By describing a speaker‘s tisbre in relation to its information content, we would
be able to reflect in a certain way the individual characteristics of speech. From
our point of view the timbre characteristics of speech are the most individualized,
and apparently this is precisely why it is so difficult to describe the content of
these characteristics. Those aspects of the content of the tinbre of speech that
yield to description and which may be correlated with expressions of the speaker's
emotional and mental state will find their use in general analysis of the emotional
characteristics of speech.

We attenpted to study the information content of the tisbre of speech by the known
method of the semantic differential (3) , based on recording the verbal evaluations

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

made by subjects of a certain aspect of a spoken stimulus. The use of the human
auditory system as a sufficiently sophisticated analyzer of individual and emotional
characteristics of speech has already recommended itself positively (4).

Methods of the Experiment

Subjects were asked to evaluate the timbre of the voice of a speaker (tape-recorded)
uttering a certain phrase, using scales such as ”good-bad," ”large-small,” "happy-sad'
and so on. About 80 such scales were used in all. The scales were divided into

five ranks, each having a score from 1 to 5. As an example the scores for the ”good-
bad" scale reflected perception of the following ranks of timbre: l--”very good,"
2--’good,' 3~—“neither," 4--”bad,' S--"very bad." The lexical and grammatical

content of the phrases serving as stimuli was the same for all analyzed timbres;
consequently the main element that underwent variation was the timbre of the
speaker's voice.

College students of different majors and specialties and senior high school students
served as the subjects. Each stimulus were evaluated by an average of 50 subjects.

Printed questionnaries bearing a list of the scales of characteristics and an
explanation of the scoring system were used.

Statistical treatment of the data entailed finding the average scores for each
stimulus in relation to all scales, and correlation and factor analysis of these
averages.

Two series of experiments were conducted (with )1 and 17 stimuli).

Results and Discussion

Obviously average scores falling between 1 and 2 and between 4 and 5 would be signi-
ficant. Averages such as these would persuasively indicate that the timbre character-
istics of speech can be differentiated by the perceiver.

Thus for example, the information content of one certain timbre is expressed by the
characteristics "sad,” "old," "inaccurate," "rough" and so on. The information
content of another is expressed by the characteristics "clear,“ l'accurate," ”strong,"
"good," "calm" and so on. One can easily be persuaded of the qualitative consistency
of each of these descriptions.

correlation-factor analysis of the average scores revealed the principal factors
defining the way the content of the timbre characteristics of speech is perceived.
One of them is represented by the characteristics "calm-irritable," "happy-sad,"
”unconstrained-tense," "smooth-rough," “good-evil" and so on--that is, by character-
istics reflecting perception of the speaker's tone.

The second factor is represented by the characteristics ”clear-distorted,“ "good-bad,"
"beautiful-not beautiful." "pure-hoarse," "usual-unusual." This factor combines
perception in relation to subjective assessment and clearness criteria.

61

FOR OFTWCJAL.USEINVLV
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-ROP82-00850R000600030032-8

I’Un U- a Asthu v95. v-uuo

 

-I

Figure 1. Intersection Plane of Factors 1 and II

 

3,5 I rritated

Figure 2. Intersection Plane of Base Scales

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP02-00850R000500030032-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

.0";
1y
Put-3
Figure 3. Intersection Plane of Factors II and IV
Key:
1. Normal 3. Paresis
2. Fibrosis 4. Laryngitis

Figure 1 shows the position of the tinbre stimuli in the intersection plane of these
two factors (determined for the first series, consisting of 11 stimuli). That the

factors were interpreted correctly can be seen from a oonparison of this space with
the disposition of these stimuli in the intensction plane of the so-called base

scales (the scales which most fully express the semantics of particular factor
groups). The stimuli fall within this space in correspondence with their average
scores on scales defined as being base scales.

For one factor group we adopted "dominant" as the base scale, and "hoarse" as the
base scale for the other. The similarity in the distribution pattern of the stimuli
in both spaces indicates, in our opinion, both that the factors are interpreted
correctly and that the base scales are selected correctly (see figures 1 and 2) .

Among the samples of speech studied, some belonged to speakers with a normal speech
system (stimuli S, 0, 8 and 9) while othersbelongedtotipeakers with certain speech dis-
orders: fibrosis (l.3,4), paresis (- .7), and laryngitis (10,11). 'lhe use of normal.
and pathological speech is motivated by the fact that differences in the tin-bre
characteristics of speech are highly significant in relation to such a sanple, and

manifestation or nonmanifestation of these differences has fundamental significance
to determining the possibility of using it for diagnostic purposes.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-UK oft-1L0“. oar. unm

The position of timbre stimuli in the intersection plane of the factors and in the
intersection plane of the base scales indicates a clear tendency toward grouping

in relation to the criteria for normal and pathological, and toward differentiation
of stimuli in relation to pathology, depending on its nature. 'mus the second factor
also represents what is normal.

Our work permits the conclusion that it is possible to analyze the tinbre character-
istics of speech by the method of. the semantic differential. m: the character-
istics of the "tone" factor managed to reveal themselves attests to the promise of

studying the emotional and expressive content of speech represented by timbre.

A description of the information carried by the characteristics of the timbre of
speech, when compared with an acoustic description of the same stimuli, may lead to
creation of automatic systems that could determine the individual's emotional and
mental state on the basis of the tilbre of his speech, and to creation of systems
able to diagnose speech pathology.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. 'l‘orsuyev, G. P., ”Fonetika nngliyskogo yazyka' [The Phonetics of the English
Language], Moscow, 1950.

2. Vaarask, P. K., "Tonicheskiye sredstva rechi" [The Tonic Resources of Speech],
Tallin, 1964.

3. Osgood. Ch., Suci, 6., and Tannenbaum, 9., "The Measurement of Meaning,’I
Urbana, 1957.

4. Galunov, V. 1.. Manerov. V. Kh., and Tarasov, V. 1., ”Auditory Analysis of
Speech Recorded in the Presence of Emotional states simulated by Different
Methods.” in "Rech' i emotsii" [Speech and motions], Leningrad, 1975.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF PERSONAL HEARINGS TO REALIZATION OF THE
PHYSICAL GIARACI‘ERISTICS OF A SPOKEN SIAM? (ACWRDING ‘10 CLINICAL OBSERVATIWS)

Ye. N. Vinarskaya, A. S. Nikiforov, s. A. Soldatova

Research Objective

To be realized, the physical characteristics of a speech signal require externally
determined energy outlays by the body, which change depending on the complexity of
both the structure of the signal itself and the operational structure of the act of
conmuuucation. The question is, would consideration of just the objective complexity

of these structures be enough to arrive at a conclusion as to the level
of energy to be expended?

Research Methods

To answer this question we used the method of clinical observation of a group of
patients (150) suffering focal lesions of the mesencephalic-diencephalic division
of the brain, manifested as symptoms of insufficiency of the ascending activating
effects of nonspecific structures (1).

Research Results

Dynamic observation of our patients showed that as pathology proceeds, they must
gradually experience a greater personal interest if they are to enter into spoken
communication. Their speech becomes slower, quiet, monotonous, emotionally unex-
pressive, and lexically and grammatically simple: speech becomes increasingly more
tiring to the patients, and they exhibit an increasingly greater need for supple-
mentary motivation or volitional effort. In a more-pronounced phase of illness

patients cease to use speech at all in situations not having direct personal meaning
to them. However, if a patient is made emotionally interested in the topic of
discussion and in the results to which such a disenssion might lead, he arrives at
the necessary motivation for speech, and he begins to speak. The more personally
meaningful the topic and purpose of discussion become to the patient, the less con-
strained, louder and more expressive the patient's speech becomes and the richer is
his use of segmental and supersegmental phonetic resources and of lexical and
grammatical resources. Thus one of our subjects, patient 2., 42 years old. who was

unable to make any sort of speech contact with medical personnel and even his wife,
unexpectedly revealed the ability to advise his favorite daughter on discipline in

public prior to an examination: In the course of an hour he essentially answered all
of her questions with a quiet, monotonous voice. Just prior to his death, another

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f‘!“ urns .I‘h Udl'o VI‘I—I

subject who was even more gravely ill, patient x., 57 years old, suddenly entered in-
to spoken contact with his wife when she broached the subject of writing his will.

he a rule speech of patients improved in all respects when the discussion turned to
their health, to the prospects of a certain method of treatment and to the prognosis
of illness. As an example patient 3., 43 years old, who exhibited a pronounced lack
of motivation to speak, reacted to questions with monosyllabic, quiet, unintelligible
and intonationally unexpressive replies, but when it was remarked that the color of
her face was good that day, she showed signs of interest, and clearly uttered in a

sonorous voice with an intonation of prideful joy: "I never use any sort of creams.
just cold water and soap.”

It may be concluded that focal lesion of the usencephalic-diencephalic division of
the brain, coupled with selective disturbance of ascending activating effects of

its nonspecific structures upon cortical and suboortical neurons specific to speech
behavior make these neurons functionally lacking. while in the normal individual

the excitability of these neurons is raised to the necessary level automatically,

in our patients such regulation loses its automatic nature and therefore becomes
accessible to analytical study. The method of clinical observation is enough to
permit the conclusion that imparting meaningfulness to the topic of conversation in
relation to a given personality has fundamental significance to making speech be-
havior possible irrespective of the complexity of its structure. In some cases
personal interest assumes exceptional forms in relation to regulation of the energetic

support of the individual's speech behavior. The following observation is an example.

Valeriy 1., 24 years old, learned that he was going to die soon. This fate was
postponed by his wife Marina, who took the risk of subjecting her husband to a new
method of treatment. From that moment on, and until his death 4 years later, Valeriy
devoted his entire life, in all of its manifestations, to the service of Marina,

to her happiness and welfare. Everything in which Marina was interested acquired
personal meaning to Valeriy; all else had no meaning to him, and was unconsciously
ignored by him. As Valeriy's physical strength drained away, the restrictions he
imposed upon his own personal activity became increasingly more severe. Several
times in the course of these years Valeriy was on the brink of death, but despite

the severity of his physical state, he unexpectedly recovered once again, because

"he could not bear to anger Marina,“ because “he had no right to abandon her in such
a state" (she was expecting), because "funerals are difficult in winter, and Marina's
labor had to be easy. "

In the middle of the fourth year the patient's state deteriorated dramatically once
again, excessive mental and physical exhaustion developed, and various symptoms of
organic affliction of the central and peripheral nervous system appeared, to include
in the mesencephalic-diencephal ic division. It is noted in the disease history that
the patient responded to questions with a quiet, unexpressive and monotonous voice,
often pronouncing only the first syllable of words making up very short sentences.
Soon the patient once again developed pneumonia. severe, painful contractures of

the arms and legs arose, and convulsive spasms appeared in individual muscle groups.
His speech became almost inaudible and incomprehensible, and he almost stopped
talking. However, on the day following the birth of Marina's child,Valeriy was not
to be recognized. All who entered the ward were greeted by a smile, and using a
loud, emotionally expressive voice and clearly articulated words, he informed them

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the weight and length of his daugher and the contents of his telephone conversa—
tion with his wife. Despite cachexia of the greatest severity and worsening organic
affliction of the brain, the patient was able to read and to work out the schedule

for his daughter's care, and he was able to maintain an interest in talking with
visitors about Marina's future and, in this connection, the image of women in Russian
literature. He was unable to maintain any sort of conversation on topics not having
a relationship to his health, his wife and daughter: His voice would die down, the
rhythm, intonational structure and articulation of sounds would become irregular,
phrases would become simple, and Valeriy would fall altogether silent.

Conclusions

When taken all together, the clinical facts suggest that energetic support to the indi-
vidual's speech behavior, and the physical characteristics of the spoken signal as
well, are dependent primarily on the personal meaning of this signal (2.3) within the
structure of the activity going on. This premise should obviously be accounted for

when creating technical systems interacting with man and automatically identifying
his emotional state on the basis of the spoken signal.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Vinarskaya, Ye. N., Nikiforov, A. 8., and Soldatova, s. A., 2H. NEVIDPAT. I
PSIKH. IM. KORSAKOVA, No 9, 1977, p 1347.

2. Leont'yev, A. N., "Deyatel'nost', soznaniye, lichnost'" [Activity, Consciousness,
Personality], Politizdat, 1975.

3. Vilyunas, V. K., "Psikhologiya emotsional'nykh yavleniy" [The Psychology of
Emotional Phenomenal, MGU, 1976.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI VI'I'ILIAI. var. UI‘LI

SPEED! RECOGIITION SYSTEM RBCOGNIZBS SPBAKBIG BY VOICE
'r. K. Vintsyuk, A. I. Kulyas, A. G. shinkazh

A learning phonemic speech recognition system operating at the Ukrainian 858. Academy
of Sciences Institute of cybernetics is capable of recognizing, with high reliability,
the words and coalescent sentences of only that speaker to which the system had been
tuned in its learning mode (1,2). the reliability of. recognizing the spoken signals
of another speaker dropped to 70 percent, given a lexicon of 300 words. These facts
permit the assertion that both the SPOROII signal description employed and the recogni-
tion and learning method account for voice individuality. If this is so. then the
description and the recognition method may be applied, without any special changes,
for recognition of the individuality of the speaker in relation to some key phrase

or password.

A mathematical model of a s_>oken signal, the recognition method, the nuthod by which
the system learns to recognize the speakerby voice and the results of experiments
are briefly described below.

Spoken signal Description (3)
A SPOKE" signal is a sequence of vectors (elements) read out uniformly in time:

X.=(x}. x,..... x.. .... Q.

where l is the length of the realization. Elements x1 are 48-dimensional vectors
with binary components 0 or 1. Component xiv, with element x1 having number I), is
equal to ll, if at the i-th went in time the energy in the v-th spectral band is

above a certain threshold 0v, and simultaneously greater than the energy in the
neighboring or (v-l)-th band. The 0v thresholds are chosen such that the pauses of

vectors x; would be zero in 90 percent of the cases.

Thus elements *1 represent the sign of the frequency derivative in relation to the
frequency of the current spectrum of speech. Obviously elements x1 define the posi-
tion of the maximums and minimums of spectral energy on the frequency axis and,
equal 1y so, the quality of the formant maximums. The sequence X1 contains informa-
tion on change in the position of the maximums and minimums oi' the current spectrun
with respect to time.

Sequence xi does not depend explicitly on the intensity of pronunciation.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mathematical Model of a Spoken Signal Accounting for Voice Individuality

Now let us describe a mathematical model of word signals applicable to phoneme recog-
nition. This must be done before the method of speech recognition can be explained.

Observed realizations x1 are interpreted as the results of random distortions in
standard signals of the same length l. The set of standard signals for one speaker
is determined as follows.

let there be a finite ordered set E of standard elements e(j) , where j is the number
(name) of the element. Let us assume that standard elements e(j) have the same
physical meaning as elements xinfactors with binary conponents. Elements e(j)

are elementary segments of speech with a duration of 15 msec, and they represent
phonemes, or usually parts of phonemes.

Each word or word combination with number k is defined by phonetic-acoustic trans-
cription Rk--a sequence of element names from set E:

Rt‘qu In. .... In. .... liq.)v m .

where qk is the nunber of symbols in the transcription of the k-th word.

Transcription RR is defined as an operator which, being applicable to E, generates
the initial standard signal for the k-th word:

Rm. (din). (l‘Uu)~ .... Nb)- 0U“, ”‘ (2)

Next we introduce transformation v of the initial standard spoken signal. Operator
v, when applied to RkE generates a standard signal with length l>qk with the follow-
ing structure:

V“ I: -— WM)- "::.°‘."'.! . "BIL—"'- ﬁlm) . ..., ‘1!!L".:;'_.°".‘l) . ....
' ’. ' v. [on v, pa: V. p”
«I ). .. e(l )
. ‘f- ..__?!n__«e.. e.. e.. 2.). (a)
v“ pan

where vs are the components of operator w-that is. v- (v1, v2, .... vs, ..., VClk)’
The following limitations are imposed on whole numbers v5:

m(k,s)\;v,slM(lr. s). s=l. 2. q. (4)
"a
2m-.. (5)
s-—-l
69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'vee Us a evenne— vua- Us nun

NululJoImllipsx (4)45) determine the set V(k.l) of operators v generating, from
Raﬁ, all possible standard signals ka8 with length 1.

Assume that the first and last elements in the word transcriptions are represented
by an elementary standard pause signa1--that is, jkl - jk -1. In addition. let
m(k.1)-m(k,qk)-o and M(k, l)-H(k,gk)-¢. For all other 5 2t is assumed that m(k,s>0).

Obviously the standard word signals vaks, v)V(k,l) are coarticulated signals
distinguished by a nonlinear pronunciation rate and different (including zero) length
of pauses at the start and end of a word. The rate is adjusted by the choice of

numbers vs, and coarticulation is accounted for by the presence of such 3 that
m(k,s)=M(k,s)-1.

These constructs account for the fact that speech is generated out of elementary
"bricks" common to all words, and they account for the main factor of variability
in speech--nonlinear change in the rate of pronunciation.

Variables E, {Rh} (N--nunber of words in the lexicon).

{Mk 3), Wk. 3) “$315

_N
01-]

define the parameters of the gramar generating the standard SS‘OROD signals. 'mese
parameters are individual to each speaker. They are evaluated on the basis of a
learning sample consisting of realizations of a word uttered by the same speaker (3).

Speaker Recognition Method

If we designate by p(Xi/ka(d)E(d) the probability of signal Xi on the condition that
the standard signal is

vR. (d)E('d). v6V(k. I. d).

where d is the number of the speaker, using the method of maximal: likelihood we can
write the criterion for detection of a speaker on the basis of pronunciation of
one word of a lexicon consisting of N words as:

d(x.) w 9'1.— -.;- mm p(X./vR.(d)E(d» (6)

Let us assume that observed elements xi derived from standard elements e1 as a result
of independent distortions by additive noise with binary, identically distributed
and independent components. men criterion (6) could be written in the form:

don) =--'E%'*"""'""v7w":1"-n EIWM-(VRddMNDJ (7)
70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where (vR.(d)E(d)). =e, --an element with nulber i in sequence katd)E(d) defined

by relationship (3); ﬂ(x1,ei)--the Sewing distance between at; and e1. similarly
as with phonemic word recognition (1,3), criterion (7) is realized as follows: The

minimum with respect to v is sought by the dynamic programming method, and the minimm
with respect to k and d is found by complete sorting.

In this case when the speaker is recognized by a password or a word combination
k'. minimization with respect to k is not necessary.

Characteristics of the Model

Different parameters of the generating grannar reflect individual voice characteristics
differently.

Set £(d) primarily expresses the geometric characteristics of the speaker's articula-
tory system and the means of articulation of the principal sounds. Phonetic—acoustic
transcriptions Rk(d) depend on E(d) and reflect the individual manner of pronuncia-
tion of coarticulated speech--words in this case. Variablesm(k.s), M(k.s) express
the individual rate of pronunciation.

of the three sets listed above, £(d) would apparently be the least individualistic.
In particular it may be suggested that 2(d) does not depend on the speaker, and

set £(d') of one speaker d' may be substituted for B as being cannon to all speakers.
Then only

(RAJ. and f (m(k.s).M(k.sm.§...1-,

would be evaluated in the speaker recognition learning node.

Experimental Results

In the first experiment speakers were recognized on the basis of the key phrase
"I an a person."

Nenty speakers, including four women. took part in the experiment. The phrase was
spoken in the presence of the noise of a BESH-é computer room with the speech recog—
nition system operating normally. The signal/noise ratio was 20 db. An MIC-61
microphone was used.

Each speaker repeated the phrase 10 times with an interval of 1 minute between
repetitions. Four out of 10 of the repetitions were used as the speaker learning

sample. Set 8(d) was common to all speakers. The latter was represented by the
an!) Emotion of one of the male speakers, calculated in previous learning experi-

ments in the recognition of spoken words. There are a total of 80 elements in E.
Transcription ded) and the variable

‘ (.m(k.. ’. d). M(k0. s. d’) i .q;.'

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
were determined for a given qk. =19 during the learning process.
scribed in (3) was used for this purpose.

An algorithm de-

The tables below show the results of recognizing learning and control samles

separately for male and female speakers. Criterion (7) was used in relation to a
fixed k =k'.

 

 

 

 

Men Women
Total Total Total Total
Realizations Errors Realizations Errors
learning 64 1 learning 16 0
samples samples
Control 96 2 Control 24 8
samples eagles

As follows from the tables, the results of speaker recognition were satisfactory
for men. The relatively poorer results for female speakers can be explained by the
fact that set 1-:(d) determined for male speakers poorly appoximates the signals of
female speakers. Individual E(d) must be used for each speaker.

Then we introduced recognition refusals (l).
for a refusal threshold of 12:

The following results were obtained

 

 

 

 

 

Women
hen Total
Total mali-
Reallzations Errors Refusals rations Errors Refusals
learning 64 0 2 learning 16 0 0
samples samles
Control 96 0 3 Control . 24 2 6
samples samples

Thus the sum total of speaker recognition is characterized by the following data:
1 percent errors and 5 percent recognition refusals.

In the second experiment the optimum pair (d,k) minimizing criterion (7) served as
the recognition response. In this case the number of the word and the number of the
speaker are indicated--that is. the word recognition and speaker recognition problems
are solved simultaneously. There was a total of 205 classes in.the experiment--

200 words recorded from one speauer and five recorded from male speakers uttering
the key phrase "Listen, computer" for identification purposes. At first the

process of learning to recognize 200 words of one speaker was performed-4;, 3k and
(m(k,s), M(k,s)) were evaluated. Then the process of learning to recognize speakers

on the basis of the key phrase was carried out in the presence of a fixed E-—Rk.(d)
and (m(k',s.d), H(k',s,d) were evaluated. The resulting significance levelof
recognition was 99 percent.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclusion

Resources for learning and phonemic recognition of spoken words, developed and investi--
gated by the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Cybernetics, may be used
successfully to identify speakers on the basis of their pronunciation of. passwords

or key phrases.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Vintsyuk. T. K., and Shinkazh, A. G., "Phonemic Recognition of Spoken Words:
Learning and Recognition Algorithm, and Experimental Insults,“ in "'l‘ezisy
dokladov VIII Vsesoyuznogo seminara 'Avtomaticheskoye raspoznavaniye slukhovykh
obrazov'" (Abstracts of Reports at the Eighth All-Union Seminar “Autonatic
Recognition of Auditory Patterns], L'vov, 1974, pp 19-24.

2. Vintsiuk, T. K., Gavrilyuk, o. N., and Shinkazh, A. 6.. "Phoneme-by-Phoneme
Recognition of Speech Conposed of the Given Vocabulary," in "The Proceedings
of the 1976 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal

Processing," Philadelphia, 1976.
3. thsyuk. '1'. IL, and Shinkazh, A. 6., “Automatic Transcription of Patterns on

the Basis of a Learning Sample," in ”Obrabotka i raspoznavniye signalov" [signal
Processing and Recognition], Kiev, 1975, pp 102-120.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fun vs a Oblﬂh woe. vnua

EMIONALITY 01’ THE PEBONALITY AS RELATED '10 PSYGO-
PﬂYSIOIDGICAL MD SPEECH enams'ncs

N. V. Vitt, L. V. L. B. Yermolayeva-Tomina

The emotionality of an individual has a dual origin-~biological and social. Being a
component of temperamentuthe dynamic aspect of behavior, man's emotionality. as
outwardly expressed, is unavoidably subordinate to socially accepted norms, and
this is manifested especially strongly in speech. All changes in the way the subject
regulates his reactions to emotion-producing situations fall on a bipolar scale
corresponding to the binary principle of the expression of emotions in speech--
voluntary-involuntary expression (1). When studying the expression of emotions
in speech. it is inportant to find characteristics which would in a sense break

through the regulatory filters. irrespective of the level and individual structure
of the person's emotionality (2).

within the context of 'speech-emotions-personality," there are at least four proper-
tiesof human emotionality that are met significant: 1) emotional reactivity (equat-
able to V. D. Nebylitsin's impulsiveness); 2) emotional stability-lability, equatable
to the frequency with which emotions arise; 3) intensity, which can be determined
easily from the EEG and from speech characteristics; 4) duration, manifested as the
persistence of an emtion.

The objective of our research was to cowaratively analyze general emtional re-
activity and its expression in speech.

we used a modified variant of P. P. Blonskiy'sprocedure coupled with simultaneous
EEG recording. The subject was asked to recall, in his memory, and “relive" emo-
tion-producing situations of different modalities. The latent time of the recall
of auction-producing situations and the intensity of changes in brain biorhythms

in response to ”reliving“ such situations were recorded. Spoken comunications
were analyzed in terms of two basic factors--formal linguistic and semantic content.
The verbal material included verbal statements by subjects in oral and written form.
and a recording of oral responses to Rorschach inkblots. The experiments were per-
formed individually with each of 40 subjects (3).

Indicators of general emotionality included the average latent time of recall and
the cumulative changes in biorhythms in response to recall of oration-producing

situations. A matrix (see Table l) was drawn up on the basis of an analysis of the
distribution of the frequency with which rhythms increased, decreased or remained

unchanged when the subject recalled each modality--joy. anger, fear and displeasure.

74
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 1. changes in Cunulative Rhythm Energy in Response to Recall of ﬁltration—
Producing situations of Different modalities

Emotional
S tate Dominant
Reproduced Hemisphere Forehead Occiput
Anger Left Delta Delta
Theta Alpha
Alpha Be ta-l
Beta-2 Beta-2
Pear Right Delta
Beta-2 Beta-2
Displeas ure Right Delta Delta
Alpha
Beta- 2
Joy left and Delta Delta
right Then Beta-2
Alpha

Only those changes in rhythm which were observed in more than 50 percent of the

patients were included in this matrix. By using the matrix we were able to monitor
the ease with which emotional states were reproduced and the intensity with which

the emotions were experienced. Local changes in rhythms with respect to 1) left-
right hemisphere and 2) forehead-occiput were superiuposed over the concrete changes
recorded in the rhythms of each subject. 'lhis made it possible to determine the
expressiveness of emotions of different modalities exhibited by each of the subjets.

For the purposes of conparative analysis we considered the following data in the
spoken communications: total length. number of verbs. the nunber of attributes,
with subjective evaluations placed in a separate category, and the mmber of inter-
jections. In terms of semantic content we considered the modality of the produced

text (that is, whether it was stated categorically or unconfidently): the nature of
the topic. defined as static or dramatized--that is, dynamics. 'neuporal character-
istics included the time of the verbal reaction and the length of pauses.

'lhe analysis showed that the level of emotionality and the dominant emotion in the
individual structure of emotionality are expressed more distinctly in the oral form
of verbal communications than the written form.

A comparison of general emotionality and the average time of verbal reactions re-

vealed a v-shaped dependence. The same sort of V-shapcd dependence was discovered
between general emotionality and the indicators of the productivity of creative
verbal comunications (determined in relation to the nuaber of associations).

The EEG indicators for emotion dominance correlated with pauses, with the mnber of
Subjective evaluations made and interjections used by the subjects, and dynamir-
that is. dramatized--narration of the plots.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run on Mt 0AA. van VIM-I

This approach to studying cmotionality of the personality in relation to psycho-
physiological and speech characteristics and application of the corresponding pro-
cedure revealed that it would be possible to study controlled and uncontrolled
expression of emotions.

BIBLIOGRAPI’IY

1. Vitt, N. V., "Simulation of ﬁctional Speech,” in 'Materialy V-go Vsasoyuznogo
sinpoziuma po psikholingvistike i teorii kcmmikatsii' [Proceedings of the

Fifth All—Union Symposium on Psycholinguistics and Conunication meaty],
Part 2, Dbscow, 1975.

2. 01'shannikova, A. Ye., et a1., “Evaluations of Procedures for Diagnosing Eno-
tionality,“ VOPR. PSIKHOIOGII, No 5. 1976.

3. Vitt, N. v.. and Ermolayeva-‘mmina. L. 8., "A Procedure for Revealing Emo-

tionality in Mnemonic Processes." in ”Haterialy v-go Vsesoyuznogo s'yezda
psikhologov 5588' [Proceedings of the Fifth All-mien Congress of USSR

Psychologists], Moscow, 1977.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vnmnsm'ry or spares mos
L. 'r. Vygonnaya

A large number of linguistic questions (the causes of acoustic variability, the
tempo scale of a particular language, the tempo couponents of intonation and so on)
as well as questions associated with clarifying the dependence of the rate of speech
on the speaker's state and on the situation. with evaluating the individual's
capacxty for voluntarily changing his pronunciation rate and for hearing speech
signals transmitted at different tempos, with selecting an optimum ratio between

the tempo of speech transmission and the speech temo typical of the listeners,

and so on, may be clarified by determining how differences in the tempo of speech
differ among representatives of different languages.

Interpretation of the tempo of speech as a particqu language trait is consistent
with the present notion existing among the hearers of a particular language that
speech tempo is a variable characteristic which may be used to distinguish among
representatives of the same language, tooomare one's own and foreign speech and to
make rather accurate evaluations and self-evaluations from the standpoint of such
unique features of speech. The limitations imposed on speech in relation to tenpo
are not rigid. Speakers can vary it significantly while still remaining couprc-
hensible. These variations are an indicator of the speaker's individuality, one

of the characteristics by which the listener can assess the nature and genre of

the statement, the style of speech and the emotional state of the speaker. as well

as the rhythmical and intonational structure of phrases, which reveals the content
of the statements.

Our objective was to reveal the tempo characteristics of Belorussian speech in compari-
son with Russian. The experiment was performed on 27 native Belorussian speakers
havmg facility with literary language (22 men and 5 women).

One of the main difficulties in establishing tempo differences that are significant
to a particular language is the ambiguity of variability in tempo--the fact that
characteristics corresponding to the text, to the individuality and to the emotional
state of the speaker are all represented simultaneously in a spoken message. This
is why special :esearch on tempo requires a standard text which may be deemed hom-
qeneous and neutral. which does not elicit clearly pronounced emotions (of varying
sign and level) in the speaker and which does not motivate him to emphasize, while
reading. speech's function of emotional expression.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PHI ‘Iffl‘ 0A.. (13¢. UNLI

In our experiment we used 20 narrative phrases (806 syllables, 1,870 phonemes)

of varying length--from 21 to 71 syllables. Each phrase had the nature of an
assertion. and it transmitted established facts having no relationship to the speaker
(these were phrases taken from an encyclopedia). Specifically, we used a narrative
statement which, according to published data, is read at a tempo maximally close

to the average teupo of the speaker (1). 'me material was read by the speakers in a
recording studio, where it w.~s tape-recorded. After first becoming acquainted with
the experimental situation, the apeakers--persons with an advanced philological
education-were asked to read the text in a tempo comfortable to them-—in a normal
tempo. After this, the same text was read by another speaker in what was, from the
standpoint of each speaker, a slow and a fast tempo. As he read, the speaker had to
keep in mind his own inpressions of had different ﬁenpos would sound. In one experi—

ment sore of the speakers were asked to read the text at some particular tenpo at
different times (within the same month).

Analysis of the recordings revealed the average pronunciation tempo of each contin-
uous speech excerpt of each speaker in three required tempos. Pauses between phrases
were not considered, since according to (l) pauses in messages. and in narrations
specifically, do not have an influence on the tempo of phrase pronunciation. Three
variants of individual tempo were established for each speaker-mortal, fast and

Given the conditional nature of the speech (we analyzed reading, and not spontaneous
speech, and so on), the differences in the normal tempo of Belorussian speech ob-
tained for native Belorussian speakers having facility with literary language are
found to be extremely indicative when compared with the corresponding data for the
same three gradations of tempo established for native Russian speakers (2,3). For
the latter, the average duration of sound in normal, fast and slow individual tewo
was, respectively, 65-73 msec, 63-60 msec and 75-85 msec. Thus an individual temo
that is slow to native Russian speakers is fast to native Belorussian speakers.

In tho.- case of slow pronunciation of text. the average duration of the sound of
Belorussian speech spoken by most subjects (17 speakers) was 91-111 msec; smaller
groups. had an average duration of 143 msec (8 speakers) and 200 msec (2 speakers).

in the cans..- of fast pronunciation, 17 persons maintained a sound duration averaging
between 9'5 and 63 Hume, U persons had an average from 67 to 71 msec and 2 persons
aVeraged from 77 to 83 msec.

Comparison of the obtained data would show difference in the significance of the
general tempo characteristics of Russian and Belorus:.'an language, as well as

difference in their significance within the framework of the same language spoken by
different representatives of that language.

All three established gradations of speech tempo are equally typical of speakers
using a given language, and given its great significance, variability in tempo
cannot be thought of as random, as fully arbitrary and unpredictable.

'rh-- diverse causes behind variability in tempo require further systematization and
clarification.

78

FOR OFFICIAL ts; LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We were interested in determining how our speakers would respond to an instruction

to speed up and slow down their speech tempo, and in how much of an increase or
decrease in their speech tempo was perceivable by them. The instruction to ”slow
down" the speech tempo produced a rather individual reaction in different speakers.
The speech tempo decreased by 6, 9, 14, 15, la, 23, 25, 30, 33, 37, 41, SS, 59
percent. Most speakers reduced their tenpo by 14-25 percent. The response to a
request to read faster was less variable: All speakers increased their tempo by

not less than 16 percent, with most doing so by either 20-27 percent or 40-41 percent.
'l'ne maximum acceleration of ten'po noted was 67 percent. For speakers whose individual
normal tempo could be interpreted as slow, acceleration of the tempo by 50 percent
elicited the same phenomena noted in a state of emotional tension: The speakers
increased the number cf falsely started words, they omitted certain sounds and

syllables, they misplaced their accents, they made semantically justified word
substitutions, they spoke more loudly and so on.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. 'Pypolohiya intonatsii movlennya" [Typology of Speech Intonationsl, Kiev, 1978,
pp 151-152.

2. Bondarko, 1.. v., Verbitskaya, L. A” and Pavlova, L. P., "Acoustic Characteristic-;

of Russian Speech Depending on Different Pronunciation Tempos," in “Voprosy
fonologii i fonctiki" [Problems in Phonology and Phonetics], Part 1, Moscow,
1971, p 47.

3. Paufoshima, R. P., "Speech Tempo in Some Russian Dialects," in "misskiye govory.
K izucheniyu fonctiki grammatiki, leksiki" [Russian Dialects. Analysis of
Phonetics, Grammar and Vocabulary], Voscow, 1975.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IVA Urn-n u“. vat. Vino:

MUTUAL CORRELATION BETHBEN PERSONAL AND SPEECH
CHARACTERISTICS IN AN EMOTIONALLY TBNSE SITUATION

S. s. Galagudze. G. V. Nikolayeva

organized in an emotional situation, characteristics which manifest themselves as
a tendency to simplify speech to permit its more-optimum regulation.

a nunber of characteristics of the lexical and grannatic level of speech improve
when certain subjects experience emotional tension (3,6). In particular, we find
the following remark in Vitt's work cited above: Emotional states have different

The objectivu of our research was to examine the dynamics of the lexical and gramatic

levels of speech in response to emotionally tense situations, from the standpoint of
the information-energy approach developed in psychology by Vekker (1.2; L. M. Vekker

1976) .

with this objective in mind we conducted experiments in which 30 subjects provided
samples of spontaneous oral speech in an emotionally tense situation (their first
examination in their principal specialized subject) and in normal conditions (back-
ground). Then the recorded speech was transcribed into typewritten text, from which
the following lexical and gramatic characteristics were then isolated and analyzed:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the overall length of narration, lexicographic diversity, ratio of the number of
verbs to the number of adjectives, the ratio of the number of abstract words to the
number of concrete words, the quantity of “weed” words, the quantity of grammatically
and logically incouplete sentences, presence of complex sentence structures and

complex subordinate phrases, and the quantity of words having a clearly positive or
a clearly negative connotation.

In order to reveal the dependence of speech dynamics in an emotional situation on
the personal qualities of the subjects, we examined certain personality properties—-
introversion—extraversion and neuroticism (Eysenck's method) and anxiety (Cattell's
method).

Hand tremor was used as an objective indicator of mobilization of the body's "energy
resources" in an emotionally tense situation.

The experimental data were analyzed in several stages. In the first we examined the
characteristics of the energy indicators of the subject in a background situation and
in an emotionally tense situation. In this aspect the subjects fell into two groups
with respect to the tremor dynamics indicator: The first group consisted of sub-
Jects for whom the difference between background tremor indicators and the indicators
of tremor in an emotional situation was above average; in the second group this
difference did not reach the average level.

In the next stage of analysis we had to compare the energy characteristics of the
subjects with their speech characteristics. Cbmparison of energy characteristics,

as defined by tremor indicators, and the speech characteristics stated above revealed
the following laws behind their dynamics in response to an emotionally tense situation.

In the first group of subjects, for whom the indicator of emotional tension exceeded
the sample average, the background indicators of the productivity of speech (total
length of narration, lexicographic diversity, quantity of complex sentences and com-
plex subordinate phrases) were found to be higher than in an emotionally tense
situation.

In the second group of subjects, for whom the energy indicators in an emotional
situation do not exceed the aveiage, the results were different in nature. Some
of the subjects were typified by the same dynamics of speech activity observed in
the firstgroup: An emotionally tense situation shortens their narration, makes it
nure stereotypic and so on (see table), while the other subjects of this group
improved their speech characteristics in a stressful situation in comparison with

the background.

Thus in the final variant we were able to distinguish three groups of subjects
in terms of "energy-information" mutual dependencies:

Group 1 (9 persons)~-subjects in an emotionally stressful situation exhibit improve-
ment of a number of speech characteristics on the background of low energy activation;

group 2 (12 persons)--subjects exhibit a decrease in a number of productivity indi—
cators of speech, on the background of low activation;

etoup 3 (9 persons)--subjects in an emotionally stressful situation also exhibit
a decrease in a number of productivity indicators of speech, but on a background of
high energy activation.

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'll“ UI'I'ILIAI. var. unul

Distribution of the Indicators of Lexical and Grammatic Level of
Spontaneous Oral Speech in Background and Stressful Situations
Experienced by Isolated Groups of Subjects

Group 3 now Activation Group 2 low Activation Group 1 High Activation
_ (9 Subjects) (12 Subjects) (9 Sub ects)
Indicator Background stress Background Stress Background Stress

1.11emorenergy 111 5
(arbitrary 124.9 100.0 112.8 101.2 188.5

units)

2. Length of 148.8 110.6 200.2 116.6 128.2 69.2
narration

(words)

3. Lexico- 2.8 3.5 3.8 3.1 4.0 3.1
graphic

diversity

(index)

4. verbs 2.8 2.9 2.7 3.4 1.7 2.8
(adjectives)

S. Abstract 0.82 0.63 6.51 ' 0.35 0.31 0.37
(concrete)

6. "Weed" 0.04 0.06 0.06 0.08 0.11 0.23
words (index)

7. Complex 0.77 0.92 0.73 0.35 0.52 0.37
sentences

and complex

subordinate

phrases

(index)

8. words with 0.06 0.09 0.08 0.18 0.08 0.23
positive and

negative conno-

tation (index)

 

As may be deduced from the characteristics of the lexical and grammatie level of
spontaneous oral speech, an emotionally tense situation does not have a destructive
influence on statements spoken by subjects in the first group. In general the speech
of Subjects experiencing a stressful situation remained at the same level in regard
to grammatic, syntactic and semantic structure as in a normal situation; moreover
certain subjects even exhibited greater smoothness, better structure and greater
expressiveness of statements in an emotionally tense situation.

At the same time, anaf is of the spoken statements of subjects inthesecond and
third groups revealed certain characteristics in the organization of speech in an

emotionally tense situation, such as reduction of the total length of narration. a
decrease in lexical diversity, an increase in a number of "weed” words, more frequent

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use of verbs than adjectives, growth in the number of concrete words, an increase in
the number of logically and grammatically incomplete phrases, a decrease in the
number of complex sentences and complex subordinate clauses, and an increase in the
number of words having positive and negative connotation.

These laws agree well with published data (5.6) on the dynamics of emotionally de-
pendent speech.

The next stage of analysis of the obtained data presupposed comparison of the speech
characteristics of the subjects with their personality features. We found it

interesting to compare the first and second groups of subjects in relation to their
speech and personality features, since totally opposite tendencies in the nature of

changes inspeech activity were observed in these groups on the background of low
energy activation in an emotionally tense situation.

We attempted to reveal the dependence between the indicators of extraversion—intro—
version, neuroticism and anxiety on one hand and the successfulness of speech in an
emotional situation on the other hand by the method of tetrachoric correlations.

We found that the successfulness of speech in an emotionally tense situation is
negatively correlated with the anxiety indicator (r==0.52 at p<0.05) and positively
correlated with the extraversion-introversion indicator (1 no.5? at p<0.05). The
coefficient of correlation between the neuroticism indicator and the successfulness

of speech in a test situation was nearly statistically significant (r -0.39) and
negative in sign.

Thus the first group of subjects was dominated by unanxious extraverts exhibiting low
neuroticism while the second group was dominated by anxious introverts exhibiting high
neuroticism.

The third group of subjects varied in the type of laws that were applicable; however,
the highly “energized" state of subjects in the emotion-producing situation made it
different from the first two groups. It would be natural to assume that this case
reflects the curvilinear nature of the "energy-information" function: According to

the hypothesis of curvilinear dependence (presence of an inverted U-shaped dependence),
as the energy factor rises in value the productivity of activity rises, and then, after
achieving a certain optimum, it begins to decrease. Hence we can conclude that the
law discussed above represents the descending branch of the "energy-information” curve.
In this case the intensity of emotional tension exceeds a certain optimum, which is

why destructive changes occur in the speech of subjects in this group.

All of the above-noted characteristics of speech in an emotional situation imply
simplification of the informational structure of spoken signals. Thus reduction 0!
the density of propositions, achieved in particular owing to growth in the number of
irrelevant repetitions of words, parts of words and so on in emotionally dependent
speech. and owing to growth in the number of "weed” words, is a direct indication of
a decline in the information level of the communications of the subjects.

Dominance of the number of verbs over adjectives in the speech of subjects under emo-
tional tension, a decrease in lexical diversity and so on lead to inadequately pre-

cise transmission of the contents of the message or, in other words, to parallel

83

FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY
'UK Ul‘l‘“ URI. 03?. UIVLI

ordering of different levels of generality. Speech reveals a tendency toward

syncretism, to adjacent ordering of constructs that should have been hierarchically
ordered.

Let us now examine the dependencies revealed for the first and second groups of
subjects. At first glance the pattern appears contradictory, since on the back-
ground of identically low activation in an emotionally tense situation, the changes
in the speech of these subjects resulting from this tension occurred at different
planes. However, when we compare this planar variation with the personality
characteristics of the subjects, this contradiction disappears.

As was shown in research by M. s. Zhamkoch'yan, inward direction of the individual's
thoughts manifests itself most clearly in the presence of anxiety, such that be-
havior is typified by restlessness, concern for the individual's physical well-being,
high nervousness and subjectivity, cbpendence of behavior on the individual's moods
and physical condition, and shifting of attention on the self. Consequently as

an energy characteristic, anxiety represents a certain potential of subjectivity.
Neuroticism may be classified in similar fashion. Extraversion, meanwhile, can be
interpreted as an indicator of an aggressive, public orientation, and in this sense
it represents a potential for outward orientation upon another object.

Anxious introverts are dominated by the motive of personal well-being, which in
stressful conditions elicits a dominant uneasiness about failure. As a result such
an individual expends considerable energy on his emotional experience of possible
failure, which reduces the amount of energy that can be devoted to the activity
itself. A lower information level would also correspond to a lower energy level,
and therefore low activation in subjects of the second group is accompanied by a
decline in the productivity of speech under the influence of an emotionally tense
situation.

On the other hand if an orientation toward activity dominates over a subject's
motive of personal well-being, the energy outlays are redistributed in favor of

the object of activity. This law is observed in the fact that in the first group
of subjects, which was dominated by unanxious extroverts exhibiting low neuroticism,
the productivity of a number of speech characteristics improved on the background
of low activation.

Our work was an attempt at applying the information-energy approach to the study of
emotionally dependent speech. It permitted us to explain certain facts that do

not tit within the framework of traditional concepts about the nature of changes
ocuurring in speech in stress-like and stressful situations. It stands to reason
that the problem is not provided with an exhaustive solution by the conclusions
suggested here. The obtained results can be thought of only as a tentative working
hypothesis on the road to solving the multifaceted problem of speech, personality
and emuLions in their mutual relationship.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Vekkcr, L. M., "Psikhcheskiye protsessy' [Mental Processes], vol 1, 1974,
Vol 2, [976.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vukkcr. L. M., and Paley, I. H., "Information and Energy in Mental Reflection,‘
in "Ekspcrimcntal'naya i prikladnaya psikhologiya' [Experimental and Applied
Psychology]: Issue 3, 1971.

Vitt, N. V., "Speech and the Critical Situation," in 'Predvaritel'nyye
naterialy eksperimental'nykh issledovaniy p0 psikholingvistike" [Initial Findings
in Experimental Research on Psycholinguistics], Moscow, 1974.

zhamkoch'yan, M. 5., "correlations Between Intelligence Characteristics
and Orientation waard the Self and Toward the Group,“ diploma project,
Leningrad State University, Department of PsychOIOQY, 1973.

Leont'yev, A. A.. and Nosenko, E. L., “Some Psycholinguistic Characteristics of
Spontaneous Speech in a State of Emotional Tension,“ in "Obshchaya i prikladnaya
psikholingvistika" [General and Applied Psycholinguisticsl, Moscow, 1973.

Nosenko, E. L., 'Osobennosti rechi v sostoyanii emotsional'noy napryazhennosti,"
[Characteristics of Speech in a State of Emotional Tension], Dnepropetrovsk, 1975.

Hahl, J. P., "The Lexical and Linguistic Level in the Expressions of Emotions,”
in Knapp: P. H. (Editor), “Expression of the Emotions in Man," 1963.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rm UI'I'ILIAL ”I: UI‘LI

USING SPEBOX WRISTICS '10 IDNINR MIMI. STATE IN CBILDREN
v. I. Galunov, A. I. Kliorin, H. H. Chekodanova

The objective of our work was to test, in real conditions, the method of determining
an individual's psychophysiological (emotional) state on the basis of the temporal
and melodic characteristics of the spoken signal (1). The work involved parallel
study of the parametric characteristics of spoken signals, adaptive reactions and

a number of biochemical and physiological indicators widely used in clinical practice.
The research was conducted on children 5-9 years old. The child's hospitalization
was the emotion-producing factor.

Research mthods

The study was performed on 31 children, for 27 of whom this was the first visit to
the clinic. It was the second visit for 3, and the third visit for l. The children
were examined twice--on the let-2d day of hospitalization and on the 9th-lOth day.
We analyzed blood sugar and cholesterol, measured arterial pressure, performed an

associative experiment and recorded a speech test. The children were divided into

two age groups--S-7 years (unable to read) and 7-9 years (reading fluently). Subjects
were shown pictures of an object or situation (representing, for exanple: "I have

a coat, a hat, boots and a scarf”). They were asked to answer a question about the
givun picture and tell a story relating to it. Subjects in the second group were
asked to read a standard text (for example: ”Fe bought a notebook, a book and a
pencil") and to tell a story related to it. The spoken material was recorded simul-
taneously by two microphones. One was set up 40 cm from the subject's mouth while" the
other was secured to the jugular fossa. The signal from the first microphone was

used in analysis of the spectral and temporal characteristics of speech, while that
from the second microphone was used to analyze the parameters of the fundamental tone

(FT) and particularly the melodic characteristics of the PT. The spectral and melodic
characteristics were analyzed by standard methods (2).

Serum cholesterol was analyzed by the Hrakos-Tbvarek method. Blood sugar was analyzed
by the llagcdorn-Jensen method. Blood was sampled from the ulnar vein of the children,

on an ewty stomach 3 hours prior to study of speech indicators. Arterial pressure
was measured by Korotkov's method immediately prior to study of speech indicators.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Research Results

Two scales with distinct correlates in speech parameters were used to describe the
emotional state of the children: “inhibition-arousal“ and "normal-fear.“ It was
hypothesized on the basis of existing data that an increase in the tempo of speech,
growth in the average frequency of the PT, an increase in the range of change in the
FT and an increase in its unevenness correspond to change in state from inhibition
to arousei. Change in state from normal to fear produces an increase in the number

of pauses in speech without a change occurring in the length of an individual element,
which is reflected as an increase in the length of standard phrases without change in
the duration of the vocalized (voiced) fraction.

Comparative analysis of spoken material obtained in the first and second recording
sessions showed that for most children, fear was experienced less in the second re-
coming session. Only three children erhibited the opposite picture. Greater depres-
sion in the second recording session was diagnosed for two children on the basis of
their speech indicators. This result is consistent with the observed pattern of
changes in the behavior of these children.

Comparative analysis of the informativeness of the speech parameters we studied showed
chat:

For practical purposes the mean PT frequency does not change under the conditions of
this experiment;

change in the variance of the PT is rather irregular (which is probably aggravated
by the inadequate stability of the voice control mechanism in children):

unevenness of the PT melody was found to be the most informative indicator.

The biochemical indicators we studied did not produce a stable picture permitting us
to diagnose change in psychophysiological state as a stress reaction to hospitaliza-
tion. it should be noted that a decline in cholesterol was revealed in both children
who exhibited increased depression in the second recording session. Moreover there
is a general tendency for cholesterol to decline as arousal, diagnosed on the basis
of speech characteristics, decreases. Observation of the dynamics of arterial
pressure revealed its normalization in the studied group of children by the 3d-4th
day of hospitalization, which correlates well with the revealed pattern of changes
in speech parameters.

Thus the research indicates that:
The existing methods of evaluating pscyhophysiological state on the basis of charaztur-
istics of the spoken signal may be used successfully as one of .the indicators for

diagnosing emtional stress in the children's clinic;

the corresponding indicators should be considered when organizing therapy.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

I Q..- Ito-0‘ uno- u-.- vo n...

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Galunov, V. 1., and Manerov, v. 1th., ”Ways 0! Solving the Problem of mating
Systems by Which to Determine a Speaker's national state," VOPmSY KIBEDIB‘I'IXI,
Moscow, Vol 22, 1976, pp 95-113.

Sapozhkov, M. A. , 'mchay signal v kibemetike i svyazi" [The spoken signal in
ojbernetics and Conunications), Moscow, Svyaz'izdat, 1963.

88

Ml! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EFFECT OF INDIVIDUAL AND SWIM-08PM W625 IN PARAMETEE OF THE
AMICULA’IORY TRACT ON MCTBRISTICS 0? ms SPOKEN 51(3th

v. I. Galunov, s. L. Koval‘, I. B. 'l‘ampel'

The objective of our work was to determine the paramters of the spoken signal depen-
dent on the psychophysiological state of the speaker and to reveal the limits of
possible changes in these parameters. Such an objective is usually reached by
analyzing spoken signals obtained from a speaker experiencing different states.

Some standard analysis procedures are used, and the characteristics to be used in
diagnosis are selected randomly. Because both the analysis methods and the character-
istics they reveal are rather sizeable in number, it may take a very long time to sift
through all of the acquired data. However, we could somewhat alter the plan of
research: we could start by analyzing the speech formation process, and after this,
using the standard methods of the acoustic theory of speech formation, we could iso-
late those parameters which reflect specific features of the emotional spoken acoustic
signal.

In this paper we will illustrate this approach to the problem using as our example

the changes occurring in the tone of the speech control muscles of the speaker as

he experiences different states. Husde tone is known to be one of the

physiological parameters that changes faithfully in response to changes in the speaker's
psychophysiological state. In order to make it possible to capitalize on this fact
todiagnose a speaker's state on the basis of spoken signals, we would have to answer

the following questions:
1. Precisely how is. each concrete state associated with muscle tone?

2. In what way can muscle tone be translated into the language of mechanical tissue
constants (coefficients of tension or moduli of elasticity, impedances) used in the
acoustic theory of speech formation?

3. Whatsor'; of influence do changes in the mechanical constants of the tissues of
speech forming organs have on the spoken signals?

Our end was to answer the third of these questions. It should be considered that the
results of such research could have independent significance, since they establish
the set of parameters of the spoken signal which are subjected to the greatest changes.

Further research on the spoken signal may establish in what manner these parameters
change. if the answers to the first two questions are known.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
I‘UA urns nae. not. Ul‘hl

According to traditional ideas, the spoken signal is the result of filtration of

a signal by the vocal tract; therefore we studied the influence changes in mechanical
parameters of tissues have on pulsations in the volumetric rate of the voice source
and on the transmission function of the channel. Among the mechanical constants
controlling oscillations of the vocal cords, the coefficients of tension and the
distance between the resting vocal cords can apparently vary to the greatest degree.

The transmission function of the channel is basically determined by the configuration
or function of the particular channel area; however, the impedance of the channel

walls, which clearly depends on the tone of speech muscles. has an influence on the
position and width of the first formants.

Speech formation has been studied with a mathematical model of the vocal cords (l)
and the vocal tract (3) using an eve-222 computer.

In the first part of the research the authors examined the influence of the variations
in the coefficients of tension and the distance between resting vocal cords on the
volumetric rate of air just beyond the vocal cords. A model with two degrees of

freedom accounting only for symmetrical oscillations was studied (1). The overall
tension of the vocal cord is described in this mdel by five tension coefficients;

all coefficients varied proportionately during simulation.

The volumetric rate of air flow just beyond the vocal cords at different cord tensions
is graphed in Figure 1. Table 1 shows the basic numerical results. "K" stands for
the ratio of the coefficients of vocal cord tension to the corresponding coefficient
values adopted as normal. The period and amplitude of the oscillations were measured
20 msec after cord pressure was "turned on" so that unstabilized oscillations

could be avoided .

It follows from analysis of the results that when the tension of the vocal cords
increases, the oscillation frequency grows by about up to half an octave over normal.

The oscillation amplitude drops at this time. Beginning with a certain value of
K, rather than coming together. the vocal cords oscillate without touching each

other. As tension increases further, the oscillations attenuate soon after vocal
cord pressure is applied. As tension increases the oscillation spectrum becomes
simpler, eSpecially in the high frequency range. When the tension of the vocal
cord decreases, the oscillation amplitude increases while the frequency drops by
within two octaves. The duty factor (the ratio of the time the vocal cords remain

in contact with one another to the length of the oscillation period) grows at
first and then declines. As the duty factor increases, the high frequency oscilla-

tion Spectrum grows, while the oscillations themselves retain their previous shape.
Because this is so, the ratio between the levels of the spectral components of the
VOicc source in the high and low ranges at first grows somewhat in response to an
increase in tension, and then declines significantly. The relationship of

these changes in the tension of the vocal cords to the individual's actual anatomical
and physiological potentials is not exactly known; however, it may be hypothesized
that tension may increase within rather broad limits, while its decrease is apparent-

ly limited.

‘igure 2 and Table 2 show data illustrating the dependence of the volume flow rate
beyond the vocal cords at different values for the distance between the vocal cords
(the initial equilibrium distance separating the vocal cords in the absence of
vocal cord pressure). A negative distance means that before starting their work,

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
no 0‘

  

‘ /

 

 

-//“\~~
\
° - - - v 1-w-1-v-w- v- V"! 1-1—r-r-r-v-1-w 7-: -r-- r-ﬁ-vm
I r ' :zif'J—r ' I 1-H to a; f "(gr
I” . .
I” '
- - ‘ ...... -m-p-p. ‘V. F.‘
‘1‘. war-7': 1 1.3111'T'1‘1'v-r‘1-ﬁ'." o —-. '(3 {’“l'r

Figure l. Volumetric Air Flow Rate Beyond Vocal Cords 10 msec Following
the Start of Work: K- l--noma1 tension; K>1--vocal cords

more tense; K<l--vocal cords less tense

l. cut/sec
2. msec

the vocal cords are pressed against each other--that is, they invade each other's
space by distance h. As h increases, .It first the oscillation amplitude grows while
the frequency remains practically constant. Then, after the vocal cords break
contact (that is. when the oscillation spectrum changes abruptly) the amplitude

and frequency decrease noticeably, and finally the oscillations begin to attenuate.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run ‘4. a lblﬂh vua. v. Iago

Table l

l (1 323230 ( 2 gall"):- 3 333......“

ma (m)

 

Key:
1. Frequency of fundamental tone (Hz) 4, Comments

2. Rate amplitude. ems/89° S. Oscillations attenuate
3. Duty factor

As h grows the high frequency spectrum beooaes simpler. As h decreases, and then
as the vocal cords press together more and more firmly. the oscillation frequency
grows insignificantly while the amplitude declines. 'lhe speaker can easily compen-
sate for this drop in amplitude by increasing vocal cord pressure: however, this
would elicit a rise in the frequency of the fundamental tone and an increase in the
duty factor of the oscillations. It should be noted in general that in terms of
emotional speech, the amplitude of acoustic oscillations may be a significant
parameter describing the state of the speaker. The speaker is able to conpeneate

for amplitude changes, though apparently this changes the intensity ratios of
different sounds.

Thus far we have been discussing the characteristics of the voice source. The in-
fluence the speaker's state has upon the transmission function of the vocal tract
should be discussed as well. The fact is that changes in psychological state do
more than change the tension of muscles working the vocal cords: they also cause

changc in the tone of the muscular walls of the articulatory tract, and consequently
in” a parameter of the mathematical model of speech formation characterizing this

quality of the walls--the impedance of the vocal tract walls.

According to present ideas (2) the impedance of vocal tract walls is close to
1600+1.5 gm/sec-cm". The influence of variations in the real and imaginary fractions
of impedance upon the position and width of formants was investigated. Calculations
were performed using the algorithm suggested in (3). It was found that only the
imaginary fraction of inpedanoe has a significant influence on formants. As impe-
dance grows the frequency of Eormants diminishes, and their width decreases. The

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
v
(li'b h .. oo'mu

 

Figure 2. Volumetric Air Flow Rate Beyond Vocal Cords 10 msec After the
Start of Work at Different Initial Distances Between Cords:

No 1--h-+0.105; NO 2--h-+0.18; No 3--h-+0.48

width of the first formant changes met aignificantly--by 2—2.5 times in response
to a two-time change in the imaginary component. The calculation results are shown

in Table 3. Here, P1 and F2 are the frequencies of the first and second fornants,
and 3| and B, are their widths.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cw..." Ann-1y:-
I ' II n ' : '
no u) I 'Imrm? (1 ecu“ "e" I(2) llp‘nﬂun
0.0! WI
1.21 I I8 xouﬂnmu
1')! I I I.) Jenn-1016)
nJa N I
0.1.1 2"; '
0J0": 2|.
run I m
3.0.15“ 2| T 4m
mm» 22'! 400 0.5I I
0.005 22:- 300! 0.64
mm. 2le 260 6.51
mu ! 231 Inn on
0.05 l 252 I1 0.10 “Mum
0,01“. 270 - - antynmt (5)
___—___.—
‘Mopted as normal.
may of fundamental tone (Hz) 4. Cements
amplitude, an 3/sec 5. Oscillations attenuate
factor
Table 3
(1’. I (2)1quunr _ Quintana '(3
"""‘" I ulna-cm - _—
Ifm I M
M I600+l.5 1'61 .14 "52 36
I000 I10 036 20 I042 11
_ _.___ .. _.. _.- _.__...——L—_—.. -—
IrIII0 I03 545 M 853 45
[III mm 0 LS 520 M 810 2“
"300 I3." - 600 I? 8.10 ' 20
":00 +0.! .104 3200 660 94
|u| "$00 I- LS 32! ID? 620 4|
ImII.I.1.o m 42 Mo 24
I000I0.B I 404 I20 l924 77
|c| 1600 I LS 101 M I907 6')
I600 1.1.0 436 24 I897 I30
"300 I 0.3 3:" >200 220‘! 3‘!
III l000I LS .1l6 ml 221! 11
man I .1." 2M ‘2 225: 1'1
. . . _ __ ——._-__‘—.__—___—————
I'm I 0.0 394 I911 I522 I20
m won I L5 .151 77 I600 ms
IMO I .1." .124 12 mm M!
. 3. Pbmnts
.nce , gut/seven? 4. Hz

94
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And so, we can assert on the basis of the suggested approach and the preliminary
trial calculations that specific features of speech associated with different
psychophysiological states of the speaker may be revealed through the ratio of the
levels of the high frequency and low frequency spectrums, through the frequency of
the fundamental tone, the amplitude of acoustic oscillations, the ratio of formant
widths and the dynamics of changes in these parameters from one sound to the next.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Tampcl', I. 8., and Yurgenson, A. 0., "Simulation of the Work of the Vocal
Cords,” TEKHNIKA SREDSTV SWAZI, N. '1‘. SB. MPSS, SERIYA TWNIKA PROVODNOY
SWAZI, Moscow, No 9, 1976, pp 64-70.

2. Flanagan, J. L., lshizaka, K., and slipley, K. L., "Synthesis of Speech From a
Dynamic Model of the Vocal Tract and Vocal Cords,” THE BELL SYST. TECHN. J.,
Vol 54. No 3, 1975, PP 485-506.

3, Garbaruk, V. 1., and Tampel', I. 8., "Dependence of Pennant Structure on Varia-

tions in the Shape of the Vocal Tract,f' TEKHNIKA SREESTV SWAZI, N. '1‘. $3.,
SERIYA TERI-INIKA PROVODNOY SWAZI, Moscow, No 9, 1976, pp 44-48.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pom FREQUENCY AS AN INBX OP VOIG INDIVIDUALITY
V. B. Gitlin

Man is known to identify a speaker better by vowels (1,2). the spectrum of which is
determined uniquely by the parameters of formants and of the voice source. We
analyzed the correlation between individual frequencies of the first three formants
of six sustained vowels a, o, y, H, u, 3.

Pormant frequency was chosen as the object of analysis for the following reasons.
First, it was one of the principal acoustic characteristics of the semantic content

of speech, inasmuch as it is a polar parameter of the speech tract. Second, methods
of isolating formant frequency are rather well developed today in comparison with.
for example. the methods of isolating formant width.

Fomant frequency was isolated by the method suggested in (3). nomant frequency
was defined as the frequency at which the signal at the output of the formant filter
intersects the zero line in synchrony with the fundamr ntal tone. A description of

the set-up for isolating formant frequency can be found in (4).

Phonemes were pronounced by speakers in a soundproof room. A total of 35 speakers
participated in the tests--22 men and 13 women. The speaking time and the length

of pauses were about 1 second. Wenty utterances of one phoneme were recorded during
one testing session. Tests were performed for 2 months at irregular time intervals.
Formant frequency was determined for each speaker as the average for all 20 utterances.
One testing session was performed with each phoneme.

The measurement results are graphed in Figure 1. Here, Arabic numerals indicate the
nunbers of the male speakers (from 1 to 22) and Roman numerals indicate the nunbers
of female speakers (from I to xv). We can conclude from the appearance of the graphs

that correlation exists between formant frequencies and the speaker's voice. The
data in Figure l were used as a basis for calculating correlation coefficients using

well known formulas:

M

I

M— 2 [Hm ~rml Imn—rml
I-—l

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1)

’1,“ 3:3: r!
:szW W we

cut 0- n-v-vrIW'v—H—vwinor

 

 

4 . n n u t Hon» inn-mm
Mi 5) (3)
V a, ,1!“
m ‘= W?! .19
’ 0—0, N
30° -c.n.o.v-unvuvn-v-H—r'

 

s 9 n n u t t o 9 Ho-nlumou

F R

i ll “ f g

”m ' ovum «NJ/'3
mm M r—o u

thf'A:
I500 .n. u. -

  

                                        

   

    

'v'v Imrrvw-rvmvv- -- ------'-
F t u :3 1| when“) Comm:
)9 ’
1200 M «V
4’ q F
mo M.»¢~x,_. . W31": “9' z
73:. °'W' WM ° 0—“ y
6 5' s n a z! : 1 WI 0 opaunnapa
. an a)
_mo mum: a,u,o,F3
mo :3“;
. _ 0 -
2.500 luin'é unéu-w',n "3111:? 'iv QII'WF 0 Ton“) ayln.”
5,”; e)
‘Pomu .9, u, 5 F3
2“” '50 :1 ‘5'
2‘00 .g 1 .on.nt'uvv110I'v' Inn-"0! I l'" "" "

1 5 9 13 n 2: r 9 g g. «outpauxmopa
re 1. mixmdence of Phoneme Frequency on Speaker

nes
at number

97

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
Table 1.

Table 2 .

where Pﬁx) , F1(y)--fomant. frequencies for phonemes x and y respectively, averaged

  
 

 

 

 
 
     
    
   
   

I’U. U. a lyahh Udb vu‘ua

56.4 l H?!

I'll I I5!

Correlation Coefficients

 

OJ“!

0.I III

- 0.”.1
0.2"
MM

0.2")
0.279
0.227
«um;
0:34 I

 
 

0.4 l5

0.293
0.. . ‘-
0.35:
II, I '14

Sample Standard Deviations all-We) I, a:

| 42,-: l |'-'-.I

I m | an

0.01 I I -

(U54 0. I 49
0.075 0. I 4 7
0.092 0.291

0. I90 I

0.064 0.242
0.076 0.2I8
mm 0. I94

nvcr 20 realizations, i = 1,2,. . . , unspeaker umber,

M

“’Il’h'Il 42"”) “0?.
I'HI

I-‘(s) --

| M
‘ u

M zI-Ks)
I-‘I

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
 
 

(‘2)

(3)
Tables 1 and 2 show the results of calculations based on formulas (l)-(3). The

calculations were made for the entire group of speakers (men and women together).
The parameters of the first formant of the phonemes w, y, H were calculated for

won only. Inasmuch as the resulting matrix of correlation coefficients is synetri-
cal, the repeating elements are dropped from Table 2.

If we arrange phonemes in the order of decreasing standard deviations shown in
Table l. we get the following sequence:

a) for Fl--a’ e, OI H. y! a ;
b) for F2‘-3' “I u; at 0' 3’;
c) F3--M, a, u, o, a, y.

The succession of phonemes in order of increasing error of identification of the
speaker by another person, obtained in (2), was as follows: a, a, hi, 0, a, y.

It is consistent with the arrangement of phonemes in order of decreasing standard
deviation for F2 and P3. Thus our data do not contradict the hypothesis that devia-

tion of individual formant frequencies from a certain average is an index used to
recognize a person‘s voice.

As follows from Table 2, a definite correlation exists between the individual fre-
quencies PI for all phonemes and formants. This correlation is rather weak for the

first formant, but it becomes significant for the second and especially the third
formants.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Ramishvili, G. 5., "Automatic Voice Recognition," ‘i'BlOiNICHBSKAYA KIBERNETIKA,
No S, 1966.

2. Gitlin, V. 8., Kuznetsov, P. 6., Tikhonov, G. A., and Chepkasov, A. G.,
"The Informativeness of Fussian Phonemes in Determining the Individuality of
a Speaker's Voice," in "Avtomatika i opoznaniye obrazov. Avtomaticheskiye

ustroystva ucheta i kontrolva" [Automation and Pattern Recognition. Automatic
Accounting and Monitoring Units], Issue 4. Izhevsk, 1969, pp 54-60.

3. Campanella, S. 1.. and Coull.er, D. S., "Formant Period Tracker,“ 0.5. Patent,
Cl. 179-1, No 3335225, 8 Amust 1969.

4. Gitlin, V. 8., and Smetanin, A. 14., ”Formant Filter Design,“ IZVBSTIYA WSSIIIKH
UCHEBNYKH ZAVEDENIY. RADIOELBKTMNIKA, V01 19, No 8, 1976: PP 98-100.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EFFECT OF DIFFERENT EMIONAL STATES ON CHANGE IN 1115 SPECTRUM 0F MISS WELS
'1'. G. Gomina

There are a large number of difficulties in instrunental analysis of emotionally

colored, speech. steaming on one hand from the redundancy of the spoken signal and
on the other hand from the absence of a clear classification of emotional states.

Experimental research conducted in recent years showed that ”the number of disconti-
nuities in the spectrun of a vowel detectable by man is not only greater than two.

but also, what is especially unpleasant, it differs for different vowels and depends
onthe concrete features of the stimulus“ (1). What is ilplied here is that the mel
spectrum is segmented. It would be easy to imagine how much more difficult it would
be to interpret a supraeegaental spectrun (2) dependent on the structure of the speech
forming apparatus and the emotional state of the speaker. and in a sense superimposed
over the segmental spectrum. This obviously explains the fact that almost no descrip-
tions of a suprasegmental spectrum in acoustic parameters have been atteupted in
recent years. As of today, our information on the prosodic characteristics of
emotional speech is much richer than our intonation on the suprasegnental spectrum.
This is what motivated us in our choice of a research topic. Considering the fact
that a tested and sufficiently reliable procedure for processing spectrogram of emo-

tional speech dues nuLexist yet, our first task was to find a procedure which would
satisfy the objectives of our research to the greatest degree.

In our experiment we analyzed phrases uttered by ll English speakers. The phrases
were spoken in five emotional states: normal (neutral pronunciation). joy. anger,
fear and melancholy. M series of experimental material were employed. The first
included four phrases with stressed vowels [o]. [m], [3:] , and the second included

four phrases having [do Ml. In] as the stressed vowels.

One hundred twenty realizations were selected for spectrographic study as the result
of listener analysis. Half of the selected phrases were analyzed with a 24-channel
dynamic spectrograph at the Laboratory of Speech Pattern Recognition of the Kaunas

Polytechnical Institute. 'lhe other half of the phrases were analyzed with the Kay-

sonograph spectrum analyzer produced by “Kay-Elemetrich' me recordings were made
in contour block mode.

Processing of the spectrograms entailed dividing the spectrograms into bands coinciding
with the formant ranges of the analyzed sound, allowing in this case for possible
ovurlap of formant ranges. his method of dividing spectrograms into bends had been

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
used in (3), the objective of which was to stud' the spectrum of Russian vowel
sounds perceived by car. In our experiment we found division of the spectrum into

250-980 H: (the range of the fundamental tone and the first formant): 980-2180 Hz

(the range of the second formant); 2180-3880 Hz (the range of the third formant)

and 3880-8570 Hz (the range of higher formants). The total energy of spectral cowo-
nents in the appropriate band, expressed as a percentage of the total vowel energy in
all four bands, was adopted as the energy characteristic of the spectrum of the given
band. The energy characteristics were also conpared in broader bands: The 250-2180 82
band, treated as the low frequency range, and the 2180-8570 Hz band, treating it as
the high frequency range. The analysis results showed that information indicating
arisal of emotional tension can be obtained just by making this division into two
bands (low and high frequency). Deformation of the spectrum in comarison with a
neutral state, expressed as a shift in spectral energy into the higher frequencies,

L8 observed when joy, anger and fear are expressed, and a shift into lower frequencies
:s observed when melancholy is expressed. Mrs-detailed analysis accounting for four
spectral bands revealed, besides the tendencies indicated above, a large hater of
.ndividual traits in the spectrum of emotionally colored signals, typical of specific

speakers and expressing themelves in most cases as cospensatory processes, mainly
between the first two bands of the vowel spectrum.

Additional characteristics of emotional speech were revealed by sonogram analysis,
performed on the basis of a vocal signal classification suggested by Trojan (4). This
classification is arrived at by contrasting the vocal signals in terms of sparing
(forced) voice formation and a dilated (constricted) pharyngeal cavity. According

to Trojan, constriction of the pharyngeal cavity and forced voice formation occur
when fear, anger, melancholy, pain and revulsion are expressed. 0n the other hand
dilation of the pharynx and sparing voice formations are typical of expressions of
pleasure, joy and satisfaction. ‘i'ne author suggests acoustic correlates for each of
these characteristics. Analysis of, sonograms produced in our experiments showed that
an emotional state such as anger can be expressed only through forced voice formation
without constriction of the pharynx, while joy may be expressed through forced voice
formation, and not just sparing voice formation alone. A comparison with normal
sonogram revealed the following acoustic characteristics of esotional states. Joy
is characterized by expansion of the spectrum of stressed vowels due to arisal of
additional high frequency components, by a dominance of vocalism (S), by greater in-
tensity of the high frequency components of the vowel spectrum, and by greater dis-
tinctiveness of unstressed vowels, expressed as expansion of their spectrums in com-
parison with both normal and other emotional states. Anger is also accompanied by
expansion of the spectrum of stressed vowels, by greater intensity of high frequency
components of the spectrum-though to a lesser degree than with expression of joy,

and by insignificant dominance of vocalism. slight expansion of the spectra: of
stressed vowels and dominance of consonantism (5) are noted in the expression of

fear, while an increase in vowel intensity is not observed. Pronunciation of con-
sonants (such as -pl-, ~ktr-) is typified by significant deadening of sonants, which
reveals itself in recordings of the high frequency components of their spectrums.
Expression of melancholy is accompanied by narrowing of the spectrum of stressed
vowels--that is, by registration of only the low frequency characteristics, and by
dominance of consonantism. Pronunciation of consonants and dull, explosive consonants,
as in fear, is accompanied by registration of high frequency components of significant
intensity.

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
This analysis or emotional speech at the spectral level confirmed the possibility for
distinguishing among different emotional states on the basis of parameters such as
shifting of spectral energy characteristics, expansion or narrowing of spectrums
coupled with simultaneous enlargement or reduction of the intensity of spectral compo-
nents, dominance of consonantism or vocalisn in spectruns, and characteristic ex-
pression of consonants (especially in expressions of fear and melancholy). It should
be noted, however, that the proportion contributed by each of these parameters varies
in expressions of different emotional states. Moreover expressions of emotion mani-
fest highly noticeable individual characteristics of the speaker, ones which are a
consequence of the structural uniqueness of the speech apparatus, and of the indivi-
dual's habits of pronunciation. Having all of this in mind, we would have to hypothe-
size that it is impossible to create a certain universal model of each emotional
state. All we can do is reveal the most general tendencies, ones allowing for a
certain degree of variability, inasmuch as signals associated with vocal expression--
Trojan validly notes--are always located in a space delimited by two opposite poles:

sparing (forced) voice formation at one end and dilation (constriction) of the
pharyngeal cavity on the other.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. chistovich, L. A., et al., ”Piziologiya rechi. Vospriyatiye rechi chelovekom"
[Speech Physiology. Speech Perception by Man], Leningrad, 1976.

2. 'rseplitis, L. K., "Analiz rechevoy intonatsii" [Analysis of Speech Intonation],
Riga, 1974.

3. Varshavskiy, L. A., and Chistovich, L. A., "Average Spectrums of Russian Vowel
Phonenes,“ in "Problemy fiziologicheskoy akustiki' [Problems of Physiological
Acoustics], Vol 4, Leningrad, 1959.

4. Trojan, P., “Biophonetik,” Zurich, 1975.

5. Potapova, R. K., "Temporal Organization of the Syllable as the Basic Component

of the Temporal Emotive Characteristic," in "'l‘esisy dokladov ”so-9" [Abstracts
of Reports at the mac-9] , Minsk, 1976.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KINETIC OMANIZATION OP SPEECH AS Q42 0? m MEANS OF 115 EMIONAL COIDRATIOII
A. P. muravlev

The sounds of speech, which input phonetic value and phonetic sywbolism to the latter.
:asically have a connotive and expressive nature, and therefore they may be used in
speech as a means of intensifying emotional expressiveness.

Language makes broad use of the expressive possibilities of phonetic value in the
acoustic make-up of words having an expressive coloration.

let us eraiine the following synonyn progression: amt [comtenancehnuno [face],
mama [M]. 9810 [snout], xapn [muzzle].

me synonyms in this progression are sylistic. and they are arranged in order of
stylistic decline free: the poetic '1! xx“ through the neutral” nuuo" to the coarser
“nopna-pww-xapa. " With the exception of expressively neutral '1! mo,“ all of
the other synonyms in this progression are emotionally colored. This emotional
coloration may be described by measuring the synonym progression against the attri-
bute scale 'beautiful-repulsive." Then the progression of synonyms given above would
reflect a transition from the attribute “beautiful" (mm) to the attribute “repulsive"

( xaps) .

The phonetic value (the meaningfulness of the acoustic form) of these words may be
calculated by the formula:

‘
,
SI .Z—g-Lk-‘ﬂeehﬂk' I 5“
2k. '
with It." 435:1, k" .. 235::

Here. stucalculated (theoretical) phonetic value; any-phonetic value of the i-th
sound; Pi—normal frequency of the i-th sound: Pmumaximm frequency of the sound
in the given word, i--each sound of the word.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urnunt 03b ONLY

In terms of the calculated phonetic value. all synonyms of our progression fall into
the exact same sequence in which they arrange themselves with respect to the attri-
bute scale:

 

 

 

Scale Beautiful-aepusive
words 1! mt :1 14110 mega M xa as
5t 2.0 2.4 2.9 3.3 3.5

The following values are assigned to the degrees of the scale to calculate st:

Very beautiful -
Beautiful -
Neither -
nepulsive -
Very repulsive -

manner-

Consequently the scores for the words Mum" and “n "no“ may be interpreted as
"beautiful,” the score for ”Home“ may be interpreted as “neither,“ the score for
"piano" may be interpreted as “more likely repulsive," and the score for "xapn"

may be interpreted as “repulsive." 1heee scores are also confirmed by the function
of these words in speech--in particular, the possibility of forming diminutive
affectionate forms. 'me words “J! an" and "xapn" do not allow for formation of

such forms; this may be explained by the fact that they express the extreme degrees
of the attribute “beautiful” and I'repulaive"—-that is, they are in a sense the ideal
standards on the scale. The words "n mic" and “Manna" may take diminutive affec-
tionate tom-vnnmmo. momenta, momenta, which corresponds to their middle
position on the scale. But the word mbue, while being the diminutive affectionate
form, it does not carry this value in In uase, instead acquiring what is more likely a
degrading coloration: "ryl'tse v pushku" [she is up to his/her little nose in the
dirty husinesé’l‘his reflects transition of the phonetic value of the word "pane” into
the “repulsive” half of the scale. Here are a few more examples of the correspondence
between phonetic value and expressive coloration of words in synonym progressions:

 

 

 

Scale Graceful-Coarse

Words ouu m sea 6}! man u
[orbs] [eyes] Lpeepers]

st 3. 1 3 . 6 3. 8

Scale Safe-Terrifying

words cr pax yrtac xy'rb
[fear] [terror] [horror]

Sr, 3.6 3. 1 4. 1

words BOND"? sypnm aK ynupb

Lvanpire bat] [werewolf] Lvamp ire]
St, 2 . 7 3. 3 3. 5

[continued on following page]

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"02d: se'rep oyps yparaa m 'rom rm oyn
[wind] [gale] [hurricane] [storm] [typhoon]
St 2.8 3.2 3.4 3.9 3.9

‘mus the acoustic form of expressive synonyms is clearly nonrandom. It imparts '
different content, assisting these words in carrying out their function and ampli-
fying and euphasizing their emotional expressiveness.

Phonetic value may be seen to amplify expressive words not only in synonym progressions.
As a rule, words having expressive acoustic form assume figurative meaning precisely
owing to their phonetic value.

mm the word “ran" once meant “reptile” (it still retains this meaning today in
zoology). But the phonetic structure of this word euphasizes the attribute I‘coarse"
(on the "graceful-coarse" scale, 5: . 3.8). It is due to its phonetic value that its
meaning changed, and the word became coarse and abusive ["vile creature'].

A shift in meaning favoring the sound content of a word can happen in many other cases
as well. Here are examples of words that have acquired 'negative" emotional colora-
tion owing to their “negative” acoustic content: Bunpa [otter], lads [toad],

xyx [beetle], onyx? [fruit], nonyx [burdock], xpuca [rat], nyo [oak]. pmo
[snout]. moms [mm]. xpnx [hog], myx [spider]. Examples of "positive“ shifts

in response to “positive" acoustic content are: 60? [God], nmus (lily), Men
[honey]. Munoaa [mimosa], opal [eagle], coxm [falcon].

'me acoustic content of a word may even neutralize an emotional coloration that had
been imparted to a word by its definition, and create a new, opposite emotional
coloration corresponding to the sound. As an exanple the word nmnx [buttercup]
(derived from the root an?) was initially defined as 'mnuxa' [a malicious
creature], and correspondingly it had a negative emotional coloration. But the
acoustic content of this word is characterized by entirely different attributes:
"good” (1.9), “graceful“ (2.0), "light" (2.3), "beautiful” (1.8), "kind' (2.2). It
was in correspondence with this phonetic value that the word acquired a new emotional
value.

Cases in which the semantic meaning of a word is fuzzy and ambiguous are especially
indicative. In such a case the definition of a word is derived almost entirely from
its phonetic content. Such words have an especially clear emotional coloration. Thus
it would be difficult to interpret the sesantic meaning of the word rpuna, but

its clear emotional coloration derives from its phonetic content, which assume the

following values on different scales: ”coarse" (3.8), "dark" (6.4), "terrifying” (3.4),
”awkward" (3.4).

Let us also coware these exalples: llama [hulkl--"big" (1.9), ”coarse“ (4.0),
”slow“ (3.5); Kapra [hag]--"coarse" (3.6), “terrifying” (3.5), “awkward“ (3.7);
Oeoma [gawk]-"bad" (4.1), 'big" (4.2), "dark" (3.7), “passive” (4.0), 'dull" (4.3),
"puny“ (3.9), ”slow” (4.0)) xaM lcad]--"bad" (3.8), “coarse“ (3.5), ”dark“ (3.9),
”repulsive" (3.7), “lowly' (3.8); XWIHK [runtl--“bad" (4.1), "passive” (4.3),

”weak“ (4.4), “repulsive“ (4.0), "puny" (4.3): xptﬂ [harridan]--"bad' (4.8), “coarse"
(3.7), "dark" (3.9), “repulsive" (3.7), "awkward" (3.5).

105

FOR 0mm]. USE ONLY
d \In VI I lyiﬂh not. UI‘LI

This property of words-~that or emphasizing, amplifying and even creating emotional
expressiveness in speech--is used by talented poets, who organize the acoustic fabric
of their poetic works in such a way as to create an emotional tone corresponding to
the general expressive content of the particular work.

An acoustic emotional tone is mechanically created in a poem by filling the text with
sounds of the needed content and reducing the frequency with which sounds having
opposite content are encountered. Knowing the mnerical values for the content of

individual sounds and the normal (average statistical) frequency of their occurrence
inspeech, we can calculate the phonetic value of a poem.

Here are the results of calculating the acoustic value of the content of some well
known poems.

A. Pushkin, "A winter Morning'u'bright,” 'light,‘ "joyful.”

H. Lermontov, "Mountain Smits”--"melancholic."

M. termontov, "Tedious and Melancholy"--"dark," "sullen."

F. Tyutchev, "A Spring Thunderstorm"--"bright," “strong.“

F. Tyutchev, "Us Met"--"exalted."

A. Blok, ”on Spring, Endless and Boundless”--"joy£ul,” “bright.“
A. 810k, "Patigue"--"sullen."

s. Yesenin, "I Remember, My Beloved, I number"--”wonderful.'
V. Hayakovskiy, 'Here"--"dark," ”sullen," "terrifying."

V. Mayakovskiy. "Our Republic Grows and Stands on Its Peat” (an excerpt from the
poem ”Good'ﬂ-Jcheerful."

When in keeping with the general content of a poem, the subtle organization of its
acomtic form influences the reader's consciousness, and it is one of the means by

which the author creates a special emotional tone comparable to that produced by a
piece of music.

Sometimes poets use a sound-color combination in their work: then the acoustic
pattern of the text creates a color accompaniment in the reader's subconscious, in-
tensifying the emotional influence of the poem.

It would be very important to cnphasize that the acoustic tone of a poem is created
by poets unintentionally, involuntarily. This acoustic tone comes about owing to

their poetic talent, their "feeling for sound." meretore when we analyze the acoustic
organization of a work, we reveal not the emotional state which the poet tries to con-
sciously shape. but rather the actual emotional tone to which the poet was tuned at
the moment he created the work.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
These two planes coincide in the examles given above. But this is not always the

case. As an exuple for many of N. A. Nekrasov's poems that we analyzed, no matter
what their “obvious" emotional content was, the attributes we arrived at were only
those of a minor emtional tone--"melancholic," "sad.“ 'dark.‘ "sullen," "terrifying."
'lhis is a definite manifestation of the perpetual minor emotional predisposition of
this ”melancholic poet.“

The possibility is not excluded that the capability sounds have for emphasizing and
even creating emotional coloration in statements is also exercised in couuonplape
speech. (This is especially noticeable in the use of jargon and of affectionate
and abusive words, which are phonetically very expressive as a rule). '

1his creates a possibility for using analysis ofathe phonetic structure of a speaker's
speech (together with other criteria) to automatically diagnose his emotional state.
It may also be possible that the special acoustic organization of spoken messages
(once again. together with other techniques) , may be used for directed emotional
influence upon the listener.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USING SPEECH CHARACTERISTICS 'm EVALUATE INDIVIDUAL PERSONALITY FEATURE
I. s. Zamaletdinov, R. B. Bogdashevskiy

Speech, which is a system of phonetic signs patterning a communicative function on
the basis of lexical and syntactical principles and employing sound modulation to
raise information content (through connotation.emphasis and emotion), has recently
attracted the attention of many specialists. Our purpose is to briefly illuminate
certain directions taken in differential psychophysiology and pathological psycho-
physiology in speech research, and demonstrate the scientific grounds for approaching
this subject from these angles.

I. P. Pavlov's suggestion that there ewe singular, common laws of nervous activity
associated with the first and second (speech) signal systems opens up the prospects

for experimentally studying, from an objective point of view, the typologicai features
contained within a widespread form of general activity--speech. In addition, Pavlov's
recognition of the relatively unrestrained nature of speech and its adaptive, creative
orientation was the starting point for L. s. Vygotskiy's conception concerning the
mutual relationship existing between spoken signals and the mind. and for his “cultural-
historic" theory of the development and formation of the personality. We should also
note that the present tendency for Soviet psychology to study the personality in terms
of the activity category (N. A. Leont'yev) opens up highly promising prospects for
studying individual personality features on the basis of parameters of the individual's
speech.

It should be recognized that the work on typological differences in speech has un-
fortunately been extremely insufficient. Certain researchers have noted that
speech intonations are definitely correlated with certain typological properties
inherent to the personality (5,7). Thus persons with an inhibited-inert style of
mental reaction speak predominantly with a monotonous tone and with a low range of
tonal \ariations; slmech is characterized by insufficient tonal expressiveness, dis-
turbed rhythm, reduced tempo and longsr pauses. 0n the other hand the speech of
excitable-mobile personalities is characterized by diverse and rich intonation, a
high tempo, and concurrent instability of tempo. Significant prevalence of para~
linguistic, "kinetic" characteristics ("communicative gestures“ was found to be more
typical of subjects of the ”mobile” type than of "inert" subjects experiencing emo-
tional tension (9). without diminishing the significance of these primary parameters
of speech that reflect the typological properties of the personality, we feel it
suitable to limit our discussion to works analyzing parameters of speech function
having greater complexity--lexical, grammatical, syntactic, stylistic, semantic and
motivational.

108
FOR OFFNJA1.US£GDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In our opinion these characteristics express the personality comenent of speech
generation and oral behavior to the greatest degree. This conclusion is consistent
with the need for taking an integrated systens approach to studying and evaluating
speech, as is the case with research on individual typological differences, as had
been emhasired many tines by B. h. uplov and v. D. Nebylitsyn, who cautioned against
making premature conclusions from an analysis of the function of sons single analyzer
or a single neuronuscular action (8,11).

According to present ideas the strength of nervous processes, as related to arousal,

is characterized by the maximum performance of nerve cells, lability is characterised
by the rate of arisal and cessation of a nerve process, and mobility is characterized
by the speed with which the signs of conditioned stimuli are transformed (B. M. 'neplov,
v. D. nebylitsyn).

Recent research on the mutual correlation between typological properties of the indi-
vidual and speed parameters of associative speech reactions revealed significant
correlation between react;on speed and the lability and mobility characteristics.
Moreover this correlation was significant only in relation to differentiated reactions
associated with a combination of speech and rental processes and requiring the action
of a feedback system (10). It was also revealed that I'inert" subjects deal such more
poorly with assignments testing speech and mental processes than do "labile" subjects
(6). Although the speed paraneters of activity were sufficiently high, "inert" sub-
jects made more mistakes because they failed to think out the assignment fully and
analyze changing conditions completely.

Research by L. B. Gakkel' persuasively shows that the “inertia of the stimlatory
process,“ being a typical trait of a subject suffering an obsessive syndrome, is

highly correlated in an associative experiment with difficulties in associations

manifested as dramatic elongation of the latent period, echolalia, repetition and
stereotypy of responses (4).

Hence it would be valid to expect, in the external expression of speech, a unique
pattern of ”marching in place,“ together with delays in speech and with expression
of stereotypic gramtical structures.

mntion should be made here, however, of the role played by word associations in
lexical construction of speech. It has longbeen known from a purely stochastic
approach to speech generation that successive eleaents in speech are associated to-

gether by a statistical dependence defined predominantly by extralinguistic factors--
that is, by the psychological facts of associative linkages (I. P. Pavlov, A. S.

vygotskiy, A. A. Leont'ycv, P. A. Shevarev, Yu. A. Samarin). Much attention has
been, and is still being, devoted to these realities.

The works of A. G. Ivanov-Smolenskiy, A. s. Vygotskiy, A. A. neont'yev, A. R. Luriya,
A. A. Brudnyy and others demonstrated that the consciousness contains the semantic

fields of the associations typical of each word: the persistence of these fields is
relative, and it depends on the frequency with which these associations are realized,

on how widespread their use becomes and on how well they become entrenched in spoken
communication.

109

FOIOFI‘ICIALUSEONLY
I'VE VI'I'ILIIQI- U’l UNL'

It also appears possible to distinguish between the “artistic” and "thinking“ type,
using I. P. Pavlov's terminology, on the basis of speech content. Thus while asso-
ciations made by the former type are abundantly represented by concrete associations
reflecting superficial and descriptive aspects-~that is, a content reflecting con-
crete situations. the associations of persons of the ”thinking" type are predominantly
generalizations and abstractions-~that is, their associations are analytical-synthetic.

A. A. Brudnyy's hypothesis concerning the parasituational or systemic semantic state
of a word as opposed to its situational state is interesting in this aspect. In the
former case words have a certain semantic potential, and in principle they may be
interpreted as having a direct association with internal speech, with subconscious
speech activity. In the situational state, semantic potential is realized in the
form of a set of “contextual meanings." while a situationally conscious use of words
is associated as arule with speech organized sequentially-~“one word after another,”
systemic speech activity may entail synchronous use of several words--'one word simul-
taneously with another (others)' (1).

And in fact, it would be plausible nosuggest that the speech of personalities with
developed abstract thinking processes would be dominated by associations of the first
type-~semantic linkages with paradigmic content: relationships between synonyms,
antonyms and generalizations of a certain class of statements. What we also fre-
quently encounter in such speech is a unique sort of surface roughness due to absence
of the fluent, coherent combination of words-~"ohe word following another'--often
encountered in the speech of personalities characterized by 'artistic‘ or "descrip-
tive" thinking. Mention of two styles of narration known in linguistics--practical
and hypotactic--would be pertinent here. The former corresponds to the principle of
written speech, where one meaning or event is followed sequentially by another--that
is, elements in the content of narration are linked in time. This style is wide-
spread in the speech of children and in the developmental years, while with age it

is substituted by the more-developed hypotactic style, in which a large amount of
semantic, subtextual, temporal, local and causal associations exist simultaneously.
In its grammatical expression, such speech is therefore typified by complex branching,
by various causal and subordinate relationships, by adverbs, and by various auxiliary
grammatical resources.

Variations in the degree to which these styles of speech are represented and changes
in these styles are often noted in the speech of adults experiencing various extra-

linguistic conditions making speech difficult (fatigue, emotional stress and so on).

The ideas suggested above have been confirmed by recent experiments performed by
Kharash, who studied the influence of rigidity in speech on the psychological struc-
ture of meaning (12).

The author experimentally confirmed that the lower is the level of development of the
paradigmic meaning of speech-—that is, that side of meaning in which the individual's
life experience and intelligence are structured and generalized, the higher is the
rigidity (which we define as the reverse of mobility) of the individual's speech.
Interpretation of the syntagmic meaning of the content of speech as its coaumnicative
aspect, and paradigmic meaning as the semantic or intellectual aspect is, in our
opinion, in keeping with Vygotskiy's profound definition of the word as "a unity of
communication and generalization, of communication and thinking" (3).

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And so we have analyzed, to the extent possible in the space allowed, sooe pathopsycho-
logical and typological questions, dwelling in greater detail on "lability-inertia"
and “mobility-rigidity” categories in application to speech. M directions may be
noted in speech-related research on the concept “nervous syste- strength,"vhich is
determined primarily by the strength of the stimulatory processm-that is, by its
functional endurance or perfomncs, which is in turn characterised by the inhibition
threshold. The first is represented by research on the stability of speech in the

presence of strong interference (emotional stress, background noise, linitations on
perception of speech generation by the speaker himself). The second is represented
by research on stability associated with lengthy continuous speaking.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. arudnyy, A. 5., "The Problem of Semantic States," in "Sosnaniye i deystvitel'nost'“
[Consciousness and Reality], Frunze, 1964, pp 6,8.

2. Vitt, N. V., "Mutual Relationships Between Intellectual Processes and Functional
State," in "Nauchno-metodicheskaya konferentsiya ‘Lingvo-psikhologicheskiye

probleuy obosnovaniya netodiki prepodavaniya inostrannykh yazykov v vysshey
shkole'” [Scientific-Methodological Conference "Psycholinguistic Problems of

Validating Foreign Language Instruction Methods in the Higher School." Report
Abstract], Moscow, 1971, p 81.

3. Vygotskiy, L. S., “Izbrannyye psikhologicheskiye issledovaniya" [Selected Psycho-
logical Studies], lbscow, 1956, p 52.

4. Gakkel', L. 3., “Methods of Studying Directed Speech Reactions," PIZIOIDGICHBSKIY
ZHURNAL, NO 5, 1951, p 547.

5. zhigil', V. 6., 'Intonational Errors and Their Causes,“ in 'Nauchno-metodicheskaya
konferentsiya 'Lingvo-psikhologi-meskiye problemy obosnovaniya netodiki prepoda-
vaniya inostrannykh yazykov v vysshey shkole',” Moscow, 1971, p 134. '

6. Kozlova, V. 1., "Diagnosis of Lability in Speech and Thinking on the Basis of
Tests and Self-Evaluation," VOPROSY PSIKHOIDGII, No 4, 1973.

7. Holonova. L. P., "Experimental Phonetics and the Psychology of Speech,“ in
"Uchenyye zapiski HGPIIYa" [Scientific Notes of the First Moscow State Pedagogical
Institute of Foreign Languages], Vol 20, Izd-vo mu, 1960.

8. Nebylitsyn, V. D., "Osnovnyye svoystva nervnoy sistemy cheloveka' [Basic Proper-
ties of the lithium Nervous System], lbscov, Izd-vo Prosveshcheniye, 1966.

9. Nosenko, B. I... and Velichko, L. 9., “Some Characteristics of a Speaker's
Kinetic Behavior as Indicators of Emotional 'Dension,‘ in "'Rech' i emotsii'.

Materialy sinpoziuua" [”Speech and notionsd' Symosiun Proceedings], Leningrad,
1975, p 23.

10. Suzdaleva, V. L, and chuprikova, N. 1., "Rate Parameters of Associative Reactions
and the Wpological Properties of the Hts-an Nervous System,“ VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII,
No 3, 1974, p 137.

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'VR UI'IILIAI. Us’l‘. \II‘LI

ll. 'l‘eplov, B. M” "New Data From Research on Properties of the Hanan Nervous
System,” in "Tipologicheskiye osobennosti vysshey nervnoy deyatel'nosti
cheloveks" [Typological Features of Human Higher Nervous Activity], Vol 3,
Moscow. Izd-vo APN RSI-‘SR, 1963.

12. Khsrash, A. 0., ”Rigidity in Speech and the Psychological Structure of Meaning,“
in "Aktual'nyye probleny psikhologii rechi i psileogii obucheniya yezyku"

[Pressing Problems in Speech Psychology and in the Psychology of Language
Instruction], lad-v0 mu. 1976.

112

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WISTIC WW5HC8 OP m PBONETIC IDRD IN DIFFERENT
TYPES OF WIONALLY ORGANIZED was

1.. V. zlatoustova, H. v. xhitina

Our objective was to study the acoustic characteristics of speech reactions to
specific subjective experiences. The material we analysed included wholly organized,
emtional texts--syllabic verses (works by A. 310): and B. Pasternak), and prose written

in contrasting style and characterized by reduced spatial and teaporal organisation
(1.. N. 'nolstoy's story "he Shark“).

The results of acoustic analysis of the verses were compared with the prose: from our
point of view the simlicity of the text, the maxim descriptiveness of presentation.
and the contrast between the author's narration and the emotionally colored stateIents
of the characters provided sufficient material for comerison.

These texts were subjected to acoustic analysis with a Kay-Electric sonograph; wiﬁband
and narrow-band sonograms in the 8-4 kHz range, recorded from 10 readers, were examined.

Discussion of Experiment

In our assessment of emotional expression we based ourselves on an analysis of the
integral organization of the phonetic word. The reason for this is that parameters
such as the time taken to utter syllables making up a phonetic word, the frequency of
the fundamental tone, and its intensity are characteristics not only of the stressed
syllable of a word. but also of the unstressed syllables, though it is true that the
stressed syllable is the most informative. At the same time we need to note the
iQortance of accounting for the relationship bewaen the frequency of the fundamental
tone in the part of a phonetic word proceeding the stressed syllable and in the part
following the stressed syllable.

1. Persons not having an education in dramatic arts and not being professional
speakers simulating emotionally colored, cos-unicationally meaningful statements ex-

hibited the following type of organisation of fundamental tone frequency (within the
framework of a phonetic word) as being met characteristic:

1) 'ﬂ'te maximu value of the first pretonic vowel is always less than the minimum value
of the tonic vowel;

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a use we rel. and. use. UI‘IJ

2) the start of a tonic vowel is characterized by a sharp rise in frequency over a
relatively short segment of time--from one/sixth to one/third of the total duration
of the sound, with the shorter segment dominating (for example, for speaker B.the
duration of this segment was 50 msec while the total duration of the sound was

148 msec; for speaker S.the figures were 33 and 180 msec respectively);

3) of interest is the steep leading edge of the frequency of the stressed segment

and its gentler trailing edge, as is equally true of both the stressed vowel and the
posttonic syllable. This decrease in frequency is characterized by a sufficiently
stable low point (90-110 Hz) for all male speakers. Thus the frequency range from
the peak at the stressed vowel to the end of the decline in frequency at the posttonic

syllable varies for different speakers within 275-125 Hz, 250-90 Hz, 170-100 Hz and
so on;

4) in the majority of cases the total realization time of an emotionally colored
phonetic word is greater than that of a neutral phonetic word; here, the increase
in time is predominantly due to greater length of the tonic syllable, and mainly the

stressed vowel and the posttonic syllables. When the temporal values of emotional

and unemotional statements are close, the main difference is in the distribution of
the time of the pretonic and tonic vowels, this ratio being about 3:1 for emotional
statements and 1.5:1 for unemotional statements.

11. Actor simulation reveals the same characteristics, though in emphatic form--
that is:

l) The leading edge of the frequency of a tonic vowel takes up one/sixth of the
realization time in a frequency range from 150 to 200 Hz;

2) an actor's pronunciation is distinguished by the dynamics of the tone of the first
pretonic syllable, for which the minimum value is 125 he andthenaximum is 240 Hz.
Thus with actor simulation, a tonic vowel begins not at a point higher than the
maximum of the pretonic syllable, but at a lower point, which creates additional
contrast in the frequency of the fundamental tone within the phonetic word;

3) the posttonic syllable is uttered similarly as described in the general model above:

4) another feature of an actor's pronunciation that may be noted is the greater con-
trast between the segment characterized by a sharp rise in tone and the segment of
decreasing tone. The tendency to hold the frequency at its maximum for a certain
length of time is also more noticeable in an actor's pronunciation than in that of
untrained speakers;

5) a dramatic change in the spectral pattern of the vowel is typical of emotional
statements made by actors: A fundamental frequency of 400 Hz causes change in the
formant structure of the vowel "y":

6) the tonic vowe‘ of an emotionally distinct word is characterized by high total
energy, which remains highly stable throughout the entire time of the vowel's

pronunciation.

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
r’OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A wholly organized poetic text (a syllabiwtonic verse) never produces the time con-
trasts described above, while the frequency of the fundamental tone remains sore
constant. The structure of a tonal line of verse is unique as a rule in that the
frequency at the beginning of the line matches the frequency at its end. Such a
tone structure is a consequence of the symetry of the verse, which is a product

of all of the parameters imparting organization to the verse, to include semantic
and syntactic parameters.

Conclusions

Thus in terms of contrast, a phonetic word in prosaic text may be distinguished by
the following: 1) The duration of the tonic vowel: 2) the specific contour of. the
frequency of the fundamental tone of the tonic vowel (a sharp rise in frequency

during the first third of the sound to its maximum, and a smoother decline of the
frequency of the fundamental tone over the remaining portion of the tonic vowel and
the posttonic syllable): 3) the tonic vowel of a word distinguished by its contrast
is characterized by total energy that is maximum for the text and stable for the
entire sound; 4) sounded consonants, to include consonants contained in tonic

syllables, do not contribute to the greater duration of emotional statements; 5) an
integrally organised poetic text is characterized mainly by a fundamental tone fre-
quency of smoother structure, without a sharply delimited tonic syllable, with a
rather even increase in the time of pronunciation of tonic and pretonic vowels, and
an increase in the time of posttonic vaels at the ends of a line of verse.

This experiment confirms observations (1) indicating that the traces of certain eso-
tional states in the long-term usury are stable and that their verbal expressions
are adequate.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Gromova, Ye. A., 'Baotional mmory and Biogenic Amines," in “Strukturno-

funktsional'nyye osnovy mekhanizmov pamyati" [Structural-Functional Principles
of Memory Mechanism], Nauka, Moscow, 1976.

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'VE UI‘IILIAL use. UNLI

DYNAMICS OF BIDTIONAL TENSION IN A SITUATION INVOLVING
AN ANTICIPATED ourcous OP VARIABLE PROBABILITY

s. L. Zysin

In 1965 Grashchenkov and Latash (1) indicated the importance of accounting for the
meaningfulness of a signal, and not only its probability, in experiments in which
the GSR is recorded. Since that time the 653 has earned itself an ilportant role
in the psychological experiment as an indicator of emotional state. thus we can

rightfully assert today that Grashchenkov and Latash demonstrated the dependence of
the magnitude of an emotional reaction to a stimulus on the letter's neaningfulness.

But what are the relationships between the aeaningfulness of a stimulus and its
probability? his question was examined by Peygenberg (5) , who arrived at the con-
viction that an unexpected stimulus--that is, one with low probability--is meaning-
ful. But this point of view cannot but elicit some objections. ”sun that an
object 0 having biological value is distinguished by a certain set of signs wl, wz,
w3, ..., wi. Would we, then, not agree that the more faithfully each of these signs
defines O—-that is, the higher the probability that event 0 follows event wi (Pom) ,
the more meaningful this sign would be? 1111:: i-plies that event wi would be en-
comtered along the path to object 0 more frequently (the probability of such en-
counters would be higher) if the event's objective meaningfulness is greater. Thus
we arrive at a conclusion opposite to Peygenberg's viewpoint: the meaningfulness of
a stimulus is proportional to its probability.

Our objective was to experimentally test this hypothesis.

The method was as follows. 'lhe subject sec. at a console with four laps of different

colors that could be turned on and off from another console by the experimenter.
There was a button beneath each lamp that turned it off. The subject had to turn off

the lamp inficated in the experimenter's preliminary instructions and he was not to
turn off the others. The leaps were turned on in random order in series of four,

and the place of the test lamp in the tetrad was render. as well. The subject's emo-
tional reaction was evaluated with the assistance of a ISR recorded on encephalograph
tape. The magnitude of the emotional reaction was assessed on the basis of the ampli-
tude of the (SR wave.

Experiments performed with this method produced the following results:

1) In the first series a GSR was recorded only in response to flashing of the test
lamp.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2) Following a certain nutter of experiments (different for different subjects) an
increasingly more expressive reaction to preliminary flashes of other lamps arose.

3) When the test lamp turned on in the middle of a series, subsequent flashes of
other laws did not produce a reaction.

4) 'lhe amlitude of the (SR grew distinctly from the first flash in the series to
the fourth as the mater of alternatives decreased.

5) In the intervals between flashes (10 sec) the (SR returned to its isoelectric
line.

Conclusions and Discussion

The flashing of each lamp in our experiments may be interpreted as a sign of approach
of an anticipated outcome. We can assess the meaningfulness of these signs to the
brain on the basis of the magnitude of the emotional reaction. Thus the results in
2), 3), 4) above show that the intensity of an emotional reaction, and consequently
the meaningfulness of the sign, is proportional to the a priori probability of the
anticipated outcome. If the magnitude of the emotion is E, the flashing of a leap

is w; and the anticipated event is sj, then this proportion may be approximated by
the expression E=f(st/wi).

This dependence would not be couplets without consideration of the influence of
motivation, which depends on need. Inasmuch as the magnitude of an emotion is propor-

tional to the intensity of a need N (3,4)--that is, to the tendency for state so to
transform into a certain state 53, we could validly write B'st-so'st/wi

he follows from the results examined in (5) , this function is not continuous, inasmuch
as the QR returns to zero in the intervals between lamp flashes. In other words
there is no emotional tension when there is no movement toward the goal, and it arises
only at the moment the probability of the anticipated event changes.

Results 1) and 2) are also a good confirmation of the hypotheses, suggested here and

earlier (2) , concerning the relationship between the meaningfulness and probability
of an event. we find in fact that the meaningfulness (weight) of sign wi cannot be
established by the brain before the probability that "i would appear prior to the
anticipated outcome sj--or, to put it in another way, the probability of the transi-
tion wjﬁsj'nis clarified. It takes a certain amount of time to determine meaningful-
ness, and therefore at the beginning of the experiment, before meaningfulness is
established. there is no emotional reaction, but as soon as the brain clarifies the
probability characteristics of the signs. it ascribes a certain meaningfulness to
them, and an emotional reaction appears, the magnitude of which corresponds to this

meaningfulness .

we can see from this discussion that a relationship arises between meaningfulness
and probability only within the space of signs of a certain object (situation, task).
And inasmuch as there can be no emotions apart from msaningfulness, it would hardly
make sense to consider the influence of the probability of a stimulus upon emotions
in general, without indicating the particular task in relation to which the probabil-
ity of the sign is evaluated. For example the probability of seeing a freshly broken

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a on we I smartl- var. Vl‘hl

branch in the fomst would be negligibly small in twwrlson with the prubabiliLy ut
seeing an intact branch. Here we to agree with Peygenberg, such a discovery should
have a most violent effect on our emotions during a forest stroll. But in fact

we would barely take notice of it, since in this case a problem, in relation to which
the broken branch might serve as a sign of something, and be correspondingly
meaningful, is absent. However, in a situation where a hunter is following the
tracks of a wounded animal, possibly even hiding in mush, the same branch would
become a highly probable sign of the closeness of danger. and therefore its meaning-

tulness and, consequently. the emtional reaction to it would be greater.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Grashchenkov, N. 1., and Latash, L. 9., "The Role of the Orientation maction in
Organization of Action." VOPMSY PSIKHOIOGII, No l, 1965.

2. Zysin, s. I... "The Mechanisms of Thinking Pathology in the Presence of
Schizophrenia,“ in "sb. psikhologicheskoy b-tsy No 3, g. L-da“ (Collection of
Leningrad Psychological Hospital No 3], Leningrad, "Meditsinaﬂ' 1978.

3. siminov, P. V., "Teoriya otrazheniya i psikhofiziologiya emotsiy" [The ‘meory
of Reflection and the Psychophysiology of Emotions], Moscow, "Nauka', 1970.

4. siminov, P. v., 'Vysshaya nervnaya deyatel'nost' cheloveka (elmtsional'no~
motivatsionnyye aspekty)" [human Higher Nervous Activity (Emotional-Motivational
Aspects”, Moscow, "Nauka', 1975.

5. Peygenberg, I. M., "M029, psikhika, zdorov'ye" [Brain, Hind, Health], Moscow.
"Nauka', 1972.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PERCEPTION OP SPOKEN INFORMATION ON A NOISE MCKGMWD BY
1.1512885 IN A STAR OP SENSORY W

M. N. Il'ina, I. H. Lushchikhina

He may conclude rather confidently from punished data that perception of speech in
a state of emotional tension is characterized by shifting of this process to the

sensory level, without active, purposeful recognition of the meaning of the message.
This process, which may be called “perceptual resonance,” is abundant with echolalic

reactions such as simple repetitions, frequent unfinished replies, and arisal of
false alarms.

we were interested in perception of speech at the opposite pole or. more precisely,
in a state of sensory monotony, which is typical today of automatic control and
monitoring systems encountered in many forms of work performed by operators. We
know that in the presence of sensory monotony, subjectively experienced by operators
as apathy, boredom, loss of interest in work, sleepiness and so on, the number of
times important signals are missed increases, the performance curve (the u-shaped
monotony curve) periodically falls and rises, the capability for performing comlex
assignments worsens while the rate of performance of simle assignments remains high,
and so on. These data were obtained mainly from research on psychomtor fmctions,
meaning that they cannot be extended to the case of sensory monotony without initial
testing.

The activity of listeners receiving spoken information on a noise background over a
long period of time is, in our opinion, a classical example of sensory mental labor
(perception and registration of a certain form of incoming signals). we had full
grounds for assuming that monotonous reception conditions, aggravated by a negative
environmental influence, would elicit sensory monotony within the first hours of

work. He suggested the hypothesis that the mechanism of sensory and actor monotony
are the same. This had to be confirmed both by experimental data and by parallel
peychophysiologicel analysis of the state of the listeners.

Five professional:- participated in the research as listeners, working on a regular
daily work schedule.

The sxbjects listened to articulation tables of words and phrases on the background
of a chorus of speaking voices. The speech-noise ratio was kept at a constant level
throughout the experiment, equal to 5 d). under these acoustic conditions average
word intelligibility was 40-50 percent--that is, the reception conditions were
difficult.

119
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run annular. vat. URL!

The subject wrote down the words and phrases he heard in their entirety with a
mechanical pencil. 'lhis made it possible to record reaction times with an electronic

stopwatch. ‘rhus besides work accuracy (the correctness of signal recognition), we
accounted for work speed.

'Ihe recordings were played in a free somatic field (through loudspeakers) or through
headphones.

The following techniques were used to monitor the psychophysiological state of sensory
monotony experienced by the listener:

1) measurement of pulse by a pulsotachometer during the entire time of work:

2) measurement of simple and complex choice reactions to sounds of different intensi-
ties after each hour of work;

3) measurement of the number of symbols reviewed in a correcting test before and
after the principal work:

4) dynamometry and tapping tests following each hour of work.

Analyzing the results, we found that objective quantitative work indicators recorded
in the course of lengthy reception of spoken information on a noise background taking
the form of a chorus of speaking voices can in fact reveal the presence of the sensory
monotony syndrome. Evidence that this is so includes. first of all, absence of
deterioration, or presence of insignificant deterioration, of the results of articu-
latory tests using tables of both words and phrases toward the end of a lengthy
experiment, and a general increase in the ninber of omissions and lapses during work
with tables of both words and phrases.

Listener performance follows a sawtooth curve, which in the opinion of rust re-
searchers is typical of the sensory mnotony syndrome.

That the listeners were in a state of sensory monotony was confirmed by their sub-
jective experiences (a decrease in interest in the work, boredom, a tired feeling,
sleepiness) and changes in a number of psychophysiological functions. Examined
separately, the latter reveal a complex pattern of changes occurring in listeners
during lengthy reception of spoken information on a noise background. Thus indica-
tors characterizing the state of levels of regulation associated with complex
functions worsen: The choice reaction time increases; the mnber of symbols reviewed
in the correcting test decreases while the number of mistakes increases.

A clear improvement in performance of simple assignments reveals itself on the back-
ground of deterioration in complex functions. The time of simple sensomtor reactions

decreases, and the number of symbols reviewed increases (in the correcting test, in
the absence of differentiation).

The changes are found to be insignificant at a more-remote level of regulation--

motor regulation. The physical strength and frequency of movements remain practically

unchanged, which confirms the conclusion that the state induced is monotony, and
not fatigue.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus the techniques we used, some of which were related directly to the second
signaling level of. regulation while others were related to the motor apparatus,
confirmed the previously revealed fact that in the presence of mnotony, higher
centers undergo inhibition while motor centers undergo arousal.

Perception of speech by listeners experiencing a state of sensory monotony, as is
true for cases of. emtionai tension, is characterized by a sharp decline in active,
purposeful recognition of the leaning or messages coupled with periodic falls and
rises of the performance level and an abundance of omissions and mechanical repeti-

tions, without attemts at reproducing an entire message on the basis of a few of
its elements. .

121

not: oincw. use own
tun vrrouuu. not. 01“.!

ANALYSIS OF THE W m 0? IKPERSMTBD 5m
N. P. Kasantseva, v. Kh. Hanerov, B. L. mrav'yev

wersonation of human speech. which is limited predominantly to stage performance,
is beginning to capture the interest of specialists in speech research. we are now
finding that the capability for imitating the voice and speech of another person
may be a serious interference to automatic systems verifying the identity of a
speaker on the basis of spoken signals. But the process itself of speech ispersona-
tion, and mainly the question as to what characteristics of speech are imitated and
with what successfulness, has not been studied, to the extent that our data show.

Inasmuch as the successfulness of impersonation may be determined only through
auditory analysis. another question arises: What attributes are used in auditory
perception to describe the sounds of a voice (to include an impersonated voice)?
Research conducted by the method of the semantic differential (Voiers, Galunov)
showed that a listener perceiving a speaker's voice makes use of four or five signi-
ficant independent perceptual dimensions: 1) an overall evaluation of the voice,

to include an evaluation of its timbre; 2) the magnitude or volume of the voice;

3) the dynamic nature of the voice; 4) the pitch of the voice.

As we can see, the first two dimensions are qualitative. they are multidimensional
unqualified variables that do not yield to objective measurement- 'ihe third dimen-
sion is associated with objective characteristics of the signal such as "loud”

or 'nonmnotonous,” which obviously can be simlated in trivial fashion and were

not examined in our work.

We were mainly interested in voice pitch. which has a clear objective correlate--

the frequency of the fundamental tone. Published data indicate that it is responsible
for a certain degree of resenblance of voices perceived by the ear. Thus R. Colton
notes a correlation between the probability with which one speaker may be mistaken

by a listener for another and the similarity of the fundamental tone frequencies.

Our research answered the question as to whether or not the fundamental tone fre-
quency of the impersonator's speech is tuned to the fundamental tone frequency of

the speech of the individual being impersonated: The inpersonated speech of USSR
people's artists V. Merkur'yev, B. Garin and A. Papanov was tape-recorded for this

purpose, using a standard text. lenkontsert artist Yu. Garin was the impersonator.
Sasples of the speech of V. ﬂerkur'yev, A. Papanov, E. Carin and Yu. Garin were used

for comparison of imitated and original speech. Using a specialized instrument, we

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FTP Irregularity

 

man PT? ("8) (all
Saucers Original Imitated Original Imitated
V. Herkur'yev 165 166 258 462
E. Carin 152 155 380 431
A. Papanov 145 130 409 477
in. Carin 122 ~ 352 -

measured the mean fundamental tone frequency (up) and the irregularity of the funda-
mental tone frequency curve. which we defined as the st. of moduli of frequency
changes measured within each cycle in the course of playback of a speech excerpt.
then we determined and WM the overall means of the fundamental tone frequency

and irregularity for the entire text (lo-ls sentences). The results are shown in
the table above.

As we can see from the table, the results of the experiments do not lead to categori-
cal conclusions. In two cases we observe exact tuning of the fundamental tone of

the impersonator's speech to the fundamental tone of the individual being imersonated
(v. Herkur‘yev, B. Carin); in one case such tuning does not occur, though an increase
in the fundamental tone frequency in the direction of the fundamental tone of the
ilpersonated individual (A. Papanov) is noticeable. No tendency to tune the voice
to the irregularity of the fundamental tone curve was revealed. It is suggested that

the work be continued with the purpose of increasing the volume of spoken material
and the number of speakers and ilpersonators.

123

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m sﬂl‘ vs a as use. WI. VI‘IoO

POSSIBILITY OF SWING mounts! com!- SPIBGI BY m
SEWATION MOD

N. G. Kanyshnaya

Various methods of objective and subjective analysis are presently enjoying rather
extensive use in research on perception of emotionally colored speech. ﬁnch atten-
tion is being devoted in this connection to developing the methods (and techniques)
of subjective evaluation of the state of a speaker on the basis of spoken signals.

The results of many studies show that as a rule, speech segments of up to a phrase
in length are the most appropriate stimulus.

Our objective was to establish the possibility of identifying a speaker's emotional
state on the basis a segment stimulus--a sequence of sounds, vowels and consonants,
organized in a particular fashion. It should be euphasized that our work is one
in a series of experiments having the end goal of revealing the optimum segment,
one allowing for the greatest degree of identification of the emotional state of

a speaker on the basis of the stimulus he presents.

we used an electronic sag-.euLaLorua special device that divides speech, with a h‘gh
degree of precision, into discrete members-words, syllables, sounds and so on.

The experiment was performed with phrases satisfying the requirements of sound
quality and categorized rather definitely by listeners as representing a certain
class of emotional states. The phrase "Eto tak prosto" (“This is so simple"! spoken
by four subjects experiencing different emotional states--melancholy, sorrow, anger,

wrath and joy-"was subjected to segmentation. The experimental set of phrases also
included emotionally neutral phrases (that is, phrases representing normal speech),

spoken by each of the subjects, making it possible to analyze identification of
normal speech in general and deviations from it more clearly.

The segmentation technique using a segmentator was described in detail earlier (1).
He used it basically as follows:

1. We found the temporal location and duration of 'windows"--segments containing
the vowel sounds A, 0, O. In view of the instability of the way the word “8T0" was
spoken, the vowel segments of this word were not factored out.

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY . ...

2. The resulting set of vocal segments was transcribed on magnetic tape in a specific
sequence: moo-o" and 'a-o'uthat is, we arrived at stimuli containing three "windows"
and two ‘windows" respectively.

3. He subjected the sequence of consonants remaining after removal of the vowels to
further segmentation in order to achieve the clearest sound for each of the consonant
segments individually and for the entire sequence as a whole. Thus we arrived at
the consonant segment-stimli ”same" for each of the states. 'lhe total mwer of

vocal stimuli used in the experiment was 26 (13 segments containing three I'windews"
and the sue number of segments containing two 'windows"). and the total nutter of
consonant stinili was 13.

Listener analysis was performed by a group of lo inexperienced listeners. They were
somewhat familiar with the research material because they had formerly participated
in an experiment involving identification of emotional states implied by spoken
phrases. The stimuli were presentec‘ to the listeners several times in accordance
with a certain program.

Series A--the listeners were presented segment-stimuli containing two “windows"

segmented out of texts spoken in one of the emtional states and out of normal
speech.

Series B--in this stage of the experiment the stimuli were presented to the listeners
in binary fashion. Normal speech was cospared with some other emotional state.

'lhe experimental material included pairs of stimli which differed or did not differ
from normal speech (that is. normal-anger, normal-melancholy. normal-normal and so
on).

Treating the data obtained during listener analysis, in each case we found the
percentage of positive and negative evaluations relative to the total nulber of
decisions made by the listeners (the total was adopted as 100 percent).

'lhe vocal segent data demonstrated the following. 'me emotionally neutral state
(normal) and weakly expressed emotions such as melancholy and sorrow are recognised
the most distinctly. In the overwhelming majority of cases the definitions offered
by the listeners were consistent with the primary names attached to these states.

When normal stimuli were presented and the definitions of the state offered by
listeners were not consistent with the primary names of that state, as a rule
such definitions fell into the class of names characterizing the physical state of
the subject (depression) and the class of emotional states specifically (sorrow).
It would be interesting to note that the percentage of correct identification of
normal state increases when the segment-stimulus contaim two 'windows.“ The per-
centage of correct identification of the normal state also rises when stimuli are

presented in pairs. In the case of false identification of the emotional states of
melancholy and sorrow. the definitions offered by the listeners were either names

characterizing the physical state of the subject (depression) or, to a significantly
lesser degree, nmes in the class of emotional states specifically. The state names

encountered most frequently were regret and insult. In a nuber of cases weakly ex-
pressed emotions (melancholy. sorrow) were associated with the normal state. this

permits the suggestion that the norm is a relatively variable concept. The definition
of normal must be qualified in relation to ead; subject in each concrete case.

125
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rum VI'I‘ILIAL UBI‘. UNL'

A less consistent and less regular pattern is observed with identification of
maximally saturated emotional stator-anger, wrath and joy. In most cases the
definitions offered by listeners evaluating the states named above did not agree
with the primary names of these states. Thus joy was identified as anger or fear:
anger (wrath) was identified by the listeners as joy, fear and even sorrow. In
other words in the case of wrong identifications, the offered definitions exhibited
considerable scatter within the class of specifically emotional states. Typically,
in contrast to the situation with the normal state, segment-stimli containing
three “windows" were found to be more informative in relation to identification of
the emotional states of melancholy, sorrow, joy and so on: The percentage of
correct identifications of the stimulus grows. The analyzed material did not reveal
any sort of definite trend associated with paired stimulus presentation in relation
to identification of both strongly expressed and weakly expressed emotional states.

Data acquired with consonant stimuli were subjected to similar treatment.

A comparison of the results of both types of segments would show that the percentage
of correct identification of the speaker's emotional state depends to a certain

degree on the nature of the presented stimulus. The percentage of correct evaluations
of the normal state was higher with vocal stimuli. A definite increase in the per-
centage of correct stimulus identifications is observed when consonant stimuli are
presented. This is most typical ofstronglyexpressed emotions (anger, wrath, joy),

and less so of weakly expressed emotions (melancholy, sorrow).

A comparison of the data also reveals certain trends in the qualitative aspect of

listener evaluations. Identification of emotional states tends toward greater
definiteness in the case of consonant stimuli. In most cases the spectrum of state

names is somewhat narrower than that for identification of emotional states on the
basis of vocal stimuli. What we have said concerning differentiation of the fre-
quency of consonants and vowels in emotionally colored speech confirms the point f
view that the time of pronunciation of consonants and vowels may be a sufficientl,
informative indicator assisting in recognition of a number of emotional states (2).

A repeat experiment performed a year later confirmed the previous results. However,
these results should be viewed as tentative, requiring testing with more facts.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Potapova, R. K., and Kamyshnaya, N. 6., “The Syllable and Its Perceptual-Temporal
Correlates," VOPROS‘! YAZYKOZNANIYA, Vol 4, 1975.

2. Potapova, R. K., "Temporal Organization of the Syllable as the Principal
Component of the Temporal Emotional Sign,“ in "Tezisy dokladov ARSO-9' [Abstracts

of Reports at the AEO-9], Minsk, 1976.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BVALUA‘I'IGI 0P spasm 8! LIME BXPRRIENCING 01mm sum
Yu. A. Katygin

Increasingly more attention has recently been devoted to evaluation of states on the
basis of speech. The expert evaluation method used for this purpose has still not
been sufficiently developed from a procedural standpoint. The question as to
whether or not perception of speech is distorted by different states experienced by

listeners is still open. This consummation deals with the preli-inary results of
research on this question.

Prior to evaluating the tape-recorded speech of speakers, each listener evaluated
his state according to the scale: aroused-~caln--inhibited. Subsequent analysis
of the material took account of such categorization of the listeners.

Speakers‘ voices were evaluated according to a modification of Osgood's method of

the semantic differential (v. Eh. Hammv, 1975) using 17 preselected characteristics
(out of 31): Sorrowful-joyful, toneless-clear, call-aroused and so on. Minus point
scores for each characteristic neant perception of the voice as inhibited. while plus

scores scant perception of the voice as aroused.

The experimnt was conducted with nonprofessional experts—43 persons from 18 to 24
years old. The voices of five speakers experiencing different functional states
(naturally the speakers do not know which) were presented in strict sequence: a cal.
state, followed by change in the initial state (mental supersaturation or nonotony
elicited in specially conducted experinents).

The research was conducted in two series. henty-four listeners experiencing a
state of relative physiological rest took part in the first series; these listeners
did, however, note different degrees of arousal-inhibition within themselves. Equal
nubcrs of listeners for each of the tests and for each category of self-evaluated
state were samled for analysis of the results. (The test naterial consisted of
the voice of a speaker experiencing a particular state, tape-recorded for listener
analysis).

The data show that on the average the span of the evaluations given to the five
speakers increases as we proceed for: “inhibited" to “around" listeners (0.68, 0.76

and 0.80 points respectively. The span of the evaluations is defined as the number
' of points between evaluations of the voice in a relatively calm state and in a

state of nental supersaturation or Innotony). The nature of the distribution of

127
FOR OFFICIAL I53 ONLY
run \Irrlt IM- use. UNLI

evaluations relative to the zero point of the ”aroused-inhibited“ voice scale implies
thatiJudistinctionfrom ”calm" listeners, “aroused“ and ”inhibited“ listeners are
more emotional. being more sensitive to change in voice characteristics depending on

the state of the speaker. But there also is a difference between "aroused’ and
“inhibited" listeners: The evaluations offered by "inhibited“ listeners exhibit

a broader span. and they tend more toward extreme positive or negative values. Of
course 8 out of 15 evaluations (tests) of "aroused” listeners were higher ("more

aroused") than the identical evaluations offered by "inhibited“ listeners, the reverse
was true for five evaluations ('moreinhibited"), and two of the evaluations were
equal. In other words 'inhibited' listeners tend to evaluate a voice as more inhibited

than do “aroused“ listeners, and the latter evaluate a voice as being more aroused
in comparison with the former.

The evaluations made by men and women from the same group of listeners (six each),

who evaluated the tests in a calm state, were compared. The same female listeners
also evaluated the tests in a relatively tense situation (prior to an examination).

The evaluations were consistent for both situations. The results showed that women
were able to differentiate the state of the speaker more clearly than men (the
differenccis statistically significant). This was particularly true for differentia-
tion between monotony and fatigue. The span of evaluations given by women suffering
tension prior to an examination was greater than that observed for women in a calm

state. That is. evaluations obtained in a more stressful situation reflect changes
in the state of the speaker more adequately.

Nineteen listeners took part in the second series of experiments. while in the first
series only six female listeners evaluated tests while suffering pre-examination
tension, in the second series first the entire group evaluated the tests in a

more stressful situation--prior to an examination, and the same procedure was used

on the same listeners experiencing a relatively calm situation. In the calm situa-
tion. all but two listeners assessed their state as ”calm,“ while prior to the
examination there were 12 “aroused," 4 "calm," and 3 ‘inhibited" listeners.

As in the first series, 8 out of 15 evaluations made by “aroused" listeners were
higher than the evaluations offered by "inhibited" listeners, S were lower and 2
were equal. The average span of evaluations given of the five speakers was greater
for "aroused" listeners (0.96 points) than for "inhibited” listeners (0.64 points)
and "calm" listeners (0.80 points) when the listening was performed prior to an
examination. In a calm situation (among "calm" listeners) the evaluation span was
0.88 points.

The evaluations offered by “aroused" listeners for the voice of speaker No 1 (super-

saturation) have a larger span (1.9 points) than those of "calm" listeners (1.7
points), while the Span for 'inhibiteﬁ“ listeners is even less (0.8 points). How-

ever, in terms of speaker No 2 (supersaturation) and No 4 (diagnosis unclear), the
evaluations offered by ”inhibited" listeners (1.7 and 1.2 points respectively are
observed to have a larger span than the evaluations of "aroused“ listeners (1.2 and
0.2 points). The evaluations offered by "aroused" listeners in relation to speakers
No 3 (monotony) and No S (supersaturation) are higher than those given by ”calm“

listeners, and the evaluations of the latter are higher than those given by
“inhibited" listeners.

128

FOR 0FFK]Al.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Because the nuuber of "calm" and “inhibited” listeners was small, we singled out-
10 listeners from the entire group who evaluated their state as "calm" in a calm
situation and as 'aroused' prior to the examination. Then we compared the evalua-
tions Inde by this group in the two indicated situations.

In general, the evaluations offered by ”aroused' listeners of all speakers but No 2
(supersaturation) exhibit a larger span (0.86) than that of evaluations offered by
calm listeners (0.56). In one case the evaluations were even of opposite sign.

There are also more statistically significant differences in the evaluations given

by listeners experiencing a stressful situation (8 out of 10) than in the evaluations
offered by listeners in the relatively calm situation (3 out of 10).

reveals greater expressivaness of the evaluations made by women than those made by
men in both the calm situation and prior to the examination. For the women, there
were more significant differences between evaluations, and the average group data
were more similar. The span of evaluations made by women in a calm situation is
0.76 points, while that of evaluations made prior to the examination is 1.32 points;
the figures for men are 0.42 and 0.52 points respectively. With both men and
women, the span of evaluations is greater in the situation of pre-examination
stress; there are more statistically significant differences between the evaluations
offered by men and women prior to the examination (0 out of 15) than in the calm
situation (5 out of 15).

The results demonstrate the contradictory nature of the dependence of an evaluation
made of a speaker's voice on the state of listeners. It may be hypothesised that
the differences indicated above in the dynamics of evaluations made by listeners
experiencing different states arise due to individual features of the voices of the
speakers. These same features of the voice of a previous speaker obviously also
influences the evaluation given to the voice of a sucmeding speaker as the

listener goes on from one test to the next. If in general an increase (decrease)
in the fundamental tone corresponds in most cases to an increase (decrease) in the

evaluations given by listeners, these factors may also have an effect in those cases,
few in number, in which an increase in the frequency of the fundamental tone is
accompanied by a decrease in the evaluation, and vice versa.

Consideng the unique conditions of the second series of experiments, we might
imagine that the evaluation given to the speaker's voice was influenced not so much
by the state of the listeners as by the attitude of the latter toward the experimental
procedure. In cmarison with the pre-examination stress situation, in the rela-
tively calm situation the listeners performed on the background of an obviously
negative attitude toward the experiment, which in all probability had the effect of
decreasing the expressiveness (the span, the aqalitude relative to the initial state
in one direction or the other) and adequacy (change in sign. inconsistency with
general group dynamics) of the evaluations.

Three basic conclusions can be made fro. the data. The first: The state being
experienced by the listener does not hinder him from recognizing changes in the

speaker's voice tending toward greater arousal or inhibition. 'lhe second: he
initial state of the listeners influenced the evaluation given to the voice of the

speakers. In most cases "aroused" listeners evaluated the speaker's voice as being
more aroused (irrespective of whether it was toneless or clear) than did ”inhibited“

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-UK orb-nun. USE ONLY

listeners. This means that the voice of a speaker in an aroused state was recognized
to be mare aroused by “aroused“ listeners, while the voice of a speaker in an inhibited
state was recognized to be more inhibited by listeners feeling themselves to be in an
"inhibited" state. The expressiveness of this law may also depend on the attitude of

the listeners to the procedure itself of voice evaluation. The third: Female
listeners are more categorical than male listeners in their voice-based evaluations

of state, and they are able to discern subtler changes in the speaker's state.

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OIl OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOMBPAC‘IOBS WIRING m ACCURACY OF A LISTBNBR'S EVALUATION
OF MIMI. STARS

T. V. korneva

The emotional state of an individual is an'imortant factor defining his speaking
behavior. lusearch on the ways emotional states are expressed at different levels

or speech has now become extremely ilportant in connection with the task of monitor-
ing the state or a Iunan operator. Host research being conducted in this area has

to (b with word pronunciation. which is closely associated with physiological processes
and which theretore is least open to voluntary regulation (control) in comarison with
higher levels or speech organisation (1.2). The objective correlates of notional
states in speech must be sought not only with the purpose of creating autonatic
sectional state recognition systems but also with the purpose of training specialists
that are to monitor the state or operators. automatic systems that could satis£y
practical needs have not been created yet, and conclusions are made as to the state

of an operator by a group of expert specialists as a rule. Thus the task is to

raise the reliability of expert evaluations. However, much less research has been
conducted on the characteristics of speaking than on the characteristics of speech
perception, and most of the research has been concerned with resistance to inter-
ference (2,3) .

In this connection we undertook research with the listener as the object. We em-
ployed the following procedure: a subject was asked to listen to speech recorded

from 23 mentally ill speakers experiencing different emotional states. The form

and degree of expression of the latter were evaluated by a connission of psychiatrists
on the basis of a comlex of clinical psychopathological signs. 'lhe speakers uttered
a set of specially selected phrases varying in syntactic structure and phonemic
composition. The phrases were devoid of any content that would indicate the speaker's
emotional state. Listening to the speech of each speaker. the listener had to

select one of six oquiprobable states: a depressed mood, anxiety, apathy, anger,

an elevated mood and normal (an even mood), indicating the degree to which the given
state is expressed. The list of possible states was written on the data sheets on
which the subjects recorded their conclusions. me correctness of the listener
responses was evaluated on a six-point scale. theoretically. the highest score a
subject could run up for the entire test was 138 points. and the minim was 23.

One hundred persons (50 women and 50 men) from 25 to 50 years old took part in the
experiment as the listeners. 0n the average, the subjects successtully handled their

task of identifying emotional states on the basis of an isolated spoken signal devoid
of any sort of lexical or senantic content. The average score for the group was

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI Ul’l‘lLlhIa 05"- UN...

82 points. Thus the prosodic characteristics of speech are a dependable indicator
of that individual’s emotional state.

sive information is (4). Sex and age have been found to influence the successfulness
of identifying emotional states on the basis of voice. However, significant scatter

such a personality structure would include the following characteristics: dependence.
sensitivity, conformity. anxiety and tension. Such a structure, which implies that
the subject is greatly dependent upon his environment, seems to generally promote

depends much less upon his surroundings, and consequently that his personality does
not promote development of an orientation toward other people. In this connection

Thus the capability for correctly evaluating an individual's emotional state and
the dependability of expert evaluations are a function of the personality features
of the expert himself. Inasmuch as personality structure is stable to a significant
degree. the dependence upon its reliability in each case of evaluation is constant
as well. This dependence may be significantly reduced through special training.

are variables, the dependence of the reliability of expert evaluations upon these
characteristics is more complex. Basically two techniques are used to study this
dependence: The expert's state is altered by drugs (tizertsin) (5) or a state of

We studied the impressive activity of subjects experiencing different emotional
states elicited by mental illness. With this purpose we examined 160 patients

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

suffering manic-depressive psychosis (80 women and 80 men). In contrast to other
mental illnesses, manic-depressive psychosis does not cause significant changes in
the patient's personality, and it manifests itself as cyclic, rare or less prolonged
changes in mental state. Eighty of the examined patients were in a depressed state.
We did not examine patients with extreme or serious forms of depression.

I
Analysis of the results showed that subjects in a depressed state basically retain
the capability for adequately evaluating the emotional state of a speaker on the
basis of his voice. The average score for the depressed patient group was 79.2;
it was somewhat lower than the narrative indicator (82.0), but the differences are
statistically insignificant. women managed better with the listening assigmlent:
Their average score was 82.0, while that of men was 76.4 (the difference was statis-
tically significant, p<0.0l). Analysis of the structure of test fulfillment showed
that reduced adequacy of evaluations is not uniformly distributed throughout the
entire test. Subjects made the greatest nunber of mistakes identifying a depressed
mood (37 percent correct responses out of the total number of responses pertaining
to this state). The accuracy of identifying anxiety and apathy did not decrease
below normal, and on the average it even grew somewhat. Subjects were most success-
ful in identifying anger and an elevated mood, though in comparison with the normal
state their accuracy was somewhat lows-r. Significant differences appeared in the
structure of test fulfillment by men and woven. The matrix for the distribution of
the probabilities of errors aade by women in a depressed state does not basically
differ from the standard matrix. Thus for exasple, an even mood was identified by
women correctly in 67 percent of the cases (compared to a standard of 63.8 percent) .
while men were correct in only 46.7 percent of the cases. An even mood was mistaken
for a depressed mood by women in 12.5 percent of the cases and by men in 21.0 percent.
The latter may be explained by projection-~a well known form of aanifestation of an
expert's state in his evaluations of the state of other people. 'lhe reasons for the
decrease in accuracy of identification of a depressed mood by subjects in a state
of depression remain unclear. It may be hypothesized that reduced sensitivity to
the sectional state of a subject experiencing the same state is a psychological
defense mechanism. l-Nidence of this can be found in the fact that the accuracy with
which a depressed mood is identified through verbal expression grows and reaches
the standard level as the subject emerges from his state of depression. He established
this fact by examining 80 manic-depressive psychotics in a state of intermission--
that is, in the absence of disease symptoms. The structure of test fulfillment for
this group of listeners corresponded to the structure of healthy subjects.

mus we analyzed the dependence of the accuracy of listener evaluations on a number
of factors. Having studied our group of expert listeners, we can conclude that the
reliability of evaluations made by different experts varies, inasauch as it is a
function of certain characteristics of the expert's individuality such as his person-
ality features, sex, age, presence of special training and so on. Because these
characteristics are fixed in any one expert. differences in the reliability of his
evaluations would depend primarily on variable factors, one of which is his emotional
state. It was demonstrated that the accuracy of identifying emotional state on the
basis of prosodic characteristics of an individual's speech decreases on the average
when the subject is in a depressed mood. However, the influence of the expert's
emotional state on the accuracy of his evaluations can vary.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.

3.

4.

S.

rvn Ufl‘lblﬂh van URL!

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Luk'yanov, L. N., and Prolov, M. v., “Signaly sostoyaniya cheloveka-operatora'
[signals Indicating the State of a Human Operator], Moscow, ”Nauka', 1966.

Noeenko, 3. I... "Osobennosti rechi v soetoyanii enoteional'noy napryazhemosti"

[Characteristics of Speech in a State of Emotional 'nension], Dnepropetrovsk,
1975.

Pollack. I. et al. , "Couunication of Verbal Modes of Expression," in "Language
and Speech," 1960, pp 121-130.

Bazhin, Ye. P., Vuks, A. 2a., and Korneva, 1‘. v., “Possibilities for Recognizing
auctions on the Basis of an Isolated Spoken signal," in "Peikhologicheskiye
problemy psikhogigiyeny, psikhoprotilektiki i nediteinekoy deontologii"

[Psychological Problems of Mental Hygiene, Prevention of Mental Illness and
Medical Deontology], Leningrad, l976.

Kon'kova, o. v., Bazhin, Ye. E2, and Uskov, P. N., "Some Features of Expert
Evaluation of the Emotional state of a Comnicent in a Commication Situation."

in "Problem meditsinskoy psikhologii" [Problem of. Medical Psychology],
Leningrad. 1976.

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(SING 'IHB SEMICALLY comm PMS m0!) '10 MUN]!
PMPBSSIWAL errss 0? All AMOR'S VOIG

A. N. Kunitsyn. V. I. 'l‘arasov

The question as to whether or not it is possible to study an artist's creativity
by the methods of the natural sciences is still being widely debated in the arts.
The principal objections tosuch application boil down to the idea that an actor's
creative process is clearly subjective in nature, and that it does not yield to
any sort of formal description.

whether or not that is true, the procedure by which an actor transforms himself
into another character has become an object of serious study. Ibsearch by Professor
P. v. Simonov persuasively demonstrates the fruitfulness of using the methods of
the natural sciences to study the emotional aspect of an actor's creativity (1).

We believe that the solution to this problem depends in many ways on the choice of
the research method. The method selected Inst equally satisfy the demands of

art criticism and the demands of the natural sciences, especially when study of

the emotional substrate of an actor's creativity is involved. Pm this standpoint.
methods based on studying subjective evaluations appear promising. A. A. Okhtomskiy
wrote: "...so-called subjective evaluations are just as objective as any others...”
((2), p 135). We believe that subjective evaluation methods are in keeping with the
very essence of the creative process of an actor.

Among the subjective evaluation methods used to study works of art and the creative
process, the method of semantically contrasting pairs (SC?) has earned the greatest
popularity. Subjective evaluation of stimli on the basis of certain character-
istics, which is the basic principle of the SCP method, is also the basis for an
actor's regulation of his emotions on stage: the actor's ability to parcel out the
dominant characteristics of an object or a phenomenon on stage, and to organically
experience them--that is, experience then in fact--is a typical feature of the
school of experience which is now validly referred to as Stanislavsky's school.

he education of an actor in Stanislavsky's school begins with teaching him to
parcel out dominant characteristics; s. o. nebel', one of the oldest teachers and
one of stanislavsky's colleagues, writes: I'At first we try to dispell the notion
of eeotionality. the student sits with a pencil. a wall, a window, a window view
or a notebook before him. He must examine them without leaving out a single detail.
Stanislavsky calls this first exercise 'abstraction of characteristics.’ This
represents more the position or a scientist than an artist. And in fact, the

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE(MNLY

exercise itself and its name are perhaps more suited to science than to art.

Strict analysis of an object, an appeal to note only that which is, imagining nothing
extra, but missing not even the most negligible detail...“ ((3), Pp 69-70). Ab-
straction of characteristics is becoming a general principle of initial training
exercises. Students are taught to evaluate the most distant and the closest objects
and the highest and lowest sounds, and they are taught to evaluateandexperience

all shades and intensities of sound. In other words characteristics at the basis

of an actor's emotional regulation are also the object studied by the SCP method.

We studied subjective perception of the emotional speech of an actor. Acting apart
from the experience of emotional states would be unimaginable, and therefore theatri-
cal speech, being the principal resource of expression, is primarily emotional
speech. This is why study of theatrical speech actually means study of the pro-
fessional features of an actor's transformation. The following question naturally

arises: How does a professional actor's speech differ from that of a first-year
student of dramatic arts?

To clarify this question, we conducted experiments on subjective perception of
emotional speech. Our subjects were students in first-year acting classes who had

practically no acting skills and no facility with theatrical speech, and prominent
masters of the leningrad stage--USSR people's artists Ye. A. Lebedev, V. I.
Strzhel'chik, and Ye. z. Kopelyan.

The set of speech stimuli consisted of the phrases “This is so simple' and "This
is so simple that I have to say it.“ These phrases satisfy two requirements:
They do not have a definite emotional content, and they are easily uttered in any
emotional state. These phrases were uttered in the following emotional states:
melancholy. joy, anger, anxiety, fear, sorrow and normal.

Emotional states were simulated by means of actor transformation. The phrases

were tape—recorded and played back for listener analysis. Thirty listeners
evaluated the speech stimuli on the basis of 53 attributes using a seven-point

scale (for polar attributes) and a four-point scale (for monopolar attributes).
The listening results were subjected to factor analysis.

The emotional speech of students breaks down into four factors. The first factor
was interpreted as a subjective correlate of acoustic expression of actively
experienced joy. It included the following attributes:

Elevated 0.97 Bright 0.94
Avid 0.97 Gay 0.94
Lively 0.95 Sharp 0.93
Alert 0.92 Active 0.88
Aroused 0.86 Clear 0.86

The attributes associated with the second factor permit its interpretation as a
subjective correlate of a general esthetic evaluation:

Good 0.97 Beautiful 0.82
Tender 0.89 weakened 0,31
Pleasant 0.88 Pure 0.70
Mild 0.88

(Not) malicious 0,33

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The third factor was interp:eted as an “anger“ factor:

Halicious 0. 80 Harsh 0. 58
Angry 0. 83 Distorted 0. 58
Resonant 0. 63 Full 0. 51
Strange 0. 61

me set of attributes associated with the fourth factor permit its interpretation
as a ”fear“ factor:

Frightened 0. 83 unusual 0 . 61
Breaking 0. 81 Subdued 0. 60
Heepy o. 81 Encuiaered 0. 53
Plaintive 0. 74 Unconfident 0. 53

The emotional speech of the prominent actors breaks down into five factors. The
content of the first four factors remains the sane as with perception of the emo-

tional speech of students; a new factor, the fifth, was interpreted as the "volume“
or ”saturation“ factor:

Rich 0. 94 Thick 0 . 80
Full 0. 91 Heepy 0. 76
Battling o. 87 Shrill O. 76
Deep 0. 80 Plaintive 0. 64

this factor indicates that the voice of professional actors is more saturated by
overtones. and that“ is more flexible and expressive. his is a qualitative evalua-
tion of voice, associated with experience acquired in many years of acting, in which
individual features of the voice were used as a means of artistic expression.

BIBLIOGRAPRY
l. Simonov, P. V., ”Metod fizicheskikh deystviy K. S. Stanislavskogo i fiziologiya
euotsiy" IX. 5. Stanislavsky's Method of Physical Actions and the Physiology
of Emotions], Moscow, 1962.

2. Lkhtonskiy. A. A., ”Physiology of the Motor Apparatus,I in “Sobr. soch.‘
[Collected works], Vol 3, Leningrad, 1952.

3. Knehel‘, H. 0.. “Poeziya pedagogiki" ['me Poetry of Pedagogical, Moscow, 1976.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI UI‘I'ILIAL UBI'. ONLY

WEEKEND“ OP MORAL STATES 0!! ms BASIS OF SWIG
AND TEMPORAL CHARAC'IBRIsTIG 0P SPEECH

M. V. Lasko, 2h. 1. Mavitskaya

'lhis paper describes the possibility of using content analysis of speech to diagnose
an individual's states arising in the course of highly meaningful activity, and it
analyzes the dependence of the teaporal characteristics of speech on the speaker's
state.

A previously published report presented the results of research aimed at creating

a method making it possible to use content analysis of speech, obtained in the course
of interpretation of ambiguous stimulatory material in the laboratory, to reveal and
numerically express states such as anxiety, depression and aggression,and psycho-
neural tone (1). Our attempt at measuring states by means of content analysis scales
was successful in the first approximation. The results provided the grounds for
suggesting that if a certain state is manifested in the semantics of the verbal
behavior of an individual acting in a naturally formed emotional situation (apart
from an experimental situation and without provocation of speech by specially chosen
stimulatory materials), this state could be diagnosed by means of the content analysis
scales we developed.

Comparison of the content evaluation of state with some structural and dynamic
characteristics of speech revealed a stable negative correlation implying that the
greater the expressiveness of anxiety, the greater is the rate of speech. According
to published data the rate of speech may both increase and decrease when emotional
tension rises (3). ﬂat this change can occur in either direction is usually ex-
plained by individual typological differences in reactions to emotion-producing
stimuli (stimulatory and inhibitory reactions) (2). In our opinion this phenomenon
is associated with more-general mechanisms. Inasmuch as the rate of speech is

one of the formal characteristics of productivity, its dynamics should follow the
Yerkes-Dodson law. In other words it may be hypothesized that the rate of speech

is maximum at a certain average (optimum) level of emotional tension. Below or
above this level, the rate of speech would fall. When the complexity (or difficulty)
of speech and mental activity is increased, the level of emotional tension that is
optimum in relation to the rate of speech shifts in the direction of lower values.

we test this hypothesis we analyzed the speech of students recorded a) during an
oral examination (58 persons) and b) in the laboratory during unrestricted interpre-

tation of ambiguous stimulatory material (30 persons). Speech that was first

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tape-recorded and then transcribed was subjected to content analysis. The average
number of words uttered in 1 minute was the indicator for the rate of speech. Sub-
jects participating in the research-were also asked to evaluate their own state
using scales specially developed in our laboratory.

The research revealed the following laws. Monologue speech-moral presentation of
prepared responses--was found to be the least informative in the oral examination
situation for state diagnosis by means of content analysis scales. The principal
information on a state was obtained during dialogue speech, when the statements of
the students were responses to the examiner asking for clarifications or additional
information. It is namely in these speech excerpts that the verbal elements of
anxiety revealed themselves. the verbal cosponents of other content scales were
practically absent from the speech of this group of students. Apparently the in-
crease in the uncertainty as to the outcome of the situation, occurring in response
to requests for clarifications and additional information, and the limited time
available to prepare a response increased the student's emotional tension and caused
him to reduce control over his speech generation, which is what made anxiety the
dominant component of state in the content of speech. It may be possible that

the peculiarity of the situation and the activity, and the differences in social

roles left no room for manifestation of state couponents such as low psychoneural
tone. depression and aggression.

Content analysis of speech generated during interpretation of ambiguous stimulatory
material revealed verbal elements associated with each of the scales indicated above.
The dominant state component for this group of students was once again anxiety.

the average score for which was significantly higher than for students taking the
oral examination (9.3 as compared to 3.7). However the reverse was found to be true
from self-assessments of state: notional tension was lower among students partici-
pating in the laboratory studies (24.5 as compared to 27.9). At the same time posi-
tive correlations were revealed in each group between states defined by content
analysis and self-assessments of state (on the average, P<0.05). Thus despite the
contradictions between the absolute values for content—analysis state and self-
assessed state in the laboratory and during the oral examination, the values obtained
within the same situation were statistically consistent with one another.

The following was revealed by analysis of the average rate of speech and the nature
of its statistical relationship to the particular features of emotional state.

The rate of speech was higher in the laboratory than during the examination (252
syllables per minute, as opposed to 196). It might be concluded from just this fact
alone that the rate of speech decreases as emotional tension rises. However. this
conclusion is valid only in relation to the group average. The correlation between
rate of speech and state may be either positive or negative within the group. Thus
correlation analysis showed that higher anxiety (determined by content analysis)

and emotional tension (determined by self-assessment) in the laboratory correspond
to a higher rate of speech. while in the examination situation the reverse is true--
higher values for these factors correspond to a lower rate of speech (0.05>P>0.0l).

These research results provide the grounds for suggesting that the basic content

of speech and the real conditions within which it is generated impose specific limi-
tations on use of its semantic and temporal characteristics as indicators of emo-

tional state.
139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- you we I assoc..- v9» Vain.

a limitation must be imposed due to reduction of verbal elements reflecting charac-
teristics of state. However, the stable relationship we revealed between self-

preted as evidence of a curvilinear dependence between rate of speech and degree of
emotional and (or) intellectual tension. consequently the absolute values of rate

of speech are not reliable indicatorstatstate. The obvious solution would be to

use relative values of the rate of speech for this purpose, and namely the degree of
its acceleration or deceleration. Under otherwise equal conditions (in terms of

the content of speech and the situation), an increase in the rate of speech may
indicate an increase in emotional tension or anxiety that has not yet exceeded the
limits of optimum intensity. But it the rate 0: speech declines, we may presume
that emotional tension or anxiety has exceeded the limits of optimum intensity and
is having an unfavorable influence on speech productivity.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Lasko, v., and Hezvitskaya, Zh., ”Determination of Emotional State by Content
Analysis of Speech,“ in ”Rech' i emotsii. Materialy siupoziuma 11-14 noyabrya
1974 9.” [Speech and Emotions. symposium Proceedings, 11-14 November 1974),
Leningrad, 1975.

2. Nosenko, E. L.. "Osobennosti rechi v sostoyanii enotsional'noy napryazhennosti“
[Characteristics of Speech in a State of Emotional Tension], Dnepropetrovsk,
1975.

3. Cook, "Interpersonal Perception," 1969.

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WITIW OP OPERA‘IOR STATE BY “ASKING CHARACTERISTICS 0? m SPOKEN 8!“
V. G. bebedev

Our objective was to clarify the possibility for automatic recognition of the function-
al state of a hman operator on the basis of certain characteristics of the spoken
signal.

We studied a pair of states, "emotional tension" vs. 'normal." Recordings of the
voices of athletes experiencing different emotional states were used as the experi-
mental material. Spoken signals were recorded as follows. Il'he subject was shown a
series of nmbers written in the following order: 10, 12. 14. 16, 18, 20, l9, 17,
15, 13, ll--that is, even nunbers from 10 to 20. then odd numbers from 10 to 20. and

then odd mmbers from 19 to ll. After reading this series of nubers the subject had
to recite them from memory into a tape recorder's microphone.

moordings were made in different situations:

1) in a state of rest;

2) 30 minutes before the start of the competitive event;
3) immediately prior to the athlete's performance.

In the first case all subjects handled their assignments rather easily. he recordings
made in this situation corresponded to the 'normal' state. In the second and es-
pecially in the last situation noticeable growth in emotional tension was observed
among some athletes, expressed in the recordings as omissions of certain numbers and
confusion of their order.

Recordings of those subjects who expressed the greatest emotional tension in the last

two situations were selected for analysis. These recordings corresponded to the
state of "emotional tension."

The recordings were analyzed with a “DESK-6" computer. The word to be analysed

was fed into the coaputer through an analog-digital converter with a quantization
frequency of 20 kﬂz. It was then broken down into segments 16 msec long, and spectrum
moduli were calculated for each segment by means of a DP? [expansion unknown] proce-
dure. Then, using an algorithm simlating a masking effect, we isolated the masking

141

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PW 0"“.th USE ONLY

characteristics [maskpriznaki] of this segment of speech (1). Each masking character-
istic was represented by a pair of numbers: P1”), 31(3), where 1’10) is the fre-

quency and 3i”) is the amplitude of the i-th masking characteristic of the j-th
segment. Thus the word under analysis was represented as a sequence of masking

characteristics for lS-mc segments of a spoken signal. The similarity of. two
segments k and m Has determined by the formula:

. . at.- ﬁ—P'm' Im ' (I)

where mm is the distance between segments k and m, being the sum:

Pl- :- p..(') + “.0! . ' (2)
he") - 1,: ml‘n [In F.(') _ l’n p.09]: _ '(3)
Phi") - 13ml!!! [In E,(') — In 3’}qu (4)

where P100 and 310‘) are, correspondingly the trequency and amplitude of the

i-th masking characteristic of the k-th segment, i is the mmber of the masking
characteristic of the k-th segment closest in frequency to the j-th masking character-
istic of the m-th segment, and a-const.

The transition from similarity measure a for segments to similarity measure A for
words is achieved by a method described in (2). The maximtn measure of similarity
between two words (Am) was determined by means of dynamic programing:

A...
”7:7

Lulu "' ﬂux (Lu Ls) ‘ (5)

where 1.1 is the length of the first word and L2 is the length of the second word.

The recordings of three speakers were selected for an experiment in automatic
recognition of state. The learning sequence for the recognition algorithm contained
one utterance each of the word ”twelve” in the "normal“ state and in the state of
“emotional tension" by each of the three speakers--that is, there was a pair of

standards, corresponding to the states to be recognised, for each speaker.

The control consisted of three utterances of the word "twelve” in the "normal”
state and three utterances by each speaker in the state of “emotional tension.”
The measure of similarity (5) with each of the two standards corresponding to a
given speaker was calculated for the control sample. Recognition of state was said

to be correct if the control utterance had the greatest similarity to the corresponding
standard of the learning sequence.

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In our experiment the states of two out of three speakers were recognized correctly,
and two mistakes were made in recognition of the third speaker's state. That is,

16 out of 18 utterances were recognized correctly.

For stricter testing of the effectiveness of the suggested algorithm tor recognising
the state of a human operator, we would have to have recordings corresponding to
difterent enotional states and confined as to authenticity by additionn electro-

physiological monitoring data.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Zagoruyko, N. 6., and Lebedev, v. 6.. ”Effect of ﬂushing and Antenatic Analysis
of. Spoken signals." in "Vychislitel'nyye sistealy" [Water System]. Issue 61,
novosibirsk, 1975, pp 103-111.

2. Velichko, V. IL, and Zagoruyko, II. 6., "Autcnstic Recognition of a Limited Set
of Oral Oomands,‘ in "Wehislitel'nyye sisteny." Issue 36. Novosibirsk, 1969,
pp 101-110. '

143

FOR OFFICIAL (5!: ONLY
e nice we a s\ sass. Huh Vl‘hl

A MICE MEASURING MIONAL mUSAL-INBIBITION
V. Kh. Hanerov, R. Yu. Ramanavichus. G. A. Yakushenkov

Research by many authors has shown that the characteristics of the fmdamental tone

of speech carry a significant fraction of information on the speaker‘s emotional
state. Evidence that this is true can be found, in particular, in experimnts with

auditory perception which have demnstrated that listeners are capable of identifying
the state of a speaker on the basis of both the signal recorded with a 'neck" micro-

phone and a spoken signal passed through a low frequency filter.

Electroacoustic analysis has also demnstrated the diagnostic value of the fundamental

tone of speech, and especially its frequency (1,2). Various authors recon-end using.
as informative characteristics, certain parameters of the curve of fmdamental tone

frequency plotted with respect to tiunthe average over a segment of particular length.
the range (span) of changes in frequency, the autocorrelation function, the variance

and frequency irregularity (1.2). The last indicator is defined as the sum of the
moduli of the gain in fundamental tone frequency measured in each period.

gum—l.)

our research established that it is a highly informative indicator for the diagnosis

of three states: inhibition, normal and emotional arousal. This indicator has been
routinely measured by means of a special program written for the Nairi-Z digital
computer.

This paper describes a specialized device measuring the average frequency of the funda-
mental tone of a phrase within an arbitrary segment of a recording of limited length,
the irregularity of the melodic curve of the fundamental tone and the duration of

the test phrase.

The device consists of the following basic blocks: a microphone amplifier, (MU),

a level indicator (10). a total segment isolator (WU), a fundamental tone frequency
isolator (VChO‘r), a speech segment duration measuring unit (1P), a switchboard (K081) ,
a unit determining the average frequency of the fundamental tone (08) , a unit deter-
mining the irregularity of the fundamental tone's period (01), a digital display (T31)
and a print-out block (VPU) .

144

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

the venom, after which it is converted into a sequence of pulses with a spacing'
corresponding to the periods of the fundamental tone. The output of the VChO'l' is
connected to the appropriate terminal by a signal from the m. The 08 uses these
pulses to determine the average period of the fundamental tone within the phrase, and
the 01 determines the fundamental tone‘s irregularity. ﬁne work of the as and 01 is
controlled by signals emitted by the IP and the m.

Il‘he output parameters of the device are: the average period of the fundamental tone,
its irregularity and the duration of the phrase; these parameters are fed through the
K01 to the 1'51, and through the W0 to a teletype unit.

let us examine the principle of operation of the instrument's basic blocks. 'me

tonal segment isolator is intended for isolation of tonal segments within a phrase.
The decision as to whether or not tonal segments are present within a speech excerpt
is made on the basis of the ratio of energy in the high frequency and low frequency
ranges of the spectrum of the spoken signal. A sixth-order filter in the low fre-
quency channel isolates the energy of the spoken signal within a frequency range up to
1,000 827 a sixth-order filter does the same in the high frequency channel for fre-
qencies above 3,000 He. Following full-wave detection and smoothing by low fre-
quency filters, signals from both channels are transmitted to a camarison circuit.
which outputs the logical result 1 when energy in the low frequency channel exceeds

energy in the high frequency channel. the output of the cosparison circuit is connec-
ted to an AND logic circuit, the second input of which receives signals from the
analysis interval determining circuit. Signals pass from the output of the AND
circuit to the as and 01 to control their work. he fundamental tone is filtered out
in the mar. Pour band filters span a range of fundamental tone variation from 80 Hz
to 400 1-12 (80-120 32, 120-180 11:, 180-270 Hz, 270—400 as). The "most advantageous"
frequency channeluthat is, the channel in which the first harmonic of the fundamental
tone is located at the given momentuis automatically turned on according to a certain
logic. This logic helps to prevent low frequency noise, mistakes caused by jumps to
the second harmonic and penetration of the first formant of the spoken signal into

the particular range.

signals pass from the vchdr block to the 05 for determination of the average period
of the fundaaental tone of the phrase. The sum of all of the periods of the funda-

mental tone within the phrase and the mute: of periods and the average period are
calculated in the 06. The 05 contains AND and OR logic circuits, a delay circuit,
a decoder, trailing and leading edge isolators and the appropriate pulse oscillators.

Calculated values of the average period of the fundamental tone are transmitted from
the output of the OS via the switchboard to the digital display.

The procedure for determining irregularity of the curve describing change in the funda-
mental tone is carried out by the 01 block. It contains four counters, six registers,
two decoders and several AND-NOT circuits. this block determines the modulus of the
difference between adjacent values of fundamental tone periods and sums all of these
modules in relation to a single phrase. The calculated irregularity value is trans-
mitted via the switchboard to the digital display.

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UPI‘ILIAL W5 UNI-I

The circuitry of the digital display permits representation of the parameter measure-
ments in visual digital form in the decimal system. Pour IN-Z cold-emission indica-
tor lanps are used in the display. The circuitry includes three decoders based on
155101. microcircuits. three code converters based on 118551 and lLBSS3 microcircuits,
and three AND-NOT circuits based on 118558 circuits for potential latching.

Three parameters are displayed in succession. The succession is determined by the

switchboard. The first lanp indicates the number of the parameter while the next
three indicate its nunerical value.

The device is designed as a table model powered by a 220 volt circuit.

The device was tested with a spoken signal recorded in different conditions causing
emotional arousal or inhibition of the speaker. the or these situations was rock
climbing, the program of which included a preplanned tall by the climber. The spoken
signal was recorded with a portable Sputnik-401 tape recorder. Even though the re-
cording quality was low, the resulting curves for the dependence between irregularity
of the melodic curve and the frequency of the fundamental tone (averaged in relation

to standard samples) revealed growth in the climber's emotional arousal well and were
consistent with the evaluation of the climber's state made by the trainer. The device

was also tested with other models of emotional states (mental illness, actor simula-
tion). The tests proved its performance in real conditions.

BIBLIOGRAPRY

l. Manerov, V. Kh., "Investigation of the Spoken Signal to Determine an Individual's
Emotional State," Dissertation Abstract, Leningrad, 1975.

2. Galunov, V. 1., and Manerov, v. Kh., ”Approaches to Solving the Problem of the
Speaker's Emotional State," VOPROSY KIBBRNETIKI, Moscow, No 22, 1976.

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INFORMATION CONiaﬂ‘ OF THE EID'HONAL GIARAC‘I'BRISTICS OP SPEECH
V. L. Marishchuk

As has been demonstrated by many authors, intense emotions cause change in the fre-
quency characteristics of speech, its tempo, the spacing between sentences, words

and sounds, and so on. However. much less attention has been devoted to the informa-
tion content of the speech. And yet, changes in senantic structure, in the logic of
presentation and in the meaning behind the way phrases are put together bear especially
inportant information allowing us to determine the onset of tensionua state character-
ized by a decrease in stability of mental processes and a decrease in reliability.

we observed the behavioral reactions of students and pilots in testing units and in
real flight, and when perforaing parachute jumps, laying special emphasis on novices.

In addition to running various tests, we evaluated the intonation content of the
speech of our subjects.

The procedures we used included recitation of a well-neurized poes, memorization,
sunnatization of the meaning of a short story, tests of logic, associative thinking,
interviews etc. (1).

'lhe results showed that depending on their strength, duration, the degree of the
subject's adaptation to then, his functional state, his psychological sets and his
social motives, psychogenic effects may elicit different responses and states. We
classified these reactions in relation to three conditional phases: A, B and C.

In conditional phase A, which is typified by general positive changes, we usually
observed a certain increase in the overall tempo of speech, coupled with a slight
lengthening of thinking pauses, improvement of diction and growth in expressiveness
of the most informative phrases. Subjects usually did better on tests than in the
initial background situation: The quatrain was recited accurately, the meaning of the
control story was sunnarized more accurately, and the test for logical thinking was
conpleted faster. Tests of associative thinking were coupleted more successfully,
and the associations became generally richer. In interviews with the experimenter,

subjects sometimes used figures of speech and siniles. increases in other test indi-
cators and grout): in the effectiveness of activity (professional or simulated) were

noted as a rule. The isolated cases of transition to intonations, phonetions and
articulations atypical of the subject and use of unusual and inappropriate expressions
were not enough to suggest presence of tension or to perait prediction of a tendency
of deteriorating performance.

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The next conditional phase, B. was usually characterized by dissociation of the ex-
ternal manifestations of tension (including structural and acoustic indicators) from
the practical results of activity (to include the information content of speech).
Thus we noted involuntary transition to atypical speech tones and timbre (for example
the subject's voice turned either shrill or deep, atypical hoarseness and swallowing
of occasional words appeared, and so on), but the semantic content of speech remained
practically undisturbed, and the task at hand was performed effectively. In other
(rarer) cases, while diction, articulation, and the tempo of speech remained clear
and normal (special care was even taken to keep the structure of speech correct),

we observed a certain decline in the semantic merits of the uttered phrases and
deterioration of the performance of scan elements of activity.

In phase C, concurrently with'a general decline in test indicators and a worsening of
activity results, we observed pronounced externally expressed structural and acoustic
changes (all changes listed in phase B, and additionally a dramatic decrease in the
length of pauses between words and sentences-~"drum speech"—-or inadequate pauses going
as far as tenporary stupor). Deviations in the content of speech were noted in parallel.
Thus in cowarison with the initial data subjects recalling the semantic content of the

short story left out up to one-third of the semantic units contained within it, and
the results of the test for logicdecreased (by 15-20 percent).

The results of the associative thinking and analogy assignments deteriorated an
especially great deal (by up to 50 percent of the initial level). In certain cases,
tense students and some novice parachute junpers were unable to interpret the figura-
tive meaning of proverbs. Parachute jtmpers in a state of extreme tension made certain
errors in the well-learned quatrain:

A lonely sail hovers white

In mists above a sea of blue!

What does it seek in a land so distant?
What did it leave behind at home?

The parachute jumpers often left out the word "mists“ or they substituted the word
"sea" by "sky," and instead of ”does it seek" they said 'did it leave,“ in a sense
anticipating the events.

A brief interview revealed difficulties in logic such as: transitions to topics having
nothing to do with the question asked; unjustified and categorical deductions; un-

justified conclusions; digressions from initial premises; refusals to reply ("I give
up"); clear lack of organization in replies ("jumpsfrom point five to point ten");
difficulty in solving analogies.

Among purely external speech characteristics accompanying intense emotions, we also
observe inadequate intonation--bursts of loud speech or pauses, or transition to a
whisper, not in keeping with the logic of presentation, but spontaneously, parallel
to fluctuations in emotional arousal.

Type B and C reactions were also observed among subjects undergoing training in moun-
tain climbing. The subjects usually increased weir rate of speech, and missed words
and phrases, which in a number of cases distorted the meaning of the transmitted
information. This could be explained by tension combined with euphoria. In severe

cases we observed stupor, a total inability to express thoughts.

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY . ..

It is quite understandable that analysis of information content of speech acconpanying
intense emotions is not meant to substitute for the methods of spectral analysis of
spoken information, isolation of intonational characteristics and other procedures
for evaluating acoustic changes in the structure of spoken signals.

moreover it would be suitable to focus attention on the fact that an objective evalua-
tion of state, and all the more so a sufficiently probable prediction of the success-
fulness of activity, may be arrived at only through integrated study of different
sorts of intonation about the individual, to include physiological indicators and
information on performance of his principal activity. 'lhis is especially ilportant
to consider because in the presence of extreme emotional tension, we may sometimes

observe opposing trends in different functional and other indicators. For example
some may decline (ones which are secondary to the activity at hand or which play a
secondary role in the maintenance of overall performance) while others that are more
important and more meaningful may stay at their previous level or even increase. 'me
psychological set toward performance of the given activity and a high level of motiva-
tion play an inportant role in this case. Thus, investigating performance of complex
flight tasks, we found that pilots suffering intense fatigue and mental stress were
unable to couplets relatively siaple psychological tests, but they were able to
perform the skills of aircraft control and make navigational calculations without
reproach (2) . We revealed almost no changes in spoken information pertaining to pro-
fessional activity (radio comands and reports, internal communication, exchanges of
flight information) that could distort the content of this information. On the other
hand all of the changes we categorized as being in group C were observed in responses
to psychological tests and in conversations on subjects other than flying (both in
questions and especially in replies). It should also be noted that the total volume
of spoken information decreased sharply.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Marishchuk, V. i... Afanas'yev, Yu. A., Kuksa, I. I., and Hikhaylov, G. V.,
"Voprosy organizatsii i mstodiki professional'nogo otbora v wuz' [Occupational
Selection in the Air Force School--organization and Methods], Izd-vo mm
pri GDOIFK in. P. P. lesgafta, Leningrad, 1972.

2. Marishchuk, V. l... Bondarev, B. V., Yegorov, V. A” Plakhtiyenko, V. A., and
Frantsen. B. s. . "Stability of Mutal and Psychometor Functions in Extreme
Conditions,” in "'Aviatsionnaya i kosmicheskaya meditsina'. Materialy III

Vsesoyuznoy konf. po aviatsionnoy i kosmicheskoy meditsine" ["Aviation and Space
Medicine." Proceedings of the Third All-Union Conference on Aviation and

Space Medicine], Ibscow, 1969.

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run vrrn Ins. uor. UI‘LI

CHARACTERISTIG OP ACOIBTIC RESOUKIBS EOR BXPRESING MIOIB IN
W 5mm, AND SOIE mm 3593ch 01’ m psosnsn O? m meme: 0! WINS

V. P. Horozov

The grounds for the choice of the object of analysis: Most studies of the acoustic
resources for expressing emotions have involved ordinary cmversational speech (1,2).
The acoustic resources of emotional expressiveness in vocal speech were studied for
the first time in our bioacoustic laboratory at the USSR Academy of Sciences Institute
of Bvolutional Physiology and Biochemistry imeni Sachenov (3-7).

Vocal speech (singing) differs significantly from ordinary conversational speech in
acoustic structure, physiological mechanisms of its formation and its auditory per-
caption. The intensity of the singing voice can reach 120 db (when measured 1 meter
away) , the range of variation of the fundamental tone is more than two octaves, and
the average statistical spectrum exhibits a sharp increase in intensity of the third
formant (high singing formant). Vocal speech is distinguished from conventional speech
by vowels of tenfold duration, by presence of vibrato-modulation of the amplitude,
frequency and spectrum (with a periodicity of 5-7 Hz), by the particular features of
articulation (diction) . by the nature of respiration, by unusually pronounced activity
of the resonating system and so on.

We demonstrated that these features of vocal speech are significantly predetermined by
the unique function of singing as a means for transmitting emotional and esthetic
information primarily (6). The distinct emotional orientation of vocal speech is
emphasized by the existence of such genres in singing as weeping (for example
"Yaroslavna's lament," which expresses the emotion of grief), various songs acmnpany-

ing games and dancing (expressing the emotion of joy) and so on. Sometimes the same
vocal work may contain an entire range of emotional experiences (for example u. I.

Glinka's "Doubt" and others).

All. of this makes vocal speech an extremely convenient object for studying the
acoustic resources of expression of emotions by voice.

Our laboratory has been working in this direction for a number of years, since 1972.
Considering that we have discussed the experimental results thus far rather completely

in recently published works (3-7) , we will limit ourselves in this cosmunication to a
brief commentary on them and to their extremely general evaluation in connection with
the problem of the language of emotions.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ' "

The main objective of our research was to answer the question "What acoustic para-
meters of a singer's voice are responsible for transmission of information on an
emotional state, and to what extent are they responsible for doing so?

to obtain the raw data for our research we used two modifications of the actor trans-
formation msthod, which has earned a rather substantial reputation as a means of
simulating the emotional states of man (8,9,11,12). The first variant of the method,
which we described in a number of previous works and which we named the method of
emotional-semantic inversion (3-7), essentially required a singer to sing the same
phrase of a vocal piece, but with different emotional tones or in different emotional
context (joy. grief, anger, fear, indifference). 'men the samples of singing which
were judged most adequate to the particular emotions by a sufficiently representative
group of expert listeners were singled out (the probability of correct identification
of the emotional context had to be not less than 0.8-1.0), and finally the phrases
contained in these samples were subjected to acoustic analysis with the purpose of
revealing structural changes in the signal associated with change in emotional context.

The second modification of the method, which was tried out in the work of one of the
graduate students of our laboratory, G. H. Kotlyar (7), essentially entailed selection
of samples of vocal phrases from pieces sung by an outstanding master of vocal arts--
F. I. Chaliapin, samples which experts scored as having the most clearly expressed
emotional context (joy, grief, anger, fear), and their subsequent acoustic analysis.

Acoustic analysis was performed by the methods of integral spectrometery, oscillography
and intonometry, and by the methods of statistical computer treatment of the results.
In distinction from our previous works (3,4) a significantly broader range of acoustic
characteristics of the vocal spoken signal was subjected to analysis:

1) Average duration of a syllable within the phrase;

2) coefficient of variation of the duration of syllables in the phrase;

3) relative duration of pauses in the phrase (in proportion to the total
duration of the phrase);

4) average loudness of the sounds of words in the phrase;

S) the coefficient of variation of voice loudness in relation to syllables;

6) average steepness of the front (the leading edge of sound loudness) of
syllables within the phrase;

7) average steepness of the drop in loudness of syllables;

8) relative level of the high singing formant (according to integral
spectrometry);

9) the peak frequency of the high singing formant;

10) vibrato frequency;

ll) the depth of amplitude-freqmncy modulation of vibrato:

12) the nature of changes in the fundamental tone (the melodic orientation and
the intonational stability of the voice).

It was established that all of the acoustic parameters of the singing voice listed
above changed to one degree or another in response to change in the emotional context
of the vocal phrase. In this case a unique set of distinguishing characteristics was

discovered for each emotion-~grief, anger, joy, fear. He adopted, as the acoustic
characteristics of particular emotional states, the extreme values (in the mean

statistical data) assuned by each of the acoustic parameters listed above in response

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urrlulna. ual. UNIJ

to changes in emotional context. By doing so, we were able to determine the sets of
characteristics that were associated with each of the emotions.‘ As a result we
established thatnegative emotions--grief, anger, fear--possess a larger number of
distinguishing acoustic characteristics (six or seven). while the positive emotion
(joy) possesses fewer (two). He associated this finding with the greater biological

significance of negative emotions, which had its influence on formation of the acoustic
code of emotions in the course of evolution.

Acoustic resources for expressing emotions by voice are characterized as extralinguistic
resources of communication (10). Our research showed that vocalists have the capability
for transmitting information about an emotional state to their listeners not only by
singing vocal phrases from different musical pieces, but also by singing vocal exer-
cises (singing melodies without words, using one vowel) and even by singing just a
single (I) vowel on a single note.

We also performed a special experiment having the purpose of establishing the possi-
bility of expressing emotions by means of instrumental music. At our request, a pro-
fessional violinist played a passage from the I'lil:>ndo Capriccioso" by Saint-Sachs
several times, imparting different emotional meaning to each execution--joy, grief,
anger, fear, indifference. when these passages were subsequently played back to
different categories of expert listeners. the percentage of correct identification of
emotional context was extremely high (70-100 percent).

These data show good agreement with our previous experiments on the role of the dynamic
characteristics of a signal as resources for transmitting the emotional context of a
vocal phrase (4), and with our ideas about the extralinguistic nature of the resources
of emotional expressiveness.

The general results of our research led us to the conclusion that the system of vocal
Speech contains a unique alphabet or set of acoustic voice characteristics which a
singer uses to transmit certain emotional moods to his listeners. Despite the infinite
diversity of shades of emotion and of the shades of emotion used in singing. and despite
the individuality of renditions by different vocalists. there are grounds for suggest-
ing that the acoustic code of emotions in singing is an invariant. Research has
demonstrated the unity of the principles of emotional expression in both the singing
of outstanding masters of vocal art (Chaliapin) and that of contemporary singers.
Apparently it is precisely this unity of the acoustic resources of emotional expres-
siveness that makes the emotional content of singing universally intelligible to a
broad audience.

Comparison of our data with the results of research on the acoustic resources of
emotional expression in ordinary speech (1,2) also leads to the conclusion that the

acoustic resources of emotional expression are common to both singing and speech.

A talented singer selects the resources of emotional expression from life experience
(that is. from speech). This is precisely why such resources are distinguished by
plausibility and universal intelligibility.

 

’Thc procedure for determining these characteristics and the experimental results
are described in greater detail in (3.4.6.7).

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhe physiological grounds for such universality and for the universal intelligibility
of vocal resources of emotional expression can be found in the dependence of the
nature of sounds emitted by man on the physiological state of the body of the indi-
vidual experiencing a given emotion, and on the state of vocal organs in particular.
Thus the acoustic characteristics of emotion contained in voice are determined by
physiological characteristics of the individual's state. This fact apparently lies
at the basis of not only the unity of the vocal resources of emotional expression

but also the mechanisms by which emotional information is decoded by the listener--
that is, by which he perceives emotions. Moreover the facts cited above also indicate

that there is something in cor-son in the vocal resources of emotional expression in
people and animals--a phenomenon first recognized by Charles Darwin.

Finally, we have the grounds for suggesting that the resources of musical expression
or, to put it more precisely, the resources of emotionality in music, also have some-
thing in con-Ion with the resources of emotional expression in speech and singing.
Diverse though it may be today, instrumental msic, which was born in man's distant
past, more than likely as a means of imitating the huan voice, remains emotionally
effective and corprehensible to the listener to the extent that it reflects the

resources of vocal emotional expression. A confirmation of this point of view can
be found in the statements of many prominent musicians, and in their works as well.

The language of emotions is without a doubt evolutionarily older than logical speech.
In the course of the individual's ontogenetic development, he masters the language
of emotions long before logical speech. According to the theory of evolution this
phenomenon reflects a phylogenetic law. However, with arisal of logical speech the
language of emotions used by man's prehistoric ancestors did not lose its important
function in conmlunication. It makes the logical meaning of speech significantly
richer, and it resumes its dominance in singing, music, theatrical speech and acting,
acquiring the attributes of the highest form of art.

The most important general feature of the acoustic code of emotions is its independence
of the phonetic acoustic code (logical speech), despite the fact that both are essen-
tially characterized by the same acoustic parameters of the human voice. mis feature,
which we demonstrated experimentally with vocal speech using the method of emtional-
semantic inversion, has a morphological explanation as well: It has been Established
by neurophysiological studies that man perceives the logical meaning of speech by the
left hemisphere of the brain, and its emotional meaning by the right hemisphere (13).

The practical aspects of our research: We discovered during our experiment that far
from all vocalists are capable of satisfactorily expressing different emotions by their
voices, in the same way that far from all listeners can correctly identify the emotional
context of the renditions played to them. Individual indicators varied from 30-50 to
100 percent for both performers and listeners. This provided the grounds for recounend-
ing special tests (created on the basis of the method of emotional-semantic inversion)
to evaluate the emotional expressiveness of singing and the capability for perceiving

the emotional content of singing. These tests may be used in conservatories and music
schools as objective criteria in occupational selection and in voice instruction.

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

3.

40

5.

10.

11.

12.

13.

0“!“ Ul‘flklﬂh U0.- UI‘LI

BIBLIOGRAPHY

"Rech‘ i enotsii. Haterialy simpoziuma (ll-l4 noyabrya 1974)“ [Speech and

motions. Synpcsi-un Proceedings (11-14 November 1974)], toningrad, 1975,
127 pp, illustrated.

"nech' . enotsii i lichnost'. 'Dezisy dokladov sispoziuua" [Speech, Bastions and
Personality. Abstracts of Symposiu- Reports], zoningrad, 1978, 40 pp.

Kotlyar, G. M., and Morozov, V. P., "Mal and Dynamic characteristics of
Vocal Speech as Acoustic Correlates of Its notional Expressiveness,‘ in
'kch' i emotsii. Haterialy sinpozim,“ Leningrad, 1975, pp 29-37.

Kotlyar, G. H., and Horozov, V. P., “Acoustic Correlates of the Emotional
Expressiveness of Vocal Speech,” AKUSTICH. 230m, Vol 22, No 3, 1976, pp 370-376.

Horozov, V. P., "Measurement of the Emotional Expressiveness 0: Vocal Speech:
Possibilities and Prospects,“ in "Nauchn. sessiya, posvyaehch. 80-letiyu D. Ya.
Andguladze. 'l‘ez. dokl." [Scientific Session Dedicated to the 80th Birthday of
D. Ya. Andguladze. Report Abstracts], Tbilisi, 1976. PP 9-10.

Horozov, V. P., ”Biofizicheskiye osnovy vokal'noy rechi" [Biophysical Principles
of Vocal Speech], "Nauka', L. 0., 1977, 232 pp, illustrated.

Kotlyar, G. 14., ”Investigation of Acoustic msources for Expressing notional
States in Vocal Speech,” abstract of dissertation in pursuit of the degree of
candidate of psychological sciences, Leningrad, 1977.

Simonov, P. V., "Hetod K. s. Stanislavskogo i fiziologiya enotsii" [The Stanis-
lavsky Method and'the Physiology of Emotions], Moscow, 1970, 153 pp, illustrated.

Simonov, P. V., "Vysshaya nervnaya deyatel'nost‘ cheloveka. Hotivatsionno-
emotsional'nyye aspekty" [Hmn Higher Nervous Activity. Motivational and
Emtional Aspects], Mscow, 1975, 150 pp, illustrated.

Bondarko, L. V., "mrukovoy stroy sovremennogo russkogo yazyka" [Acoustic Struc-
ture of Modern Russian Language], Moscow, 1977, 176 pp, illustrated.

Kunitsin, A. 14., ”Experience in Using Stage 'nechniques to Simulate Oral Bx-
pression of national States," in ”Mch' i enotsii" [Speech and motions], .
Leningrad, 1975, pp 38-44.

Galunov, v. 1., and Tarasov, V. 1., "The Naturalness of Expressions of Emotional
States and Study of the Characteristics of the Spoken Signal," in "Rech' i
emotsii," Leningrad, 1975, pp 55-61.

Balonov, L. Ya., and Deglin, V. I... ”slukh i rech' dominantnogo i nedominantnogo
polushariyf' [Hearing and Speech in the Dominant and Nondoninant Henispheres],

Leningrad, 1976, 220 pp, illustrated.

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m CONTKJL OP OPERA’KOR STATS IN “REGION WITH
THE OBJECTIVES OF EXPBRI CERTIFICATION

v. I. Hyasnikov, O. V. Kon'kova, B. A. Popov, P. N. Uskov

evaluations made by specialists representing the appropriate services are presently
enjoying active use in some special areas of medical and psychological expert certifi-
cation. ‘l‘he tasks of such experts include determining the mental status of operators
and defining group psychosocial characteristics. The end goal of such specialists

is to make a functional diagnosis--that is, not only to reveal the structure and
degree of possible disturbances in mental activity, but also to make a prediction and
determine what measures would promote psychological and occupational adaptation.

An operator's speech and his verbal behavior are along the principal sources of the
information such specialists need. msearch and practical efforts in this area have
shown that we are making far from full use of all of the possibilities afforded by
dialogue speech. 'l‘hus relatively little attention is being devoted to spoken oo-uni-
cation, or dialogue, as an independent source of information, even though some
positive results have been achieved in this area (1).

But use of dialogue speech for diagnostic purposes does involve certain difficulties.
First of all it should be pointed out that control of the para-eters of dialogue
speech always presupposes comarison with certain standards. As a rule indicators
obtained from different people in a.representative sasple serve as such standards.
However, deeper examination of this question has revealed that application of standards
to dialogue speech is not entirely valid, inasmch as the laws of speech generation are
to a high degree individualistic for each pair of conunicants. This leads to the

practically important problem of obtaining standards applicable to each pair of ob-
served persons. In this case we would be dealing with difficulties of another sort,

namely choosing the method that would ensure reliability in the comparison of different
passages of dialogue speech in the course of its generation. A nudist of studies have

been performed in this area: the most significant are those performed under Jaffe's
guidance (2). Jaffe's system provides the framework for tackling the tasks of opera-

tional diagnosis .

As we know, the state of an individual is characterized by a broad spectrum of

behavioral manifestations. It should be esphasized that different aspects of be-
havior are closely interrelated. Each of them asst-es greater or lesser diagnostic

significance depending on the type of situation and on the state elicited by that
situation. Consequently one-sided consideration of individual aspects of behavior

would result in one-sided evaluations of states. In this connection behavior data must

155

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Vl Ufl‘ILIAL UM URL!

be subjected to integral analysis. Speech behavior must not be examined apart from
other resources of communication.

In recent years specialists have focused attention on a group of behavioral elements
that have come to be called nonverbal. It has been demonstrated that nonverbal be-
havior is related to speech behavior by certain laws, and in this connection it may
serve as an additional source of diagnostic information. Elements of nonverbal
behavior which should be considered include: the distance between the partners;

the location of the partners in space relative to one another during discussion; the
postures of the partners; gesticulations; visual contact. According to our data,
directed consideration of these behavioral elements significantly raises the diag-
nostic value of information, and especially in regard to evaluating the emotional
relationships between the communicants.

One example would be to record the number of visual contacts achieved during oral
communication (by means of television apparatus). Establishment of the fact of
visual contact would require the ability to determine, from the image on a monitor
screen, that the gaze of one of the partners is fixed upon the other. Special ex-
periments were conducted to reveal the accuracy with which an expert could establish
the point of gaze fixation under these conditions and to determine the possibilities
for developing this capability in an expert. The research results showed that the
accuracy with which an expert determined the gaze fixation point is sufficient to
establish the presence or absence of visual contact (210‘, pc0.0i). We revealed a
tendency to understate the true value of the gaze fixation point (ps0.00l); conse-
quently the vector of arising errors is in the direction of the conditional zero
point (a fixation point located right before the eyes). Thus a situation is

created in which angular dimensions are systematically understated by the expert.

In a case where the plane of the subject's face on the monitor screen is at an angle

to the planeof the screen, the quantity of errors made in the evaluations is dependent
on yet another variable--the angle between the axis of eye fixation and the axis formed
by the expert and the image of the observed subject. As this angle increases, the
lumber of errors grows. It was also established in this research that the expert‘s
capability for determining the gaze fixation point by means of a televised image is

a trainable function. Hence follows the need for special training that would increase
the reliability of establishment of the fact of visual contact.

Another example of using nonverbal communication resources is the measurement of the
metric distance between partners, which is used as one of the indicators of social
distance. A special computational formula was proposed in this connection (3). It
provides quantitative data (in the first approximation) for this indicator, and it
requires elementary treatment of the televised images of the partners:

(—3 tie-v —<—:— (%)w+(——-":

where D--distance between partners; A,B--true linear dimensions of the partners;
a,b—-linear dimensions of partners on the screen; c,d--distance, on the monitor screen,

from the conditional center of mass of the partners to the center of mass of the
partners and to the center of the television screen; k-—empirical coefficient of the
television system; u—-angle between vectors c and d.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The next ilportant step is to consider the ratio of cosmuntcative to noncomunicative
gestures. especially if we wish to evaluate the stability of the group as a single
whole in stressful and critical situations. A shift of this ratio in the direction

of noncomunicative gestures indicates certain difficulties in interpersonal cosmunica-
tion and interaction. On the other hand sutual correspondence between the postures of
partners engaged in oral communication indicates group cohesiveness. High corres-
pondence indicators are observed with high cohesiveness of the group, which is highly
significant to expert practice. We developed special printed terms to be used in
expert certification to obtain quantitative characteristics of nonverbal behavior.

We now have unlimited possibilities for automating control of the nonverbal parameters
of behavior. In the opinion of a number of authors. application of Jafte's system

to analysis of nonverbal comnication resources opens up certain prospects. Prom
all that we can see, the potentials of this system are in fact much greater, inasmuch
as it makes use of stochastic processes.

In conclusion we would like to turn attention to one more information source, namely

proxemic parameters. Pronemic parameters--that is, characteristics of the spatial
organization of hunan behavior-must be accounted for it we are to raise the accuracy

of conclusions made by an expert on all noted behavioral facts.

Thu it is rather difficult today to evaluate the state of an individual on the basis
of just speech alone. Obviously if progress is to be made in this area, an integrated
approach would be required. one which would not permit the rendering of one aspect

of behavior absolute at the expense of others. Integrated experimental research should
demonstrate the validity of this approach.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Gazenko. 0. G., Myasnikov, v. 1., and Uskov, r. IL, 'Behavioral Control as a mi
of Evaluating the Functional State of Cosmonauts in Flight," AVIATION. SPACE AND
mamas MEDICINE. Novenber 1976, pp 1226-1227.

2. Jafte, I. 1., and Teldstein, 5., “Rhythms of Dialogue," Academic Press, New York.
1970.

3. Popov, B. A.. ”A Procedure for Working with ’l'elecoununication Data in the Period
of mu [expansion unknownl,” in “Haterialy konferentsii molodykh spetsialistov
IMBP Hz SSSR, g. Hoskva. 1977 9.“ [Proceedings of a Conference of Young Specialists
of the USSR Ministry of Public Health Institute of Biomedical Problems, Moscow,
1977] (in press).

4. Val'siner. Ya., personal commnieation.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a van vs a system you \u‘bl

or the fundamental tone of the voice, change in tespo and distribution or pauses in

include a decline in the intensity of speech, monotony, an increase in the length of
pauses and of the latent period of the speech response, and decreases in the volume of

mental processes.

General arousal of the organism directly effects the nature of breathing, the rhythm

or speech, the tone of speech forming organs, and particularly the vocal force applied
and the dynamic range of speech intensity. An increase in the intensity of speech

is invariably accompanied by significant changes in the rhythmic, intonational and
spectral structure of the spoken signal. Changes in the intonational contour of
speech may be elicited by forcing of the voice, or it may serve an independent communi-
cative purpose (for example that of expressing irony, sarcasm and so on) while vari-
ations in speech intensity remain relatively insignificant.

Our objective was to study the dynamics of the averaged third-octave spectrun of

vowel sounds in quiet, normal and loud speech (low, normal and high vocal force
exertion by the speakers).

Mlve male speakers took part in the experiments. Isolated vowels sounds were
pronounced many times (not less than 10) with varying vocal force. The intensities
of the third-octave components or the spoken signal were measured with the assistance
of a condenser microphone positioned a standard distance away from the speaker, a
measuring amplifier and an acoustic frequency spectrum analyzer (type 3347).

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY " '

Analysis of the experimental data showed that simultaneously with growth in speech
intensity, there occurs an involuntary increase in the average frequency of the funda-
mental tone-4’0 (Table 1). Thus when we proceed from quiet to normal speech (when
speech intensity increases by 8-12 db), Po increases insignificantly, by 5-20 percent,
while when we proceed to loud speech (with the speech intensity increasing by 20-24 db),
to increases by 60-90 percent. An increase in the average frequency of the first
formant, P], is also observed when the voice is forced. According to data from third-
octave spectrum analysis, meanwhile, changes in the mean frequency of the second formant

of vowel sounds are less pronounced, and the directions in which the changes occur
differ.

 

 

Table 1. Mean Frequency of the Fundamental Tone and First.- Pbrmant of Vowel Sounds
uttered Ten Times by Three Speakers with Different Vocal Force
A ”2 l06 I70 04 110 "0 M I40
0 I25 I00 I90 00 500 450 010 I20
I1 I35 142 240 90 210 206 400 I96
V I42 I30 265 I21 210 210 530 240
3 I32 “6 23 I20 510 000 100 260
A 142 I28 I90 62 150 660 000 ' 200
O 166 no I90 _ 00 600 450 '660 210
u I65 no 206 6d 325 no 390 I10
3' 136 I45 228 so 390 3I6 420 - nos
3 I12 I30 'I96 05 SW ‘10 630 2I0'
A I10 145 I 30
0 IGO m 200 05 SW 000 6I0 ‘ so
II I15 I40 225 85 35 210 460 ' no
v ns :32 23; too zoo 390 4.10 so
3 I61 IIO 2" 11 coo m 060 no
Kay:

1. Sounds 4. Quiet

2. Hz 5. bond

3. Normal

Figure 1 shows the dependence of the man frequency of the fundamental tone, P0.
of the vowel sound '0" on its intensity A.

As the vocal force increased frou mini nal to normal (as A increased from 60 to 80 db)
Po increased by 41 Hz (from 92 to 133 In) , while when A increased from 80 to 100 db
(that is, when the speaker went from normal to forced speech) the increment in F0
was 186 Hz.

An increase in the dynamic range of the mean frequency of the fundamental tone is
typical of higher vocal force. This nonlinear dependence of P0 on speech intensity

is typical of male and female voices.

159

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UI'IILIAL U3I'. UNLY

§§§§§

1110
109

 

ca 65' 7o :0 as 90 9': I00 '0!
Acoustic pressures, db

Figure 1. Dependence of Fundamental 'i‘one Frequency Po on sound Intensity:

Points indicate mean values of Po, lines indicate standard
deviations of P0

Table 3 shows typical values of the averaged third-octave spectrun of vowels
uttered with different vocal force. We can see from Table 2 that when vocal force
is low, the bulk of the energy in the spectnm of vowel sounds is concentrated in
the low frequency range, 125-160 Hz (the range of the fundamental tone's frequency).

As the intensity of speech rises, the frequency of the fundamental tone increases,

and the harmonics of the fundamental tone (in the 250-630 a: range) have an intense
masking influence upon the averaged third-octave spectm, hindering measurement of
formant frequencies.

At normal vocal force the spectral components in the range of the formant frequencies
increase, while low frequency components decrease. When vocal force is increased,

the high frequency spectral components (LOGO-4,000 Hz) undergo additional increase
while low frequency components (160-250 Hz) decrease.

Analysis of the results showed that third-octave spectral analysis would best be
used to evaluate the dynamics of the fundamental tone's frequency and the extent of
energy redistribution in the spectral: of vowel sounds.

The shape of the averaged spectrum of vowel sounds bears information on the individual-
ity of the speaker and on the dynamics of his vocal force.

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
exaged Third-Octave Spectrums of Vowel Sounds uttered

       

     

m “an
M.W-nmm
m m nun
mg“ nun
mu“ nun
m m nuw
m mw.unu
m m mm”
mm. .m.
m-m.mum
m m mu
w. 2.
:W ___

man an»
as“ “an
“um «um

auw nun
nun mum
“mm ”mm
H m uwu
“ﬂu Mun
“nu ma»
nwn man

an” ”a“
nu” nay
a“. 9..

_an
_nn

__5
an
.59

«um
wan
«mm
was
was
I'UK ”PHI-IA]. Ubb ONLY

POSSIBILITIES FOR EVALUATING INTENSITY OF A SPMR'S WONAL
TENSION ON THE BASIS 0? CHANGES IN QMMSTIG 0? HIS SPEECH

E. L. Nosenko

One approach to examining speech, in which it is viewed as one form of complex
intellectual activity, presupposes representation of its organization as a ”hier-
archical multilevel substructure“ (N. A. Bernshteyn, 1966), the levels of which
differ in complexity and in the subject's awareness of then. As we know, the indi-
vidual's awareness of individual corponents of polystructural activity increases

in the course of this activity as we ascend from one level to the next. While the
speaker is “actually" aware (using A. N. leont'yev's term, 1947) of the dominant
semantic level of speech and his awareness of operations associated with the lexical
and grammatical structure of a statement is limited to conscious mnitoring--that is,
he is not fully conscious of them, motor realization of the statement is at an even

lower level in the hierarchy of awareness of speech phenomenauthe unconscious level,
or the level of "unconscious control'I (h. N. Leont'yev, 1965).

This comunication will attempt to justify the possibility for evaluating the intensity
of emotional tension experienced by the individual on the basis of a consideration of

which components of speech are responsible for various difficulties in speech.

The hypothesis is suggested that arisal of mistakes and difficulties in speech of
which the speaker is unaware (which he cann-zt correct) or of which he is aware but

finds it hard to surmunt. is an indication of a high degree of emotional tension in
the speaker. This pertains to those elements of speech which are at higher levels of

awareness in the hierarchy of the levels of organization of the spoken statement,
and which can consequently be controlled more meticulously in speech proceeding in a

normal state. 'Ihis hypothesis is based on the experimentally established fact that
in a state of emotional tension, conscious control over the quality of activity
weakens.

Apparently the more intensively the speaker experiences emotional tension, the more

his capacity for maintaining effective conscious control over the quality of his
activity is disturbed, which is what leads to mistakes and difficulties not only at

levels of organization of a statement requiring distribution of attention between
the intent of the statement and its concrete linguistic realization, but even at the
highest level of speech, the semantic level.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

To test this hypothesis we subjected, to maratiw psycholinguistic analysis, the
spoken statements of the same subjects in a state of emtional tension elicitedby

different emotion-producing factors '(an examination, questioning, anticipation of
surgery and so on) and in a normal state.

Special attention was devoted to examining indecisiveness phenomena in speech and
statements containing the speaker's self-assessment of the quality of his own state-
ment. We also used the method of having a subject listen to a tape recording of his

speech when he was in a state of emotional tension, and then asking him to consent
on what he heard.

Our observations may be summarized as follows.

1. Mistakes and difficulties arise in the speech of subjects in a state of emotional
tension primarily at the level of the granatical structure of statements.

This may be explained by the following. Owing to the mechanism of “conscious control,“
a speaker in a normal state selects linguistic units and links them together in a
syntactical scheme efficiently and without mistakes, all the more so because in per
forming this operation, the speaker need consider only the relationships between

linguistic signs, and he need not relate them to extralinguistic objects or concepts,
as in the case of selection of the syntactic structure itself. or in the process of

choosing words adequate to a given goal of communication.

In a state of emotional tension of even an insignificant degree, it becomes more
difficult to distribute attention between the semantic level of speech and its lin-
guistic structure, which is what leads to errors in syntax, to "awkwardness“ of
conposition and so on. As a rule the speaker does not even notice these mistakes.
On hearing recordings of their own speech, subjects are bewildered by the fact that
they may have, for example, declined a noun ilproperly without noticing this slip of
the tongue. An example would be "...po sravneniyu s 1965 godu" (instead of 'godom') .

2. Arisal of mistakes (corrected by the speaker!) in the choice of words and seler
tion of the syntactic scheme of a statement appropriate to the given goal of comuni-
cation attests to greater weakening of conscious control over the quality of activity
in a state of emotional tension, and consequently to greater intensity of this state.

The fact is that for the speaker to understand his choice of a certain word or syntactic
scheme for a statement, hc must consider the intent of the statement. This operation
proceeds under a greater degree of control of the speaker's voluntary attention than
does observation“ the rules of grammar.

Therefore if even on the condition that the speaker is able to concentrate his volun-
tary attention on his speech he makes errors such as using an inappropriate adjective,
and he fails to recognize such errors, we would have adequate grounds for suggesting
that he is experiencing a State of severe emotional tension. The plausibility of
this hypothesis is confirmed by the fact that even after becoming aware of the in-

adequacy of his choice of a particular word, a speaker in a state of emotional tension
is unable to efficiently find an adequate substitute. Evidence of this can be fomd

in the numerous "false starts" in speech, analysis of which would show that they
unambiguously signal the arisal of difficulties in word choice. For exanple when asked

thequestion: "what geometric figures do you see in Figure 3?“, a traffic controller
in a state of emotional tension replied: "... the pho... the photograph bears a

163
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI VI'I'ILIAL U3l UNI-i

a star, a circle and a triangle.‘I The false start “The pho..." attests to the fact
that the decision to use the word "photograph" instead of the word ”figure" does not
satisfy the speaker himself. but he is unable to effectively find the adequate sub-
stitute. A speaker's self-assessment of the quality of his own speech can make it
especially clear that he is having difficulties in word choice. For example: ”In the
second row I see a (the speaker pauses for 1.8 seconds)... (the speaker stutters)...

a watchauacallit (a pause of 1.2 seconds) a (a pause of 0.3 seconds) triangle, how
silly of me!“

3. In a state of severe emotional tension (which we observe, for examle, in subjects

prior to surgery). speech changes occur even at the level of programing the intent
of a statement.

The grounds for this assertion are that when subjects are permitted to hear recordings

of their mm speech, they note the overeuphasized positive or negative connotation of
the words they choose as being ”unnatural," “atypical of them in a normal state.‘ For
example "...my lab results are very terrible.“

Disturbances in the dominance of the names of things in units of speech beyond phrase

length (in contrast to speech in a calm state, the speaker forgets whether or not
certain objects and subjects presently under discussion had been mentioned earlier)

also attests to weakening of control over the quality of speech even at its dominant
level, the one of which the speaker is fully aware in the course of his speech.

This communication offers a classification of different changes in the characteristics

of speech in a state of emotional tension from the standpoint of their usefulness
in identifying different degrees of intensity of this state.

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

80MB 91mm FOR ANALYSIS 0? THE STATE OF AN INDIVIDUAL
GI THE BASIS OF WRIS‘HCS OF HIS 8PM

B. L. Nosenko, 0. N. Karpov, A. A. (bogey, G. N. Bordovskiy

Analysis of the state of an individual doing work prestpposes effective acquisition of
information about his state.

The state of a human operator is usually evaluated on the basis of measurements of

a number of physiological parameters (pulse. heart beat, respiration and so on)
made by contact sensors.

This report examines new set-ups for sonitoring changes in the state of an operator,
based on recording changes in the characteristics of his speech.

The authors obtained experinental material confining the infornativeness of a large

master of speech parameters to be used as indicators of emotional tension that may
arise in an operator in critical work situations and lead to work failure. In con-

trast u. previous research in which the vocal cos-mication channel was used as a
source of information on the state of the hunt: operator (P. v. Simnov, H. V. mlov,
L. N. Luk'yanov, V. A. Popov; c. B. villiams and x. N. Stevens, etc.), the authors of
this co-umication have developed a means for sonitoring changes in the state of a

speaker requiring not comarison of the intonational contours of the sane standard
words or phrases, but analysis of the flow of coherent speech.

Glanges in the characteristics of speech associated with particular features of the
neurophysiological nchanisns of esotional state may be classified as follows:

1. Changes in the characteristics of speech in a state of emotional tension stoning
from the characteristics of autonomic reactions inherent to this state.

2. Changes in the characteristics of speech reflecting the particular features of
the sensory and mental processes occurring in a state of emotional tension.

3. Ganges in the characteristics of speech associated with certain motor reactions
occurring in a state of emotional tension.

Considerable tensing of the moles of the speech forming apparatus. to include the

vocal cords, in a state of emotional tension causes change in the frequency of the
voice's fundmntal tone. Consequently it would be suitable to use. as indicators

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a-UA vs'rsuusa. not. URL!

of emotional tension, characteristics of the frequency of the fundamental tone such
asthe range of its variations, the swiftness with which tones appear in the flow of

speech in which the frequency of the fundamental tone significantly surpasses the
mean frequency typical of the given speaker, and so on.

Changes in breathing rhythms, which have an effect on the temporal characteristics of

speech, are typical of emotional tension: The number of pauses in the flow of speech
increases, their duration grows longer, and the locations of pauses change.

On this basis, the following could be used as objective indicators by which to
identify states through speech characteristics:

1. Fluctuations in the frequency of the voice's fundamental tone.

2. Fluctuations in the loudness of speech (increases or decreases in comparison with
speech in a normal state).

3. Ganges in the tempo of articulation (in the absolute telpo of speech).

4. Fluctuations in the general tempo of speech from maximum to minimum (the range
of variation of the speech tame, the rate of change of speech tom).

5. Change in the average length of a passage of speech uttered without pauses due
to indecisiveness (a decrease in comparison with speech in a normal state).

Our objective was to create an electronic speech analyser to be used in a diagnostic
system recognizing an individual's emotional state on the basis of his speech
characteristics.

me following were used as informative parameters: change in frequency of the voice's
fundamental tone and changes in teaporal characteristics of speech.

'no simplify the circuitry of the analyzer, we settled on digital representation of
amplitude and temporal parameters.

The speech analyzer is based on series K-lSS integrated microcircuits assembled into
a set of counters accumulating information on the tenporal characteristics of speech
within 10 seconds of current time, and information on changes in the frequency of
the fundamental tone during each second of the tonal signal.

The fundamental tone analysis circuit represents a digital filter, and the parameter

it measures is the per-second distribution of the number of periods in the spoken
signal on a frequency axis.

Change in signal intensity is determined by comparison of the envelope of the
wideband signal with the thresholds of normal intensity--that is, normal, loud and
soft bands are isolated.

The parameter measured here is the number of times a given threshold is exceeded in
4, particular time interval.

166

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

 

Key:
1. Pause block lo. lntonational characteristics block
2. Hose 11. Duration-to-voltage converter
3. Wral characteristics block 12. 15h [not further identified]
4. Articulation tespo l3. Pulse counters
S. Pause duration 14. Print-out block
6. Nuwer of pauses 15. Mal signal envelope block
1. Intensity measuring block 16. Print-out control block
8. Simlation block ’ 17. The sensor block

9. Low frequency filter

mange in the parameters of speech with respect to time provides a couplets dynasic
picture of changes in the individual's functional state.

The functional layout of the analyser consists of the following blocks (Figure l):

temporal characteristics isolating block;

intonational characteristics block;

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI Ufflbll‘h UOI‘. ”I‘ll!

print-out control block;
print-out block;

pause simulation block;
time sensor block;

intensity measuring block.

The analyzer works as follows. In the pause block the spoken signal is transformed
into an envelope indicating presence and absence of a signal; two types of envelopes
are produced in this case: with a pause duration 1930 nsec and with a pause dura-
tion t2>250 msec. The envelope with 1'1 pauses is used to count the number of pauses
and their duration within each 10 second interval, and the envelope with 12 pauses
is used together with the envelope of the tonal signal to obtain the characteristics

of articulation tempo. Concurrently the vocal signal passes from the pause block
through the low frequency filter, with tave'mo Hz, into the intonational character-
istics formation block.

This block measures the duration of each period of the frequency-modulated signal of
the fundamental tone, and depending on the duration of the period, a value of one is

added to one of the eight accumulating counters. As a result the eight counters
provide the pulse frequency distribution for a 1 second interval of the fundnental
tone. Intensity is measured in the intensity measuring block and compared with eight
thresholds. The parameter measurements are fed to the print-out block, which is
controlled by the time sensor block and by signals from an lip-16 high-speed type-
writer.

Independent verification of the analyzer is achieved by the simulation block, which
generates pulses of variable frequency within the limits of the fundamental tone
frequency, and tonal signal envelopes with pauses 1930 msec and 19250 msec.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

level and the acoustic level. It has been studied mainly with respect to individual
sounds, syllables and words (1,2,3). Interest in studying whispered speech has recently
grown, but we were unable to find any descriptions, in the linguistic literature, of
the acoustic characteristics of enotional whispered speech, which _is of considerable
interest to a number of disciplines, including linguistics.

The objective of our research was to determine the acoustic characteristics of eno-
tional whispered speech. Our research material consisted of 76 emotionally colored

phrases expressing anger, amaze-ent, irony and approval, and neutral phrases corres-
ponding to the formr. In keeping with our objective, we had a speaker read each

sentence four tiller-emotional and neutral phrases were read correspondingly in a whis-
per and at normal loudness. Enotionality was ieparted to the phrases by their pro-
nunciation in context. 'Do achieve neutral phrases, we left out the esotionally
colored context. Recordings of whispered and loud pronunciation of the phrases by

the speakers were subjected to listener analysis to determine how identifiable the
emotional states were by native listeners.

mly those phrases which, according to not less than 80 percent of the listeners,
expressed the expected emotional connotations were selected for electro-acoustic

analysis .

The next stage of the work was electro-aooustic analysis of the selected phrases,
perfor-ed with an intonograph at the laboratory of experimental phonetics of Odessa
state (hiversity. Electra-acoustic analysis was perforated with respect to the follow-
ing characteristics: the envelope of the fundamental tone frequency for the entire
phrase, the frequency range of the phrase in pt [not further identified], the fre-
quency interval of the principal stressed vowel in pt, the peak value of the funda-
mental tone frequency, phrase duration in nsec, average syllable duration in use,
and the speech rate--the number of syllables uttered per second.

Phrases were subjected to couparative analysis in two planes: e-otionality-neutrality,
loud-whispered speech.

As far as the first opposition is concerned, it was exanined in previous works by

the authors (4) in relation to loud epoch: our present objective was to study this
opposition in relation to whispered speech.

169
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I V” U. I Iblﬂh Uh" Vl‘h.

As we know from the appropriate literature, the sounds of whispered speech are created
by the passage of air through constricted passageways of the whisper triangle and the
glottis with the vocal cords not vibrating. The arising noise is the principal source
of the sounds of whispered speech. as opposed to vocal phonation (2).

Obviously when whispered speech supplants vocal phonation the envelope of the
fundamental tone can still be isolated, as is confirmed by other studies. There are

indications in the linguistic literature that not only can the fundamental tone be
heard in whispered speech. but also it can be voluntarily modulated (3). Visual

analysis of the fundamental tone frequency envelope of our intonograms revealed that
in comparison with voicedspeech, the periods of the fundamental tone of whispered
speech, complicated by noise components. exhibit an irregular nature.

Calculations showed that the percentage of the signal falling within the fundamental
tone channel was on the order of 30 percent, as compared to 95 percent for vocal
speech. Graphs revealing the dynamics of the fundamental tone frequency distinctly

showed retention of the configuration of the fundamental tone curve in relation to
both whispered and voiced speech.

A decrease in overall frequency was found to be specific to whispering in both emo-
tional and neutral pronunciation. Thus in regard to the opposition "whispered-voiced
speech," the maximum frequency of whispered speech was found to be 5 pt lower in rela-
tion to neutral speech and 3 pt lower in relation to emotional speech. In whispered
speech, emotional phrases were distinguished by a maximum frequency 5 pt higher than
that of the neutral variant.

The van der Harden test, which does not require knowledge of the distribution function

and which may be used with a small number of variants. was applied to reveal differ-
ences in the compared neutrality-emotionality oppositions of whispered speech.

Interpreting the peak frequency of the fundamental tone (for female voices) in whispered
neutral speech as a manifestation of random variable x and the corresponding charac-
teristic of emotionally whispered speech as a manifestation of a random variable Y.

and identifying the latter with serial numbers r and considering that nl-nz-ld and

that n-28, we calculate x using the formula

= ' -337 5
X ‘X‘l’ ("—44”) ()

Turning to the van der warden test table, we find x05, x01:

X >Xu>Xa
‘ 837 &D9 41%

The calculated value confirms the presence of significant differences between the
average values of the peak fundamental tone frequency for emotional and neutral
phrases uttered in whispered speech. It may be concluded that these two general sets
are unconditionally different.

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prcsenn‘ of diffvmmvn in Um yeah (imam-mun! (nun th‘bﬂs‘iom or am! lunal am!
neutral whispered speech can also be seen in relation to male voices, though it would

be difficult to conclude that the general sets are momditionally different. inasmch
as

Xd<X<Xon
£08 ‘50 5.26

where nl-nz-ll, n-22.

Analysis of the frequency interval of the principal streswd syllable revealed that the
latter is typified by a lower value in whispered speech than in voiced speech, in
relation to both neutral and emotional pronunciation (for voiced speech we have 6 pt
for neutral pronunciation and 10 pt for emotional pronunciation. while for whispered
speech the figures are 4 pt and 6 pt respectively). Emotional phrases uttered in
whispered speech were characterized by an insignificantly larger interval between
syllables in cosparison with neutral phrases.

Analysis of the frequency range of the phrases showed that whispered speech was
accospanied by a significant decrease in this characteristic in cosparison with voiced
speech (for voiced speech we have 14 pt for neutral and 16 pt for emotional pronunci-
ation, while for whispered speech we have 4 and 9 pt respectively). Emotional phrases

uttered in whispered speech were characterised by a broader range in cosparison with
neutral phrases (5 pt broader in phrases expressing an intense degree of anger and
amazement, and 2-3 pt broader in phrases expressing approval and irony).

Hence it follows that this parameter is obviously the most meaningful of all examined
frequency characteristics. and it may be said to be a distinct sign of emotionality.

Analysis of telporal characteristics revealed a general tendency toward slower temo
in whispered speech in maism with loud speech, which may be explained in part by
the fact that articulation can be stronger with whispering than with loud speech (1).
me tespo of whispered neutral speech is 3.2 syllables per second, for loud neutral
speech it is 3.8 syllables. for whispered emotional speech it is 2.6, and for loud
emotional speech it is 3.9 syllables.

notional pronunciation in whispered speech was found to be slower than neutral pro-
nunciation, the figures being 2.6 and 3.2 syllables per second respectively. Average

syllable duration in whispered neutral speech was 300 nsec, it was 270 msec in loud
neutral speech. 380 use in whispered emotional speech and 280 msec in loud emotional

speech. Average syllable duration in whispered emotional statements expressing anger
and approval was 380 usec, it was 300 msec for neutral phrases, it was 270 nsec for
phrases expressing irony and aeazestsnt. and in neutral phrases corresponding to the
former it was 280 nsec. Applying van der Harden's test to the figures for average
syllable duration in notional and neutral whispered speech, we come to the conclu-
sion that differences do exist between them; however, it would be difficult to conclude
that these general sets are unconditionally different, inasmuch as

Xa<X<XoI
6.50 6.98 8.5'

where n l-nz-ZS , n-50.

17 1
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
f0“ Ufl'lLlAl. use UNLV

This means that tenporal characteristics are not always constant in their uanifesta—

tion, and that in comparison with other acoustic parameters they are the most suscep-

tible to change, obviously connected with expression of different emotional connota-
tions.

As far as frequency characteristics are concerned, despite a decrease in their value
inwhispered speech in comparison with voiced speech, the difference between the:- is
enough to permit their use for identification of emotional and neutral whispered
speech.

And so, whispered speech carries unique information on the frequency and tenporal
parameters of the acoustic signal, information which may serve as a definite criterion
for differentiating between eaotional and neutral speech.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. mnikin, N. 1., "Hekhanizny rechi" [Speech Mechanisms], Moscow, 1958.

2. Butyrskiy, L. s., “whispered Speech,” in "Trudy VII Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seminara
ARSO" [Proceedings of the Seventh All-mien ARSO School-Seminar] , Alma-Ate, 1973.

3. Smol'yevskiy, A. A., "Intonational msources of Whispered Speech," in “Haterialy
Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii 'Analiz i sintez kak vzainoobuslovlennyye metody
eksperinental'nogo foneticheskogo issledovaniya rechi'" [Proceedings 'of the
All-Union Conference “Analysis and Synthesis as Interdependent Methods of Ex-
perimental Phonetic Study of Speech"! , Minsk, 1972.

4. Kolymba, 8. PL, Nushinkyan, B. A., and Pirogova, A. A., ”Acoustic Correlates of
Emotionally Colored Phrases Expressing Anger, Approval and Irony in mdern
English," in "mch' i emotsii" [Speech and motions], Leningrad, 1975.

S. Brovchenko, 'r. A., Varbanets, P. 0., and Taranets, V. 6., "Hetod statisticheskogo

analiza v foneticheskikh issledovaniyakh" [The Statistical Analysis Method in
Phonetic Research], Odessa, 1976.

172

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WS‘l‘Im 0? HUMAN 8PM BEHAVIOR IN STIBSSPUL CORDI‘HOIS
v. A. Popov, I. s. Zamaletdinov, N. v. Krylova, A. v. Nikonov

If we accept the premises of the adaptation and information theories of arisal of
emotional states, we should find that in addition to physiolOgical and acoustic para-
meters, psychological parameters should enjoy broader use in research on emotional
stress, in view of their greater reactivity and the diversity of the forms of mental
reactions to stressful conditions.

The objective of our research was to reveal the influence of emotional factors asso-
'ciated with real extreme conditions (parachute juaping) on the acoustic and psycho-
linguistic indicators of the speech behavior of operators experiencing different
degrees of emotional tension. 'no permit evaluation of general mental state, in addition
to leasuring autonomic indicators we recorded parameters characterizing perception,
attention, memry, thinking and so on.

Our subjects included persons making their first parachute jup, persons with some

juming experience and record-breaking parachute jmers. this permitted comparative
analysis of the levels of dependence exhibited by variations in speech indicators on

the expressiveness of emotional tension. In addition to psycholinguistic methods such
as the free association test, and directed and undirected reporting, our array of
methods included tests of working memory using numerical material, and the recording
of the parameters of motor activity and the basic physiological functions.

Cowarative analysis of the experimental results permitted us to distinguish three
basic groups of parachute jumpers, differing in terms of acoustic variations and

psycholinguistic and behavioral characteristics.

its first group contained beginning parachute juupers, the second contained persons
with some jmping experience, and the third was made up of masters-class parachute

iii-Peu-

'l‘he largest changes in characteristics of speech behavior and thinking were observed
in reports provided by beginning parachute juspers.

The reports were predominantly of assertive or descriptive content, and their ex-
pressiveness was limited to lexical resources. he reports were distinguished by

brevity, by fragmentation coupled with digressions from the subject at hand, and by
loose composition: syntactic relationships were violated.

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’Uﬂ Ufl‘l‘ IRL U3: UNL'

Speech often included "feeler" words such as "etc,“ ‘kakoy-to,‘ “etot samyy,"

"takoy" and so on, "parasitic" words such as "vet," 'znachit" and ”tax", and extended
vowel sounds such as 'e-e-e." We often encountered uncorrected slips of the tongue
and instances of paraphasia. In verbal material there was an increase in the number
of verbs and syllables having clear positive and negative connotations. such as “very,"
”completely,“ "none" and so on.

The psycholinguistic indicators of the speech materials representing the second group
exhibited rather distinct differences from the indicators for the first group, to

include broader use of creative and esthetic resources of oral speech. Rich content
was noted in the oosuaunications, which possessed a descriptive, assertive and a
demonstrated emotional orientation.

The speech behavior of parachute jlﬂpets in the third group was stable and individual-
istic, and it exhibited a tendency toward a literary, creative poetic style. Origi-
nality in discussion of the subject and a somewhat melodramatic manner of speaking
were noted in their reports.

In terms of the latent period of associative reactions, relative to background values
the beginning group was distinguished by its shortening (by 20 percent on the average)
and by its grwth imediately after landing (by an average of 15 percent).

These changes were not as highly expressed in the second group of parachute jumpers,
who had some jumping experience, remaining close to the typical reactions of the indi-
vidual.

An increase in the latent period prior to jumping and a significant decline following
the jump were observed among experienced parachutists (:40 percent).

It was established that pauses between phrases have the greatest influence on vari-
ability in the temporal characteristics of the report. Growth in emotional tension
was accompanied in most cases by a 12-36 percent increase in the frequency of the
fundamental tone and an additional 2-6 db increase in the loudness of speech.

Table 1 shows changes in the energy ratios for the third-octave spectrum of the word
”gotov" (ready) uttered by a jumper with little experience in different stages of the
jump. We can see from the table that the frequency of the fundamental tone assimes
its largest value (160-250 Hz) imediately prior to the jump. Oranges in the fre-
quency of the first formant (400-630 Hz) were less expressive.

In the parachuting stage experienced parachute junpers managed to utter up to 140-180
syllables in their reports, while beginning jumpers uttered 80-110 syllables. When
the situation in the air was complex (or when the reserve parachute had to be opened),
the reports given by beginning juspers were highly abbreviated, or the juapers refused
to make their reports.

An analysis of the reports showed that during free-fall, speech intensity increases
by an additional 4-12 db. Speech often assumes the attributes of screaming, and as
a consequence it becomes less intelligible. In these cases the increase in loudness
of speech is accompanied by growth in speech tempo (by 12-24 percent) and in the mean
frequency of the fundamental tone (by 35-95 Hz).

174

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘Gotov" Utte
: filters, 0
'llable "tov
l the first
e um \n rayon» VJ; UNI-l

(1)

I man I] rpynnl ill mum
immanent (2 0mm! (3) Wampum
.nauuomcru ) «monomers moon
3
~o
§
I so st:
.5.
§
30 $5)
:
§
.0 3

  

MAO nous on» name summed
, mans spam . upwua

Figure 2. Memrization (Percent) of a Sequence of Six lino-Digit Nunbers
by Parachute Jumpers Exhibiting Different Degrees of Proficiency
(Averages for Groups of Seven Persons)

Key:
1. Group 5. l-temorization errors. \
2. Beginning parachute jumpers 6. Background
3. Experienced parachute junpers 7. Before jump
4. Masters of sports 8. After jump

These changes in a number of acoustic parameters of speech are caused not only by
high emotional. tension but also by the influence of the intense noise created by
currents of air about the free-falling julper.

Significant changes in the cardiac rhythm of all parachute jumpers were recorded in

the course of parachute jumps. However, they were most pronounced among beginners.
Thus while the pulse rate of all jumpers did not exceed 74 beats per minute during a

medical examination prior to the jump, after the jump (within the first minute after
touchdown) the group average for beginning jumpers was 121 beats per minute, it was
104 beats per minute for the group having some experience, and it was 97 beats per
minute for experienced jumpers.

Figure 1 shows the results achieved by different groups of parachute jumpers in a
test requiring them to memorize a sequence of six two-digit numers. He can see that
emotional stress inﬂuences performance in this test in different ways: Stress has
an intense mobilizing action upon beginners, raising their self-control and attention,
as is expressed by the decrease in the percentage of errors made in memorizing hunters
before the jump. Such a change was not typical of the experienced parachute jumpers

taking this test, indicating that the emotional situation surrounding the jump had
less influence on them. -~

Thus analysis of the results shows that the characteristics of speech behavior bear
valuable information on the dynamics of mental state associated with different degrees
of influence by emotional stress.

176
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THE ”LB 0? VERBAL PRISMTION 0? MATERIAL IN ONE W00
0! DIAGDSING THE swam. GIMMS‘HCS OF AN INDIVIDUAL

I. A. Popova

The object of our study was the qualitative modal characteristics of stable human
emotional characteristics, interpreted as the principal characteristics expressing
the essence of emotional experience (4). within the great diversity of such para-
meters, we can isolate three primary (basal) emtions: joy (J), anger (A) and fear
(1"). lbdal parameters are manifested most clearly in individuals for whom one of
these emotions is dominant (5).

The scarcity of methods for studying motions provides motivation for seeking new
approaches. We believe there is promise in developing not only "direct” techniques
addressed specifically toward emotional phenomena, but also “indirect" techniques
aimed at processes which cause emotional expression. the such "indirect“ technique
of diagnosing emotional characteristics is that of studying some aspects of color
perception (color preference in particular), since the latter is closely associated
with emotions (3.6.7.9, etc.). Persons differing in the mode of their dominant emo-
tions share exhibit differences in color evaluation.

Many factors influence this evaluation: associations, the symbolic significance of
color. the psychophysiological background of the organism, the type of “approach“
taken to the evaluation, density, dimensions, materials, the object producing the
color stimulus and so on (1,8 etc.). Obviously the means by which the color is
presented for evaluation--verbally or by means of a color standard--significantly
influences the results of the experiment. Both methods have their merits and short-
comings. When color standards are presented, the stimulus material is the same for
all subjectsuthat is, they all evaluate the same colors. However, the density,
dimensions and material of the standard become factors of influence. Preference
can be shown only to the particular shades of color shown, which signifi “antly coar-
plicates interpretation of the results. with verbal presentation of the color, the
boundaries of the object of evaluation expand. lords represent a generalized im-
pression of a color, ones which may be different for different people. Factors

of the stimulus such as density, dimensions and so on are eliminated in this case.

Our objective was to study and compare two methods of presenting colors (verbal and
standard) in regard to their differentiating capacity--that is, in regard to how
well they divide subjects into groups differing in the modality of the dominant
emotion.

177

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
run vrrnLuu. var. UIVLI

Research Methods

The strategy of the work was as follows: Using "direct" methods on each subject, re-
veal the relationship between emotions of different modalities, contains the subjects
into groups with dominant emotions of the same mdality and compare these groups in
relation to color preference (using the two methods of color presentation).

Seventy subjects--students of both sexes--participated in the experiment. They were
18-25 years old. Pollowing analysis by the ”direct” method, we distinguished the
groups Jaf (seven persons). in! (ten persons) and jar (five persons), containing
persons exhibiting dominance of an emotion of the same modality.‘ These groups were
compared in pairs in relation to color preference (determined by different methods)
using van der Warden's X-test.

Methods of Studying Color Preference
Verbal Variants
l. Nunerical Ranking

The subjects were shown the names of eight colors (red, blue, yellow. green, gray,
violet, brown, black), and they had to place a hunter from 1 to 8 beneath each color

in order of preference (l--greatest preference. 2--lower preference and so on).
A score corresponding to the number chosen by the subjects was awarded to each color.

2. SD (Semantic Differential) Method (Modification)

Preliminary research showed that Osgood's method of the semantic differential can be
used with ”abbreviated" scales to organize color preference. Pour factor evaluation
scales were employed. The experimental procedure required the subjects to evaluate
eight colors on the basis of four scales in accordance with the instructions provided.

The results are represented in the form of a numerical value for each evaluated color
(calculated as the mean score for all scales).

3. Lyusher's Test (Modification)

The experimental situation was as in the original test. Bight White cards with the
names of colors written on t! :m were placed before the subject. The procedure was
repeated two times. The scale of values ranged from 8 to l in order of preference
(the most preferable color received 8 points).

Variants in Which Color standards were Presented
1. SD Method (Modification)

The experimental procedure was as in verbal presentation, except that here the sub-
ject evaluated color standards similar to those used in Lyusher's test.

'ﬂere and subsequently, upper case letters designate high values while lower case
letters designate low values.

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The subject had to arrange the same color standardsin order of preference.

insults and Discussion

Groups of sibjects differing in the modality of their doainating sections were con-
pared. Differentiation of the subjects with respect to their dominant emotions

tended to be better with verbal description of the color than with perception of
the standards. 'Ihis was true for all colors. me one exception was the SD method:

Not one of the variants revealed significant differences between the subjects.

Let us examine the possible causes of this fact. Significant differences between
groups would confirm the possibility of using the color preference method as an indi-
cator of emotional characteristics.

The differences between the verbal and standard methods prove that the way in which
colors are presented for evaluation is a significant parameter of the evaluation-
that is, it is not color preference in general but only certain of its attributes
that are associated with emotional characteristics.

Absence of significant differences between swjects shown color standards may mean
that on its own, the tone of a color is not inforaative enough for our purposes.
Either color tone plays too minor a role in color sensation (for exanple it may be
responsible for perception of a color as were or cold), or it may exist in an in-
direct, nore-cosplex relationship with enotionality, fitting within some integral
characteristic of color including the other two cosponents of color sensation--
saturation and brightness.

when a color is named verbally to an individual, he evaluates his own general in-
pression of the color for which the word stands. this general impression must be
based not only on the tone of the color but also on the other cowonents of the color
sensation. Differences in emotionality revealed by this method of color presentation
may be a consequence of the fact that these coeponents make a more significant contri-
bution to the general expression of the color. People are able to distinguish between
different shades of a given color resulting from variations in its saturation and
brightness.

me fact that no differences were revealed beateen the groups by the SD method is
an important result.

We selected this method for color evaluation because it is believed that it may be
used for fully objective experimental analysis of the evaluational coaponent of
pragmatic neaning--that is, because it is believed that the SD method can be used to
determine a subject's attitude toward stimuli presented to him (2). For our evalua-
tion purposes, however, the method turned out to be lacking. 1111s fact requires
further content analysis; at the mutant we can only speculate on its possible causes.
Apparently the evaluation scales (especially the 'clean-dirty' scale) cannot be used
for subjective color evaluation-~that is, in this case they have somewhat different
content. Moreover in the other methods all of the colors are presented together,
while in the SD method the evaluations are aade successively, which precludes compari-
son. All of this hinders the use of this method for our purposes.

179

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI Ul'l'ﬂ IAI. USE UNLY

Conclusions

1. Emotional characteristics can be differentiated better with the verbal variant
of color preference methods than those in which color standards are presented.

this allowed us to suggest the hypothesis that different conponents of color sensa-
tion play a role in color perception, and that they are associated with emotions.

2. The SD method is not suited to determination of color preference with the purpose
of using it subsequently to diagnose emotional characteristics.

3. The results require further experimental testing and theoretical validation.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Alekseyev, s. s., Teplov, B. M., and Shevarev. P. A., "Twat v arkhitekture"
[Color in Architecture], Moscow—Leningrad, 1934.

2. Apresyan, Yu. 0., “Modern Methods of Meaning Analysis,” in "Probleuy strukturnoy
lingvistiki” [Problems in Structural Linguistics], Moscow, AN SSSR, 1963.

3. Dorofeyeva, E. T., "Ganges in Color Sensitivity as an Indicator of notional.

States," in "Psikhicheskiye zabolevaniya" [mntal Illnesses], Leningrad,
Meditsina, 1970.

4. ol'shannikova, A. Ye., ”Relationship of Some Adolescent auctional Features to
Physiological Characteristics,“ in ”Problelly differentsial'noy psikhofiriologii“
[Problems in Differential Psychophysiology], Vol 9, Moscow, 1977.

S. ol'ehannikova, A. Ye., and Rabinovich, L. A., "Sons Individual Characteristics
of Emtionality," VOPHDSY PSIKHODOGII, No 3, 1974.

6. Friling, 6.. and Auer, K., "Chelovek--tsvet--prostranstvo" [Man--Oolor--Space],
Moscow, 1973.

7. Khausten, R. A., "Svet i tsvet" [Light and Color], Moscow-Leningrad, 1926.

8. “1‘5ch v proizvodstvennoy srede" [Color in the Production Environment], Moscow,
1967.

9. Shvarts, L. A., ”Change in Color Sensitivity in an Emotional State,“ in
"Problcmy fiziologichcskoy optiki" ['me Problem of Physiological Optics], Vol 6,
1948.

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm or m mm my: musuc
n. x. Potapova

msearch on the evolution of human language and speech has shown that a large nuber
of factors have influenced the origin and development of particular features of
phonation and articulation, among which biophonetic factors occupy one of the central
places (1,2). According to the biophonetic conception the syllable is the elemntary
unit of spoken cosuunication. On this basis it would sees: right to suggest that
changes affecting the temporal organization of a syllable and a train of syllables

in a spoken statement may be a sufficiently informative characteristic by which to

establish the particular emtional state to which the spoken signal under analysis
belongs.

Our study was exploratory in nature. The end goal was to reveal the cosponents of
the temoral esotive characteristic use) which would permit us to differentiate

spoken state-ants in terns of the polarity "normal-abnorsal.” The Tic is defined in
this case as a set of temoral comments (3).

According to data acquired by objective and subjective analysis of emotionally
colored speech, the ‘i'BC may be included among the basic emotive characteristics.
When cospared to other characteristics of this sort. the m is found to be a fully
reliable objective characteristic; however, the main difficulty lies in revealing

the concrete set of temoral parameters necessary and sufficient to the task at
hand.

Our research suds use of lexically and syntactically heterogeneous experimental
material. notional states were siaulated: a) in a hypnotic state: b) by an actor's
performance. Experimental material of sufficiently representative voluse was tape-
recorded in the field and subjected to instrumental analysis following a particular
prograe. The temrai data processing program entailed a certain number of parameters
(:1 - 25).

The experimental material was analysed with the purpose of revealing differences in
relation to the polarity 'nornal-abnorual" (the definition of “abnormal" was pre-
viously determined by subjective analysis). Some parameters were found to be stably
informative. while the informativensss of others was unstable.

By examining the syllable as the material basis of the speech code, we were able to
reveal a certain set of tenporal parameters that could be used to describe defer-a-
tion of the tesporal contour of a statement. A liuited mater of parameters were
found to be the most informative (n- 3).

181
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Ul‘l'ILll‘la U§L UI‘LI

One of the principal informative parameters is the temporal relationship between
consonants and vocal components of the speech segment under analysis: the tonic
syllable in the phrase (word group); the rhythmic structure containing the tonic
syllable; the phrase as a whole. ﬁle contrast between vocal and consonant time,
which is characteristic of a number of emotional states indicated by speech, is
sufficiently regular. This also may be explained from the standpoint of the bio-
phonetic conception--by change in muscle tension, by constriction or dilation of the
throat during articulation, by forced or sparing voice formation and so on (1).

'me results showed that vocalism is dominant in spoken statements associated with
sane emotional states (for example the polarities "normal-sorrow" and "normal-
melancholy") while consonantism is dominant in spoken statements associated with
other emotional states (for example the polarities "normal-anger," “normal-wrath“
and "normal-fear"). 'me TEC labels the second member of each of these polarities.

In a number of cases when an emotional state is compared with normal, changes in
tempo provide adequate information. Such changes are described roughly by average
syllable duration and more precisely by average sound duration, which is in this
case a correlate of the rate of articulation. Analysis of tempo characteristics
confirmed thenotion that this parameter is informative. Moreover, changes in teupo
had a dual nature, being positive or negative in comparison with normal tempo. The
contrasts "normal-fear” (0-) and “normal-melancholy (sorrow)" (0+) were rather con-
sistent in this regard.

Informative parameters also include temporal differences between vowels of the

main rhythmical structure of a phrase (word group)--that is, of the rhythmical
structure containing the principal stressed syllable of a phrase (word group). Thus
for example a tendency toward isochronous stressed and unstressed vocalism was ob-
served in spoken statements associated with anger (wrath). An opposite tendency to-
ward tenporal contrast in stressed and unstressed (especially posttonic) vowels was
observed for the temporal contour of rhythmical structure in phrases uttered in a
state of melancholy or sorrow.

We were able to confirm a number of our observations by studying the temporal structure
of musical works. In particular musical speech confirms the validity of the conclu-
sion that when states such as sorrow and melancholy are expressed, the duration of the
vocal component of a syllable undergoes relative lengthening. If we turn to the worksOE
M. P. Mussorgsky, who achieved astounding mastery in the transmission of the intona-
tional wealth of human speech, we could illustrate our observation with the following
examuc. In his "Folk Paintings," not only the metric aspect of the text but also

the temporal organization of the phrases is indicative. For example in "The Orphan”
Mussorqsky emphasized stressed syllables by increasing their temporal duration. By
combining the number of words in the musical phrase (n - 3) with this increase in the
duration of the first stressed syllable, he was able to transmit the intonations
associated with grief, with sorrowful iamentation (4).

It should be noted that the weight sf each component of the temporal emotive charac-
teristic (TEC) may be verified with sufficient reliability by an analysis—synthesis-
analysis method using musical resources. Naturally, the temporal parameters of the
TEC would appear in a work of music as components of--in addition to the melody--
timbre, its dynamic characteristics and the nature of articulation-~that is, the means

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
by which the sounds are elicited (staccato, legato and no on) (5). Preliminary
experiments in this direction demonstrated broad possibilities for verifying the
significance of me couponents.

1.

3.

4.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Trojan. Pu 'Biophonetik" Mannheim (Hien) Zurich, 1975.

Lieberman, Ph.. “On the Origins of Language. An Introduction to the Evolution
of Hulan Speech.” New York (London), 1975.

Potapova, R. x. . "memoral Organization of the Syllable as the Basic Couponent
of the huporal Emotive Characteristic," in '1»:in dokladov Misc-9" [Abstracts
of ﬂeports at the Also-9], Minsk, 1976.

"Mahaya nuzykal'naya literatura" [Russian mical Literature], Issue 2,
Leningrad, 1975.

IVulin, Yu. N., et al., 'Huzykal'naya form“ [Musical Porn], Moscow, 1974.

183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e was we a eu Ollln vast. \u‘lal

A METHOD 0? SLBJBCTIVB ANALYSIS OF MIONALLY COIDRBD season
L. V. stat'yeva

The objective of our research was to find metlwds of auditory analysis of experiments].
material consisting of phrases spoken in different emotional states by actors and

by hypnotized subjects.

In experiment consisting of four stages was patterned in order to study the forms of
expression of emotional states, and their identification by the method of subjective
definition of emotions.

On comparing the subjective data acquired in the first stage of the experiment, we
found it valid to group the emotionally colored phrases presented for evaluation as
positive-negative and strong-weak; after this, the stimuli were distributed in rela-
tion to their saturation (by means of a ranking procedure).

Subjective evaluations of emotional states produced a list of state names that could
be distributed into three classes: class I names reflecting the physical state of
the subject resulting from a) inhibition and b) arousal; class 11 names reflecting
the moral and mental state of the subject and modal elements, and being a) diffuse
or b) compact by nature; class III names--emotional states specifically. The latter
were found to fall into eight zones, each of which is represented by a general name
(fear, anger, joy, sorrow. grief, irony, resentment, tenderness) and contains up to
10 names.

That the acoustic analysis method we used was effective was confirmed by objective
analysis of emotionally colored spoken signals.

however, some expressions of the same emotional state by different speakers were
identified differently by listeners--either as negative or as neutral, while some

listeners believed them to be positive states. There was never an, doubt as to normal
pronunciation by all speakers; the associated state was designated as neutral.

Analysis of the results of the experiment described above led to the hypothesis
that a number of the listeners categorized emotionally colored spoken stimuli not
in relation to their negativeness, positiveness and neutrality but rather in rela-
tion to the degree of their expression--that is, strong-weak emotions. 'lherefore
in the next stage of auditory analysis we felt it suitable to ask the group of
listeners (the same ones) to determine the expressiveness of the signal they per-

oeive--that is, they were asked whether or not the given stimulus could be categor-
ized as a 1) normal statement or as a 2) strongly or 3) weakly expressed emotion.

184
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analysis of the experimental data made it obvious that emotional states such as
sorrow and melancholy were perceived definitely as weakly expressed motions.

The following emotional states were strongly expressed: fear, horror, anger, wrath,
joy and ecstasy. Ambiguous definition of emotions such as anxiety, tenderness,
pleasure and love (the last three were interpreted by actors)-that is, association
of the given stinilus with all three of the factors described above simultaneously—
doee not contradict the results of the previous experiment, and it affords the
ground for suggesting that at the perceptual level, individual expressions of these
emotional states are found to differ in terms of their expressiveness. '

We compared the subjective results of listener analysis performed in the stages of
the experiment described above: all emotionally colored phrases (except normal)
broke down into groups of positive strong and positive weak emotions, and negative
strong and negative weak emotions.

As a consequence it was deemed suitable to conduct an experiment to arrive at a
subjective distribution of presented stimuli based on the degree of their saturation.
'lhese stimuli were distributed within the obtained groups of emotional expressions,
wherever the quantity of experimental phrases was sufficient to permit this. The
speakers were asked to rank a given quantity of emotionally colored phrases within
the given group, for example the "negative strong” group, in relation to their

- strength. 1his made it possible to reveal the maximally/minimally saturated phrases
and the stimuli falling in a middle position, and to determine equally saturated
phrases. however, when the matter of components was increased to n -6 within a given

group, the gradation was less stable, meaning that evaluations of emotional satura-
tion are sibjelnive.

While in the previous stages of the experiment attention was focused mainly on the
way emotional states were expressed, the goal of the concluding state was identifi-
cation of these states--naming emotionally colored speech stimli on the basis of
subjective definitions of emotion. this is a so-called open list method.

A list of names which listeners attached to a particular (nationally colored phrase
was obtained in the course of listener analysis.

mother with data contained in the special literature (1-4), the results of logical
and semantic analysis of our data made it possible to break down the entire list of
names into three classes: class I mules reflecting the moral and mental state of

the subject an: modality elements: class In representing the emotional states
specifically. Classes 1 and 11 were differentiated into subclasses. Class I con-

tained names reflecting physical states brought on by inhibition (fatigue, heaviness,
weakness, sluggishness, inertness, depression, exhaustion, sleepiness) and arousal

(agitation, nervousness). Class II contained names indicating diffuseness (confusion,
uncertainty, pensiveness, sadness, indifference, trustfulness, cospassion, inhibition,
depression, hopelessness) and coapactness (confidence, categoricalness, emotional
enthusiasm).

Eight zones of emotional states were revealed in class III-fear, anger, joy, sorrow,
grief, irony, insult, tenderness. Bach zone contained a nuwer of components (from
two to nine names). Each of the eight zones could be represented by a general name
that logically enbraces all names within the particular semantic zone. The principle

of growing emotional saturation is observed within each zone. Here is a list of the
names contained in the zones named above:
185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
o use a. ass u.— hug. v00...

1) anxiety, fright, fear. horror:

2) irritation, displeasure, anger, spite, perturbation, wrath, hatred, menace,
sadness;

3) satisfaction, jg, ecstasy, delight, happiness:

4) sorrow, grief, melancholy, despair;

5) synpathy, distress, bitterness, grief;

6) derision, irony, taunting, malevolence;

1) resentment, disappointment;

8) tenderness, love.

In keeping with the objectives of this experiment, the results of listener analysis

were processed with the purpose of revealing, for each emotionally colored phrase,
the percentage distribution of state names in each class into subclasses and their
components, and within each zone.

It should be noted that in most cases the names attached by listeners to weakly ex-

pressed emotional states, for example sorrow and melancholy, had to do more with a
certain physical state of the speaker than with the emotional state expressed in the

phrase. This confines the hypothesis that weakly expressed emotional states are asso-
ciated at the perceptual level primarily with the subject's physical state.

Identification of maximally saturated emotionally colored phrases was most consistent
in that as a rule, spoken stimuli expressing anger, wrath, fear, joy and ecstasy were
given the specific names of emotional states, or much more rarely, in cases where the
listener found it difficult to classify an emotion, they were given the name of a
physical state, namely arousal.

The list of names proposed by listeners for individual expressions of negative emotions
such as anger, wrath and fear is somewhat longer than the list of names of positive
sanctions, and it embraces a larger number of zones, to include the joy zone, which
does not contradict data obtained in the first stage of the research, in which listen-
ers established them as having a positive nature.

The effectiveness of using the listener analysis method was confirmed by objective
analysis of emotionally colored spoken signals.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Vitt, N. V., "Expression of Emotional States in Speech Intonation," Candidate
Dissertation, macaw, 1965.

2. Rozhkova, G. 1., "Perception of motionnl Intonations,’ Candidate Dissertation,
roscow, 1972.

3. Broadbent, D. 5., and Gregory, 34.. "Perception of nationally 'i‘oned Words,"
NATURE, London, Vol 2l5, 1967, pp 581-584.

4. Ponagy, J., and Hagdics, "Entotional Patterns in Intonation and Husic,"
ZETSOIRIPT FUR PHONETICK, Berlin, Vol 16, No 1/3, 1963.

186

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A mo FOR ESCRIBING INDIVIDUAL PMPER'I'IBS OP V0185 EMPLOYING
ANALYSIS OF SPOKEN SIM 59mm AND BARDS

v. D. Serdyukov

Our main objective was to develop a description of the individual properties of
voices based on analysis of the spoken signal spectrum and band. Such a description

would be an aid to automatic identification of speech sounds and automatic voice
recognition.

According to the idealized aodel of the acoustic theory of speech formation, the
amplitude spectra: of the i-th sonorous sound has the following form:

Bi (u) 'I!) (MM (0)) R (u) (l)

where U(u)--alplitude-freguency characteristic of the source: Hum—amplitude-
frequency characteristic of the speech tract; R(u)-esission characteristic (1).

A transformation of expression (1) is described in reference (1). This transformation

ccsbines all frequency functions that do not change tron one sound to the next but
which experience individual deviations:

U (.) R (v) = Pom - (2)

where P0 is a constant factor dependent on the particular acoustic pressure level.
Under otherwise equal conditions it depends on the speaker. Taken together, the
isolated source spectrum and eoission characteristics sake up a spectrum having an
envelope that declines by about 6 (lb/octave (1).

1o consider individual deviations tree this rule, we rewrite expression (2) as:

mom.) 'Geu“)U(Uj RM. . (3i

which is valid for frequencies a: for which the condition U(u)R(w) >0 is satisfied;
here, Ukhu) is the source spectrum of. the k-th speaker, and ska“) is the anplitude--
frequency characteristic accounting for individual features of the source spectrusn

187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nus vernal“. var. UNL!

(including acoustic pressure) in comparison with the same characteristics of an
"ideal“ speaker. An ”ideal” speaker is one having certain speaking habits typical
of the given speech environment and being characterized by specific anatomical

constants--averages for example. The ideal voice is prograIIned into the recognition
device as a system of standard images stored in its memory.

The anplitude-frequency characteristic of the speech tract of an ideal speaker may
be written, in correspondence with reference (1), as:

3 . .
H:(')- '30.) [1 HM") - (4)
F' .

where HUMP-resonance characteristicscorresponding to the first three formants
of the t-th sonorous sound: r3(w)--correction factor accounting for the influence of
all formants above the third on the trend of the frequency characteristic in lower
frequencies, and dependent not only on frequency u but also on the total length of
the speaker's speech tract.

1!: account for individual deviations in factor r3(u). we introduced the term akrm);
to account for individual features of the resonance frequency characteristics of the

k-th speaker in relation to some ideal frequency characteristics, we introduced the
term akﬂiﬁo). Then

”II ('0) -'- “um ("0 “a: (m) "I 0") (5)

which is valid for frequencies 0 satisfying the condition Hum) >0.

(1), (3), and (5) give us an expression associating the amplitude spectrums of the
i-th sonorous sound in the pronunciation of the ideal and the k-th speakers:

P.. (a) - n. (v) .,, 0-) «LL-(u) P. (a) -
=4. (a) had“) P. (to) _ (6’

wh;ch is valid for frequencies to satisfyin: the condition 911“" >0; skunk-amplitude-
frequency characteristic reflecting differences between the voices of the k-th and

the ideal speakers at frequency w; it does not depend on the phonetic quality of the
sonorous sound uttered:

1h (m) 3h: 0") ¢l1_(")-

If we assume that voice differences depend mainly on parameters of the excitation
source and the higher formants, we could write expression (6) in the form:

PM 0") 3M 0") P: (m) ' ' (7)

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It follows from (7) that the individuality of the speaker's voice may be described
in the first approximation by changes in the a-plitude-frequency characteristic I E
the coununication channel.

A simple rule for describing the individual features of the voice of the k-th speaker
at frequency w follows from this sane expression:

“In ('0 z Pu (’)/PI 0’) (8)

By subjecting speech to spectra-band analysis using a coat: of n filters, we can

approximate the characteristic uk (0:) by the stepped function ck (j) . j sl,2,...,n,
the values of which are determined according to the rule: '

«(1) - Pup/pug . _ (9)

where Pkiihand Pij are the mean weighted spectral amplitudes of the learning patterns
of the i- sound in the base frequency band of the statements uttered by the k-th
and the ideal speakers.

Considering deviations from rule (7) , we can describe the individual properties of
the voices by minimizing a functional of the form:

I.
’2' lz'le — axU)P.,l’ = mln (I0)

where Io‘I, and where I is the nunber of sonorous sounds.

The expression for determining ck (j) , obtained as a result of coordinate-by-coordinate
minimization, appears as follows:

I. I.
'3”) :2 2 Psi/I

m,- «m
l-l l-I

which is valid on the condition that

Io ’-
| u
7.22. Wm

1b «evaluate the effectiveness of the equations we developed to represent information
on voice individuality. we conducted a number of experiments establishing the condi-
tions under which these equations are the most effective.

189

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI Ul'I'ILIAI; WI: UNLU

In particular we tested the effectiveness of normalizing individual differences among
speakers according to the rule:

xux‘l = .[(i)xllt ‘- ‘I 2n": ’5'] — ‘. 2....Il,

where the values of ak(j) were determined by expressions (9) and (11) at 10-1;
x13: {xijlcm where X—-the recognition unit's set of standards; ﬂ“: lx'NI I X." War--
set of sound standards corrected for the individuality of the k-th speaker.

The criterion for the effectiveness with which voice individuality was accounted for
was:

8-: (Pu—P)I(P¢—P).

where P”, P and Poureliability of recognizing a standard test sauple, correspondingly
with amplitude-frequency correction of the standard sound patterns on the basis of

one of the previously described rules (PH), and using ideal standards (P) and indi-
vidual sound standards (Pc). The patterns of identical sounds averaged for all of

the speakers were used as the ideal standards.

The conditions of spectrum and band analysis were varied in the experiaents. In the
first experiment sounds in prescreened samples of sonorous speech were isolated as
instantaneous spectral cross sections. Each spectral section was described by 12
readings taken off the envelope of the amplitude spectrum at 400 Hz intervals
(2-100 Hz, where B is the passband width of filters in the spectrum analyzer).

The experiment was run with 840 utterances of stressed and unstressed vowels and
sonants (M, M ’, n, n ', p, p ', H, H ') in the speech of five speakers. The test
sample contained 690 utterances. The decision as to effectiveness was made on the
basis of the minimum Euclidean distance from the standard patterns to the test utter-
ances. Rule (ll) was found to be best for deterlining the values of function ak(j):
5 =0.9, PH=68 percent, 90-69 percent; rule (9) was also found to be extremely
effective, though only in relation tc stressed vowel sounds--the sound 'H" in our
experiment.

This method of accounting for IR': (not further identified] using rule (ll) was also
tested in reiation to vowel sounds in spectrum and band analysis of a signal using

a comb of 20 band filters with B =250 Hz. uniformly covering a range from 200 Hz to
4 kHz. The results of recognizing 336 control utterances in statements made by eight
male speakers were as follows:

5 = 0.78, P” = 83.6\; Pc - 84.5‘.
The third exyeriment was based on 2,400 utterances of stressed vowel sounds pro-
nounced by 10 speakers; of these, 1,680 were test utterances. The spoken signal was

subjected to spectrum and band analysis in the lea-8,200 Hz range using a comb of
six filters having an average passband width s-1,3so Hz.

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This method of accounting for If!“ using rule (ll) produced the following results:
5 -0.3, PHI79I, Pc-93\. The experiments showed that as the passhands are widened,
the work of the models worsens; correspondingly, change in the speaker is adeqtnte

to change in the amplitude-frequency characteristics of the comunication channel
in the first approximation. Our method of expressing the individuality of a speaker's

voice was also tested with an SARG automatic voice recognition system (2). he
found that by describing the voice as a stepped function did.” we can significantly

raise the reliability of recognizing a standard sanple of 60 key phrases uttered by
10 male speakers (by 10 percent in the case of the piecewise decision making rule,
and by 20 percent in the case of the linear decision making rule). ’

The experiments demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed method of expressing

the integral properties of voices in relative form, as conpared to their absolute
description, in spectral and band analysis of speech.

BIBLIOGRAPBY

l. Pant. 6., 'Akusticheskaya teoriya rechobrazovaniya" [Acoustic Theory of Speech
Formation]. Izd-vo 'Nauka", hoscow, 1964.

2. Ramishvili, G. 5., Sordyukov, v. 0., and 'rushishvili, M. 3... “Experiments in
Computer Voice Veriﬁcation," in “Trudy VIII Vsesoyuznogo seninara 'Avtomaticheskoye
raspoznavaniye slukhovykh obrazov'" [Proceedings of the Eighth All-mion Seminar
"Automatic Recognition of Auditory Patterns” (Misc-VIII”, Part 4, L'vov, 1974.

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'PILIAL USE ONLY

ANALYSIS OF THE VARIABILIT! 0? W31. POW?! comesmaz
ASSOCIATED WITH CHANGE IN PAIJEB SHAPE

A. I. Tarasov, A. A. Fedorov, G. P. Pisenko

While the speech forming process has characteristics canon to all people, it remains.
deeply individualistic due to variations in the dimensions and shape of elements
forming the speech tract. But it is difficult to study the influence of the geo-

metry of tract eleaents upon the individual characteristics of speech due to poor
accessibility to this system.

One of the methods that surmounts this difficulty is the use of a removable upper
denture, which permits investigation of the influence exerted by the shape and

depth of the palatine vault, the position of the teeth and so on upon formation of
speech sounds.

Change in palate shape due to orthopedic interference has an obvious effect on forma-
tion of consonant sounds; however, the influence prostheses have on formation of
vowels is unclear, and the available data are few in number and contradictory.

Methods of quantitative analysis of the quality of vowel sounds based on investiga-
tion of their formant structure have recently been developed. Individual voice
characteristics are known to be the product of differences in the averages of the
three first formants, as well as of the positions of formants above the third.

Our objective was to analyse the influence of removable dentures on formation of
Russian vowel sounds.

We analyzed six Russian vowels uttered by 15 speakers. The speakers were patients
of different age groups exhibiting no noticeable defects in pronunciation and making
their first visit for the purpose of acquiring removable upper dentures. Some speech
inadequacies associated with the loss of natural teeth were disregarded.

simplified spoken asterisk-the syllables be, bu, bo, etc.--was analyzed. Speech
was recorded according to the standard procedure with a ”2vuk-l' tape recorder.
Each speaker uttered each syllable three times. We evaluated the dynamics of the
three series of recordings. The first series was recorded before the subject was
fitted for a proﬁtilesis- Considering that the subject had no experience in using
protheses, this recording was interpreted as normal, typical of the speaker due to
prolonged adaptation and arisal of a stable form of articulation. The second re-
cording was made immediately after the prostheses were manufactured so as to avoid

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the consequences of possible adaptation in pronunciation occurring as the speaker
became accustomed to the prosthesis(that is, to the new tactile sensations), and
arisal of compensatory forms of articulation. Thethird recording was made a month

later, after the speaker adapted hiuelf to the prosthesis. In this case we applied
an additional layer of wax to the outside surface of the base of the prosthesis in

the area of the middle third or the front teeth, or in the area of the side tecth.
with the purpose of placing the speaker in radically unusual conditions by changing
the actual resonant volume of the oral cavity.

To obtain the formant pattern of vowels, we processed the recordings with a SO-channel
spectrograph connected to an M-222 digital coaputer. The spoken signal was processed
within a constant range--75 Hz-Slthz. The entire range was broken down into 50
channels, with each channel 250 Hz apart. Following conversion to digital form,

the output of each of the channels was fed to the computer. Each channel was inter-

rogated 100 times per second. Next the computer was used to obtain spectral patterns
taking the form of I'visible speech'--that is, a dynamic picture of spectrum maximum.

Next the pattern of “visible speech” was analyzed: A stable vowel segment was
selected out, and a spectral cross section was made through the central part of this
stable segment. The results were in the form of a digital read-out and a pic .ure of
the spectral cross section. We obtained 3X6 or 18 cross sections for each speaker.

First of all. using published data on the formant structure of Russian speech, we de-
termined if the vowels of speakers without prostheses corresponded to the obtained rSor-

aunt pattern. ’meresults showed that the formant structure is within the range

typical of the formant structure of Russian vowels, though individual variability
in formant position was observed. within the permissible limits for each speaker.

In other words on one hand the formant structure remains consistent with the infome-
tive structure of the vowel, while on the other hand it clearly reveals individual
features inherent to the speech apparatus of the given individual.

Analysis of the formant structure of vowels uttered immediately after prostheses were

fitted showed that disturbance of tactile habits by the introduction of P10933898
which caused alteration of the acoustic signal (as well as acoustic feedback), did not
cause change in the informative positions of formant: inherent to the given vowel;
moreover the formant positions characteristic of the speaker remained the same as
well. The fact that the position of formtmts remained practically unchanged in com-
parison with the position of formants uttered without prostheses permits the suggestion
that vowel formant structure is not disturbed by dentures.

Analysis of the third experiment, in which we determined the influence of admissible

disturbances in the shape of the palate and alveolar prccesses on vowel formation,
showed that in this case the formant structure does not change, and the individual

formant positions characteristics of different speeches remain the same.
The results show that changes, within certain limits, in the normal anatomical struc-

ture of the palate and alveolar processes do not influence the individual proper-
ties of vowel formant structure due to the peculiar way in which vowels are formed.

193

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run vrl'nycna. use UNLI

SOME BSUIIX'S OF RESEARCH on IN’IONATIWAL WRISTICS OF
PRINCIPAL STRESED WEI. SO!!!” 0? MIONAL sprees

V. L. Taubkin

Speech intonation is known to be an important means of transmitting information on the
state of the speaker. Perceived subjectively as change in the pitch and intensity

of the voice with respect to time, intonational parameters can also be objectively
recorded and measured. which is why researchers are so interested in them.

Fundamental tone frequency is the intonational parameter which has been studied

most fully thus far. The common conclusion of most works is that growth in the
intensity of emotions causes corresponding growth in the mean frequency of the funda-
mental tone (1-5).

0n the other hand development of depressive states causes a decline in the mean
frequency of the fundamental tone (6-8).

The shape of the melodic curve undergoes significant changes as well. As a rule a
speaker's neutral state is characterized by an insignificant range of temporal changes
in the fundamental tone frequency, by smooth transitions from rises to falls and by
absence of overpeaks among instantaneous frequency values. Growth in intensity of
sthenic emotions usually causes an intense increase in the variance of the fundamental
tone, and arisal of dissonances (overpeaks) in a melodic curve having sharply pro-
uounced melodic rises and falls. Asthenic emotions are typified by a decrease, in

-omparison with the neutral state, in the variance of the melodic curve, smoothness
:f transitions from rises to falls, and intonational unexpressiveness (l,6,7,9).

" number of researchers have suggested that the shape of the melodic curve may be
.' adequate differentiating characteristic by which to recognize the emotions of
tH: syeaker, not only in terms of their intensity but also their quality (3,10).

aJoever, it is very difficult to express the intonational characteristics of speech
in formal terms with the purpose of using them to recognize the state of a speaker.
The reason for this is the uncertainty contributed by the influence of the lexical-
gra.matical level of speech. Thus we must seek invariant intonational parameters

0: fragments, or we must subject the spoken text to parallel analysis.

Inveztigation of the intonational characteristics of the principal stressed vowel
soun.s of speech is of great interest in this aspect. These sounds bear signifi-
cant information on the emotional coloration of speech (ll-13), and they exhibit
littP: dependence on the acoustic environment in quasisationary parts of the signal.

194
FIMICNHWCIAL USE¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This communication presents some results of research on the melodic contours of
the principal stressed vowel sounds of speech. Spoken material was obtained for
the analysis by actor simulation. the faithfulness of the actor's experiences was
monitored by electrophysiological indicators. Positive and negative emotions of
varying intensity ('joy,‘ I'clelight," "anxiety," 'fear") were selected for analysis.
Special attention was devoted to studying the behavior of speech parameters in re-

The experimental material was sampled and grouped in accordance with the results of
electrophysiological monitoring and listener analysis. m intensity of emotions
was evaluated by a group of experts using a five-point scale. The clearest emotions
Jere awarded a score of 5. while the least expressive were awarded a score of 1;
neutral states were scored from 0 to l. Listener analysis of the states simlatod
in the actor experiment. which we arbitrarily designated as 'anxiety'na and I':]oy"--J.
produced scores from 1 to 3, on the average for the whole group of listeners. 'l‘he
stages”fear'°--P and ‘delight"--D were characterised by average scores from 3 to 5.
Utterances by speakers in a calm state speaking in a normal style--N, and with diff-
erent variations in speech telpo and loudness (five groups: 'dictation"--D,
'rapid"--R, ”normal loud"--NL. "loud dictation“--DL, “rapid loud"--RL). made up
separate groups. The overwhelming majority of averaged listener evaluations of
these groups of speech responses were limited to values between 0 and l. The one
exception was several “loud rapid" reactions--R:,--evaluated by listeners as weak
negative emotions (scores from 1 to 1.5).

The fundamental tone was isolated by an H-SO digital cosputer using the displacement
method suggested in (14), which permits measurement of individual oscillation periods
of the vocal cords.‘

Our research revealed the following laws for the behavior of the melodic contours
of the principal stressed vowel sounds of speech:

1. The state of rest, including cases of intentional distortion of pronunciation
style (narrative sentences were used), is characterized by a practically horizontal
intonational curve, with a slight downward slope toward the end of the sound: fluctu-
ations in the instantaneous frequency values relative to the average frequency are
highly insignificant, and in our cases they did not exceed 10 percent. In this case

changes in speech tempo do not elicit signifith changes in the average frequency
of the fundamental tone (Pp-r, while an increase in pronunciation intensity causes

it to rise significantly.

2. A typical feature of negative emotional states is a steep downward slope of the
intonational curve from the beginning of the vowel to its end, coupled with a general

"the complete research program also included analysis of the behavior or the speech
tract's first formant and the energy and duration of the principal stressed vowal.

However, the results of this research are not discussed in this commmication due to
space limitations.

195

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI W'll IRI. emu UI‘LI

increase in in proportional to the degree of emotional tension. ‘the span for the

slope angle 0! the intonational curve. when considered together with the increase
in the average frequency of the fundamental tone of a given utterance of a principal

stressed vowel (relative to the backgromd frequency), may serve as a dependable
correlate of emotional expressiveness.

3. Positile emotional states were also characcerized in our experiments by an in-
crease in PM proportional to the degree of emotional tension. In this case the
melodic curve was characterized by a rise in the frequency of the fundamental tone

in the initial phase (by up to 25-30 percent over the initial level), and by its
decline at the end or the vowel. In this case the more clearly positive emotions
were expressed. the higher and longer was the initial rise in frequency of the funda-
mental tone and the higher was the average frequency of the fundamental tone for

the given utterance.

2:
no
mo

0,6

 

 

00 oz - o t/

' - ' '2 (5"
Figure 1. Example of Intonational Metrics (Obtained for Fi‘r'Z-tO-lf’)

Key:

1. Fn/Fpri 3. Seconds
2. Shout

196

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

contours for the main stressed vowel sound of one speaker, those for which the average
frequency Pn- increased by about two times (230.15) in cosparison with the state of

rest-~N. Normalizing, in relation to the initial frequencies, the nelodic curves of
selected utterances corresponding to positive and negative enotions of different in-

of stressed vowels occupying different positions in a word--that is, being within the
first, second and subsequent syllables, we did not reveal significant changes in their
form. Sane differences were revealed in the melodic conclusion of the vowel of the
last syllable: however, these differences (in the decline in frequency of the funda-
mental tone toward the end of the curve) are not fundamental. We should also note
that in our examination of speech in a state of rest, we limit ourselves to just
narrative phrases alone. Here we to examine the intonations of other types of co-mi-
cative phrases. we should find unique differences in an behavior of the particular

tension rises.

In our description of intonational metrics, it was not our objective to find the
threshold of each parameter (average frequency of the fundamental tone, parameters
associated with the form of the melodic curve) to be used in deciding the class to

which a given utterance belongs. 'no find the boundaries between these classes, we
would have to analyze pattern recognition in a multidimensional space of character-

1. Mourad-Krohn, 8., 1113 JOURNAL OF MENTAL SCIENCE, Vol 103, No 9, 1957.

2. Nikonov, A. V., VOYENNO-BEOITSINSKIY NORM!" No 9, 1973.

3. Galunov, B. I., and Manerov, V. Kh., "Correlation Between Psychophysiological
state of the Speaker and Characteristics of the Spoken signal," in '"rezisy dokl.

VIII Vses. seninara po avtomaticheskonu raspoznavaniyu slukhovykh obrazov"

197

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

fun “If“ IAL USE. UNI—I

Prolov, H. V., and Taubkin, V. L. , "Influence of the Speaker's notional State on
Some Parameters of the Spoken Signal,” in “Mater. Vses. siupoziuna 'Rech' i enotsii'“
[Proceedings or the All-Union Symposium "Speech and motions” , Ieningrad, 1975.

simonov. P. V.. Prolov, H. V., and Taubkin, V. I... “An Invariant Hethod of

Recognizing the Emotional State of a Group of Speakers on the Basis of Their
Speech,“ mum. wssu. mam. MAL, Vol 26, No 1, 1976.

Moses, R. , 'Emtional Causes of Vocal Pathology,“ in “Psychological and Psychiatric
Aspects of Speech and Hearing," New York, 1960.

Nikonov, A. V.. and Popov, V. A., “Structure of the Speech of a Hanan Operator
in Stressful Ganditions," in “Materialy Vses. sinpoziuma 'Rech' i emoteii',‘
Leningrad, 1975.

Bazhin, Ye. P., Galunov. V. 1., Gorekiy, G. 0.. and mnerov, V. 101., “Objective
Diagnosis of Emotional state in the Psychiatric Clinic on the Basis of Speech,“
in "mterialy Vses. simpoziuma 'Rech' i emotsii',‘ Leningrad. 1975.

Kolylba, s. N.. Nushikyan, B. A.. and Pirogova, A. A., ”Acoustic Correlates of
motionally Colored Phrases Expressing Anger. Approval and Irony in Men English."
in "Materialy Vses. einpoziuma 'mch' i emotsii'.‘ Leningrad. 1975.

Vitt, N. V.. "Expression of hotional States in Speech Intonation," VOPROSY
PSIKHOIDGII, No 3, 1965.

Luk'yanov, A. 8., and Prolov, H. v., “signaly sostoyaniya cheloveka-operatora"
[Signals of Human Operator State], .bscow, Nauka, 1969.

Bondarko, L. V. et al., "Phonetic Correlates of Din'erent Degrees of Speech Bx-
pressiveness and Functionality," in "uterialy Vses. simpoziuma 'Rech' i emotsii’,"
Leningrad, 1975.

Nushikyan, B. A., “the mle of lbnal Characteristics in Transmission of the
Speaker's Emotional State,” in "Materialy Vses. simpozimns 'Rech’ i emotsii'."
1975.

Sobolev, V. N., and Beronin, S. P., “Investigation of the Displacement Method of
Isolating the Fundamental 'none of Speech," BLEK'I'ROSV‘IAZ', No 12, 1968, pp 30-36.

198

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANALYSIS OF ADAPTIVE EMISDB 01’ ms ARTICIM‘iORY om MIDI. SYSTBH
A. A. Pedorov, G. P. Pisenko, A. o. Yurgenson

Being a conunication source, the main objective of the speaker is to generate acoustic
signals bearing certain semantic information.

In the ideal case all acoustic signals intended to comnicate a fixed meaning must be
identical to one another, irrespective of who the speaker is and of when he utters them.
However, what we observe in fact is significant variation in spoken signals, albeit
within certain limits imposed by the need for retaining semantic information. In this
case we can isolate two forms of causes of such variation. Some of them are associated
with different individual features of the speech forming systems of different people,
while others are associated with certain differences in the way a certain individual's
speech forming system functions at different moments in time due to changes in the state
of the speaker or the environment. Individual differences may be produced by the most
diverse causes: differences in the anatomy of the articulatory tract, in the structure
of the control processes associated with speech forming organs, in the system responsi-
ble for monitoring speech formation and so on.

The speech forming mechanism is flexible, as can be seen from the fact that different
articulatory configurations produce approximately the sen formant frequencies. This
phenomenon is known in phonetics as compensatory articulation. We know, of course.
that each individual possesses sufficiently stable articulatory habits, and that they
are basically the same for all other subjects of the same language grow. when we
say that articulation is coupensatory, we mean that the similarity between two sounds,
one formed normally and the other by coapensatory articulation, is only approximate.

Discussing compensatory forms of articulation, we will distinguish between two types
of variations in articulatory structures. The first type will include variations in
the structure of different articulatory elements of different speakers. What we en-
counter here are differences in the anatomical structure of elements of the speech
tract: the shape of the palate, the mass and shape of the tongue and the jaw struc-
ture of different people; such differences make individual "tuning“ of the articula-
tory tract for formation of the required formant structure necessary. The second type
of compensation in speech formation is associated with change in the articulatory
structure of a particular speaker. If we ignore change in structure as the individual
develops from child to adult, which would he a special task on its own, arisal of
compensatory forms of articulation is usually associated with pathological changes in
the shape of articulatory elements due to injury, surgery and so on, or due to changes
in their control mechanislunreduction of the mobility of articulatory organs, a de-

creaue in the range of their movement and so on, which would require the subject to
.061” the structure if he is to produce the necessary phonemic somds.

199
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'll. Vl'I‘I‘vIRb U06 VI‘L'

The accumulated experimental phonetic and logopedic material providing anatomical and
physiological descriptions of articulation does not provide accurate data on compen-
satory forms of articulation exhibited by different speakers. What we find for the
most part are averaged data on articulatory characteristics (roentgenOgrams and
palatograms) of a number of Russian phonemes. structural variability has not been
considered, owing significantly to the methods used by the authors: Different ele-

ments of articulation characteristic of different speakers were studied separately,
and then the results were combined into an overall picture of phonemic structure.

Particular information on variability of articulatory structure associated with con-
sonants in Russian language may be obtained by comparatively analyzing the palatograms
of several speakers. Though such data are significant to our understanding of the
mechanisms of consonant formation, they cannot answer the question as to which ele-
ments of the articulatory tract produce the differences seen in palatograms, and

how this difference influences the mutual arrangement of other elements of the tract.
The shape of the hard palate is important, since together with the dental and maxillary
systems it provides the foundation for articulatory movements of the tongue in speech.

It should be noted that investigations of the mechanisms of speech formation, to

include compensatory forms, have rarely examined the acoustic characteristics of the
spoken signal. This significantly reduces the value of such investigations, since

they do not provide any more information on the acoustic signal other than a qualitative
description of the phonetic sounds.

Our objective was to study the adaptive processes associated with formation of Russian
consonant sounds by a speaker with a hard palate altered dramatically by artificial
means. Such alteration disturbs the usual habits of articulation and causes arisal

of compensatory articulatory dynamics associated with arisal of new myotactic sensa-
tions and with the consequent need for acoustic tuning.

The research was conducted on 10 speakers having no pronounced speech defect. The
subjects were undergoing fitting for complete removable upper dentures.

Tape recordings were made of the speakers reading standard syllable tables.

They read the text before being fitted for the dentures, irmediately after their
manufacture and fitting, and following a week of adaptation to the dentures.

He also recorded texts read by speakers wearing dentures with dramatically altered
shape: Adhesive wax pads were applied either to the front and side teeth or to the
center of the palate (to the flat roof of the palate).

The texts read by the speakers were played back to five listeners, who wrote them
down. Analysis of perception errors required plotting of matrices showing transitions

of certain consonants into others. The consonant transition matrices were averaged
in relation to all listeners, which made it possible to randomize the perception

errors of different listeners.

In all, we obtaired five consonant transition matrices for each speaker--normal,
using a denture without adaptation, following adaptation to the denture and, corres-
pondingly, alteration of the habits of articulation, and two matrices associated
with disturbance of articulatory habits due to sharp distortion of the shape of the
palate.

200
FOR 0FFK3AI.USE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our analysis of the transition matrices led to the imortant conclusion that the
nature of transitions is cannon to all matrices, the only difference being the nunber

of transitions, which is greater without adaptation and in the case of speech pro-
duced in the presence of the adhesive was pads.

'me largest mnber of transitions is associated with disturbances in the voiced-
soft attribute, which may be explained by the fact that soft consonants are distin-

guished in Russian by a canon articulatory attribute-~nandatory elevation of the
central ridge of the tongue toward the hard palate.

The transition from voiced to surd consonants differing only in the absence of a

voice source may be explained by redistribution of the energy of the noise and voice
cosponents of the sound source due to impairment of articulation.

It should be emphasized that these are tentative data. and that dynamic electropalato-

graphy should provide a conclusive answer to the question as to what articulatory
movements are responsible for compensation.

201

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
I V“ V. I 0‘ .I‘h UU‘ ”I‘M.

AN anoonrmu FOR REMIZING amount. STATES OF SPEAKERS
on ms BEIS 0P STRESSBD WEI. SOWDS

H. V. Prolov, V. L. ‘raubkin, N. A. Luzhbin

Depending on the initial requirements, the task of monitoring a speaker's emotional
state on the basis of his speech can be divided into four stages. They entail
recognition of emotions on the basis of a given fragment of the speech of 1) one
speaker and 2) a group of speakers, and evaluation of emotional states on the basis
of any fragment of the spoken signal of 3) one speaker and 4) a group of speakers.
The acoustic characteristics usedin stages 1 and 2 permit partial or canplete neutrali-
zation of the negative influences of the lexical-grannatical composition ofspeech and
individual features of the speaker on the quality of recognition. Such neutraliza-
tion is achieved by normalizing the parameters. by selecting invariant indicators and
standards and by appropriately grouping the speakers. In distinction from the first
two stages, effective completion of stages 3 and 4 would require, in addition to use
of the acoustic-phonetic characteristics of the signal, consideration of the lexical-
grammatical level of the coucunication, and possibly analysis of its semantic content.
Variants of stages 1 and 2 were examined in (1-3). These works also provide the
results of recognizing emotional states of speakers in real and laboratory conditions,
both in the presence and in the absence of external and internal noises.

Stages 3 and 4 cannot be completed in their entirety by the methods available today.
However, certain approximations may be made. They require, in particular, determina-
tion of formal characteristics of emotions that are invarth in relation to lexical-
grannatical composition of speech and in relation to the individual characteristics
of the speakers. Characteristics which satisfy these requirements to one degree or
another were obtained from utterances of stressed vowel sounds. These sounds bear
significant information on the speaker's emotional state (1), as is confirmed by
studies on perception of emotional speech (4-6). In comparison with the influence of
emotions, the dependence of the set of characteristics determined in these works upon
the phonemic category of the vowels, the acoustic environment of the sound under
analysis, the lexical-gramtical characteristics of the statement and so on was found
to be low. By accounting for this fact and by introducing special acoustic standards.
we were able to formulate and solve a variant of the problem of recognizing the emo-
tional state of any speaker on the basis of an arbitrary speech fragment.

Stressed vowel sounds were extracted' from the speech of an actor simulating positive
and negative emotions of different intensities, and from speech uttered in a state of

 

'Algorithms for automatic isolation of stressed vowel sounds are described in (8-9).
and they were not analyzed in the present work.

202
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rest. In the latter case the intensity and tempo of speech were intentionally dis-
torted. These experiments are described in detail in (1). Material from six speakers
was first subjected to listener analysis in order to permit its classification in
terms of different states. Utterances which could not be classified uniquely were

excluded from further analysis. The recognition algorithm was run in a Yes-1020
digital cosputer. '

me information space consisted of eight parameters, which were determined by process-
ing the recordings of the stressed vowel sounds. They included: 1) sound duration-4r;
average values (within time '1') , 2) fundamental tone frequency-40¢, 3) power H,

4) mnber of times the spoken signal crossed the zero value-4°, and 5) the dispersion
of the fundamental tone frequency--D(Povp). The i-th intervals of the fundamental tone
Th, were isolated by the displacement method (7). In addition to the characteristics
listed above (the characteristics are not presented here in the order of their im-
portance) . we used 6) asymmetry of the smoothed curve of the fundamental tone, MPOT):

MP") 4*" " #23:” “" ;

Smoothing was perfoer in a window of values for five samples for which Palm (Tog-Vi.
to and t2 denote the beginning and end of Fol-(t) on the time axis respectively, and
the extreme point t1 is such that Pm(t>t1)<l’or(t1) for t1<t‘tz, and such that the
first derivative of function Fog-(t1) IO; 7) the average of the first derivative
F'1,orr of function Pal-(t) in the time (tl-to) :

I. I - '

l ., -, P at P’ >0
F . = l‘ (()d(. where F — '°' J"

not in n..." or or 0 at F’gm-(O

8) the average of the first derivative 3201. of function For“) in time (t2-t1) :

F" --—'-"F' (0d!
30 _‘I_llu|‘ 0? I
I

in this case F'z'mmo if there is no descending segment in the smoothed curve of
the fundamental tone. The parameters isolated for each speaker (except “For” were
normalized in relation to their average values, obtained from material pronounced in
normal style. Although some of the selected indicators (for example ’01" f0, M)
exhibit certain correlations among each other, thus making it possible to reduce

the parameter space, a certain amount of redundancy does raise the reliability of
recognition on the background of different levels of noise, which have different
effects an isolation of these indicators. In particular, it is with this purpose

in mind that we suggest supplementing the parameter space by the trajectory of the.
first formant.

203

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Preliminary research showed that for practical purposes the classes of states we
analyzed do not intersect. Hyperplanes approximating characteristics separating the
surface into an eight-dimensional space are sought in two successive stages: 1) we
divide the entire set of utterances into two classes corresponding to the state of
rest (accounting for distortions in speech tempo and intensity) and emotional tension,
and 2) we find the hyperplane dividing the class of emotions into subclasses of posi-
tive and negative emotional states. The recognition process was organized as a
hierarchical system in order to simplify the structure of the algorithm applied to
our set of working characterstics. Only those solution rules that are found in each
stage by means of the same procedures can be used.

Hith this purpose we developed the exploratory algorithm Pam RBOOGNIZER, which
can be used to determine the location and configuration of patterns and to seek
possible points of their intersection in an n-dimensional space of continuous miseri-
cal characteristics. The algorithm makes use of a learning flowchart similar to that
described in (10). It entails finding a dividing hyperplane W passing through the
center of the segment connecting the closest points of convex envelopes stretched
over points in the pattern of the learning sample. Our learning flowchart differed
mainly in that it did not require complete sorting of points in the learning sasple;
instead, the results of intermediate iterations were subjected to analysis (points
which would knowingly not participate in further learning were excluded). The parts
of the algorithm and the order of their Emotion are discussed below. The initial
data--the learning sample together with the results of listener analysis and the test
sample--were fed into the data bank (subroutine BANCD) , in which they were subjected
to primary processing and normalization. At each hierarchical level, possible inter-
sections between patterns were verified. the area of pattern intersection was analyzed
if it was present, and a decision was made on whether or not to exclude points within
this area from further learning (subroutine CROSSING). The main working part of the
algorithm consisted of three functional blocks: 1) the learning subroutine mm.
which creates, on the basis of the learning sample and expert evaluations, hyperplane H
separating two patterns A and B: 2) a testing subroutine TEST, which tests the quality
of pattern division during learning, using the found equations for the hyperplane

and the expert evaluations; 3) a recognition subroutine RECOGN, which uses the found
solution rules on the test sample--that is, it correlates new material with pattern A
or B. Learning and recognition were performed both in relation to each speaker taken
alone and in relation to the entire group of speakers.

By applying the algorithm described above we obtained a rule for recognizing the
following in relation to each speaker: a) the classes “rest“ and “auction" in 99 per-
cent of all cases, b) the classes “positive and negative emotion" in 100 percent of
the cases; and in relation to the whole group of speakers: a) the classes “rest"

and "emotion" in 97 percent of all cases: b) the classes “positive and negative emo-
tion" in 96 percent of the situations. In comparison with the first stage, in which
all eight characteristics were used, sufficiently effective division of patterns was
Found to be possible in the segond sgage withinathree-dimensional space of normalized
(see above) parameters A(Forp),r lo‘r,F 201-. A certain decline in the quality of recog-
nition in relation to the group of speakers can be explained by individual character-
istics of emotional expression, which complicates the configuration of the patterns
and increases the number of intersection points. Selecting speakers appropriately
within the group would obviously help to eliminate this shortcoming. It should be
noted that the algorithm can be used to continue hierarchical division of previously

204

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtained patterns: for example it can be used to divide the class of positive emotions
into two subclasses depending on the degree of emotional tension. '1!) permit analysis
of this and other possibilities for isproving the structure of the recognition system,
we suggest supplementing the working space of characteristics with a m-ber of spectral
parameters (timbre characteristics) and with some characteristics of speech flow
(average frequencies of. the fundamental tone, intensity, tetpo and so on).

It should be pointed out in conclusion that this algorithm can be supplemented by a
procedure for approximately evaluating the level of emotional tension (within a~ given
class of emotions). in proportion to the size o£_the vector extending in the two-

dimensional space of normalized characteristics For: to from the coordinate origin to
the point representing realization of the vowel so . 'l‘he degree to which the
emtions examined in this work are expressed can be measured in precisely the same
£ashion as in the preliminary research, though in this case the coordinates would be

P' 1m,F'2or.A(Foq-) -
3181.106um

1. Luk'yanov. A. IL. and Prolov, M. v., 'Signaly sostoyaniya cheloveka operatora"
[signals 0: Human Operator State], Moscow, Nauka, 1969.

2. Prolov, H. V., and ‘raubkin, v. 1... “Recognition of Emotional and'Physical Stresses
in a Group of Speakers by Means of Speech Parameters,“ in “Blektronnaya apparatura
i metodicheskiye VOPIOSY neyrotiziologicheskogo eksperimenta" {electronic Apparatus

and Procedural Questions Associated with Neurophysiological Experimentation] ,
Moscow, Nauka, 1975.

3. Simonov, P. V., Prolov, H. V., and Tatbkin, V. I... ”An Invariant Method of

Recognizing the Emotional State of a Group of Speakers on the Basis of 'lheir
Speech,“ 23. W0, Vol 26, No 1, 1976.

4. Bondarko, L. V., et a1., ”Phonetic Correlates of Different Degrees of Speech
Expressiveness and mtionality,‘ in "Materialy Vses. simosiua 'Rech' i

emotsii" [Proceedings of the All-union Symposium “Speech and motions'l,
Leningrad, 1975.

5. Kolynba, S. N., Nushikyan. E. A., and Pirogova, A. A., ”Acoustic Correlates of.
nationally Colored Phrases Expressing Anger, Approval and Irony in Modern
English," in I'Materialy Vses. simposiuma 'nech' i emotsii',‘ Leningrad, 1975.

6. Nushikyan. B. A., "The Ible or mnal Characteristics in the Transmission of
a Speaker‘s Emotional State,“ in "Materialy Vses. simoziuma 'Rsch' i emoteii',”
Leningrad, 1975.

7. Sobolev, V. N., and Baronin, S. P., "Investigation of the Displacement Method
of Isolating the Fundamental tone of Speech,“ EWSWAZ' . No 12, 1968,
pp 30-36.

8. Khayretdinova, A. 6., "A Method of Automatic Isolation of Accent in a Flow of

Speech," in “vychislitel'nyye sistemy" (Computer Systems], Novosibirsk, Nauka,
1971.

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ Ufl‘lLlAL IBI'. ONLY

9. nndreyev, Yu. H” “Automatic Isolation of Accents in Oral Speech," in "Rachevoye

obshcheniye v avtonetizirovannykh sisteuakh" [woken Oct-Imitation 1n Automated
Systems], Moscow, Neuka, 1975.

10. Kozlnets, B. 8., “A Recurrent Algorithm for Dividing the Convex Envelopes of

mo Sets,“ in ”Algoritmy obucheniye rupoznavanlyu obruov" [Pattern Recognition
Learning Algorithm], Moscow, Sov. radio, 1973.

11004
CSO: 8144/1642

-£ND-

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY