BIOHEDI CRL 8ND BEHBVIORRL SCIENCES
( FOUO 11/79 )
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040021-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

JPRS L/8385

9 April 1979

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL Scxsuces

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 11/79)

U. S. JOINT FUDLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICiAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040021-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation pri-arily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
trans-isaions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro. English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

lleadlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforlation was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sunarized or extracted.

Unfauiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or nausea preceded by a ques-
tion earl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. Times within iteus ire as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COMIC” MUS AND REGUIA‘I'IOIIS MINING mesa“ OP
HATBRIAIS ramme- HERBIN REQUIRE mr DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 8% RESTRICTED MOWICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mas n/saas
? z 9 April 1979

TWSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE MD TECHNOLOGY

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL Scxeuces
(POUO 11/79)

Courems

BOOM!

Radioecology of Pbreet arsenals
(R. M. Menuhin, M. A. Ben-hm; mm, No 6,

19:8) coon..000Cece...000.0.oeeeeeeooeeeoeeeoeveeeQO

310mm!

Granting Operator-0' Yak
(v. r. Vem, et «LL; mam mum
0mm (mm-mmzcmm
Rm), 1978) 000.000....00.000000000000000000000

GMICS

amen-emu Subemtieuon or the Princlpaea of Gene
Mutton “clamoring in run

(n. P. woman, e1: 31.; 00mm Am mm: 8883,
No 5’ 1978) 00000.00..no.to...onloooooeooooooooe‘iooo

PUBLICATIQIB
Counters 1:: Neurophysiologicel Research
(v. 1). mn, A. v. Kormenkiy; m v
mommzmxcmm mum, 1978) ......
Scmll'Ier m summc mamas

ussn Acedeuror Science Announce-enc- or Hedda and mm
um mun: 8833, no 10, 1976)

Hero or Socialist. labor
com Hem: end Commutative Prizes

PAGE

21

28

- a - [III - USSR - 22 851' P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECOLOGY

RADIOECOLOOY OF FOREST ORGANISMS
Sverdlovsk BKOLOOIYA in Russian No 6. 1978 pp 97-98

[Review of monograph by R. M. Aleksakhin and M. A. Naryshkin: ”Migration of
Radioactive Nuclides in Forest Biogeocenoses". Moscow. 1917]

[Text] Forest radioeeology has been successfully developed in the last twenty
years. Periodicals have published many studies on this problem. and by now
there has developed a real need to analyze and generalize the accumulated
material. This problem has been solved by the authors of the book being
reviewed. who have made a great personal contribution to the formation and
evolution of forest radioecology. Research conducted with the participation of
these authors was used as the basis for the book. Furthermore. a great deal of
literature is analyzed and the leading role of Soviet scientists in solving the
problems is reflected.

The book devotes much attention to a justification of the practical and scientific
significance of forest radioecology as an independent scientific trend; the
specifications of interaction between precipitated radioactive contaminants and
forest landscapes are given. Particular attention is called to the exceedingly
high retentivity of the arboreal floor for radioactive precipitation. Specific data
are given in the book to describe the rate of pirification of plant and tree tops
from retained radionuclides and translation of the latter to the strfaee of the
forest floor and then to the soil. These data form the basis for evaluating
irradiation doses to which many organisms are exposed within the forest
biogeocenosis.

One chapter in the book is devoted to a discussion of quantitative aspects of the
distribution and migration of man-made radionuclides in forest Soils. Forms of
discovery of long-lived fission products are examined: Sr”. Csl . and others;
and the transformation of these forms in time due to change in their biological
accessibility for the root systems of vegetation. The role of forest soil as an
arcumulator of radioactive substances reaching the sin-face of the soil from the
tops of vegetation and from the atmosphere is noted. Particular attention is
focused on the important role in blogeochemical migration of radionuclides of
the corresponding natural chemical macroanalogs-alkali metals for Cs137 and
alkaline-earth roi- si-90. This situation is illustrated by a wealth of factual
material describing the distribution of mobile forms in the most common soil
types of the USSR of such natural elements as Na. K. Pb. Ca. Mg. and Sr.
Resulés of experiments are cited on the effect on the speed of vertical migration
of Sr leached from the soil by water and by solutions of compounds of its

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chemical analog. calcium. The data in this chapter are of interest not only to
radioecologists. but also to specialists in forest management.

A large section is dedicated to a description of the pattern of transition of
major fission products and their chemical analogs into forest vegetation from the
soil. The authors justifiably emphasize that it is. in fact. the soil pathway of
access which defines the content of a radionuclide such as Sr90 in timber. Based
on their own experimental data. the authors discuss in detail the relative
migrational ability of man-made radionuclides and the correspondi neural
analogs. expressed as so-called magnitudes of observable ratios 0 related
element pairs. The kinetics of formation of a quasi-equilibrium state in the
distribution of radionuclides and element analog in the biomass of forest
vegetation is examined for the element pair Sr lCa. Detailed discussion is
given to causes of altered content of Sr90 in forest vegetation in time following
single introduction of a radionuclide under the forest cover. The factual data
cited make a substantial contribution to the biogeochemistry of fission products
and natural alkali metal and alkaline-earth elements.

in the concluding chapter of the monograph. the distinctive featues of
distribution in forests of artificial radionuclides are considered in their zonal
aspect. The initial factual data are presented as the results of experimental
research and encompasses the basic forest regions of the USSR. A comparative
evaluation of the content of fission products in the biomass of woody vegetation
and other components of the forest cenosis revealed significant differences in
the concentrations as a function of the specimen sampling site. biological
aspects of the test objects. and the physical and chemical properties of the
radionuclides. These materials permitted the authors to make several important
generalizations and to spell out the leading factors responsible for the
distribution of radionuclides tiwough components of the cenosis and its time
changes: quantitative parameters were obtained to describe the retentivity of
the forest floor for individual radionuclides. it should be noted. however. that
the numerical data cited in the book concerning the distribution of radionuclides
through forest components varies greatly according to the research region.
Unfortunately. the authors did not give this a convincing explanation.

The totality of experimental data on the distribution and migration of Sr90 in
the forest served as the basis for construction of a mathematical model of
gig-anon of this radionuclide and a definition of the coefficients of transfer of

between various components of the forest cenosis. A good correspondence
was found between the proposed model and factual data. providing grounds to
use it to predict the distribution of Sr” in the forest in the remote future. The

principles of mathematical model! set forth in the monograph may be used to
construct a model of migration in orests not only of radioactive elements. but
also of natural stable ones. and for that matter. any contaminants entering the
forest cenosis due to the discharge of industrial wastes into the environment.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The materials presented in the book. as a whole. permitted the authors to
formulate important generalizations which show the specifications of distribution
and migration of radionuclidcs in forest biogeocenoses. It was found that the
ovorhead portion of the forest floor. especially in coniferous forests. is
characterized by a much greater ability to retain radioactive contaminants
which have precipitated from the atmosphere than herbaceous plant com-
munities. A major portion of the radionuclides retained in the vegetation tops
remains there for quite a long time: this can cause a rise in the irradiation dose
of the assimilating and reproductive organs. The authors formulated a thesis on
the exceedingly important sanitation and hygiene role of the forest which is
manifested in a reduction in intensity of wind and water migration of
radionuclides beyond the boundaries of a contaminated territory after translation
of their bulk under the cover of the timber floor.

The vital nature of this monograph goes beyond the framework of purely
radioccological problems. The information presented in it can be useful for
predicting the consequences of forest pollution by other toxic substances of non-
radioactive nature. to evaluate the sanitation and hygiene role of the forests
under conditions of environmental pollution by industrial wastes.

The book may offer certain interest for radioecologists. forest management
specialists, hygiene specialists and a wide range of other experts engaged in the

elaboration of the problem of protecting the environment from man-made
pollutants.

Reviewed by F. A. ‘i‘ikhomirov. Moscow State University imeni bomonosov

COPYRIGHT: ladatel'stvo "Nauka". "Ekologiyn". 1978

8817
050: [870

3
roe ornctiu. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENGINIBRING PSYCNOLOGY

ORGANIZING OPERATORS' NORK

Moscow ORGANIZATSIYA TRUDA OPERATOROV (INZNBNBRNO-
PSTKROLOGIanSKIYB PROBLBNY) (Orgenizing Operetors' Nork:
Engineering Psychology Problens) in Russian 1978 signed
to press 22 Her 78 pp 2. 192-211. 223

[Annotetion. teble of contents and conclusion of book by
v. P. Vende et el._ltdetel'etvo "Bkononiks." 15,000 copies,

22b peges]

[Text] This book is devoted to the engineering psychological
especte of orgeniring operetors' work in different sectors of
the netionsl econony (nechine building, the netellurgicel end
chenicel industries end trensportetion). Speciel ettention is
devoted to en enslysis of the processes of infornetion process-
ing by nen end of the interection between the operetor end con-
puter; specific reconnendetions ere cited for selecting the
cherecteristics of operetionsl nonitoring end control equipsent.
The euthors describe the engineering psychologicel nethods for
evelusting end increasing the efficiency of control centers in
order to increees the efficiency end reduce the level of tension
in the operetor's work.

The book is intended for specielists in the fields of scientific
orgenizetion of work end nsnegenent. engineering psychology.
Acs [eutoneted control systens]. ergonomics end equipnsnt design.

Tehle of Contents _ Pegs
Introduction 3
Chepter One. Engineering Psychology's Reseerch on
the Hen-Operetor's Activity 5
1.1. The Tesk of Engineering Psychology in
Orgsnizing Operetors’ Work 5
1.2. A Psychologicel Anslysis of the Operator's
Activity 22
1.3. The Distribution of Functions in the "hen-
Nechine” Systee 36
h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.4. Organizing the Exchange of Information in
the "Han-hachins" System 39
Chapter Tuo. The Problems of Engineering Psychology's
'Analysis and Planning of Control Centers for
Automated Control Systems 58
2.1. hethodological Issues of Engineering
Psychology's Analysis and Planning of

Automated Control Systems 58
2.2. Describing and Evaluating the Efficiency of
Eunan Engineering Systems 60
2.3 Setting Norms and Standardizing the Require-
sents of Engineering Psychology 76
Chapter Three. Engineering Psychology's Development of
Operational Monitoring and Control Equipment 78
3.1. Engineering Psychology's Study and Evaluation
of Elements of Information 78
3.2. Types of Operational Information Display
Systems in Automated Control Systems 108
3.3. Psychological Principles for Improving Infor-
mation Systems 121
3.6. Enploying the Principles of Engineering
Psychology in Planning the Operators' Centers 132
Chapter Pour. The Economic Efficiency of Engineering
Psychology's Developmental ﬂork 171

6.1. General Principles for Determining the
Economic Efficiency of Engineering

Psychology's Developmental Work 171
b.2. The Economic Efficiency of Engineering
Psychology's Developmental Work 179
Conclusion 192
Conclusion

Long Range Problems of Engineering Psychology in Automated
Control Systems

The imnense importance of further increasing efficient management

of the economic system and of increasing the efficiency of deci-
sion making was pointed out in the decisions of the 25th CPSU
Congress. Engineering psychology is called upon to play a
significant role in implementing these decisions. During a
short period--20-2$ yeara--a sufficiently firm theoretical

foundation has been created for the science and rich practical
experience has been accumulated.

Several stages can be distinguished in the development of engineer-

ing psychology. During the first stage, the processes of
perceiving the individual elements of instruments (needles.

dials. scalar forns and figures) vere the subject of research
for engineering psychology; during the second stage, the

5
FOR orncm. use ouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

perception of instrument readings as a whole was subjected

to study; later. there was a transition to the analysis of

the perception of information from information display systems
with multiple conponents. Modern engineering psychological
research is devoted to the problem of optimizing the san—
operator's interaction with complex information systems which
not only include the display equipment but also the methods.
algorithms and facilities for preparing operational information.
including conputer programs and terminals.

At the same time. it is necessary to recognize that, with the
exception of those rare cases where psychologists directly
participate in the planning of complex information systems.

the majority of the research in engineering psychology is
lagging behind the rate of development and dissemination of

new control equipment and systems. The enormous scale of
the scientific. technological and engineering developmental
work in the field of automated control systems, the expansion
of the operators' functions and the reduction in the time for
making responsible decisions have brought about the requirement
for an in-depth psychological basis for this developmental work.

The ever increasing complexity of controlling these systems
requires an optimal organization of interaction between oper-
ators--operators who are jointly accomplishing the control tasks--
by means of the collective formation of an adequate psycholog-
ical model of the actual system. The psychological aspects

of the problem of an optimal organization of interaction between
different specialists who are jointly creating a multi-faceted
model of a somewhat complex reality are not only of current
interest for making control systems more efficient but also

for solving complex scientific problems (for example. on
environmental protection). creating large-scale projects and

in many other cases where the solution of a problem is con-
nected with the synthesis of large amounts of diverse infor-
mation within limited periods of time. A reduction in the
efficiency of control systems and work of scientific and de-
sign groups frequently occurs due to a loss of information

when it is transmitted from one echelon to another.

then solving an operational problem which has arisen--in
reference to control systems--the goal of engineering
psychological planning consists of the optimal combination

and utilization of all its a priori experience which is

recorded in the instructions. machine programs and the structure of
the information display systems and also of the potential pro-
fessional and creative abilities of the collective and of each
operator based on the selection and coordination of adequate
professional (detailed) and universal (integrated) languages and
interactive equipment.

6
ma orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The selection of the interactive structure and the technical
equipment for the operators' work must be directed at optimizing
the importance of psychological factors of work complexity when
the most responsible functions are being accomplished. Hhen
organizing interactive and control equipment--as when optimizing
the information display systems--it is advisable to combine
probability methods and multilevel adaptation for the purpose
of ensuring that the collective functions as a socio-technical
system of adaptive interactive communication (hybrid intelli-
gence). The following are characteristic of such a system:
--an anthropocentric structure;

--a dynamic level of interaction;

--a flexible hierarchical structure;

--common responsibility and prestige;

--the individual adaptation of the interactive functions,
structure and equipment to the active participants who are
personally performing in the system;

--the selection of active participants by primarily con-
sidering the divergent or convergent phases of the work or

the common pupose of the system;

--the collection and analysis of information and the foraation
of an integrated model of the objective situation or the
theoretical task which is being jointly conducted by all the
system's participants;

--the optimization of individual and systemic psychological
criteria and factors for the level of difficulty of the solu-
tion;

--the open nature of the system. maximum utilization of all

the accumulated knowledge and experience. active interactive
communication and a widespread exchange of experience with other
systems;

--the existence of highly developed equipment for collecting,
storing. transmitting, processing and displaying information--
equipment which is built on the basis of the principles of
multilevel adaptation to the participants of the system;

--the existence of a common, universal (integrated) language
along with narrow. professional (detailed) languages;

--common ncccsnibﬂity to the information and primarily to the
Integrated information.

He must immediately stipulate that, bv hybrid intelligence. we
primarily mean systems of intellectual interaction between em-
ployees. including the interaction between scientists and

their historical predecessors. and not complex men-machine
systems. It is necessary to take into account the fact that the
historical wisdom of mankind is not just concentrated in books
or other specialized sources of information. K. Marx pointed
out that "the history of industry and the objective existence of

7
F08 OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

industry which has developed are the open book of man's essen-
tinl forces which present themselves to our senses as man's
psychology."* It is of interest that. as if justifying the
need for a branch of psychology like engineering psychology.
K. Marx warned in the same place that "...the psychology to

which this booku-that is. the most sensitive to our senses and
most accessible part of history--is closed cannot become a
truly substantive and real science."

He cited the anthropocentricity of its structure as the first
feature of systems of hybrid intelligence. 0n numerous occas-
sione. 3- F. Lomov has elPhasized the importance of developing and
enploying an anthropocentric methodology for engineering
psychological planning of all "man-machine" systems.

Based on the nethods for constructing them. systems of hybrid
intelligence are the exact opposite of systems of artificial
intelligence. Psychologists sometimes criticize the designers
of systems of artificial intelligence for their excessive
"machinocentrism." however, in our opinion, this approach is

an adequate ideology for this specilization whose goal is

the creation of autonomous-achine programs for solving intel-
lectual problems. At the same time, it is not assigned the

goal of modeling psychological processes; the design of the
programs may be based on other principles than man's process

of thinking and. moreover, it may surpass the research on the
psychology of thought. It is not assigned the goal of optimiz-
ing the psychological structure of the activity of a person
interacting with a system of artificial intelligence since

the person's presence here is considered a temporary. compulsory
phenomenon-~until programs are designed to automatically accom-
plish all functions. The strategy for the problems of artifi-
cial intelligence is one of improving the machine and its intel-
lectual potential.

To the contrary. in all the versions of the systens of hybrid
intelligence, including the man-machine versions. man always
remains the central figure and the machine components of the
system are only the means for his work. The strategy of the
problems of hybrid intelligence is one of improving man. in-
creasing his creetive and thinking potential. Thus, by their
very nature. the systems of hybrid intelligence are anthro-
pocentric in contrast to the machinocentric systems of artifi-
cial'intelligence.

*K. Harx and P. Eagles. "Soch.," vol 62. p 123.

8
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In systems of hybrid intelligence, the technical equipment is
an auxiliary element which assists the individual in his work.
In contrast to this. in the men-machine versions of systems

of artificial intelligence, the individual is frequently either
an extension of the machine components employed to back them

up in case they break down due to insufficient reliability or

a supplement to the machine in case the need arises to accom-
plish an unforseen task or a task which has not yet been put
into algorithms.

It is necessary to emphasise that the systems of hybrid and
artificial intelligence are not just exact opposites but they
also dialectically merge into each other. For example. if

the group of creative tasks being accomplished by the individ-
ual in a system of hybrid intelligence becomes narrower and
if the experience accumulated for their accomplishment is
sufficient for a formal description, then reducing this formal
description to machine programs assisted by an individual can
be formulated as a new task of the system whose work must be
reorganized according to the principles of artificial intelli-
gence.

0n the other hand, premature attempts to design a system of
artificial intelligence for functions which are far from being
completely described by algorithms are very frequently observed.
The individual's participation in such systems is unavoidable
and protracted and it is connected with the accomplishment of
complex creative and responsible tasks. At the same time, the
machinocentric approach employed for the system which is con-
sidered as an artificial intelligence provides for a divirion
of functions between the individual and the machine which is
primarily based upon the functional capabilities of the machine.
The remaining functions are included in the duties of the
individual as an auxiliary, temporary component of the system
(until formalized algorithms are collected). It is natural
that, in the majority of the cases organized according to the
machinocentric methods, the individual's work does not have

a comprehensive psychological structure and it is connected
with a great deal of difficulty. The norms for the permissible
functions, conditions and limitations on the duration of the
individual's work in systems of artificial intelligence must be
developed and acknowledged.

Besides the differences reviewed above in the philosophical

and methodological interpretation of the machinocentric con-
ception of artificial intelligence and the anthropocentric
conception of hybrid intelligence, the classification of a
system to one of these types also has a purely practical, organ-
izational significance. Engineering and technical requirements

9
FOR onucm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

serve so the initial. basic require-ants for the creators of
syntese of artificial intelligence while the require-ants of
psychology serve this function for the designers of systeas of
hybrid intelligence. The systens sethod for psychology. which
waa developed by b. F. Loeov. is highly significant for develop-
ing iaportant aspects of the theory of syetoas of hybrid intel-
ligence.*

Iron the point of view of our concept of systeas of hybrid inte1~
ligence. the individual's work with the coeputer is regarded as
e peeudodialog. i.e.. the individual'e secret dialog with other
people during hie work. with people who have recorded their
knowledge. their forecasted answers and opinions in the aachine
prograa (the aaterialiration of the planner's strategy of think-
ing in the structure of the inforaation display syetess is
regarded with the sane attitude). horeover. the eachine pro-
graa can reorgs'iee the initial knowledge according to as cos-
plex as plan as desired. however. fro: the point of view of
reflecting the social and biological requireaents of een--the
aoet inportant factors for deteraining the tasks. the intel-
lectual synchronization of people and the individual effect when
solving creative probleee--the nachine cannot add anything new.

At the cane tiae. the large capacity of the coaputer's aaaory

and its coabinatory and calculating capsbilitiee nahe it pos-
sible to efficiently accuaulate experience for oolving different
classes of probleae and they aake it poeeible to accueulate date
on the individual features of problea solving by separate
operators and to develop optiaal forss for giving each of then
advice. reference data. instructions and partial-answer displays.

Depending on the specific course of the solution and the dif-
ficulties encountered by the operator. recosaendations on the
values of the psychological factors of coaplexity exaeined

above can be read out on the cosputer's wideotergingI, At

the sane tine. in the event of a delay above the norl or obvious
sistekes in preparing information for accoaplishing an operational
task and also in the event of large shifts in the psycho-
phyeiological indices for the operator's state. the aabiguity

in the teat end the nunber of levels of freedoe in perceptugl
and intellectual activity are lieited right up to producing an
algorithe for a certain reserve solution or even ranoving the
operator froo his participation in the control process.

During the first stages. advice can be preaented to the oper-
ator in the following sequence:

--elesenta of inforaation relevant to the task are vioually
selected. thereby lieiting the area for collecting inforsation;

‘See I. P. Loaov. "The Systees Approach in Psychology."
VOPROSY PSI‘KOLOGII. No 2. 1975.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--the probable critical elements of the situation are selected
sore precisely:

--the relationships between elements. including different types
of relationships. are reflected. Bnploying the principle-of
structure [16] serves to reduce the seeking coefficient for

the relationships;

--the loops in discrete dynamic interrelationship. fldﬂh on in
sequence;

--distinctive tags are selected for the situations in the event
there is a danger of intereference arising.

Combining the elements of information into semantically whole
groups--operative perceptual units-~is a special task. The
principles of autonosy and structure. which we have described.
are the basis of the machine algorithss for displaying advice
on optimizing the nusber of operative perceptual units; in
many cases. it is necessary to display advice on the probable
priority relationships for signals being perceived end the
preferred priority order for processing them.

It is important to continue developing methods for visually
presenting the algorithss for making and implementing a de-
cision. Using two-way communication between the individual

and the computer by means of. for example. a videoterminnl

with a ”light pen“ during the process of solving experimental
end actual operational tasks end using the special methods of
the operator's own account of the course of the solution make
it possible to efficiently carry out individual end individual-
operational adaptation of the structure for presenting infor-
nation.

As we already pointed out. from the point of view of engineering
psycholoBY. selecting the level for adapting the structure of
information display systens to the functions end psycho-
physiologicai features of the people making decisions in the
automated control system is an important requirement for im-
proving the display systess.

In essential cases where especially important decisions are
being sede based on the inforsation displayed. for example,
in controlling an entire sector of the national economy. the
individual adaptation of information display systems to the
special features of the functions and individual work style
of the executives and other employees of the sector's central
staff is required.

An analysis of a nusber of automated control systens for sectors
revealed the following typical deficiencies in the methods and

equipment for displaying information at the highest levels of
sector managenent:

11
FOR OFFlCth USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--the excessively fractionated nature of information which hampers
an overall. strategic evaluation of the sector's operational
status. the detection of deficiencies and the selection of the
most efficient organizational and technological measures by the
sector management:

--difficulty in perceiving tables due to their insufficient
clarity and small size on the screen of the cathode ray tube:
--difficulty in selecting tables. comparing them to each other.ond
a lack of trends expressed in an obvious form for the dynamics

of production:

--insufficient consideration for the special features of the
functions of individual sector executives:

-- a lack of consideration for individual psychological features
of information perception and processing and customary and pre-
ferred forms of displaying information.

The enumerated deficiencies testify to the fact that the existing
forms of information output in the majority of sector automated
control systems need to he made significantly more efficient

from the point of view of considering the psychology of employees
using the information.

He recommend that the methods of multilevel psychological adapta-
tion of information equipment to information users be taken as

the basis for making them more efficient; at the same time.

special attention must be directed at adapting the information
equipment intended for the highest levels of the national economy‘s
sector management.

It is primarily necessary to provide additional specifications
for display equipment for integrated, summarized information and
for trends in the dynamic indices of the sector's work.

The creation of additional. integrated information equipment
within the sector automated control systems--equipment which
facilitates the general. strategic evaluation of the sector's
status. the trends in its dynamics and the selection of critical
linko--will facilitate and accelerate decision making in managing
the secter. Improving the forms for tables and the conditions
for perceiving and analyzing them must promote this.

A more differentiated consideration of the functions of sector
executives and employees is required when selecting the forms
and makeup of the information to be displayed; more complete
processing and preparation of data is required to facilitate
their analysis in the precise area which interests each speci-
fic executive. In some cases. it is necessary to ensure con-
sideration for the individual features of the sector's senior
executives in perceiving and evaluating information. Making
information display psychologically efficient--even when

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accomplished according to this abbreviated plan-~will signi-
ficantly increase the efficiency of sector automated control
system utilization at all levels of sector management.

The basic stages of work on making them psychologically efficient
must be: an experimental psychological evaluation of the existing
form» of information output: developing reconsendations for
improving the fore and makeup of tables and for isproving the
perception of then; developing principles end equipment for
displaying integrated (summarized, strategic) information:
developing principles for displaying trends in the dynamics

of the sector's work. A plan for asking the information equip-
ment of sector automated control systems more efficient should

be developed on this basis.

There is no doubt that consideration of engineering psychological
requirements in Iaking information equipnent employed in ell
types of automated control systems more efficient will make it
possible to significantly increase their technical and economic
efficiency. This conclusion is confirmed by the work experience
of the engineering psychology subdivisions of the USSR Academy

of Sciences Institute of Psychology. the Leningrad State Uni-
versity ieeni A. A. Zhdenov and the All-Union Scientific Research
Institute for Bquipment Design in developing and actually im-
plementing the engineering psychology sethods cited above for
organizing operators' work.

The develop-ant of control systems with a multilevel. engineering
psychology adaptation of the implements and conditions of work

to the individual will make it possible to increase the efficiency
of the operators' work even more.

The ”nan-computer" systen where interaction is designed according
to the principles of individual adaptation is unique to the
systems of hybrid intelligence. The collective is the most
common type of these systems. In this case. all the other parti-
cipsnts of the hybrid intelligence can influence the psychological
factors of the complexity of the problem solution by the parti-
cipant who is recognized as the temporary leader in accordance
with his ability and the specific course of the solution. In
many of these systems. it is necessary to introduce a special
group of participants whose role boils down to developing recon-
mendetions for controlling the interactive and decision process.
distributing functions. changing the hierarchical structure.
individually adapting the organization and means of labor to

each active sember of the system of hybrid intelligence and

not decision making. These kinds of functions primarily belong
to the field of competence of psychologists who participate in
this case as sets-operators.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In our opinion, developing a theory and languages for dialog
within systems of hybrid intelligence is one of the most in-
portant problems for optiniring interaction [24. 63. 113. 132.
1331. Along the numerous types of dialog. the following are
of prinary interest: according to the relationship in perti-
cipants' ranks--hierarchica1. equal. didactic and instructive
dialog; according to the type of signals used--visua1, oral.
audio-visual; according to spatial and temporal parameters--
remote, direct. delayed. anticipated (hidden). Pseudodialogs.
various types of emotional perceptions of the machine as an
independent "partner" in interaction,are a special group.

The problem of languages primarily arises in the sense of forming
a common. collective, psychological model of the external vorld
[26. 121. 129. 131]. It is especially inportant to study the
processes of sythesising an integrated model of the problem

(for example, an emergency) situation based on the detailed
models vhich various operators have of the individual structures
of the facility (for example, a topological model. a physico-
technological model. a schematic of static relationships, a
schematic of dynamic relationships).

The experience of creating a theory of universal scientific
languages may prove beneficial in solving this problem of
engineering psychology.

One of the central tasks in realizing the idea of a hybird
intelligence is the individual adaptation of the vork organi-
ration. tosks and equipment to each participant of the inter-
active systen. Experiments have revealed a high level of
efficiency for individual- and operational-adaptive information
systems equipped with a specialized signal analyzer vhich dis-
tributes them according to priorities and regulates the overall
intensity of the stream of information flowing to the operator
depending on his individual productivity and psycho-physiolouicll
state.

It is anticipated that both of these research directions and the
synthesis of adaptive systems will be combined within the frame-
vork of the general problems of a hybrid intelligence. The
development of a theory of individual adaptation must be di-
rected at discovering individual psycho-physiological differences.
studying the special features of their manifestation in the
operator's activity and studying technical methods and means

for compensating for negative manifestations. The development
of a common list of individual differences and leans of compen-
sating for them is an important practical and scientific task

of engineering psychology.

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Concurrently. a research program has been outlined on the
problem of individual adaptation of work equipnent under
extreme conditions. L. A. Kiteyev-Snyk's research has shown
that the dichotony of types of reactions under extreme con-
ditions increases the spread betveen the indiees for the
operators' behavior by increasing the value of adaptation of
work equipment to the individual features of the reaction
(passive or active). At the same time. the solution to the
problon of adsptationis being simplified due to the small
number of types of reactions under extreme conditions.

For normal conditions, it is also necessary to try to ninimire
the nunber of variants of adaptive properties of work organi-
zation and equipment for each type of operator function. Por
example, individuals with vividly the pronounced signs of intro-
verts (reticent people inclined to individual work) nay be
more beneficial within a system of hybrid intelligence as
hidden participants of the dialog. It is advisable to assign
them the task of first thinking through the situations which
the operator will actually come up against. For active inter-
action with his colleagues and the computer. an extrovert

(a person inclined to intensive social contact during work)
should frequently be the operator in a system of hybrid
intelligence; during the course of interaction. he must report
on the selected decision method. Combining the processes of
thinking and social contact is required to assist the operator
working on a real-time basis.

In principle. individual adaptation of work equipment to the
individual can be used: first. instead of vocational selection
if .ll significant individual differences can be compensated

for; second. to reduce training tine when the level of adaptation
conpensates for the lack of vocational skills; third. to

expand the circle of functions accessible to the operator under
extreme conditions and to inprove the values of the criteria
for evaluating the activity under normal conditions.

In all cases. individual adaptation is directed at reducing the
actual complexity of solving operational problems. At the

same time. the a priori knowledge on the solution of each problem
and the advice stored in the computer or modified by it must be
presented to the operator with a degree of absoluteness which is
adequate for their level of confidence in each specific case and in a

form which takes into account the individual psycho-physiological
and personal features of the operator.

15
FOR orncm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The operator training system for industrial facilities with
rapid flow processes should be one of the areas of primary dis-
seminetion of individual-adaptive systems.

In many western countries. operator neuro-psychological illnesses
have become a mess occurrence. Our widespread system of

training and selecting operators for high levels in hierarchical
control systems played a significant role in the fact that this
problem does not exist in our country. For example. as a

rule. people who have proven themselves in work as controllers

of rayon power engineering enterprises and as duty engineers

of electrical power stations become central controllers of

power systems in Soviet power engineering. Until quite recently.
work experience as a boiler and turbine operator was a manda-
tory condition for an assignment to a major power unit as an
operator. This long and especially cup1r1cnl method of train-
ing operators--operators who frequently have a higher technical
aducation--provides than with a broad and firm foundation, hands-
on experience. knowledge and associative relationships between
the information model and the actual processes being controlled.
when promoted. a gradual increase in the complexity, an expansion
in the scale and an increase in the degree of responsibility of
the tasks being accomplished take place; the degree of success

in accomplishing these tasks serves as the most adequate and
natural factor in selecting operators and advancing them to a
higher position. Let's point out in passing that this method

of practical training causes a relatively low level of signifi-
cance for the structure of the information models since the
operators use large amounts of specific knowledge about the
facility. as if it were latent knowledge behind the information
model.

however. this extensive method of training and selection does
not meet the modern conditions of the mass nature of the
operator vocations.

Courses for training executives and operators are being set up;
various kinds of simulators are being disseminated.

Undoubtedly. the use of simulators plays a significant role by
supplementing the theoretical training for operators. however,
as a simplified and artificial model of the facility. the
simulator cannot completely replace training under actual
facility conditions. Therefore. upon immediately landing in
high levels of the management hierarchy after this kind of
training. the operators find themselves in a more difficult
straits when problem situations arise than do their col-
leagues who have gradually been advancing to this level for

a long time.

16
FOR onxcm. use omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The possibility of spreading neuro-psychological illnesses
among the operators as a result of introducing artificial.
accelerated training methods which give rise to incomplete and
inadequate psychological models of the facilities being con-
trolled. the computers and the abstract display systems makes
the problem of individual adaptation of training programs and
technical equipment important to the state.

During the process of creating a psychological theory for
synthesizing systems of adaptive interactive communication
(hybrid intelligence). it is necessary to solve the following
basic problems:

1. Study the prumiples of the stochastic determination of an
individual's behavior by the structure and equipment of inter-
active communication. The primary issues are those of con-
trolling the operator's attention and adequately presenting
him with incomplete, a priori data and advice with a limited
level of confidence with due regard for the operator's in-
dividual features.

2. Create a systems methodology for discovering the psycholo-
gical structure and for doing a qualitative and quantitative
analysis of the factors and criteria on the complexity of
solving conceptual and perceptual problems. Specifically.

the structural-psychological concept of synthesizing the
technical equipment for work can serve as a theoretical basis
for solving this problem.

3. Discover the psychological principles for the flow of
conceptual. mnemonic and perceptual processes under the
conditions of intensive interactive communication.

It is especially important to begin experimental research of
the processes for forming multidimensional. collective
psychological models of complex situations which are beyond

the scope of the individual (for example. vhen time is scarce).
In this way, methods of efficient interaction between parti-
cipunts in solving complex creative problems should be dis-
covered, specifically during the stages of divergence (generat-
ing different ideas and approaches) and convergence (jointly
carrying out the selected approach: forming the most adequate.
uniform objective degree of reality for the collective psycho-
logical model). It is necessary to conduct a thorough psycho-
logical analysis of the experience of divergent interaction in
"brainstorming" groups and of convergent interaction in
"synergistic" groups‘; these groups bear some of the features
of promising systems of hybrid intelligence.

 

* See. for example. P. Hill. "Nauka i ishusstvo proektirovaniya" (Science
and the Art of Planning).translated from English, V. P. Venda. ed.. Moscow.
”hir." 1976. 17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the point of viev of the concept of adaptive interactive
communication which we have developed, it is not so important

to study isolated. individual creativity in the research on the
psychology of creativity as it is to analyze the effect of
interactive communication on the individual's creativity.

It is necessary to begin forming requirements for the optimal
methods. structure and means of interactive communication in the
creative process and it is necessary to begin preparing infor-
mation and nanaging the creative work of large formal and in-
formal groups.

The important role of mass interactive communication in the
creative process is specifically confirmed by the regular
sequence of scientific and technological discoveries.* More-
over. the forecaated increase in the number of discoveries
required for scientific and technological progress can occur
not so much by increasing the personnel strength of scientists
and material expenditures on research as by specifically in-
tensifying and adapting interactive communication between sci-
entists. engineers and society as a whole. By organizing and
managing interactive communication. time periods can be signi-
ficantly reduced for discovering significant requirements,
setting important taokr. generating a multitude of possible
approaches to their solution. synchronizing the thinking of
many scientists and specialists on the most promising ideas
(the situation known by the phrase "the idea hangs in the air")
and achieving the resounding event of overcoming the next wall
of ignorance as the final phase in the routine work cycle of
the collective hybrid intelligence; after this, a neu cycle
begins with the discovery of new problems.

b. Select the optimal levels, methods and means for adapting
the structure and equipnant of interactive communication for
accomplishing various functions under normal and extreme
conditions. At this point. it is important to accumulate and
systematize factual data on individual behaviorial features
and to create an engineering psychological theory of compensa-
tion for negative manifestations of individual features from
the point of view of accomplishing functions.

Solving this problem vill enable engineering psychology to signi-
ficantly facilitate the psycho-physiological selection for such

a prestigious vocation as operator and. in a number of cases, to
replace it by individual adaptation of work conditions and imple-
ments. In addition. it is possible to expect a rapid increase

in the nulber of vocations which were unsuitable for man or
beyond his endurance without this kind of adaptation.

 

*Sse A. G. lvakhnenko. "Dolgosrochnoye prognozirovaniye i
upravleniye slorhnymi sistemami" (Long Range Forecasting and
Henagement of Complex Systems). Kiyev, 1915.

18
FOR onlcm. use (my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Study the biological and social aspects of organizing

adaptive interactive communication and the relationships
between then.

In this respect, it will be necessary to clarify the fundamen-
tal. phylogenetically deternined properties of the aalleebility
of the psyche. physiology and biology of sen and anilsls.

The study of the social determination. organization and stisula-
tion of the processes of interactive coasunication when opera-
tional (control). scientific and other creative problsas are
being solved with the assusption of equal prestige and equal
responsibility for all participants; a study of the dynasic
nature of the hierarchical structure; the optinal cosbination

of biological and socio-psychological factors-~these are the
seat isportant conditions for efficient functioning of systess
of hybrid intelligence as a single organism in the decision
making node.

Functional systems theory (after significant additional work)
and the sethods of social psycholosy. individual psychology and
differential psychophysiology can becoae the starting point for
researching these aspects.

6. Develop the psychological aspects of a theory and methods for
storing, reorganizing and reproducing the actual aspects of the
knowledge (wisdon) of the human population in order to asks
maxi-us use of all current experience in solving each specific
probles.

The key for solving this probles is undoubtedly the solution of
the scientific and technological probless of crest'oe date banks,
an overall state autoseted control systes. a network of conputer
centers. etc. however. we would like to enphssize the extreaely
ilportant psychological issues of interactive cossunicstion
between large groups and couple: conputer systens under specific
conditions. for exanple. under the dynanic hierarchy and indiv-
idual adaptation of inforaation equipssnt which are characteristic
of the systeas of "hybrid intelligence."

It is necessary to specify that. by hierarchy. we do not seen
adsinistrstive subordination but the prisary direction for joint
inforsation support during a particular phase of the systel's
work depending on the specific course of the problel solution.

The search for general principles and specific features of inter-
active cossunicetion in asnaging the national econosy. in sci-
encc and in culture is of special interest.

19
ton orncm use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. The development of physical, nathenatical, biological and
other nodels of adaptive interactive communication based on
general systels theory is of definite research inportancc.

At the sass ties. to avoid a repetition of the rapid. profound
crisis which befell the so-called sinuleted nodeling of socio-
technical conplexes. it is necessary to observe practical and
experinental control conditions for the basic elsnents oi the
sodels for their scope (gradually increasing the cosplexity of
the structure) and for their theoretical and psychological sub-
stantiation.

8. Develop an engineering psychology theory and sothods for
synthesizing and forecasting the developeent of systens and
equipment for adaptive interaction.

Overall. it see-s to us that developing the problens of organi-
zing adaptive interactive connunication during the process of
solving conplex creative problens in nenagenent, science and
culture vill be an extrenely inportant and prosising direction
for theoretical and applied engineering psychology research

for the coning 30-40 years.

COPYRIGRT: lzdetel‘stvo "Ekonosika", 1978

9001
080: 1870

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE DULY

GERBTICS

use 515

BXPBMMAL SWSTWIATIW OF '11!!! PRINCIPLES OF GENE MATION “WIRING
IN MAN

Moscow DOW mm: NhUK $533 in Russian Vol 243 No 5, 1978 pp 1313-1316

[Article by headenician N. P. Dubinin. Yu. P. nltukhov, I. I. Suskov, R. l.
xhil'chevskaya. K. I. Afanas'yev. '1'. N. Halinina. H. It. nol'shakova, A. v.
Shurkhal, 0. L. Kurbatova. and V. D. Prokhorovskaya]

[Text] Because the biosphere is being contaminated by nutagens. genetics is
faced with the urgent task of developing nethods for directly evaluating the
intensity of mutation and differentiation of different types of genetic loads
in human populations. It has been stated that it is apparently ispossible to
evaluate changing notability in the conteaporary huan population (1). In
recent years, however, an approach that has led to opposite conclusions (2-6)
was developed as a result of research in population and biocheaical genetics
(7-9}.

This approach is based on principles formulated earlier (2,3) and requiring:
l) A search for new mutations not by mass screening of the population but
rather vithin a nonrandon sasple of newborn infants and nursing children
deviating fro- the norm in relation to a large couple: of characteristics;
2) use, as labels of genetic Iutations, of rare variants of sononorphic
proteins deterained by electrophoretic analysis: 3) use of a sufficiently
large assortnent of genetically polymorphic proteins and systems of blood
groups to identify the segregational load and to exclude cases of debatable
parentage. The first studies performed in accordance with this progra-
deeonstrated its effectiveness in relation to revealing the segregational
load (6). its offer evidence of identification of de novo lutations in the
present publication.

They were revealed by electrophoretic analysis of blood proteins in a seall
group of preasturely born children (50 individuals) and children (newborn
and up to 1 year old) with congenital developmental abnormalities (177
individuals) under observation in specialized clinics. The "control" group
consisted of 500 healthy newborn infants free conventional obstetric
hospitals. Concurrently we studied the mothers and fathers of all premature
children and of some children with developmental abnornalities, the eothers

2].
FOR OFFICIAL 1!“! ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE OIL!

of healthy children, and 1,300 male donors. The obtained data will be
subjected to detailed analysis later. In this publication we will present
only the main results of our research.

He studied the following gene loci, which encode synthesis of proteins and
erythrocyte antigens: ml“. min, um, Pam, m2,erythrocytes as (4 loci),
3.0: m. AC9. My 6101. ADA, SOD p “b (2 loci), Hp, 6c, 'i'f, All), A”,
“‘8'; ”1(a): P.

Protein variantsnordinary and rare-were revealed by electrophoresis in
poiyacrylaaide and starch gels (15) with some modifications. Blood groups
were determined by standard serological nethods.

Inasmuch as new gene labels were added in the genetic screening as our pro-
graa developed, not all children were studied in relation to the entire set
of loci. Ii‘able 1 reflects only some of the data we collected, the volume of
which will continue to grow. It follows from the table that there are
obvious differences between the two groups being covered in relation to

the frequency of rare protein variants: While only five variants exhibiting
altered electrophoretic nobility can be found in the control group. there

are is along praature children and children with developmental abnormalities.
This means that in the latter case the average frequency of rare genes is
about one order of magnitude higher than in the foraer case.

These data alone, which establish that rare electrophoretic protein variants
are encountered quite frequently in the group of abnormal individuals. have
fundaaental significance. They confirm the earlier hypothesis (9) that a
correlation exists between genetically aonostorphic characteristics and the
individual's viability, and it would seem that they psrsit us to assert that
the dominant share of electrophoretically determined rare protein variants
is net inherited from previous generations.

In fact, analysis of the blood of the mother and father of a premature child
with a variant genotype in relation to mm (Figure 1) clearly showed that
this variant was absent free! the parents, hails parentage cannot be excluded
in relation to 16 polymorphic loci.

For understandable reasons it was extremely difficult to obtain blood saaples
from the parents of children with multiple abnormalities. Nevertheless we
were able to study four families in which the child exhibited a rare pro-

tein variant.‘ and to reveal that the same pattern is observed here as well:

The variants of erythrocyte esterase (two cases). phosphoglucomvutase (one case) ,
and albuain (one case) found in the children were absent from both parents

(Figure l) .

Here as in the case of mutation in relation to lactate dehydrogenase, parent-
age cannot be excluded in relation to a nusber of polymorphic genes (Table 2) .
and consequently there are substantial grounds for believing that the
identified mutations arose do new and were not imerited fan previous generations.

22
m OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
M 0mm WE ONLY

Table l. rrequency or Rare Electrophoretic Variants of Protein in Bealthy
Infants, Prenature mildren, and Guildren with Develop-ante].

     
   
  

  

Abnormalities
(1) maize—:31. interwoven”
Wave“- mmue "mm
eun-
when.
“I.
6 mum: on
( ) )1:qu want-m ’ g 3
(8) Wumumm 220 2(1')
(9) Jam 22: u
m» mammal-toil m 3‘ q
(n) luau unmtpoum M3 1
Cnvvfwgwwmum- m 0
tea 1
(13) rammmmamamunuea a: .
mm
(14} WWI-W (15) g a
(1.6) I‘pmmennmlmmn 223 1‘)
comm
(l?) Amman-W 221 1
Cpcnnamauameu
um (18) WW”
. Variants discovered in the one individual.
Kay:
l. Electrophoretically analyzed 10. Erythrocyte phoephoglucomtase
proteins ll. Erythrocyte acid
2. Healthy newborn children phosphatase
3. Samle size, individuals 12. Erythrocyte auperoxide dimtaeo
4. timber or individuale with n. Erythrocyte glutanate-pyruvete
rare variant transa-inaee
5. children with developmental 14. hemoglobin
abnonalitiea and premature 15. Serum tranererrin
children 16. Seru- group-specific couponent
6. Erythrocyte lactate 17. Sen- albumin
dehydrogeneee 18. Average frequency per locus per
7. Erythrocyte salute individual
dehydrogenaee
8. Erythrocyte phoephogluconate
dehydrogenaee

9. Erythrocyte eaterase

23
m OFFICIAL us: 01“.!
ﬁgure 1.

mlee of “Rare‘ zlectrophorettc Protein Variante Detected
1n the Blood of Children with Develop-en“! Abnorlauttee:
a--Zym9nl of erythrocyte lactatedehydroqenuex 3~<3u1d
with mutant genotype; 1.2--ch11d'e eother and father
reepectively: 4o-ch11d wtth nor-a1 genotype: Inc-nylo-
gran of erythrocyte eetereee. ﬁgure lb: 7-omtant
genotype: 4,5--chud'e anther and father: 1-3.6unonal
genotypee. ﬁgure In: 5-Phenotype with eherply weakened
activity of one of the eetereee zones (noted by ')1 1-4--
noml qenotypee. Bleetroptwreele in polyacryla-lde gel;

duty-ogre- o! erythrocyte phoephogluoouutaee: Jupheno-
type with eharply reduced ecttvtty in one zone: 1.2-

phenotypee o: parente (lather and (ether reepecttvely). Electro-

phoreele 1n etarch gel. In an photographe, the cathode 1e
above and the anode to below. Arrow polnte to etart poeltton.

233
M OFFICIAL (BB OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Genotypes: of Gtiidron carrying Mutant Genee and of 'iheir farente,
Polynorphic Loci

“m“. W‘a‘mﬂ lune ante

gain"; alls‘ é 25!:

 

(4) PM 8 MN» unite P‘A Ace l—I All --I- tool I- I-I l-i
mu.)

(5) Unit B SIMS! «DEE P‘ AA CC I-I I"! - l—Il-I l— i-I
One (6’ u an» an& P- AA to 1-: AA .. l— l—H— 141-:
PM?) 8 “N80 cable I” AA cc I-I BE l-ll- — - - -
m ' A0 “RSI 0:080 I” AA CC I—i an i-H— - - - -
On A "N31 Gallic 1" AA 0c in! nu t-l— — -- - -
Pogo?“ A "Nu (knee P“ AA CC I- OBI—H- - - - -

. n
" A nun own. 9- AA CCI— uni—n.- .. — -
0m MN” (‘10.. I” AA cc 3-! I!!! i—H—l - -— - -
Page“ Mil luv whim“-.. .. _ .. .2.3
“an, AIM RM P. AA cc l- - - -- — —2
0m m w I» AA ocg- .. .. _ .. _ .. 1-:
PW I"! Rh' P‘ AA oc - - - — — I-a
any) IN hh‘ P'Mcc— .. .. .. -1.3
0m IN nh‘ P’Mm—-_____|-3
Key:

1. Studied fuiliee in which 4. Child
mutation nae detected 5. Mother

2. Erythrocyte antigens 6. father

3. Blood proteine

The fact that rare electrophoratic varianta of aonoaorphic proteine have a

negative influence on norphogenoeia and developeent nakee the conclusion
undehatablo.

Case: of detecting do new mutation. in new: proteina and erythrocyte enaylel
in large population groupe heve not been deacrihed yet. herria et el. (10)
generalized the reeulte of my yeara of reeeerch on Buropeane in «twee blood
rerc electrophoretic protein variants were revealed. They ahowed that arieal
of the rare variant in the given generation could not be ascribed to Iutation
in any or 77 taniliee. none or which were related: in all caeee the variant
was found in either the Iother or the father-that ie, it an inherited Iron

25

In nmvn I" my
M OFFICIAL WE ONLY

previous generations. Buch variants can in fact be classified as selectively

neutral. ‘l‘heir "cometibility" with ontogenesis is possibly «ssociated with
the concrete state of the environment and (or) particular features or the
integral structure or the genotype. There night also be differences in the
nature of anino acid substitutions. The authors (10) attupted to make a
probabilistic assess-ent of. the upper linit of the nutation rate for genes
encoding synthesis or serm and erythgocyte enzymes. and they showed that

a nutation rate greater than 2.24‘10 per gene per generation lust be
excluded with a probability of 50.95. According to a recent estisate eade
by Nei (ll). who used Neel's data (12), the lutstion rate for _

genes responsible for synthesis of blood proteins is about 7.2010 ‘.

If we seems that only five of the variant protein types shown in Table 2

can be classified as "new” mutations. then the average gene mutation rate for
this grow is about 240'3 per locus per generation. considering that only

a third or the individual anino acid substitutions are revealed electro-
phoretically. ‘mis estilate light increase as the set of analyzed

proteins is expanded.

Thus while Neel (13.14) suggests nass electrophoretic analysis of blood
sasples fro- hundrsds of thousands and millions of persons. the data we
obtained showed that selective screening within the Ira-mark o! the
lowland approach (2-0 is all that is necessary for the purposes of
nonitoring the mutation load in huan populations.

this work was done with partial financial swport fro- the world health
Organisation. grant 6 3/lel/l02.

813le

l. Crow. .1. P.. men. mums, Vol 2. 1971. p S9l.

2. Dubinin, ﬂ. 9., and Altukhow. Yu. 9., in 'moreticheskiye l prakticheskiye
podkhody k problens lutagenov i kantaerogenow okrurhayushchey sredy"
(Theoretical and Practical Approaches to the Problem of mtagens and
Carcinogene in the Environment). Moscow. cidroseteoisdat, l976, p 38.

3. Dubinin, N. 9.. and Altukhov, Yu. 9., in "Geneticheshiye posledstviya
sagryasneniya okrushayuahchey sredy" (Genetic Consequences of mviron-
eental Contanination). Moscow. lsd-vo Hysl' , 1977. p it.

4. Altukhov, Yu. P., mbinin. N. 9.. and Khilchevskaja. R. L. 'Abstr. v.
intern. Congr. um. Genet., Mexico.” 1976. p 172.

s. Dubinin. a. 9.. Altukhow, m. p.. et al., om, Vol 225. no 3. 1975, p 213.
6. Dubinin. N. P., Altukhov, Yu. 9., et al., DAN. Vol 230. No Q, 1916. p 957.

7. Altukhov. Yu. P” DAN, Vol 189, no 5. 1969. p 1115.

26
M OPHCIAL [BB ONLY
9.

10.
ll.
12.
13.
14.
15.

M OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Mtukhov. Yu. 9.. "populyntuonnaya gonouka ryb“ (PL-h Population
Genetic». Moscow. 197‘.

Mtukhov. Y“. poo CM Wehkov. Y“. Go. ﬂwm. mm. 8105.. vol 33'
N0 3, 1972. p 281.

"atria. IL. at 51.. MN. HUM. mm” Vol 37. 197‘. p 231.

N01, H” m. .1. non. mam-n Vol 29, 1977. p 225.

No.1, J. V.. PMC. NAT. MAD. SCI. 0.8.A., Vol 70, 1973, p 3311.
Noel. J. V., in 'mt. Effect. Environ-I. Cones...“ N. Y” 1972. p 99.

8001. J. V” M. 58., Vol 26, 1974, p 319.

Burn. a” and llopklnuon, D. A” '31ka 0! Enzyme Electrophoresi-
1n “man Genetics.” 1976.

comma”: Izdatol'otvo “Mun“. 'Doklady Macon“. mu): 588R", 1978

11004

C803

1870

27

FOR OFFICIAL IBE om
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

PUBLIC!!!”

comma Ill MOMIOINIOAL mos

Moscow m V mormmmxm mm in Malian 1978 biped
to press 2). Jul 78 pp 2, 3-8, 239

ﬂoatation, introduction and table or contents tron book by V. D. ﬂush
and A. v. Korinevatiy, Iadatel'stvo “m", 11.00 copies, 239 mg]

M This monograph is concerned vith the use or laboratory

cmters in neurophysiological research. Topics include
the genesis and statistical structure of the total electric-

al. activity of the cerebral cortex and nthentical uthoda
for its study. A detailed wesentation is given for con-
puter-generated uthoda of mitipla spectra: cox-relational
analysis and evaluation of the aaplituda-tiae organisation
of cerebral. recesses according to m data. ‘rbe distinc-
tive features of neurophysiological research inrdvare and
software are elaborated with a descriptim of an operation-
al syste- auparvisor oriented to carry out such experi-
aenta, and the architecture or the comter which Lapla-
aents this system. 6 tables, 60 illustration, .696 rater-
eaces.

Introduction

Research on the brain's electrical activity has been actively developed for more
than five decades and is becoming even more vital. ‘lhe foundation for this
research was laid by the discovery of the ﬂuctuating voltages which comprise
the so-calied fundamental electrical activity of the brain. first recorded by
Prawdicz-Neminslti (1925) in animals: and by Berger (1929) In humans. Later on.
as techniques for sensing and amplifying biopotentiais and methods of re-
gistration and analysis of electrograms were improved. a large number of forms
of electrical brain activity were described. In some classifications. there are
several doun forms (Sokolov. 1962; liozhevnikov. Meshchersltiy. 1963: Gu-
sel'niltov. 1916). All bioelcctrical activity of the cerebrum is customarily
divided into two extreme groups: pulsed and total slow activity.

During the entire evolutionary history of eiectrophysiology of the CNS. the most
widely employed method of total registration of the brain’s electrical potentials

28
P0! ORIGIN. ”SB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has been dubbed "electroencephalography.” 'I‘otal registration of electrical
voltages is used to study the brain's ontogenesis and phylogencsis; to reveal the
mechanics of conditioned reflex connections and the actions of narcotics and
other drugs; to analyze the formation and interaction of the brain's functional
systems which implement higher mental functions; and to study and diagnose
various CNS lesions in neurosurgical and psychiatric clinics.

The method of electroencephalography is applied to solve a wide range of
problems (althotgh the list of them is far from complete). since it allows us to
observe processes occurring in various sections of the human and animal nervous
system and is the most direct. and currently the sole. means of obtaining
information about these processes.

The initial optimism expressed by researchers that simple relationshlps could be
established between the processes of information handling and the EEG was
found to be unjustified. in spite of the fact that cleetrophysiology is replete
with a great deal of wide-ranging factual data aimed at describing BBC samples
in different physiological states. the variegation of these data and its frequent
contradictory nature do not imbue it with the ability to reliably define general

patterns linking electrical reactions of the brain with the physiological functions
of the organism.

The problems found in defining these patterns are particularly associated with
the inadequate theoretical and experimental level of development of the nature
of total electrical activity of the brain and its connected structural links. This
in turn makes it impossible to extract the most meaningful elements and
fragments of recordings from complex and deceptive EEG curves.

The comparatively slow progress in resolving fundamental questions of el~
cctrophysiology seems to be related to the fact that the study target is much
more complicated and deceptive than that in other sciences. such as astronomy.
physics or chemistry. in addition. electrophysiology (and biology in general) is
much slower than the "strict sciences" noted above to adopt quantitative
methods of study. Due to the enormous complexity of the phenomena being
studied. many physiologists are still uncertain of the broad application of
mathematical methods. For this reason. and for a number of objective reasons
(state of the art of registering and processing large quantities of data.
chelopmcnt of methods of applied mathematics). the overwhelming majority of
facts accumulated by electrophysiology come from visual analysis and oral
descriptions of clectrograms. A natural outcome of this is the current feeble
faith in the data being described and problems of comparison. A similar
situation may be encountered. it would seem. in any branch of scientific
research if we are dealing not with evaluations and comparisons of subjective
impressions. but with objective analysis of phenomena in the real world; the
language of quantitative measurements and comparisons must be used. at that.
No matter how strange it seems. these natural considerations do not appear to
be unconditionally evident in modern physiology. This is particularly clearly
shown by the fact that in recent years works have continued to be published and
to enjoy popularity in which a wide. convincing justification is given for the
effectiveness and necessity of using mathematical methods in biology in general
and in elcctrophysiology in particular (Beyll. 1970; Fomin. Berkinblit. 1973).

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

Bieetrophysiology. at the same time. is a clear example of a field of natural
scientific research where it is theoretically impossible to do without the
language of mathematics. In fact. a rather typical example of a single
experiment with BBC inspection is the registration of hundreds of meters (at the
standard rate of EEO recording) of the more complex curves. if recording is done
(or interpreted) in digital form. the problem of analyzing these data contains an
extremely large number of interrelated factors. each of which is subject to
variation within limits which are not always accessible to experimental control.
Under these conditions. human intellect seems unable to survey this "ocean of
data" and explain and study the entire set of interdependent measurements. The
oral description of these observations is even less promising.

Progress is clearly only possible when factual material is produced to reveal its
informational value. That is. 8805 must be objectively. quantitatively analyzed
using mathematical methods of analysis.

The tendency to use analytic methods which allow quantitative definition of
unknown functions arose at almost the same time as the birth of elec-
trocnccphuiogrnphy. The initial use of mathematical methods was begun by
Iiietseh (1932) and Livanova (1934) in studying the frequency composition of
Iii-:63. Such works were. however. for a long time rare episodes in the
physiological literature mainly due to the labor-intensiveness of the methods.
The development of mathematical methods received a significant push in
clectrophysiology in the late 1940s when computers first appeared.

it was expected that the use of mathematical methods and high-speed computers
would permit rapid decoding of information contained in the EEG: and a
correlation to be found between the nature of electrical activity and behavioral
acts. But progress was quite modest in this area.

It appears that it is now still impossible to exhaustively explain the fact that in
the 30 years of existence of the computer (a unique technical invention which
is one of the most powerful and all-purpose devices in research activity) so little
has been contributed to the evolution of physiology. But some problems standing
in the way of effective utilization of computer technology in electrophysiology
are obvious. For example, we could show such factors as the need for the
physiologist-researcher. when attempting to use digital computers in his work. to
solve a multitude of problems which are unfamiliar to him. in particular. for
each computer with a given set of technical characteristics there are problems
of data input. screening superﬂuous material. excluding artifacts. a convenient
method of presenting the end result of processing. programming. and so forth.
M a rule. physiologists have been unprepared to solve these problems.
Disappointment now awaits even those researchers who feel that they only need
time and tedious labor to overcome problems. This is especially linked with a
”shortcoming" of computer technology such as its exceedingly high speed. the
frequent updating of computer types and generations. software. and pro-
gramming. This all makes the user feel that computers are "obsolete" as soon
as they start up. so you have to hurry as fast as you can not to fall behind. but
you still remain in the very same place (Hamilton. W”).

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The abundance of current and planned computers also creates a difficult problem
of selecting a computer to "hook up" with one's studies. The primary question
here Is whether to use a specialized or all-purpose computer. The decision can
involve a compromise between the technical possibilities of the computer
selected and the expenditures of acquisition and maintenance. Choosing an all-
purpose computer in turn gives rise to an alternative: a laboratory-type mini-
computer or a large central processor of the institute or lnterinstitute type?
The certain advantages of large computers (evolved software. high speed. and
memory capacity) can be offset by such deficiencies as difficulty in access to
the computer. longer maintenance periods. the need for large amounts of clerical

and administrative work. problems of changing programs and transmitting data
from the laboratory to the computer room. and so forth.

llut the solution of all technical. administrative and financial problems is only
a prelude to the primary question: what can be solved with the computer and
how? The popular opinion that "computers can do everything" is not always
connected with an understanding that the lack of a clearly stated problem can
make the computer (like mathematical methods in general) useless.

We should still bear in mind that even the most theretgh formulation of
problems and a correct application of mathematical methods will not gua-
rantee rapid success and will not spare researchers from disappointment if they
expect too much from the "mechanization" of physiological research. And this
is not a matter of partial errors and underestimates or shortcomings of the
computer or methods used. The main cause could be the wrong choice of
approach to the entire problem of analysis of physiological data. it can not
be excluded that algorithmic methods may theoretically not be applicable to
decode this kind of data. An analogy is suggested here with problems
encountered by researchers involved with machine translation. We know that the
problems encountered have made them totally revamp their entire approach to
language structure (Taube. 1967). When analyzing "brain language". especially

electrograms. time may prove it necessary to make basic changes in current
approaches.

With the transition: to computer analysis of data. electrophysiology is now using
more or less traditional mathematical methods borrowed mainly from the
storehouse of the technical sciences: information theory. signal processing.
operations research. pattern recognition. etc. The increased quantity of factual
data is growing at very fast rates. The number of studies (articles. dissertations)
done using computer is also rising. At some laboratories and institutes. for
several years since the acquisition of computers. the number of these studies has
greatly exceeded the volumt cf research in which "machine" methods were not
employed (ivanov. Kieshchev. .1975). it seems we can say that the computer has
been turned from an exotic deviccnpowcrful. unfamiliar. obedient only to a
small group of devotees-into a common instrument of physiological research.

31
ran orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless. in spite of the almost daily use of computers and the wider arsenal
of mathematical methods. until now the pictures of 880s and the mechanics of
various BEG rhythms still remain greatly unciarifled. lt ls still unknown which
BEG parameters are associated with information processes in the brain. and how
much is reflected in elcetrograms of the brain of ”physiological provision of
mental fmctions" (Bekhtereva. 1974). Finally. one of the main problems in
electrophysiology has not been surmounted: the absence of direct effector
manifestations of EEG phenomena.

Problems of improving methods of EEG analysis. finding more meaningful
parameters. studying the nature of individual forms of electrical activity and
their connection with the basic aspects of CNS activity are thus as urgent as
be ore.

Attempts to solve some of these problems were investigated by the authors for
the past to years and more. This study is a generalization of some of the results
obtained in that time. The studies were not aimed at examining and comparing
the meaningfulness of various methods of EEO analysis or efficient use of
computers in electrophysiology. A more modest task was set: to evaluate the
functional significance of spectral-correlational parameters of 880s and amp»
lliudc-time characteristics of voltages simultaneously sensed from many points
on the brain. These questions were resolved by successive application of
methods of spectral~correlational theory of random processes and the me of a
control digital computer. The results of the work presented in this book. we
feel. rather convincingly prove the effectiveness of using computers to solve
similar problems. and are evidence of the meaningfulness of some EEG indicators
which can only be evaluated with computer data processing.

in the course of research many secondary problems had to be solved. of cause:
organization of computer data processing in real time. statement of controlled
experiments. hardware and software. studying the statistical structure of signals
being recorded. distinctive features and error of the variables being analyzed.
etc. All of these problems were reflected in this book. Diverse literary data
have been drawn upon in presenting the material. But the authors have not
aimed at giving an exhaustive literary review of all studies touching upon the
questions of interest.

Research was carried out from 1964 to [975 at the human and animal con-
ditioned reflex laboratory of the Institute of Higher Nervous Activity and
Neurophysiology of the USSR Academy of Sciences. The authors are indebted
to supervisor M. N. Livanov and to all the laboratory co-workcrs for their
constant aid and support. We feel obliged to express our sincere thanks to
colleagues who collaborated on inidividual portions of the research: T. A.
Koroi'kova. l. N.. Knipst. G. A. El'kina. L. A. Potuiova. M. N. Zhadln. T. M.
Yefrcmova. N. s. Kurova. i. V. Tishaninova. l. V. Misochko. P. N. Dubncr. A. M.
Silcrstov. Ya. A. Vasil'yev. Ye. M. Belyavskiy. V. P. Markin. and O. V.
Afunas‘ycv. The authors also thank N. A. Lazareva for the great assistance
rendered in preparing the manuscript.

32
Fox omcm use om
FOR OPHCIM. USE ONLY

Table of Contents

Introduction 3
Chapter One

film structure and mathematical study methods 9

M The nature of total electrical activity of the cerebral cortex ti

L2 The history of development of mathematical methods of EEO

analysis 19
1.3 Spectral-correlation methods of ill-:0 analysis 26
M Spectral evaluations and their properties. Aspects of analysis

of short realizations to

1.5 Analysis of the statistical structure of electrical brain activity on
L6 Methods of analysis of three-dimensional organization of

biopotentials 22
1.7 Ewiuatlon of topogram dynamics as method of analysis of

space-time organization of cerebral processes 78

Chapter Two

Organization of computer processing of biosignals M
M ilardware for computer processing of biosignals 94
2.2 Aspects of programming of electriphysiological research l02
2.3 Algorithms for control and processing data of electrophy-

sloioglcal experiments 112

Chapter Three
Evaluation of functional significance of spectral-correlation indicators of blopotcntiais
3.l Connection of spectral-correlation indicators of cerebral
potentials of rabbit with motor reaction to afferent stimulation l28
3.2 Analysis of the nature and functional significance of rhythmic
components of the theta range in cerebral potentials of the

rabbit l39
3.3 Eiectrophysioiogical study of mechanisms ensuing sensomotor
reactions of the rabbit [59
Chapter Pour
Quantitative analysis of amplitude-time organization of cerebral
electrical activity 175
4.! Study of space-time organization of cerebral potentials of
the rabbit 175

4.2 Analysis of the functional significance of systemic changes
in the magnitudes of potentials of the cortex of the large

hemispheres of the rabbit usirg a controlled experiment 208
Conclusion 215
References 222

COPYRIGHT: lzdatei'stvo ”Nauka". [978

8617
080: 1870

33
con outcm. use ornx
POI OHIO!“ "8! ONLY

com-rim AID sum-me omzmous

088! Am 01’ some: WINNERS 0P ”NBS AND PRIZES

hero or Socialist labor
noecou mm mm: MU! 8838 in Russian No 10. 1970 pp 139-160

[Articlez "Acaduician P. ll. Padoseyav. hero of Socialist Labor]

[Text] [or great services in the develop-ant of the social sciences. for
active social and political work, and in connection with his 10th birthday.
Vice-President of the uses. Academy of Sciences. Acaduician Petr Nikolsyevich
vmsmv vas awarded the title of hero of Socialist Labor and the Order of
Lenin by the Ultase of the Presidiu of the 0881! Supra-e Soviet of August Zl.
1978.

1'. ll. l'edoseyev is e prooinent Marxist scientist. a specialist in the field
of dialsctics and historical netsrialisa. and the theory of the building

of co-unisa. he has node profound investigations into questions of narxist-
Leninist philosophy, theoretical problens of contenporary social develop-out.
sociology, present day problems of the building of comnist society. and
the education oi the new nan. Of special significance are his works devoted
to investigating fund-entsl questions and patterns of the develop-soc of
socialist society and the struggle against contenporary bourgeois ideology,
reiornisa and revisionist. Acad-icisn P. II. redossysv has nede a consider-
able contribution to solving the philosophical probl-s of contanporary
natural sciences and strengthening the union of representatives of the con-
crete sciences. especially naturalists and philosophers.

As one of the leading soviet social scientists. P. l. Pedoseyev is constently
engaged in eolving problus in the creative application of naterialist
dialectics to investigating fundanental problens of social develop-ent, and.
to analysis of the properties in the nanilestation of basic mist-uninh-
laus during transition iron capitalise: to socialism and during the building
of socialin. Problus of the philosophical basis of scientific con-miss.
together with current probl-s o! the application of hernia-minnow“
an integral systen of philosophy, econonic and social-political vim-oto
the theory and transforlation of present day life, were the subject o!

P. l. ledosayev‘s scientific quest during alnost e half century of research
activity.

3';
m omcm. us; on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hany years of P. U. Fedoseyov‘s scholarly activity were devoted to working
out basic categories in historical materialisn. He has made a great con-
tribution to the development of knowledge on productive forces and relations
of production and to the resolution of problems related to material condi-
tions of social life. his articles and books on problems of socialism and
proletarian humanism and works on the historical development of Harriet-
leniniat ideas and their relation to the present are widely known.

Major works were noted in the creative work of P. N. Pedoseyev during the
l960's and 1970's. At that time his books on analysis of and generalisa-
tion about nsJor tendencies in contemporary social developent were pub-
lished: "Kosmunirm i filosofiya” [Connois- and Philosophy], "Herksiu

v xx veke” [Harrism in the Mntioth Century]. ”Malektilta sovremannoy -
epokhi" [The Dialectics of the Present Epoch] and others. These works are
characterised by profound understanding of the multiforn changes occurring
in the world . the ability to discern in their contradictory intertwining
the main line of the socioeconomic development of mankind-~the abolition
of the exploitation of man by his fellow man and affirmation of the free
and all-around development of the individual-and detailed theoretical
analysis of problems of the contemporary liberation movement.

The works of P. N. Fedosoyev ermine the basic tasks of political scientists,
the major trends of the scientific quest. They touch upon the basic trends
of political science. from questions related to increasing the social and
economic effectiveness of production. the perfecting of the mechani- of

the national economy and the introduction of program-focused methods of
planning. to working out of a conception of the fundamental rights and
freedoms of men and problems of perfecting forms of socialist democracy,
analysis of the content and structure of scientific ideology, and questions
of coasnunist education and the socialist way of life.

1’. N. Pedoseyev is engaged in important scientific organisational work. lie
was director of the Institute of Philosophy of the USSR Acedmny of Sciences,
acndemician secretary of the Economic, Philosophic and Legal Sciences De-
partment and later of the Philosophy and Law Department of the USSR Academy
of Sciences. In 1962, P. N. Fedoseyev was, for the first time. elected
vice-president of the USSR Academy of Sciences and chairman of the Social
Sciences Section (he held this position until 1967). Prom l91l to the
present. Vice-President of the USSR Academy of Sciences P. N. Pedoseyev

has again headed the Social Sciences Section of the Presidium of the USSR
Academy of Sciences.

P. N. Fedoseyev has successfully combined research and scientific organi-
rational work with social. political and govermental activity. For many
years he worked in the apparatus of the 0C CPSU and was editor-in-rhief of
the periodicals bOL'SREVlK and PAKIIYMYA mar Party Life. From 1967 to
1973, he occupied the post of director of the Institute of Harnism-lasninima
of the co CPSU. P. U. Pedoseyev is a muber of the cc CPSU. deputy of the
USSR Suprae Soviet, the chairman of the National Bducation. Science and

35
ron omcm use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Culture Mission of the Council of nationalities of the USSR Sumeee
Soviet and chairman of the Society for Soviet-nungarian Friendship.

1’. N. Fadoseyev's many years of selfless work for the good of our country
is highly esteemed by the Soviet goverrssent. he has been awarded three
Orders of Lenin, three Orders of the Red Dunner of Labor. the Order of the
Patriotic War. first degree, end nsny nedals.

P. N. Padoseyev's many-sided activity in the field of science has won the
recognition of the international scientific community. lie was elected an
honorary me-ber of the llungerian Acadeey of Sciences and a foreign eenber
of the Bulgarian. eeechoslovakian and Folinh Academies of Sciences and of
the Acadesny of Sciences of the on.

P. N. Psdossyev has devoted ell his powers end talents to selfless service
to science, social progress and to the triumph of conuniu.

OOMIORT: Iedatel'stvo "Nauka." "Vestnik Akadenii nauk SSSR," 1978
Gold Medals and Consecutive Priees

Hoscow V8811“! MOM! "All! 8838 in Russian No 10, 1978, pp 1100.141

[Text] The USSR Academy of Sciences announces coepetitions for 7 gold
eedels and 18 connorativs prises.

Gold Models

The I. F. Pavlov liedal is awarded to soviet scientists for their work as
a whole in the developent of the teachings of I. O. Pavlov (deadline for
submission of works - October 2b. 1978).

The A. P. Kerpinskiy Medal is awarded to soviet end foreign scientists

for a body. of distinguished scientific work in the fields of geology,
paleontology, petrogrephy end mineralogy (deadline for submission of works -
October 7, 1978).

The D. 1. Hondsleyev Hedel is awarded to soviet scientists for distinguished
works in the field of cheeical science and technology (deadline for submis-
sion of works - November 1, 1918).

The S. 1. Vevilov liedel is awarded to soviet scientists for distinguished
works in the field of physics (deedline for submission of works -
Decuber 26, 1978).

The D. K. Cbernov Medal is awarded to soviet scientists for distinguished
works in the fields of the physical chemistry of netallurgicel processes
and metallurgy (deadline for submission of works - August 1, 1979).

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The 8. P. Korolev Modal is awarded to soviet scientists together with a
monetary prise of 2000 R for distinguished works in the field of aero-
space technology (deadline for submissions - September 30, 1979).

The A. N. Tupolev Model is awarded to soviet scientists together with a
nonetsry prise of 2000 R for distinguished works in the field of aero-
nautic science and technology (deadline for submission of works - August 10,
1979).

Cosmemorative Prises (awarded to soviet scientists)

The I. P. Pavlov Prise (2000 R) is awarded for the best scientific works
in the field of physiology (deadline for submission of works - October 21.,
1970) .

The A. P. Karpinskiy Prise (2000 R) is awarded for distinguished scientific
works in the fields of geology, paleontology, petrography and mineralogy
(deadline for submission of works - October 7, 1978).

The K. H. Bykov Prise (1500 R) is awarded for scientific works in the fields
of physiology: cortico-wiscerel physiology, the physiology of digestion
and balenology (deadline for submission of works - October 21, 1978).

The V. V. Dokuchaev Prise (2000 R) is awarded for distinguished scientific
works in the field of soil science (deadline for submission - December 1,
1978).

The s. A. Chaplygina Prise (1000 a) is awarded for the best original work
on theoretical research in the field of mechanics (deadline for submission
of works - January 5, 1979).

The K. A. Timiryesev Prise (2000 R) is awarded for the best works in the
fields of plant physiology and general biology (deadline for submission
of works . March 3, 1979).

The V, G. lelinskiy Prise (2000 R) is awarded for the best scholarly works
in the fields of literary criticism, theory and history ~(dead14ns-for aub-
mission of works - Iiarch 13, 1979).

The N. G. Chernyahevskiy Prise (2000 R) is awarded for scientific works
in the social sciences (deadline for submission of works - April 24, 1979).

The s. n. Vinogredskiy Prize (2000 R) is awarded for the best works in the
field of general microbiology (deadline for submission of works - June 1,
1979).

The 1.. A. Chugaew Prize (2000 R) is awarded for the best works in the field
of the chemistry of complex compounds (deadline for submission of works -

July 5, 1979).

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OWICIM. "8! ONLY

The A. H. lutlerov l’rite (2000 R) ia awarded for the heat worka in the
field of organic eheniatry (deadline for auhnieaion of worha - July 30,
1979).

The A. B. Per-an Price 0000 R) in awarded for the beet ecicntific worka
in the field of linerology and geoche-ietry (deadline for aubieaion of
worke - Auguat 8. l979).

The P. h. Tahiochkov Priae (2000 R) ia awarded for the heat worha and heat
new conatructiona in nanotechnology (deadline for euhnieaion or worha .
Auguet 17. 1979).

The A. 0. Kovalaveltiy Prize (1000 R) ie awarded for the heat work. in the
fielde of general. conparative. deecriptiVe and experimental uhryology
of invertebratea and vertebratae (deadline for euhniaaion of worka -
Auguat 19, 1979).

The I. 1. Vavilov Price (2000 R) in awarded for dietinguiahed research in
the field of genetica, aalection and plant breeding (deadline for euhnie-
aion of worka - Auguat 26, 1979).

The 6. V. Plekhanov Prise (2000 R) in awarded for the heat worlta in the
field of philoaophy (deadline for auhniaaion of worka - Sept-her ll, l9").

The N. 8. Kurnaltov Prize (1000 R) ia awarded for diatinguiahed work. in
the field of inorganic chenietry, phyaico-ch-ical analytic and ita appli-
cations (deadline for auhniaaion of worka - Septuher 6. 1979).

The r. 8. Redorov Prize 0000 R) in awarded for dietinguiahed worka in
cryatallography (deadline for auhniaoiona - Septuher 22. 1979).

General Proviaiona

ﬂith a view to encouraging acholara for diatinguiehed acientific worke,
acientifie diacoveriel and inventiona having great aignificance for acience
and practice. the USSR Made-y of Sciencea awarda gold nedale and print
cone-outing diatinguiahed acientiata on the haaia of conpetitiona.

Gold nedale are awarded for diatinguiahed acientific works. diacoveriea
and inventiona or for a body of work of great acientific and practical
aignificance; individuala nay participate personally in the coupetitiona
for gold nedala.

Come-orative pritea are awarded for the beat individual scientific worke,
diacoveriea and inventiona and alao for a aeriea of ecientific worka on
one eubject; II a rule, the worka of individual authora say he euhnitted
in coupetition for theae pritee. "hen collective worka are preeented,
only the principal authora are indicated. but no nore than three peraone.

38
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The right to nominate candidates in the competition for gold medals and
emssemorative prices is granted to: academicians and associate members

of the USSR Academy of Sciences and of the academies of sciences of the
union republics; scientific institutions. institutions of higher educa-
tion; scientific and engineering societies; scientific and technical coun-
cils of governmental comsittees, ministries. departments, technical coun-
cils of industrial enterprises; design offices; scientific councils of the
USSR Academy of Sciences and other departments on major problems of science.

In nominating a candidate for competition for a gold medal or prize. one
must submit to the USSR Academy of Sciences (ll7901. US? (Special City
Postal Service], Hoseow 3-71. Laninskiy Prospekt, ll.) no later than three
months before the award date, with the superscription "For the Competition
for the Gold Medal (Priaer':

 

a) Reasons for the submission, including the scientific character of the
work. its significance for the development of science and the national
economy;

b) The published scientific work (series of works), materials of scientific
discovery or invention. in triplicate:

c) Intonation about the author (list of basic scientific works. discover-
ies, inventions, place of work and position held, home address).

Works awarded the Lenin Prize. the USSR National Prize and co-semoratiVe
prises of the academies of sciences of the union republics and branch
academies are not accepted in the competition for gold medals and prices
come-crating distinguished scientists.

Scholars awarded gold medals and prizes are granted the right on publica-
tion of the works to note in the headline "Awarded the Gold
Medal (Price) of the USSR Academy of Sciences for 19__."

Each of these medals and prizes are awarded once every three years on a
significant date in the life of the scientist whom the medal or price
comaemorates.

The decision of the Presidiu of the USSR Academy of Sciences on the award-
ing of gold medals and prizes and short annotations about the works awarded
gold medals or prizes are published in the W811!“ MADE}!!! NAUK SSSR and
IZVESTIYA AKADDiII NAUK $85!! of the corresponding series. VBSTNIK AKAUMI
mun SSSR contains portraits of the scientists awarded gold medals and
prizes.

The published scientific works emined during the session of the Presidium
which are awarded gold medals or prizes are transmitted for keeping to the
Library of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

39
1’0! orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The gold ledele end everd cartiﬂcetee for gold Iedele end prteee ere

preeented at the ennuel Oencrel Aeeenbly of the 0888 Acute-y of Sciencee
(during the are: 10 deye 1n Mel-ch).

comm: Indetel'etvo "ﬂuke," "Veetnlk Made-ll neuk 8881!." 1978

9380
690: 1870 END

no
’08 ORIGIN. USE ONLY