FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10233
4 January 1982

USSR Repoﬁ

LIFE SCIENCES

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(FOUO 1/8 2)

..FB'8 FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original “'t have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unat. ibuted parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
LIEE SCIENCES
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(P000 1/82)

CONTENTS

BIOCHEMISTRY

Handbook Describes Rapid Microbial Identification Hethoda. . . . . . . . .
BIONICS

Algorithms of Intellectual Activity...............................

Bionic Modeling of Fish Electric Cmicatian and Location

Syatemn.........................................................

Cybernetic Approach to Han-Machine Interaction Analyzednnun...
BIOTECHNOIDGY

Respiration and Oxygen Patterns of Dolphina.......................
ENVIRONMENT

Animal Ecology Assists in Behavior Control........................
MEDICAL DEMOGRAPHY

Life Expectancy: Analysis and Hodeling...........................

The Environment and Health...”...................................
PHYSIOLOGY

Aviation Medicine

Regulating Mechanims of "acne...oo.eoooeaaeaeeeaeoeeeeoeeeleooo

- a — [III - USSR - 21a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

26

35

39

65
(07

51
90

SH! 1"
mu "Fl-THAI NSF ONI \'

Objective Method for Evaluating Vestibular Stability Frau

Trend of Nystagnic Indices After Exposure to Cumulative
Coriolia Acceleration...OI.0.00....0'0...OOOOOOOOOUOOCOIOIOCOOOO

Problens of Space Biology, Vol 39: Effects of Hyperbaric
Env1r°nnent on “In and Anil‘l'oonceon.aooooooossoolooloooooooooo

Book Explores Advanced Theory of Extracellular Brain Currents.....
HUMAN FACTORS
Probleas of Space Biology, Vol 61: Biological Rhythls............

Textbook Analyzes Western Projective Personality Measurement

Techniques......................................................
Decision Making and Air Traffic Control...........................

PSYCH IATRY
Medicinal Preparations Used in Psychiatry.........................

Indivioaal Distinctions of Munan Menory (Psychophysiological

study)ssssssaoooassess.'ssssososooostooaooso0.0.0.0sslsslssstslo

Blectrophyaiological Correlates of Mutual Relationships
Existing Between Desynchronizing and Synchronizing
Brain Structures During Sleep and wakefulness...................

New Book Subjects Brain-Stress Correlates to Quantitative

Analy’issososootsotssosoossvsososssoocotssssssssssssscsosossloss

PSYCHOLOGY
mtion. and Thushtooaa-oosoooo-aoooooossoaosooooooooosooooooooso
Psychology in Physical muc‘tion 3nd sport.aosaossssoooooooooossas

Development of Psychological Science at the Psychology
Department Of MOSCOW University-oooooooooosacoco-soooOoooslooooo

Psychological Studies of Intellectual Self-Regulation and

Activity.soososcolsossossitsosssoos'osssssslasssoosssooooossssss

_ b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9a

103
10]

112

119
123

131

1‘3

106

155

157
160

166

171
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIOCHEMISTRY

HANDBOOK DBSCRIBES RAPID HICKBIAL IDENTIFICATION MODS

Kishiaev IBKORBNNYYB M8100! BNZIMOINDIK'ATSII MIXRDBOV in Russian 1979 (signed to
press 9 Jan 79) pp 2-4, 170-171

[Annotatiom table of contents, and foreword from book “Rapid Enzymatic Methods of
Microbial Identification", by Valentin Mikhaylovich uikitin and Stepan Vasil'yevich
Plugaru. Kishinev State Medical Institute, Moldavian SSR Ministry of Health
Izdatel'stvo “shtiintsa‘, 1,525 copies. 172 pages]

next] This monograph presents rapid methods of enzymatic identification and
biochemical differentiation of microorganisms. Per the first time, a microbiological
classification, developed by the authors. of rapid methods for studying the bio-
chemical activity of microbes is presented. no book illuminates the theoretical.
methodological, and technical problems associated with rapid enzymatic methods of

microbial identification. and it examines the influence of various factors on the
rate of bacterial enzymatic reactions.

me monograph is intended for a broad range of specialists—microbiologiets, bi-
ologists, biochemists, epidemiclogists, specialists in infectious diseases, and
laboratory technicians.

Contents Page

Poreword.................................. 3

classification of Microbiological Methods of Rapid Determination of
theaiochemicalPropertiesofMicrobes. . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . 4

Chapter 1. Rapid Enzymatic Methods of Microbial Identification on Media
ContainingaFermentableSubstrate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

Drop Methods of Rapid Determination of the Enzymatic Activity of
MicrobcsonSolidMedia......................... 8
m Micromthods of Rapid Determination of Microbial Enzymatic Activity 12
Capillary Methods of Rapid Determination of the Enzymatic Properties
Ofﬂicrobes............................... 23
An Electrophysical Method of Rapid Enzymatic Identification of
MicrobesonLiquidMedia ........................ 28

Enzymatic Methods of Microbial Identification on Polycarbohydrate
Nutrientﬂedia.............................34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter II. Rapid Enzymatic Methods of Microbial Identification on Carbo-

hydrate-less India Using Special 'lVest Media Containing a Permentable Substrate

Enzymatic Methods of Microbial Identification Using Tabletired
Carbohydrates.............................
Enzymatic Methods of Microbial Identification annoying Polymer Films
CcntainingCarbohydrates .......................
Rapid Enzymatic Methods of Microbial Identification Using Carbohydrate-
ImpregnatedPaperDiscs........................
1. Methods Employing Carbohydrate-Impregnated Paper Discs Without
apHIndicator...........................
2. Methods Employing Carbohydrate-Impregnated Paper Discs With a
pMIndicatcr............................
3. v. M. Mikitin’s and S. V. Plugaru's Methods Emloying Carbo-
hydrate-Impregnated Paper Discs with a pa Indicator, Covered by
aProtectivePilm .........................
Rapid Enzymatic Methods of Microbial Identification Emloying
v. M. Nikitin‘s and A. P. Kalancha's (1974) Rapid Enzymatic mthods
of Microbial Identification Using Carbohydrate-Immgnated Paper Ploats
the 'nest Strip Method for Rapid Detection of Fermentation of Organic
Acid Salts by Microorganisms (Nikitin, Kalancha, Ruseykina, 1978) . . .

chapter III. Influence of Different Factors on the Rate and Results of
Determining Biochemical Properties of Microbes . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Effect of Carbohydrate Concentration in a Paper Disc on the Results and
Rate of Determining Microbial Enzymatic Activity . . . . . . . . . . .
Effect of the Wpe and Concentration of pi! Indicator in Carbohydrate-
Impregnated Paper Discs on the Results of Determining Bacterial
Enzwatichctivity ..........................
Effect of the Me and Concentration of Polymer in the Protective Film
of a Carbohydrate-Impregnated Paper Disc on the Results of Determining
MicrobialEnzymticActivity .....................
Effect of the Concentration of the Microbial Culture on the Time of
Sugar Fermentation on Carbohydr«.te-Inpregnated Discs . . . . . . . . .
Effect of the Inoculation Concentration of a Microbial Culture on the
Time of Carbohydrate Fermentation in the Carbohydrau-Inpregnated
PaperPloatMethod ..........................
Effect of the Growth Phase and Age of a Microbial Culture on the

Time of Sugar Fermentation on Carbohydrate-Imegnaud Paper Discs . .
Effect of Incubation 'nemerature on the insults and Rate of Determining
the Enzymatic Activity of Microorganisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Effect of the Composition and Quality of the Nutrient Mediu- on Rapid

Determination of the Enzymatic Properties of Microbes Using Carbohydrate-

.‘npregnatedPaperDiscs........................

Effect of the Nutrient Content of the Liquid Phase on Rapid Determination

of Microbial Enzymatic Properties Using Carbohydrate Floats . . . . . .
Effect of Carbohydrate-Impregnated Paper Disc Storage Time on Quality .

Bibliography...............................

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

60

63
66
67

71

76

109

112

112

119

124

128

132
134

140

147

153
158

161
FOR OFF" 1.“. USE ONLY

Porewo rd

The biochemical activity of microorganisms can be studied by determining their
capability for breaking down various chemical compounds (organic, inorganic, and
synthetic) by means of specific emo- and endoensymes released by them. Such deter-
minations play an important role in identification of such microorganism in the
laboratory, and they are broadly employed as a means for describing the pathogenic '
properties of microorganisms. Moreover industrial microbiology uses methods to

determine the spectrun of enzyme and their activity in its search for micro-
organisms that actively produce specific enzymes which are used in directed

catalysis with the purpose of obtaining useful biological products and various
bacterial cultures, which are in turn used to break down various wastes and
toxic chemicals.

Medical microbiologists interested in identifying pathogenic microorganisms and
determining the properties of different populations of bacteria study their bio-
chemical activity, inasmuch as this activity is the basis of bacterial classifications,
and it is always used to establish the generic meabership of disease agents, and as

a means for their specific and typological differentiation.

The longest and most laborious stage of microbiological analysis performed in the
course of laboratory diagnosis of a given infectious disease is that of studying
the biochemical properties of pathogenic microbes (especially when 8-10 and more
specific enzymes produced by the disease agent must be revealed).

It takes 24-48 hours and longer to analyze 5-7 enzymes by the commonly accepted.
universal serial differentiation technique, used to study the biochemical properties
of microbes. This length of time for determining the biochemical traits of microbes
fails to satisfy the demands of microbiological practice and the epidemiological
service today.

New methods of rapid determination of the biochemical properties and enzymatic
activity of microorganisms have been developed. and existing methods have been
improved in the last 20-30 years in the Soviet Union (Adamov, 1964-1972;
Andreyeva, 1960; nndreyeva. et al., 1976; Blinkin, 1963; Blokhina, 1977; Kalina,
1973-1976; Kiktenko, 1953-1966; Kichenko, 1948; Nikitin, 1964—1978; Plugaru. 1970-
1977: Ravich-Birger, 1955-1970, and others) and abroad (Closs, 1971; Hatsen, 1970;
Schwartz, 1968; 'miry, 1974). Owing to their quickness. and the negligible outlay
of labor and materials, rapid enzymatic methods for determining the presence of
microbes and identifying them has significant advantages over Hiss's consonly
accepted classical serial differentiation technique, and chemical methods. They
are distinguished by high specificity, simplicity of execution, and high informa-
tion content; moreover they may be used to study fermentation of substances with
chemical nature that is unknown or insufficiently revealed.

A large number of diverse rapid micro- and macromethods of determining the enzymatic

activity of microbes have been developed and proposed. But most of them have not
enjoyed broad application in bacteriological laboratories. this can be explained

by a nmnber of reasons: imperfections in many rapid methods that seriously limit
their use; lack or extreme scarcity of a number of chemicals and preparations
necessary for quick enzymatic identification of microorganisms, and absence of a
scientific classification of these methods, and of the required scientific references
and manuals.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR or'l'll'lhl. USE UNLY

A real necessity has arisen for testing a matter of the lost praising rapid and
economical methods of fast enzymatic identification of microbes; information ob-
tained from experimnts with these nothods would per-it us to select one (and
possibly two), and reoomend it for introduction into microbiological practice.

'Ihis monograph will promote broader and fuller use of the possibilities or rapid
enzymatic methods of bacterial identification, and further development of the
theory and improvement of the microbiological methods of rapid detection of the
biochemical properties of microorganism.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Shtiintsa", 1979

11004
C80: 1840/19].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFNJAI.USEIONLV

BIONICS

UDC: 153.001.57+621.391

ALGORITHMS 0F INTELLECTUAL ACTIVITY

Tashkent ALGORITHY INTELLEKTUAL'NOY DEYATEL'NOSTI in Russian 1979 (signed to press
20 Dec 79) pp 2-6. 132

[Annotation, foreword, introduction and table of contents from book "Algorithms of
Intellectual Activity", b; Adyldzhan Akhmedovich Usmenov and Anatoliy Viktorovich
Napalkov, Uzbek Scientific-Production "Cybernetics" Association, Uzbek Academy of
Sciences, lzdatel'stvo "Fan", 100 copies, 132 pages]

[Text] This monograph is the result of joint research of specialists in the area
of algorithmic analysis of brain function and theoretical cybernetics. It des-
cribes the methods for the study of higher nervous activity in man and some models
related to analysis of thinking while playing chess. Analysis is made of the
learning process; an algorithmic description is given of man's orienting and
exploring [research] abilities under difficult environmental conditions. Analysis
is made of the process of decision making in new situations that are not known to
man. There is discussion of the means of using algorithmic descriptions of
intellectual activity to solve practical problems.

This book is intended for a wide circle of scientists, students, school children
and all those concerned with problems of development of cybernetics and creation
of artificial intelligence. Illustrations 7; bibliography lists 185 items.

Foreword

Development of cybernetics opened up vast new opportunities to study brain function.
The period that has elapsed since the publication of the works of N. Wiener re-
vealed that most efforts to analyze the mechanisms of intellectual activity on

the basis of existing methods of formal description did not lead to perceptible
results. Until recently, there has been a rift between neurophysiological studies
related mainly to accumulation of facts and development of theory in the field of
cybernetics. The rich opportunities for demonstration of the mechanisms of brain
function, which were created on the basis of development of cybernetics and computer
technology, have remained unused. For this reason, the ideas of V. K. Kabulov
concerning the algorithmic direction in cybernetics are considered to be extremely
relevant.

The problem of applying theory of information processes to the study of brain
function is of special importance. Thinking is an example of the most complex
and refined information processing. Many studies are presently being pursued in
this direction. Many questions are the subject of serious discussion.

5

FOR OINNCLAL.USEIONLY
FOR‘OFFKHAL.USEINVLY

This book reflects one of the directions whose goal is to provide an integral
description of the mechanisms of higher nervous activity on the basis of the method
of algorithmic analysis. The material is arranged in accordance with the principle
of advancing from simple processes and means of their formal description to more
complicated ones. This mode of presentation also conforms with the history of
formation of theory of information processes. First, there is discussion of the
general conception of information-related activity as a phenomenon of construc-
tion, transformation and transmission of images, then there is analysis of different
mechanisms of brain function. The methods, which are based on use of cybernetic
theory, are compared to the results of psychological and neurophysiological studies.

Introduction

The main function of the brain is to process information. There are amazing
properties in information and its processing. While they do not exist by themselves,
in a ”pure form,” they are always expressed by some physical or chemical systems,
they move from one system to another, retaining their main "content" (remaining
unchanging). Thus, it is well-known that messages can be transmitted over radio
waves, expressed in the form of sonic oscillations, written on paper, etc. The
essence of information cannot be reduced to any of its physical "carriers." The
same properties were found in a study of information processing, in particular,
in development and use of computers. The program as a description of information
activity cannot be reduced to the physical arrangement of a computer. The same
computer, as a physical system, can be used for different information-related
activity, for example, the capacity to play chess or control melting of steel.

These properties creategreat difficulties in the study of information processes,
if they are expressed in living organisms. They have the capacity to emerge in
the form of various physical and chemical manifestations, altering their "external
image."

Information processes are organized in the form of social structures and construc-
tions, which do not have an unequivocal conformity to the structure that ex-

presses their basis. Por this reason, isolation of physicochemical elements play-
ing an informative role does not make it possible to analyze integral information
activity as such. When a researcher tries to study information activity on the
basis of isolation of physical or chemical elements that express it, for example,

he determines the structural formula for insulin, effect of renin on blood

pressure, or examines bioelectrical phenomena in neurons of the brain, he inevitably
overlooks integral information processes. Only physicochemical phenomena are the
object of his observation.

In the past, the above-mentioned difficulties were underestimated. For this
reason, as has been recently shown, a substantial gap developed in the system
of man's knowledge about phenomena in nature. Assurance that science has suffio
cient information about information processes in living organisms turned out to
be a great and dangerOus illusion. The extent of the miscalculations made in
science is determined by the great significance of information processes in
different areas of man's life.

In our times, it became apparent that, while science had a powerful armamentarium
of resources in the area of investigation of chemical and physical phenomena

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

primitive level, and they do not rise above the simple collection of facts. 0n the
one hand, it has become apparent that the previous attempts at studying informa-
tion activity on the basis of analysis of physicochemicsl processes were doomed to
failure. 0n the other hand, efforts made to artificially construct information

mechanisms of brain function. For this reason, in our times a new and pressing
problem emerged, that of organizing research of information processes as such, on
the basis of isolating them from the obscuring physicochemical systems.

First of all, the question arose of the possibility of isolating and "cultivating"
information activity outside living systems. we know that until chemical processes
were studied in "test tubes" and microorganisms were cultivated on nutrient media

systems, where they could be "preserved" for a long time and studied. In this
connection, a need arose for special symbols and rules of construction of informa-
tion structures and their elements.

Just as it was necessary to start with the reproduction in test tubes of the

most elementary reactions in the field of chemistry, in the study of information
processes one had to artificially reproduce, at the first stages, the most
elementary information structures and their correlations. Then it became possible
to reproduce in models and to study the properties of complex information systems.
After the foundation of abstract theory of information processes was laid in this
manner, it was possible to analyze on its basis the complex, complicated informa-
tion systems existing in nature, for example, the thinking of a designer, investi-
gator, information processes at the basis of control of development of an organism
and biocenoses, pathogenic information systems responsible for development of
diseases.

The correlation between theory of information processes and mathematics is very
important. Apparently, the formal means of describing information processes

of abstract description (systems of formulas) that are used in chemistry. At
the same time, since mathematics is part of information activity, there is the
prospect of constructing a single, integral system of modern mathematical means
of formal description.

Contents Page

Foreword 3

Introduction 6
7

INMR(MWHCJAL.USE(MVLY
FOP "FFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 1. Elements of Theory of Intellectual Activity
1. The role of cybernetics in the study of living organisms
2. Means of using cybernetics
Chapter 2. Development of Theory of Information Processes
1. Construction of abstract system
2. Means of investigating information mechanisms
3. Modern approaches to the use of cybernetics in studies of brain
function
Chapter 3. Algorithms of Orienting and Exploratory Activity
1. Formulation of the task. Specifics of orienting and exploratory
activity
2. Results of experimental research
Chapter 4. Algorithms of Decision Making in New Situations
1. Mechanisms of decision making
2. Methods of investigation
3. Discussion of results
4. Algorithms of making plans and decision making in specialist work
Bibliography

COPYRIGBT: Izdatel'stvo "Fan" UzSSR, 1979

10,657
cso: 1840/999

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIONIC momma OF FISH WC commlzcanou MID 140057108 SYS'MIB
Moscow VESTNIK MADE}!!! NAUK $553 in Russian No 1, Jan 81 pp 99-110
[Article by V. H. Ol'shanskiy, A. A. Orlo'r, and Dr Biol Sci V. R. Protasov]

['next] The methods of creating bionic models differ from methods usually employed
in biological research to model any processes or phenonena. Every biological
object is typified, on one hand, by universality in relation to the functions

it performs and, on the other hand, unique features inherent only to a living
organism. Using technical devices to directly copy biological structures per-
forming certain functions fails to produce optima solutions. 'merefore when
building a bionic model, it would be best to use only the general pheno-enological
characteristics typifying a particular aspect of the activity or function of a
living organism, applying in this case the su- total of presently available
knowledge and technical devices.

Infomtion on Electric Fish

About 300 of the 20,000 presently existing fish species possess special electricity
generating tissues and are capable of generating electric fields. Along these,
only the electric eels, electric catfish, electric skates, and American stargarers
have distinctly pronounced electric organs with which they create intense electric
fields about themselves, used in attack or defense. ‘lhe electric organs of the
skate, for example, generate discharges having an amplitude of up to 50 w and a
current intensity of up to 50 amp in sea water. the energy of such a discharge
may be estimated as 1 1:3 per gram of electric organs. 'lhe frequency of discharges
in response to stimulation attains 150 as, each discharge lasting 3-5 mac.

The rest of the species make up a second grow of so-called weakly electric fish,
which generate relatively weak electric fields with alplitudes on the order of
5-10 V in water.

Weakly electric fish are divided in terms of the sort of discharges generated in‘to
wave and pulsating species. Pulsating species include all Dbruyrifornes (except

for gynnarchids) and the bulk of the gynnotids. ‘lhe duration of discharges pro-
duced by pulsating species is much shorter than the tine interval between discharges:

in this case the fish may vary the discharge frequency within broad limits. For
most pulsating species, this range is 1-60 pulses/sec. Ilave species generate

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quasisinusoidal discharges of practically constant frequency. mess frequencies are
species-specific , and they fall within the SO-2,000 a: range.

Fields generated around fish differ frou electric fields around dipole sources -
(Figure 1) mainly due to nonuniform distribution of a fish's electric skin resistance.

The electric organs of fish consist of specialised cells (electric plates) trans-
formed, as a rule, out of mole fibers and, in sons species, out of nerve fibers.

A typical feature of these cells is functional differentiation of cell sedaranes.
taking the form of innervation of just one side. At the moment of stimlation.

the potential difference across an electric plate attains 40-120 Iv. Electric

plates in electric organs are stacked into calms, which are in turn connected in
parallel. Oding to this the emf and current produced by the whole electric organ
significantly exceed the corresponding outputs of a single electric plate. The
orientation of these calms in electric organs located in the fish body predetenines
the polarity of the discharge and the current direction.

 

Figure 1. Electric Field of a 22 on Long Aptsmotus in Water with Specific
Resistance Equal to 3.2 Rob's-cm (tron Knudsen, E. 1.. ”Spatial
Aspects of the Electric Fields Generated by Weakly Electric
Fish," JOURN. COMP. PHYSIOLH Vol 99, 1975, pp 103-118): Field
potentials are indicated horisontally in uv on the equipotential
lines corresponding to then. field intensities are indicated
vertically in uV/cu near the vectors associated with them.

All weakly electric and many strongly electric species have electroreceptors exhibit-
inc high electric sensitivity. 'i‘hey evolved free fish lateral line organs, and
they are situated in the skin. comunicating to the body surface through pores.

10

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'meir densityis usually greatest in the anterior parts of the body and the head.
In terms of their physiological properties. electroreceptors are divided into two
basic types--tonic and phasal. ‘Donic electroreceptors adapt slowly, and they are
sensitive to low frequency electric fields in the 0.5-20 32 range. Inceptors of
this type have also been found among both freshwater and sarine electric fish,
as well as among sons nonelectric species. Phasal electroreoeptors have been

found only in freshwater weakly electric species and in the electric eel. These
quickly adapting high frequency receptors exhibit their greatest sensitivity in the
60-2,000 Hz range--that is. in the frequency range of electric organ discharges.

me joint operation of electric organs and electroreceptors of weakly electric

fish supports electrolocation and electrooo-unication functions. Because tonic
electroreceptors are insensitive to the discharges of electric organs. their basic
purpose is apparently associated with so-called passive location and orientation-
that is, with registration of exteer electric fields of biotic and abiotic origin.
The ways fish use their bioelectric fields in their vital activities are diagramsd
below (Diagram 1).

Diagram 1

Fish Bioelectric Fields
m: ”ppm

For For For For Maintenance
Defense location Co-unication of School Integrity

Interspecific
Defensive and Intraspecific

'nsrritorial Inter-
-
ibdeling Electrocomunication Systm

'me principal carrier frequencies of the discharges of the electric organs of weakly
electric fish are speciewspecific as a rule. and therefore we can hypothesize that
electric fields are used by fish mainly for intraspecific communication. Experi-

ments have demonstrated the existence of electrooomnication in a large umber
of weakly electric fish. and that such oomnication has dominant significanc': in

sexual and territorial mutual relationships. its range of electrocosnunication
detected by R. Bauer in experimnts with a ls cm long Onathonm petersii is

11

Feeding

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

30 cm, which agrees with the theoretical estimate of this value for most weakly
electric species.

Investigation of fish electrocosmunication requires thorough physicotechnical
analysis of close electromagnetic low frequency co-unication in conducting media.
without clear physicotechnical premises, we cannot perform competent experiments,
theoretically predict the possibilities of fish electrocoummication systems, re-
veal the mechanisms of their operation, adequately describe the parameters of
electrocommaunication systems, and assess their optimal paramsters from different
points of view. lbreover it would doubtlessly be interesting to develop electro-
conductive comunication devices of direct practical significance. Promahistori-
cal standpoint, most pioneering efforts in this direction were started under the
influence of ideas suggested in the biological literature.

Examining the problems associated with short-range underwater electrocos-unication,
we should distinguish the following physicotechnical aspects:

propagation of electromagnetic fields in conducting media; effectiveness of trans-
mitting and receiving antennas, and matching antennas to the apparatus; factors
restricting transmission and reception possibilities; design of the system as a
whole-«election of the operating frequency and type of adulation, estimation of
the range and dependability of communication in relation to given overall dimensions
of the apparatus and its power supply possibilities, and so on.

let us examine these problems briefly.

Propagation

In most technical situations, the required ranges of comnication significantly
exceed the necessary depths of conunication. It would be advantageous in this
case to select the working frequency of comunication such that the electromagnetic
signals would propagate as a so-called "surface wave“, which may be arbitrarily
imagined as a signal propagating upward from its source to the water surface, then
through air along the surface and. finally, downward through water to the receiver.
The nature of propagation is basically defined as the product of two terms:

F1! and 32?: .

where I‘m-range of connunication, adv-total depth of commication, 6—magnitude of
skin layer in water. Approximations describing propagation of an electromagnetic
field in practically all real comnication situations have been ptblished.‘

2 Bannister, P. R., “Quasi-Static Fields of Dipole Antennas at the Earth's Surface,“
RADIO 561., Vol 1, No 11, 1966, pp 1321-1330; Kraichman, n. 8., "Bandbook of
Electromagnetic Propagation in Conducting Media,“ MVHM', 1970.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

in biological and some technical applications, meanwhile, the surface wave ISSIIIP-
tion (the assumption that the total depth of the source and receiver is much less
than the range of comunication) is unacceptable. In these cases the singlest
approximation is used in the estimates as a rule—equations for the field of a
dipole source in a boundless. uniform conducting media.

In a conducting lieditn (in distinction from dielectric media). the polar diagrams
of a dipole source may be plotted only on the condition that the orientation of
the receiving antenna is determined. The receiver's polar diagram may also be
plotted only on the condition that the coordinates of the reception point relative
to the source and the magnitude of the skin layer at the operating frequencies in
water are given. At ranges from the source comensurate with the magnitude of the
skin layer in water, elliptical polarization of the electric field's intensity
vector is significant, and the polar diagram does not possess a zero point, no
matter what the orientation of the receiving dipole antenna in the polarization
plane.

Assessment of Antenna Effectiveness

An electric dipole source can be fully described by the dipole moment It. If we
represent I 1 as

n = 1/:3—T-I- VT}.

where P--power, 3--total impedance, and l-—effective antenna length, coefficient
are = 12/( Izel) may be used as a measure of the effectiveness of an electric dipole
antenna: Of two identically situated and identically oriented antennas of equal
power, that having the greater “3 will emit the greater signal at any distant
point.

If the class of antennas is given, we can optimize them-«that is, we can find the
antenna with the greatest 03. For example in the class of dipole antennas with a
fixed total length L, those antennas having electrodes with longitudinal dimensions
on the order of UM are optimum.

as may be increased by placing an insert made from insulating or fully conducting
material between the elfctrodes. 'mis raises the effective length of the antenna.

09 may be used to assess the effectiveness of dipole antennas in terms of not only
emission but also reception: The greater tie is, the greater is the signal to noise
ratio. However, this is valid only if two conditions are observed:

the length of the receiving antenna is much less than the range of comunication;

The sensitivity of the receiver depends on the antenna's thermal noise. and not
some other factors (for example the level of atmospheric disturbances).

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI-‘I-II'IAI. "SI-I ONLY

'ihere are many practical situations in which these conditions are not satisfied.
Such situations require development of ways to suppress outside interference:
therefore it would be suitable to use anti-electrode antennas, which would require
subsequent correlationprocessingof'the recorded potentials (recall that the number
of electroreceptors in fish is very large). Multi-electrode antennas require a funda-
mentally new approach to assessment of the effectiveness of receiving antenna.
Developing such an approach is a pressing problem of engineering and bionics.

‘ihe Electromagnetic Background

'lhe electromagnetic background in water is the product of sources of different
origins (Diagram 2). Each component in the diagram may dominate under certain con-
ditions. However, at the frequencies used for underwater electrocomnunication,
fields produced by thunderstorms (atmospheric disturbances) are dominant as a rule.
A large nunber of papers devoted to them not only cite experimental data but also
thoroughly analyze the origin and propagation of atmospheric disturbances.‘ A
knwledge of the theory of atmospheric disturbances permits us to approximate
experimentally measured levels and spectrums at other depths, explain the temporal
and spatial features of the background, and predict the unique features of the given
region. It is important to study the electromagnetic background both from the
standpoint of practical engineering problems and from the standpoint of biological
problems (electro-ecological in particular). Investigation of fields of biologi-
cal origin is an important part of the study of electromagnetic fields in water.

The Design of Concrete Electrocomunication Systems

In contrast to the situation with most known communication system (radio, acoustic.
optical) , the design and parameters of mderwater electrocoamunication devices
depend to a significant extent on the concrete application, and as a rule, if
communication is to be maintained with a different object, a new device of a differ-
ent sort would have to be developed. Designing such devices entails determining
the conmunication frequency (1’), signal intensity (So) at the reception point re-
quired for communication, and transmitter power (P); the most suitable types and
designs of antennas are revealed, and their as are muted. If the particular
communication problem is fundamentally soluble, the dependability of comunication
may be assessed with a consideration for the possible mutual orientations of the
transnitting and receiving antennas. The computations are usually made in several
stages, in each of which the values of the parameters and the designs are normed
down more specifically.

we will go through the motions of making a tentative assessment of the operating
frequency of communication as an illustration of the whole computation process.

Because there is an exponential term in the equations for propagation in a con-
ducting medium elect. magnetic cormunication is impossible at frequencies at which

' Maxwell. E. I... "Atmospheric Noise From 20 Hz to 30 kHz,” Jam. RES. NBS, Vol 2,
No 6, 1967.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Diagram 2
Sources of Electric Fields in an Aquatic anironmnt

I.
Abiotic Sources

    
   

 
   
  
 

Fields of Thunder-
storm Origin (At-
mospheric Distin-
bances)

  
  
      
  
     
   
     

‘l‘elluric and
Induction
Currents

 
 
 
 
  
  

Diffusion
Currents

II.
Biotic Sources

lone Nonelectric
Fish and Some

Other Aquatic
Organins

  
   
  
 

   

Accunulations
of 200- and
Phytoplankton

  
   
 

Schools of
Nonelectric

Fish

   

    
  
 

Electric
Fish and
Their Schools

111 .
Anthropogenic Sources

Electric
Reconnaissance

    

High-Power
Superlov
Frequency
Electro-
conunication
and Electro-
navigation
System

     
   
   

  
        
    
   
   
   
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
   
   

Electric Power
Transmission
Lines

Electric Fish
Traps

  

the depth of the skin layer in the medium is significantly lower than the range
or‘ communication (or, in the case of a surface wave, lower than the total depth of

the source and receiver).

On the other hand the law information content typical of comunication at low fre-
quencies and the usually observed decrease in the level of the electromagnetic

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE "Ni .V

background in water in response to growth in frequency indicate to us that it would
be unsuitable to use frequencies so low that the depth of the skin layer in the

medium would significantly exceed the range of communication (or, correspondingly,
the total depth of the source and receiver).

Consequently it would be suitable to select the operating frequency such that the
maximus communication range would be equivalent to several (three to five for
examle) skin layers in water. Correspondingly, in the case of a surface wave

the operating frequency must be such that the total depth of the receiving and
transsitting apparatus would be equivalent to two or three skin layers. 'mus if
comands must be transmitted from a vessel to fishing gear located up to 400 meters
below the surface in ocean water, the specific electroconductivity of which is

4 ohm‘1 “'1, then, considering that a skin layer of 100 meters corresponds here

to a frequency of 18 Hz, we can recomend this frequency as the one to be used.

In addition to these considerations, when selecting the operating frequency of
communication we also account for the nature of the signal (for example. speech),
the need for suppressing the industrial frequency (50 or 60 Hz) and its harmonics,
and the possibilities and convenience of practical realisation of the device.

Thus if we are dealing with weakly electric fish cosmunicating in fresh water (the
specific electroconductivity of which is about 10'1 ohm"1 m'l) at ranges on the
order of several meters, frequencies on the order of hundreds of His would be the
most advantageous. but the known frequency range used by weakly electric fish
does not exceed units of kHz, which is apparently associated with the difficulties
of achieving high frequencies in biological structures.

We comuted the parameters for several concrete systems on the basis of these
considerations.

They included a chipboard device to control apparatus mounted on a trawl (Figure 2),
a system permitting coununication among SCUBA divers (Figure 3) , and "shore-to-
water" and ”water-to-air" communication systems. 'lhe computation results were
checked out by natural experiments conducted in the Sea of Japan. The parameters
of the systems are presented below.

For the shipboard device controlling apparatus mounted on a trawl: coxmmnication
range-«l km, depth--up to 400 meters, operating frequencies--lO-16 as, dipole
moment-40,000 amp-m.

For electrocoumunication between SCUBA divers: comunication range-70 meters.
depth-mp so 50 meters, operating frequencies-400 Hz to 2 kHz, dipole moment—

2 alp'll.

For “uater-to-air" comunication: ccusunication range—200 meters, transmitter
depth--50 meters, altitude of reception point--70 meters, communication frequency--
300 Hz, dipole moment-4.5 amp-n.

For "shore-to-water" comunication: couunication range--2 km, comunication
depth--50 meters, working frequencies--16 Hz to 2 kHz, dir_ole meant-4,000 amp-m.

'l'hese devices are now being introduced for practical use.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (II-TIC! Al, I 15F ONI ‘V

     

m ‘:::::g::-‘

(3)

1 . Transmitter
5 . Receiver

2. Cable
3. rowed electrode

 

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Discussing the prospects and limitations of bionic modeling of fish electro-
cosmunication systems, we should point out the following basic differences between
these systems and the underwater electrocoumnication devices know today.

Biological electrocommunication involves distances consensurate with the dimensions
of the object involved. At the location of a receiving partner, the electric

field is significantly nonuniform, and it is picked up by a large quantity of
electroreceptors located all over the body of the fish. In a technical application,
meanwhile, comunication entails distances significantly exceeding the dimensions
of the object involved, the field near the receiving partner is quasiuniforn,
and the signal is picked up by dipole antennas. Puller utilization of the spatial
structure of a signal and interference, and transition to dipole antennas from
multi-electrode receivers would be promising from the standpoint of solving the
most important problems of underwater electrooommication, such as raising the
intonation content of comunication, raising the signal to noise ratio, improving
electromagnetic compatibility, and improving interaction with other systems
(electric location and orientation systems).

On the other hand, in distinction from the situation in the biological world,
technical applications permit the use of comonents with specific electroconduc-
tivity significantly exceeding the specific electroconductivity of water-components
made of superconducting metals. Such cosponents make it possible to esploy con-
cepts that are inapplicable to living nature--that is, ones outside the scope of
bionic mdeling.

Modeling Electrolocation Systems

Active electrolocation is defined as registering changes in the electric field
produced by weakly electric fish 6.18 to distortion of this field by objects
characterised by conductivity different from the conductivity of the surrounding
medium. Almost all known weakly electric fish of both wave and pulsating species
have an electrolocation capability. It should be noted in this case that the

two basic taxonomic groups of weakly electric fish-“African Mormyriformee and
South American gymnotids—reside in the turbid waters of rivers and streams.

The capability for detecting and discriminating between objects by means of an
electric field is a remarkable adaptation of a living organism to an environment
in which conventional visual orientation is difficult and often impossible. “ibis
is precisely why a fish's electrolocation system. which to some extent substitutes
for the animal’s vision, represents a new sensory systemu'electrovision".

'lhc electrolocation function was first discovered in 1958 by G. Lissaann and

K. Meychin in a representative of the African lbrmyriformes. Gymarhus pilobtcus.
Using a conditioned reflex technique, the scientists revealed that the fish are
capable of di. inguishing between metallic and dielectric objects enclosed in
porous cases, and distinguishing between fresh and salt water contained in these
cases. It was also demonstrated that the distribution of the potential of the
electric field on the surface of the fish's skin, created by electric organ dis-
charges, becomes distorted when objects having electroconductivity different from
that of water come near the fish body. It was hypothesized that channel-like
structures located in the skin--mormyromasts--are responsible for picking up

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" 1 kl PK? c‘n\-l \

thusu leLultluus, and thus that they are electroreceptors--a new class of sensory
units discovered among representatives of the animal world. Numerous studies sub-
scquuntly performed-in this direction were devoted to the physiology and morphology
of clectroreceptors and electric organs, as well as to the principles and mechanisms
of their joint work.

 

Figure 4. Active Blectrolocation: 1--centra1 nervous system, 2--electric
organ command (triggering) center, 3-—electroreceptors,
4--eiectric organ, 5--object of detection, 6--electric field
flux lines

Figure 4 provides a general diagramatic approximation of active electrolocation.

The field generated by the electric organ and distortions within it are picked up
by phasal electroreceptors located in the fish's skin (the density of electro-
receptors in some species attains 80 per square millimeter). Then information is
successively transmitted by a system of nerve tracts to different divisions of the
centralnervoussystem. In addition to processing signals structurally associated
with the lateral lobes of the medulla oblongata, the central nervous system monitors
the work of the command center controlling the electric organ. There are intra-
central associations directly associated with the electrolocation function . One
of them manifests itself as avoidance of janmdng signals by changing the fundamental
carrier frequency of the electric organ's discharges.

Electroreceptor sysaems participating in active location must react in the best way
possible not to the electric field itself but to changes within it, thus manifesting
a capability for so-called relative sensitivity. The general functional character-
istics of any electroreceptor are:

passive conduction of electric current through the tissues of the electroreceptor
to the surface of the receptor cell:

'Bennett, H. v. L., “Electric Organs. Electroreception," in Hoar. u. S., and Randall,
D. J. (Editors), "Fish Physiology," New York, 1971; Protasov, V. R., "Dioclektri-
cheskiye polya v zhizni ryb " [Bioelectric Fields in the Life of Fish], Moscow, 1972:
Heiligenberg. w., "Principles of Electrolocation and Jamming Avoidance in Electric
Fish," Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, Springer-verlag, 1977.

19

 

FOR OUTWCJA1.USE‘MVLY
POI! 0310“. “SF ONLY

the activity of the receptor cell itself, expressing itself as generation of a
reception potential and synaptic transmission of a stimulus to nerve endings;

the capability for encoding signals in a form convenient for subsequent transmission
by an afferent fiber.

An adequate stimulus acting upon a receptor would consist of a potential difference
between the opening of the receptor pore on the skin surface and the basal unbrane
of the receptor cell. The mechanism of action of the receptor is as follows:
Current generated either by an outside source or by the electric organ itself first
passes through the highly conductive tissues of the channel, and then through the
apical nonconductive menbrane of the receptor cell, which acts as a high frequency
filter, and through the basal meshrane. If the voltage drop across it reaches

the absolute threshold, the cell generates a regenerative receptor potential, which
is responsible for activation of the nerve fiber innervating the cell. This activity

carries information on gradual changes in the electric current passing through the
receptor, and it is responsible for one of the types of codes carried by the fiber.

Mention should be made of the great diversity of information encoding methods

(four or five basic types are conditionally distinguished) correlating approximately
with this type of electroreceptor. 'lhe advantages of a particular type of encoding
used by fish are to a great extent hypothetical, though they are discussed in
detail in many papers. Incidentally, the large min: of functional types of
electroreceptor units is obviously associated with the need for differentiating
their properties so as to permit their use in electrolocation and electrocmmica-
tion. In this case even receptor units intended solely for location are character-
ized by different adaptation times in relation to a varying stimulus, which indi-
cates that they are predisposed for detecting either motionless or moving objects.
Some pineal electroreceptors (the T-units of gymnotide) exhibit so-called phasal
sensitivity-«hat is, they respond differently to stimuli, producing either an
ohmic or a capacitive load of the same ispedance. ibis is believed to be associated
with the capability fish have for identifying plant and animal objects which, as we
know, have significant capacitive properties.

Blectrosensory inf armation undergoes primary processing in the lateral lobes of
the medulla oblongata, when signals from a tremendous umber of receptors covering
the entire surface of the animal's body experience temoral and spatial integra-
tion. Just at the level of the lateral lobes, a fish's sensitivity to objects
rises by about one order of magnitude in mison with the sensitivity of a
single electroreceptor, which agrees with data from conditioned reflex experiments
performed to determine the threshold sensitivity of fish.

we can conditionally distinguish two directions in contemporary research on fish
electrolocation system. 'lhe first concerns itself with the spatial aspects of
electrolocation and deals with the following problems:

investigation and mnerical modeling of the geometry of fields generated by electric
organs, and fields associated with introduced objects:

study of the spatial orientation of the electroreceptors with the purpose of re-
vealing how important it is to assessment of the dimensions of an object and the

range to it, and to precise determination of the object's conductive P109031“-
20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. (WIN

The second direction is associated with the tesporal aspects of electrolocation.
It deals with the following problems:

clarification of the way the rate or frequency of electric organ discharge
affects whether or not the electrolocation system is optimum:

investigation of the ways and means of functional differentiation of electro-
receptor units permitting their simultaneous participation in electrolocation,
using a single processing center in this case;

study of the electrolocation capability of fish in the presence of noise.

'lhe advances that have been made in both directions provide a sufficiently full
impr-ssion of the general peripheral phenomenology of fish slectrolocation system,
and thus allow us to construct its bionic model. It is also obvious that further
study of the mechanisms and principles of information processing in the central
nervous system will make it possible to significantly update this model.

In its physical interpretation, the problem of modeling fish electrolocation
systems boils dam to building an electrolocation system which can detect an
object on the basis of the amount of distortion it creates in the primary electric
field. and to seeking optimum circuits for the emitting and receiving devices.

For practical purposes this problem should be divided into two. he first con-
cerns close-range electrolocation, or 'electrovision", which permits detailed
identification of the object, to include its structure, shape, and dimensions.
Certain advances have already been made in this direction in our country by

A. I. Bondarchuk (Minsk Radiotechnical Institute) , but the resolution of his
system is satisfactory only when the array of measuring electrodes is located
right next to the object. The second problem, which will be examined below, con-
sists of building a model capable of detecting objects at greater range. The first
step in this problem is to try to formalize the basic principle of electrolocation,
so as to permit sensitive assessment of the object size which the model could de-
tect and the ranges within which it can function.

Simple mathematical expressions may be obtained, for example, for the case of a
metal ball located within the field of a dipole emitter (Figure 5). If the
distance d from the emitter to the object is much greater than the lengthl of the
dipole and the diameter 2a of the ball being detected, a dipole approximation may
be used to describe the field of the emitter, and near the object the field itself
may be assumed to be uniform. If, moreover, the object is located on the axis of
the emitting dipole, then the intensity of the distorting field at the location
of the emitting antenna is

a

ll

31
2M| .d.

E]-

 

In order to register the maximum difference of potentials, the measuring electrodes
must obviously be located as far apart as possible. But because the entire

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I‘SII'. "NIX

electrolocation model must obviole be contained within the sane carrier and
occupy a limited volume, the maxima- spread between the measuring electrodes would
have to be linited to the length l of the emitting dipole. In this case the
minus potential difference bearing information about the object is

e'l'
”NU-mf-

mus if prior to introduction of the object the potential difference at the
emitting electrodes was U (asst-ling no change in current), then after the object
is introduced. we observe an increment in the potential difference across the
electrodes, (/1, which depends on the dimensions of the object and the distance
to it. It is easy to see that the tern

in!
W

has electric resistance as its unit, and the inclusion of an object in the circuit
of the emitting electrode changes the external load R, defined by the value of
interelectrode resistance, by the amount

an _1_
dR-m- d“

similar expressions may be obtained for any solid having a shape different from
spherical.

 

Figure 5. Emitting Electrodes A and B, Separated by Distance In are
Contained in the Circuit of a Generator with an emf of E:
I--current in the enitting circuit: a spherical object of
detection with radius a and its center at point c is separated
from the enitting dipole by distance d: 0--angle between dipole
axis and a radius-vector extended from the center of the dipole
to point C; o ;, aznspecitic electroconductivity of the medium
and the object

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to a useful component bearing information on the object, a? would
also include all sorts of noise-producing fluctuations in electric resistance.
They include:

Fluctuations in interelectrode resistance occurring due to temperature changes
in the median, changes in salinity, and so on;

noise-caused changes in electrode resistance associated with instability of the
double electric layer and fluctuations of electric potential:

noise produced by the motion of water masses, particularly by waves on the water
surface.

'me expression for U may thus be rewritten as:

where 63' represents the total miss-caused fluctuations of impedance. In this
case the maximal possible electrolocation range would be defined by the ratio
dR/dR', and it would not be affected by an increase in the power of the system,
as is the case in electrocomunication. In order to plan and tentatively assess
the possibilities of an electrolocation system, we would need to know the values
of all known noise parameters. and account for them.

One of the first systems based on this principle is a highly simple electrolocation
system' intended for installation aboard small vessels and yachts. Such a system
is capable of detecting underwater obstacles within a range equivalent to 1.5-3
vessel lengths, and determining the direction of their movement.

Research aimed at improving this electrolocation system involves theoretical and
experiment \1 determination of all noise cosponents. From the design aspect, this

means seeking optimum electrode systems characterized by minim-1 impedance fluctua-
tions.

As far as the prospects of bionic modeling of fish electric systems in general are
concerned, electrocomunication models are now the nearest to immediate practical
use in this vast area, and the most enticing direction is that of creating "electro-
vision", which would have great significance not only to engineering but also to
biology, cybernetics, and medicine.

" See Stain. H. H., "An Electric Field Aid to Underwater Navigation” in "IBEB Int.
Conf. on Engineering in Ocean Environment. Panama, Florida," Vol 1, 1970,

pp 122-124.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo 'Nauka", "Vestnik Aksdemii nauk SSSR", 1981

1100!.
(:30: 1840/16).

23

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR Ofi'li’lAl. USE ONLY

CYBERNETIC APPMAGI '10 HAN-MEIER INTERACTION ANT-LYZBD

Moscow HYSHLENIYB €3st I PBRERABOTKA INFOM'ISII BVM in Russian 1980 (signed
to press 20 Jun 80) pp 2-16, 288

[nnnotatiom table of contents, and introductory article by Academician A. I. Berg,
Doctor of Philosophical Sciences 8. V. Bivyukov, and Doctor of Psychological
Sciences N. I. zhinkin from book "Human minking and Computer Information Pro-
cessing". by Samil Ios ifovich Shapiro, Izdatel'stvo ”Sovetskoye radio', 0,000
copies, 288 pages]

[‘Dext) This monograph is devoted to human thinking and its relationship to com-
puter programing, and to joint work with a computer in mutually advantageous
dialogue. Another aspect of the book has to do with corputer simulation of indivi-
dual fragments of the thinking process with the purpose of identifying its laws.

mis book is intended for psychologists, educators, mathematicians, cyberneticists,
and specialists in artificial intelligence.

Contents Page

Man and Computer: simulation of Thinking and Man-mahine Dialogue . . . . . . 3
Promthehuthor .... 17

l. Problemin'minkingSimulation . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. .. . . . 19.
1. Man and Computer in a Control System (19). 2. Problem
Solution by Man and Computer (22). 3. Models in Mathematics and
and Applied Sciences (24) . 4. me logical Operator Model (LOH) .
Research Tasks (27) . 5. The Single-channel Nature of Conscious-
ness (29). 6. logical-Psychological Coordinates (LPC) (36).

7. LPC in Learning (39).

2. logical-Psychological Coordinates in HM Decisions and
ComputerPrograms ..... 41
l. The "Revolving Barrel” Problem. LPC's for Excluding
Repetitions and Minimizing Distance to Goal (41). 2. Informa-
tion Coding by Man and Computer. The "Hanoi Tower" Problem
(53). 3. The "Path Game“ Problem (67). 4. Mechanisms of

Concept Recognition by Man and amputer (77). 5. Han Evaluates
a situation (83). .

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. ManandCouputerinGoal'rreeProblems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
1. The Derivability Problem. LPC's in Goal Tree Problems (93).
2. Limitation of the Goal l‘ree by logical Coordinates (98).
3. lbs '13th Labor of Heracles“ Problem (Continuation) (113).
4. Solution of logical Problems by Man (120). 5. (ptimizing
Computer Programs by Means of Psychological Coordinates (125) .

4.HanandConputerinDiaLogue......................-135
l. The Permutations Problem. Initiation of Dialogue.
Individual Psychological Features of Man (135). 2. 'me
“visible Squares" Maze Problem. The Dialogue Continues
(148) . 3. The 'Alliance" of (Inputs: and Man in Solution
of 'lbpological Problems (153). 4. ‘me mute: “Uses”
Man's Psychological Coordinates (163). 5. Problems Asso-

ciated with Filling in Embers in Arithmetic Operations
(168) .

5. Assessment Functions in Human thinking and Conputer Programs . . . . . . 181
1. The "Game-8" Problem (181). 2. Oomarison of the lbthods
and Results of Solution Organization by Man and Computer (188).
3. Ordering Numerical Arrays by Man and Outputer (194). the
Theoretical Information Model of the Ordering Problem (TIM)
(202). An Experiment With Man. Computer, and TIM (209).

6. ins Computer in the Psychological Bxperimnt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223
1. "Voting" Programs (223). 2. Taxonomic Programs (226). .
3. Taxonomy in Different Metric Spaces (238). 4. We
Programs in the Psychological Experiment (245) .

Appendices.................................. 250

Bibliography................................. 280

Namemdex.................................. 286

Man and Computer: simulation of. winking and Han-Machine Dialogue

As we know, the main objective of cybernetics is to study the mechanisms by uhich
intricate dynamic systems are controlled--in£ormation-10gical mechanisms primarily.
In two ways, this objective is inseparably associated with the "human factor'. First,
man's participation is a distinguishing trait of a broad spectrum of such system

(in engineering and technology, in economics. in coamunicaticns, in military affairs.
and so on) (sometimes referred to as ”hunanistic" systems): this trait of intricate systems
is closely associated with the modern scientific-revolution, typified by growth in
the iuportance of intellectual labor in all spheres of culture, in the broad inter-
pretation of this word. Second, control of intricate dynamic systems, optimization
of which is the principal aim of cybernetics, has the goal of raising the effective-
ness of human activity. Considering that the scale and rate of processes and systems
that must be controlled are ranging ever-further beyond the “natural" possibilities
of human intelligence, automation of a number of. intellectual procedures on the basis
of the ideas and resources of cybernetics (as well as mathematics and logic) is be-
coming an acute necessity.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me problem of broadening the possibilities for cognitive and practical control
activity by creating ”cybernetic mlifiers" of the human brain requires that we
conduct intense integrated research at the interface of cybernetics, psychology,
and logic. 'lhis is a grandiose problem, apparently much more so in its complexity
than that of describing physics in mathematical terms-a problem which has been
addressed since the times of hepler and Newton. no reason for this lies in

the fact that solution of this problem depends on progress in cybernetic simula-
tion of perception and thinking. and on advances in psychological analysis of those
phenomena which characterize man's internal world. 1311s is so because we would
first need to understand the nature of these processes and phenomena, their course.

and their properties before we can reproduce certain manifestations of these processes
and phenomena with modern cosputers.

At the dawn of cybernetics. it seemed to some scientists that siaple application ~
of mathematical methods and the resources of cybernetics to the area of intelligence
would insure success in discovering the "secrets of thinking'. 'me work of the
brain began to be interpreted as operation of a giant comuter, and it seemed that
this notion, which was theoretically grounded by the concepts of information and
algorithms, model and feedback, and so on, was in and of itself a guarantee of
success. But one of the founders of cybernetics, Claude Shannon. himself warned
in 1956, in connection with the “information fad", that the premises of information
theory would not be intrinsically productive in psychology.1 They might turn out
to be productive. but if this is to be so, then we would need to meticulously study
the appropriate factual material, interpreting it from a new point of view.

It is now fully recognized that a knowledge of mathematics and logic and use of

the hardware of cybernetics cannot cowensate for insufficient knowledge of the
essence of the processes to which the new theoretical and technical resources are
applied. mreover these resources are still a long way from taking full account of
the "huaan factor”: The "cybernetic paradox“ of our times is that while man has
invested the computer with that which is not inherent to his own “information pro-
cessing" apparatus--high speed in successive performance of elementary operations
leading to solution of amputation problems, a speed beyond the reach of the
“natural” human computer, he has not inparted that which is specifically l‘hunan"

to the computer-wisdom, intoiligence, thinking, and recognition. Human thought,
which has created so many things in the world of science--from a model of the gene
to pictures of the boundless universe, itself remains dramatically incomprehensible:
Our scientific knowledge of the intimate mechanisms of the mind, of the laws of
human behavior, and of the essence of the processes by which man solves complex
problems and learns, is still extremely incoaplete, and in many instances fragmentary.
and most importantly, in terms of its determinacy, the language of this knowledge is
far from that of that ideal scientific rigorousness which has evolved in mathematics
and logic and which expresses itself practically in comuter programs used in the
processing of digital an:a Symbolic information. ‘mus it is no surprise that the
notion, which came into L ing back in the 1950's. of making comuter operations and
complexes of operations analogous to corresponding acts of hunan behavior, continues
to be an unreachable goal-“even despite the fact that the intensity of efforts in
this area is growing. he Bongard validly noted in his time, the reason for this

lies in the shortcomings of the idea “of the means for devising programs. with which
to simulate couples human behavior".2 'lhe reason for this is that modern experimnts
in computer simulation of intellectual processes and solution of complex 'noncomuta-
tional" problems are comelled to borrow from man's 'experience" of perception and

26

FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY
thinking, and reproduce, in cosputer programs, only some elementary methods of
human actions.

the fact remains, however, that cybernetics has graphically demnstrated that it
is possible to describe a number of aspects of intellectual and cognitive activity
in formal terms. Although there is still much that is unclear and debatable in
the prospects and limits of such formal description, one thing cannot be‘doubted:
The bounds of “human” attributes that can be invested into a oaputer, though they
may not embrace the latter in their "entirety", will continue to expand more and
more.

Researchers attempting to envision the boundaries of cybernetic simulation

of intellectual procedures sometimes cite the limitations of logical formal
description, as follows from Godel's well known theorems suggesting that our rather
substantial scientific theories, beginning with the arithmetic of natural nubers,
are incomplete, and that it is imossihle to prove the consistency of such formal-
ized systems by the resources formalized by these systems themselves. Such
suggestions must be approached with great caution, since describing the rules

of hunan behavior in coaplex problem solving in formal tem is not the same

thing as describing an arithmetic axiom in formal terms. But inasmuch as some

real methods by which people reason can be expressed by the machinery of mathe-
matical logic and formal arithmetic, Godel's results are an indirect argument in
favor of the impossibility of ”infinitely complete" formal description of perception
and thinking-«his is true even despite the fact that at the moment no one is able
to indicate the ”upper boundary" of the corresponding achievements of cybernetics.3
However, sticking with the facts, we would have to assert that more and more forms
of human intellectual labor are being transferred to the cosputer.

It would be an obvious mistake to interpret reproductions of certain manifestations
of the mind in model form-was computer programs-as transgressions upon the "Punt?“

Of PSYChOIOQical science, upon the object of psychology, or to interpret this
as "substitution“, by cybernetics and mathematics, of the psychological methods of
studying the phenomena of perception, thinking, memry, and learning. To reason
this way would mean viewing "descriptiveness', which is in many ways still inherent
to psychological research, as sometimes positivein psychology as a science. In fact,
'descriptiveness" and "analytical rigorousness" are not opposites in scientific
thought--they are only different stages of development typical of one science or
another. Every science, even mathematics, begins with ”simple descriptions“ in
order that it could subsequently rise to theoretical generalizations. For many
sciences, this ascent turns out to be associated with the use of the machinery of
analytical formulas. this is true not only for mathematics but also physics, and
not only logic but also psychology. Logic rose to the mathematical level in the .
latter half of the past century, while psychology is experiencing this metuorphosis
today. The analytical method was part and parcel of all aspects of logic: In
logic, that which is theoretical is inseparable from that which is described in
formal mathematical terms.

Not being a deductive science. psychology could aver become similar to logic in
this respect. To it, mathematics will apparently always be a modeling tool, which

will consequently presuppose presence of a vast library of ewirical knowledge on
the behavioral and psychological side of man.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL UM ONLY

the mathematization of psychology is a difficult process, inasmuch as we are dealing
with penetration of the ideas and methods of mathematics and cybernetics into areas
that are far removed from the ideal of 'rigorousness' and ”constructiveness' which
mathematics and logic have brought into being, and which cybernetics has assimilated.
Bellman was right when he wrote: 'classical mathematics is based on methods re-
quiring complete universality. In the course of its evolution, the brain

arrived at methods of operation which are ‘correct' only in general terms, and
which are not at all 'rigorous' .""

Development of "mathematical psychology” would be possible only on the basis of
integrated research conducted at the interface of psychological knowledge with
cybornetics on one hand and mathematics and logic on the other. 'This research,
it would seem, lust be based on a unique coupmmise: "relaxing" the ideal of
precision with the goal of bringing it closer to the "imprecision" of human
thinking, learning, and understanding.

We know that usage of loosely defined (indistinct, fuzzy) concepts and sets plays
an inortant role in man's cognitive activity and in his practical, orientational
and controlling activity. If a concept is strictly defined, and if a set is dis-
tinct, then for each object in relation to which it would make sense to raise the
question as to its medaership within this set, we could answer this question by an
"either-or“ approach: ‘ihe object either belongs to the given set (it falls within
the strictly defined concept), or it does not belong. But when we deal with in-
distinct sets, we can refer not only to (total) membership and (total) nonmelbersbip
of an element in a set, but also to different degrees of medaership. Pormalization
of this interpretation of the relationship between particular objects and fuzzy
concepts led to development of the cybernetic theory of fuzzy sets and algorithms:5
in this case, fuzzy algorithms have fond their natural place on the ”scale of
algorithmicity", being a "transitory form' between structures of the algorithmic
type and structures of heuristic nature.‘

Although the ideas or" "fuzzy logic" has arisen in mathematics before ”my did

so in cybernetics (an example is the description given at the beginning of our
century of the so-cailed sieve of Brmo--a generalization of the well-known sieve
of Eratosthenesnmaking it possible to select, from the set of natural melbers,
those which are prime or "almost" prime) and in logic (in particular, in connection
with the theories of multivalent and infinite-valent logic, developed in the 1920's),
the ideas of precise handling of ilprecise ideas on the basis of a special 'logic
of nonrigorous objects" arose mainly in response to the need for modeling complex
and "hunanistic" systems. This can be explained by the fact that models containing
fuzzy sets and algorithms of the same sort may be used successfully to describe
processes and systems, for which the application of the conventional formal terms
of mathematics and logic (ones reproducing the world through spatially defined con-
cepts and rigid constructs) would not be very effective. In this case, the proper-
ties of such systems yield to analysis by fully rigorous methods.

Development of “fuzziness' theories is one of the manifestations of the growing
effort to apply formal mathematics and logic to man, which is a product of the in-
fluence of cybernetics and the need for simulating intellectual processes.7 But

of course, this is not the only manifestation. others we can name include the
obvious yearning to account for, in “precise knowledge', the contradictory phenomena
of human thinking (note in this connection that fuzzy concepts indirectly contain

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

within themselves a "(Kucha)" paradox and reliability (the property of thinking
that allows mistakes to be made in the acquisition of results).

I t
i

There is an Eastern fable about three blind men who came across an elephant and
tried to determine what it was. The one who grasped the elephant by its tail said
that the elephant was a rope. "No, it is like the tnmk of a tree." objected the
one who held the elephant by its leg. ”Both of you are wrong,“ declared the
third. “An elephant is a snake.” He was holding the animal by its trunk....

This fable is not a bad account of the present situation in cybernetic sisulation
of cognitive psychological processes. Scientists develop various l'intellectual"
models, but they are unable to persuasively answer the following questions: How
do these models “in fact" relate to the hush mind? How can we prove that these
”nonpsychological" program are adequate, in a certain sense, to that which is
being modeled--the mind?

Of course, we could sinplify the problem by assuming the stance of ”cybernetic
behaviorism"--by adopting the thesis that man is a certain finite automaton. From
a "psychological" standpoint this simplifying thesis takes the form of the "maze
hypothesis" of thinking, according to which thinking entails a search for the path
to a goal within a maze of possibilities given in some particular form, a search
directed by cer:ain criteria; and, as we know, maze problems can be represented in
the terms of an automaton without difficulty. Both approaches are similar in that
the work of the brain and the function of human intelligence are interpreted as
algorithmic activity.

'me significantly simplifying nature of these approaches was quickly recognized

by cyberneticists and psychologists. At the very first syaposium on I'mechanisation
of thinking' (Taddington, England, 1958) the American cyberneticists (H. L. Minskiy)
and (D. M. ﬂak-Key) said that logical thinking is not exhausted by algorithm.

Some western psychologists contrasted the behaviorist-algorithmic conceptions of
thinking with the point of view of Gestalt psychology: more is no such thing as

a mechanism of “information processing“, a processing mechanism involving discrete
steps. Man "sees", ”grasps" a situation integrally, and he envisions the path to
solution of a problem just as integrally.

In terms of modeling cognitive processes, however. we can assune a position inde-
pendent of these psychological conceptions--a position that is “psychologically
neutral", one which is often associated with the “artificial intelligence" direction.
she essence of this position is to create computer systems for solving couple):
problems without making simulation of ”artificial intelligence“ a mandatory pre-
requisite: The main thing is for the computer programs to produce results that
are no worse than those obtained by man.8 Such an approach is fully possible,
since research efforts in the "artificial intelligence" direction are in fact
directed not at simulating the essence of cognitive processes in and of themselves,
but rather at automating complex forum of activity, at automation, for which de-
scription of the “external" behavior of the individual would be sufficient.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But this ”artificial intelligence“ approach does have its limits as well. Beyond
a certain point. a knowledge of the properties of the process which we wish to
automate becomes increasingly more desirable. But at this point, we encounter the
difficulty which was metaphorically presented in the fable of the elephant and
blind men presented above. the inconsistency betmn the enormous amunt of

facts accmulated in psychology and that sodest fraction of these facts which are
reflected in cybernetic models is obvious. lbreover the cognitive activity of an
individual operating in 'cooperation' with modern automatic devices has been poorly
studied. In particular, not enough research has been conducted on the psychological
aspects of the relationship between hunan thinking and couputer programing. Work
in this area is only just beginning. The results obtained in this area thus far
make it all the more obvious that we need to answer the couple): of questions per-
taining to man-machine control systems.

It is in light of these conclusions that we should approach 5. I. Shapiro's mono-
graph. It analyzes a question of isportance to cybernetic simulation of cognitive
mental processes and human behavior—the nature of the qualitative differences
existing between human thinking and information processing by a computer. The
author sheds light on the dialectical mity of the process and result of thinking;
he analyzes the anbiguous nature of the relationship between mental phenomena and
their logical, I'formal" description. The book quite rightly emphasizes the funda-
mental role played by the principle of hierarchical organization in the work of the
lumen nervous system and mind: it makes mention of the significance of techniques
for Zeducing. encoding, and recoding psychological material—all that justifies the
need for analyzing human mental activity at different levels.

(has of the book's main points of enphasis is the problems associated with studying
thinking from the standpoint of cosputer programing and joint work of man and
conputer in dialogue mode. These problems are precisely what make it so necessary
to develop formal descriptions of the individual aspects and parts of intellectual
processes. and to reveal the laws of human heuristic activity, so that effective
computer program for solving complex problems of one class or another could be
written. the book demonstrates how computer simulation imparts concreteness to
experimental study of the individual aspects of thinking.

In his examination of all of these questions. the author rests on the traditions
of domestic psychological science, which reject both the one—sidedness of the
behavioristic "maze" conceptions of thinking and the extremism of the approach of
Gestalt psychology to intelligence. in which mental phenomena are viewed as somehow
being unyielding to analysis in strict terms.

The general aim of the author's analysis may be stated as follows: Creating com-
puter programs for solving complex ('noncomputational") problems on the basis of
intellectual procedures which, at the given stage of development of psychology,
cybernetics, and logic, yield to formal description. and concurrently reproducing
certain manifestations of thinking in these programs. According to the author's
main idea, the "bridge” should be built from both sides: from the human side-
from the logical and psychological processes relative to which we can establish
that they “participate" in himan problem solution, and from the coqmter side-
creation of cosputer models aiding the study of thinking. In this case both
approaches--but especially the first-when visaed from their applied aspect, are
sited at raising the effectiveness of the “art" of programing.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shapiro's book is the first in domestic literature to systematically study the
question of 'psychological" cosputer software. Development of such software, the
author believes, may be defined as the “zone of imsediate programing development".
But this "zone” may be very inportant to psychology: Psychologically szbstantiated
programs can serve as limited cosputer models of intellectual procedures which,
through "comparison“ with hmn mental actions, could lead us step by step closer
to their prototype. and predict the mental process being simulated.

”mutually advantageous” dialogue between man and computer was chosen in the book
as the principal method of analyzing the problem noted above. In this case
attention is centered on the distribution of functions between the participants
of the dialogue, on the basis of the principle of the unity of psychological and
mathematical support to the dialogue systems.

As we know, psychological experimentation is the principal means of studying hunan
thinking. Being himself a teacher of mathematics in high school and college, the
book's author is, so to speak, at the "starting point of the developmnt of hulan
thought", and he makes competent use of this method, and of the data that have
been accumulated with its help. Relying on an original logical-psychological
conception of thinking, as described in his previous book, in the present mono-
graph the author develops his logical operator model of intelligence further, from
the aspect of organizing man-machine dialogue system. Thus he introduces the con-
cept of logical-psychological coordinates, which are a further development of the
concept of logical coordinates used in the book ”at algoritmov-k sushdeniyam"
[From Algorithms to Conclusions]: Shapiro demonstrates the function of logical-
psychological coordinates in terms of general heuristics, and he examines their
role in human thinking and learning, and the possibilities for their ”extension“
into computer intonation processing programs.

Shapiro centers his research on developing programing approaches based on informa-
tion on the process of logic and creativity, derived from psychological experimenta-
tion. 1° The author successfully solves the problem of "bringing to the surface”
these landmarks of hman activity in problematic situations. As Shapiro's work

logical-psychological coordinates are a tool of heuristic activity: however, this
tool is associated with algorithmic behavior. This is why the book undertakes the
study and formal description of some psychological mechanisms of man's knowledge

assimilation in terms of the algorithmic approach. Such description is necessary

data from a psychological experiment, one revealing the appropriate logical-
psychological reference point. In this case a dialogue is established between man
and muputer, in such a fashion as to capitalise on the strong aspects of each of
the ”partners". As Shapiro's results show, this approach makes it possible to
study some questions associated with the relationship between conscious and un-
recognized cosponents of the strategy followed by the individual, with the way in-
formation is encoded, and with the way heuristic and algorithmic systolic struc-
tures are used in thinking and neurodynamics.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The concept of logical-psychological coordinates may be a productive basis for
further research on the mechanisms of mental activity. As we know, control of
purposeful hush behavior is inseparable from speech, which follows the rules of
language; in this case the dynamics of speech are 'autusatic', while the goals of
language are comprehended. his process of comprehension involves coupler inter-
action between meaning expression and the objective ('denotative") aspect of
linguistic constructs, and discrete and continuous ("analog“) structures partici-
pating in mental processes. It would seem that the logical-psychological coordi-
nate conception would be capable of making a significant contribution to the study

of problems associated with all of this, on the condition that this conception is
refined further, particularly from the aspect of broadening its psychological
foundation.

Shapiro validly notes that the special methods for studying thinking met rely on
a corresponding theoretical conception of thinking activity. And such a conception
is developed by the author, in which case tbo hypotheses are placed at the basis of
this conception--a "gnoseological'wperational model of thinking: The aeswption
that consciousness has a “single-channel“ nature and descriptive intuition has a
“multichannel” nature, and the premise that there is “reciprocity“ (incoupatibility)
in the conscious part of the intellectual operational (associated with the fulfill-

ment of operations) and logical-psychological (conceptual) comonents of the
thinking process.

What the "single-channel--muitichannel nature” hypothesis means is that several con-
currently occurring mental processes cannot simultaneously serve as the focus of
consciousness: only one of them is fully realized: the stronger it is and the more
active the process of recognition is, the more significant is the complex of pro-
cesses proceeding in parallel in the unconscious sphere. The hypothesis of ”reci-
procity" declares that concrete mental actions (“operators”) and the logical-
psychological reference points which control them are processes of different types,
in which case (according to the premise of the “single-channel“ nature of con-
sciousness) domination of one of these processes leads to displacement of the other
from the center of consciousness. It is impossible for man to clearly recognise
both his own mental actions and the logical-psychological mechanism controlling them
simultaneously.

As Shapiro shows, the operational-'gnoseological" model of thinking he proposes is
supported by concrete psychological facts, and it is consistent with the con-
clusions of logic and cybernetics. Thus the ”reciprocity“ hypothesis places a
psychological foundation beneath the logical-somatic model of hmn information
processing.‘1 while the hypothesis of the single-channel nature of consciousness
sheds additional light on a mnber of mechanisms of perception, thinking, and
learning; in particular it providessome explanation to the phenomena described by
Bruner (growth in the concreteness of cognitive activity in response to extreme
stimuli) and P. A. Shevarev (”displace-em", from the consciousness of subjects
under certain conditions, of the rules of algebraic action in order to validate
the appropriate behavioral acts) . and so on. Shapiro's conception leads to an
interesting approach to interpreting the psychological nature of Rick's law, which
establishes a dependence between the latent time of the choice reaction on the
amount of information contained in a stimulus. It reveals new ways for building
information models of problematic situations formally describing (to a certain
extent) not only recognized but also the unconscious components of thinking.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY '

'lhe monograph develops and utilizes, in various classes of programing problems,

an entire series of logical-psychological reference points revealed through psycho-
logical experiments; by taking this approach the author excludes repeat 'moves",
minimizes the distance to the goal--both final and intermdiate, creates the basis
for planning behavior and countarproposing “coordinates", and so on. Studying the
relationship between the algorithmic and heuristic components of thinking in the

way that they are represented in different variants of cosputer programs, the author
thus investigates the actions of an individual directed by algorithms described from
without: As Shapiro shows, the mare fully the logical-psychological reference
points borrowed from the individual's "repertoire' are elployed, the more effective
is the program.

The sort of interaction occurring between man and computer depends on the nature

of the problems being solved. Thus in the case of the “director problem" (and its
generalization--"the circular conveyor problem”, which is a variant of the classical
three machines problem), it would be suitable to have the computer first thin the
branches of the goa.‘ tree, and for man to prune the ”dry branches' on the basis of
logical-psychological coordinates. In problems of another type ("visible squares",
and others), it would be better for the solution to begin with the individual, who
would plan the general course of the work, relegating to the computer the task of

sorting through the largest set of variants, ones equally remote from the extreme--
most and least probable-alternatives.

There is no single rule of object recognition in problems of the ”classification of
nunbers" type. These are problems with ambiguous conditions, ones often encountered
in life, in science, and in day-te-day experience. In each case, man does somehow
solve them. Analyzing these solutions. the author distinguishes two levels of
logical-psychological reference points: "universal" coordinates which remove the
"upper" layer of uncertainty, and coordinates permitting closer tuning, a closer
approach to the given type of problems. Shapiro demonstrates has these reference
points interact with each other, how they fall into order in response to partial

sorting, and how these processes could be esbodied within programs promoting an
effective search for solution.

We can see here that the operational~"gnoseological" conception of thinking is
consistent with the logic of nonrigorous objects, discussed above. We can presme
that further synthesis of both approaches will make it possible to obtain new,
interesting results in the simulation of cognitive processes. But even in its
present form, Shapiro's work signifies a new step in the development of the methods
of cybernetics representation of cosplex ”humanistic" systems. Many of the author‘s
conclusions may be laid at the basis of further research on heuristic programing
and on "artifical intelligence”, and therefore they should be of interest to psycho-
logists, logicians, cyberneticists, and developers of man-machine complexes.

room

1. Shennon, K., "Raboty po teorii informatsii i kibernetike" [Studies in Informa-
tion Theory and cybernetics], Moscow, lad-yo Mir, 1963, 668 pp.

2. Bongard, M. M., ”Problems uznavaniya” [me Recognition Problem], Moscow,
Izd-vo Nauka, 1967, p 6.

33

FOR OFFICIAL ISIS ONLY
3.

4.

S.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For more information, see Dreyfus, Kh., "Chego ne npgut vychislitel'nyye cashiny.
Kritika iskusstvennogo reruns" [What Computers Cannot Do. A Criticism of
Artificial Intelligence], Hoscow, Izd-vo Progress, 1979, and the postscript

to the Russian translation of this book, written by one of the present authors.

Bellman, 8., "ldbernetika i neditsinskaya diagnostika" [Qbernetics and
Medical Diagnosis]. Moscow, Ind-yo Ranks, 1967, p 25.

The reference is primarily (though not exclusively) to the conception 1.. A.

Zade developed in the mid-1960's. Of. the numerous works of this scientist

and his school, we cite only a few: Zade, L. A., "me Principles of a New
Approach to Analyzing Couple): Systems and Decision ﬂaking Processes," in
'Matematika segodnya" [Mathematics my). Moscow, Isd-vo air, 1974: Zade, L. A.,
"Ponyatiye lingvisticheskoy pore-annoy i ego prinenoniye k prinyatiyu
priblizhennykh resheniy" [The Concept of the Linguistic Variable and Its
Application to the Making of Approximate Decisions], Moscow, Izd-vo Mir, 1916.

Biryukov, B. V., ”The Algorithmic Approach in Science, and the Conception 0!
Fuzzy Algorithm,” in "Ribernetika i sovrenennoye nauchnoye posnaniye" '
[Cybernetics and Modern Scientific Knowledge), Moscow, Isd-vo hanks, 1976.

See Biryukov, B. V., "The Problem of Abstraction of Infallibility in Logic."
VOPROSY Pstor-‘n, No 11, 1973.

Pospelov, G. s.. and Pospelov, D. A., "Artificial Intelligence Research in
the USSR," in Berg, A. 1., (Editor), “Kibernetikw-na sluzhbu koumnim“
[qbernetics in the Service of Cos-Ionian], Vol 9, "Control and Information,‘I
Moscow, Izd-vo Energiya, 1978.

Shapiro, s. 1., ”ct algoritnov~k suzhdeniyal. Eksperinenty po obucheniyu
elemental: natenaticheskogo nyshleniya' [From Algorithms tooonclusions. marinate
on the Elements of Mathenatical minkingl. Moscow, Izd-vo Sov. radio, 1973.

See Berg, A. I., Biryukov, B. V., and Stolyar, A. A., the “Operational-logical
'Model' of Thinking and learning, and Cybernetic Pedagogics,‘ in Shapiro, s. 1.,
"0t algoritnov--k suzhdeniyan' [Pros Algorithm to Conclusions), Moscow, Isd-vo
sov. radio, 1973.

shreyder, Yu. A., "SemanticAspects of Information Theory," in "Infornatsiya

i kibernetika" [Information and Cybernetics], noscow, Ind-v0 Sov. radio, 1967)
see also Biryukov, 8. v.. 'Kibernetika i netodoIogiya nauki" [Cybernetics and
the Methodology of Science], Moscow, Izd-vo Nauha, 1974, Chapter 3.

OOPYRIGlT: Izdatel'stvo ”Sovetskoye radio”, 1980

11004
C50:

1840/ 187

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BIOTECHNOLOGY

UDC 612.2:599.5
RESPIRATION AHD OXYGEN PAITERNS 0F DOLPHINS

Kiev DYKHANIYB I KISLORODHYYB REZHIMY ORGANIZMA DEL'PINOV in Russian 1980
(signed to press 3 Apr 80) pp 2-5, 331

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Respiration and
Oxygen Patterns of Dolphins", by Asya Zelikovna Kolchinskaya. Irina Nikitichna

Han'kovskaya and Anatoliy Grigor'yevich Hisyura, Izdatal'stvo "Naukova dunks",
1,000 copies. 332 pages]

[Text] The monograph presents the authors' ideas on the respiratory system. patterns
of gas mass transfer. and control of these processes in the body of mammals. Experi-
mental data and information are presented that are available in the literature on

the functions of the organs of external respiration, circulation. the respiratory
function of blood, the features of capillarizstion of cardiac and skeletal muscles,
the content and distribution of myoglobin in the muscle fibers. and on tissue
respiration of dolphins. Experimental and theoretical (on mathematical models)
studies are described on mass transfer of gases, oxygen patterns of the body and
oxygen patterns of the muscle tissue of these animals.

It is designed for physiologists. specialists in the field of mathematical modeling
of biological processes. engineers. zoologists, biochemists. biologists, physio-
logists and veterinarians.

Contents Page

Introduction 3
Chapter I. General Ideas on the Respiratory System and the Process

of Mass Transfer of Cases in Mammals 6
Chapter II. Oxygen Patterns of the Body and Control of them ‘ 76
Chapter III. Ecological Factors That Govern the Uniqueness of the

Dolphin Respiratory System 89
Chapter IV. Anatomical-Histological Features of Individual Components

in the Dolphin Respiratory System 99
Chapter V. Respiratory Rhythm and Its Control in Dolphins 116
Chapter VI. Pulmonary and Ventilator Spaces. Respiration Mechanics

of Cetaceans 168
Chapter VII. Ventilation and Diffusion Capacity of Dolphin Lungs 168
Chapter VIII. Cardiac Rhythm. Electrical Activity of Heart and

Fratures of Dolphin Hemodynamics 181

35

FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE URL!

Chapter Ix. Blood of Dolphins and Its Respiratory Function 218
Chapter x. Oxygen Patterns of Dolphins 260
Chapter XI. Process of Mass Transfer of Oxygen. Carbon Dioxide and

Nitrogen in Dolphins 267
Conclusion 287
Bibliography 291
Appendix 325
Introduction

A study of the dynamics of marine mammals attracts the attention of an ever greater
number of domestic and foreign researchers. The increased interest in this question
is explained. first of all. by the fact that the respiratory system with its com-
plicated mechanisms that guarantee gas exchange in the lungs. gas transport by the
blood. and oxidation processes in the tissues plays an exceptionally important role
in the adaptation of marine animals to underwater conditions. Since the lungs.
cardiovascular system and respiratory function of the blood in different species

of marine mammals have undergone the deepest and most general changes during adap-
tation to an aquatic medium. their study is of undoubted value for basic sciences.
evolutionary physiology. biochemistry. zoology and bionics.

For physiologists and specialists in the field of mathematical modeling. the
respiratory system of Cetaceans. and of dolphins in particular. is not only an
interesting. but also a rewarding object of research. The approach to studying the
respiratory system from the position of the theory of control on this original
biological subject is somewhat simplified by a number of circumstances. Under
natural conditions the main links in the dolphin respiratory system are seemingly
separated. During submersion to depths over 100 m the gas exchange in the lungs

of these animals is practically missing and gas transport by the blood is isolated
both from external respiration. and from the respiration of a large group of
tissues. support. muscle. etc. The powerful and short respiratory act that is
implemented on the sea surface in Cetaceans is replaced by a respiratory pause of
incommensbrable duration. During this pause. as during a slow-motion movie. events
unfold that occur in the respiratory cycle. The ventilation-perfusion ratios, the
general blood flow and the blood supply to the greater part of the body change
significantly. This governs drastic alterations in the rate of gas streams through
the alveolar-capillary membrane. These and other features of the functioning of the
respiratory system and the process of gas mass transfer in the dolphins sera to
suggest to the researcher engineering solutions for controlling this complicated
physiological process. The authors of the presented monograph.therefore. did not
refrain from attempting to create a mathematical model for the dolphin respiratory
system. They present for the reader's judgment the results of their experimental
and theoretical research on this system.

Currently the world literature on marine mammals has less than a thousand sources.
A major contribution to the ecology. morphology. physiology and biochemistry of
Cetaceans has been made by our domestic and foreign scientists summed up in mono-
graphs and surveys [l.2.21.23.65.6l.86-88.116.117.125.126.146.184.198.206.208.
236.237.269.262.269.279.282.293.376.504.527.530.S90.680.721.722.752.755.776.788].

Certain surveys and sections of monographs cite information about the respiration
of marine mammals [6.65.86-88.ll7.126.207.269.279.282.516.527.530.533.53b.539.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
556,560,574.S76.758.785.798, and others]. However there are as yet no special
monographs on the physiology of dolphin respiration. In addition, the works that
discuss external respiration, the respiratory function of blood. circulation, the
adaptation mechanisms that permit marine animals to withstand oxygen deficiency,
hypercapnia. high pressure and its drops are primarily based on morphological data.

The extreme lability of the oxygen patterns in dolphins (transition from hyperoxic
to very pronounced hypoxic states) cannot help but stir the interest of physiologists
in a study of the oxygen supply system, and investigation of the oxygen pattern of
Cetaceans, and the mechanisms controlling them.

Oxygen deficiency that develops during prolonged diving is considered the main
factor restricting the diving depth and the time for the animals' stay underwater.
Therefore. starting with the end of the last century up to our time. determination
of the oxygen reserves of diving animals and study of the adaptive mechanisms that
guarantee their least expenditure underwater have been at the center of attention
of many researchers. The publications on this subject present calculations of
oxygen reserves in diving animals of various species. It is a significant short-
coming of these calculations that they take into account the condition of the animal
that was recorded at a certain time period in a stationary pattern that does not
exist in reality, i.e. . the oxygen reserves are defined as if in an unchanging
system. In reality. a constant redistribution of the oxygen reserves and change in
the demand for them by groups of tissues that are considerable in weight occur in
the Cctaceans. The complex interaction between different physiological adaptive
mechanisms requires a new approach. the application of a different principle for
computing the reserves and the possible expenditure of oxygen. an approach that is
based on a description of the dynamics for the functioning of the entire respiratory
system and the system of regulating the body's oxygen patterns. Such an approach
was used in the joint work of the scientific collectives of the A. A. Bogomolets
institute of Physiology (department of hypoxic states. headed by Doctor of Medical
Sciences A. Z. Kolchinskaya) and the Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR
Academy of Sciences (department chairman-~Doctor of physical-mathematical sciences
B. N. Pshenichnyy). The results of the joint studies are presented in this mono-
graph. It also surveys the published data on these questions. Individual results
of experimental studies described in the monograph were obtained by the authors
jointly with V. H. Alekseyev, V. V. Belenikin, P. V. Beloshitskiy, L. N. Bogdanova,
N. G. Bukhman, S. A. Gulyar, K. A. Dzhincharadze, V. P. Dudarev, K. F. Zhikhareva,
B. A. Zhurid. V. A. laboluyev, N. I. Zapopad'ko, V. F. Zelenskaya, 0. G. Karen-
deyeva. Yu. N. Korolev. 0. G. Koshev, S. K. Hatisheva. T. D. Hinyaylenko, V. S.
Mishchenko, L. 1.. chchenko, N. P. Ocheretnaya, Ye. V. Prudnikova, I. F. Soko-
lyanskiy. A. S. Spakhov. Yu. V. Stepanov. Yu. T. Strelkov, V. I. Fedorchenko. M. H.
Filippov. v. H. Shapunov. N. V. Shtuchenko. References for these works are given
in the appropriate sections. The development and realization of the mathematical
model described in the book for the respiratory system on the digital computer
BESM—é and studies on the model were done by A. Z. Kolchinskaya, and A. G. Hiayura
joint 1y with B. N. Pshenichnyy. Yu. N. Onopchuk. D. I. Marchenko, D. V. Shevelo.

I. S. Rnppoport. The studies of P0 distribution in the dolphin muscle tissue were

done by A. Z. Kolchinskaya. I. N. Ngn'kovskaya and Ye. G. Lyabakh [108] on the model
[11.8].

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He consider it our pleasant duty to express our sincere gratitude to all col-
leagues who participated in our joint research. as well as the director of the

Georgian branch of the VNIIRO [expansion unknown] of the USSR Ministry of the Fish
Industry. Candidate of biological sciences L. B. tauladze. scientific coworker

K. A. Dzhincharadze. and the entire collective of this branch where a considerable
portion of the experimental work vaa'done4/

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Naukova dunka", 1980

9035
CSO: 1860/146

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENVIRON“

ANIMAL BCOIDGY ASSISTS IN SERVICR cou'rmz.

bbsccw BKDIDGIGBSKIYE osmvr UPRAVEINIYA mm ﬁlm!!! in Russian 1980
(signed to press 11 Jul 80) pp 2, 188—191

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from book "Ecological Principles of Animal
Behavior Control". edited by Doctor of Biological Sciences D. s. Pavlov and

Doctor of Biological Sciences V. D. Il'ichev, ussn Academy of Sciences Institute

of Evolutional Morphology and Ecology of Animals imeni A. N. Severtsov, Isdatel'stvo
"Nauka", 2,700 copies. 192 pages]

l'Dext] his collection is devoted to control of the behavior 0! animals in different
taxonomic groups. Development of the biological principles of controlling animal
behavior and creating, on their basis. a strategy for wise behavior control would

make it possible to solve the highly complex problems of exploiting natural and
artificial ecosystems. Thus the problems discussed in articles contained in this

collection are very timely.

UN 591. 511

BIOXDGICAL PRINCIPLES OF ANIMAL BMVIOR coumx.

[Abstract of article by B. P. Manteyfel', D. S. Pavlov, V. D. Il'ichev, and
L. H. Baskin]

[Text] Development of the biological principles of animal behavior control is
significant to many areas of science and economics. nurse directions of work are
distinguished: I--utilization or the laws of animal behavior, closely associated
with behavior prediction: II--stimulation of animals to display reactions in their
repertoire. nib-change of behavior by genetic methods or by interference in the
ontogenesis of behavior. 'me first direction mites the passive methods of control,
while the last two deal with the active methods. Pour groups of control methods
are distinguished among the latter: l—creation of a certain motivation of be-
havior; 2--influence by effective stimuli; Buinterference in the ontogenesis of
behavior: 4--changc in normal animal reactions by genetic methods.

Bibliography-~55 references.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 591.51:595.511

PRINCIPLES MID ”PEACHES 'l'O INSECT BEHAVICR cosmos
[Abstract of article by G. A. Hasakhin-Porshnyakov]

[Text] me mechanisms and informational organisation of insect behavior are
examined. A distinction is made between progralned behavior controlled by neuron-
detectors, and modifying behavior, which is swordinated to lower and higher
associative schemes of internal behavior control supporud by feedbacks and indi-
vidual memory. Sensory inputs are analyzed. and a scheme of signal-assisted con-
trol of insect behavior is given. Signal-assisted control of the behavior of

harmful and useful species (by an) is demonstrated with various examles of
successful chemical, optical, and acoustic signaling methods. and of exposure of
insects to an artificial electric field.

Bibliography-J13 references.

UDC 59l.51:597:639.2

CONTROL OF FISH BMVIOR MING FISBING

[Abstract of article by 8. v. vyskrebentsev and H. P. Arononovl

[next] A combination of defensive and exploratory reactions is typical of the
behavior of fish in a trawl, as are orientation reactions. Fish behave differently
in different zones of a trawl. Bottom-dwelling fish would best be influenced by
stimuli eliciting an exploratory reaction in sons one of a trawl. Mechanical
devices and acoustic and electric fields may be used as the controlling stimuli.
Pelagic fish require development and use of stimuli which also elicit an explora-
tory reaction in zones one and two of a trawl, preventing their exit from the
fishing zone into none two. Stimuli for pelagic fish may include electric and
optical fields, as well as various mechanical devices.

UDC 59l.51:597.639.2
BASIC MISS AND PRINCIPLE O? WING F151! SGIOOLING BEIAVIOR
[Abstract of article by v. V. Gerasinov, A. A. mrkov, and D. V. Radakov (deceased)!
[best] The basic laws governing fish schooling behavior and mechanisms insuring
contact and coordinated actions between individuals in a school are described on
the basis of the authors"and published data. A nuber of ideas are suggested
the principles of controlling fish schooling behavior. ‘

Bibliography-44 references.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUBSMOPD‘DIRBCTWMBYPISH INAGROUP
[Abstract of article by '1‘. S. ushcheva]

[‘rext] Experimental studies are used as the basis for describing the unique features
of first- and second-order indirect learning among schooling and nonschooling species
of fish. The dependence between indirect learning and the tendency for schooling is

established; it manifests itself especially distinctly in second-order indirect
learning.

Bibliography-4N references.

UDC 591.1853597.639
OLE‘AC‘HON MID THE mom 0? P188 BEHAVIOR com
[Abstract of article by G. h. Halyukina. Ye. h. Harusov. and A. O. Kasunyan]

l'hext] Intra- and interspecific commieation of fish based on olfaction is co.-
plex and diverse. Its significance is also extremely great in certain periods

in the life of species exhibiting a relatively low level of olfactory develop-ente-
nicrosnatic species. It is experinentally downstrated that the olfactory organ
of fish is highly sensitive to any natural odors. “are so than other suntan-aces,
these stimuli are behaviorally active; their attractant or repellent acti'n is

the basis for developing methods to control fish behavior.

Bibliography--116 references.

UDC 59l.51:597.639
COMML OF M BEHAVIOR 0P FISH IN MING ﬂA‘i'BR
[Abstract of article by D. 3. Pavlov]

('Dext] The biological principles of controlling the behavior of fishin flowing
water are analyzed with the exalple of freshwater, semi-migratory, and migratory
fish. 'me rhea-reaction ('rheotaz'tis") is the basis for the behavioral reaction

of fish living in flowing water. In the course of evolution. fish developed two
basic behavioral stereotypes in flowing water-the behavioral stereotypes of
pelagic and bottom-dwelling fish. Among pelagic fish. the dominant orientation
mechanism is visual, and they are typified by low threshold and high critical

flow rates for the rheo-reaction. Among bottom-dwelling fish, the tactile orienta-
tion nechanisn has the greatest significance, and they are typified by high thresh-
old and low critical flow rates. m principles of control of the behavior of

fish in flowing water are distinguished--active and "passive".

Bibliography-~14 references.

41

POI! OMCIAI. USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USEONLY

(DC 591.51:598.'599

MMWOFMBEAWOROPBIRNMWNMWPACIOR
[Abstract of article by A. D. Vladyshevskiy and D. v. Vladyshevskiyl

[‘Dext] The ontogenetic sequence of for-ation of behavior directed at nininizing
the negative consequences of anxiety and direct'pureuit is analysed. in. following
types of behavioral adaptations are distinguished: higher intensity of reactions.
withdrawal or covert love-est, and differentiation. It is concluded that adapts-
tion of animal behavior to anxiety is directed on one band at the nest effective
assurance of security possible and. on the other hand, at lininization of ties and
effort expended on defensive reactions. '

Bibliography-dd references.

use 591.Sl:S98. 334
CONTROL 01’ 1'33 BEHAVIOR OP FISH-EATING BIRIB A? manna HATER BABIES
[Abstract of article by B. M. 2vonov]

[Text] Intensive development of pond fish culture has nade it necessary to protect
water basins from fish-eating birds. Direct observations at fish farms in
hstrakhanskaya and Odesskaya oblasts led to developmnt of the rules of acoustic
repulsion of birds from water basins using tape recordings of the alarm and distress
signals of different species of seagulls and wading birds.

UDC 591.Sl:598
THE ORIENTATIONAI. NATURE OF museum sum IN ms CONTROL 0? BIRD BEAVIOR
[Abstract of article by v. D. Il'icbev]
{Text} Analysis of practical experience accmrlated in the use of bird repellents.
and of field experiments permits reconendation of contained repellenteas a new
means of behavior control. Destined repellents have been developed on the basis of
an analogy with the natural reactions of birds having signaling ilportance, to in-
clude. besides warning cries, cues indicating a situation dangerous to birds (danger
cues). enjoined repellents presuppose sisultaneous use of acoustic alar- or dis-

tress signals and imitations of a factor nortally dangerous to birds. creating a
situation of extreme danger.

Bibliography-43 references.
one 591. 51 x 598

BIRD GROUP BEHAVIOR AND WE BPPBCTIVBIBSS OP BOOSTIC REPELLENTS

[Abstract of article by A. v. 'l'ikhonov)

[west] Bxperinental material is used as the basis for discussing the unique features
of the defensive reactions (flight, dispersal) of colonial birds and birds forming

62

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

temporary flocks. 'lhc principal attention is devoted to the adaptive features of
defensive reactions in different taxonomic and ecological groups of birds (wa-
footed, wading, gulls. Corvidae) having important significance to further develop-
ment of methods to control their behavior. Son geographic and interspecific as-
pects of the effectiveness of acoustic repellents are examined. Practical recon-sende-
tions are given on repelling birds from agricultural materials and fish culture
basins with the help of acoustic repellents.

Tables-m1, bibliography-~24 references.

UDC 591.51 :598
MIDI. OP BIRD BBiAVIOR BY ACDIBTIC REPELLBMS AT AIRPIBLIS OF M LIMA" 553.
[Abstract of article by V. S. Shevyakcvl

{text} The ornithological situation at airfields of the Lithuanian 888 was studied
in joint research conducted by representatives of airfield services. The effective-
ness of acoustic repellents upon different species cospositions and upon nesting

and migrating birds, and the action of repellents in different seasons and times

of the day were determined. Recommendations are given on organizing bioacoustic
measures employing acoustic repellents to frighten birds away from airfield landing
strips. Concrete descriptions are given of a permanent acoustic device at a landing
strip, and movable devices installed aboard motor vehicles.

Tables--1.

UDc S9l.Sl:599.6
[SE OF DEFENSIVE BEAVIOR IN (“GUIA'I'B comm.
[Abstract of article by L. H. Baskin]
[‘next] Ungulate defensive reactions are basically species-specific, while effective
stimuli are specific to populations. Formation of defensive behavior is associated
with assimilation of the experience of the mother and companions. ‘lhe relationship
between defenses and social behavior is significant. 'mese principles lie at the

basis of control of defensive behavior. line control methods differ in the case of
a defensive dominant and the case of a coﬁination of fear with other stimuli.

Bibliography—~14 references.

UDC 59l.636.599.6
CONTROL 0? ms BEBAVIOR OF AGRICULTURAL mm M? 1mm commas
[Abstract of article by '1‘. N. Venediktova, Ye. A. Karavayev, and V. G. Pushkarskiy]
[‘Dext] The prospects and basic principles of controlling the behavior of agricul-
tural animals at industrial livestock cosplexes are discussed. Methods for con-
trolling the motor reactions of pigs and cattle are proposed. Nays for reducing
aggressiveness and decreasing arousal of animals at times of regroupings and re-

locations are developed.

Tables—l. bibliography-~10 references.
63

FOR WI. US! ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 591.51:599

IDCAI. Dim, “MIC “ABILITY, MD MI“ man's OF 138 WHO
SIGNALS O? m PROGENY

[Abstract of article by A. A. Nikol'skiy]

[Text] the traits of acoustic signals produced by nae-ale are swject to geographic
yariability. However. the local specificity of these traits may be a consequence of
two processes-ogenetic inheritance and learning. are capability for imitation is
the basis of learning. The simlest case of imitation involves mnotonous execution
of a group species-specific signal. The imitation capability of manuals has been
studied very poorly. The signals of hybrids possess internediate traits in rela-
tion to the traits of the signals produced by the initial species (or subspecies) ,
which confirns the genetic inheritance of these traits. mutual imitation of acoustic
signals (serger of individual traits) may be a coepronise between the genetic
stability of species-specific traits and the need for creating isolation between
different groups.

Bibliography--21 references.
one '591. 34 :599. 323

WWW AND W BEHAVIOR. me now 01’ 0mm SM! m THE
AGGIESSIVE BEHAVIOR 0? HOUSE MICE

[Abstract of article by v. Ye. Sokolov, Ye. v. Kotenkova. and 2. P. Zinkevidll

[west] The results of many authors, including those of this article, on the effect
of volatile cosponents liberated by house mice upon the aggressive behavior of
individuals (mainly sales) of the same species are generalized. The following
problem are examined: me influence of experimental anosnia in house nice on
aggressive behavior: hormonal control of excretion of the phemmme causing
aggressive behavior, and of its sources: 'repellent" phemne and its relation-
ship to the pheromone of aggressive behavior: effect of prior exposure to olfactory
signals on aggressive behavior; the complexity of the structure of the aggressive
behavior pheromone, data on its chemical miticn, and the role of olfactory
signals in the aggressive behavior of other rodent species.

Tables-4, bibliography-72 references.
common: Izdatel'stvo “Hanks”, 1980

11004
C80: 1840/175

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MEDICAL DEMOGRAPEY

LIFE EXPECTANCY: ANALYSIS AND MODELING

Moscow PRODOLZHITEL'NOST' ZHIZNI: ANALIZ I HDDELIROVANIYE in Russian 1979 (signed
to press 8 Jun 79) pp 2, 156-157

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Life Expectancy: Analysis and Hodeling",
edited by Ye. M. Andreyev and A. G. Vishnevskiy, Department of Demographics,
Scientific Research Institute of Planning Computer Centers and Systems of

Economic Information, Central Statistical Administration of the USSR,

Izdatel'stvo "Statistika", 11,000 copies, 157 pages, illustrated]

[Text] As a result of lowering of the mortality rate, there has been a significant
increase in mean life expectancy in most countries of the world. However, the .
lowering of mortality differed in different countries, and even in different regions
of the same country. Analysis of these differences helps demonstrate the main
socioeconomic and biological factors, upon which the mortality level depends, and

to define the main directions of control for further decline thereof. The authors
of the articles in this collection explore the most important trends and patterns

of mortality in the USSR and foreign countries; they propose new methods for ana-
lyzing it and mathematical modeling.

This book is of interest to demographers, social hygienists, sociologists and
economists.

Contents Page

Foreword 3
Life Expectancy in the USSR: Differential Analysis (Ye. M. Andreyev) 7

1. Coal and tasks of investigation 7

2. Differentiation of mortality levels 9

J. Differentiation of mortality curves 13

a. Link between shape of mortality curve and mortality level 21

5. Factors determining the shape of the mortality curve 22
Typological Approach to the Study of Infant [or Child] Mortality

(K. Yu. Shaburov) 31
The Causes of Decline of Infant [child] Mortality During the Years of

the Great Patriotic War (R. I. Sifman [deceased]) 50
Cardiovascular Diseases and Life Expectancy (V. A. Biryukov) 61
One Method of Studying Survival Curves (Ye. M. Andreyev,

V. M. Dobrovol'sknya) 80

1. Method of linear approximation 82

2. Choice of standard 85

55

FOR 0F!1C1A1.USE¢DNLY
It”!(lﬂﬂ(lAl.USE(NVLY

3. Nature of time-related trend of parameters a and b
6. Dynamics of parameters a and b in different countries of the world
5. Correlation between parameters a and b to describe male and
female mortality
6. Analysis of the present situation in the area of mortality using
parameters a and b
Principles of Mathematical Description of the Essence of Mortality
Processes (V. F. Shukaylo) -
Construction of Simulation Model of Survival Time of a Real Generation
(A. Yu. Kardash) '
l. Streler-Hildvan theory
2. Construction of simulation model on-the basis of Streler-Hildvan
theory
Obituary of R. I. Sifman
Principal published scientific works by R. l. Sifnan

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Statistika", 1979

10,657
650: 1840/999

b6

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(HULY

“DC: 312.432/637
THE ENVIRONMENT AND HEALTH

Moscow OKRUZHAYUSHCHAYA SREDA I ZDOROV'YB CHELOVEKA in Russian 1979 (signed to
press 19 Oct 79) pp 4-7, 213-216

[Annotation, foreword and table of corzents from book "The Environment and Human
Health", edited by A. D. Lebedev, Institute of Geography, USSR Academy of Sciences,.
Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 6250 copies, 215 pages]

[Text] This monograph describes, for the first time in Soviet literature, the
principles and methods of geographic investigation of human ecology; several
theoretical concepts were developed on this subject. The conception was intro.
duced of territorial anthropoecological systems. It was demonstrated that
various types of environments can affect human health. and analysis was made of
geography approaches to optimization thereof.

Illustrations 32, tables 20; bibliography lists 459 items.
Foreword

Among problems of Soviet constructive geography, the mainstcn of which is research

on the scientific prerequisites for optimizing interaction between man, society and
the environment in the presence of the progressive scientific and technologica

revolution, the problem of environment and health holds a special place. This is
not simply a pressing problem; preservation and isprovement of men's health is one
of the important goals of a fully developed socialist society. It is related to
the search of criteria of optimum interaction between society and the environment,
to assure the environmental qualities needed by man.

The new Constitution of the USSR, which recognizes that the supreme goal of

social production is to meet the needs of the Soviet people, directly states

that a healthy environment is a guarantee of health of the citizens. Under condi-
tions of developed socialism, there is ample room to implenent this conception.
The decisions of the 23d, 24th and 25th CPSU congresses are directed toward this.

In accordance with the importance of this problem, general humanization of science
became evident in the early 1960's, including the system of geographic sciences.
Along with traditional studies of natural resources and conditions of placing
industries, there was a drastic increase in importance of studying man's environ-
ment, both natural and altered by industrial endeavors, including the markedly
urbanized environment. A new direction of research in medical geography was one
of the manifestations of this process; at one time it had devoted much attention

47

FOR‘OFIICIALIUSE(MVLY
IN)! CINHC]AL.USII(HULY

to infectious pathology of man, where the links between human diseases and the
environment are the simplest and easiest to study. At present, studies of eco-
logical geography of noninfectious diseases and pathological states of man began
to gain increasing significance in that branch of geography.

Studies in medical geography started as far back as 1962 at the Institute of
Geography, USSR Academy of Sciences. At first, they dealt with specific medico-
' geographic investigations of a regional geographic nature. Gradually, there was
intensification of geographic investigation of human ecology, on the basis of
methodological interpretation of the demonstrated correlations between human
diseases and the environment. There was substantial expansion of the range of
research. Of course, the characteristics of man's living and working conditions
do not merely refer to denonstration of environment-caused diseases and patholo-
gical states. He are dealing here with the need to investigate various features
of both the natural and urbanized environment. upon which depend, more or less,
favorable or unfavorable living conditions, and then to relate them to social,
biological, engineering or other needs of people. And it is important to do
this, not only for a single individual, but for different population groups, so-
cieties and mankind as a whole.

A new scientific direction, the study of geographic aspects of human ecology,
began to form in 1971 at the Institute of Geography. It was based on concep-
tions of integration of heterogeneous phenomena in specific parts of earth,
the possibility of society having an active influence on the environment in
accordance with set goals.

The constructive sets of modern geography enable us to formulate the question of
tasks and means of protecting and improving man's environment, to develop prob-
lems of optimization thereof. At the same time, the question of objective cri-
teria of quality of the environment, as well as range of human capacity to adapt
to unfavorable states thereof in general and individual changes in particular.
is acquiring special meaning to constructive formations.

It is apparent from the foregoing that studies of geographic aspects of human
ecology, which accumulated many of the achievements of modern medical geography,
developed expressly within the framework of constructive geography.

The scientific conception of this new direction, which is being developed at the
Institute of Geography, USSR Acadeny of Sciences, was formulated in articles by
A. D. Lebedev, V. S. Preobrazhenskiy and Ye. L.Raykh (Lebedev et al., 1972;
Preobrazhenskiy, Rnykh, 1974; Raykh, 1976). In addition, the main theses dealing
with research on geographic aspects of human ecology were discussed at a large
conference, which convened in 1975, of the Institute of Geography, USSR Academy
of Sciences, together with the Institute of Human Morphology, USSR Academy of
Medical Sciences. A collection, "Theory and Methods of Geographic Studies of
Human Ecology" (1974), with the complete text of papers, was published for this
conference.

In view of the fact that the questions raised at the conference inspired much
interest in the community, it was decided to continue to discuss them and
elaborate them further in the collection, "Geographic Aspects of Human Ecology"
(1975), which was prepared at the Institute of Geography, with the participation
of geographers, medical specialists, philosophers and other specialists.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F13R1OFFICJAI.IISEZ(MHLY

Thus, the monograph offered to the reader, "The Environment and Human Health," so to
speak, completes a certain stage of work on this complex and vast problem. As they
began to work on the monograph, the authors' objective was not so much to answer
comprehensively all questions that arose (which could not be done, not only because
of the limited size of the book, but current depth of work on the problem), as to
outline the main aspects of the problem. Porthisreason, the contents of this mono-
graph are limited primarily to discussion of those problems of human ecology, for
which the existence of geographic aspects is the most apparent. The authors also
took into consideration the fact that the most general theses of the close link
between human health and nature of social relations, which must serve as the founda-
tion for analysis of this problem, have already been discussed in the book,

"Society and Human Health" (1973), which was written by an international team of
authors, with 6. I. Tsaregorodtsev as the general editor.

The structure of the monograph reflects both conceptual theses of the new direc-
tion and specific studies. Among the latter, the sections dealing with the

effects on health of various socioeconomic changes in the presence of the scientific
and technological revolution, urbanization, pollution and effects on man of the
technogenic environment are probably referable to more traditional aspects of
recent literature, related to consideration of the state of man's environment. The
authors were aware of the fact that questions of man's life and endeavor under
urban conditions and development of cities in the interests of man were discussed

in the monograph by Yu. V. Hedvedkov,'?um and the Urban Environment” (1978), which
is also in the "Problems of Constructive Geography" series.

The sections of the book dealing with adaptation to the environment, including
extreme states thereof, and ecology of nutrition against the background of food
resources are more unusual.

The monograph ends with sections, in which an effort was made to outline the geo-
graphic aspects of the problem of optimizing the environment in their more general
form, as well as in one of the more special, but specific variants, pertaining

to regions of new economic development.

Extensive use was made in working on this book of the 10 years of experience of
several of its authors in research in the field of medical geography of the African
continent, and this was partially reflected in the choice of specific examples to

confirm general scientific theses.

Host of the work on writing and preparing this monograph was done by a team of
staff members of the Institute of Geography, USSR Academy of Sciences, consisting
of L. V. Haksimova, Ye. L. Raykh, L. I. Saravayskaya, M. P. Stradomskaya and P. A.
Frumkin under the general guidance of Ye. L. Raykh, A. D. Lebedev and V. S.
Preobrazhenskiy. In addition, some sections of the book were authored by V. P.
Alekscyev (Institute of Ethnography, USSR Academy of Sciences), 3. B. Prokhorov
(Institute of Geography of Siberia and the Far East, Siberian Department of the
USSR Academy of Sciences) and V. I. Rusanov (Tomsk State University).

Contents Page

Foreword 5

Chapter 1. The Environment and Human Ecology (Ye. L. Raykh) 8

Human ecology and geography 9
#9

FOR 0F11CLALIJSEIMHLY
lﬂﬂl(lﬂﬂ(]Al.USE(MVLY

Anthropoocological criteria of quality of the environment 12
The environment and human health 15
Chapter 2. Methodological Approaches to the Study of Anthropoecological

Systems (Ye. L. Raykh) . 20
Medicogeographic territorial.differentiation (8.8. Prokhorov, Ye. L. Raykh) 26
Anthropoclimatic territorial differentiation (V. I. Rusanov) 61

Chapter 3. Adaptation and Acclimatization (L. V. Maksimova) 52
Conception of human adaptation 52
Mechanisms of adaptation 55
Conditions affecting adaptation 57
Approaches to evaluation of adaptation 63

Chapter 4. Adaptation and Heredity (V. P. Alekaeyev) 69
The concept of acclimatization and adaptation in general biology 69
Adaptation and man _ 71
Morphophysiological variability of the human body 76
Standard reactions and geographic environmental conditions 77

Chapter 5. Extreme Natural Living Conditions (L. V. Maksimova, Ye. L. Raykh) 80
Approaches and methods of isolating territories with extra-e conditions 82
Characteristics of some regions with extreme natural conditions 97

Extremely cold regions 97
Extremely hot, dry regions 103-
Extremely hot, humid regions 108

Chapter 6. Urbanization and Human Health (M. P. Stradomskaya) 113
Urbanization as a process that forms the urban environment 113
Effect of urban environment on health 117
Changes in demographic indicators 121

Chapter 7. Environmental Pollution and Human Health (M. P. Stradomskaya,

Ye. L. Raykh) 126
Environmental pollution as an ecological process . 126
Geography of pollutants and location of industry and motor vehicles 130
Effect on human health of pollution of superficial water, and noise

pollution of the urban environment 141
Population pathology 146
Means of improving the environment ' 145

Chapter 8. Nutrition and Human Health (P. A. Prumkin [deceased],

L. I. Saravayskaya) 150

Food resources 150
Resources of plant origin 155
Resources of animal origin 158

Typical diets 162

Status of public nutrition 166

Chapter 9. Optimization of the Environment (Ye. L. Raykh) 171

ChapterlO. Design of Optinum Environment in Newly Developed Regions

(8. B. Prokhorov) 183
Problems of optimization of the environment at different stages of

land development 184
Elements of social adaptation directed at optimization of processes

of vital function of the public 187
Problems of optimization of the environment in specific medico-

geographic studies 191

Conclusion (Ye. L. Raykh) 195

Bibliography 200

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hanks", 1979

10,657
CSO: 1840/999 so

FOR‘OFFRJALIEHEOhﬂN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSIOLWY

AVIATION MEDICINE

Moscow AVIAISIOKNAYA HEDI‘I‘SINA in Russian 1980 (signed to press 5 Nov 79)
pp 2-4, 54-95, 247

(Annotation, foreword, chapters ’0 and 5, and table of contents from book "Aviation

Medicine". edited by Prof. A.N. Bahiychuk, doctor of medical sciences, Izdatel'stvo
DOSMF SSSR. 17,000 copies, 258 pages]

[Text] This book deals with questions of aviation medicine as they relate to the
features of medical support for flights aboard aircraft of the civil aviation and
DOSMP. Measures for creating optima: working conditions for aircrew personnel
are examined, the complex of measures insuring a high level of health among aircrew
personnel and their psychophysiological capacities is presented. and other top
priority matters of medical support to insure flight safety are examined.

Foreword

As a result of scientific and technical progress in the field of aviation technology,
the inventory of aircraft available to civil aviation is being constantly enlarged
with the ‘ru-l3lo, Tu-lSla, 11-62. 11-76, Tu-llolo, 11-86 and other airliners that

handle passengers and freight on a massive scale; and with the iii-6, Hi-8, 141-10

and Ka-26 helicopters that are used extensively in the various sectors of the
national economy. Aviation materiel is also being improved in the civil aviation
flying schools and the DOSAAP flying clubs.

Today's aircraft and helicopters are couple: flying machines equipped with the
latest autonatf: and semiautomatic devices, but. as before, nan plays the leading
role in the man-machine system.

The control of modern aircraft is regarded as a comprehensive task including. on
the one hand, the human operator, and on the other, the technical control devices,
with both elements interlinked.

Good reliability and efficient operation of this system can be insured only if
the specifications of the elements of the aircraft interacting directly with the

hunan operator conform to his physical and psychological capacities, and if flight
factors do not adversely affect the operator by lowering his work capacity.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this connection. medical backup for flight safety in the civil aviation and
DOSAAF is organized in two directions.

The first direction provides for the creation of the east favorable working
conditions for aircrew personnel in the broad sense of the concept.

These measures are realized directly in the design of the flight deck and its
equipment in accordance with special medical engineering requirements, and they
include rational layout of working places and equipment in them. devices that
insure the proper cabin enVironment, protection of the cabin environment from
pollution by noxious chemicals, protection against noise and vibration. observance
of lighting standards and so forth.

The second direction in medical backup for flight safety provides .‘or the set of
measures. whose main object is the human operator, that insures a high level of
health in aircrew personnel and their psychophysiological and psychological
capacities. such as to guarantee high reliability in the human element of the
system by which an aircraft or helicopter is controlled.

The medical measures in this direction cover candidate selection for civial aviation
flying schools and DOSAAF flying clubs in respect of candidates' state of health

and observation of their health during training and flight activities; evaluation

of candidates’ personal qualities also plays a certain role.

An important place is assigned to questions of work, rest um’ eating schedules.
and also to observation of the physical preparedness of aircrew and flight engineer
personal and other special aviation medicine matters.

One special area in insuring flight safety is medical analysis of the causes and
conditions of flying accidents and aircrew errors in order to prepare medical
recommendations to prevent them.

The most topical questions of medical backup for flight safety in civil aviation
and DOSMF aviation are discussed in the relevant chapters.

This book is intended for aviation doctors and other aviation specialists, and

its aim is an attempt to offer a systematized presentation of questions of aviation
medicine as they apply to the features of medical backup for flight safety in aircraft
of the civil aviation and DOSAAF.

Contents Page
Foreword .. ........ ....................................................... 3

Chapter I . Development of Aviation Medicine in the USSR
(Prof. A.N. Babiychuk, doctor of medical sciences) . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Chapter 2. Medical Aspects of Work and Rest Schedules for Aircrew Personnel
(V.F. Onishchenko, F.V. Babchinskiy. candidates of medical
sciences) . ..... .. 21
Chapter 3. Physiological and hygiene Characteristics of the Flight Deck
and Passenger Sections (G.A. Demidov, candidate of medical
sciences) ceases-ones ecu...- oncogenes-000.000...eoeoeoeo-oeoone ‘1

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The pilot's working Position oooeaeooooOslo-00.0000oooooooooooaoe.000-0000
Cabin microclimate in passenger aircraft ............;....................
Barometric pressure ....................................................
Air temperature in pressurized cabins ..................................
Relative humidity in pressurized cabins .....................u..........
Atmospheric ozone .......................................................
Chapter 4. The Role of Vision in Flight Activity
(1.0. Semikopnyy. candidate of medical sciences) ...............
Visual acuity and vision correction in flight activity ...................
Correction of vision .....................................................
Aircrew personnel vision in night flying .................................
Spatial orientation in flight ease-once...successes-eocvocooaacoaoesasaaoe
Significance of color vision in flight .................... ...............
Studies of pilot visual functions in an aircraft cabin ...................
Studies of visual perception of instruments ..............................
Chapter 5. Effects of Altitude Factors on the Body and Physiological-Hygiene
Features While in a Rarefied Atmosphere
(Prof. Ye.H. Peshkov. doctor of medical sciences) ..............
Hain altitude factors characterizing high-altitude flight, and their
biological significance ................................................
Change in barometric pressure and its effect on the body .................
Causes of and conditions for the onset of changes in barometric pressure
Effect on the body of gas expansion in the pneumatic cavities ..........
Changes in the body during liberation of gases dissolved in the blood
and tissues ..........................................................
Vrpor formation in the fluid and semifluid media of the body ...........
The role of partial pressure in supplying oxygen to the tissues at
high alcitmes .IOIUCOOOOOIOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00000000IOOOOODICOI...
Features of beathing atmospheric air at altitude .......................
Features of breathing an air-and-oxygen mixture ........................
Features of breathing pure oxygen (excluding air supplied via a mask) ...
Features of breathing hyperbaric oxygen ................................
Features of breathing hyperbaric oxygen with the use of compensation
(counterpressure) ....................................................
Chapter 6. Accelerations in Flight and Their Effect on the Human Body
(I.A Tsvetkov, doctor of medical sciences) .....................
Physical characteristics of accelerations and conditions in which
they occur .............................................................
Accelerations during takeoff and landing .................................
Accelerations in flight ..................................................
Chapter 7. Aviation Noise and Its Effect on the Body
(V.H. Kozin. candiate of medical sciences) .....................
Sources of noise and their characteristics ...............................
Effect of noise on the body ..............................................
Days of reducing noise and means of protection against noise factors .....
Chapter 8. Vibration (Yu.N. Kamenskiy, candidate of medical sciences) .....
Sources. Physical characteristics .......................................
Effect of vibration on the human body ....................................
Symptoms of vibration sickness ...........................................
Prevention of vibration sickness .........................................

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

42
55
#5
b9
50
52

54
55
57
58
61
64
65
66

68

68
69
69
71

73
76

76
76
82
83
87

93
96

96
103
lib

122
123
126
129
133
133
134
137
142
IN}! OI1WCJAI.IJSEI(MVLY

Chapter 9. Basic Principles in Medical Plight Examinations in the Civil
Avi‘tion (B.L. Gel'lan, candiate of Dedic.1 sciences) sssssososs
Medical monitoring in the periods between examinations ...................
Annual certification of aircrew personnel by the flight medical board .....
' Preflight ledical .0n1t0r1n8 see-asses...sssssasoosoossooeoosoeo0.0.0.0000
Medical monitoring during flying ...........................................

Chapter 10. Medical Support for Flying at Aviation Schools
(Prof. A.M. Babiychuk, doctor of medical sciences, A.G. Gridchin.
N.A. Pnlalﬂrchuk) oeosssoooooooosoossoosss'sIssssssseoelssosss.
Differences between visual flight and instrument flight ..................
Introductory, training, test and solo flights ............................
Instrmnc flight 000.0000.00.IIQOOOOIOOOOIII...COCOOCOIOOOOC0.00IOIOOOCIC
Chapter 11. Medical Support for Parachute Jumping
(I.A. Tevetkov. doctor of medical sciences) ...................
The parachute as a means of descending from altitude and the classification
of Parachute Jumps sonss-baoaaassosoossssessssssssssooaosasssassess-seas
The effect of parachute jumping on the human body ........................
Medical support for parachute jumping and the prevention of traumatism ...
Emergency escape from high-performance aircraft ..........................
G-loads developing in emergency escape for an aircraft and their effect '
on the body OOOOOOOI'OOOOIQII.0...0.0...I0...00.00....IIOOOIOOOIOOOOOIOO
Prevention of traumatisn during ejection .................................
Chapter 12. Medical Support for Aviation Sportsmen in the USSR DOSAAP
(Prof. A.N. Babiychuk, doctor of medical sciences.
“CA. Palmrchuk) 00.0.00...0.00.0.0....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIIIO.
Chapter 13. Search and Rescue for Aircrew Personnel and Passengers
(Prof. a.n. Babiychuk, doctor of medical sciences) ............
Chapter 14. Questions of Aviation Toxicology
CT.A. Drobyshevskaya, candidate of medical sciences) ..........
The degree and nature of the effects of noxious chemicals ................
Noxious chemicals in the air on the flight deck and in passenger sections
and monitoring the status of the air ...................................
Atmospheric ozone ......................................................
Radiation background from cosmic radiation .........1...................
Aviation fuel. lubricants. and products from their thermal-oxidative
breakdown. Preventive measures when servicing and repairing aviation
equine“: 00.0..ICOIOOOQOto...CO0.0....OIIUIOO'OOOOO.COICOOOOOOOOIOIIOO.
Aviation fuel. Kerosene. Gasoline ......................................
Chronic poisoning; effect on the skin; first aid ........................
Prevention of poisoning .............................;...................

Lubricants. .............................................................

A. Mineral 011 ...... a.nos-aoaoosossseesosoesseessosssssssssososssssss.

B. Synthetic lubricants ...............................................

c. Preventive aeasurea ................................................

Polymers used in the cabins of airliners .................................

Noxious chemicals in atmospheric air at airports, and monitoring them ....
Chapter 15. Medical Support in Crop-Spraying Operations

(L.D. Derevyanko. candidate of medical sciences) ..............

Sb

INDR OFTWC1AI.[EHE(MVLY

146
167
168

150
151

153
154
156
156

164
166

170
172
175

177

'180

186
188

196
197

200

203
204

206
206
207
208
208
209
209
210
217
218

222
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 16. Physiological-Hygiene Principles for Protecting Crews (or
Passengers) against Shortage of Oxygen in the Air
(Prof. Ye.H. Peshkov, doctor of medical sciences) ............. 229
Basic principles in group protection against reduced barometric pressure
and insufficient oxygen in the air ..................................... 229
Basic principles in individual protection against the effect of reduced
partial pressure for oxygen ............................................ 230
Basic principles and features of physiological-hygiene requirements for
oxygen equipment and for the amOunt of oxygen needed for crew members .. 231
Basic principles and features in determining physiological-hygiene '
requirements for oxygen equipment and the amount of oxygen needed for
passengers and stewards ................................................ 241
Bibliography ............................................................... 265

Chapter 4. The Role of Vision in Flight Activity.

In order to insure normal flight both by day and at night. pilots should have
vision good enough to read the instruments quickly; their eyes should focus well
when looking outside the aircraft cabin. particularly against a background of the
unfocused field of vision; they should be able to distinguish correctly any light
or colored orientation devices and light signals; they should be able to adapt
quickly to bright or dim illumination; they should be able to see instrument
readings in emergency and pre-emergency situations, that is. in time-deficit
conditions. It has been shown that in aircrew personnel the organ of sight is
under great stress when flying an aircraft in both clear and difficult weather
conditions.

According to both Soviet and foreign publications, about 90 percent of all information
the pilot receives comes throagh the visual analyzer. This has also been confirmed
by the fact that in today's aircraft there is a large number of flight instruments
which the pilot must constantly monitor. In individual types of aircraft there

are now as nany as 600 instruments and symbols carrying various kinds of visual
information. In addition. the instruments combine readings for several parameters
characterizing the aircraft's position in the air.

During flight, the visual analyzer is subjected to the effect of various adverse
factors, as for example the speed of flight, which is frequently combined with

a time deficit in observing the readings of the flight instruments and evaluating

the spatial position of the aircraft. Time deficit is seen particularly in emergency
situations when the pilot does not manage to perceive instrument readings correctly;
this can lead to pilot error.

Considerable significance for visual work in flight attaches to the layout of
instruments and control panels. It is common knowledge that many of them are
located not in the center of the pilot's field of vision but way above his head,
or on the side, to the left and right relative to his position in the cabin. In
order to maintain constant and simultaneous visual observations on all instruments

55

FORIOFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the various symbols within his working area, the pilot must not only turn his
head to either side but also change the position of his trunk within his seat,
as a result of which he is under constant stress.

In addition to his work on the flight deck the pilot must at the same time observe

the situation outside the cabin. This means that he frequently flies with unfavorable
light conditions in the cabin. At night, lighting conditions in the cabin are

not usually optimum since if illumination is normal the pilot will be able to

orient himself only poorly with respect to the situation outside. This is why

during night flying, illumination of the instrument panel and control console

should be minimal but at the same insure that instruments can be read. Irrational
lighting at the pilot's position can lead to premature visual fatigue.

In civil aviation many aircrew personnel are aged bS-SO or more. Efficiency in
their work depends not only their general physical condition but also on the status
of the visual analyzer. and in particular. its functional reserves. There is good
evidence that in pilots in the older age group, during the process of flying work
these reserves are rapidly depleted, and during intense and prolonged stress they
may be completely exhausted. In this connection, great significance attaches not
only to the status of the visual analyzer at any given moment but also to its
reserves for insuring further visual work at a sufficiently high level. Therefore.
in evaluating the status of the visual functions in aircrew personnel, particular
significance attaches to special examination methods that must be adequate for
flying work and sensitive enough to detect visual fatigue. Moreover, they should
assist the aviation doctors in detecting the early signs of pathologic and functional
disorders in the visual analyzer during the process of flying activity. It is

very important to conduct these studies in time-deficit conditions, and this is
achieved by giving subjects special tests.

Among the large number of visual functions there are some on which flight procedures
and ultimately flight safety depend directly. These include visual acuity and
accommodation, night vision, spatial orientation, color vision and so forth.

Visual Acuity and Vision Correction in Flight Activity

Visual acuity is determined by the resolution of the retina. The central part

of the retina. called the macula lutea retinae, insures the highest level of visual
acuity (1.0-1.5 and more). On the periphery, retinal resolution falls off sharply.
Thus, for example. at a distance of 10° from the macula lutea retinae, visual acuity
is 30 percent of the maximum, and at a distance of 20°. only 15 percent. Visual
stress in a pilot when monitoring instruments on the flight deck of an aircraft

and other orientation devices outside it is put mainly on the central vision.

Visual acuity is a quite stable function, but under flying conditions its level,
when acted upon by various adverse internal and external factors that the pilot
frequently encounters during flight, can be altered. Enhanced flight stress affects
visual acuity in pilots. As a result, as a rule there is fatigue of the ocular
muscles that insure ocular accommodation. Accommodation disorders in pilots are
observed most frequently at ages 65-50 or older. In most cases they cannot read

the text of flight documents rapidly and correctly at the usual distance without

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

appropriate correcting glasses. At the same time, given only a small degree of
age-related hyperopia (of the order of 1.0-1.5 diopter) they can distinguish the
instruments and other symbols on the control panel, located at a distance of some
60-80 centimeters from their eyes. quite satisfactorily. With a large degree of
presbyopia (for example. 3.0-3-5 diopter), and in maximum magnitudes of hyperopia
in refraction. which are regarded as serious medical conditions, instrument readings
can be seen with difficulty, while small symbols or alight deviations in needles
on scales of instruments cannot be seen at all. The onset of visual fatigue is
rapid in pilots aged 45-50, and in this connection they are forced more frequently
to take breaks in order to rest. At a greater distance. however, that is, outside
the aircraft cabin. as a rule these pilots are well oriented. The only exceptions
are those pilots who are found to have a high degree of hyperopia (1.5-2.0 diopter)
during medical flight examinations.

Vision acuity studies during medical flight examinations by boards are usually
done with the aid of the Golovina-Sivtsev chart, which consists of 12 rows of
symbols. This chart has serious shortcomings since the difference between the
rows of symbols on the test chart corresponding to visual acuity of 0.1-0.2 is
100 percent, 0.2 to 0.3. 50 percent, 0.3 to 0.6, 33 percent. and so forth. This
method allows error in evaluating visualiacuity when doing studies on individuals
with lowered visual acuity. This defect is eliminated in visual acuity studies
with the aid of the Kholina chart. which consists of 33 rows of Landolt's rings.
Visual acuity is determined with an accuracy down to [0 percent at all stages in
loss of acuity.

Thus, in cases where it is necessary to clarify visual acuity through conclusions
reached by a board, or for the purpose of prescribing prophylactic measures, the
use of the Kholina chart can be fully recommended as an additional method during
visual acuity studies.

Visual acuity studies can also be done with the aid of just one symbol. by using

a broken Landolt's ring. By moving it toward and away from the subject the threshold
distance can be determined for the correct response; which. given the appropriate
recalculation, will characterize visual acuity.

The ability of pilots to make observations outside the aircraft cabin during flight,
particularly during takeoff and landing. that is. when there are time constraints
on tracking ground and air orientation devices, is evaluated from the status of
dynamic visual acuity.

At a rate of movement for an object at up to 20°lsecond at an exposure time of

1.0 seconds, dynamic visual acuity is static (u.c. Kozyr'kova). Bach subsequent
increase in the rate at which an object moves relative to the preceding 20°/second
reduces dynamic visual acuity by 0.1 to 0.2 As a rule, as exposure time is reduced,
dyanmic visual acuity falls off. An individual ability to distinguish moving objects.

and also age-related changes in dynamic visual acuity. have been established. The
lowest indexes for it occur in individuals older than 40. In order to determine

the relationship between static and dynamic visual acuity so as to clarify individual
and age-related features in the perception of moving objects, it is advisable to
conduct studies on dynamic visual acuity with objects moving at a rate of 80°Isecond
at an exposure of 0.25-8.5 seconds.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Correction of Vision

The use in flight of correcting glasses by individuals with age-related weakening
of accommodation is provided for by the existing regulations on medical certification
for aircrew personnel in civil aviation.

Aircrew personnel with abnormal refraction are not permitted to fly when using
correcting glasses.

Compared with other countries that are members of the ICAO. in the Soviet Union;
standrad requirements for permitting aircrew personnel to fly are considerably
more stringent in terms of the status of the main visual functions (visual acuity,
refraction accommodation). Thus, for example, minimum requirements for visual
acuity for pilots of classes I and 2 aircraft within the civil aviation system
are 0.6-0.7, while abroad, these functional requirements have been lowered to 0.1-
0.3. that is. by a factor of 2 or 3.

Correcting glasses designed for aircrew personnel should possess a number of advantages
over regular correcting glasses made for the general public in our country. First

of all, flying glasses should be unbreakable. fireproof and dustproof to a certain
extent, fit closely on the pilot's face, and have reliable fastenings. They should
restrict the field of vision as little as possible. The optical glass in flying
glasses should have one or two, or even three focal distances if required. and

the glass should be able to be replaced easily for other glass. Bach crew member

who uses glasses should have a spare pair made to the same prescription when he

flies.

Aircrew Personnel Vision in Night Flying

In civil aviation night flying and flying at dusk now occur extensively. Hodern
navigational aids, improved airfield lighting and radar equipment make it possible
for pilots to continue flying in even the most complex weather conditions. However,
the increased stress on the visual analyzer in conditions of relatively low internal
cabin illumination can negatively affect the quality of the pilot's work. It has
been established that in night flying, pilot recognition of instrument readings

and weak light signals in the aircraft cabin and of orientation devices outside

the cabin is possible only if he has a high level not only of light sensitivity

but also of acuity in night vision. In this connection. the maintenance of
conditions that promote a high functional status for the visual analyzer in

aircrew personnel during reduced illumination is considered a major problem in
medical support for night flying.

In contrast to day vision. night vision is more labile. Factors reducing night
vision include insufficient oxygen supply, fatigue resulting from incorrect
organization of work by aircrews. the consumption of alcohol on the day before
flying and so forth. The use of vitamins by aircrew personnel is most important
for maintaining a high level of night vision. Thus, for example, if vitamins A,
C and B are deficient in food, night vision can be reduced extremely rapidly. At
the same time it can be rapidly restored to its initial level after vitamins have
been supplied to the pilot's body (n.3, Trusov).

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In our country. several instruments have been proposed and applied for light
sensitivity studies for the purpose of professional selection of pilots. They
have included in their time the extensive use of the Kravkov-Vishnevskiy

chamber. However, during the process of operating this instrument serious
defects were found that affected the quality of studies on night vision in
aircrew personnel. Thus, for example. the Kravkov-Vishnevskiy chamber did

not enable visual acuity to be studied in lowered illumination. as at night.

As a result, the medical board's conclusions on the suitability of aircrew

and trainee personnel for flying were based only on data on the rate of nighttime
adaptation. At the same time. visual acuity is of great significance for pilots'
visual orientation in conditions of lowered illumination. Nighttime adaptation
and visual acuity are insured by different elements of the retina and are not
mutually dependent. In medical flight examination certification. nighttime
adaptation and visual acuity for night can be studied differentially by using

the instrument of 1.0. Semikopnyy.* The instrument (figure 4.1) is.a portable
rectangular box with lightproof covers forming a dark chamber 50 centimeters

long. This length precludes the effect of accommodation on the results of

the study. Red and orange aircraft silhouettes and Landolt's rings are used

as the experimental test objects (figure 6.2). A facility for altering their
position during the study makes it possible at the same time to monitor the
indications of the subject. Inside the chamber. illumination can be varied
within the limits of 0.0004 to 3 lux. which makes it possible to create the
conditions of a natural night varying from dark cloud cover to moonlight, and
also to simulate twilight. Studies are done in three stages (baseline adaptation,
a 2-minute deadaptation. and the study proper of nighttime adaptation and acuity
in night vision). The fact that the instrument is portable and the facilities

for rapid studies (3 to 5 minutes) make it possible to use it (in flight) for pro-
fessional selection and subsequent monitoring of the status of night vision of aircrew
personnel in the periods between medical certification.

Many years of experience have shown that aircrew personnel with lowered night
vision functions in regard to nighttime adaptation Gmore than 60 seconds) and
with a visual acuity of less than 0.03 usually experience difficulties of some
kind in visual orientation during night flying. According to available figures,
they make up 2.2-2.6 percent of all individuals studied. During the winter

and spring period the number of individuals with lowered night vision is sharply
reduced (to 1 percent).

Comparative studies done on healthy subjects and individuals with impaired night
vision using the Semikopnyy instrument under clinical conditions at the Military
Medical Academy imeni S.M. Kirov and the Moscow Institute of Eye Diseases imeni
Gel'mgolts have made it possible to establish a standard for permitting flying work

 

*I.D. Semikopnyy's instrument for doing night vision studies has now been
adopted by the USSR Ministry of Health for supply to all medical establishments
in the country. In addition, in 1961 at the International Congress of Military
Ophthalmologists in Budapest it was confirmed as the standard instrument for
testing night vision in pilots in the socialist countries.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in pilots who have a rate of nighttime adaptation of no more than 60 seconds and

an acuity of night vision of at least 0.03. Individuals in whom the status of these
functions is lower than the established level are grounded for night flying for

a period of treatment. Experience in the Air Force has shown that timely administration
of prophylactic vitamin therapy for pilots with a rate of nighttime adaptation of
between 50 and 60 seconds and visual acuity down to 0.03 sharply reduces the number

of individuals grounded from night flying because of the status of this function.

 

Figure 4,] The Semikopnyy Instrument for Night Vision Studies

l. Housing 2. Panel 3. Lightproof cover 4. Obturator

 

Figure 4.2 Experimental Test Objects for Night Vision Studies using the
Semikopnyy Ins t rument

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Spatial Orientation in Flight

The pilot's spatial orientation includes definition of the bearing and distance
of visible orientation devices and also evaluation of their relative locations.
For a pilot to judge the quality of visual evaluation of distance under flight
conditions it is necessary for him to have an adequately high level of perception
for the relative and absolute distance of objects.

Depending on the observation conditions. visual orientation in space is effected

in binocular or monocular vision. However, in nonocular vision the signs characterising
spatial vision are perceived less precisely. Binocular vision insures better quality
perception of space because of the additional pulses arriving in the cerebral cortex
from the eye muscles in convergence and divergence.

Observation of space is nade difficult in a so-called "empty field," when there

are no kinds of landmarks, as for emple against the background of the sea. in

a cloudless sky, or at night with lowered illumination. The pilot becomes to some
extent myopic and unable to observe distant landnarks. The Howard-Dolmen instrument
is used for studying spatial vision in pilots. In research work, many people use
various modifications of this instrument.

Some interest has been aroused in the modification made by the Polish ophthalmologist
E. Zagar (1961). This instrument makes it possible simultaneously to evaluate the
depth between objects and their height. Three rods (or needles), one of which

moves. are used as the test objects. The subject observes the object through an
aperture in a screen measuring 20 centimeters wide by 12 centimeters high while

his head is restrained by a special device.

A modification of the intrument--a portable version with an indpendent power supply.
named the "Neptm,"--has been deveIOped at the State Optics Institute (Leningrad)
for evaluating relative distance in flight activity conditions (directly at the
pilot's working area). however. because of the extremely small dimensions of the
test objects and the small distance at which they are presented to the subject (not
froa 5 meters as provided for by the lloward-Dolaan method, but from 20 centimeters).
accuracy and reliability of results are reduced. At this distance it is not so
much the status of spatial vision but the status of accomodation in the subject
that is determined.

In order to judge the quality of visual evaluation of distance in flight activity
conditions, in I967 V.V. Baranovskiy developed an instrument with whose aid individual
sensitivity is deternined to basic stimuli that have a signal value in evaluating
absolute distance. The study takes no more than 3 to 5 minutes, which makes it
possible to use this instrment in civil aviation and DOSAAP during medical flight
examinations, and in research work. Within the instrument a set of stimuli are
modeled. typical for the visual perception of changes in absolute distance. The
instrument makes it possible to alter the magnitude of the object and the degree

of its approach, which corresponds to real observation of an object moving within
limits of 30 to 50 meters.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A dependence has been established between the quality of flying and the status of
absolute distance on the instrument; this dependence is particularly noted when

an aircraft is landing. In individuals asking good or excellent landings, the
perception threshold is l to 9 meters. In satisfactory and unsatisfactory

landings. thresholds increase to 18 meters. Threshold magnitudes of 10 meters for
absolute distance when an object is moving away from the observer have been established
as standard.

When studying spatial vision and the facility to evaluate a spatial position correctly
during.flight, it is also necessary to know the status of other visual functions

that participate directly or indirectly in spatial vision and insure that it is

at an adequately high level. These functions include binocular vision, muscular
balance in the eyes, the availability of fusion reserves and others.

The status of muscular balance in the eyes is insured by the correct placement of
the two eyeballs in their orbits; this is known as orthophoria. In this version

of muscular balance, both eyes are directed toward a fixed point without additional
load. However, other innate versions of muscular balance also exist, as for example
in latent strabismus, when the visual axis of one eye does not match that of the
other. This condition is known as heterophoria. Fixation on a point in space by
both eyes is in this case compensated by fusion forces in the oculomotor muscles.

In this connection it is generally assumed that heterophoria is an indicator of
potential instability in binocular vision. However, experimental studies by V.V.
Baranovskiy and Yu.P. Petrova using a measured load on the convergence-accommodation
apparatus have shown that stability of binocular vision in aircrew personnel with
heterophoria of 2° is greater than in orthophoria or heterophoria of 1°. It is
suggested that this kind of stability in binocular vision in heterophoria is explained
by the itineration of the nerve pathways in the central part of the visual analyzer
resulting from continuous excitation of the retinal convergence reflex to the
activity.

These data have served as a basis for lifting the restriction on flying in individuals
with impairment of this function. Practical flying activity has shown that there
have been no aviation accidents associated with heterophoria in pilots.

According to some authors (E. Zagar). muscular equilibrium is considered impaired
only when esophoria reaches 3.0 D and exophoria 5.0 D for distance, and esophoria
up to 2.0 D and exophoria up to 8.0 D for close vision.

when doing studies on the oculomotor apparatus it is very important to rule out
oculomotor paralysis and paresis, which can be detected by using the double-image
method (with colored glasses). This method is used when individuals complain of
diplopia, and also when, during diploscope studies, the symbols on the chart are
read by the subji t not along one horizontal line, because the diplogram for one
eye is higher than that for the other.

Pusion reserves make up that status of muscular strength in the external and internal
ocular muscles in convergence and divergence. They determine the binocular stability
of both eyes. To study this function, a special device called a Herschel prism

is now in series production in the GDR. Two prisms are mounted in a special frame
with a handle for holding it in the hand. In the zero position the prisms neutralize

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

each other and appear as plain glass. when one prism is turned within the frame
relative to the other. refraction is either increased or decreased. During the
study the prism is held in front of the left or right eye. The subject focuses
both eyes on a point at a distance of 1 meter. The prism is then rotated with the
base facing the nose. or the other way round. In the first case fusion reserves
on the internal ocular muscles will be determined. and in the latter case, the
external muscles. The instrument is sealed in diopters.

Significance of Color Vision in Flight

The ability to perceive different colors in the working area and outside it is an
innate function related to day vision. At night, colors are not distinguished by
their shade at illuminations less than 0.1 lux. At night. individuals with normal
color vision distinguish unlit colored orientation devices or colored objects on

or color brightness. In the dark an orange-red shade is perceived as mostly dark.
while a green-blue shade is mostly light.

The ability to distinguish colors normally is mandatory for aircrew personnel, sine:
during flight it is essential to distinguish rapidly and accurately signals such

as airport and navigational lights. warning signals. rockets. flags and so forth.

The ability to distinguish the color of landmarks on the ground under local conditions
is just as important; this is essential, in particular. in forced landings. Colored
light indicators are used extensively in the aircraft cabin.

Luminous colored signals are perceived much better than signals illuminated by
natural light. however, the angular dimensions of signals and their brightness
characteristics are by no means unimportant in the pilot's discriminator ability.
Colored signals that are small or at extremely low brightness may pass quite unnoticed
or be taken as a signal of another color if the pilot is in a time-deficit situation.
Color vision can be impaired in various kinds of nervous disorders or in nervous
stress. as frequently occurs during flight under complicated conditions. and also
subsequent to diseases of the eyes or central nervous system

Color vision studies can be done using several methods: with the aid of color charts,
anomaloscopes and colored lights. The Ye.B. Rabkin polychromatic charts are usually
used in medical certification for aircrew personnel. In studies of the status of
color vision. when using these charts the function is considered defective when
there is incorrect reading of its individual test objects. without taking into
account the features of professional activity. Research conducted by A.B. Plehel‘
has shown that type C anomalous trichromats can correctly distinguish the colored

lights used in aviation practice.

The decisive factor in studies of color vision by medical flight certification
boards should be the determination of thresholds for distinguiahing colors. The
(Rautin) anomaloscope is the most suitable for this; it makes it possible to determine

acuity in distinguishing color in each of the systems of the color-perception
apparatuses of the eyes. namely those for red, green and blue. Using this method

it is possible to detect early impairment of color vision.

63

INJR OFTNCIAL USEZCMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of colored lights does not permit quantitative differentiation in the status
of color vision but it does insure maxim. approximation to conditions in flying
work connected with distinguishing colored signals used in aviation. The colored-
light method is used to present to the subject lights with different color
characteristics (as in air navigational lights) at great distances (up to 2 to 3
kilometers) under airfield conditions.

The visual work capacity of aircrew personnel in civil aviation is evaluated on

the basis of results froa testing visual functions at relative rest, that is. on
nonflying days. Naturally. under these conditions, the maxim: level of visual
functions is determined. and in the process of flying activity it can be substantially
changed as the result of adverse factors in flight.

Studies of Pilot Visual Functions in an Aircraft Cabin

With respect to the working conditions of the pilot, it is first of all essential
to evaluate the status of the visual functions subject to the greatest change in
the process of flying activity. These functions include accommodation, stability
of clear sight, visual throughput capacity. and close visual acuity. Evaluation
of visual perception of instruments and signs by pilots should be done directly
in the working area of the aircraft cabin. During the first stage, these studies
can be done in up-to-date simulators during the training of aircrew personnel in
whom impairment of visual functions was found during the course of medical flight
examination boards or during hospital examinations.

Accomodation studies can be done with the aid of a portable ergograph. determination
of close and distant points in clear vision separately for each eye, or by moving

a special text closer to and further away from the subject's eyes. For this it

is necessary to have a special ruler with a movable area on which Lendolt's rings

or letters from regular charts for studying close visual acuity can be affixed.

For young individuals (20 to 30) text 5 or 6 from this chart can be used. tor older
individuals the text should be selected on an individual basis and should have
considerably larger angular dimensions.

Determination of stability in clear sight consists of fixed observation of rings
with gaps (the gap being equal to 1/5 of the ring diameter) for two or three minutes
at a distance close to threshold for the sight of a nonfatigued eye. In isolated
periods the gap in the ring is observed clearly while in others it merges with the
ring. "Block" tests consisting of an image of groups of squares can be used for
the same purpose. When looking at a given test the subject sees the figures and
the background alternately. This corresponds to a clear sight of the gap in the
ring. Exposure of the "block" test is the same. here, account is taken of the
time that the squares themselves are seen (one above and two below: position I)
and the time that they are not seen, that is. the time that the backgromd is seen
(two squares above and one below: position II).

Results from this study are expressed by the relationship between the time of clear
sight (position I) to total exposure time (positions I and II). When using the
"block" test it is essential to present them against a white background. The subject
should gaze fixedly at the center of the squares for three minutes. Using a stopwatch,
the time for the shift in the process of perception is recorded for various positions.

610

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Visual throughput capacity is studied with the aid of the Krzywoglawy chart, which
is a square arrangement of 49 rings with gaps. Each ring has the gap in one of
eight possible directions (above, below. on the right. on the left. UPPer left.
lower left. upper right, lower right). The probability of the ring being in any
one of these position is one in eight. The chart is placed at the level of an
instrument panel. Illumination on it shoald correspond to conditions in appropriate
cabin illumination. Aircrew personnel being tested determine the position of the
gaps in the rings as rapidly as they are able. Each response equals 3 bits (logZ
1/8). The information capacity of the entire chart is 147 bits (3 x 109). As
required. the capacity of the chart can be doubled or trebled during testing by
turning it one way or the ether.

Incorrect identification of a ring means a loss of three bits of information. Taking
into account the time spent on the test, throughput capacity equals

110') - (3n)
‘1'

where n is the number of incorrectly recognized or missed rings. and ‘i‘ is the time
that the chart was exposed.

Change in the throughput capacity of the visual analyzer can also be evaluated from
the number of errors made before and after stress, that is, before and after flying.
The physician must have a second copy of the chart to monitor and record errors.
Before the test it is necessary to make four or five dmy runs with each subject.

Studies of Visual Perception of Instruments

As the result of age-related changes in ocular accomodation or other impairments

of the visual analyzer. the ability for good perception of visible objects can be
lost. In this connection, studies of the quality of visual discrimination of
instrument readings under aircraft cabin conditions (or in simulators) should be

done on individuals at various ages, wearing, if required, correcting glasses that
compensate accomodation impairments or refraction anomalies. Here it is essential
to take into account fatigue in aircrew personnel during the process of working

under various illwnination conditions for the instrument panel. In one case the

level of illumination is set by the pilot himself. In the other two cases illumination
should correspond to the minimal: and maximum levels permitted by the standards (Sector
Standard 1.00796-75).

The small symbols from the No 5 or No 6 Sivtsev chart, designed for studies of close
visual acuity. are then set on the instruent panel level against one of the
instruments. Evaluation of the visual function can also be done from accurate and
rapid discrimination of readings of navigatonal instruments at various levels of
illumination. Response time is recorded using a stopvatch. Errors made in discerning
instrument readings are considered separately.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 5. Effects of Altitude Factors on the Body and the Physiological-
Hygiene Features While in a Rarefied Atnosphere.

Main Altitude Factors Characterizing High-Altitude Flight, and Their Biological
Significance.

The properties and condition of ground-level atmosphere largely determine the
characteristics of all life-support facilities. primarily altitude and oxygen
equipment. and hence. the working conditions for the crew.

The atmosphere consists of several layers, each of which has its own character in
terms of changes in and properties of physical-meteorological parameters. The
lowest and most dense layer of the Earth's atmosphere is called the troposphere;
it extends from the Earth's surface up to variOus heights in different parts of
the world: above the pole up to 7.000~8,000 meters, in the middle latitudes up to
l0.000-ll.000 meters, and above the eQuator up to 17,000-18,000 meters.

The troposphere is of great biological importance and a main element in the Earth's
entire ecologic system in which the metabolic processes essential for maintaining
life take place.

Above the troposphere is the stratosphere. In terms of its physical-meteorological
characteristics it is more stable.

The absence of fog and dust in the stratosphere determines the good visibility and
more favorable flying conditions. The stratosphere extends up to 50.000-60.000
meters. Air temperature in the stratosphere at altitudes of 11,000 to 32,000 meters
is almost constant within the range -56°C to -S7°C.

Atmospheric air is a mixture of various gases whose composition at various locations
on the Earth's surface and at various altitudes remains virtually unchanged; up
to 7,000 meters it also contains moisture.

At sea level. the main gases are found in air in the following proportions: nitrogen
78.08 percent. oxygen 20.95 percent, argon 0.93 percent. carbon dioxide 0.03 percent.
In atmospheric air. oxygen is found in three forms, namely molecular. atomic. and

in the form of ozone.

Atomic oxygen possesses toxic properties. However, considering that it is found
at altitudes greater than 100,000 meters. it presents no danger to the human body.

The availability of molecular oxygen in atmospheric air is of great biological
significance since it insures the conditions essential for supporting life. The
redox processes in the human body take place thanks to molecular oxygen.

Ozone is found in small amounts in atmospheric air. It is formed mainly by the
action of ultraviolet rays from the Sun and cosmic rays. and, in the lower atmosphere,

in lightning discharges. Ozone possesses high biological activity and toxic properties
and is a powerful oxidant.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hhile indifferent for the body, nitrogen is of great importance in forming the
gaseous medium and atmospheric pressure. but it cannot be considered harmless for

the body during changes in barometric pressure.

Carbon dioxide is a metabolic end product. Increasing or decreasing the amOunt
of carbon dioxide in the body can affect the nature of functional acitivity in
various systems.

Various kinds of radiation in the atmosphere are of certain biological significance.
They include electromagnetic, corpuscular, ultraviolet, X-rays and others.

Barometric pressure falls with altitude, and as it falls partial pressure for oxygen
also falls.

At great altitudes the human body is subjected to comprehensive effects from the
following adverse factors: lowered partial pressure for oxygen. low barometric
preSSure, low air temperature. radiant energy. and others. of these, the most
adverse are lowered partial pressure for oxygen and the drop in barometric
pressure.

Change in Barometric Pressure and its Effect on the Body
Causes of and Conditions for the Onset of Changes in Barometric Pressure _,

Changes in barometric pressure in terms both of rate and magnitude are not without
consequence for the body. Man feels pressure gradient during climbing to or
descending from altitude, and also when an aircraft cabin depressurizes. By a
pressure gradient is meant an increase or decrease in barometric pressure; and also
the difference between the pressure of the surrounding medium and the pressure in
a pressurized aircraft cabin.

Depending on its direction, a gradient is either a decompression gradient or a
compression gracient, that is. it is either falling or rising. The main characteristics
of a pressure gradient are the rate. the multiplicity factor. the magnitude and

the duration.

The rate of a gradient is the change in the magnitude of pressure per unit of time
(mmHg per second). Gradient multiplicity factor is defined as the relationship
between the pressure in a pressurized cabin (in normal flight) and the barometric
pressure of the surrounding medium. Gradient magnitude is defined by the difference
in barometric pressure inside the cabin before and after depressurization.

Pressure gradients that occur in less than one second are called explosive
decompression. This kind of situation can occur in sudden accidental depressurization
of the cabin. In explosive decompression there is a noise like an explosion which

is the sound of the air rushing out of the cabin; condensation of air vapors forms
fog and dust in the cabin.

The causes of cabin depressurizntion during flight at great altitudes, and of changes
in barometric pressure in the cabin, can be damage to the walls or glazing (windows),
engine failure or failure of the air-conditioning system, and inadequate pressurization
of individual cabin elements because of malfunction.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Change in the barometric pressure during flight exerts a definite effect on the bodies
of the pilot and passengers. and the magnitude of this effect depends on cabin
pressurization and the operation of systems regulating pressure. In a drop in
barometric pressure. various kinds of dyabarism processes can occur. that is.
disorders in the body associated with the change in barometric pressure that depend
on a number of conditions. including the time taken for the pressure change. the
frequency, and the multiplicity factor of the gradient. Dysbarism processes are
usually divided into three main groups:

processes associated with the expansion of gases and the occurrence of excess pressure
in the hollow organs and difficultiesinequmlizing this pressure with_ambient pressure;
this is the phenomenon of altitude meteorism associated with the expansion of gases

in the gastrointestinal tract. blocked ears, earache, pain in the area of the sinus
maxillaris and the sinus frontalis, and so forth;

processes associated with the formation of gas bubbles in the tissue from gases
previously dissolved in the tissues (altitude joint and muscular pain, altitude cough
and other decompression disorders);

processes associated with the formation of vapors (”boiling?) in fluid and semifluid
mediums. particularly the onset of altitude subcutaneous emphysema.

Effect on the Body of Gas Expansion in the Pneumatic Cavities

Processes associated with the expansion of gases and increased pressure in the pneumatic
cavities in the human body are usually considered in the following aspects:

in decreased ambient pressure--a decompression gradient;

in increased ambient pressure—-a compression gradient;

in small pressure variations in a pressurized cabin during varying flight conditions.
Climbing to altitude is accompanied by an increase in the volume of gases present

in the gastrointestinal tract (altitude meteorism) (see table 5.1 )

Table 5.! Characteristics of the Increase in the Circumference of the Torso

at the Level of the Abdomen at Altitudes 2,000-16,000 Meters

Altitude in meters
Condition 2000 4000 6000 8000 10,000 12,000 lb,000

 

 

Perimeter of the

torso at the level 0.6- I.0- 2.2- 4.0- 5.1- 6.4- 8.2-
of the abdomen 0.8 .8 3.4 6.7 5.8 7.9 10.5
(umbilicus). cm.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l1)R 0W“W(1Al.l£3EZCMQLY

As the intestines dilate and abdominal pressure rises. the mobility of the diaphragm
is restricted during inhalation and exhalation. the depth of respiration is reduced
and the tidal volume of the lungs is decreased. Pressure on the diaphragm changes

the position of the heart and as a result circulation is impeded. In addition to

the mechanical effect on internal organs and the circulatory and respiratory systems.
altitude meteorism exerts a marked reflex influence on other organs and systems. With
only a slight increase in the expansion of gases in the intestine. individuals experience
unpleasant sensations in the abdominal field. With a significant increase in the
volume of gases in the intestines. severe autonomic vascular disorders can develop.
The ingestion of food rich in fat or of carbonated beverages pronotes the formation
of intestinal gas.

Gradual decrease in the pressure of the surrounding medium causes virtually no
unpleasant sensations in the middle ear or the frontal and maxillary sinuses.
However. in sharp pressure gradients or if there are inflammatory processes present.
blocking of the ears and sensations of "popping" and pain can occur as the result
of swelling of the mucosa and stenosis of the canals. A drop in pressure in the

surrounding medium is usually tolerated better than an increase, since air is removed
from a cavity more easily than it is forced in.

If the pressure gradient moves from low to high. in most individuals the unpleasant
sensations and popping and pain in the ears are uSually experienced when the gradient
is moving at the rate of 1.2-1.6 mmHg/second. The pressure difference formed between
the cavity of the middle ear and the surrounding medium acts as a definite irritant
on the nerve endings. Similar phenomena occur in the frontal and paranasal sinuses
when equalization of pressure is impeded in the case of compression gradients.

Rapid (explosive) decompression. which is most often associated with rapid cabin
depressurization during flight. occupies a special place in the general scheme of
the effect of barometric pressure on the human body. The special feature of its
effect is that the drop in pressure in the medium surrounding the body creates a
large difference between the pressure in the hollow organs and in the surrounding
medium. Excess air pressure (free gas) in the hollow organs (intestines. paranasal
sinuses. frontal sinuses. lungs) can cause unpleasant sensations and sometimes even
pain. The effect of explosive decompression on the body depends mainly on the
magnitude and duration of the gradient. and also on the patency of the respiratory
airways. respiratory resistance. the phase of the respiratory cycle. the design

of oxygen masks. means of compensation and the method by which oxygen is being fed
to the lungs.

During decompression. under the effect of excess pressure occurring at the moment

of decompression pulmonary tissue is subjected to expansion and the diaphragm is
displaced downward. A stream of nerve impulses passes to the central nervous system
from the lungs. diaphragm and other internal organs. In the first instant of the
effect there is a reflex deep exhalation followed: by breath holding and. after

a certain period of time. rhythm disorder. The structure of the respiratory cycle
is disrupted especially significantly when the explosive decompression coincides
with the inhalation phase. Respiratory muscles are usually stressed and the amplitude
of the electromyogram for the respiratory intercostal muscle is increased. This
change in the respiratory function is the body's protective response to prevent

the danger of overdilation of the the lungs.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Small pressure variations of varying amplitude and duration occurring during various
flight conditions also affect the body. In isolated cases variations in pressure
can reach 18-20 mmﬁg at a rate of 7-8 mmﬂg/sec. These pressure changes can cause
unpleasant sensations in the ears, headache. and the phenomenon of general malaise.
Their intensity depends on the duration of the effect.

In accordance with standards for air worthiness and the requirements for aircraft
cabin pressurization in civil aviation, the rate of pressure change established

for the cabin at any stage of flight, including during climbing and descending from
altitude, should not exceed 0.18 mmng/sec 1152. However. even these magnitudes

of variation can cause unpleasant sensations in the ears in some individuals.

Changes in the Body During the Liberation of Gases Dissolved in the Blood and
Tissues.

Above altitudes of 7.000-8.000 meters, any further drop in barometric pressure can

be accompanied by decompression disorders that include a range of various changes

in the body. including altitude pain in the joints and muscles. dermal itch, altitude
cough. retrosternal pain and so forth. Decompression disorders are seen in different
ways in different individuals. The probability of their occurrence and their duration
depend on the degree of atmospheric rarefaction. the rate of climb, the length of

time spent at altitude, the degree of body cooling. physical stress and so forth.
Decompression disorders are very rarely seen until an altitude of 7,000-8,000 meters
has been maintained for 5 minutes. The longer these altitudes are maintained the
greater the percentage of cases of decompression disorders.

For example, while maintaining altitudes of 10,500-ll,000 meters for 1 hour,
decompression disorders are seen in 25-30 percent of individuals (averaged figure).
Physical stress increases the onset of disorders to 30-45 percent. Most authors
think that the cause of the main forms of decompression disorders is the formation
and expulsion of bubbles of nitrogen or some other indifferent gas dissolved in
body fluids and tissaes. Carbon dioxide is also involved in the formation of gas
bubbles. Reduced barometric pressure leads to a situation in which body tissues
become saturated and oversaturated. The content of gases in the tissues is greater
than the limit they can retain at a given pressure. Under these conditions the
so-called process of desaturation of the body from gases takes place. Excess gas
contained in the tissues passes into the blood. This process depends on the duration
and multiplicity factor of the barometric pressure gradient. In a slow pressure
gradient the gases are given off mainly by diffusion. In a rapid pressure gradient
gas in dissolved state is given off in the form of bubbles.

In falling barometric pressure the body tissues possess the ability to retain a
certain amount of excess gas. This ability of the tissue is characterized by the
coefficient of saturation. which is defined as the relationship between the pressure
of a gas dissolved in a fluid and the total ambient pressure.

The ability of the tissues to retain gases in a slightly oversaturated state creates
conditions for maintenance of stability in the internal physicochemical medium.
During a sharp barometric pressure gradient moving downward, when gas saturation

in the tissues exceeds the maximum limit, gas bubbles are formed. Intensity of
bubble formation depends on the difference in the partial pressure of the gas

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FF1C1A1.USE!ONLX

dissolved in the tissues and the pressure of alveolar air. and also on the hydrostatic
pressure in tissues. the condition of the inner surfaces of the vessels, temperature,
and the surface tension of fluid mediums in the body. The bubbles that form exert
pressure on the tissue surrounding them and cause pain.

Typically. gas bubbles can be washed out by venous blood and reach the capillaries
through migration. When they enter the pulmonary capillaries the gas bubbles can
cause a tickling in the throat and and coughing. When they reach the field of the

central nervous system they can cause dizziness, vision changes. paresis. convulsions,
paralysis. deterioration of the general condition and loss of work ability. Pain

can result from reflex spasms in capillaries and vessels (as the result of deformation).

Prolonged pain, in which the dynamic equilibrium of basic nerve processes begins

to be disrupted. is frequently accompanied by a secondary reflex response. In these
cases, instead of the normal sensations of pain, secondary sensations can occur,
with functional disorders in most of the body's systems. acute loss of work ability
and collapse (shock).

In some cases decompression disorders are seen in the form of loss of sensation

in individual parts of the body or pain along nerve roots. If there are lesions

of the higher sections of the central nervous system there can be serious impairment
of respiration and the activity of the cardiovascular system. accompanied by
manifestations of general asthenia. dizziness, excessive perspiration. nausea. a
precollapse condition and sometimes less of consciousness.

Vapor Formation in the Fluid and Semifluid Media of the Body.

In conditions of lowered barometric pressure, belou 47 mmﬂg (at altitudes above

19,200 meters) with a body temperature of 37'c. the process of vapor formation.
so-called "boiling' of biological fluid media, takes place in the most porous tissues
of the body as the result of the diffusion of water vapor and dissolved gases (oxygen,
nitrogen, carbon dioxide and others). Here. the so-called "altitude" tissue emphysema
develops (figure 5.1 I.

The formation of vapor takes place regardless of the degree of blood oxygen saturation.
As altitude increases. the gas bubbles formed initially expand. separating the
surrounding soft tissues. Individuals experiencing this first begin to feel

pressure and then difficulty in moving the hands and fingers. and pain is sometimes
felt at the site of the gas bubble.

After descending from altitude. the reverse process takes place (vapor condensation);
the gas bubble first decreases in volume and then completely disappears. Tissue
emphysema forms mainly on skin surfaces not protected by compensating devices. and
it is also of a localized character limited to some small area; accordingly. for
short periods of time (5-10 minutes) itpresentsno danger to the life of a human
being wearing a special compensating outfit.

In order to prevent the formation of vapor on the surface of the body appropriate
counterpressure is created. which should be greater than 47 mmﬂg when added to
atmospheric pressure. The use of full-pressure suits or compensating suits and

of compensating gloves and hose for the hands and feet substantially reduces the
danger of vapor formation in biological fluids in the human body at high altitudes.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.1 Image of Hands in Conditions of Rarefied Air at Barometric Pressure
of 8.5 Imllg with the Onset of Altitude Mb”!!!

Key: A and B. Initial condition at barometric pressure of 760 Inﬂg
c and D. At baronetric pressure of 8.5 mmHg after 10 minutes
(the images on the left are outside the hand. the ones on the

right are X-ray pictures)

The left hand is protected by a compensating glove.

1. Image of the layers of the compensating glove with air residues

2. Raising of the skin on the back of the hand because of the vapor
and gas bubbles formed beneath the skin

3. Image of expanded air in the compensating glove

4. X-ray pictute of the vapor and gas bubble on the back of the hand

(altitude tissue emphysema)

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Role of Partial Pressure in Supplying Oxygen to the Tissues at High Altitudes
Features of Breathing Atmospheric Air at Altitude

Under the conditions of rarefied atmosphere, the magnitude of partial pressure for
oxygen is of great importance for the human body since the process of oxygen
saturation in the body takes place only when oxygen partial pressure in the
pulmonary alveoli is greater than in the capillary blood in the alveolar walls,
and in other tissues when it is less than that of capillary blood. Hagnitudes for
partial pressure for oxygen and carbon dioxide in inhaled air and the human blood
and tissues in sea-level conditions are shown in table 5.2.

 

Table 5.2
Partial pressure E!!!
0b1ect Oxygen Carbon dioxide
Inhaled air 159 0.23
Alveolar air 100-110 40
Arterial blood 75-98 35-b3
Venous blood 35-45 41-50
Body tissues 10-20 55-60

Water vapor and carbon dioxide with a partial pressure of #7 mmﬂg and 40 mmHg
respectively are always present in alveolar air. Oxygen partial pressure is
determined by using the following formulas:

in alveolar air

0
P alv. - (P - 67)__2_ _ .
°2 “ 100 "° '
in inhaled air (under mask and in the upper airways)
0
Po inhal. - (pn- 1.7) _2 ,
2 100 ’
in atmospheric air
02
Pozatl'll. I Pun—0.0 ;
where P0 is partial pressure for oxygen. man; Pn is atmospheric pressure, mung;

2
0 is the content of oxygen in inhaled air. volumetric percent; 47 is partial pressure
for water vapor in the lungs, lung; and 40 is the mean magnitude of partial pressure
for carbon dioxide in alveolar air. mnﬂg.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As altitude increases total pressure of gases falls; but partial pressure for its
component parts, Such as carbon dioxide and water vapor. remains virtually unchanged
in alveolar air. In this case a substantial change occurs in the oxygen pressure
gradient in alveolar air. As a result of the drop in total pressure and particularly
in partial pressure for oxygen in alveolar air. the process of diffusion is impeded,
that is. the passage of oxygen through the alveolar walls into the blood, its bonding
with hemoglobin. and its penetration of the tissues. The oxygen deficit in the
tissues is caused by the drop in its partial pressure in alveolar air, which causes
oxygen starvation (hypoxia). When oxygen is cut off from the tissues in sea-level
conditions. human work capability deteriorates already in the first 2-3 minutes
because oxygen reserves in the body are used up relatively quickly; after 5-6 minutes
the situation is life-threatening.

In most individuals, in climbing to altitudes of l,200-l,300 meters virtually no
changes are observed in the body. The body copes satisfactorily with the oxygen
deficit in the inhaled air. Starting at altitudes of l,200-l.500 meters the level
of activity in individual functional systems of the body begins to change. These
changes differ in different individuals. One early sign of hypoxia in these

In some individuals, at altitudes of l,500-2,000 meters initial changes are seen
in the activity of the cardiovascular system, external respiration. and higher
nerv0us activity. These changes are frequently insignificant and the pilot's body
retains quite satisfactory work capacity. Above 2,000 meters is referred to as
the reaction threshold, and the layer of air between 2.000 and 3,000 meters is
called "the zone of full compensation," since the huaan body can cope quite
satisfactorily with this kind of oxygen deficit for 3-4 hours. However, in long
duration flights (6-8 hours) at altitudes of 2,000-3.000 meters (cabin pressure)
the human body begins to show signs of oxygen starvation.

Marked functional changes are seen in the body at altitudes of 3,000—b,000 meters.
If these altitudes are maintained for prolonged periods. pulmonary ventilation,
heart rate and minute volume increase, arterial pressure 'is elevated and a number
of other functional changes of an adaptive nature are initiated. At the same time
the onset of general lassitude, somnolence, dyspnea, sensations of heaviness in
the head and sometimes dizziness and other signs is seen. that is, all the signs
of "altitude disease." The reserves of the body are depleted.

An altitude of 14.000 meters is known as the "impairment threshold": heart rate

and pulmonary ventilation rise steadily. the capacity for correct perception of
surrounding objects and incoming information falls off, and the attention and memory
wander; as a result of which general work capacity drops, the onset of apathy and
fatigue is seen, and sometimes the phenomenon of euphoria, a state of excitement
and slight "intoxication" and so forth. In marked oxygen starvation metabolism

is impaired and changes occur in the process of oxidation in protein, lipids and
other substances that play key roles in the biochemical responses of the body.

Fluid loss also occurs; this happens mainly as the result of increased evaporation
from the skin and the mucosa of the upper airways.

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In most people. in oxygen deficit the motor activity of the digestive organs is
altered, food passes slowly through the gastrointestinal tract, and the functions
of the salivary and gastric glands are changed. These phenomena can sometimes be
acconpanied by loss of appetite. changed taste sensations and nausea.

The altitudes between 4,000 and 6,000 meters are usually referred to as the zone
of "incomplete compensation": in most healthy individuals the body can still cope
for short periods with the oxygen deficiency in the inhaled air even though it does
not fully compensate for demand. The marked increase in the activity of the
cardiovascular system and respiration during the first stages of hypoxia is caused
mainly by the neuroreflex response.

Hhen altitudes of 5.500-6,000 meters are maintained for prolonged periods, the vital
organs beging to suffer to a more marked degree from the oxygen deficiency. Harked
changes are seen in the central nervous system and the balance of basic neural
processes (excitation and inhibition) is upset. The speed of response reactions
slows. there is difficulty in motor coordination, logical thinking. attention and
memory deteriorate, and differentiated inhibition is affected. Despite the substantial
increase in pulmonary ventilation and heart rate, the body is unable to maintain
functional systems and the activity of the organs at the required level. Respiration
often becomes shallow, the tidal volume decreases. periodicity is seen in the
respiratory cycle; the cause in acute oxygen starvation is excessive inhibition

of the cerebral cortex and subcortical centers (I.P. Petrov).

Because of the onset of marked disorders in the body, the altitude of 6,000 meters

is known as the "critical threshold." As altitude increases blood oxygen saturation
and oxygen partial pressure in alveolar air decrease steadily. Mean figures for
change in oxygen partial pressure in alveolar air and blood oxygen saturation when
breathing atmospheric air in activity simulating that involved in flying an aircraft
10-15 seconds after the oxygen supply has been cut off, as seen in an altitude chamber
(altitudes 6.000 to 12.000 meters). are shown in table 5.3. while the oxyhemogram

is shown in figure 5.2.

Table 5.3
'Altituda in meters
Parameter _6_0_OQ _8_0_99_ M M
Oxygen partial pressure 35.7-39.8 30.1-34.2 25.3-26.7 21.6-22.6
mung in alveolar air
Oxygen blood saturation 66-69 56-57 48-50 b0—63

from oxyhemograph 1

At altitudes of 7,000-8,000 meters life-threatening signs are seen and the neural
capacities begin to deteriorate relatively quickly (after several minutes). Perception
and processing of incoming information is impeded and operator activity deteriorates.

75

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"ll--
w-

‘i an!

 

Figure 5.2 Oxyhemogram of Subject 1. Recorded at an Altitude of 12,000 meters
Following Oxygen Cutoff

Oxyhemogram in ground-level conditions

Oxyhemogram at 12.000 meters breathing oxygen

Oxyhemogram at 12,000 meters after cutoff of oxygen supply via mask
(the arrow pointing downward marks the moment of oxygen cutoff, the

arrow pointing upward marks the moment when oxygen was again supplied
via the mask)

99".

D. 40 seconds

I. Heart rate trace
2. Oxyhemogram
3. Respiratory movements of the thorax (marked in lo-second intervals)

Numerous erroneous actions and lack of motor coordination occur. 0n the BBC
(figure 5.3 ) slow high-amplitude waves are seen. while on the EKG (figure 5.5 )
the waves are altered. indicating significant oxygen starvation.

Taking into account the frequent cases of critical conditions initiated in the
body, the layer of air at altitudes above 6,000 meters is arbitrarily designated

as the "critical zone," where without additional oxygen supply it is dangerous
because of the rapid impairment of work capacity and loss of consciousness. "hen
the so-called "reserve time" has run out when breathing rarefied air. work capacity

in man is completely disrupted, autonomic disorders are seen, and the onset of a
syncopal conditions follows.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTIC“ I. USE ONLY

'000000000000000000
I: \

    

lllllilllllltllllllllOOIIIOIIIIIIIIII'IIUDI'I

   

(n) ‘

Illll'lllllllIlllllllllllllllllllll'llllilliilllllll'll
It"

OOOOOOOODOOODOm

  
     
   

A. In ground-level conditions
3. At altitude of 12,000 meters using "demand oxygen equipment"

C. At altitude of 12,000 meters 1 minute after cutoff of oxygen supply
to the mask.

I u
l I.
. l ' ll

EISSMZEZZZ22222322223332..."
.gsgiiguﬁégiilglsiaZZZZZZKFZZIFZZZ

(C)‘i.ll!::.ui::3..la I i!.| I .IIIII

brooaoooaonaoaooaoaaaoooaooonoao

     
      
  
  

   
 
    
     
  
     
   

  
        
   

           

  

  

Figure 5.4 Electrocardiogram of Subject P. in Various States of Oxygen Starvation
at 11,000-12,000 Meters after Cutoff of Oxygen Supply to Hack

Key: A. EKG 1n ground-level conditions breathing noml oxygen (lead II)
B. EKG at 11,000 meters 1 minute after cutoff of oxygen supply to mask
(marked in 0.05 second intervals, chl-IIIV)
C. EKG at 12.000 meters 1 minute after cutoff of oxygen supply to mask

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reserve tine is the period in which work capacity is retained after the body receives
insufficient oxygen. or the tine elapsed after cabin depressuriaation before work

capacity is lost. At altitudes above 6,000 meters, according to various figures.
the time for possible retention of work capacity varies within considerable linits.
This is explained by the fact that the studies were done in disainilar conditions

using different sethoda.
"Reserve time" as a function of altitude is shown in table 5.&. (averaged figures).
Table 5.0

Altitude. meters 8000 9000 11,000 12,000 13,000 15,000 15,000 16,000 17,000 18,000

 

Reserve tine 120- 80-90 25-30 20-25 16-20 15-18 10-15 9-12 9-10 8-10
seconds 130

At altitudes of l3.000-18.000 meters the tine that the altitude can be naintained

is substantially reduced and is associated with rapid reduction of oxygen in the
blood and also with the constant presence of water vapor in alveolar air at a partial
pressure of 107 IIng and carbon dioxide at 60 lung.

Features of Breathing an Air-and-Oxygen Mixture

At altitudes above 12.000 meters the normal supply of oxygen (without excess pressure)
with facilities for the delivery of atmospheric air via a mask is ineffective in

the event of cabin depreaaurization and does not adequately protect the pilot's

body from oxygen starvation. For example. at mow-15,000 meters, even when pure
oxygen is being breathed fron "demand oxygen equipasnt" not at excess pressure the
onset of oxygen starvation is rapid and physiological functions are altered
substantially. Respiration becomes sore rapid, pulsonary ventilation increases

and after a relatively short period of tine, periodic (forced) deep respiratory
novenents ar- men against thebackground of fast respiration. When great altitudes
are maintained oxygen partial pressure in alveolar air falls. Blood oxygen saturation
progressively decreases. In these cases. the quality of operator activity deteriorates

sharply .

Average figures on the change in oxygen partial pressure in alveolar air and blood
oxygen saturation in different individuals when using demand oxygen equipment while
saintnining altitudes of 10,000-14.000 meters for 2-3 minutes while engaging in '
simulated flying activity are shown in table 5.5.

Table 5.5 Change in Oxygen Partial Pressure in Alveolar Air and Blood Oxygen
Saturation at Altitude

Altitude 10,000 11,000 12,000 13,000 ,
Oxygen partial 16 000
pressure in alveolar 105-108 78-86 62-66 38-46 30-33
air, slang
Blood oxygen
saturation from 98.1. 94-96 80-83 55-64 52-“
oxyhemograph. X

 

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with respect to higher nervous activity. at altitudes of 14,000-15,000 meters a
predominance of the inhibitory process is noted in the cerebral coretx. This is
indicated by the increase in the latent period in response to incoming stimuli.
constraints on movements, tension. the degree to which conditioned reflexes are
shown with time. and also the appearance of slow, high-amplitude waves on the EEG.
In addition. in these conditions, the handwriting deteriorates, task solving becomes
difficult and errors are seen in the execution of various kinds of tasks. This

is also explained by the development of excess inhibition in the cerebral cortex
caused by the lack of oxygen in the body.

During the initial period when maintaining altitudes of 14,000-15,000 meters, when

a periodic-type oxygen set is used, the EEG of a subject shows a rhytln of 7-9
waves per second. As oxygen starvation develops and the general condition deteriorates,
the normal alpha-rhythm disappears from the EEG and slow, high-amplitude waves are
seen, first at 6-5 per second and then at 4-3 per second. Under the same conditions,
on the EKG lowered R and T waves are observed, with smaller R-R, QT and '1‘? intervals
and an increase in the systolic index. ﬂeart rate increases 30-60 per minute and
arterial (systolic) pressure is elevated loo-30 mlig. Following a pressure gradient
at these altitudes, subjects relatively rapidly begin to experience difficulty in
determining colors on the instrument panels and when they attempt to carry out tasks
associated with physical stress (on the control colunn and pedals) a deterioration
is seen in their general condition and. in turn, a drop in heart rate. The tine
that altitudes of 13,000-15,000 meters can be maintained with retention of work
capacity depends not only on the oxygen supply but also on the observance of eating
and rest periods before climbing to altitude.

averaged figures for reserve time when breathing oxygen without excess pressure
are shown in table 5.6.

 

 

 

Table 5.6
Altitude 13,000 13,500 119,000 14,500 [5,000 162000
Reserve time 7-8 5-6 2-3 25-35 15-18 ll.- 16

min min min secs secs secs

analysis of material from research conducted at altitudes of 16.000-16,000 meters
using "demand oxygen equipment" which does not exclude the possibility of inhaling
air via the mask, has shown that this principle of oxygen supply cannot be used
as the basis for a practical supply of oxygen to pilots at these altitudes because
of the rapidly developing signs of oxygen starvation.

Features of Breathing Pure Oxygen (Excluding Air Supplied Via a ﬂask)

When atmospheric air is prevented from entering the mask a relatively satisfactory
condition with a certain degree of oxygen starvation is maintained at altitudes

of l3.000-l&.000 meters for longer than when a mask is used that allows air to be
sucked into the airways. while. however, the increase in the time that altitudes
of l3.000-llo.000 meters can be maintained is more or less significant. at altitudes
of llo,500-15,000 meters it is insignificant. Under these conditions, despite some
improvement in the oxygen supply. human work capacity remains at a low level and
can be maintained only for short periods.*

 

 

*Air hein? sucked in under the mask was eliminated by creating a small oxygen
nverprossnn- in the mask (35-50 millimeters of water).

79
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At altitudes of 16,500-15,000 meters. even when air is prevented from entering the
mask, physiological reactions in subjects start to change relatively quickly. Heart
rate and respiration increase considerably, along with pulmonary ventilation. Heart
rate in some individuals reaches 140-150 per minute and respiration 30-32. On the
EKG the R and T waves are suppressed. the R-R, QT and T? intervals are shortened

and the systolic index rises. (see figure 5.5.). After a short time subjects begin
to make errors when solving arithmetic problems. Their handwriting deteriorates
(see figure 5.6 ). Blood oxygen saturation drops to 55-50 percent. Systolic
pressure is elevated 5-65 mung, and diastolic 5-50 lung. As the altitude is
maintained. inhibitory processes are initiated. Conditioned reflexes increase with
time.

With closed eyes. in cerebral bioelectrical activity (during the initial period

at these altitudes) the rhythm decreases to 9-8 and then to 7-5 waves per second,
with a slight drop in amplitude. As the degree of oxygen starvation increases and
the general condition deteriorates. the normal alhpa-rhythn disappears from the

EEG and high-amplitude slow waves appear at 3-2 per second. At this tine cardiac
activity begins to weaken, motor coordination is impaired and the skin becomes
pallid, with subsequent transition to a precollapse and collapse condition. Oxygen
partial pressure in alveolar air and blood oxygen saturation decrease progressively
as altitude increases.

l' 1| .(A) 1(8) '(C) ’(0)
5,5». 14.5‘2' ”

   
  

Figure 5.5 Electrocardiogram of Subject M at an Altitude of 14,500 meters Using
an Oxygen Mask that Excludes Inhalationof Air: leads I, II and III

Key. A. Baseline trace
B. At an altitude of 6,600 meters before pressure gradient
C. At an altitude of [6,500 meters after 2 minutes
D. After losing altitude

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

(”semiﬁnal M

(A) Mair“. 5.

g-..-

9""”"7"”'7'37-}.9577- n:-I-m-s-m-um-)w_

99504493., 96' game-umdampen-nu
- : . I .}'”.'I'm'; . a . a
7 9“ ""‘"'”"'l&v'?-fn. ‘ mn’hﬁdawﬂum (D)

' ‘37”- .umnmmm u- c)
u -)-w~um-;'lu -J?

9ll} —

3a 2m» maeamm, €29" 6‘3 a) 5mm, - ,
c-Juu nqum (E) Jowuillu u l a - m m

Figure 5.6 Samples of Handwriting and Solving of Arithetic Problems by Subjects
2. and N. at an Altitude of lb.000-lb,500 Dieters (Inhalation of Air

under Mask Excluded)

Key:
1 and 2. In ground-level conditions before the experiment
3. At an altitude of 16,000 meters
6. At an altitude of 16,500 meters
A. Subject 2.
3. Subject N.
c. After 2 minutes: 17 actions. no errors
D. ll actions, no errors
B. After 2 minutes: 16 actions, 1 error
F. 8 actions. 3 errors, 1 slip of the pen

Average figures on the change in oxygen partial pressure in alveolar air and blood
oxygen saturation in different individuals after 2-3 minutes at l0,000-M.000 meters
as the aircraft pilot (with intake of air under the mask excluded) are shown in

table 5. 7.

From analysis of the material presented it follows that the onset of marked tachycarida
(heart rate of 160-150 per minute or more) with depressed R and 1' waves on the BIG

and simultaneous appearance of slow. high-amplitude waves on the no (5-3 per second)
are the signs of an incipient presyncopal condition. Marked brsdycardia following
marked tachycardia, and a drop in arterial pressure with marked changes on the sac
indicate considerable weakening of cardiac activity and the onset of a precollapse
condition resulting from marked oxygen starvation.

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.7 Oxygen Partial Pressure in Alveolar Air and Blood Oxygen Saturation
at Altitudes of 10,000-14.000 Meters

Ms

Physiological Sim 10,000 11,000 123000 13:000 ”IMO

Oxygen partial pressure
in alveolar air. mung 107-110 82-88 68-73 46-54 34-37

Blood oxygen saturation 98.8- ' 96-98 83-86 62-68 66—50
from oxyhemogram. 2 99.8

For conparison. the times that altitudes of 13.000-15,000 meters can be maintained
in conditions when the intake of air under the mask is excluded are shown in table
5.8 (averaged figures)

Table 5.8 Time Spent by Subjects at Altitudes of 13.000-15.000 Haters when Intake
of Air under Mask Is Excluded

Altitudel meters Time liaintained
13.000 95 minutes
13,500 30-60 minutes
16,000 10-20 minutes
14,500 2-3 minutes
15,000 20-30 seconds

In order to improve the oxygen supply, at altitudes above 12,000 meters oxygen sets
are used that deliver the oxygen for breathing under excess pressure.

Features of Breathing Ryperbaric Oxygen

Comprehensive studies conducted by large collectives jointly with industrial
enterprises have made it possible to sane extent to clarify the problem of
pioviding oxygen at hyperbaric pressure at altitudes of 12.000-15.000 meters,
establish a number of the laws involved in the change in basic physiological
functions. work out the pernissible magnitudes for delivering the oxygen, and
develop special sets of oxygen equipment for flights in the stratosphere.

The use of excess pressure for breathing which automatically increases to maintain
an absolute pressure of 112-115 mung (by absolute pressure. in this case we mean
excess pressure under the mask plus atmospheric pressure at a given altitude) has
made it possible considerably to increase the time that altitudes up to 15,000
meters can be maintained. even given the marked functional changes in respiration
and circulation. At altitudes above 13,500 meters the excess oxygen pressure under
the mask added to the barometric pressure and regulated automatically. remains
FOR OFI-TCIAL USE ONLY

virtually constant. For example, it the pilot is at 15,000 meters. where atmospheric
pressure is 90 mmﬂg, excess pressure under the mask will be maintained at 25 mag,
which makes a total of 115 mullg, with small variations on either side. “hen descending
to 13,000 meters and then to 12,000 meters, absolute pressure increases to 145 mmng
first by reducing and then by removing the excess pressure under the mask.

Despite the relatively large magnitudes for oxygen excess pressure under the mask,
partial pressure in the alveoli and blood saturation are reduced as altitude
increases. although the drop in blood oxygen saturation is less than without excess
pressure. The nature of these changes (averaged figures) is shown in table 5.9.

Table 5.9 Dependence of Oxygen Partial Pressure in Alveolar Air and Blood Oxygen
Saturation on the Magnitude of Excess Pressure at Altitudes of
12.000 to 15.000 Meters

AltitudeI meters
Factor 12 l000 13,000 14 .000 15 .

-_-_

 

Hagnitutde of excess
pressure, I'Jilg 30-50 95-115 185-208 320-350

Oxygen partial pressure
in alveolar air, mmllg 66-74 52-60 lob-50 36-45

Blood oxygen saturation
from oxyhemogrsph. 2 87-90 78-83 73-77 64-68

When excess pressure of 300-1000 use water or more is created. unusual conditions

are set up for respiration: resistance is created in the trachea, bronchi and lungs
to the movement of the inhaled oxygen, and because of this a corresponding pressure
is created on their walls. The oxygen pressure acts as a kind of irritant on the
pulmonary receptor apparatus.

When acted upon by excess pressure, all parts of the pulmonary tissue are expanded,
the degree to which they are filled is increased, respiration becomes slower and
deeper. and the relationships between respiratory capacities in the respiratory
phases are altered. The structural characteristics of the respiratory cycles are
also altered, the exhalation phase is extended. particularly during the initial
period, the inhalation phase is shortened, and the total respiratory cycle is more
prolonged. The most clearly marked changes are observed directly after cabin
depressurization at great altitudes.

When breathing oxygen under excess pressure the mobility of the diaphragm is
restricted and the intercostal and abdominal muscles used in exhalation are
stretched more than those used in inhalation. The eaess pressure exerts a
considerable effect in the intensity of the muscle bioelectric potentials. This
dependence is of .1 directly proportional nature (see figures 5.7, 5.8 and 5.9).

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.7 Roentgenkymogrsm of Respiratory Movements of the Diaphragm in
Subject C. when Breathing Oxygen under Excess Pressure.

left: baseline recording
right: with pressure of 500 no water under the mask
(mobility of diaphragm is restricted)

Mt(A)

I k—_—#—————.1I

 

Figure 5.8 Electromyogram of Subject 3.

Above: baseline recording
Below: breathing oxygen under excess pressure of 500-600 mm water

Key: 1. EKG
2. Respiratory movements of chest
3. Elcctromyogram of intercostal muscles
4. Electromyogram of oblique muscles of abdomen

(left to right: inhalation, above; exhalatio below)

A. 10 seconds B. Inhalation C. Exhalation.

84 \

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFiﬂCIAl.US£IDNLY

“
m

  
      
 

 
  

' [""l

0?.

I..
'u:

  

Figure 5.9 Oscillogram of Physiological Functions of Subject K. with Excess
Pressure in the Lungs from Zero to 1,200 mm water

(left: start of delivery of excess pressure)

Key: 1. EKG
2. Respiratory movements of cheat
3. Electromyogram of intercostal muscles
4. Electromyogram of oblique muscles of abdomen
(inhalation above. exhalation below)

Speech difficulties are characteristic of breathing under excess pressure. Words
can be articulated only after taking a deep breath and with great effort on the
part of the entire respiratory and articulatory apparatuses. The helodynamics of
pulmonary circulation also change. resistance to blood flow in the pulmonary
circulation increases. and the return of venous blood to the heart and into
systemic circulation is impeded. The flow of tissue fluids and the blood is
slowed.

The marked shrinking of the shadow of the heart and vascular bed under excess
pressure of 600 mm water can be seen on the X-ray image (figure 5.10 ) Associated
figures are shown in table 5.10

Table 5.l0 changes in Heart Size and Vascular Bed during Respiration under
400 mm water Excess Pressure (average figures)

Percentage decrease in Percentage decrease in
basic size of heart size of vascular bed

  
     
   

   

 

      
 

    
  
   

Phase of size at size at Decrease
respiration level of level of in size of
aortic arch arch of heart and
pulmonary vascular
artery bed is shown

      
 
 
 

as percentage
of initial
condition

  
    

Inhalation
Exhalation

8S

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 5. 10

 

Left: Baseline recording. no excess pressure
Right: In excess pressure of 400 .1 water under mask

(shadow of heart and vascular bed is smaller. Pictures
taken at full inhalation)

The attempt by the developers of equipment to supply oxygen in respiration rider
excess pressure using a pressure of 115 mailg encountered great difficulties at
altitudes of l6.000-l8.000 meters. The time that man can spend at each successive
altitude decreases significantly. Whereas at 16,000 meters the limit averages 6-
8 minutes. at 17,000 meters it is reduced sharply to 50-60 seconds. and at 18,000
meters to 30-40 seconds. with marked functional changes in peripheral circulation
and external respiration.

At altitudes of 16.000-18,000 meters. when oxygen is breathed at excess pressure
some indivrduals become distended. with hyperemia. the palpebral fissure is narrowed.
the eyes water, perception of instrument readings deteriorates and heart .ate and
respiration rate increase considerably. In some individuals the heart rate increases

60-80 per minute above normal rate. Blood pressure is elevated and there is
considerable speech difficulty.

In the conditions encountered at 16.000-18.000 meters the general condition in man
and the time that these altitudes can be maintained are influenced not only by the
oxygen deficit in the body but also, and chiefly. by the changes associated with
excess pressure in the lungs. and in particular by circulatory disorders. One of
the causes of the deteriorating general condition is the development of functional
insufficiency in the cardiovascular system. The marked increase in excess pressure
in the airways and lungs creates even greater difficulties in pulmonary circulation.
Afferent impulses arrive in the brain from the recepttrs in the upper airways and
lungs. Respiration and circulation are adjusted autonomically and the blood pressure
in the vessels of systemic circulation is elevated. When the load on the heart

15 increased, especially on the right atriun and right ventricle. conditions are
created for he development of congestion in the periphers vessels. This all
adversely af ects the general condition of the body. In 8 h cases the reason for
lowered work capacity is evidently not only hypoxia but a1 autonomic changes in
cerebral circ latinn.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Along with hypoxia. hypocapnia also plays a definite role in the deterioration of

the pilot's condition. Free carbon dioxide is "flushed out" of the blood in the
excessively rapid and deep respiration, that is, in increased pulmonary ventilation.
Hypocapnia reinforces the adverse effect of oxygen starvation. reducing work capacity
even further.

Since respiration under excess pressure substantially alters the activity of the

most important functional systems in the body, mainly the respiratory and circulatory
systems, in excess pressure of more than #00 mm water. external counter-pressure

must be used. For example. at a magnitude of 530-550 mm water, without counterpressurs,
after 1-2 minutes marked shifts are seen in autonomic responses, with considerable
deterioration of the general condition (collapse, loss of consciousness). This

happens because of circulatory disorders. cardiac arrhythias, extrasystole, a
restricted flow of venous blood to the heart, disruption of the structure of the
respiratory cycle and other symptoms typical of the stage of decompensation.

However. a healthy individual who has been trained to breathe oxygen under pressure.
regardless of the difficulties encountered in emergencies. can withstand sudden
excess pressure under the mask up to 800 mm water for short periods (up to 30
seconds) without using compensation devices. and up to 1.000 I- water in the mask
when wearing a vent suit, without pressure in the tension devices.

Features of Breathing Hyperbaric Oxygen with the Use of Compensating (Comterpressure)

The use of compensation devices when breathing under excess pressure makes it
possible to extend the range of altitudes between 16,000 and 18,000 meters that

can be maintained safely and to weaken or prevent the rapid development of functional
changes in the body. For this purpose use is made of special equipment in the form
of a compensating jacket or vent suit that creates counterpressure on the surface

of the human body. In this case, also, however. despite the large excess pressure in
the lungs and the counterpressure on the thorax, oxygen partial pressure in alveolar
air and blood oxygen saturation still decrease as altitude increases (see table 5.11).

Table 5.11 Change in Oxygen Partial Pressure in .Alveolar Air and Blood Oxygen
Saturation at Altitudes 16,000-18,000' Meters when Breathing under

Excess Pressure

Altitude
Indicator 16.000 17,000 18.000

 

Excess pressure in mask, mm water 660-490 610-660 760-800

Pressure in chamber of vent suit
II water “0-490 610-660 740-800
Oxygen partial pressure in

alveolar air, using 36-60 35-38 33-36

Blood oxygen saturation, from

oxyhemograph, X 70-74 68-70 62-66
87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

Despite the creation of more favorable conditions for respiration, the use of a
compensating jacket does little to linit the developuent of functional changes in
respiration and circulation. At an altitude of 16,000 neters, and even sore so

at 18,000 meters. subjects are in an extremely stressed condition. heart rate and
respiration are slower than without the compensating jacket but are nevertheless

substantially increased. For example. at an altitud
increases M percent from its initial status; at 17,000 meters it increases 56.5

percent, and at 18,000 meters, 66 percent. In some subjects, at altitudes of 17.000
to 18,000 meters heart rate reaches 175 per minute.

The use of a compensating jacket with a rubber chamber coupled to the breathing
system does not provide adequately effective conpensation for excess pressure in

The counterpressure created with the compensating jacket is applied only to some
parts of the bod; while the head, neck, and upper and lower extremities remain
unprotected. In these areas of the body. at altitudes of 16,000-18,000 meters the

return of venous blood to the right heart is hampered and reduced, and pulse pressure
drops. The elevated arterial pressure and increased heart rate are obviously associated

with these changes .

Figure 5.“ Oscillogran of Subject 1.. Breathing Oxygen under 1,200 I; water
Excess Pressure Using Various Forms of Compensation

Key: A. Baseline recording .
8. Breathing. oxygen under excess pressure without compensation

C. In a compensating jacket
0. In a vent suit

I. EKG
2. Respiratory movements of thorax

3. Electromyogram of intercostal muscles
lo. Electronyogram of oblique nuscles of abdomen
(left to right: inhalation. above; exhalation, below)

5 . I nhalat ion

6 . Exhnlat ion
88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Improvement in conditions for the supply of oxygen at altitudes of 16.000-18,000
meters can be provided either by increasing the efficiency of the compensating
jacket and developing "self-breathing” devices that actively assist respiration.
or--and this is more reliable-by using compensating garments that cover the entire
body. including the upper and lower extremities.

The use of a vent suit in combination with an oxygen mask and the creation of excess
pressure up to 75 mung improves the efficiency of the oxygen equipment. At altitudes
of [7.000-18.000 meters further increase in excess pressure above 73 mmlg causes
intense lacrimation and narrowing of the palpebral fissure. resulting in difficulties
in the perception of instrument readings. The increased pressure also adversely
affects the sense of hearing.

A pressure helmet provides the best conditions for breathing under elevated pressure.
when a vent suit is used in combination with a pressure helmet it is possible to
create more excess pressure in the lungs. Absolute pressure at altitudes above
12,000 meters can be brought up to 145 mmllg. thus significantly increasing the
altitude that can been maintained safely, even during cabin depressurization.

Given the same magnitudes for excess pressure in the lungs. when vent suits are
used respiratory movements are made more easily than when compensating jackets are
used; this can be seen from the bioelectric potentials for the respiratory muscles
on the electromyogram (figure 5.11).

Despite the relatively satisfactory conditions created by oxyge: sets and'eltitude
special garments (in the form of compensating jackets and suits. masks and pressure
helmets). in cases of accidental cabin depressurization, the most favorable conditions
'3r supplying oxygen to the body at altitudes above 15.000-16,000 meters are created
inside a full-pressure suit within which elevated pressure (compared to that of

the surrounding medium) essential for normal respiration in man is maintained.
However. because of their cumbersomeness and certain inconveniences in operation,
full-pressure Suits are not used extensively in aviation.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo DOSMP SSSR, 1980

964?.
C80: 8144/1609

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

REGULATING MECHANISMS OF anon!

Leningrad RSGULIRUYIBEBHIYE lEKHANIZHY PAHYATI in Russian 1960 (signed to press
13 Feb 80) pp 5-6. 95-96 .

[F‘oreuord and table of contents from book "The Regulating hechanisu of henory"
(Proceedings of the International Synposiun "Hechanisas of Heaory Control“ in
Leningrad. 1976) edited by on. vii-um. Isdstel'stvo "Nauka'. 2050 copies,
101 pages]

[Text] This publication is based on several papers aui materials discussed at the
international synposiun “hechanisns of Heaory Control" held in Leningrad in Novenber
1976. In view of the great nuaber of studies presented at the Syeposiun. the or-
ganising coasittee was not able to publish all of the nterial. In connection

with this and taking into account the great scientific ieportance of questions
raised during the Synposiua. the organising coeaittee requested that those speakers
and discussants whose material was not available for the proceedings of the Syapo-
siua expand and revise their work for publication in the fare of aseparste

book. which a majority of authors agreed to do.

According to the basic directions of research on this problea. the book is divided
into three sections; I. Heaory Mechanism and Possibilities for Their Regulations
II. Nemphysiological Studies of Henry Control ﬂechanieas: III. Hemm-
ceutical Methods of honor: Control.

Since these general tendencies have not been definitively solidified. the reader
will find various principles and approaches to the prohlea of nenory control: hou
it is studied tron different points of view and hot; it is perceived by representa-
tives of various disciplines froa various “schools”. But this. at first glance
diverse. aaterial is unified by a persistent search for ways of actively inﬂuencing
aeaory function in the interest of nnkiul. In all three above-aentioned areas
there is an accumlation of interesting data which apparently will soon require

new explanations.

In the area of nesory mechanism the interest is again on the stmctm-al-cheaical
hypotheses of aenory. Data has been obtained on the transfer of constant functional
and pathological states of the brain free aninal donors to intact recipients by
nem-hunoral factors of a peptide nature obtained free the brain and cerebral-spinal
liquid. These experiments question the real nature of the participation of specific

neuropeptides-connectors in the fornation of new adaptive connections in the central
nervous systen (CNS). At the sane tine it has been shown that a series of recently

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

discovered neuropeptides. fragments of hypophyseal hormones in the brain, has a
general alleviating effect on memory.

Eleotrophysiological studies of the train are continuing successfully and confine
the actual role of interstructural synchronization of electrical processes in the
optimization of learning and sensory. Studies of the pre- and post-synaptic mecha-
nisas with the goal of increasing the effectiveness of synaptic transsissions for
brain and sensory flexibility have been further developed.

In the field of nemphysiolcgical approaches to the study of the control aechanisns
of the mind. it has been shown that electrostisulation of a series of non—specific
brain structures plays an iaportant role in transforming certain defense seclunisns
of the higher brain functions, including seaory. Studies on the sechsnism of intra-
and trans-cranial sicrcpolarisaticns, which aid neucry processes and optimize a
series of other SIS functions. are also continuing successfully. 'dith respect to
the regulation of brain function and memory processes. the recently discovered brain
phenomenon of fonmlating artificial stable functional connections. whose activation
can elicit super-activation of higher brain functions and thus overcoae certain
pemnent pathological brain conditions. has been especially proaising. In relation
to this, the indicator of brain states-oa constant extra-slow potential or a quasi-
constant potential difference--is exceptionally infomtive.

In the field of neuropharsaceutical appoacMs to memory control. studies to deter-
mine the role of various nediatory systeas in the formation and fixation of teaporal
relationships and long-tern memory are developing. On this basis are also being

developed the principles of active involvesent in the process of senorisation and

information retrieval in the brain. The recently foraulated proble- of pharasceuti-
cal non-specific connections. which as erperiaental data show. ensure the insediatx:
fixation of active effective neurodynaaic connections. is being intensively studied.

Interesting experisental data have appeared on the role of chroaosone restructuring
in the growth of several CNS functions. The reciprocal translocation of certain
antosones leads to pathological shifts of CNS activity. However. in the premnce
of other Robertsonian chromosome translccations. there is an optisisation of several
CNS functions. These studies open up new, cytogenic. approaches to the stuiy of
brain function and in part. selcry.

Real physiological principles and aechanisns of the organization of Iencry have been
successfully used in natheaatical and nohine nodelling of learning processes in
neuron nets. which can give additional evidence on the paths of active involvement
in the organization and course of memory processes.

It is iapossible to even mention all of the “new develop-ants” in the prohlen of
aesory control. However. the directions of research ae'ntioned above indicate that
it is possible to hope that the tine is near when the study of the brain will enable
us to productively optimize the senory processes in the event of their destruction
or for immediate activation in unusual circumstances or under experiaental ccndih'ons.

Books devoted to the problem of memory, the most controversial and perhaps the most
important problen of contemporary neurobiology and medicine. have always aroused a

great interest anong readers. The collective of authors and editors here hopes that
this publication will be of use to specialists in the field of aenory problems as ‘

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

well as to a wide circle of interested readers.

Table of Contents

Foreword 5
Section I» Henory mechanisms and Possibilities of Their Regulation
On the physical treatment or memory mechanisms. 1. Ye. Hikhal'tsev 7
On the comparative-physiological method in the study of macromolecular
mechanisms of memory. N. A. Tushmalova 18
Learning under adjunct stimulation of immunogenesis. P. P. Ashnrin.
:1. Yu. Yeropkin 22
Some changes in the macromolecules of the brains of monkeys learning visual
discrimination. 8. Petrovich. 3. Protich. D. Chupich. Dsh. Kramalich 2"

On two stages of the metabolic processes in the brain of rabbits accompanying
the formation of a conditioned reflex to light. ‘1'. B. Shvets-‘reneta-Guriy 26

Biochemical correlates of the active brain state. V. s. Repin. h. A. Jani-
lovskiy. B. I. Klement'yev. I. I. Stepanov 30

Characteristics of the synthesis of high and low molecular proteins
during a randomization of stimulation and learning. 3. I. Klement'yev.

I. I. Stepsnov. T. S. Glushchenko. 0. V. Bogdanov 32
hemory and morphogenesis in insects. I. :1. Sheyman. N. Yu. Sakharova,
I. A. Yefimov 35

On the role of brain cortex synapses in subcellular memory mechanisms.
A. A. .‘ianina. a. P. Kucherenko. Ye. G. Gilerovich. V. 5. Turovskiy. . A
A. A. Ivonin 38

Section II: Neurophysiological Studies of Memory Control hechenisms
0n the role of some cortex structures of the larger hemisphere of the brain

in the appearance or memory in lower monkeys. A. u. Bakuredse #2
Electrophysiological analysis of the optinl level of. eaotional tension
during mnestitic activity. H. 3. Zvykov ‘59

Long-term memory (long lasting nervous processes) in various structms of
conditioned reflex systems and various functional brain states. V. P. aura-
v'yevs. A. T. Selivanova. h. N. Lasuloo. '1'. Ye. Kolosovm 53

Local effects of repeated rhythmical inter-hemispheric stimulation: its
relationship to the mechanism of excitation. Ya. hakhek. Ye. Urdslnk.
V. Pavlik. I". Khorak 56

Reorganization of bioelectric activity of brain structures and systems
under the influence of micropolarisation controlling memory processes.

6. V. Gal‘dinov. N. N. Karyavtseva. Yu. A. Blank 616
The effect or micropolariution of ”sharp” an! chronic centers of
epileptic activity. Ye. I. Tkachenko I 67

The possibility of establishing an integal conditioned reaction while the
production or its individual components is disturbed by electric shocks.
5. B. Tsvetovskiy, .‘J. V. Vol‘f. V. P. Leutin 69

92 Q

\

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section lllt Nemphemceuticel Hethode of Meeory Control
A comparative evaluation of the role of biogenic nonunines in the processes

of developing and tinting temporal relationships. R. I. Kruglikov 73
Experimental uses of pharmaceutical effects on tumor: through the exchange
of biogenic amines. Ye. A. Groeovs 77

The relationship or the learning process in animals st emotionally different
support levels to the activity level of serotinin end noradrenergic
systems of the hrsin. ’1‘. P. Selenovs 82

Periodic changes in the activity of cortex neurons in tissue cultures
under the influence of serotinin and their eigﬁficsnce in the nechcnieue
of neuory. A. 3. Chuhkov, A. A. Nikonov 86

Cotechohnincrgic nechnnieu of conditioned-reflex behavior. Ye. Endr'e'tsi 89
COPYRIGHT: Isdstel'stvo ”hula”. 1980

9233
650: 1860/1030

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma ()l-‘FIUAL USE ONLY

000 612.886:6ll.85

OBJECTIVE METHOD FOR EVALUATING VBSTIBULAR STABILITY FROM TREND 0F NYSTAGHIC
INDICBS AFTER EXPOSURE TO CUMULATIVE CORIOLIS ACCELERAIION

Moscow IZVBSTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: SERIYA BIOLOGICEBSXAYA in Russian he 2,
Mar-Apr 81 (manuscrlut received 15 Feb 80) pp 276-283

[Article by I.A. Sidel'nikovl-

[Text] Studies in which 172 electronystsgsogrems (ENC) were re-
corded were conducted on 30 volunteers. These investigations showed
that the cumulative action of Coriolis acceleration either stim-
ulated nystagmus or suppressed it (although there were no signifi-
cant changes in nystagmic indices in some cases). The present art-
icle proposes an objective new method for individual evaluation of
the functional status of the vestibular analyzer during stationary
vestibuloletry, based on comparative evaluation of the trend of the
changes observed in nystagmic indices after continuous cumulative
exposure to Coriolis acceleration ICCCA].

Subjects in which the rate of the slow nystagmic phase (RS?) after
exposure to CCCA exceeds its actual value prior to exposure are
considered to be vestibular-stable. while those in which the nystag-
mic RSP undergoes a significant reduction (or remains unchanged)
after CCCA are regarded as vestibular-unstable.

The effect of Coriolis forces on the semicircular canals is due (Voyachek. 1908) to
the production of a resultant between the Coriolis forces acting on opposite ends

of the canal.

Stimulation of the otolithic apparatus is also undoubtedly of etiological signifi-
cance in the development of autonomic disturbances under the action of Coriolis
acceleration (Harkaryan and Sidel'nikov. 1967). Bergstedt (1961) believes that
Coriolis acceleration is registered only by the otolithic apparatus and that, if the
subject moves his head, e.g.. in the frontal plane. the acceleration due to gravity
is doubled. However. in Gueddy's opinion (Cuedry et a1., 1961), the Coriolis
acceleration that develops when the head is moved is insignificant in comparison
with the acceleration due to gravity. The reaction of the otoliths to movement of
the head is therefore almost identical to the normal reaction. i.e., that observed
with the chair not rotating, while the semicircular canals exhibit an intensified
reaction. It is hypothesized that this unusual type of stimulation of the semicircular

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

canals causes a reflex interaction of the two vestibular systems. which is reflected
in the corresponding reactions and is responsible for the difference in the stimuli
associated with tilting and straightening of the head.

Thus, it is obvious from the studies cited above and other reports by a number of
authors {Khilov. 1936, 1969; Popov. 1939; Yuganov. 1963, 1965; Yuganov et a1., 1963.
I964; Bryanov, 1963; Lebedinskiy et al., 1963; Kursahvili, 1961; Sidel'nikov, 1970;
Schubert, 1954; Bornschein et a1., 1956. 1962. 1963; Dowd et al.. 1966; Sinks. 1968;
Collins. 1968. and others) that Coriolis acceleration represents a complex and unus-
ual external stimulus to the semicircular canals and otolithic apparatus.

In View of these circumstances. we felt it expedient to utilize a test involving
simulation of Coriolis acceleration. particularly continuous cumulative Coriolis
acceleration (COCA). by the Harkaryan-Sidel'nikov method (Markaryan et al.. 1966)

as a functional load on the vestibular analyzer. What we had in mind was the fact
that nystagmus is an integral reaction of this analyser. so that the stimulation of
the cupular system and otolithic apparatus during such tests should affect the degree
of ny-tagmus. In this case, data on the nystagmic reaction recorded before and after
exposure to CCCA could be used to evaluate the sensitivity and stability of the ves-
tibular analyzer or make an objective judgement regarding tolerance to the action of
Coriolis acceleration. The present investigation was conducted to determine whether
this approach is feasible.

EXPERIMENTAL METHOD

Studies in which 172 electronystagmograms (ENC) were recorded were conducted with

30 volunteers 20-40 years of age. A special electronystagmographic technique (Sid-
el'nikov, 1970. 1978) was used to record nystagmus. Blectronystagmography was car-
ried out during two rotation tests (u - 60 deg/sec in test I and w - 180 deg/sec

in test ll) prior to exposure to CCCA and two rotation teats (u . 180 deg/sec in

test 111 and m - 60 deg/sec in test IV) immediately after exposure to CCCA. The acce-
leration (I deg/secz). angular velocities (w - 60 and 180 deg/sec), and chair stopping
time (stop stimulus - 0.15 see) were always constant. Stopping of the chair and re-
cording of the postrotation nystagmus were conducted after the rotation nystagmus
disappeared, i.e.. generally after rotation at a constant angular velocity for 40-120
sec. In making each record of postrotation nystagmus, we employed a method for bio-
logical enhancement of the information content of the nystagmic indices (Sidel‘nikov.
1970a and c, 1974). The intervals between the rotation tests were 5 min.

Continuous cumulative Coriolis acceleration (COCA) was carried out during the third
rotation test. i.e., with a constant rotation speed of 180 deg/sec. During rota-
tion. the subject made steady pendulum-like movementr of the head through angles

of 30° to the left and right of the vertical position. The duration of the right-
left and left-right head movements was 2 sec. Continuous rotation and tilting of the
head toward the shoulders was continued until nausea and pallor appeared, but for
no more than 15 min. Subjects who displayed pronounced symptoms of air sickness
(seven in number) were retested 1 or 2 days later but with a CCCA that was reduced
by a factor of 2. He also conducted control studies (six) in which the subject
rested for a time equivalent to the duration of the CCCA test. The indices obtained
for the postrotation nystagmus recorded after exposure to Coriolis acceleration were
compared with the nystagmic reaction recorded immediately before the CCCA test. The

95

FOR 0FFNJA1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENG data were employed to determine the duration and rate of the slow phase (RS?)

and the amplitude and frequency of nystagmus. The latter three indices were evalu-
ated every 5 sec over the first 30 sec of nystagmus. We also determined the average
indices for the first (1-15 sec) and second (16-30 sec) 15-sec periods of the nystag-
mic reaction. The indices in question were measured with the aid of specially devel-
oped nystagmometric gages and reference tables. i.e.. Sidel'nikov nystagmometers
(Sidel'nikov, 1970b. 1975). In order that the nystagmographic indices could be com-
pared with the sensitivity and stability of the cupular system and otolithic appara-
tus. we determined the threshold of sensitivity to linear acceleration. the resis-
tance to cumulative linear acceleration in Khilov-swing tests. the threshold of sen-
sitivity to electric current for the vestibular analyser. the threshold of nystag-
aic sensitivity to angular acceleration. the duration of nystagmus in the Barany test.
and the resistance to CCCA for each subject.

The experimental data were subjected to statistical processing. establishing the mean
(H), mean error (m). and reliability of the changes in the indices investigated. with
the error probability (P) serving as the reliability criterion (Kamenskiy. 1966).

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Proceeding from the results of 30 studies utilizing the maximum CCCA time. the 30
subjects were divided into two groups. The first group consisted of subjects (15
individual ‘ who withstood maximum exposure to Coriolis acceleration without mani-
festing vestibuloautonomic reactions. when determined by other methods. the vesti-
bular stability of this group was rated as high and its vestibular sensitivity as
low. The second group comprised subjects (15 individuals) who displayed the symptom
complex of motion sickness during CCCA; when determined by other methods. their ves-
tibular stability was rated as low. The subjects in the second group participated
in experiments in which the duration of the maximum exposure to continuous cumula-
tive Coriolis acceleration was reduced by a factor of 2. Table 1 gives the indices
of vestibular sensitivity and stability for the two groups of subjects. together
with the average durations of nystagmus in response to the stop stimulus for rote-
tion speeds of 60 and 180 deg/sec before and after exposure to Coriolis acceleration.

As can be seen from Table 1. the changes in the duration of nystagmus following COCA
were slight, took different directions. and were independent of the degree of vesti-
bular stability, i.e., exhibited no regular pattern. while the indices of the func-
tional status of the vestibular analyzer (Table 1) showed a clear division of the
subjects into vestibular-stable and vestibular-unstable with respect to the action
of adequate stimuli.

The results obtained for other nystagmic indices (88?. amplitude. and frequency)
were somewhat different. The clearest and most reliable changes were observed in
such indices as the rate of the nystagmic slow phase. Table 2 gives data on the
changes in nystagmic indices during the first 5 sec and over the first (1-15 sec)
and second (16-30 sec) IS-sec periods of the reaction.

The data in Table 2 indicate that the RS? decreased in all the subjects toward the
end of the nystagmic reaction. This parameter was highest during the first 5 and

15 sec of nystagmus. The nystagmus rate was greatest for the higher angular rota-
tion speed. Thus. the 88? found for the stop-stimulus period after rotation at

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

180 deg/sec was twice that obtained for the stop-stimulus period following rota-
tion at a speed of 60 deg/sec.

After continuous exposure to Coriolis acceleration. both groups of subjects exhibi-
ted characteristic and reliable changes. especially in the 35? during the stop-
stimulus period following rotation at a speed of 180 deg/sec and during the first
15 sec of the nystagmic reaction.

Thus. after maximum exposure to CCCA, the first group of subjects was characterised
by a significant increase in the RSP during the stop stimulus following rotation at
a speed of 180 deg/sec and no changes after the stop stimulus following rotation at
60 deg/sec.

A significant decrease in the RS? during the stop stimulus following rotation at a
speed of 180 deg/sec and CCCA and a reliable decrease in this index during the.

stop stimulus following rotation at a speed of 60 deg/sec were typical of the second
group of subjects. Hhen the duration of the CCCA was reduced by a factor of 2, the
maximum change in the RSP for the second group of subjects was similar to that for
the first group, i.e., the RSP increased after CCCA. Figures 1. 2. and 3 illustrate
these variation patterns for the 85?.

RS? (deg/sec) ' Analysis of all our experiaental data showed
‘0 that the action of stimuli during tests in-
70 \ volving continuous cumulative Coriolis acce-
60 \ leration (CCCA) altered the levels of cer-
50 \\}\z tain nystagaic-reaction indices. After the
00 y \' subject was brought to a stop following ro-
so -\, ‘ tation at a speed of 180 deg/sec. the most
,0 - ’ \\._~_ - significant changes were in the rate of the
m ‘== slow phase and the nystagmus amplitude.
0 The character of the changes in these indi-
‘9 sea for the aaximun CCCA duration were simi-
. sec lar to those in the RS? when the subjects
were exposed to 2-g loads (increased weight)
Fig. 1. Graph representing change and linear accelerations during swing tests
in nystagmic RSP during stop stin- (Sidel'nikov. 1970a, 1979). In those cases
ulus following rotation at speed where exposure to CCCA did not produce auto-
of 180 deg/sec for first group of nomic disturbances in the subjects. the
subjects. who withstood cumulative change in the RS? took the form of stimula-
Coriolis acceleration without ves- tion. Conversely, in those cases where a
tibuloautonomic disturbances. l) vestibuloautonomic motion-sickness syndrone
RSP before CCCA; 2) 38? after CCCA. developed. the subjects exhibited an inhi-
bition effect, i.e.. a decrease in the RS?
from its original level. These changes in
the nystagmic reaction were quantitatively most pronounced during the stop
stimulus following rotation at a speed of 180 deg/sec.

m 20

Thus. the graphs representing the nystagmic RSP recorded before and after naximua
exposure to CCCA showed two types of relative positioning for the corresponding
curves. The RSP curves were located above the initial curves in the first type
of reaction and below then in the second type. It must be noted that the second
type of reaction was characteristic of subjects who exhibited a distinct vesti-

97

FOR‘OFIICIAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

a Rayon—05330 .2

00¢ .25
Inna»? no :oauauav .uouu annul— .o
3.0 v m huwnunanoun uouuo 0833 63:03:» 0353.»: .w
.382... “3 9.8» uoud new 5.. .48... .s
33 loam 32.9332. 0.33.39 .3 :33: coauoguuunmaﬂuoo.» .o
you: .2 <08 .3an add 2.88 .n

333 .3 300303 «0 noon.

2:.»- .nouuaoo .3 no gnu-no.— uqteodaou 033:":
<80 3 0.25098 in: no «and .3 a3» 93.50 2:53th no 833:: .c
<80 0... 0.30093 Elan-x .3 3002... no boa-=2 .n
«53 .2 8823 no 9.96 .~
d.- .huuclS—Eéqo .3 >25. «0 cs 4

“5

, . . ”anus 32..“ .8: . ... e2 8..
v.0nﬂ0.uﬂ «.Ouﬂc.v ”3.308 6 h.nﬂ°.8 . w.ﬂﬁn.¢ F "“0 h 0.Qg.a 0.09.8 “o: C 5% E Q
I . I . 933.8. 138.: r . . . . ﬁg
OO-Q“°o.v «.Gﬂﬂau . _ . .aeﬁgoo ..N$.nﬂ OW 9+0 0 w.°HP.O ¢.NH°.FN Ntﬁﬁ°oa ‘0: h = . wdv. . ... . E

. . . .I. again «.338 #8: ..
...«Hto— ...oﬂnéhgéﬂuooé 12.2.8 .n 3...: ... 9.61 a..ﬂn.8 ..«Ho.»N .od 3 = . .

. . 95.3w. «.328 . _, An: 33.:
98’. ....oﬂoJ ngéﬂsod o.ohn.8 90%.. .23.? «JHaéu odﬂuds "on a. _ . 4. . 8.353....— .
. ts! .
. . u
. _ akin; wit}: ,
.133 our-1a.. altars.» I? : nelson... 3.9.0. .. ‘gi
2v

 

15-... 3E. Iii-5|... . on

<80 no 538 none: 3825
0.3325 v.5 0.33m new .0305 ccwuocahluaaapauuu> can unawauamz acuuauouuoom me .3333

_ Sea.

'98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFK3AL.USEZONLY

0.3m“ £82.50: .0
2- .83.?! .o
. 08:3 .3. ..
.36 v a 333.33.. noun» com .3365 0.532?

                          
  

.AouOuonv nouvauo Monacoo :« vozuou uo dowuunqahouvv new odd>uounu .0
-no 3a.. so... 82.28.... 3.3.3.. .2 88 you... 2:. 388 .m
.25: .3 00.32. .wo coo... us
303 .2 3339.. 933:8 2.3: noum ...
avau: souuuoo .Nu savanna. we wanna: .n
<uoo an ousoonuo insane! mo «an: .d. ou00ﬁnan uo Queue. .a
coco o» ousoonxd Islaxn: .ou avau- no 0959 .—
. "as.
. . igtiglgigi'iolliguas
”Nona”. 18".”. no.3”. ﬂame”... 9.83”... ha 33. ASE... iguana 3.3... .32. .8 .
a can . v on. a r. on... a a 3+. 8 9.8.3 as. a 8. v .3 .. as“. 8 933.8 we: . .
33.5. .33”. mam..." Heme... 338.8. aim... . a”. 9... 153.3. Rene... . 8. o . . a .
a on... . a a»... a v 2.»... 9 2+3... 98...}... 3.3.3 « a o... 0.36... o 2.3.8 :. . _ N _
.63”. new...“ _ new... came... tenuous. . .. . . a H
«on: .6“... ”.91.... 3.3.... 3.38 . = H a
«6...... «.33.. «an... 123.2. . _ n .
”6...... 3.“... tone... 3.3.8 . A w.
. .
«.33.. ﬂows”. «6%... eemqa ”5.3.2.5653...
«63... 2+... « «.3...» tats... o....H....3. can". 8. .
«awn. 39mg... 1%..» "3.3.8. 3.3.3. 38.2”... a. =
.6»... . a 9+. » . v.33... . 23.... ads“. 8. . no". 3. ..
.63”. Roux. «am...» name... 3.... . .
«.38. «.3... «6...... 12.1.6. wins a. . .
«am... 33...» 2.3.... 923.... «.33 _
«5...... a .n ”a“... 92.3.... 3%. a...

 

<uoo cu cuaaonxm uouu< van cucuon uumxuou ow. can oo «o avuoam aw :owuuuom ucwaoHHom
«Hasuumlaoum unauaa uou noon ¢nlou vac n.n.. m. was nun» nn.. n no mucuuum nu>o «mauve. uaamauaaz

N OHAQH

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RSP (deg/sec)
00

  

~§8§8K§§

30sec

Pig. 2. The sane, for subjects in
second group, who displayed pronoun-
ced vestibuloautonomic reactions when
exposed to continuous cumulative Co-
riolis acceleration. Symbols the
sane as for Fig. l.

- RSP (deg/sec)

 

Pig. 3. Change in RS? during stop
stimuli following rotation at speeds
of 60 and 180 deg/sec for second
group of subjects. who withstood ex-
posure to Coriolis acceleration for a
period equivalent to 501 of neximua

tine without_vestibuloautonomic dis-
turbances. l) ESP before CCCA (180
deg/sec); 2) RSP after CCCA (180
deg/sec); 3) RSP before CCCA (60
deg/sec); 4) BSP after CCCA (60 deg/
Isec).

buloautononic syndrome at any point during
exposure to CCCA for the maximum time.
while the first type of reaction was char-
acteristic of subjects who withstood the
tests without developing the autonomic
symptom complex of motion sickness. The
stop stimulus following rotation at a speed of 180 deg/sec ends it possible to use

the RSP data to obtain definite and very valuable information on the functional status
of the semicircular-canal receptorsand otduxhic apparatus. as well as on the charac-
teristics of their interaction. The existence of two types of changes in the rate of
the nystagmic reaction was confirned by the fact that the data obtained in other ves-
tibular tests showed the subjects to differ in vestibular stability.

However, we also obtained the first type of change in nystagnus rate for the subjects
in the second group when they participated in experiments in which the duration of ex-
posure to CCCA was only half the eaximum duration. This indicated that. in addition
to the original functional status of the analyzer. the extent (or phase) of the vee-
tibuloautononic motion-sickness syndrone was important for the change in nystogmua
rate.

Data on the nystagnic RSP level in the second-group subjects exposed to COCA for only
half the aaxinun tine were of particular interest for elucidation of certain of the
mechanisms by which the observed effects were produced.

As we saw above, stinulation of the nystagmic 35? occurred in place of inihibition
in this experimental variant. Phenomena of this sort enable us to hypothesize that
stimulation of the nystagmic reaction can occur only when the vestibular-analyser
otolithic apparatus receives a stinulus of definite optimun strength.

100

lNDR‘OFTﬂCJAI.lEﬂE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In cases vhere the otolithic apparatus is overstimulated (a process whose strongest
manifestation can be seen in vestibuloautonomic disturbances), there are paradoxi-
cal cupular reactions. In view of the fact that these are a product of the func-
tional interaction of the otolithic apparatus and cupular system, one can also speak
of the existence of "paradoxical" forms of this interaction. We observed similar
phenomena in studying nystagmic indices after cumulative exposure to linear accele-
ration (in swing tests).

Analysis of the RS? over shorter reaction times (5 and 15 sec) showed the changes in
nystsgmus rate to have the same character. especially during the first 15 see after
the stop stimulus following rotation at a speed of 180 deg/sec.

The experimental results obtained in these series of experiments can thus serve as
still another confirmation of the fact that nystagmus is actually an integral reac-
tion of the vestibular analyzer and that the character of the changes in this reac-
tion depends on the functional state of the semicircular canals and otolithic ap-
paratus and is governed by the characteristics of their interaction.

Recording of nystagmus in combination with imposition of a functional load by the
CCCA method, like swing tests, makes it possible to determine two types of cupular
reactions, making it useful in examination of flight personnel for determination of
vestibular stability in cases of simulation or dissimulstion. for objective evalu-
ation of tolerance to cumulative Coriolis acceleration and particularly to the
CCCA test .

Another striking feature of our investigations was the fact that. after preliminary
exposure to COCA, the second group of subjects exhibited the ESP changes character-
istic of a rotation speed of 180 deg/sec when subjected to the stop stimulus follow-
ing rotation at a speed of 60 deg/sec. In view of this fact and the substantial
difference between the first and second groups. it would seem possible to improve
the technique described above for objective determination of vestibular stability
during CCCA. The data obtained in these studies will be published in a separate
article.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Bryanov, 1.1.. VOYENNO-HED.ZH.. No 11. p 5‘, 1963.
2. Voyachek, v.1.. Russxn mcu, Vol 27. p 904, 1908.

3. Kaminskiy, L.S.. "Statisticheskaya obrabotka laborstornykh i klinicheskikh dan-
nykh" [Statistical Processing of Laboratory and Clinical Data}. Leningrad. 1964.

.-

4. Kurashvili, A.Ye.. VOYENNO-MED. Zﬂ.. No l, p 61, 1967.
5. Lebedinskiy, A.V., Arlashchenko. N.I.. Bokhov, 3.3.. Grigor'yev, Yu.G., Kvasni-
kova, L.N., and Father. Yu.V.. in collection: "Aviatsionnaya i kosmicheskaya

meditsina (materialy konferentsii)" [Aviation and Space Medicine (Proceedings
of a Conference)]. Moscow. 1963, p 333.

101

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
6.

8.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.

20.

IKHIOFFK1ALIEE§ONLY

Makaryan. 8.5.. Yuganov. Ye.M. and Sidel'nikov. I.A.. VOYENNO-MED. 23.. No 9,
p 59, 1966.

. Makaryan. 5.8. and Sidel'nikov. 1.A.. in collection: "Aviakoaaicheakaya medi-

taina" [Aviation and Space Medicine]. Vol 1. Moscow. 1967. p 302.

Popov. A.P., in collection: ”Voproay neditainakogo obespecheniya aviataii"
[Problems of Aviation Medical Servicea], Vol 1. Moscow. 1939. p 112.

Sidel'nikov. I.A.. "Modern electronyatagnography in the theory and practice of
vestibular-function evaluation". Author's Abstract of Candidate'a Dissertation.
Moacov. 1970a; 2M. USHNYKB. NOSOVYKH I GORLOVYKH BOLBZNEY. Mo 6. p 71, 19706;
VOYBNNO-MED. ZH.. No 12. p 49. 1970c; VESTN. OTORINOLARINGOL.. V01 2. p 26. 1974d;
VOYENNO-MED. 28., No 3, p 72. 1975c; 12V. AN SSSR. 83R. BIOL.. No 2. p 259. 19781;
IZV. AN SSSR. SER. BIOL.. No 6. p 498. 19793.

Khilov, K.L.. in collection: "Veatibulonetricheakiy profotbor na letnuyu eluzhbu

i vestibulyarnaya trenirovkn letchikov" [Veatibulonetric Occupational Selection
for Flight Crews and Vestibular Acclinatization of Pilots]. Moscow. 1936a. pp 1. 5;
"Funktsiya organa ravnoveaiya i bolezen' peredvizheniya" [Function of the Organ

of Equilibrium and Motion Sickness], Leningrad. 1969b.

Yuganov. Ye.M.. in collection: "Aviataionnaya i hoanicheakaya neditaina (natarialy
konferentsii)" [Aviation and Space Medicine (Proceedings of a Conference)]. Mos-
cow. 1963. p 496; PROBLDN KOSMICH. 3101... Vol lo. No 1. p 56. 1965b.

Yuganov, Ye.M., Markaryan, 5.5.. Sidel'nikov. I.A.. Bryanov. 1.1. and Vartbaro-
nov. R.A.. in collection: "Aviataionnaya i koanicheakaya neditsina (naterialy
konferenteii)" [Aviation and Space Medicine (Proceedings of a Conference)], Moa-
cou. 1963. p 506.

Yuganov, Ye.M.. Sidel'nikov. I.A.. Gorahkov. A.I. and Kaa'yan. 1.1.. IZV. AN
SSSR, SBR. BIOL.. No 3. p 369. 1964.

Bergstedt. M.. ACTA OTO-LARYNGOL.. Stockholm Suppl.. Vol 165. p 162. 1961.
Bornschein. H. and Schubert. G.. ZBITSCHRIFT BIOL.. Vol 107. No 2. p 95. 1954a;
Vol 113. No 3. p 145, 1962b; INTERNAT. Z. ANGER. PHYSIOL.. Vol 20. No 2. p 178.
1963c.

Collins. H., AEROSPACE ﬁED.. Vol 39. No 2. p 125. 1968.

Doud, P.M.. Moore. 5. and Craner. R.. AEROSPACE MED.. Vol 37. Mo 1. p 45, 1966.
Guedry, F.E. and Montague. E.K.. AEROSPACE MED.. Vol 32. Mo 6. p 487. 1961.
Schubert. 6.1.. J. AVIATION MED.. Vol 25. No 3. p 357. 1956.

Sinka. R.. AEROSPACE HED.. Vol 39. No 8. p 837. 1963.

COPYRIGMT: Izdate1’stvo "Nauka". "Izveetiya AN SSSR. aeriya biologicheakaya". 1981

247

C50: [860/355 102

'Ftll()FIWCJA1.lﬂ5210BﬂUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 613.693

PROBLEMS OF SPACE BIOLOGY, VOL 39: EFFECTS OF EYPEREARIC ENVIRONMENT ON MAM
AND ANIMALS

Moscow PROBLEMY KOSMICHESEOY BIOLOGII, TOM 39: DEYSTVIYE GIPEEEARICEESEOY SEED!
NA ORGANIZH CHELOVEKA I ZEIVOTNYKH in Russian 1980 (signed to press 2‘ Oct 80)
pp 4-7, 258-259

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Problems of Space
Biology, Vol 39: Effects of Hyperbaric Environment on Man and Animals", by
c. l. Kurenkov, B. 0. Yakhontov, A. V. Syrovegin. A. I. Sterlikov, V. P. Nikolayev

and D. B. Vandyshev, editor-inrchief: Prof A. H. Genin, Izdatel'stvo ”ﬂanks",
900 copies, 259 pages]

[Text] This book describes research on the main problems of submarine biology and
medicine. Attention is devoted specially to questions of saturation and desatu-
ration of body tissues with inert gases when atmospheric pressure and composition
of the gas environment change, as well as respiratory function in a high-density
environment, toxic effects of high levels of oxygen pressure, effects of inert
gases on the nervous system under hyperbaric conditions, heat exchange in man
under water at high pressure. The authors' objective did not include comprehen-
sive discussion of the problems mentioned.

This book may be of interest to a wide circle of biologists, physicians and
specialists in the field of submarine and space medicine.

There are 10 tables and ... [illegible] illustrations; bibliography covers 27 pages.

Introduction

At present, a new branch of natural science is completely formed-submarine biology
and medicine, which deals with the functional state of man and animals exposed to
the set of deleterious factors that appear when submerging into a marine environ-
ment. The objective of these studies was to find means of protection that would

enable man not only to work well at elevated pressure, but to preserve entirely
his health.

Submarine biology and medicine was conceived on the basis of classical physiology
in the second half of the 19th century, when a special type of human endeavor
appeared, work at high pressure in caissons and under water.

In the presence of elevated atmospheric pressure, there are a nunber of factors
that man had not encountered in the course of evolution, which affect the organism:

high hydrostatic pressure, high partial pressure of oxygen and other gases in
the respiratory atmosphere, high density of gases in the respiratory mixture.

103

I‘llllllIClAl.I£§Ii(MULﬂ
FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY

The fullest information on this score was first furnished in the classical work of
Paul Bert, "Atmospheric Pressure" (1878). human physiology was enriched with new
data about the toxic effects of oxygen, processes of saturation and desaturation
of body tissues with inert gases when atmospheric pressure changes, and about
functional disturbances during and after decompression. Subsequently, hyperbaric
physiology was augmented with conceptions of the narcotic effects of inert gases
(nitrogen, argon, neon. krypton), specific effects of helium, safe range of use
of nitrogen and helium at elevated pressure, possibility of man's adaptation to
long-term exposure to n hyperbaric environment.

The feasibility of developing the world's oceans depends on advances in submarine
biomedicine. The increasing interest in hyperbaric physiology is also linked with'
the development of new therapeutic methods, for example, oxygen barotherapy, and
the prospects of manned flights to such planets of the solar system as Venus, where
atmospheric pressure near the surface constitutes about 96 kgf/cmz.

The following are the most complex biological problems that prevent man from sub-
merging to great depths at the present time: overcoming respiratory functional
disturbances and neurological disorders that occur when air pressure rises to
more than 6 kgf/cmz, i.e., at depths in excess of 60 m. At such depths, when
divers breathe with air they develop a state of so-called nitrogen anesthesia,
which is characterized by diminished efficiency, drowsiness, hallucinations, loss
of sense of time and space. Host researchers consider the chief cause of this
state to be the specific effect of elevated partial nitrogen pressure; however,
it has also been demonstrated that elevated oxygen pressure, carbon dioxide
pressure and general cooling of the body have an enhancing effect on formation of
nitrogen anesthesia. One of the chief factors involved In accumulation of carbon
dioxide in the body and accentuation of cooling properties of gases under hyper-
baric conditions is the increased density of gases, which affects diffusion of
gases in the lungs and heat transfer.

The signs of nitrogen anesthesia can be ruled out when nitrogen in the respiratory
mixture is replaced with a less dense gas, helium, and thus one can increase the
depth of diving. However, when submerging very rapidly, at depths of 300-350 m,
man develops neurological disorders, the clinical manifestations of which differ
from the state of nitrogen anesthesia. These neurological disorders are charac-
terized by a set of symptoms indicative of increased excitability of different
structures of the central nervous system (tremor, hyperkinesia and others). At
the present time, the state of heightened excitability under hyperbaric conditions
while breathing with helium and oxygen mixtures is known under the name of the
nerv0us high pressure syndrome (NSVD). It is believed that the causes of NSVD
could be pressure per se, the effect of helium at elevated pressure, heat stress,
as well as accumulation of carbon dioxide in body tissues with the use of

a dense respiratory mixture. 0n the basis of the results of studies of NSVD,

some researchers concluded that 300 m is the maximum depth to which man can
submerge when using mixtures containing helium, just like a depth of 60 m is the
maximum when breathing with gas mixtures containing nitrogen. However, it was
learned that one can create conditions that postpone the deleterious effects of
high pressure. Thus, there was substantiation of the possibility of man and
animals overcoming NSVD at depths in excess of 300 m.

This book submits the results of the authors' own research on the effects of
high pressure of respiratory mixtures on man and animals. Reference is made

10‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

chiefly to the data of foreign authors in their discussion of the results of their
studies.

The team of authors expresses its sincere gratitude to V. N. Chernigovskiy.
academician of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Ye. H. lreps, academician of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, Prof I. A. Sapov, Prof G. L. Zsl'tsman, Prof A. G. Zhironkin,
Prof V. B. Halkin, Prof V. S. Parfel' (deceased), I. S. Breslav, doctor of
medical sciences, 2. S. Gusinskiy, candidate of medical sciences. G. A. Knchuk,
candidate of biological sciences and A. I. Selivra, candidate of medical sciences.
for their useful coaments and assistance in preparing this work for publication.

Contents Page
Introduction 5
Chapter 1. Dynamics of Exchange of Inert Gases Betuaen the Organism
and Environment During Compression and Decompression 8
Gas equilibrium of the organism 8
Saturation of the human body with gases in an environment
with stable composition and pressure 9
Postdeconpression and isobaric oversaturation of the organism with gases ll
Biophysical bases of the etiology of caisson disease 16
Sclubility of inert gases in physical systems and tissues of the organism 22
Rate of diffusion of inert gases in fluids 26
haldane's theory on processes of saturation of the organism with
inert gas and desaturation 29
Current models of desaturation and saturation of the body under isobaric
conditions 31
Comparative estimation of rate of saturation and desaturation of the
organism from diverse inert gases ‘0
Distinctions of the organism's desaturation from inert gas during
decompression bl
Conclusion 62
Bibliography 63
Chapter 2. Human Respiratory Function Under Hyperbaric Density Conditions 48
Physical bases of respiration in a dense medium 68
Oxygen cost of respiration 53
Ventilation mechanics SS
Ventilation reaction to carbon dioxide 62
Alveolar-arterial exchange of gases 65
Minute volume of circulation - 79
Conclusion 81
Bibliography 83
Chapter 3. Toxic Effects of High Partial Oxygen Pressure 90
Acute form of oxygen poisoning 97
Chronic form of oxygen poisoning 102
Oxygen poisoning combined with other factors 107
Mechanisms of oxygen poisoning 110
Conclusion 120
Bibliography 122
Chapter A. Neurophysiologicai Studies and Clinical Signs of the
Effects of Inert Cases at high Pressure 130
hyperbaric anesthesia 131
General clinical tigns of anesthesia and correlation thereof with
gas composition of respiratory mixture 131
105

FOR'OFFKJAI.USE1)N1Y
|-'0" JI-‘I-‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

Anesthetic effects of inert gases on the central nervous system
Motor function with hyperbaric anesthesia
The nervous high pressure syndrome
Symptomatology of the nervous high pressure syndrome and its etiology
Central nervous system during development of nervous high pressure
syndrome
Changes in excitability of the neuromotor system with development
of the nervous high pressure syndrome
Conclusion
Bibliography
Chapter 5. Distinctions of Heat Transfer in Han During Exposure to
Elevated Pressure of Gas Environment and Under Water
Heat transfer in man in hyperbaric chambers

Microlimate distinctions
Distinctions of heat transfer by convection
Changes in thermal properties or' clothing in a hyperbaric environment

Heat loss via the respiratory tract
Heat transfer by evaporation in a hyperbaric environment
Heat production in a hyperbaric environment
Heat balance in man during stay in hyperbaric chamber
Setting standards for comfortable microclimate in hyperbaric chambers

Heat transfer in man when working under water

Mathematical modeling of the human heat-regulating system in hyperbaric
chambers and under water

Conclusion

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1980

10,657
C30: 1860/999

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BOOK BXPIDRES WED mom! OP swam BRAIN CW5

Moscow BIOPIZIKA WHY”! mm mm 1:. Russian 1980 (signed to press
13 Jun 80) pp 2-4. 182-4“

[Annotatiom foreword, and table or contents from book “Biophysics of Extracellular
Brain Currents", by Aron myerovich Gutuan. assn Made-y of Sciences, Scientific
Council for Problems of Biological Physics, Institute of Biological Physics,
Izdatel'stvo "Nauka', 1,700 copies, 184 pages]

['next] This monograph presents the theory of the extracellular field and electric
influence upon the cell. The theory is refined down to assessments used as the basis
to analyze electrostinulation, the origin of the 306 and BEG, the methods of deter-
mining stimulation sources by .6 interpretation, the layered distribution of poten-
tials in the cortex, and the extracellular spike. deﬂections are raised to the
hypothesis of (etapticheskoye) interaction of neurons an". some counnly accepted
ideas about the genesis of a nunber or biopotentials or the central nervous systen.
the concept or the EEG quantum is introduced-an elemntary i-pulse of biocurrents
in the gray matter. or a synchronous extracellular postsynaptic potential from all
synapses of one axon. Theoretically predicted registration or the EEG quantum and
its use in direct investigation of a synapse are described. the concept of the IG
quantum is applied to EEG and ECG interpretation.

The bock is intended for bicphysicists and physiologists involved with the problems
of neuro- and electrophysiology.

Forty-three figures. 601 bibliographic references.
Contents Page

Foreword...............................o..

PrincipalSymbolsandAbbreviations . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .'.

3
5
I. Principlesbeable'meory....................... 7
1.1.'iheCablquuation.......................... 7
1.1.1.TheGeneralCableEquation.................. 7
1.1.2. Simplifications Associated With the Extracellular Field . . . 8

1.1.3. Rall'sCable... ..... .................ll
1.2.The0hmicCeble...........................l2
1.3.meRC-Cable.....-.. ..... eeOOeeeeeeeeOOeo 16

I.3.l.Green'sPunction.......................l6

1.3.2. The Division of Variables Method .............. . 18

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
11. Inﬂuence of an Extracellular Electric Field Upon a Neuron .
11.l. The Problen of (efapticheskoye) Interaction . . . . . . . . .
11.2. The Cable ina Given Extracellular Field . . . . . . . . .

11..21.
112..2

11.2.3.
11.2.4.
11.2.5.
11.2.6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0000

General Solution for a Segment of Cheic Cable . . . .
The Host Imortant Particular Cases of the cum: Cable in
GivenaxtracellularField..... .. . .....
The Myelinized moon in a Constant Field . . . . . . . . .
The Nonlinear Cable in a Constant Field . . . . . . . . .
An RC Cable Segment in a Given Variable Field . . . . . .

The Boundless RC Cable in the Field of a Traveling Pulse .

eeee’esse

eeeee
eeeee

11.3. Numerical Assessments of the Influence of an Extracellular Field
onaNeocorticalNeuron........................

11.3.1.

11.3.2.

11.3.3.
11.3.4.

11.3.5.
11.3.6.
11.3.7.

111. The Theory of the Extracellular Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111.1. The Extracellular Field Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

111.1.1.
111.1.2.

111.1.3.

111.2.TheSourceofanI-xtracellularField... ............

111.2.1.
111.2.2.
111.2.3.
111.2.4.

111.2.5.

Game in Transnedarane Potential in the Trigger Zone of

a Pyranidal Cell of the Cat Cortex by the Field of an
Blectrocorticogran ....
Effect of an Extracellular Field on Neuron Spike Activity . . .
Effect of a Constant Extracellular Field on Presynaptic Endings
Assessment of the Parameters of Effective Cortical Stimulation
byaConstantField......................
Assessment of the Parameters of PulsedStinulation of Axons . .
Assessment of the Interaction of Axons in-a Nerve . . . . . . .
Stimlation of a Cortical Neuron by short Electric Pulses . . .

Capacitance in a Three Dieensional Nervom Tissue Conductor

Lsplace's Equation for a Three-Dimensional Ohmic Conductor .
(brrectionstomplace'saquation. . . . . . . . .. . . . .

The Basic Integral Formula for Laplace's Equations in

theTheoryoftheExtracellularField. . . . . . . . . . . . .
TheCellasaDipole .....................
TheCellasaSetofFieldSources ..'............
The Physical Meaning and Elementary Derivation of the

DipoleFormula ........................
Relative Independence of the Source of an thracellulu Field .

111.3. The Field in a Nonhounogeneous Environeent. A General Examination,

andtheainpleCases..........'.............

111.3.1.
111.3.2.
111.3.3.
111.3.4.
111.3.5.

The Basic Integral Formula in a llonhonogeneous Environment
The Reciprocity Theorem, Electrode Theory . . . . . . . . .
The Double Electric Layer in a Nonhouogeneous Space . . . .
TheSpace ofTVoﬂonogeneous Isotropic Media . . . . . . .
TheFlatBomdaryBetveeanbdia. . . . . . . . . . . .

seeeee

111.4. The Field in a Nonhouogeneous Spherically Symetrical Medina. ‘ms .

TheoryoftheBCG ........................

111.4.1.
111.4.2.
111.4.3.
111.4.4.

General Methods of Analyzing a Spherically Symetrical Field
The Dipole in a Honogeneous Isolated Sphere . . . . . . . . .
The Field of a Tangential Double Layer in an Isolated Sphere .

The Conductivity and Geometry of Brain Tissues . . . . . . . .

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

21
21
22
22

25
27
29
31

35

35

38

40
43
44

48
48
48
48
51
52

52
54
58
59

59

'61

62

68
68
70
72
74
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

111.5. 36 Theory as Approximated by Thin'Cerebral Hebranes . . . . . . . . .
111.5.1. The Cerebral Membranes as a mltilayer Spherical Cable . . . . .
111.5.2. The Equation for the Spherical Cable and Its General Solution .
111.5.3. Nuuerical Assessmnt of the EEG Representing a Separate

Spherical Harmonic of a Tangential Layer . . . . . . . . . . . .

111.5.4. The EEG Field of the siwlest Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111.5.5. Electrostinulation of the Human Brain with Scalp Electrodes . .
111.5.6. The Reverse Problem of Electroencephalography . . . . . . . . .
111.6. The Field of the Anisotropic Media: of White Brain ﬁtter . . . . . . .

1v. Quantitative Assessments of Cortical Potentials . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1v.l. The Sources of a Field Created by Cortical Neurone . . . . . . . . . . .
1V.l.l. Physiological Characteristics of Possible Sources of an
ExtracellularField.......................
1v.l.2. The Pyramidal Neuron as a Set of Dipoles . . . . . . . . . . . .
1v.2. Layered Distribution of Potentials in the Cerebral Cortex . . . . . . .
1v.2.l.StatenentoftheProblen .................. .
1v.2.2. Experimental Data on the Nature of the Profile of the
BPCosponentintheCortex ................. .

2 3. The Synaptic Nature of the 3P Comonent in the Cerebral Cortex
.2.4.1nterpretation of the Nature of a Profile . . . . . . . . . . .
v.2.s. Theoretical Assessment of the size of a Transcortical Potential
v.2.6. The Field in Nonoriented Structures . . . . .. . . . . . .
V27.Discussion..........................

V..
V

I
1
I
I . .
I
1V.3. The Neuron Extracellular Spike . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV. 3.1. The Amplitude of an Extracellular Spike . . . . . . . .
1v. 3. 2. The Shape of an Extracellular Spike . . . . . . . . .
1v. 3. 3. Comparison of the Theory of the Extracellular Field of a Spike
HithExperimentalData.....................
1v.3.4. Spikes and Cunulative Bioelectric Activity . . . . . . . . . . .

eeeee

V.TheaEGQuantum..............................
v.1.TheConcept.andAssessmentofVa1ue ..................
V.l..l TheConceptofBBGQuantuI......... . ...

v. 1. 2. Assessment of the Three-Dimensional Structure of the Field
ofanEEGQuanttn ..................
v.1.3. Assessment of the Alplitude ofanKBG Quantum . . . .
v.2.Registration .........................
v.2.1. General Methodological Problems ...........
v.2.2. The EEG Quantum of the Frog and Cat Retimtectal Afferent

Iepulses............................
v.2.3. The EEG Quantum of Afferent Inpulses of the Cat Spinal Cord
andTrigeninalNerve......................
v.2.4. TheZBGQuantunin thenabbitaippocampus . . . . . . . . . . .
v. 2. 5. Registration of EEG Quanta in the Rabbit Mocortex . . . . . . .
V. 3. Application of the EEG Quanttm Concept to Biopotential Interpretation . .
v.3.1. Three Bands in the Spectra: of Cunulative Biocurrent of
CerebralGrayMatter......................
v.3.2. Theoretical Analysis of High Frequency Manifestations in the
EEG, in the ECG. and in Hicroelectrode Recording . . . . . . . .
v.3.3. The Quantum Band and the Spike Band in Experiments . . . . . . .
v.3.4. ESGHultipleQuanttnAnalysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

eeee
e
a
rose

0
e
e
e

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

77
77
78

81

87

93
93

93
95

100

101
103
106
107
109
111
111
114

116
119

121
121
121

123
126
127
127

129

132
133
135
141

141

144
145

147
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

v.4. Registration of EEG Quantaua New Direct mthod of Investigation of
Synaptic‘l‘ransmissionphysiology. . . . . . . . . .'. . . . . . . . . 148
v.4.l. Frequency Dependence of Retinotectal Transmission in Frogs and cuts 108
v.4.2. Posttetanic Potentiation of the Evoked Postsynaptic Potential

ofﬂossyPibersintheRabbitBippocm.............150
V.4.3.Pharuacologyofthenetinotectalsynapse ............. 150
v.4.4. The Nature of Synaptic Inﬂuence and the location of Aaron

‘nerninals.............................lSl

v.4.5. The EEG Quantum and Interpretation of Individual Intracellular
PostsynapticPotentials...................... 152

'me principles of the theory of the tissue electric field were discovered back at the
dawn of biophysics by Helmholtz (330). Research on this problem is being continued

simple situations, such as a cylindrical fiber in infinite space (487), permitting

a sufficiently precise mnerical solution. But in most cases researchers limit
themselves to examination of the orientation of dipoles, and to determination of
potential signs (118). Use or the intermediate approach of gross quantitative assess-
ments is justified by its simplicity and by the broad range of its applications.
Quantitative assess-ants are very popular in physics, at least in terns of the fre-
quency of their application. 'mey must be utilized even sure broadly in biology, in-
asnuch as the accuracy of an experiment is often limited to the first significant

in physics. It would appear suitable to apply this approach to the highly confusing
problem of brain gray matter biocurzents.

Although the principal object in this book is the extracellular field, Chapter I
begins with a description of the intracellular potential fields, inasnuch as we can
assure with satisfactory accuracy that an intracellular potential, which determines
extracellular biocurrents, does not itself depend on the latter. This result follows
from the conclusions of daapter II on polarisation of the meiarane of a cable by a
given extracellular field. Chapter III is devoted to the general theory of the
extracellular field: moreover a method for simple quantitative assessment of a
dipole and of a set of dipoles representing a source-cell is proposed. ‘lhis chapter
uses a sisplified approach to the nonhonogeneity and nonisopropicity of the brain
and its membranes. This method is used in Chapter Iv to assess concrete electro-
physiological phenomena occurring mainly in the cerebral cortex. Chapter V presents
the most isportant conclusions, demonstrating that an elenentary imulse of bio-
potentials in the gray matter elicited by a single afferent spike, which has cone to
he called an we quanta, nay be recorded. ‘Ihis prediction was experimentally con-
firmed.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I an grateful to many individuals, and mainly to my Laban-Lory colleagues. for their
cooperation. Iextend my gratitude to N. mmainoven for his; great assistance in
preparing the manuscript.

OOPYRIGIT: Izdatal'stvo 'Nauka", 1980

11004
C802 1840/190

111

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FNKJA1.USE|3NLN

HUMAN FACTORS

UDC: 612.172.2
PROBLEMS OF SPACE BIOLOGY, VOL 61: BIOLOGICAL RHYTHHS

Moscow,PROBLEHY KOSHICHBSKOY BIOLOGII, TOM 41: BIOLOGICBBSKIYB RITMY in Russian
1980 (signed to press 23 Oct 80) pp 6-9, 316-319

(Annotation, introduction, conclusion and table of contents from book "Problems
of Space Biology. Vol 41: Biological Rhythms", edited by Academician V. N.
Chernigovskiy, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 2300 copies, 320 pages]

[Text] This collective monograph deals with biological rhythms on different levels
of organization of living systems (cellular, organiemic, population), as well as
their relation to periodicity of the environment on our planet. 0n the basis of
data in the literature and experiments conducted by the authors, there is dis-
cussion of the system of biological rhythms, correlations between them and their
lability, role of rhythms in normal function of the organism, effect of exogenous
conditions on rhythms and capacity of some rhythms to adjust to the periodicity

of the environment.

This monograph is intended for specialists in the field of space biology and medi-
cine, physiologists, botanists and biologists in other fields.

Tables 3, illustrations 72; bibliography listed on 39 pages.
Introduction

A brief report about one of the experiments of the famous French naturalist, J. J.
de Moran, was published 250 years ago in the works of the Royal Academy of Paris.
He discovered that plants retain their circadian rhythm of leaf movement in total
and constant darkness. For the first time, it was demonstrated that biological
rhythms are a special category of phenomena, rather than a simple reaction to
changing conditions. This is hov deve10pment of a new science, the science of
biological rhythms, began.

One quarter of a millennium later, the problem of biological rhythms became one of
the basic problems of modern biology. Numerous studies have shown that biological
rhythms are the Very basis of biological processes.

The start of exploration of space served as a powerful impetus for further develop-
ment of the science of biological rhythms. Bxpressly there, many problems of bio-
rhythmology acquired special meaning, and often very marked practical relevance
as well. Impairment of biorhythms has often been observed during space flights.
Yet the rhythmic structure of any organism is just as important to life and just

112

IND! OFFICIAI.IEIECMWLY
FINICHHWCIAI.USB(NVLY

as complex as the spatial structure. This time structure is flexible and labile,
but still it is very vulnerable. Impairment of rhythmic structure leads to dis-
eases and even death. For this reason, one of the most important tasks of space
biology is to study biological rhythma-their stability, factors affecting them
and periodic changes in sensitivity of the organism. The study of biorhythms is
just as important to space exploration as, for example, studies of the effects of
weightlessness.

This task can be formulated on a broader basis: it is not only in space, but on our

planet that we have to be concerned with preservation of the time structure of life,
which is so sensitive to diverse factors.

What are biological rhythms? They are periodically recurring changes in nature and
intensity of biological processes and phenomena. Each of these recurrences usually
differs somewhat from the preceding and subsequent ones, both in amplitude and in
duration of period. However, if one studies rhythm long enough, one usually finds
that the mean values of rhythm parameters are quite stable. These mean parameters
change in a consistent way when there is a change in exogenous conditions.

Rhythms are not the exclusive property of living matter. Appearance of fluctuating
processes is inevitable wherever there is regulation with lagging feedback. Accord-
ingly, the most diverse processes, very distant from one another, in both inanimate
and animate nature, may be rhythmic.

However, living matter differs from nonliving in that there is more order in the
rhythmic processes. The more complex the system, the more important to it is
organization in time. Evidently, life in general is impossible without rhythms,
without pulsations. And, although biological rhythms of a given organism, or
population, must be coordinated, the mechanisms of most rhythms are profoundly
different. Although it would be tempting to conceive of low-frequency rhythms
arising on the basis of high-frequency ones and to find-the "rhythmic unit," there
is still no convincing experimental evidence of such unity of rhythmic structure.
One thing is certain: some rhythms model others in the organism, there is ayncrhoni-
zation and entraining (prolongation) of rhythms.

The science that deals with biological rhythms-biorhythmology-is a part of chrono-
biology--the science dealing with time in biology, but it actually uses all of the
main contents of modern chronobiology. The impression could be gained that such

a science is utterly artificial, as it deals with such profoundly different pro-
cesses and uniting them according to a rather formal feature, the presence of
rhythmicity. After all, there is no science, for example, such as physicorhyth-
mology dealing with photic, sonic, mechanical and other fluctuations.

If we were to refer to the current situation in biorhythmology, we would find
evidence that would appear to confirm this thought. Different rhythmic processes
are studied by biologists in the most varied directions, virtually without

a connection between one another. Only one category of rhythms is the primordial
field of research by biorhythmologists. He refer to so-called ecological rhythms:
daily, seasonal, tidal, lunar, i.e., rhythms that have distinct atronomical ana-
logues in the environment. At the present time, the study of rhythms of the
organism reminds one of the well-known parable about the blind man who tried to

..l_,//
113

FIN!(NNW(]AI.USEGDNLY
FUR ”film 05! ONLY

determine what an elephant was like. some feeling only its leg, others only its
tail, other yet only the trunk, etc.

Still, the subject of the science that is forming only now-biorhythmology-does
definitely exist. The task of future biorhythmology will be not only to analyze the
mechanism of a given specific rhythm (which can only be done by a specialist in the
narrow field of the phenomena studied), but primarily to synthesize all of the rhyth-
mic systems of the organism in all its interactions.

Our book is an effort to integrate in some way these scattered studies, to stress

the fact that all of them pursue the same ultimate goal, that of studying the
rhythmic structure of the organism.

A rhythmic structure is apparently mandatory, to some extent or other, in all living
things and it is present on all levels of organisation, from intracellular to
population processes. Biological rhythms can be observed in virtually every cell

of a multicellular organism. Some cells or groups of cells take on the role of
synchronizers, controlling the rhythm of organs or even the organism as a whole.

It is well-known that biological rhythms can persist for some time in organs and
tissues isolated from the organism.

The rhythmic structure of an organism, like its morphology, is genetically fixed.
Host rhythms appeared spontaneously in ontogenesis, but some require specific
exogenous influences for their manifestation.

All organisms adapt to the environment and bear its imprint. This also applies to
.the rhythmic structure, which developed not only as the inevitable result of complex
interactions within the organism, but as adaptation to environmental rhythms. There
is a rhythmic pattern of events inherent in each plant, and everything living that
existsonearth is permeated wiﬂaterrestrial rhythms, which are part of its
substance. when we leave our planet, we still remain terrestrial and bear its
rhythms.

Under natural conditions, these ecological rhythms conform strictly with periodic
changes in the environment due to astronomical causes. Apparently, the study of
such rhythms is of special importance in connection with exploration of space.

Ecological rhythms serve as a biological clock for the organism, enabling it to
be oriented in time and prepare in advance for expected changes in conditions.

Stability of period is typical of ecological rhythms, with regard to diverse chemical
factors, different levels of temperature and illumination, i.e., they are self-
sufflcient with respect to metabolic processes. Because of this relative inde-
pendence, the endogenous ecological rhythm controls the rhythms of the entire or-
ganism, affecting the level of motivations. But motivations apparently have no
effect whatsoever on endogenous rhythm. The rhythm of animal activity observed
under natural conditions is a complex combination of elements of behavior that

are actuated by the endogenous rhythm and immediate reactions to exogenous condi-
tions. This entire behavior is substantially modified by the biological state of

the animal.

All other rhythms, unlike ecological ones, either have no marked and stable
exogenous analogues, or else have some specific phaaic relation to them. This

114

FOR‘OPFHJAI.USE(HVLY
applies to most physiological rhythms, such as, for example, the heart beat,
respiratory excursions, etc. However, all of these rhythms are modeled to some
extent or other, in frequency and amplitude, by ecological rhythms.

Development of biorhythmology began with the proof of preservation of ecological
circadian rhythm in continuous darkness. There are two interpretations of this
phenomenon: either the rhythm is endogenous, i.e., spontaneous, and the fluctuations
are determined by an endogenous mechanism, or else the organism, when isolated from
alternation of light and temperature, perceives some sort of time signals from

the outside, senses the regular changes in geophysical factors that penetrate
through the laboratory walls.

At present, it can be considered that the spontaneity of all of the main rhythms,
including ecological ones, has been completely proven. However, an actual rhythm
always has both endogenous and exogenous components. The question of the role

of exogenous factors in maintaining and regulating endogenous, spontaneous rhythms
cannot be considered definitively answered. He cannot rule out the possibility
that geophysical factors play a significant part here.

To test this hypothesis, experiments must be conducted at a considerable distance
from our planet, where complete isolation from terrestrial factors can be ob-
tained. It is quite apparent that this question has more than great theoretical
significance. If "penetrating” geophysical factors are mandatory to maintain
rhythms, it would be impossible to make any distant and long-term space flights
without simulating the natural rhythmic environment for living organisms.

The change in period under constant laboratory conditions is another distinction
of ecological rhythms. Solardsilx lunar daily, weekly, lunar semimonthly, lunar
monthly, annual rhythms become "circa-" rhythms in the absence of the usual
environmental changes, i.e., "near-" solar daily, "near" lunar daily, etc. The
period of a rhythm under constant conditions is individual for each specimen, and
it also depends on prevailing conditions.

By analogy with physical oscillations, such rhythms are called free-flowing under
stable conditions. This implies that, expressly under stable conditions, the
rhythm is manifested as such, without any exogenously imposed elements.

Apparently, constant conditions [sic], on the contrary, have a marked unnatural
effect on the organism, deforming the parameters of rhythm. They cannot by any
means he considered the neutral background against which rhythm is manifested.

Any regulation of ecological rhythm is possible because of the fact that unstable
states-time of potential readiness (TPR)-appesr several times within each of
its periods. They correspond to the time when the organism is ready to receive
an exogenous signal, a certain change in conditions. If the signal is somewhat
behind or ahead of time, there is a corresponding shift in rhythm phase. The
same reaction to conditions occurs when they are constant. If these conditions
are close to signal values, the rhythm phase shifts ahead during TPR, and if they
are far from these values, it shifts back. There is a corresponding deformation
of the period of rhythm, and the magnitude of this deformation equals the alge-
braic sum of all phase shifts within each of the TPR's.

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR‘0F11C1A|.lEHi(MVLY

Thus, ecological rhythm is never a "free fluctuation." It regularly "consults"
with exogenous conditions to which the organism is exposed. The complex rhythmic
system of the organism cannot be absolutely closed, no matter how much we try to
isolate it, it will always react to the conditions we present to it. This reaction
to the environment is always an organic part of the rhythmic system. On the whole,
however, the rhythmic system reacts with amazing refinement and precision to the
environment, providing for maximum adaptability of the organism.

We have tried in our book to demonstrate this multifaceted rhythm system of the
organism, with its complex endogenous and exogenous interactions. ,It was not our
aim to furnish exhaustive surveys on each of the problems, which would have
required a much larger book.

The book is divided into two parts. The first deals with biological rhythms on dif-
ferent levels of biological organization, from cells to populations. The second
part describes the properties of rhythma-dsily, lunar and seasonal-that are

the most related to the environment and important to space practice. This part
also has a chapter on biological rhythms related to solar activity.

Authors who work independently in allied fields always have different opinions, a
different style, different approaches to a question and its presentation. For
this reason, we tried to reflect more fully the complexity, contradiction and
acuity of current problems in hiorhythmology.

The Authors will consider their mission accomplished, if the book will help develop
life support systems for space flights, if it discloses even more that life has
not only a spatial structure, but an equally important time structure, and if it

is instrumental in expanding continued research and generating heated discussion.

Conclusion

A quarter of a millennium has passed since the discovery made by de Heran. But
it is only in the second half of our century that, finally, the significance of
hiorhythmology to basic biology and practice of human life was appreciated, and
this discipline began to develop rapidly. Still, strictly speaking, the science
of hiorhythmology as such does not yet exist. There are only some of its frag-
ments and efforts to tie them together.

It has now become very obvious that virtually all processes in the organism are
rhythmic; some rhythms appear and are manifested independently, others are the
result of integration of several rhythms. It is equally apparent that all of these
rhythms interact with one another in some way or other, forming a more or less
coordinated rhythmic system, time organization of a living thing. In's normal
organism, these rhythms form an orderly and complex whole, like the sound of a

symphonic o.unestra.

however, it is not always by far that one can say something definite about the
mechanisms of rppearance of some biological rhythm, its regulation and lability,
and as a rule, the longer the period of a rhythm, the less we know about its
mechanism. It is relatively easy to create a mathematical or physical model
that would describe, more or less satisfactorily, the properties of a biological
rhythm. Numerous such models have been proposed and more than one interesting
hypothesis has been orpounded, but there is still no definitive solution.

116

FOR!OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The situation is even more complicated with respect to the study of the time or-
ganization of living systems. In the first place, different rhythms are the sub-
ject of research for different specialists limited to the narrow range of their
problems. In the second place. the rhythms that we are accustomed to considering
elementary are often in fact the result of complex interaction between many

rhythms. For this reason, we are still far from having a real idea about the
rhythmic structure of organisms.

The youth of our discipline is also reflected in the fact that it is called by
different names. Even in the different chapters of this book, reference is made

to biorhythmology in some cases, chronobiology in others. Of course, the teaching
on time organization of living things is the foundation of our discipline, which
should be called chronobiology, where the problem of biological rhythms is an
extremely important but special one. Of course, one should not study only rhythmic
phenomena, but all of the existing "trends," viewing rhythms as elements of onto-
genesis and phylogenesis. But yet, we feel that it is more appropriate to use

the term, "biorhythmology," which corresponds to the current state of our knowledge.

Also, a few words about the importance of our discipline today and in the future.

We have already started to become accustomed to conceptions that biorhythms are
always superimposed over the studied biological processes, that one should pay
attention to time of day and time of year in any investigation. We have yet to
become used to the fact that biorhythms are the substance of the process itself,
one of the mandatory elements of its mechanism.

The exceptional significance of biorhythmology in space biology and actual practice
of space flights has been demonstrated in many sections of our book. Long-term
manned space flights would be impossible without the study of mechanisms of
coordination of rhythms with the environment and analysis of rhythm disturbances
that occur under the influence of space flight factors.

But we hope that the conceptions of time organization of living things will have

a substantial influence on future development of such disciplines as physiology and
molecular biology, embryology and genetics, immunology and oncology, and many
other branches of biology and medicine.

Contents Page
Intrnductlon (V. B. Chernyshcv) 5
1. Biological Rhythms on Different Levels of Biological Organization
Chapter 1. Time Organization of Biological Systems (Yu. A. Romanov) 10
Time organization of biological systems as the principle of
biological organization ll
Appearance and development of time organization of biological
systems in evolution of life 12
General structure of time organization of biological systems 18
Regulation of time organization of biological systems 21
Time organization of some biological systems 23
Desynchronosis of time organization of biological systems 36
Space,and time organization of function of biological systems 38
Time organization of human functions in the presence of diseases 40
Chronopharmacology and chronotherapy 53
117

F0!‘0FFIJMJ.IENE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 2. Rhythmic Processes and Regulation of Vital Functions

(5. A. Chepurnov) 57
Physiological aspects of biorhythmology 57
Rhythmic course of the main physiological processor-excitation and

inhibition (functional rhythms) 60
Rhythmic activity and functional state of the brain . 86
Self-regulation and rhythms of autonomic processes in man and animals

with changes in abiotic environmental factors 102

Rhythmic processes of the cardiovascular system and the biological clock 110
Chapter 3. Rhythms of Animal Growth and Development

(6. A. Klevezal', H. V. Mina) 139
Growth and development as a complex rhythmic process 162
Rhythms with periods of nore than 24 hours 168
Circadian rhythms 150
Ultracircadian rhythms 151
Special categories of rhythms of growth and development 152
Rhythms and regulation of the growth process 154

Significance of rhythmic organization of growth and development processes 159

Chapter 6. Periodic Changes in Size of Animal Populations (8. Ya. Vilenkin) 166
Causes determined by properties of the population itself, exogenous

circumstances and interaction between populations of different species 167

II. Biological Rhythms and Environmental Rhythms

Chapter 5. Circadian Rhythms (V. 8. Chernyshev) 186
circadian rhythms of organisms and the environment 186
Environmental factors regulating endogenous rhythm 196
Scheme of regulation of endogenous rhythm 201
Rhythms under constant [stable] conditions 203
Daily and circadian rhythms 206
Patterns of rhythm phase shifts by time sensor (phasic curve) 208
Extension of rhythm due to various illumination conditions 210
Arrest of the rhythmic process 215
Modeling the circadian rhythm 216
Central mechanisms of regulation of rhythms 218
Daily organization of a living system 220
Adaptive significance of circadian rhythms 222

Chapter 6. Lunar and Certain Hultiday Rhythms (V. B. Chernyshev) 229

Chapter 7. Seasonal Rhythms (V. P. Tyshchenlto. 1'. R. Goryshina.

V. R. Dol'nik) 238

Seasonal rhythms of the environment (this section written by
V. B. Chernyshev) 238
Adaptive role of seasonal biological rhytl-s 239
Change in biological states as the adaptive basis of seasonal rhythms 261
Regulation of seasonal rhythms 2106
Seasonal rhythms of plants 257
Seasonal rhythms of arthropods 265
Seasonal rhythms of vertebrates 276

Chapter 8. biological Rhythms and Solar Activity (8. H. Vladimirskiy) 289
Solar activity and parameters of the environment [habitat] 292
Main cycles and periods of heliogeophysical factors 300
Heliogcnphysica] cycles in the biosphere 305

Conclusion (V. n. Chernyshev) 316

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Hanks", 1980

10,657
030: 1860/999 118

FOR OFFICIAL [3! ONLY
FOIOFI‘ICIALUSEONLY

131013001 ANALYZBS mum: PW WIT! mum moors

3!)fo PROYBKTIVIH‘I‘B W ISSIBWNIYA manner: in Russian i980 (nigh-d to press

3 Jul 80) pp 3-9

[Table of contents and foreword from book 'ijective Methods of Personality

Analysis“, by Yelena Peodorovna Sokolova, Isdatel'stvo lbskovekogo universiteta,

15,100 copies, 176 pages]

['next] Contents

Pbreword................................

Chapter I. General Chara: eristics and Classification of Projective

uchniqwsssoseeesee-ssseeseessos-o

Chapter II. nistory of the Development and Substantiation of the

mjecuvemmsesssessesseseeeosooe

51. Substantiation of the Projective lethod by the Principles of

BolisticPsychology.........................

52. Effect of Classical and Revised Peychoanalysism the Basis of the

Projectiveﬂethod..........................

53. me signiﬁcance of “New Iook' Studies to Substantiation o: the

ijectiveﬂthod.................o.........'c.o

54. me Conceptions of Projection in Substantiation o: the Projective Method
55. me Projective Method in the Context of the Conceptions of Personal

mailing.-....................o.........

chapter III. The thematic Apperception 'nest (n'r) . . . . . . . . . . . .
51. Basic Premises of H. mrray's Personality meory . . . . . . . . .

52. 'me TAT: H. mrray's Bxperimntal Procedure, Analysis Schene,

andlnterpretation...........................
53. D. Rapaport's Basic Categories for Analysis or an Stories_ . . . .

54. Sons Approaches to Interpreting the m: s. Mins' and III. Arnold's

e

SCMIBS.-o........o.....o-o....o-.o.oo-o

Chapter IV. ll. Rorschach's lnkblot 'rest . . . . . . . . . . .
51. Description of the technique and Experimental Schsne .
QustioningtheSubject.................

Determining Sensitivity Limits . . . . . . . . . . . .
52. Basic Procedures of Response Coding . . . . . . . . .

es...

119

FOR OFFICIAL [Bl ONLY

to...

939°

. 5

10

19

76
84

92

102
104
106

...107
...108

Designatingthelocationofekesponse ..................108
menasicneteninantsofnesponses....................lll
IUI UI'sLIAI- WI" URL!

53. Interpretation of the Basic Coding Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
'me Psychological Meaning of location Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . 121
The Psychological Meaning of Basic Deterainants . . . . . . . . . . . . 123

54. Interpretationoflestaesults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
Interpreting the 'nest's Basic Indicators and ’l‘heir Relationships . . . 136
AffectandltsControllability . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . 139
Evaluating Intellectual Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141

SpecialPhenonsna ............................ 144
Diagnosis of Conflict and the Defense Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146

Conclusion................................ 152

Appendices.................................154
Bibliography.... ...........................169
Foreword

Projective techniques have begun enjoying broad application in many areas of
psychological practice in connection with the growing denand for applied psychological
analyses of the personality. But their use is not always justified by the objectives
of the concrete analysis, and results are interpreted in categories adequate to ideas
about the personality that have evolved in domestic psychology. Hence it follows
that directly borrowing foreign methods of personality diagnosis without critical
inspection of their theoretical basis may produce serious difficulties, both theo-
retical and practical. All of this makes lengthy and Ieticulous work necessary to
develop a theory of the projective method based on the praises of Soviet psychology.
me first steps in this direction presuppose, first of all, associating the princi-
ples and concepts making up the conceptual machinery of the projective method with
the personality conceptions correspondingto it; second of all, distinguishing that
psychological reality which, within the framework of the given conception, serves

as the object of the projective method; and third and finally, describing this
object in concepts that have been developed in Soviet psychology.

However, to what degree are the method or the particular techniques determined by

psychological theory? 'me history of the projective nethod'e development shows that
it does not exist apart from personality unoryx at the same tine the relationship

birth of a method is prepared for by a theory already in existence, though this

 

of analysis derived from general theoretical ideas about the essence of the object
under analysis, and techniques as the technical procedures by which the method is
inenented with the purposes of refining or verifying our knowledge about the
object (33).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

paradox of this situation revealed itself with special obviousness when a few
decades following the arisal of projective techniques. their relationship to the
basic personality theories became the object of methodological reflex action--that
is, this relationship transformed into a special research task. he situation is
made even more conplex by the fact that with time, a method acquires what seems to
be relative independence from the theory that brought it into being, and it begins
to “operate“ in other conceptual systems. As a rule this promotes alteration of
the entire conceptual machinery, and concurrently, change in our ideas about the
objects under analysis. In turn, transformations of the method bring various
schemes of analysis and interpretation of the individual techniques themselves
into being as well. As an exalple despite the indisputable fact that both the
projective method and the projective technique were created under the influence of
psychoanalysis, the latter was not their sole theoretical basis: “New Look" experi-
ments on the role of personality factors in perception, and the holistic and
personological ideas of K. Levin and G. Allport affected, directly or indirectly,
the corresponding conceptions of projection, the content of the interpretative
schemes, and the personality models themselves. Consequently no matter how much
the technical procedures used in implementation of a projective method (that is,
the projective techniques) seem to be divorced from theory, they are all permeated
by theory. Of course, this does not exclude the use of some particular technique
independently of the theory which historically brought it into being--projective
techniques are broadly employed abroad by proponents of behavioral psychology and
Gestalt psychology, and representatives of the information approach. Nevertheless
it would be important to emphasize that the ambiguity and the looseness of the re-
lationships between theory, method, and "technique“ do not at all mean that the
latter may be employed apart from all theory. After all, when we interpret the
results of projective techniques, we essentially build a model of the personality,
and consequently this interpretation would be predetermined by the theory of which
the experimental psychologist is a willing or unwilling follower.

And while we find some Western conceptions of the projective method to be debatable,
the problems they touch upon doubtlessly deserve attention and further development.
”In any science," Engels wrote,'incorrect ideas (if we disregard errors of observa-
tiou) are, in the final analysis, incorrect ideas about correct facts. me facts
remain, even if the ideas about them turn out to be false“ (1, 20, 476). This is
why the task of theoretically substantiating the projective methods within the
framework of domestic psychology is so important and timely.

The projective method is oriented on the study of unconscious (or not fully realized)
forms of motivation, and in this quality it is hardly the sole, specifically
psychological method of penetrating into the most intimate area of the human mind.

But the unconscious is significantly richer in its phenomenology, as well as in
the possibilities for interpretation of its content, than had been imagined, for

example, in classical psychoanalysis. ”Meaningful experiences“, ”personal meaning",
and other constructs mvcalinq unconscious partiality of mental reflections may not
come to light, oven with direct referral to a subject's responses or observation of
his behavior. Projective techniques allow us to study these personality constructs,
which reveal themselves directly or in the form of different personality sets, in-
directly, by modeling some living situations and relationships. while most psycho-
logical techniques are aimed at studying how man arrives at an objective reflection
of the external world, projective techniques have the purpose of revealing unique
"subjective deviations", and personal “interpretations", in which case the latter
are far from always objective, though they are always personally meaninful as a rule.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Of course, the approach proposed here is not the only one possible. theoretical
and methodological substantiation of the projective method ’3 iQortant, but more
is required. He also need to conduct further research on problems such as diagnosis
of the individual style of the personality with the help of projective techniques.
creation of. scheme of. analysis and interpretation within the iterator): of the
activity approach, and many others. Efforts are being conducted in this direction
by a group of colleagues and students of ibsoow State miversity's deparusent of
psychology. '

'lhis book will acquaint students with the basic directions in projective analysis,
with the debatable problems, and with the various approaches ,to their resolution,
and it will help then arrive at an objective assess-ent of projective tc chniques,
and reveal the possibilities of their application.

CDPYRIGIT: Izdatel'stvo Hoskovskogo universiteta. 1980

11004
$0: 1840/ 189

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DBCISIM mm AND AIR TRAFFIC 001mm

macaw PRINYNI‘IYB m amovsxon V AVIKEIM SEW-(DRAW
in Russian 1980 (sinned to press 5 Feb 80) pp 2-9, 367-368

[Annotatiom table of contents, foreword and introduction fron book "Human
Decision Making in ‘Avistion Control Systems", by P. P. Rovikov, Isdstel'stvo
"Vozdushnyy transport", 2,830 copies, 368 pages]

that] Annotation

This book examines research on the activities of an air traffic controller and a
pilot. a modeling approach to describing decision asking, to experimental analysis
of activity, to simulation of air traffic control and "pilot-aircraft" system,

and to the solution of the practical problem associated with organizing, auto-sting,
and providing ergononic sipport to control systens in civil aviation is imlenented.

The book is intended for engineers specialising in air traffic control, air traffic
controllers and flight crews, developers of automated systems for aviation, students
in their senior years at institutions of higher education, and specialists involved
in analysis of decision making, systea'l analysis, and modeling.

Contents Page

Pormrdeee-eeeoeeeeeoe-eooeeeeoeeeoeeoeeeee 3
Introduction...........-o....o....o..o....o... 5

Gnapter 1. Analysis and Modeling of Decision Making. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.1SenioticAspectsofHodeling......................10
1.2Proccdura1Aspecteofmdeling.....................18
1.3 The Disposition Model of Bunn Decision Making in Control System .. . . 23
1.4mmtionofSituationsandDecisions . .. . . ..... .. .... .30
1.5 Accumulation andUtilizationofnxperience. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
1.6 Modeled Organization of Task Oospletion in Control . . . . . . . . . . . 47

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run \u-ru use. emf. \IIVI.I

clapter 2. arperinental Analysis of Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

2.1 The Activities of an Air ‘rrattic Controller. and a Description
ofthecbjectofoontrol....................... 59

2.2 Aircraft Landing Control, and a Description of the iject of Control . 68
2.3 ms Methods of Experimental Decision Making Analysis . . . . . . . . . 76
2.4 Analysis of the Activities of the Air Traffic Controller . . . . . . . 83
2.5Ana1ysisofPilotActivity. . .. . ... . . . . . ... .. .. . . 97

2.6 Relationship of Modeling Concepts to smjective Bvaluations
and the Behavioral and Bleetrophysiological Components of Activity . . 116

2.7 Analysis of the Dynamics Behind Formation and Structure of a
HabitInvolvedin‘raskConpletion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .132
diapter 3. Models of Decision Making in mal Control Systems . . . . . . . . 135

3.1 Formation of Situations and Decisions in Concrete mm [Decision
Makingnodelslwriants .......................l35

3.2 writing Up Goals and Criteria For Modeling Purposes . . . . . . . . . 145

3.3 Modeled Organization of Control Task Cowletion in cow's
[Controller Decision Making basis] and Pan's [Pilot Decision
Ming WIS] O 0 O O O O O O 0 0 O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O 0 0 153

3.4 ms Disposition Model Developer's Language as an Algorithnic
Languageandaprogrmingnanguage .................159

3.5 Disposition Model Support Systems and Software . . . . . . . . . . . . 165

Chapter 4. Machine Processing Morn-ants with PDlu's . . . . . . . . . . . . 174

4.1 Selection of Paraneters for Evaluation of Decision Making by a
Controller in an Air Traffic Control System . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174

4.2maxperimentalprogran.......................181
4.3 Results of Experiments with saw: with and without Training . .- . . . 187
4.4 Results of Bxperinents with PDm's Following Training . . . . . . . . 198

chapter 5. Machine Processing Experiments with Gum's . . . . . . . . . . . . 217

5.l moice of Parameters for Evaluating Decision Making mring Aircraft
LandingControl ...........................217

5.2mmperinentall’rogran.......................222
5.3 Comparison of Decision MakingbyPilots andem's. . . . . . . . . . 225

5.4 Evaluation of the Efficiency of a sum Operating as .a Controlling
Alwzim O O O O O O I O O O O O O O 0 0 O O O O O O I O O I O O O t 239

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chapters. PracticalAspectsofMUse........ . ...... ....262

6.1 Prediction and Detection of Conflict Situations in Air 'l‘raffic
mntrol O I o I O s s I e O I 0 s O O s I I I s O O I O O 0 O O O O O 262

6.2 Comparative Analysis of Methods nor Detecting Conflict situations . . 270

6.3 PM Procedures Viewed as an Aircraft Landing Algorithm . . . . . . . 279
6.4 me Workload of Air Traffic Controllers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283

6.5 Modeling Air Traffic Control Systems on an Accelerated Time Scale . . 290
6.6 A Ibdeling method for Evaluating Air Traffic Control Systems . . . . . 296

COncluliOn............oc....................304

Appendix 1. Description of the ”Situation Formation“ and “Decision
Bornaticn'BlocksoftheCﬂM ..................307

Appendix 2. Description of the "Situation Formation“ and I'Decision
Formation'slocksofthepm ..................33l

Bibliography.................................341

Foreword

Control is now becoming one of the principal spheres of huan activity. as a con-z
sequence of which we face a large m-ber of new practical problems associated with
algorithms, systems engineering, hman factors analysis, and ergonomics and involved
with the planning and ilprovement of this type of activity. The success with which
these practical problems are solved depends on how deeply we abject the laws and
unique features of human thinking accOIpanying problem solving to theoretical and
experimental analysis.

This book examines the decision making problem in application to control system
in several aspects. First a certain conceptual model of human activity is formed.
based on certain ideas concerning the structure, functional content, and hierarchi-
cal organization of decision making. men follows an elaboration of the conceptual
model, taking the form of a decision ﬂaking model (mo described formally by com-
plexly structured texts and dispositions. me next step involves experimental
identification of the concepts and procedures of the am through analysis of human
activity in real control systems and in the laboratory. using behavioral and
electrophysiological techniques, and subjective evaluation and scaling uthcds.

The experimental results take the form of precise descriptions of awe for huan
activity in different real systems. The facts used here are taken from analysis of
the activities of an air traffic controller and a pilot controlling an aircraft

during landing. The corresponding Dim descriptions are called the cone-the con-
troller decision making model. and the Punk-the pilot decision making model.

M intern:l logic of the models is checked out through decision making simulation -
cycles run through digital computers. no results of the machine processing

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Ull OFF" ‘Ml. USP. ONLY

experiments are also used to evaluate the adequacy of processes performed by the
DIM and the individual in real conditions. mus this book proposes and successively
imlements a modeling approach to analysis of human decision making, based on con-
temporary methods of experimental analysis of human activity, and on contemporary
methods of formal description. 'lhe modeling results are an aid to understanding
and refining the concepts, to predicting development of training processes, to
abstracting, generalizing, accumlating, and utilizing experience, and to formation
of habits and memories in cowlex activity, which is what decision making is.

its modeling approach, one of the iaportant properties of which is that it offer.

a possibility for transforming a vague conceptual model into precise, expl-icitly
modeled concepts, is extremely adequate to the practical tasks associated with
planning and improving control system of which man is an integral part. Use of
this approach is what predetermined the content of the book's discussion of the use
of 0004's to refine systems concepts, to describe the procedure for defining the
control problems and the means of their solution, to evaluate system, and to
predict their behavior.

The author of the book is grateful to engineers a. P. Kulaichev and R. N. Suleymanov
for their cooperation in running the decision making models, and to B. u. Borodenkov,

a. N. Sunin, and L. s. Zryachikh, who took part in some of the experiments and pro-
vided considerable assistance in preparing the manuscript.

Introduction

ihe decision making problem is at the center of attention of many sciences--
mathematics, logic, psychology, physiology, and philosophy. But even within the
framework of an individual science we typically find a multiplicity of conceptions
and approaches to it. This pertains first of all to definition of the "decision
making" concept itself. Predominantly in mathematics and logic, and sometimes in
psychological studies as well, deci".on making is onlpletely identified with the
means of problem solving. In physiology, meamvhile, decision making is usually
defined as just a single act occurring within comm integrated activity. In
application to human activity, this problem should be interpreted as thinking in
the course of solving problems (formal and practical). ‘ihe goal of studying this
problem is to describe this thinking process and to resolve all issues associated
with it. -

Thinking is the highest product of the brain's work, it plays a role in different
forms of activity, and it entails the individual's purposeful reflection of
properties and relationships in the outside world, abstraction and generalisation
of sensory experience, suggestion of hypotheses, definition of problem and their
solution, establishment of laws. and creative development of new ideas. thinking
became an object of experimental study in the late 19th and early 20th centuries
(31, 80, 84, 85, 117). I. M. Sechenov founded the materialistic approach tc re-
search on thinking. His works are significant in that they revealed the means by
which the behavior of the living organism is determined by properties of the ob- .
jective world and by the mind through the brain's reflex activity. ﬁle structure
of reflex activity includes mental components beginning with sleuntary levels of
sensation and ending with the highest forms of mental activity—thinking.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. P. Pavlov (90) subsequently made a major contribution to development of these
ideas. He formulated a single approach to all forms of human behavior, and he demon-
strated the basic possibility for assuming a scientific approach to analyzing the
brain's physiological activity, which is at the basis of any mental phenomenon.
Materialis‘tic viewpoints on the nature and mechanisms of thinking are at the basis
of thinking research in Russian and Soviet psychophysiology (23, 42, 57, 97, 102,
113). Thinking plays a real role in different forms of activity, manifesting itself
as the individual's solution of concrete problems as he interacts with objective
reality. Problem solving is the most frequently encountered form of thinking.
Retrospective analysis of studies on activity would demonstrate the doubtless im-
portance of the “problem solving” concept, since it is indispensable in all direc-
tions of research on thinking. however, it does require fundamental refinement.
Problem solving is a directly observable, real product of thinking (97). But
thinking itself cannot be completely reduced to just problem solving alone. The
solution mechanism is a thinking process involving certain laws governing the
dependence of analysis, synthesis, and generalisation, which themselves rust explain
what occurs in problem solving. 1311s is what makes it necessary to consider the
thinking process when studying problem solving, and to examine all real problems
associated with this. ’lhe integrated problem of analyzing thinking in the course

of problem solving is sometimes referred to as the-problem of human decision making.
It is precisely in this sense that we will define decision making as a complex pro-
cess of human information processing directed at problem solution.

In application to studying human decision making in control systems, there are a

large nulber of structural, descriptive, strategic, heuristic, and other approaches
(29, 35, 36, 37, 48, 93), in which this process is interpreted as operational acti-
vity (operational thinking). One book (93) defines operational thinking as "a process
of establishment of a sequence of actions with objects being controlled, performed

on the basis of dynamic modeling of these objects, their properties, and their

mutual relationships."

Formalization and modeling are effective mthods for studying decision making (5, 37,
91, 92, 96, 109, 117, 123). Among models that have been created and are presently
being developed, we can come across models which integrate data from different areas
of knowledge, and models locked within the framework of a single scientific discipline:
models enjoying meticulous experimntal verification, and models having no experi-
mental grounds at all; models adequate to the object of modeling, and models super-
ficially reflecting some of its significant aspects. Host works, with the exception
of some in which singular or multioomponent reflexes, functional system, and sets
are modeled, simply described decision making without modeling its structural organi-
zation, though they did have a particular physiological or psychological conception
at their basis. he first attempts at modeling the process were associated with
development of heuristic programing, which is based on the mass hypothesis of
psychology (42, 79, 142).

After heuristic programing was "defeated" in its attemts at becoming the I'computer"
theory of human thinking (87, 102), a new direction began to develop, which is now
referred to as the "artifical intelligence” problem. On one hand modeling methods
for solving problems falling within the natural intelligence sphere ilproved, and
models of deductions, inductive and deductive conclusions (25, ll9, 124, 126),

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0“ 00"“ URI. 03'. UNLI

is fully justified in the creation of "artificial intelligence” and which is highly
problematic in terms of. the atteapts made in some ptblications to associate the
latter with the mechanisms or brain function (for entangle atteepts at reducing
thinking to natural language models. and at identifying the two). However. use of
precisely this class of models. which are structurally sophisticated and are

Given the diversity of approaches to studying brain function, in most cases the brain
is recognized. directly or indirectly. to be ' couples system functioning as a single
whole. 'i'nis is in essence a systems approach (ll, 16, 40, 53. 63, 69, 105, 108, 110).

the role of an “instrmsnt' observing the properties of the other term; each term
is an abstract system (in the terms or general systems theory). and it may be de-
scribed by any of the known organizational or formal methods for describing objects
and systems. that we have here in tact is a transition from concrete to abstract

0n analyzing the studies of thinking activity occurring in the course of problem
solution. we can assert that:

a) me class of term in decision making, when viewed as a system. breaks dowu into
at least three subclasses: psychophysiological, informational-logical, and experi-
mental terms;

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

terms of this subclass are described structurally, with the logical. Operational
and algorithmic approaches perhaps being an exception. The psychophysiological
approach used here for isolating the ditferent terms is based on representation of

International-logical terms correspond to formal models and descriptions or decision
making. Representation of this subclass in integrated research is made indispensable
by the need for reproducing, predicting. and obtaining precise quantitative charac~
teristics of decision making. 'lhe language used to describe such terms met
necessarily be formal: terminal (explicit or imlicit) or purposeful. In our re-
search, the intorrational-logical term, which we named the m, is selected on the
basis of two requirements: structural and experinental identification of the m,
and the formality of the procedures used to describe it. ‘lhe am and its individual
parts are represented as dispositional descriptions or problem and the nethods

of their solution. The level of detailed description of the Don is selected to
insure convenient running of the models in a computer, as a program written in
problemrieuted langua . The model is essentially a semiotic system having a
developed hierarchical structure, a semantic memory, and the elements or deductive
and inductive conclusions, learning, planning, and goal-setting.

the psychophysiological and informational-logical terms. the structural description
of the experimental term is structurally formal. awiously, the elements ofthe
corresponding abstract system should include ”inputs", “outputs“, "the processing
method", and "the representation method”. In our research, the relationship between
the structure of decision making by man and a em on one hand and change in the
state of the object of control and in the behavioral consonants of activity on the
background oi’ electrographic processes on the other plays the dominant role. In
addition, we make use of subjective analysis methods such as reports by the subjects
themselves, questionnaires, evaluations. and subjective scaling.

Thus when we assure an integrated systems approach to analysis of decision making,
we must represent, mutually coordinate, and work out the questions and reach a
decision as to the way the process under analysis is to be structurally represented,
as to the structure, semiotics, and procedures associated with the formal models,

as to the organization and planning or the experimental research, as to the formali-
zation techniques, and as to the relationship between the experimentally determined
facts and our representations of decision making as structures and models. A large
nunber of problems of outwardly purely technical nature arise in parallel (running
the models, testing the adequacy of the models and human decision making, developing

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Vss VI lsvtns. was. Vl‘ls.

the formal machinery of modeling. and so on) , though they are not essentially an
actual factor of the systems approach. In this aspect our choice of husan activity
in control systems as the object or research steunot only from the previously
recognized practical signiﬁcance of. this problem, but also the conviction that
san~machine system are a rich experimental uodel for studying habits and intuition.
logical conclusions and deductions, bastion of concepts and sensory, planning. and
learning-wall which make up the structural basis of thinking associated with problem
solving.

COPYRIGﬂ‘r: ”Vosdushnyy transport', 1980

11006
(380: 1860/1108

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCHIATRY

EDICIML PREPARATIONS (SD Ill PSYGIAM

macaw mm PRBPARA'P! 931mm V rsmnm: in Russian 1900 (8191106
to press 3 Sep 79) pp 1-18, 207-208

(Annotation, table of contents. and the chapters I'Pr:inciples ot Psychopharnaco-
therapy“ and "Basic Objectives in Psychophamacotherapy of ﬂsntal Diseases" from
book “Medicinal Preparations Used in Psychiatry', edited by Prof G. Ya. Amtskiy,

Vsesoyuznoye kon'yunkturno-intornatsionnoye byum Glavnogo aptechnogo \pravleniya
Hinisterstva sdravookhraneniya sssn. Hoskva, 20,000 copies, 208 pages]

[west] mis handbook contains data on drugs used in the [888 in psychiatric practice
to treat patients with mental disorders. ”is principles of psychopharnacotherapy
and sodern clinical viewpoints on the me of psychotropic drugs are presented.

no concepts "specifically psychotropic action' and “directed psychotropic activity'
are analysed, the general for: and methods of psychopharnacotherapy are described.
and the probles of nedicinal pathoeorphosis of psychoses is discussed.

m handbook contains descriptions of neuroleptics (uinasin, tisertsin, teralen.
nelleril, triftasin, nayeptil. noditen-depo, ethaperasine. tremlon, heterasine.
neuleptil. haloperidol, trisedil, chlorprothixene. karbidin), tranquilizers (mean,
trioxazine, eleniu. seamen. tasepan, eumktin). antidepressants (selipranin,
pirazidol. nuredal. indopan. tryptisol. phthoracizin, eaten), psymstimlators
(sydnocarb, acephen). correctives (cyclodol. norakin). and lithim carbonate.

mis publication includes medicinal preparations produced in the uses and purchased
abroad, as of 1 January 1978.

me description of each preparation includes brief phanacological intonation, a
detailed discussion of the unique features of its psychotropic action, reco-sndations
on clinical use. and data on side-effects and couplications.
'me handbook is intended for psychiatric physicians and phanacists.

Contents Page

Principles of Psychopharnacotherapy. 6. Ya. Avrutskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Basic Objectives in Pharsacotherapy of Mental Diseases.
z.N.serebryakova ............................... 14

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 1.55 ONLY

Neuroleptics...................... 18

mm‘mlhosﬂmm0"...IICIOOCOOOOOQOOOO... 18
riungin' L. G. Bfewyeva O O O O I O o O I O 0 I I O O O O O O O O O O I 27
“rue“, n. I. Pot'ymw O O . O O O O 0 O O O O O O O O O O O O O O I O 0 0 35
Helletn,H.I.Pot'yanov......................... 41
‘rxittazin.1.¥a.@urovich......L.................. 50
Hayeptil,v.n.vozhkova.......................... 59
lbditen-depo,1.¥a.&nrovich....................... 57
Bthapon:ine,0.ll.xmtsov....................... 76
Pronolon.0.v.xondnshkova........................ 84
mutazine,I.Ya.Gurovich......................’.. 93
Neuleptn,1.¥a.mrovidn . .....................102
Haloperidol.vu.h.hleksandrovskiy....'................108
Trisedn,v.A.Yezhkova.........................115
mlommthinm.l..a.uikitma......................123
mbidin,I.Ya.mbvich....'.....................131
Tranquilizers................................138
Meprotan.¥u.a.hlaksandzovsk1y......................138
hiouzine.m.A.A1ekund¢-ovak1y .......................143
Blenim,V.N.Prokudin..........................146
Sedmn.V.N.Prokudin..........................150
Tampa-.Yu.n.hleksandrovskiy......................155
Phenazepan,¥u.A.Aleknndrovskiy ....................158
Bumkdn.¥u.h.nleksandzovskiy .....................161
Antidepressants,v.v.6rcnova........................164
mliprmn.‘COOOOOIOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOO... 1“
Pirmwl00.0..00...OOOOOOIOIOOOOCOOOCOCOQ167
“m1QCO.O.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOCOOOC00....17o
1W0....9.00...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOUOOI...172
muiptylm. O00.0...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOOO.173
m‘thoracizintnI0.0.0...OOOOOODOOOOOOOOOO0.0.176
mfen,o.P.Vertogradova..........................118
PsyChOSti-ﬂnlatots ooooooooooooooooooooood0000.00181

Sydnocarb,¥u.a.ueksandrovsk1y ..................... 181
MOM.L.H.N3I|1!OV8....'........o..oo..o.u....135

LithimCubonate .................................189

Oomctims.................................194
Cyclodol,I.Ya.Gurov1ch.........................194
”taxi", I O Y. 0 Movie}. 0 O O O O 0 I O O I I O O O O O O O O O I O O 0 O 0 197

mottopicotugs....o.........'..o......oo.....o199
Pitacem.o.....................oo........199

“Mane Index 0 O O O O O O C O O O 0 O 0 O O 0 O O O O O O O O 0 C O O O C 205
Latin Alphabetic Index of Preparations and mu Synonym . . . . . . . . . . 205

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Principles of Psychopharmacotherapy

In distinction from so-called shock methods (injection of insulin. 38?- -electroshock
therapy) . psychopharmacotherapy exploys medicinal therapy primarily. ‘lhus it has
become possible to apply the forms and methods of pharmacotherapy and-pharmaco-
dynamics cosmon in somatic medicine to psychiatry. As with all other pharmacotherapy,
correct. clinically grounded establishment of indications for treatment is of special
significance to achieving a therapeutic impact. But no matter how correctly the indi-
cations for initiating therapy are established, they lose all of their significance
as the patient's state changes in response to therapy. As a result a preparation
that is clearly indicated for a patient just beginning his therapy nay turn out to

be ineffective or even harmful in just a few days. 'mis requires constant observa-
tion of the dynamic principle when conducting psychopharmacotherapy, which means
constantly changing the treatment tactics depending on the dynamics of the patient's
state. In the course of treatment, as a rule we observe nonuniform change in differ-
ent psychopathological disorders: Some decrease in intensity while others remain
unchanged, or they becom even more intense. In each one the therapy must he
systematically changed in accordance with daily assessments of the effectiveness

of the given dose of a given medicine, plus meticulous clinical psychopathological
analysis of all changes in status. A mandatory prerequisite is total individualiza-
tion of therapy, with a consideration for the specific features of the pat- ent's
reaction.

The basic principles of the clinical action of psychotropic drugs must be followed
when establishing indications in the course of therapy. Psychotropic drugs differ
from all other medicines due to their so-called specifically psychotropic action,
which expresses itself in typical somatic, autonomic, and mental disorders, ones
which appear in the clinical pattern of psychosis due to the oharmacological proper-

ties of the preparation, and which are also encountered among healthy people.

Mental disorders which are always noted in the clinical pattern of psychosis during
the time of therapy, and which disappear only after the therapy is withdrawn, have
special significance. 'lhese psychopathological disturbances, the expressiveness of
which usually depends on individual sensitivity to the preparation, dosage, stage

of treatment, and so on, do not appear as distinct episodes. in distinction from
insulin coma, instead in a sense intertwining with the symtoms of psychosis, which
also experience changes. thus creating the impression of a chaotic coubination of
symptoms. Nevertheless this set of symtoms associated with the direct action of
the preparation is highly typical, and therefore it may be isolated from the clinical
pattern of psychosis and examined separately.

Inhibitory and activating effects arising in different cobinations have been found
to be the principal components of this set of syaptcms. ‘mese effects occur in
conjunction with a thynoleptic, thymoanaleptic, or thy-odysleptic effect. Differ-
ences in the expressiveness of general and selective antipsychotic influence (upon
psychosis in general and upon individual psychopathological disorders) is another
typical trait of the specifically psychotropic action of these preparations.
Different combinations of these coqonents oaks up the individual spectrmn of the
psychopharmacological properties of each preparation, which determines the orienta-
tion of their psychotropic activity.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '

mus aliphatic derivatives of the phenothiazine series (aninarin, tissrtsin) differ
from other neuroleptic drugs eainly due to douinance of the inhibitory cosponents
in their specifically psychotropic action. Minarin elicits lethargy, intellectual
and motor inhibition, passiveness, lack of initiative, neutral emotional reactions
going as far as development of apathy coupled with asthenic phenomena and a subdued
mood, and sometiaes development of depression (Plugel's 'apathoabulic syndrome" or
Delet and Deniker's 'psychoaffective indifference“) .

In addition to group properties com-on to all aliphatic derivatives, tisertsin has
individual features. Ihey include, first of all, significantly high expressiveness

of the inhibitory components of specifically psychotropic action, both in the mtor
and intellectual sphere and in the enotimal sphere, develop-ant of 'uotional
blockade" is much faster than with aninasin. Inhibition elicited by tisertsin

is accompanied by sleepiness, often going as far as critical sleep, differing
dramatically from narcotic sleep in its subjective and objective signs (including
386 data) , and quite similar to physiological sleep. Overall inhibition is not so
heavy as with aninasin; a subdued hood and, all the more so, depression are not
observed. Owing to the inhibitory nature of specifically psychotropic action,
aliphatic derivatives of the phenothiasine series are superior to all other neuro-
leptic drugs in the strength of their sedative action. 1hese preparations are the
ones usually able to curtail psychonotor arousal, with the sedative effect aanifest-
ing itself primarily along the lines of affective blockade, comled with notor in-
hibition.

In this connection the main indication for using aminazin and tisertsin is a state
of psychcmtor arousal of varying origin. And, on the other hand, in the presence
of states associated with motor inhibition (stupor, apathoabulia, and so on), the
existing symptous of psychosis in a sense serge with the lethargy and inhibition
introduced into the clinical pattern by the specifically psychotropic properties of
the preparation, which results in a worsening of condition. ‘ihus “psychiatric"
contraindications arise. l’or exasple aninazin treatment of patients having simple
schizophrenia apart from aggravationa or other forms coupled with expressive
apathoabulic disorders is clearly harmful, amplifying the manifestations of
schizophrenic alterations of the personality and thus preventing social and voca-
tional rehabilitation. We would have to conclude from this that a course of
aninazin therapy would be unsuitable, and that after arousal is curtailed, a switch
nust be made quickly to other neuroleptics having stronger selective and general
antipsychotic action.

me main trait of preparations classified as piperasine derivatives of the pheno-
thiasine series is presence of a stimulatory, activating element in their speci-
fically psychotropic action. 1his manifests itself especially clearly in successive
prescription of preparations with no break in the transition from aliphatic to
piperazine derivatives.

Patients exhibit motor arousal, animation of facial expressions, activity, initiative,
and a desire to act, and their emotional reactions become livelier, clearer, and more
differentiated.

The individual properties of preparations in this group also differ significantly.
bus in terms of specifically psychotropic action, the stimulatory effect of

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

triftazine is less pronounced in conparison with other piperasine derivatives. It
occurs in conjunction with distinct selective antipsychotic action, directed nainly
against hallucinatory, hallucinatory-delirious, and delirious syndrome, which
predetermines the specific psychotropic activity of the preparation. therefore
triftazin does not usually elicit a direct sedative effect. Its effect upon
affective disturbances and arousal nanifes'te itself only when the particular syndrome
involved are directly associated with hallucinatorybparanoid phenomena, and if their

reverse develop-ant begins with a decline in the intensity of hallucinations and
delirium.

'rhe stinulatory properties of the specifically psychotropic action of myeptil are
more strongly pronounced than those of triftazin, nanifesting thuselves as dis-
inhibition, maliciousneee, and sometimes euphoria. Hhile it does not have selective
antipsychotic influence upon specific peychopathological syndrome, nayeptil does

have its strongest general antipeychotic action upon the clinical pattern of psychosis
in general, often promoting a break in its course.

While possessing the general properties of their group, ethaperasine and similarly
structured frenolon differ significantly from triftasin, netarasine, and nayeptii.
The stimulatory influence associated with their specifically psychotropic action is
not only significantly aore pronounced than that of other piperazine derivatives,
but it also conhines with a typical thynoleptic (ethaperasine) and thymleptic

(frenolon) influence, which reflects itself in the spectrum of their psychotropic
activity.

The general antipsychotic action of ethaperasine is more strongly pronounced than
that of frenolon while its thynoanaleptic effect is less pronounced, owing to which
it has a deeper influence in the presence of, for example, knllminatory-delirious
syndromes, especially ones occurring together with depression.

This mutual dependence between the psychopharnacological properties of the prepara-
tions and the spectrua of their psychotropic activity is applicable not only to
phenothiazine derivatives but also to neuroleptic drugs of other chemical groups.
Thus in the thioxanthene derivative group, chlorprothianene differs from sordinol,
which has a piperazine ring in its side chain, in approsinately the same way as
aliphatic derivatives differ from piperasine derivatives of the phenothiazines.
Preparations of the butyro henone series have an even sore pronounced stimlatory
component in their specifically psychotropic action than do piperasine derivatives

of the phenothiazine series, which is consistent with the greater depth of their
elective and general antipsychotic action: at the sane tine, from the point of view

of sedative effect and direct influence upon affect. they are inferior even to
aliphatic derivatives.

In addition to having these general group qualities, haloperidol is typified by
maximum expression of stimulation among its individual, specifically psychotropic
properties: this is especially true of its motor component; however, its thym-
analeptic influence is not as great as that of frenolon and ethaperasine; but on

the other hand its thynoanaleptic effect is devoid of the dysphoric action inherent
to nayeptil, instead producing a positive nood background.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The psychopharnacological properties of a preparation correlate with the expressive-
ness of its general and especially of its selective antipsychotic action, orienud
mainly at relieving hallucinatory and delirious disturbances.

'ihe specifically psychotropic action of trisedil contines the characteristics of
haloperidol and nayeptil: activation coupled with dodnance of the motor cosponsnt,
and disinhibition coupled with dysphoria. m uniqueness of the preparation's psycho-
tropic activity expresses itself when it is carbined with the properties of haloperidol
(its influence upon deliriua and hallucinations) and nayeptil (its breaking action,

its influence upon deficient symptom and catatonic-hebephrsnic disorders) , which
raises its effectiveness in the presence of a chronic, mfavorable disease course.

Smarizing the above, we can note that the series of nemleptic drugs exhibits
several trends: an increasing order of general antipsychotic action-waninasin,
netsrazine. trisedil, mayeptil; an increasing order of selective antipsychotic
influence—-aninazin, triftazin, haloperidol, trisedil: sedative pmpertier-aminazin,

tisertsin; stinulatory action with a thyseanaleptic cosponent—neterasine, ethapera-
zine, frenolon.

All of these patterns of clinical action are typical not only of psycholeptic but
also psychoanaleptic drugs. has spoifically psychotropic properties of the repre-
sentatives of this class of conpounds are also the product of specific couponents,
the main one being thymanaleptic influence (corresponding to the antipsychotic
effect of neuroleptics) , which coshines to different extents with the stimulatory

or, on the other hand, the inhibitory component. Owing to this each preparation
assumes an individual profile of psychopharnacological properties and. consequently,
an individual spectrum of psychotropic action. Thus in terns of specifically psycho-
tropic properties. nelipranin has a distinct capability for elevating mood, which
combines with less-pronounced activation: this corresponds to its maxi-a1 thym-
analeptic activity (in comparison with other antidepressants), and therefore its
maxim effectiveness against the nest typical endogenous, vital depressions coupled
with inhibition. 0n the other hand the sedative component dominates in anitriptyline,
which has antidepressant action equal to that of nelipranin; this sakes it especially
effective against anxious-depressive states. In opposition to this, the stimlatory
effect is sharply pronounced in the specifically psychotropic action of M0 inhibi-
tors (nuredal), and it doninates over the thynoanaleptic effect, in connection with
which the therapeutic impact of such drugs is neat distinct in the presence of sub-
melancholic states proceeding in conjunction with inhibition. similarly, there is

a clear relationship between inhibitory and alphoric influence in the specifically
psychotropic properties of anitriptyline and its selective effectiveness agath
anxious-depressive states and other depressive syndromes combining with productive
psychopathological symptoms; owing to this, the latter do not become aggravated, as
sometimes happens with the use of no inhibitors, experiencing reduction instead.

sisilar dependencies may be observed in the use of tranquilizers, which also vary

in their specifically psychotropic influence. Thus the action of neprotan is dosi-
nated by its sedative, inhibitory mount, as a consequence of which it exhibits
snore-pronounced psychotropic action in relation to neurotic and neurosis-like
syndroses proceeding in conjunction with irritabilityand heightened excitability.

In opposition to this, the cosbination of sedative and activating influence seen in
trioxazine and seduxen corresponds to their greater tropism in relation to neurotic
syndromes proceeding in conjunction with lethargy. inhibition, and subsulancholic need.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

The present stage in the development of psychepharmaootherapy is typified by an
ever-increasing assortment of psychotropic drugs, including original preparations
created in this country. This denands constant ilpravenent of the form and methods
of psychopharmacotherapy, and elimination of the stereotypic approach to therapy
still encountered here and there, expressing itself as lengthy use of the same
preparations in standard doses without a consideration for the changes occurring in
the state of the patients or. on the other hand, groundless transitions from certain
preparations to others before all of their therapeutic possibilities are exhausted.

treatment, and promtly stimulate favorable trends or break negative ones.

Thus, for example, one of the typical traits of the pathomorphosis of psychoses today
is a sharp increase in the number of depressive states, which often have an atypical.
diffuse, "tasked“ nature. This is usually associated with certain transformation of
the clinical pattern of psychosis in response to prolonged neuroleptic therapy. ‘lhe
preferred neuroleptics used against productive psychopathological smtoms are unable
to influence depression: they in a sense “filter out" the clinical pattern, as a
result of which depression assumes the forefront, defining the state of the patient.

an the other hand such modifications in the clinical pattern mean an isproved prog-
nosis, inasmuch as the arisal and anplification of affective disorders is usually
accompanied by a transition from a chronic course to a sporadic course in which times

pression in a sense blocks the remaining psychopathological sylptoas or, assuring
the forefront, it dominates the state of the patient, preventing coaplete recovery
and making social and vocational rehabilitation impossible. Such protracted cases
of depression are frequently diagnosed as manifestations of a schizophrenic defect.
Experience has shown that such states can easily be diagnosed in the clinic. Certain
criteria are an aid in such diagnosis, one being the patient's own sense of a change
having occurred (in distinction from the situation with apathoabulic disturbances
existing as manifestations of schisoprenic alterations of the personality). The
patients themelves complain of their lethargy, inactivity, lack of initiative, sub-
dued mood, estrangement, and so on, and they seek help and support. Revelation of
the elements of mental anesthesia and daily variations in affect are no less im-
portant.

Such changes in states, which are encountered so frequently in practice, require
timely addition of antidepressants to the therapeutic program, and primarily ami-

triptyline, sometimes in rather large doses: this often results in significant
improvement of the patient’s state.

There is another possibility of inconplete recovery from psychosis, also associated
with the unique features of the clinical action of neuroleptic drugs used over a long

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 0.35 ONLY

period of time. I am referring to the mildly pronounced, torpid, extrapyramidal
side-effects, nainly of the parkinsonian type, which usually arise among patients
exhibiting organic deficiency or a pathologically altered background. mu dis-
turbances, which are outwardly indistinct and which often express thmelves as
hypokinesia, as . a mildly pronounced rise in muscle tone, and as light trenor of
fingers on outstretched hands, attests to extrapyraaidal insufficiency, which

say block the action of neuroleptics and hinder reduction of mildly pronounced but
stable psychopathological sysptouse. In these cases, this insufficiency is typified
by the domir ance of a diffuse pattern that nay consist of the nest diverse sysptons.
Usually representing the rudimentary nanifestations of previous psychosis, as a rule
it is often accomanied, and frequently overshadowed, by general inhibition, lethargy,
passiveness, hypochondriasis, and, on occasion, senesthopathy. Subaelancholic seed
is highly typical of such cases.

Being manifestations of medicinal pathonorphosis of psychoses, these and many other
states representing incoqilete recovery from psychosis are, in sy opinion, one of

the most iaportant problem of clinical and practical psychiatry, considering their
very high incidence and diversity. mess patients often fail to attract the active
attention of psychiatrists, especially in outpatient practice, they receive standard
doses of neuroleptics in a course of naintenance therapy, and they remain unaployable.
A certain neuroleptic drug is often prescribed to a patient 'for preventive purposes",
”just in case", and so on.

Such an approach could hardly be thought of as suitable, inamch as there must be
substantiated indications for all nedicinal therapy.

All of this requires persistent attention toward Chi. siseable category of patients,
clinical study and classification of the disease, and development of methods for pre-
venting and treating it.

Consequently considering the present state of our knowledge and the experience
accumlated in clinical psychopharsacotherapy, we can assert that in addition to ex-
panding and intensifying psychopharmacotherapy, we met also consider establishing
another trend--sensibly restricting sedicinal therapy when its therapeutic possi-
bilities are exhausted. 'mis pertains to lengthy use of neuroleptics, which promotes
reduction of the acuity of the patient's condition and a transition to a more sluggish
course, not only reducing the acuity of the psychopathological sysptoms but also
sanetines inverting permanence to acne disturbances; thus we witness a general ten-
dency of incosplete recovery fron psychosis coupled with the arisel of monotonous,
unique states lasting over a long period of tine, ones which may be described as
follows, paraphrasing Hauts' well known definition: "has psychosis is no longer,

but remission is still to come.”

Thus the notion that lengthy, sometimes perennial maintenance therapy with neuroleptics
is necessary requires reeraaination. Such therapy Inst be liaited sainly to pro-
gressive forms of chronic schizophreniannuclear and paranoid, and only when the
disease is obviously progressive, when productive psychopathological syaptous exhibit
a tendency for expansion and complication. But even in these cases, therapy must be
maximally intense. diverse, and individualized (growing doses of the preparation,
substitution of neuroleptics, their coabination with one another, their combination .
with antidepressants, alternation with courses of insulin therapy and 381', biological
stimulation methods, and so on).

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

It should be considered that even these forms often acquire an attack-like course in
modern psychopharmacotherapeutic practice. the possibility of remissions has become
a reality even in cases of rather malignant juvenile schizophrenia in response to
intensive and clinically justified therapy. The structure of the attacks exhibits
unique shifts coupled with amplification of depressive cosponents semitivetothe
use of high antidepressant doses; careful analysis may reveal this situation, for
exasple, in some forms of catatonic stupor, verbal hallucinosis, and so on. In
contrast to this, a shift in the direction of a maniacal state comled with wre-
natural behavior, reduced artificiality, nor-alieation of facial expressions, and a
reduction of "nonhuman“ playfulness may be observed in the structure of some for-s
of stable hebephrenic arousal. A similar transformation may be observed in unfavor-
ably proceeding paranoid and paraphrenic states, which must be caught in tine,

But if no changes in the therapeutic tactics produce the desired results, doubt is
cast over the suitability of prolonged neuroleptic therapy. A momtonous, mchanging
clinical pattern lasting several months and absence of any sort of pronounced inrove-
nent in response to an increase in the doses, substitution of the neuroleptic, or
addition of an antidepressant raises the question of at least temporarily withdrawing
the neuroleptic, which often leads to noticeable isprovement in the patient's state.
If in some cases aggravation does occur, this "zig-sag' does make sense as a means

for surmounting resistance to neuroleptics.

mis also pertains to treatment of protracted depression with antidepressants. Also
promising is the method of withdrawing psychotropic drugs suddenly and abruptly--
coupletely withdrawing the preparations after first raising their dosages to the
naxinun. Retrospective study of patients experiencing imrovenent revealed that

in the past, most exhibited a tendency for an attack-like course coupled with more
or less pronounced affective disturbances. And it was only as a result of unjusti-
fiably prolonged neuroleptic therapy that the tendency for remission faded away.

mess and a large waiver of other clinical questions signify a new stage in deeper
study of the patterns of prolonged psychopharmacotherepy. ebOut which there is
still much to learn.

I have dwelled on just a few of these problems in order to once again «chairs the
complexity of the large nuber of problems arising in the treatment of each indivi-
dual patient, and thus to substantiate the need for maximally individualising
therapy and surmounting all stereotypy. Therefore we naturally cannot claim to
have illuminated all aspects of therapeutic tactics in this handbook; nevertheless
the information it contains may serve as a basis for sensible, clinically justified
therapy.

Basic ijectives in Pharmacotherapy of Mental Diseases

In the 20 years of its existence, psychopharsacotherapy gained a firm foothold in
medical practice and now occupies one of the leading places in the treatment of
nervous and mental diseases. Characterized by relative simplicity and safety of

application, and combining general and selective action upon psychoses, psycho-
tropic drugs have not only noticeably raised the effectiveness of therapy, but they

have also nade outpatient therapy much more possible, which has dramatically expanded
the volume of psychiatric care.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Many forms and stages of mental diseases which required hospitalisation before are
now being treated successfully in psychoneuological dispensation. 'mis has es-
pecially important significance, since it makes an extensive, continuous progrms of
medicinal. social, vocational. and reluhilitatienal influence possible. In this

case each form of therapy potentiates the others, which dotbtlessly raises the
overall effectiveness of therapy.

Medicinal pathomorphosis of psychoses observed in recent years has led to a' signi-
ficant increase in the lumber of nonpsychotic states coupled with dominant neurosis-
like states. psychopathy-like states, reduced hallucinatory-delirious states,
different variants of depressive states, and others. In the overwhelming Iajority
of cases, such patients remain outside the hospital, and they present a new and
rather serious clinical, therapeutic, and social-vocational problem.

As a consequence we observe significant growth in the role of outpatient psycho-
neurological institutions, which must not only conduct maintenance therapy (that is,
maintain the results of therapy achieved in the hospital), but also organise inte-
grated, clinically justified treatnent of this grow of patients. aperience shows
that the overall effectiveness of therapy rises significantly when outpatient care
is expanded, when real continuity exists between hospital and dispensary care, when
the outpatient stage of psychopharamacotherapy is viewed as being no less important
than treatment inside the hospital, and when the patient is subjected to active.
clinically differentiated treat-tent in conjuction with all nsasures of social and
vocational readaptation. ’

This pertains mainly to prevention of recidivism and rehospitalisation. In addition
to an improved course of psychosis, an increase in the mice: of rehospitalizations
has been noted in connection with the extensive use of psychotropic drugs. his is
associated with changes in me clinical pattern and course of psychoses involving

a shift from chronic to attack-like disease, making reaission possible in patients
who had formerly been kept in hospitals for long periods of time. At the same time
these episodes of remission, especially ones arising in the course of chronic, pro-
gressive forms of schizophrenia, are typified by a certain degree of 'adaptation' to
the preparation being esployed, and the length of such renission is associated with
the quality of outpatient care. ﬂuctuations in state that arise in this connection
(for example, a certain degree of actualisation of deliriu and hallucinations, in-
tensification of depression. and so on) camot always be interpreted as relapses,
since they are often quickly curtailed by insignificantly raising the dose of the
preparation, or by adding other drugs. However. the section physician-psychiatrist
often makes no attempt to correct the patient's state in outpatient conditions,
instead sending his to the hospital, where the same neasures are implemented anyway:
but the very fact of hospitalization causes a break in social and vocational adapta-
tion, fills up expensive bed space. and worsens the overall results of therapy. and
on the other hand, when a relapse is curtailed in a dispensary, the patient's
presence in his accustomed environment-at work, in the familyuresults in quicker
isprovement of his condition, and further stabilisation of remission.

It stands to reason that it is not easy to solve all clinical problems by dispensary
treatment in all cases: however, the occasionally encountered practice of autonatic-
ally sending patients to the hospital should be abandoned. This would require, first

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of all , improvement of the knowledge of clinical psychiatry and psychopharmacology
possessed by physicians employed in outpatient psychiatric institutions.

In recent years the psychopharmacology division of the 3598!! Ministry of

Health Scientific Research Institute of Psychiatry in Moscow has done a great deal
of work to isprove the psychopharmscological skills of physicians through annual
suinars in lbscow and other cities. Information bulletins and methodological ptbli-
cations, including this book, serve this purpose as well.

A mandatory prerequisite of raising the quality of therapy is further consolidation
of the ties and continuity in the work of hospitals and dispensaries. In particular.
medical information on patients being released from the hospital mast be doalmented
promptly, and the data must be couplete. he a rule, the medical history contains a
rather full description of the developent of disease, the patient‘s somatic and
mental status, and so on, but the dynamics of the patient's state in response to
psychopharmacological influence and. most importantly, accumulation on outpatient
therapy and rehabilitation are absent. And yet this is precisely the information
that could help the dispensary physician to insure real continuity in the patient's
subsequent treatment. It would seem to be suitable to expand the concluding part of
the medical history with a detailed indication of the medicinal and rehabilitation
measures necessary for stabilization of remission, and the particular therapeutic
tactics to be euployed in the event of aggravation.

In this connection, mention should be nade of the tendency still witnessed in some
hospitals for reducing the doses of psychotropic drugs toamininn prior to the
patient's release, a practice associated with previously existing directives which
overstated the danger of side-effects outside the hospital and of other phenomena.
This problem has now been studied and illuminated rather fully. Groundless mandatory
reduction of dosage, especially in the presence of progressive psychoses, in connec-
tion with which a rather high level of clinical and social mtion persists

with the use of relatively high doses of neuroleptics, invariably leads to a worsening
of the patient's state, and a greater danger of a relapse following release.

No less isportant is the need for reexamining the cosmonly accepted criteria for
establishing disability. In a significant nwer of cases, changes in clinical
pattern arising in response to intensive psychopharmscotherapy are such that despite
presence of residual psychopathological disorders—the ones which are no longer im-
portant and which do not dominate the behavior of patients--such patients not only
can but also must work, since work is a powerful factor of further clinical and
social-vocational compensation. mjustified estrangemsnt of patients from work
diminishes the results of medicinal therapy and c.cates a real threat of recidivism.

hung the organizational problems, that of maintaining a regular supply of psycho-
tropic drugs is important. 'meir assortment increased significantly in recent years,
and industry has started producing original domestic preparations that are not in-
ferior in their effectiveness to foreign preparations.

3 major role in this coupler work belongs to executives of local psychiatric insti-
tutions and pharmaceutical administratio . The (551?. Ministry of Health. has

published methodological recolmeendations, which have doubtlessly played a positive
role in imroving the organization of requests for and supply of medicines.

161

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The task now is to make sure that the quantity and assortment of preparations really
necessary for cleete therapy are really accounted for in the orders submitted. A
tendency of excessively broad use of traditional preparations at the expense of new,
inproved ones has been noted in recent tines. ‘l‘hus owing to the use of other, more--
powerful neuroleptics (triftazin, haloperidol, and so on), aninazin has lost such of
its significance in long-tern therapy, and it is now being used mainly to curtail
psycho-ate: arisal of varying genesis, in relation to which it is sore effective,

as is true for tisertsin as well. In connection with the phenomena of lethargy,
inhibition, and emotional indifference it elicits, prolonged use of uinasin often
intensifies passiveness (for era-pie among schizophrenics), h‘indering social and
vocational readaptation of patients. at the sane time, due to the weakness of its
general and selective antipsychotic action, prolonged and groundless use of aninasin
prevents prescription of sore-powerful neuroleptics, and thus reduces the effective-
ness of therapy. '

The physician should also be cautioned against becoming carried away with new
“fashionable“ preparations, which are often prescribed not so such on the basis of
clinical indications as due to a desire to display one's erudition. me extensive
experience in psychopharnacotherapy really shows is that there are no good or bad,

or weak or strong preparations, that instead there are preparations which are nest
effective against a concrete state at a given moment in relation to a given, concrete
patientuthat is, therapy Inst be based on strictly substantiated clinical indica-

tions .

I have only been able to touch upon some organizational proble-s in modern treat-ent
of sental diseases which appear most inortant from my point of view. he solutions
to many of these problems are still far away, and further work is required. This
handbook, the materials of which reflect my years of work by the psychopharnaco-
logical center of the ($88 Ministry of Health. supported by the ma Ministry

of Health Scientific Research Institute of Psychiatry in Hoscow, was written

with the purpose of broadening the psychopharuaoological knowledge of physicians,
helping than conduct clinically differentiated therapy, and thus practing inrove-
nent of its effectiveness.

COPYRIGIT: Vsesoyurnoye kon“y\mkturno-infornatsionnoye byuro Glavnogo aptechnogo
upravleniya Ministerstva sdravookhraneniya SSSR, mom, 1980

1100!.
680: 1860/1029

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIN!(HNHCJAI.USE|MVLY

INDIVIDUAL DISTINCTIONS OF HUMAN MEMORY (PSYCBOPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY)

Moscow INDIVIDUAL'NYYR OSOBENNOSTI PAHYAII CHBLOVEKA (PSIKEOPIZIOLOGICHESKOYB
ISSLEDOVARIYB) in Russian 1980 (signed to press 18 Nov 80) pp 2-6, 151

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Individual Distinctions of
Human Memory (Psychophysiological Study)", by B. A. colubevm, Scientific Research
Institute of General and Pedagogic Psychology, USSR Academy of Pedagogic Sciences,
Isdatel'stvo ”Pedagogika", 10,000 copies. 152 pages, illustrated]

[Text] This monograph submits new experimental data on problems of individual dif-
ferences; there are descriptions of bioelectrical parameters by means of which
stable distinctions of brain function are determined in adolescents and adults.
Electroencephalographic methods are proposed for defining the different properties
of the nervous system characterizing the modern level of research. The BIG para-
meters are compared to memory.

This book offers scientific substantiation of the need to consider individual
psychophysiological differences when dealing with the distinctions of memory,
its optimization in the course of learning and work.

It is intended for scientific workers in the fields of psychology, psychophysiology.
physiology and pedagogice.

Foreword

Dedicated to the noble friendship and bright memory of
Anatoliy Aleksandrovich Smirnov and Boris Hikhaylovich

Teplov.

With all the diversity of theoretical and experimental studies dealing with the
disclosure of cerebral mechanisms of mnemic function, there are very few publica-
tions concerned with the problem of the innate conditions of individual differences

in human memory.

Yet the importance of working in this direction in the concepts of reflex theory

of I. P. Pavlov and his typological conception had been stressed by B. H. Teplov

as far back as the 1950's. Indeed, probably more than from any other mental
function, we could have "expected" consistent relations to the stable characteristics

163

FKHICHNWCIAI.lEﬂB(MNLY
FIHI()FF1C1Al.lﬂﬂE(NULY

of higher nervous activity. This ensued primarily from the elements in col-on in
physiological mechanisms of conditioned reflexes and association: "... a temporary
association is the moat universal physiological phenomenon in the animal kingdom
and in ourselves. At the same time, it is mental, what psychologists call associa-
tion, be it the formation of connections of all sorts of actions, impressions, or
letters, words and thoughts".[151, Vol 3, Bk 2, p 325]

But the results of the first experimental comparisons of productivity of memory to
properties of the nervous system were rather negative. This could have been attri-
buted in part to the lack of separation between the psychological concepts of
memory and learning, but mainly to the absence of integral characteristics of typo-
logical properties that are more adequate for comparison to human memory, the
systemic organization of which is demonstrable in both retaining information and
processing it.

Use of the EEG makes it possible to obtain such characteristics. The most important
feature of such methods is that they broaden the possibility of interpreting indi-
cators referable to the properties of the nervous system, thanks to the use of the
advances in allied sciences, including neurophysiology, modern physiology of higher
nervous activity and neuropaychology. This, in turn, helps gain somewhat better
understanding of the nature of the properties of the nervous system.

However, before comparing stable individual EEG features to memory, it was ne-
cessary to show that they can be used as indicators of nervous system properties,
and for this purpose they had to be compared to previously studied nonbioelectrical
parameters.

Since the 1960‘s (1961-1979) we have concentrated chiefly on the study of uncondi-
tioned reflex features of the EEG related to information processes-reactive po-
tentials (mainly reactions of alteration of rhythm and its harmonic elements)

as indicators of nervous system properties: strength, equilibrium and lability;

the study of correlations between bioelectrical characteristics and some individual
psychological distinctions of human memory. And the properties of the nervous
system are considered as the innate conditions for individual psychological differ-
ences in anemic function.

At the present tine, bioelectrical studies have been deployed of the specially
human types of higher nervous activity, their relation to properties common to
men and animals, and the role of both in forming the individual distinctions of
cognitive processes, including me-ory.

This study was conducted in the directions headed by Ye. I. Boyko, B. H. Teplov
and V. D. Nebylitsyn.

The author wishes to express her profound gratitude to all comrades who partici-
pated in the work, as well as to A. A. Smirnov, N. S. Leytes, Ye. N. Sokolov. V. I.
Rozhdestvenskaya and A. N. Sokolov, who were very helpful in the course of the
study and in writing it up.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Methodological and Hethodical Principles of the Study
The subject and methods of general and differential psychophysiology 5
16b

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Initial theses of the study related to development of theory of
nervous system properties
Menory as an object for the study of psychological manifestation
of nervous system properties
Chapter 2. Strength of the Nervous System and liamory
Bioelectrical indicators of strength and weakness of the nervous system
Strength of the nervous systen as a factor of involuntary and
voluntary memory
Analysis of the obtained functions
Chapter 3. Lability of the Nervous System and ﬂsmory
Bioelectrical indicators of lability of the nervous systen
‘Lability of the nervous system as a factor of involuntary and
voluntary memory
Analysis of the obtained functions
Chapter 6. Equilibriu of Nervous Processes and Memory
Bioelectrical indicators of equilibrium of the nervous system
Equilibrium as a factor of involuntary and voluntary awry
Analysis of the obtained functions
Chapter 5. Bioelectrical Correlates of Memory and Sane Yroblems of
Differential Psychophysiology
Possible approach to the study of innate prerequisites of abilities
Specially hunan types of higher nervous activity and their
hioelectrical correlates
Conclusion
Bibl iography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pedagogika", 1980

10, 657
080: 1840/1910

1105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI W'ILIAL 03'. Wk!

[DC 612.822.3

WMSIOWICAL comm W m RELATION!!!” EXISTING emu
mmumm AND SWNIZING BRAIN SW8 0mm 8133? AND swarms

uningrad PIZIOIDGIGBSKIY 211mm. SSSR near I. H. sscasm in Russian V01 67,
No 3. Mar 81 pp 364-370

[Article by D. A. Ronanw, Division of Cerebrovascular Pathology: Scientific

Research Institute of Neurology and Psychiatry insni B. P. Protopopov, Ukrainian
SSR Ministry of Public Health]

['lextl The characteristics of the long positive wave (P-vave)
arising in response to stimlation of the basal preoptic region
are studied; the mutual relationships existing bebteen the
P-vave and sons structures of the brain's desynchronizing and
synchronizing systene during sleep and wakefulness are analysed.
It is denonstrated that as the subject falls asleep, the sapli-
tude and duration at the Have in the Nuncophalic reticular
formation. the central nucleus or the thalams, and the posterior
hypothalamus increase. Correlation is revealed between the
expressiveness of the P-wave in the hippocamus and the total
duration or paradoazical sleep. In cowarison with wakefulness.
the P-uave in the nidbrain reticular tornation and the central
nucleus of the thalamus is reduced in this stage. he results
are discussed free the standpoint of the functional antiquity
of the preoptic Pmave. ‘me validity of using this potential

as a correlate of nutual relationships in the systen regulating
sleep and wakefulness is substantiated.

Key words: Basal preoptic area, positive wave. sleep and
wakefulness.

'l'be system regulating sleep and wakefulness includes a sizable nulber of struc-
turally distinct formations. sutual relationships between which nay be established
with the help of various techniques, to include those based on some electro-
physiological phenonena. One of then is the long positive wave (Have), which
arises in structures at the neso-diencephalic level in response to isolated stim-
lation of the basal preoptic area (4, 7, 9)--one o: the comonents of the brain's
sleep-inducing system (17) . ‘lhe Have reflects postsynaptic reversible inhibition
or a neuron ensesble, and in this connection it can serve as one of the indicators
of the orientation and intensity of the influences exerted by the basal preoptic

1&6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

area. Thus it has been established that hyperpolariraticn processes occurring on
cell menbranes, involving a decline or total cessation of their spike activity,
correlate with the P-wave (S, 9, 19). As this phenomenon proceeds, a reduction
in auditory evoked potentials (9) and in the negatiw; parse of the primary
somatosensory thalamic response (2) is observed. in. existing information affords
the grounds for suggesting that the fmctional significance of the P-wave varies
(4); however, a correlation between its dynamics and the level of wakefulness has
been studied only in acute experiments. predominantly on preparations in which
the brain stem is sectioned. and with the use of pharmacological agents. lie
therefore made it our purpose to clarify the unique features of a P-wave
developing in response to stimulation of the basal preoptic area during natural
sleep and wakefulness, as recorded from structures of the brain's activating and
sleep-inducing systems.

Hethods

Chronic experiments were performed on 13 cats weighing 2.2-3 kg. Surgical prepara-
tions were made under neebutal anesthesia. lbnopolar oonstantan electrodes with a
diameter of 50 u were inserted, on the basis of stereotaxic coordinates (11), into
the hippocanpus (E‘+3; L5: n+6), the central nucleus of the thalamus (correspondingly
+9; 1; +1). the mesencephalic reticular formation (+2, 4; -2), and the posterior
hypothalamus (+9.5; 1.5; -4). A bipolar stimulatory electrode with an inter-
electrode distance of 0.5-1 III was located in the basal preoptic area “14.5: 3; -4).
ipsilaterally in relation to the recording electrodes. Steel needle electrodes

were used to record the EEG. An electromyogram was recorded with the help of a
silver plate implanted into the neck uncles. A steel screw in the frontal bone
served as the indifferent electrode.

The experiment was performed 5-7 days after the surgical wounds healed. 'lhe animal
was in a partially soundproof box illusinated by diffuse light. Polygraphic re-
cording, which was performed during daytime from 1000 to 1800 hours. was initiated

suggested by Dement and neitman (10), on the basis of data from an electrocortico-
gram, a hippocampogram, and an sac. At the appropriate periods of sleep and wake-
fulness, the basal preoptic area was stimulated by square pulses with a duration of
0.5-1 msec and an amplitude of 5-12 volts. Individual responses were superimsed
on an oscillograph screen, and then averaged according to Yeul'yanov's method (1).
In order to obtain fuller intonation on the configuration and latent time of the
potentials, in a nunber of experiments the latter were subjected to cosputsr
averaging with a ”Minsk-22" computer (using l6 responses or more). me animals
were killed following the experiments. Direct current was fed into the brain
through indented electrodes with the goal of producing electrolytic labels. {he
brain was fixed in 10 percent formalin solution. ﬁle locations of the electrode
tips were determined from cross sections. '

The experimental materials, including data on the structure of sleep. were subjected
to statistical treatment.
I'UK UI‘HLIAI. U3!— UNIJ

Research Results

Stimulation of the animal's basal preoptic area during cal. wakefulness tamed
arisal of a long positive wave in all analyzed structures. In a nuber of cases
it was preceded by a shorter negative wave (ll-wave) (Figure l). a P—wave
developing in response to paired stimuli with an interval of Q to 10 nsec between
individual stimuli always had an amlitude that was larger than the potential
produced in response to single stimulation of the basal preoptic area: we used
this feature to identify the Have (2, 8). 'lhe configuration and the amplitude
and temporal characteristics of the Il~wave, and of the P-wave following it, were
sufficiently stable in relation to different animals. The deviations that did
occur in the parameters may have been the product of later initiation of the Have.
and an increase or, on the other hand, absence of the Isl-wave: In the latter case
the response began with a positive deflection (Figure 2). Investigation of cosputer-
averaged potentials showed that during calm wakefulness, the shortest latent time
is observed with a P-wave developing in the posterior hypothalamus (53.4.1.8 nsec).
followed by the latent time of the P-wave in the central nucleus of the thalamus--
67.8:2.0 msec, and in the mesencephalic reticular formation-40521.8 nsec. It
was only after 77.1 32.2 msec that the Have in the hippocaipus attained its
maximm. 'lhe amlitude of the P-wave was found to be greatest in this structure
as well (136 uv on the average). Differences in anplitude of the Wave of the
central nucleus of the thalamus and the nesencephalic reticular formation were
insignificant (correspondingly 115 and 92 uv: p >0.05). In a meter of cases a
positive potential was not recorded in the rear hypothalamus during wakefulness,
despite development of an initial N-wave (Figure 3).

when the animal achieved sleep of medium depth (stage III. as classified in (10)),
at which time the EEG was dominated by slow waves with an amplitude of 200-250 uv
and a duration on the order of 250 nee, occupying up to 50 percent of the duration
of the period of analysis. stimlation of the basal preoptic areas by stimuli of
the previous intensity and duration was reamed. In rare cases the animal reacted
to the applied stimulus by jerking its head. without awakening. me increase in
amplitude and duration of the P-wave during stage III sleep in cosparison with
wakefulness was found to be significant in relation to all studied structures
except the hippocanpus (Figure 3). A correlation was revealed here beaueen the
orientation of the dynamics of the P-wave in the hippocamus during the tins of slow
sleep and the total duration of paradoxical sleep. Thus in aninals for which the
asplitude of the P-wave decreased during stage III, a significant decrease in the
duration of the paradoxical stage of sleep was observed as well (an average of 2.2
percent of the total recording time), while according to the literature (18) and
our data for nest animals, its duration during daytime is 11 percent and higher.
Reduction of fast sleep was contained with a 12.2 percent increase in the total
wakefulness time: meanwhile. the duration of the retaining stages of sleep changed
insignificantly.

In stage III sleep, especially pronounced changes in the P-wave were detected with
electrodes implanted in the posterior hypothalamus. in which the mlitude of this
potential more than doubled, attaining 100-180 uv. The duration of the P-wave in
this structure increased from 32 to 100 msec. ‘Ihe characteristics of the “wave
in stage III hardly changed at all (see table).

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure l .

Figure 2 .

 

P-Have elicited by single Stimulation of the Basal Preoptic
Area During Calla Wakefulness: Points of contact (from top
down): hippocanpus, central nucleus of the thalamus, meson-
cephalic reticular formation, posterior hypothalanus,
Downward deflection of the bean indicates a positive signal.
Arrows indicate N- and P-waves.

 

P-Have of Preoptic Genesis in the Central Nucleus of the
'I'nalanus (Left) and Posterior Hypothalanus (Right) :
Computer average of 16 single responses. Arrow indicates

stimulation artifact

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
wow Urn-lust. use. out!

 

Figure 3. Dynamics of the Aqlitude of a P-ﬂave Developing in Response
to Stimulation of. the Basel Preoptic Ares During sleep and
Waketulness (Cat No 22): A—wakefulness, Busleep of sediu
depth. Gus-sleep, D--paradoxical sleep: Inexplitude of. the
P-wave in the hippocanpus, 8—in the central thalanic nucleus,
3--in the posterior hypothalamusdnin the nesencephalic
reticular tornation

The transition to 6-sleep (stage IV). in which waves with an anlitude above 250 W
and a duration from 300 to 800 Issec began to dominate, was typified by further
significant increase in the P-wave. In sous cases its asplituds reached 200 uv in
the central thalamic nucleus, 200 my in the nesenoephalic reticular formation.

and 240 my in the posterior hypothalamus. me amplitude of the P-wsve was reduced
even in this stage among animals experiencing paradoxical sleep of shorter duration.
In all studied structures, the asplitude of the N-wave increased scenwhat, but the
duration of the Han decreased significantly only in the posterior hypothalamus.
as was true for the Hays.

Onset of. paradoxical sleep, which was deduced from a sharp drop in the amplitude of
the BK; recorded from neck males, from desynchronisation of the electrocortioogran
at all points of contact, and from axles]. of. a O-rhythn in the hippocaspus and, in

a number of. cases, in thesesencephalic reticular formation. was acco-panied by further
change in the characteristics of the recorded potentials. This change included a
decrease in both the anplitude and the duration of the Have in comarison with
responses recorded during slow sleep. Only a reduction in asplitude was typical of
the Have. It would be interesting to cospare the response parameters for the fast

150

MOMGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Parameters of. the P and Haves of the Potential Bvoked by single
Stimulation of the Basal Preoptic Area During sleep and wakefulness

 

 

 

 

 
   
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

"(1) “tale-mm at Ill-1’9 manna
apa- __ _
“ﬂ?“ ammaty.‘u( 3) anuoen‘ﬂ sworn: I ”mas-oer;
1' - a o u a a (6)
1 131‘. 100—23") 85110—1211) 115 60—1501 80 (60—1
2 158 (120-200) 118 (50—200)’ 153 {too—21.0)" 115 5—1 0
3 180 {1211—2110)‘ 120 (110—180). 192 (120—300)" 120 1 °
4 no (10—160) now—1w) 73 (45—120). so 10—30).
N - I o a I a (7)
l 100 -170 22 (18-28) 106 (61—180 31
2 “122*. 2282-33 aw . a: m
:1 129 0—- ) -
4 61 80—81)’ 20 (18—22) 15 (38-iﬁ)‘ 30 16—“;
If}; _ it uu-wnmnalzurnlynnpmn (9) ml "mun
”GP“ IHIIJMLG I L'IIWlltm alumna l ”mm
1’ - s o a a a
92160—171» 71: (50—110) 66 (0—150) 32 (o—oo)
; 119 (80—190)" 104 (00—170)’ 151 (100—1 “ 100 (85—170)”
3 153 (120-2011)" 106 50—1”? 192 (140— " 112 0—100)“
( 28(0—110)" 56 0—120)" 00 (0-1”) 56(
N-IOIII
1 ll)? 00—l80) 3 (18—30) 1“ (‘0— 28 17—52)
3., $32-32 32*:3- . 2:. :°- .
' 1 9 -:. Z — —
2 53 {u—mr) 16 0—25)‘ 136 {30—281) 28 318-51)

Note:

 

the parameters of the P- and N—waves in each of the stages of

sleep are oonpared with the same in the period of wakefulness; a single
asterisk denotes changes with a probability of 0.05, and two asterisks
indicate a probability of 0.01; lupotantial parameters during wake-
fulness, 2--during sleep of medium depth, 3--during 6-sleep, 4--during
paradoxical sleep.

Parameters 6. P-vave
Hippocaapus 7. N-vave
Amplitude 8. Hesencephalic reticular formation
Dura tion 9. Posterior hypothalamus
Central thalamic nucleus
151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sleep phase with waves observed during wakefulness. In this case the differences
in the characteristics of the Pdwave recorded from the hippocaspus and posterior
hypothalamus are insignificant. 'lbe only thing that attracts attention is the
great stability of the responses in these structures. at the same time the enli-
tude of the New in the central thalamic nucleus decreases by an average of

31 uv (32 percent), while its duration drops by 14 nsec (18 percent). Even more
significant are changes in the parameters of the P-wave in the mesencepbalic
reticular formation: Its amplitude drops by an average of 64 w (70 percent), and
its duration decreases by 30 msec (26 percent). In some cases as with the than,
the P-wave is not recorded in the mesencephalic reticular formation during para-
doxical sleep.

Discussion of Results

The results show that changes in parameters of the P-wave originating in the preoptic
area during the sleep-wakefulness cycle may reflect, to a certain extent, inter-
action of the basal preoptic area with structures of the sleep-inducing and activating
systems of the brain. within which this wave arises. In this case we are able to
reveal differences in the expressiveness and orientation of the influences exerted

by the basal preoptic area during wakefulness and in each stage of sleep. Thus the
low P-wave amplitude we discovered in the posterior hypothalamus during wakefulness
and its increase as sleep develops can be explained by our present ideas about the
reciprocal mutual relations existing between the desynchronizing machinery of the
posterior hypothalamus and the sleep-inducing area of the forebrain (3) . At the

same time, the absence of significant changes in the N-wave, which represents

arisal of an excitation at the recording point (5), attests to continued transmission
of inpulses from the basal preoptic area into the posterior hypothalams, which in

all probability indicates not only the dominame of the activity of its desynchronising
mechanism, but also a decrease in their reactivity to the inhibitory influences of
the basal preoptic area.

'lhe similarity of the characteristics of the Wave recorded from the posterior
hypothalamus during wakefulness and paradoxical sleep presupposes a certain degree
of sameness of mechanisms responsible for formation of this potential in these
states, based in particular on the increase in activity of «synchronizing cospo-
nents in the brain. However, judging from the dynamics of the parameters of the

New in the mesencephalic reticular formation, the activity of its components
differs in wakefulness and in paradoxical sleep. 'me amplitude and duration of
the Have in the mesencephalic preoptic area are significantly reduced in this
stage, while during wakefulness the Han is rather pronounced in this area.
merefore the impression is created that during paradoxical sleep, the mesencephalic
reticular formation “slips away" from the inhibitory influences of the basal pre-
optic area, which may be explained by change in the orientation of forebrain
influences, and by growth in the intrinsic activity of the mesencephalic reticular
formation during this period. ‘lhe latter apparently occurs in response to in-
fluences of the reticular nuclei of the pens (13), which also exists in conpeti-
tive nutual relationships with the basal preoptic area, as was demonstrated in
experiments in which neuron activity (14) and the P-wave (4) were recorded.

As in the mesencephalic reticular formation, reduction of the [have is observed
during paradoxical sleep in cosparison with wakefulness in the central thalamic

152

l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nucleus. The P-wave in this structure is known to be associated with reversible
inhibition processes (8) lying at the basis of synchronization of the brain's
electric activity (6); we are also aware of a relationship between desynchronisa-
tion of the electrocorticogran in the period of test sleep and suppression of the
thalamcortical system in response to activation of the muncephalic reticular
formation (16) . Therefore it seens probable that the high activity of its de-
synchronizing cosponents exhibited in this stage of sleep limits the functions of
thaianic synchronizing mechanisms even more, even in couparison with wakefulness.

'me inortance of hippocanpal-preoptic-hypothalanic integration to eodulation of.
paradoxical sleep (20) is continued by. in addition to the existing data on the
sinilar disturbances occurring in this stage in response to isolated lesions or
the basal preoptic area (15) or the hippocaspus (12), the relationship established
between the orientation of changes in the P-wave in the hippocanpus and the total
duration of paradoxical sleep. In this connection, and considering the fact that
the dependence of the P-wave on fluctuations in the level of wakefulness or sleep
is lower in the hippocamus than in other structures, we can hypothesize that the
functional mutual relationships existing between the basal preoptic area and the
hippocaapus, one or the indicators or which is the Have, do not necessarily have
an inhibitory or "stimulatory" nature.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Yenel'yanov, I. P., "treatment of Evoked Potentials Recorded by the Swer-
Inposition Method (As Described by Dawson)“ in "Blektrotisiologicheskiye
issledovaniya v klinicheskoy i ekspertnoy praktike. 'rr. mum“ [Electro—
physiological Investigations in Clinical and Expert Practice. Proceedings
of the Leningrad Scientific Research Institute for Determination of Disability
and Organization of Work for Disabled Persons], Issue 13, Leningrad, 1964,
pp 46-54.

2. mgilevskiy, A. Ya., and ham, D. 3., ”Participation of Neocortical and
Reticulohypothalamic Components in mgulation or Reversible Inhibition in
the Intermediate Thalanic Nucleus,“ 211- WSSE. anew. DEYA'r” Vol 25, No 3,
1975. pp 595-602.

3. mgilevskiy, A. Ya., and Romanov, D. 3., “the Role of the mdial Pasciculus
of the Porebrain in Organization of the Electric Activity of the Neocortsx,‘
ZH. WSSH. NERVN. DBYAT., Vol 29, No 2, 1979, pp 320-329.

4. Mogilevskiy, A. Ya., and Romanov, D. 3., “Influence of the nasal Preoptic
Area on the P-Have Arising in Some Synchronizing and Desynchronising Structures
of the Brain," 2“. WSSH. NEW. DEAL, Vol 30, 1980.

5. Andersen. 9., Bccles, J. c., and Sears, '1'. n., ”he Ventro-Basal Couple: of
the males-us: Types of Cells, Their Responses, and heir Functional Organisa-
tion.," J. NYSIOL. (London), Vol 174, No 2, 1964, pp 370-399.

6. Andersen, P., and Andersson, s. A., “Physiological Basis of the Alpha Rhythm,"
Appleton—Century-Crotts, New York, 1968.

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

Brewer, 3., 'Preoptic Hypnogenic Focus and Hssencephalic Rsticular Pbmtion,’
BRAIN RBS., Vol 21, No l, 1970, pp 132-134.

Brenner, 9., “Inhibition: intrathalaniqms recurrentiellea et physiologic du
semen," WPHAIDGRAP. Chill. NBUROPHYSIOL" V01 28, No 1, 1970,
pp 1-16.

Bret-er, P., "Preoptic Bypnogenic Area and Rsticular Activating Systen,' Am.
I'l'AL. 3101... Vol 111, No 2, 1973, pp 85-111.

Deuent, 3., and Kleitnan. 11., “cyclic Variations in BEG During Sleep and
Their Relations to Eye lbvensnts, Body Motility and Ores-ins,“ BEG. CHI.
NEWHYSIOL., Vol 9, No 6, 1957, pp 673-690.

Jasper, H. 8., and Ajnon-Marsan, C., ''A stereotaxic Atlas 0! Diencsphalon of
the Cat,“ Ottawa, 1954.

Kim, 01., choi, 3., Kin, ch. 01., Kim, J. x., Kin, Ii. 5.. Park, a. J. and
Ahn, 3. 1., "Effect of Hippocamectony on sleep Patterns in Cats,“ REG. mu.
ammonium... Vol 33, No 3. 1975, pp 235-243. ‘

Lecas, I..-C., "Duration of Paradoxical Sleep Episodes. A Quantitative and
Pattern Analysis of Reticular Hultiunit Activity in the Cat,“ EEG. CLIN.
MUMPRYSIOL” Vol 43, No 2, 1977, pp 260-269.

Mancia, IL, Mariotti, 3., Roman, B. R. and Schieppati, 11., 'Basal Porebrain
and hypothala-ic Inﬂuences Upon Brain Stem Neurons,” BRAIN RBS., Vol 107,
No 3, 1976. Pp 487-497.

McGinty, D. J., and Stersan, H. 3., 'slsep Suppression After Basal Porebrain
Lesions in the Cat.,' SCIENCE, Vol 160, No 3833, 1963, pp 1253-1255.

Sasaki, K., shimno, 'l‘., Oka, 3.. Yananoto, 'l'. and Hatsuda, 2., 'nffects or
Stimulation of the Midbrain Reticular Formation Upon Manoeortical Neurons
Responsible for Cortical Recruiting Responses,” EXP. BRAIN I." Vol 26, No 3,
1976, pp 261-273.

Stemn, H. 3. and Cleunte, c. D., 'Porebrain Inhibitory Pcchanim:
Cortical Synchronization Induced by Basal Porebrain Stinulationﬂ' no. “30101...
Vol 6, No 2, 1962. pp 91-102.

Steman, M. 3., Knauas, ‘1‘., nah-am, D. and Clenente, C. 0.,“ Circadian sleep
and ﬂaking Patterns in the laboratory Cat.," BEG. CAIN. NBUROPHYSIOI... Vol 19,
No 5_, 1965, pp 509-517.

Vastola, B. It, "After-Positivity in the Lateral Geniculate 30dy,‘ J. 0?
NBUROPHYSIOL., V01 22, No 2, 1959, PP 258-272.

Yamaha, 5., "Participation of Liabirﬂypothalamic Structures in circadian
Rhythm of Slow Have Sleep and Paradoxical Sleep in the Rat,“ BRAIN RE" Vol 151,
No 2, 1978, PP 255-268.

COPYREGB‘l': Irdatel'stvo 'Nauka“. Piziolcsicheskiy zhurnal in. I. M. Sechsnova, 1931

11004
C30:

IMO/133 _ 15‘

FOROIHGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

III: 612.8

“Bi soon sumac-rs BRAIN-311138 COMES ‘10 QUAN'H‘DTM WSIS

Leningrad FIZIOIDGIGBSKIY mum's. SSSR ID!!! I. H. seem in Russian V01 67,
No 3. Mar 81 pp 473-474

[Review by V. G. zilov of book "Korrelyatsionnyye pokasateli elektroentsefalograla
golovnogo mosga pri emotsional'nom stresse" (Brain EEG Correlation Indices in
anotional stress), by a. u. Mamedov. Isd-vo ELM, Baku, 1979]

l‘lextl Doctor of Biological Sciences a. H. Hanndov's book is devoted to one of
the important problems of neurophysiology and clinical sedicine—intercentral
mutual relationships existing among brain structures in the presence of emotional
stresses.

Besides illuainatirg the concepts of domestic and foreign researchersou the mechanisms
behind formation of emotions and development of emotional stress, in the first part
of the book the author devoted his principal attention to analyzing cortico-
subcortical cross correlations associated with formation of esotionally stressful
states, the spatial-Moral organisation of '6 potentials in cases of 'signaling'
and “nonsignaling” situations, and electrographic indicators recorded from the brain
of animals predisposed to stress and resistant to stress. One of the chapters is
devoted to an analysis of the statistical parameters of electroencephalogram re-
corded in response to different pharmacological substances—aminasin, phentanyl,

and sombrevin. -

'me basic technique used by the author focuses the reader's attention on a typical
feature of negative emotional stimuliutheir capability for persisting for a long
period of time in the central nervous system, even after cessation of the stimli.
It is emphasized that this feature, which has stabilisation of excitations as its
consequence, is the most dangerous to the organism. ﬁne author meticulously
analyzes the dynamics of spatial-temoral cortico-stbcortical mtual relationships
of the brain with the correlation of autonomic indicators aooospanying development
of emotional stress. Data on the brain's pacemaker foraations and their role in

the formation of emotionally negative reactions are especially interesting. Correla-
tion analysis of neurochemical mechanisms involving the use of a nutter of pharmaco-
logical agents exhibiting different orientations of action primarily demonstrated
the complex integrated nature of stress reactions. revealing the important role
played by the adrenergic system of the hypothalamureticular couples in formation

of emotionally stressful states.

155

roe omcm. use onw-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analysis of the conditions causing arisal of negative emotional excitations and
of their transition to stable form demonstrated that besides physical factors.

the purely informative characteristics of ”conflict situations' play an inortant
role in formation of an emotionally negative state.

‘me author persuasively shows that the degree of emotional stress depends on the
amount of pragmatic information available—that is, intonation on the moment a
painful “blow" is inflicted. permitting an animal in an experimental situation to
prepare for the emotionally unpleasant stimulus in accordance with its formed
acceptor of the results of action. the dynamics of autonomic indices and cross
correlation analysis of electric activity recorded from cortico-subcortical forma-
tions confirmed that emotional arousal is significantly less pronomced in a I'sig-
naling" situation as a result of the animal's 'prediction' of the moment of appli-
cation of an emotionally unpleasant stimulus, than in a “nonsignalihg' situation,
in which the animal experiences a situation of uncertainty. It is precisely this
sort of long-persisting situation of uncertainty that is the most dangerous to

the human body as well.

A long-lasting conflict situation arising as a result of particular stressful
influences produces an irreversible process. leading to formation of a new state
in the brain, differing from normal. and typified by disturbed spatial-temporal
mutual relationships between different structures of the brain. his brain state
is accoapanied by somato-autonomic disorders, which may be referred to as a "cere-
brovisceral syndrome" of emotional stress.

The second part of the book examines some principles of the structure of automated
system intended for computer processing of biological information. Of special
interest are systems in which a computer controls a comlex experiment in real
time. becoming an organic participant of the experiment. Such integrated systems,
as follows from tne review provideJ by the author, provide a framework for creating
a single. optimally mated brain-comuter couples in the future, one capable of
effectively solving problems associated with the control of complex objects.
Differences in the possibility coeputers and man have for solving comlex problem
are examined. Indicating the limited possibilities offered by mathematics and
electronics in the creation of artificial intelligence in the full sense of this
term. the author examines the question of using, in the future, integrated brain-
couputer systems in which the advantages of human intelligence would be united
with the unique features of a computer.

A. M. Hamedov's book is doubtlessly timely and up to date. ‘lhe results of his
research, which was performed in its entirety with the assistance of a coaputer,
and which involved the use of precise quantitative methods of analysis, broaden
our present ideas about these mechanisms, and they provide indications of promising
ways to conclusively solve the problems addressed.

COPYRIGH‘: lzdatel'stvo 'Nadta". Piziologicheskiy zhurnal in. I. H. Sechenova, 1981

11004
C80: 1840/ 188

156

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
INJI40FINCJAI.lEﬂE(M§lY

EMOTIONS AND THOUGHT

Moscow EMOTSII I HYSHLENIYE in Russian 1980 (signed to press 29 Jan 80) pp 2-4, 192

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents fros book "Emotions and Thought", by
Igor' Aleksandrovich Vasil'yev, Valentin Leonidovich Popluzhnyy and Oleg
Konstantinovich Tikhomirov, Izdatel'stvo Hoskovskogo universiteta, 22,000 copies,
192 pages]

[Text] The authors of this collective monograph deal with the question of emotional
regulation of thinking activity. An effort was made to consider the correlation
between cognitive and emotional processes in the light of psychological systems
analysis. In this regard, the role of emotional processes in goal setting and
formation of meaning was demonstrated.

Foreword

This book sums up information about emotional regulation of thinking activity, and
it describes some experimental psychological studies of the role of emotions in
thinking. It so happened that thinking is most often investigated apart from a
subject's motivations and emotions. With all the difference between theories of
thinking as an analytical and synthetic process and the process of functioning of
mental actions, they are united by the fact that psychological studies of thought

do not include analysis of emotional processes. Also, psychology of emotions seldom
includes fine analysis of a subject's cognitive acts. This did not happen by.chsnce;
it reflects the rift that exists in modern psychology between "cognitive psychology"
and psychology of the personality.

Addition to psychology of the category of "object-related activity" makes it
possible to overcome this rift and pose the question of emotional regulation of
thought. In our opinion, formulation of such a question not only discloses new
possibilities of productive analysis of thought and emotions, hut permits develop-
ment of general theory of activity. -

In working on the problem of activity in psychology, questions of internal and, in
particular, emotional regulation of activity, which is instrumental in its "self-
advancement," "self-development," i.e., its creative nature, are the least studied.
As a result, there is occasional incorrect equating of activity and its technical,
operative components, absolutization of exogenous, ”rigid" control of cognitive
activity, i.e., ultimately "expulsion" of the subject fro. the activity he performs.
As a result, not only is the actual conception of cognitive processes in man node
poorer and it is more difficult to solve problems of practical importance, which

157

FfIICMHHCJAl.USE(HVLY
FOR(NﬂﬂCt\Ll£ﬂIONlN

are related to education and upbringing, evaluation of the prospects of creating
human intelligence in artificial systems, but grounds are provided for a critical
attitude to the "activity-related” approach, as it is often called, in psychology.

In modern Soviet psychology, the "activity-related approach" is sometimes set
against the "systems approach." In this regard, it must be noted that there may
be at least three variants of the systems approach in modern psychology.

In the first place, it may refer to extension of principles of describing engineer-
ing systems to the area of psychological phenomena. Such a systems approach could
result in a grossly mechanistic conception of man, vieved as a device that processes
information in accordance with previously set algorithms.

In the second place, it could refer to efforts to interpret consciousness, activity
and personality of man on the basis of physiological theory of a functional system.
Such a systems approach results in underestimation of the qualitative uniqueness

of man's conscious activity, as compared to organization of the behavioral set.

In the third place, it may refer to the study of mental phenomena in the system of
human activities. Only this systems approach can be called actually psychological.
He think that the contrasting of activity-related and systems approaches is based
on a misunderstanding: "Activity is ... a system that has structure, its own
internal transitions and transformations, its own development" [60, 82].

Psychology cannot be built by simply applying general system theory. The psycho-
logical systems approach should aid in gaining deeper knowledge of the nature of
mental phenomena, patterns of their generation and function in man's real activities.
This is the idea that we tried to apply to the specific area of research on emo-
tional regulation of thinking activity.

Contents Page

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. History and Current Status of the Problem of Emotional
Regulation of Thought
Consideration of phenomena of 'intellectual emotions and feelings' in
philosophy 5
Development of the problem of intellectual emotions and feelings at the
first stage of development of psychology as an independent discipline 20
Current status of the problem of intellectual emotions and feelings in

Soviet psychology 29
Psychology of thought and emotions 52
Chapter 2. Experimental Analysis of Conditions Under which Intellectual
Emotions Appear ' 71
Analysis of some general conditions of appearance of intellectual
emotions 72
Hethods of studying conditions of appearance of intellectual emotions 79
Time relations betueen recorded subsystems of thinking activity 88
Development of operational meanings as a condition for appearance
of intellectual emotions 105
Chapter 3. Experimental Study of Correlation Between Intellectual .
Emotions, Goal Setting and Motivation 127
158

FOI‘OFTWCIAI.IEHE(NVLY
Correlation between the process of goal setting [or formation] and
intellectual emotions while solving cognitive problems
Emotional processes in the presence of different activation for
activity
Conclusion
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Hoskovskogo universiteta, 1980

10,657
050: 1840/ 999
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCMIDGY IN PHYSICAL EDUCATIM AND SPOEI'S

Moscow PSIIHOLOGIYA YIZICIIISKOGO VOSPI'IANIYA I 8?!)er in Russian 1979
(signed to press 11 Dec 79) pp 2-10. 163

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents tron book "Psychology in
Physical Education and Sports". edited by 1'. ‘1'. Dzhasgarov and A. 1's. Puni.
lzdatel'stvo ”Pizkul'tura 1 sport", 30.000 copies. 1“ pages]

[Text] This nanual is prepared for the use of pertinent psychological categories
for students in physical culture institutions. It faniliarises future educators
of physical education and sports with the subject. sethods and current state of
psychology in physical education and sports. It presents the psychological
characteristics of sports activities. psychological problens related to training
and education in physical education and sports and conpetition in sport and the
socio-psychological aspects of physical education and sport activities.

All these relevant problem are examined in the light of current achieve-ants
in psychology, particularly sport psychology.

INTRODUCTION .

Education in psychology plays an important part in the training
of physical culture cadres. It includes the study of general psychology, age-

related psychology and the psychology of physical education and sports. General
psychology is the basis for the students' psychology education, it provides then
with intonation on the essence of the psyche—specifically arranged traits that
reflect the objective world-on patterns of mental processes and the state and
personality features of an individual as part of the socio-historical process.
Ageorelated psychology reveals the pattern of ontogenetic sental develop-ant.

The psychology of physical education and sports provides students with specific
intonation on the psychological aspects of training, education and personal
developnent during physical culture and sport activities. infomtion on the
psychological principles involved in training and cenpetition in sports and the
developnent of personality in a Soviet sportsnsn. as a citizen and subject equipped
with special abilities that enable him to achieve a high level of proficiency in
specific types of sports. The psychology course is intended for the professional
and educational training of students who will be the future instructors of physi-
cal culture in the schools. and will teach physical education to trainers for
various types of sports in the higher educational institutions.

160

MOEFICIALISIONLY
Fi”l(lﬂﬂC1A1.USEIMNlY

This is the first manual that describes problems in physical education and sports
that can be applied in the psychology program for students of physical culture
institutes. Due to the small size of the manual, the reports on the investigated
problems had to be brief. The reports on the psychology of physical education
are printed in a limited form as they have not been fully developed yet. Most
of the studies are linked to the psychology of sports.

Recently. another educational manual has been printed, entitled "The psychology
of high achievement sports" edited by A. V. Rodionov. These two manuals will
provide considerable help in the professional-educational preparation of students
at a physical culture institute. The manual consists of six chapters.

Chapter 1 examines the topics of the subject on methods of psychology in physical
education and sports and the importance of psychology as a component of higher
hysical education. The chapter also contains a short outline on the development
and current state of psychology in physical education and sports.

Chapter 2 deals with the psychological features of sport activities and discusses
the following aspects: sport as one of the basic types of human activities.
general psychological traits in sport activities, types of sport and computitive
training and communication problems in sports.

Chapter 3 describes the problems of teaching and training. including the psychologi-
cal principles involved in physical practice, tactical actions. personality
development in physical education and sports and the psychological aspects of
training of qualities of resoluteness.

Chapter 6 reports on the psychological aspects of competitive activities and of
the psychological preparation of teams for contest. the level of emotional pre-
conteat stinulation and its regulation.

Chapter 5 deals with the topic of social psychology in physical education and
sports. It includes the psychological meaning of terms like sport group, team,
collective. management and leadership in sports, psychological climate and inter-
personal relationships in the sport unit.

Chapter 6. the last chapter. examines the effect of stress on the mental condition
of a person in physical training and in sports.

This manual has been assembled by the lecturers and scientific co-workers of the
Department of Psychology of the P. P. Lesgaft Institute of Physical Culture of
the Soviet Order of Lenin and of the Order of Red Star. and edited by professors
T. T. Dshamgarov and A. Ts. Puni.

Contributors: Docent D. Ya. Bogdanova, candidate of psychological sciences
(chapter 5. 2.3); docent G. D. Gorbunov. candidate of psychological sciences
(6.6; in collaboration with A. Ts. Puni - 6.1. 6.2. and 6.3): professor

T. T. Dzhamgarov. doctor of psychological sciences (2.1. 2.2, 2.6, 2.5, 6.6);
professor A. Ts. Puni. doctor of psychological sciences (chapter 1. 3.6. 6.1,
6.2, 6.3; in collaboration with B. N. Surkov. 3.1 and 3.2; in collaboration with

161

FOI¢OFIWCIA1.IISE2(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

G. D. Gorbunov, 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3); docent B. N. Snirnov, candidate of educational
sciences (3.3); E. N. Surlwv, candidate of psychological sciences. senior

scientific associate (3.1 and 3.2 in collaboration with A. Ts. Puni).

TABLE 0? CONTENTS .

Intrauction...O00.0.0.0.00.0...OCOQOOOOOOOOCO0.0.0...OOOOOCOOOOCOCOOOOO. 3
Chapter 1 . PSYCROLOGY 0P PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND SPORTS - SPECIAL BRANCH
OP PSYCROLOCY
1 . 1 Subject of the psychology of physical education and sports. . . 5
l .2 Methods of psychology for physical education and sports. . . . . . 8
l .3 Inportance of psychology in physical education and sports
within the franevork of advanced physical culture education. . 11
1 .10 Short outline of the devalopnent and current state of
psychology in physical education and sports. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Chapter 2 . PSYCHOLOGICAL FEATURES OP SPORT ACTIVITIES
2.1 Sport as one of the basic types of husan activity............ 18
2 .2 General psychological features of sport activities. . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.3 co-lmic‘tmninmrt .Ctiv1tu.ssesseaeesassssaessaseeeeses 29
2 .lo Psychological features of different types of sports and
emetitive training..............no...“.ouuu....u..u. 3‘
2 .5 Individual psychological traits of the activity of ,
mrtmnOOOGOO'1COOOOODIOOCGOUOODUUOOOOOOOOIOOOOQOOOOCOOOOOI ‘1
Chapter 3. PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF TRAINING AND EDUCATION
3. 1 Psycmlosical problem of training in mbuit’e s s s s s s s s a s a s s e ‘6
3.2 Psychological prohlens of learning tactical actions. . . . . . . . . . S9
3 . 3 Psychological aspects of teaching resolutensss. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
3.4 Psychology of personality develop-ent in physical education
.nd ‘ports.05....ODOOOOOQOIDOOOOUOOIODOO.OOOOODOOUOOOOOIIOOO. 82
Chapter 6. PSYCHOLOGY OF COMPETITION IN SPORTS
6. 1 Psychological features of conpetitiva activities in sports. . . 91
6.2 State of nental preparedness for competition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
lo . 3 Aspects of psychological preparation for conpet ition. . . . . . . . . 97
6.‘ Levels of eaotional stinulation and its regulation. . . . . . . . . . . 105
Chapter 5 . SOCIO-PSYCBOLOGICAL PROBLEMS IN PUSICAL RDOCATION AND SPORTS
5.1 General concept of sport groups, teens and collective. . . . . . . . 1110
5.2 Supervision QM leadetOhip m QWrt tmlo........n......... 119
S. 3 Psychological clinate and interpersonal relations in teans. . . 126
Chapter 6. THE EFFECT OF PHYSICAL STRESS AND SPORT ACTIVITIES ON THE
MENTAL STATE 0? A PERSON
6.1 On the need of exercise and its fulfill-slit.................. 131
6.2 Exercise and nental developnent of an individual. . . . . . . . . . . . . 133

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

00‘
o
bu

Exerciﬂe and Work .buitytooocooooooo'ootooooocooototooooootc 136

The development of mental and paychmtor qualities
in sportsman”................u....u."nonuouunouu 139

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "szul'tura 1 sport". 1979

9680
680: 18’; 0/1001

163

MOMMUSEONLY
FOR Oman. (SE ONLY

lbsoov VBSTNIK msxovsxooo UNIVEISI‘E‘M. seam 14: PSIIBOIDGHA in Russian No 2,
Apr-Jun Bl pp 3-9

[Article by A. A. Bodalev]

remte future. These docments also deeply and thoroughly evaluated the work of
Soviet scientists in the past five-year plan, and they clearly reflected the tasks
to which Soviet science oust subordinate its activity in the llth Five-Year Plan.

In the past five-year plan, psychologists of Moscow university participated actively

characteristics were also encouraged to participate in scientific illumination of
these problems, with a consideration for their specialties. Besides having general
significance to science, the obtained results were a step forward in our under-
standing, from the positions of psychol , of the essence of formation of a nuaber
of human features characterizing nan as an individual, his develop-ant as a person-
ality, the problems of ilproving training and indoctrination, preparation for
creative labor, raising the effectiveness of labor in different areas of the
national economy, and preservation of the health of the Soviet individual.

the department illminated the psychological nechanisns of both simler and more-
compler psychological phenovsena. it traced the principal trends in formation of
cognitive, emotional, and volitional spheres of the perponality and their formation
into an integral structure, it studied development of leanings and capabilities in
the individual, ”crystallisation" of the core of the personality-~the character,

and the deviations in the general course of the personality's education, and it
examined the personality as an object and a abject of learning, complication, and
labor, all on the basis of the general psychological theory of activity, which was
also the methodological foundation of all other studies perforned by the department's
scientists in 1976-1980.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the objective world. something which develops in response to material, practical
activity and supports this activity-activity which acquires the form of internal
activity at the highest levels of its develOpment and which basically has the same
structure of external activity, the department's scientists conducted research on
a broad spectrum of the most isportant problems of modern psychological science.

‘ Research conducted in the 10th Five-Year Plan on color vision at the department
under the guidance of Ye. N. Sokolov was of fundamental inortance. A model of
color vision capable of representing numerous shades of color on the surface of

a sphere was successfully built and tested. and it was simultaneously demstrated
that the coordinate system of color vision consists of contrasting-color neurons
(red-green, blue-yellow, and black-white). 'lhis research group also created an

automated system for diagnosing color vision abnormalities with an on-line com-
puter.

Working on the topic “Neuron Mechanisms of Immory and Learning". Ye. ll. Sokolov and
his colleagues studied the mechanism of neuron plasticity, and they demonstrated
that the pacemaker mechanism, which exhibits endogenous plasticity, determines
plasticity at the behavioral level, and that associative learning is an intra-
cellular process of alteration of the reactivity of loci in the sauna. It was also
found that giant neurons may acquire additional integrative properties through in-
dependent generation of action potentials in individual anon branches.

rareover this group developed a system for diagnosing the states of an individual,
using objective electrophysiological indicators: the EEG, EKG, BIG, the rhythm

assimilation reaction, and brain evoked potentials. In the course of its re-
search, it found bioelectric correlates of different activation systems, inter-
action of which predetermines functional state. 'ihese experiments revealed the
significance of individual human differences (extraversion-introversion, strength-
weakness of nervous processes, etc.) to evaluation of the unique features of the
EEG, EKG. and evoked potentials.

Research performed in the department in the last five-year plan by A. D. Iogvinenko
and his colleagues led to the creation of a theoretical model of psychophysical
processes occurring in the human Visual system: this model describes transformation
of the visual image of a moving object. a given law of an object's motion is

placed in correspondence with a linear operator describing changes experienced by
the imagein motion. This operator, interpreted in the language of three-dimensional
frequencies, performs the function of a filter possessing certain characteristics,
presence of which was confirmed through experimental study of recognition of moving
images.

A. D. bogvinenko and his colleagues also developed the new concept of the informa-

tional spectrum of an image, and they experimentally studied the informational
spectrum of a hunter of concrete images. Using the method of selective adaptation,
they discovered the phenomenon of interaction between three-dimensional frequency
channels in the human visual system, and they plotted the curves for interaction of
these channels.

An extensive cycle of research devoted to the role of the motor system of the eyes
in various tasks--perceptual, mental, motor, and so on--was oomleted under the
guidance of Yu. B. Gippenreyter. The functions of eye movements, their place in

165

I'I‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oil-ll'IAI. USE ONLY

the structure of activity, and the mechanism of their organization and control were
studied in the course of this research: new, unique methods for evaluating visual
process parameters such as the area of the operational visual field, stress, and
voluntarism were created and successfully applied. A method for analysing the
structural units of activitywas also developed. It was based on the idea of re-
cording fixaticnal opticokinetic nystagms in association with perceptual, motor,
and mental tasks, and recently the group successfully tested a new, more-sensitive

and practically convenient procedure permitting solution of the same problems with
the help of galvanic nysta .

Consistently relying upon the theory of activity being developed at the department,
its scientists conducted research on the psychological mechanisms of goal-setting
and of formation of the individual'e motivations and needs, and the processes by
which the individual masters social experience in the for:- of training and education.

It is namely from: these positions that 0. K. 'rikhomirov and his colleagues conpleted
research in the 10th Five-Year Plan which illulinated the basic forms of goal-setting
and determined the conditions influencing the nature of formulated goals in intellec-
tual activity, to include in problem solving involving the use of a cosputer in ‘
dialog mode. They also developed techniques for controlling goal-setting in a
”dialog“ with a meter. ones which broaden the possibilities for the individual's '
creativity, by way of increasing the total nwer of goals formulated and raising
their originality. studying the significance and place of unconscious mental
phenomena in creativity, this same research group demonstrated that the range of
unconscious phenomena traditionally studied in experimental psycholOgy must be ex.
panded by including unverbalizsd operational meanings.

In that same five-year plan, efforts were continued in a program initiated by

A. N. heont'yev to reveal the cosplex dependencies tying in the characteristics

of activity in which an individual engages and the unique features in the develop-
ment of his motivations--content, structure, dynanics, motive force, emotional
valency, and so on (A. G. Asmolov, B. s. Bratus‘, V. K. Vilyunas, e. V. Ovchinnikorva,
v. v. Stalin, and others).

Also far-reaching and permeated by the principle of activity mediation was a

cycle of research conducted at the department under the guidance of G. u. Andreyeva.
It was demonstrated with great persuasiveness on the basis of materials describing
many psychosocial phenonena observed among people involved in commications that
the content and the structural and dynamic properties of these phenomena are
governed predominantly not by the individual history of the comnicating people,
but rather by the nature and specific features of the social activity in which they
engage. Using the exasple of analysing interpersonal cognition, the researchers
traced the relationship between such processes and the particular features of groups,
intergroup relations, and social situations in which every personality finds itself
every day.

Employing a system created and theoretically substantiated by P. Ya. Gal'perin.

during the past five-year plan the department continued its planned formation, in
the child and in the adult, of different types of cognitive activity having pre-
scribed properties: concurrently, the relationship between the types of teaching

and the course of a child's mental development were revealed, and the internal
mehanisms responsible for development of a child's manifestations of mental activity

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

such as interiorization, combination, automation, and so on were discovered. Appli-
cation of this method of directed development made it possible to develop highly

mental and speech development: it was also possible to develop the capacity of such
children for systematic thinking when solving so-called ”imagination problems“.

The last significant factor characterizing the mceasing progress in Gal'perin's
theory of planned formation of mental actions was the transition, clearly manifesting
itself in this research, from study of the conditions and mechanism governing forma-
tion of individual mental actions to investigation of system of actions and different
forms and types of real human activity. It is mainly in this context that in the
past five-year plan, Gal'perin and his students scientifically illuinated the
psychological conditions for formation of angles types of mental activity (using

the example of some types of special activity), and the psychological mechanisms of
combination. The procedure they developed turned out to be highly effective in
solving the problems associated with nurturing high-precision and high-speed fem

of special activity in ordinary and experimental conditions.

The system of methods created on the basis of the theory of planned formation was
also used successfully in the past five-year plan to shape the thinking and speech
of blind-and-dusb children, and in this case its application also made it possible
to reveal a number of fundamental conditions predetermining the general course of
mental development in the specific circunstances typical of the daily activities
of a blind-and-dulb person.

Finally, in 1976-1980 Gal’perin's creatively working collective managed, on the
basis of the theory of planned formation, to perform an encouraging search-were we
to judge by the obtained resultsnfor objective tools with which to diagnose hush
mental development and determine the real prospects of this development. Diagnosis
of mental activity, performed on the basis of information accmulated by pedagogical
psychologists and developing on the basis of the theory of planned formation, which
provides a cowlete picture of the state of the form of activity under analysis and
objectivizes its main characteristics, makes it possible to chart out, with marina
individualization, the course of further work with students serving as the subjects;
as a rule this produces a high didactic impact.

Research aimed at revealing the psychological characteristics of instruction activity
was continued in the past five-year plan mder N. 1’. 'i‘alysina's guidance. Following
the general laws of knowledge assimilation, formation of this activity presupposes
the conduct of such research in all stages typical of this process. The unique
features of knowledge acquired through systemic orientation of students in their
subject matter were described, and it was domnstrated that in this case, knowledge
rises to the methodological level of generalization, bringing it closer to the modern
theoretical form of scientific knowledge. ‘Iheoretical and experimental analysis
aimed at clarifying the role played by other forms of activity in formation of usable
knowledge was continued.

Research on mnemic activity, which has become traditional to this scientific group,
was supplemented by investigation of the influence of long-term memory on short-
term memory. Early form of a child's memory were subjected to special analysis,
and the conditions and stages of its development in joint objective and practical
activity of a child and adult were revealed.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ul'HLlAI. 03b ONLY

A system of differentiated indicators reflecting the level of an individual's moral
consciousness and his preparedness to behave in accordance with consciously recognised
norms was revealed by this scientific collective in the course of its effort .to
illuminate formation of the personality's moral qualities, and the psychological
foundations of an individual's philosophy. 'nleoretical research was conducted cou-
currently on the conceptual apparatus required for systemic conceptualization of
philosophical development. and the content of activity leading to successful orienta-
tion and deep assimilation of social values was determined. lbreover the scientific
collective led by N. P. ‘ralysina received new data on a mater of conditions pro-
moting elevation of knowledge to the level of an individual's personal convictions.

Research aimed at clarifying the psychological conditions for raising the effective-
ness of an individual's work with equipment, and at psychologically sibstantiating

the ways for inproving activity of the individual as a subject of different fem of
labor occupied a significant place in the department's scientific efforts in 1976-1980.
older the guidance of V. P. Zinchenko, the department's engineering psychologists
developed a conceptual scheme for functional-strmtural and microstructural analysis
of control activity; this scheme was used as a basis for thoroughly studying the
activity of an operator-manipulator, and developing experimental stands for movement
analysis of fundamentally new design, and new variants of controls having no previous
analogs.

The results of this research led to suggestion of an integrated variant of ll. A.

Bernshteyn's theory of movement structure and A. V. Zaporozhets' theory of movement
development, and to resolution of the greatest conflict existing in modern habit

psychology--the conflict between the theories of open and closed movement control
loops. They concurrently demonstrated the quanta-wave nature of organisation and

imlementation of a motor act. and presence of waves of psychological refraction in
the spatial-temporal structure of a controlling action.

An extensive cycle of research was also conducted under V. P. zinchenko's guidance on
the topic "theoretical and Methodological Principles of Planning the External and
Internal msources of Labor”; the processes studied included ones such as detection.
information retrieval, short-term memorization. information selection, elementary
logical transformations. preparation of information for problem solving, and so on.‘
Methods of functional-structural and microstructural analysis of cognitive processes
were developed and realistic ways of optimum planning of the internal resources of
operator activity were outlined in the course of this‘ research.

Working on a can assignment in cooperation with other organizations, in 1976-1980
.this scientific collective also conducted an extensive cycle of historic and theoreti-
cal—methodological research within the mainstream of the psychological theory of
activity; the purpose of this research was to develop this theory, refine it. and
determine its applications to the tasks of labor psychology, engineering psychology,
and ergonomics.

airing the 10th Five-Year Plan the department completed a series of studies having
the purpose of neuropsychological analysis of psychological processes occurring in
the presence of local brain injuries. and inrovement of the system of rehabilitation
of patients with such injuries. Recognition was stbjected to experimental study

in the course of this research (under the guidance of Ye. D. Khomskaya and L. 8.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'l‘svetkova). The research revealed the specifically mnemic element, the search
element, and the decision making element. me rich phenomenology obtained in this
case was analyzed from the standpoint of signal detection theory, and it was re-
lated to different brain structures with a consideration for the role of the left
and right cerebral hemispheres in memory processes. ihus the group was able to
establish that when the right hemisphere is injured, topological concepts are
disturbed primarily, whi is with left-sided injuries disturbances in coordinate and
projected concepts dominate. It was also revealed that space perception is supported
not only by structures of just the right hemisphere (as is asserted by many re-
searchers), but also by the joint work of both cerebral hemispheres, each of which
makes its own specific contribution to the support of these processes.

In the course of this research, new methods for evaluating captions and personality
features were developed and tested successfully, and it was revealed that the right
hemisphere is predominantly insusceptible to negative embtional influences, while
the left is so to positive emotional influences. It was also determined that among
patients having emotional and personality disorders, the influence of the emotional
factor upon memorization and information processing is absent (or reduced).

A new, effective technique for evaluating the coherence of different bands of the
EEG spectrum in the presence of intellectual tension was created in the course of
psychophysiological investigation of disturbances in mental fmctions accomanying
local brain injuries. This technique was used to demonstrate that when healthy
people experience intellectual tension, dramatic growth occurs in the general
interdependence of bioelectric processes. The local interdependence rises an es-
pecially great deal, in the form of an increase in the coherence of alpha and higher
frequencies of the spectrum, predominantly in the frontal lobes. It was also re-
vealed that the parameters of evoked potentials-mean amplitude, mean latent time,
the extent of interhemispheric asymmetry recorded in the anterior divisions of the
brain--reflect the emotional content of stimuli.

Concurrently the department's neuropsychologists developed and successfully tested
new verbal and nonverbal methods of group therapy for patients with local brain
injuries, and they created a standardized system of methods for objectively evalu-
ating the dynamics of development of descriptive thinking in the presence of speech
disturbances accompanying aphasiar An especially great deal of attention was de-
voted in the 10th Five-Year Plan to the psychosocial aspect of rehabilitation
training, and to formulation of objective criteria for evaluating the effectiveness
of this training.

Promising research was conducted at the department mder 3. v. Zeygarnik‘s guidance
in the area of pathopsychology. The methodological tools of qualitative and
quantitative evaluation of different parameters of goal formation were created.
They were used to reveal the specific ways different groups of mental patients
form end and intermediate goals, in conparison with normal people. Methods aimed
at revealing motivational disorders in different types of patients were developed

and tested, and the prognostic value of these methods was increased just as purpose-
fully by this creative group in the past five—year plan. 'ihese researchers created
a system for analyzing the internal picture of disease, one fundamentally new to
pathopsychology: they used it to reveal individual types of formation of the internal
picture of disease in the presence of different somatic illnesses. The proposed

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI‘HCIAI. USE ONLY

methods for interpreting the internal picture of disease permit assessment of the
effectiveness of medicinal therapy, and they may be used successfully in expert
labor certification.

his creative collective also acquired new scientific facts in pathopsychological
research on different age groups of children.

Here we to evaluate all that had been done by the department's scientists in the
10th Five-Year Plan, we would find it obvious that they made a sthstantial contri-
bution to the development of all basic areas of psychological science and practice.
this effort was described in detail in the article "Moscow miversity Psychologists
Aid Practice", published in this journal (No 4, 1979, pages 64-70). But the tasks
they face in the llth Five-Year Plan are even greater. Docuents adopted by the
26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet mion obligate scientists to
increase their participation in the work toward the goals formulated in the “Basic
Directions of the (583's Economic and Social Development in 1981-1985 and in the
Period to 1990“.

'no psychologists of lbscow State University, this means intensively and extemively
increasing their participation, in cooperation with scientists at other psycho-
logical centers, in creation of the psychological principles 'of formation of the
communist personality, in development of a scientifically substantiated and
practically effective system of personnel training, and mainly labor training, in
revealing the psychological prerequisites for optimising the individual and collective
activity of the Soviet citizen in all spheres of his labor, in substantial justifi-
cation, from the standpoint of the particular researcher's science, of the principles
of designing more or less complex manipulators for different areas of the national

economy, and in illuminating the psychological mechanisms of preserving and restoring
the individual's health and normalizing his spiritual and physical life in the
family, at home, and at rest.

without weakening their attention to the general theory of their science, scientists
of the Moscow State University's psychology department will actively participate in
efforts to solve these problems in the new five-year plan, ones so iQortant to

the development of our society.

OOPYRIGl’l': Izdatel'stvo Moskovskogo universiteta. “Vestnik Moskovskogo
universiteta', 1981

11004
(30: 1840/182

170

FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYGOWICAL STUDIES 0? mm SUI-W10! AND ACTIVITY

Hoacov Psmmnclcmsmn ISSLEDOVAIIITA mm'm mmursn I
AKTIVNOSTI in Rueeian 1980 (aigned to praea 25 Tel: 80) pp 2-6, 208

(Annotation, introduction and table of contenta (roe hook ”Paychologicel Studiaa
of Intellectual Self-Regulation and Activity". edited by V. H. Ruealov and
B. A. Goluheva. Indetel'atvo "Route”, 1.500 copiea. 208 pagae]

[Text] Thie collective eonograph containe the reaulte of- eevaral yeare of

atudiea of differential paychophyeiology related to the neurophyaiological

haeee of nentel activity and eat-regulation ea the neat co-on inherent prerequi-
aitea for overall capabilitiee (pereonal talent). The hook retlecta eignificant

chengee in the aethodical and conceptual approach to the etudy of the neuro-
phyaiological nachani- of individual peychological differencee.

Thie hook ie intended for paychologiate, phyeiologiate and educatora.
1313000me

The progreee achieved in differential peychophyeiologicel eciencea in the laat
decade proapted on to try to define one of the principal prohleaa of psychology—
the prohlee of inherent haaee of huen talent. lie were eotivated hy theee two
coneideratione: Pirat. the publication of theoretical and uperinental etndiae
dealing with the inner prerequieitea for talent—eental activity and eel!-
regulation (1!. s. Leytea et el); aecond. a eigniiicant ehift took place in the
interpretation of the nature of the haeic cheracterietica of the nervoua eyetaa
which induced ua to inventigate the ao-callad general cheracterietica of the
hunan nervoua eyetee (V. D. Nebyliteyn et al).

This book deacrihea the reaulte of eethodical differential peychophyaiological
atudiee of the neurophyeiological haeae tor eental activity and aura-regulation.

The etudiea preaented in thin book have one col-on objective: They ai- at the
inventigation of the ralationahip between the neurophysiological cheracterietica
of an individual (traditional featuree of the nervoua ayatee. integral electro-
encephalographic (EEG) paranetere, activation. induced activity. hypoactivity of
the brain, galvanic cutaneoua reaction and othere) and the foreal-dynanic cherac-
terietica of mental activity and ecu-regulation at varying levele of nental

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

functions (perceptive, peychonotor, anemic and intellectual). All the included
studies have a similar theoretical basis and thus this publication appears as a
monograph.

The book focuses primarily on comparison of the mental activity and self-regula-
tion features with integral no parameters which are, according to V. H. Buselov
and H. B. Bodunov, potential indicators for the general characteristics of the
nervous systee. A distinctive feature of the BBC characteristics is their reflec-
tion of the integration level of the nerve processes in the brain. The identifi-
cation of four separate factors in integral 836 parameters (space-time dependency
of EEG processes. based on synchronization and coherency, energy of slow rhytl-s.
activity of beta-2 and slow rhytl. frequencies) in the stmcture of the electro-
encephalographic activity of the brain is. according to the authors, an important
step toward the discovery of the nature and structure of the general features of
the human nervous system.

Concepts of nental activity and self-regulation were further developed and re-
inforced. The activity and selfdregulation of intellectual behavior of a person
was realized for the first time in a stochastic environment (on a model of proba-
bility prediction. by V. H. Rusalov and s. A. Kosban). The factorial analysis
of the formal-dynamic features of the probability prediction permitted the authors
to identify two factors in the area of selfdregulation—aenaitivity to the random
environment and plasticity of prognosticated selferegulation—end two additional
independent factors in the area of activity. via., speed of mental processes and

variability in the rate of mental processes.

The use of factorial analysis helped considerably to define more accurately the
existing concepts of the structure of activities and self-regulation in a
determined environment. for example, 1!. V. Bodunov confirmed in his study the
existence of three individual aspects of mental activity—speed, ergonomics and
variability. The studies of A. V. Pasynkova confirmed two basic factors of
psychomotor self-regulation (on a model measuring time intervale)—the factors
of accuracy and stability.

Comparison of the formal-dynamic feature of mental activity and self-regulation
with integral BEG parameters produced a series of completely new data (works

by V. K. Rusalov and S. A. Koalman; h. V. nodunov and Pasynkova). For example,
the level of space-time interrelation in the no processes affects positively the
mental activity rate. and negatively the plasticity of selfdregnlation.
Sensitivity to random environment shoved a tendency to a positive link with the
beta-2 activity.

Among the traditional traits of the nervous system. lability was found to have
the strongest link with the formal-dynamic features of human behavior, especially
the speed of mental processes. in a defined and a random environment.

The significance of the individual activation level, as a permanent feature of
the nervous system, reflected by various ferns of mental activity (solving

mnemic tasks and learning activities), is described by A. V. Pasynkova et a1.
and 8. A. Izyumova.

172

MWIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II. A. Aninov reports on the dynasice of nental states as one type of regulation
of on-going activities. The author succeeded in establishing sipificant
activity conponents by using s curve of skin resistance.

The typological prerequisites for involuntary and voluntary functions are dis-
cussed by B. A. Golubeva who conpilsd several experinental studies that indicate
that a high level of voluntary and second signal reactions and successful

acadenic perfornsnce are correlated with the slov (spontaneous and induced)
rhythns in the electroencephalogran. Central or reversible inhibition is suggested

as one of the possible nechanisss of voluntary selfdreguletion (according to
l. H. Sechenov).

I. A. Levochkina investigated the involuntary nechaniss of self-regulation and
established the general self-regulatory factor responsible for the functional
rearrangenent of the nerve processes during reactions of varying degrees of
cosplexity. A link has been established between the duration of individual
sequelae after experiaental inhibition induced by nonotonoue work. and the
individual differences produced by two types of inhibitions—voluntary suppres-
sion of notor reaction to a conditional signal and the synchronization of alpha-
rhytlms in the 326 while being blindfolded.

N. A. Leonova cornered extrssely-lov brain activities with features of the
aperinent. The arrangement of the nental and biological rhytlms is considered
to be the general regulatory nechanisn for the entire human behavior. '

The studies of ll. 3. Leites, E. A. Golubeva and b. R. Kadyrov are particularly
useful for the analysis of the obtained psychophysiological correlations. They
point out several indicators of the dynanics of nental activity. relatively

sinple in nature. but directly linked to the energy base; these indicators are
directly proportional to the activation level. At the sane tine. mmarous other
indicators of the dynanics of nental activity that are lore cospler and condi-
tional, are indirectly proportional to the activity level. An increase in the
activity dynamics in hypo-activated test subjects (as cospared to media-activated)
is due to a secondary cospensating action. In other words. both activation poles
proved beneficial for the dynanics of sental activities.

The above studies suggest that B. M. Teplov's indirect "evaluation" nethod,
used for the features of the nervous systss. shOuld be fully extended to the
manifestations of the nervous syste- during the dynanics of nental activities
and self-regulation that are considered inherent prerequisites of general htman
capabilities (talent).

The studies reported in this book contain substantial infornation for widening
our knowledge in the area of the neurophysiologicel bases of individual lumen
behavior.

TABLE 01’ com

Introduct1°nssssseessss00sseesesssesseessssssssssvssossssssssssssoossssse 3

173

MOMMLBBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. H. Rusalov, S. A. loci-an

Differential-psychophysiologicsl analysis of intallactual human
b°h8v1°r 1n 3 r.nd°- enviroultnt...............oo....o.o....cooo.........

H. V. Bodunov
Studies of the correlations batvaen the tornal-dynsnic aspects of
8Ct1V1ty aﬁd ch. 1n:.8r.1 EEG p.r..et¢:.esessseaeeeseaaoaasaeeseaaaeaeeoa

A. V. Pssynhova
Interrelations of psycho-otor self-ratulagion indices with the 336
background fe‘ture. .36 ch. tr.1t. of the nervou. .’.t.-eaaseosaaaeosaoao

V. H. Russlov, H. V. Bodunov
Factorial structure of integral electroencephalographic pars-stars of an

indiviwalotOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.00.00.00.00IO....l.OOUOOOODOOOOCOOOOOO0.00....

R. S. Leytes. B. A. Golubeva. B. R. Iadynov
Dynlﬁic a.pe¢t. of lethal .Ct1v1t1.. .nd 0: btlin activationaasasasssosse

B. A. Golubevs
‘l'ypplogical prerequisitas for acne involuntary and voluntary functions...

A. V. Pasynkova, 8. P. Gusova, S. S. Linovetskiy
Correlation of the induced potential conponents with the activation
indices end nuccessful acadeaic and nnenic pertornance...................

S. A. Izyunovs -
Characteristics of activation and processes of rearrange-eat and storage

of 1n10r-lt10n by an individual................o.....o........o.........o

N. A. Aninov
The fluctuation rate of cutaneous resistance as an indicator of the
functional state during voluntary and conpulsory work schedules. .........

I. A. Levotchkins
The after-effect of inhibiting actions as an indicator of selio

r38013t10n-aseeeeeasesoseasacseeas.sonoseaseaassaasasaeaaasssaoeseeeaeoeo

N. A. Leonova

The reflection of adjusted human conditions in tha dynanics of an
utrenely low brain potential and of cutanao-galvanic activities.........
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'ezvo "Ilsuka". 1980

9680
(380: 18(00/1002 - m -

174

l-‘OROI‘FICIALUSEONLY

57

83

96

114

125

135

168

163

172

185