APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040012-3

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040012-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8376

5 April 1919

TRANSLATIONS ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
(FOUO 3/79)

IJ. S. JCDIDIT PLIBLICJAFIICJFlS REEHEAOIC11 Siﬂl‘llCIE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: ClA-RDP02-00850R000100mm 2-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English—language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was sumsrited or extracted.

Unfamiliar names ‘endered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in per- ntheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. 'l'imes within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the [1.8. Government.

COPYING“ MUS ARI) RBGUIATIONS WERNING MERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED llEREIN REQUIRE MT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLIQTION BE RESTRICTED MOFHCIM. USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J‘PRS Io/BJ'IG
5 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

(Pooo 3/79)
Commas

SUD-SW AFRICA
INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Nineteen Countries Fighting Pollution in Gulf of Guinea
(THE LIBERIAN AGE. 6 lb! 79)...........................

USSR
Expert Appraiul and Monitoring of the enviroment
(Yu. S. ShmMchenko; SWITSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I
PMVO. Oct 78)....eocaeooeoeoeeeecocoon-aoeeooeoooeooee
wtsnm mom
NOWAY

Sun North Son Oil Spill. Cause increasing Dense
(John 5. Guy; NORSK 0U! Rm, No 1. 1979)............

PAGE

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN MAIRS

RIM!!! own-mas IlGl‘l‘lﬂG POLLUTIGI IN GULF OF GUINBA
honrovia rue LISBRIM AGE in English 6 liar 79 p 7

[Text] Geneva—About 13 million people living along the ahoree of the Gulf
of Guinea. neny of then in one of Africa's presier capital cities. and all
of then are increasingly affected by the growing pollution of the gulf. how.
19 nationa have grouped together to fight that pollution.

Nineteen countries aromd the Gulf of Guinea in Heat Africa have bmded to-
gether to nova their coaatlinea fro- large—acale pollution.

The gulf in a vent era of the Atlantic Ocean aching beaches fro- the ivory
Coast to Gabon. with two inner bays, the Bight of Benin and the Bight of
Biefre. Growth of concern at the riaing rate of pollution experienced along
its beechea has led to the 19 nationa affected-Angola, lain. Catt-non.

the Cape Verde lnlenb. the Congo. Gabon, The Ganbia, Ghana. Guinea-Bienm.
Ivory Coast. Liberia. Niger. Nigeria, Equatorial Guinea, Sao Tone and
Principe. Senegal. Sierra hone, Togo and Zaire—joining the Horld llealth
Organisation end United Netione' agencies to set up a progr-e to safe-
guard the environ-ant.

The contrast between unapoi led golden beachea on the one hand and polluted
harbours. aevege-aoiled lagoons nd deed fiuh or. the other hea aarvad to
jolt the govern-um; of the region into action. mey have as a warning the
evidence of what can happen when too auch pollution in not tackled mtil
too late-an in parts of the Mediterranean Sea.

Rapid industrialiaetion. new port: and harboura and conaequent develop-ant
of town end citiaa haa played an iaportant part in the aoiling of the Gulf
of Gulnea'a previouely untouched beachea. The inpact has not only af-
fected touriota. but has alao been felt by nillione of people who live along

die ahore line.

About 1.50 Billion people live in the 19 effected countries-elloet half of
then in Nigeria lone-and the etineted population of the shore region of
the gulf would be about 13 aillion of tha. Host of the region's capitals-

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Freetwn. Monrovia. Abidjan. bone. Lagos. Accra and Luanda along thee—ere
on the shores of the gulf and the entire coastal region's population is
growing faster than the inland areas.

Even cities not on the gulf play their part in soiling it, by polluting
river: which flow into it, such as the Congo, the Niger and the Volta.

The polluted aster spreads disease uong the shore-dwelleru. such as typhoid.
dysentery and polio. Another problen is cholera which has becene widespread .
in the region. thriving on the polluted uater it finds. Oyster beds are
often located near untreated sewage outlets. and pass on disease when eaten.
became they contain disease aicroorganians filtered into the. fro- the pol-
luted water. Contaminated shellfish heve caused outbreaks of food poison-
ing end disease in Africa and Europe in recent years because of this. no
has as a result issued a nanuel on shell-fish hygiene.

Hidden pollution such as this poses another threat. epitonised by the
Mini-ate disease. first observed in the Japanese village which has given it
its nene. ‘ihere. fishermen and their fsnilies were crippled by nrcury
poisoning caused by eating polluted fish.

As well as nercury. other dangerous ninerals can be found in polluted water:
cadmium. antinony and arsenic eaong thee. Pesticides (six Gulf of Guinea
countries nmuiactured in 1972 nore than 9,000 netric tonnes of pesticides)
and industrial waste find their way into the sea, fouling lagoons and
estuaries.

Oil is another came of pollution in the Gulf—~Angola, Gabon and Nigeria
produced aore than 130 nillion tons in 1977 ad Zaire and Congo have also
big reserves. Host is exported. but enough renains as a legacy on terred
beaches.

"hot ls planned is a coastal water quality progra-e and the countries and
agencies concerned working together on a four-stage approach: assess-out
of the degree of pollution; detenination of water quality; aatablishnent
of criteria for defining "acceptable risk“: and the develop-eat of control
strategies and appropriate legislation.

Oyster beds, for exupla. will be sited far enough away fro. sewage out-
falls to lake [words illegible] safe fro- heelth [words illegible] and the
sane will [words illegible] to bathing beeches [renainder of article il-
legible].

WRIGHT: hot evailable

(SO: 5000

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

EXPERT APPRAISAL AND MNITORIUG 0F TUE ENVIRONMENT
Moscow SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARST'O l PMVO in Russian No 10. Oct 78 pp 91-97

[Article by Yu. S. Shenshuchenlto. senior scientific worker of the Institute
of Stnte and Law of the Ukrainian SSR Acedesy of Sciences. candidate of

jurisprudence: "Coeprehensive Expert Ecological Appraisal and anitoring
of the Environ-mt")

(Textl In providing for high quality of Inn's environment in the

Soviet Union, as in other countries of the world. in recent years preference
has been given to organisational-legal institutions of a preventive nature.
This is related to a change in ewhasis in protection of the environ-ent
from the hanful result of production activity to the process of production
itself. to the stage of planning the utilization of nature and construction.
One of the institutions that has this direction is coqrehensive expert
ecological appraisal of construction plans.

Conprehensivu Expert Ecological Appraisal

in the USSR cowrehensive expert ecological appraisal is being conducted
for several large construction plans by the USSR Gosplan end the USSR
Cosstroy. It is being carried out pa:tially by a nudaer of other ninistries
and departaents and design organizations. Republic co-ittees for the
protection of nature engage extensively in this activity.

Under the Ninth Five-Year Plan agencies of the State Co-Iittee for
Protection of Nature of the Ukrainian SSR Council of Ministers, for CI-gﬂﬁ,
gave an expert ecological appraisal to l0.855 sets of tutorial on selecting
construction sites and 12.627 technical designs for construction. 0! the
designs that were considered. 1.165 were rejected or sent for reworking
because of violations of requiresents for the protection of nature. In
1976 this coalittee and its inspection teas considered 3.836 sets of nteriels
on selecting construction sites and 2.20 technical designs. 0! these.

133 sets of eaterials and 106 designs were not accepted. Thus the technical
plan for locating the production of nonferrous sulfurous dyes at the
Rubethsnsltaya Krasitel' production association was not approved because

of the fact that its iwluentation could cause a significant deterioration

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the environment in this region. Materials for the plan for
reconstructing an asphalt-concrete plant in Novoaydsrskiy Rayon in
Voroshilovgradskaya Oblsst were returned for reworking because of the lack
of developments for protecting the atmospheric air; the design for the
reconstruction of the Rozhishche cheese plant in Volynskaya Oblast was

not approved since an increase in the capacities of purification equipment
was not envisioned along with the increase in the enterprise's capacities.
Neasures taken by the committee made it possible in 1976 to retain about
3,000 hectares of agricultural land and 600 hectares of forest in the
first group.1

The expert appraisals conducted by the State Committee for the protection
of nature of the Ukrainian SSR Council of Ministers have a number of
advantages over comprehensive expert ecological appraisal conducted by
special couissions that have been created in each specific case by the
republic gosstroy. The latter is a one-time expert appraisal that

embraces a relatively small part of larger construction objects. Many other
objects also need expert appraisal and to provide this is possible only
when it is handled by a permanently functioning state staff. Therefore the
introduction of comprehensive expert ecological evaluation on a union level.
in our opinion. should involve a system of agencies that was created in
March 1968. the State Committee for Nydrometeorology and Control over the
Natural Environment of the USSR.

A most important requirement for expert ecological appraisal is objectivity.
Observance of this requirement could hardly by insured by such a department
as the USSR Goaatroy (the gosstroys of the union republics). since its
primary task is to fulfill plans for capital construction. The activity

of institutions and organizations under the jurisdiction of the USSR
Gosstroy which carry out capital construction itself requires objective
ecological evaluation. To place the responsibility for an expert ecological
appraisal on the State Committee for Nydrometeorology and Control of the
Natural Environment of the USSR which is superdepsrtmental. in our opinion.
could lead to disinterested correction of mistakes allowed in the process
of planning and construction by institutions and organizations of the USSR
Cosstroy and other construction ainiatries. It seems expedient to utilize
more extensively for expert evaluation the most important national economic

plans of the Interdepartmental Scientific and Technical Council for
Comprehensive Problems of Protection of the Natural Environment and Rational

Utilization of Natural Resources under the State Committee of the USSR
Council of Ministers for Science and Technology and also the corresponding
republic councils.

Along with improvement of the mechanism of superdepartmental expert
ecological appraisal, the expert appraisal conducted by individual ministries
and departments also needs organizational improvement. As distinct from
auperdepsrtmental expert appraisal which is conducted. as a rule. in terms
of already completed developments of scientific and technical documentation.
departmental expert ecological appraisal of plans for construction is

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carried out cosprehensively--alnng with the developsent of the basic technical
documentation. In the process of such export appraisal it is easier to
change the technical and economic substantiation of the plan or the

plan itself. fros the point of view of the interests of the protection of
nature and to provide for their coordination with all other tasks. Taking
into account the great significance of departnental expert ecological
appraisal. one should reinforce existing divisions of ninistries and
departnents for expert appraisal with specialists of a nature protection
profile and also increase the role of scientific and technical councils
under ainiatrias and departsents in solving the corresponding problems.
which would correspond to the tasks arising fron the decree of the CPS“
Central Com-ittee and the USSR Council of Ministers. "0n Isproving
Planning rut-m work.“ of 20 Hay 1969.2

Interesting experience in producing cospreheneive expert ecological
appraisals of plans for construction has been accusulated in other countries
with which the Soviet Uniou cooperates in the protection of nature.

In the United States. for ass-pie. the nain for- of expert ecological

appraisal is notification of the affects of the planned industrial and
other facilities on the environment.

Since 1970 when this institution was introduced federal depart-onto annually
publish an average of about 3.000 such notifications. The essence of the
notifications consists in the obligation of those who undertaken appraisals
and state agencies publicly and privately to announce possible effects of
the planned construction on the environ-ant. The notifications are

drawn up on the basis of ecological appraisals of plans that are carried
out in keeping with internal rules adopted by sore than ‘0 federal depart-
nents. In the standard publication of the announce-eat which, as a rule.
takes up from 10 to 60 pages (the notification concerning the questionable
design of a petroleum pipeline through Alaska. however. took six voluaes).
according to a law of 1969 concerning the national policy in the area of
protection of the environment. should elucidate the following issues:

the effect of the plan on the environ-eat; irreversible results of
inplesentstion of the plan; alternatives to the proposed seasurea: the
interconnection between short- and long-tern consequences for the
environ-eat and any irreversible cosnitsents with respect to resources.3

The procedure for publicly asking the envirbnnental impact state-ant. which
is regulated by special instructions, envisions the publication of a draft
of the announcenent in the press and reference to it for consideration

by central and local departments and also the corresponding federal
agencies which have work experience in the area or protection of the
environ-ant. Interested agencies and public organizations and also
citizens can make remarks orally or in written fore and sake proposals for
inproving the plan for construction free the point of view of the interests
of the protection of nature. A failure to respond is tantamount to having
no objections.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After such a preliminary environmental impact statement the corresponding
department draws up a final variant of the announcement. taking into
account the remarks and suggestions that have been made. Thie variant
along with the remarks is sent to the Agency for Protection of the
Environment (for less important projects the corresponding state and
county agencies have the right to consider them) no lean than 30 days
before the beginning of construction. The agency studies the notification
and. if necessary. provides an additional expert appraisal of the plan
with the help of specialists. after which it considers the plan acceptable.
acceptable with certain changes or unacceptable. When the plan is
considered unacceptable the agency taken measures to convince the

author of the plan that its implementation is inexpedient. If the agency
does not succeed in doing this it sends the environmental impact
statements of federal agencies to the Council on the Quality of the
Environment or brings a legal suit to stop the construction. The

Council for the Quality of the Environment. like the agency, is not
authorized to veto plans that are in oppositZ-n to the interests of the
protection of nature. It also uses the uthod of persuasion or reco-ends
to the president that the iaplementation of the plan he stopped. however
the council rarely resorts to this measure. As a result. the majority

of cases of this category are resolved by the court. In approximately

15 out of 100 cases the latter decide to halt the implementation of

plane for construction which can exert a negative influence on the condition
of the environment.“

To produce an all-around expert ecological evaluation of plans for
construction presupposes that the institutions that do the expert
evaluations have the necessary information base concerning the condition
and tendencies to change of the surrounding environment in the region of
construction. In the Soviet Union intonation about protection of the
environment and the utilization of natural resources at the present time
is gathered by numerous ministries and departments. public organizations.
VUZ's and scientific research institutions. But they are frequently of a
fragmentary nature. are not developed and are not distributed under a
centralized policy. which complicates their utilization by agencies that
are making expert ecological evaluations and other agencies and organizations.
Consequently it becomes obviously necessary to organize a unified system
of observations. collection. processing and dissemination of information
concerning the condition of the environment, that is, the introduction of
a system that is presently called monitoring.

Monitoring of the Environment

Monitoring the environment on a global level was first discussedst the end
of the 1960's and already by l97l a special connission of the Scientific
Couittee for Problems of the Environment of the International Council of
Scientific Unions formulated the concept of monitoring which was adopted
at the Stockholm conference on problem of the environment in 1272.
Somewhat later it became a constituent part of the UN program for
environmental protection (W). In 1976 in Nirobi there was an

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intergovernmental conference on monitoring which made the first ettemt

to establish its primary task and in 1975-1917 organisational questions of
the development of a global system for monitoring the environment were
discussed at regular meetings of the council of managers of the M.
which considered monitoring "as a process of regular observation of
individual parameters of the environment. their changes and interpretations
for specific ende."5

in spite of the fact that the idea of global monitoring has already
received a certain amount of practical implementation. there are many
difficulties and unsolved problems related to its further functioning

and development. The same can be said about national monitoring systems.
In our country monitoring the environment means primrily a system of
observations that makes it possible to establish changes in the condition
of the biosphere under the influence of man's activity.6 The observations.
consequently. should embrace the changes that are taking place under the
influence of any factors. including the natural forces of nature. but with
the establishment of anthropogenic changes that are subject to regulation

on the part of state and the society. Sometimes the concept of monitoring
hes a broader content. in the opinion of l. P. Gerasimov. monitoring is
not only e system of observations. but also a systes of supervision and
control of the condition of the environment that is exercised on various
scales. 1. P. Gerasimov proceeds from the idea that "observation."
"supervision" and "control" with respect to the environment should be
purposive. interconnected and effective (full-value) and that they do not
have any strict and individual content. ﬁle content of “observation."

the author writes. should necessary include "supervision" in some for- since
observation of something that is done without any relation to control
indicators of the observed phenomenon has no object. The same thing can
be said of "supervision" of any phenomena without any "control" conclusions
would only be "a thing in itself.”

Undoubtedly observation. supervision and control are concepts that are
closely interconnected. Moreover. the concept of "control" integrates the
concept of "observation" and "supervision." me arbitrary nature of
observation and supervision. however. does not mean that they have any
independent significance or specific tasks. The essence of observation
consists in the collection. processing. storage. analysis and transmission
of information. This is the first function of control which involves a

to not and prompt influence of the state on social processes." (”aeration
is a source of information not only for making decisions. but also for
exercising control. ‘lhe latter. as a method of providing for legality

and state discipline. a method of administrative activity. relies on
observation and is sometimes interwoven with it. but cannot be reduced to
that. The function of supervision is more multifaceted and also consists
in an evaluation of actions.9 It must establish whether or not the actual
state of affairs established during the process of observation of the object
corresponds to the earmarked goals and evaluate the supervised activity and
take measures to eliminate shortcomings that are revealed.10 The specific

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

significance of observation and supervision makes it possible to speak
about the expressed peculiarity of these elements of control that appear
as its independent stages or functions. I. P. Geraaimov. by expanding

the weaning of monitoring. actually reduces it to control. But he himself
recognizes that at the present time there is no possibility of implementing
the suggestions he makes concerning monitoring "in some kind of cowlete
form. that is. in an entire change of observation-supervision-~control."n
Therefore. by suggesting an expanded definition of monitoring. 'te

actually goes beyond the frasework of the concept of it as a systea of
observations of the condition of the environment.

The importance of monitoring lies not only in the gathering of information
about the condition of individual elements of the environment. but in the
analysis and evaluation of them. since only correctly evaluated information
can be a scientific criterion for controlling the quality of the environ-
ment. An evaluation of the condition of the environment. including
comparison. correlation and integration of the results of observation.

is one of the must iaportant general goals of monitoring. the culmination
of the process of analysis of information obtained through it. But in the
present stage it is not yet possible to produce an all-inclusive evaluation
of the quality of the environment. Therefore the practice proceeds along
the path of determining the primary goals of monitoring. 1he intergovernmental
conference on monitoring in 1914. for exaqle. formulated seven program
goals for goal monitoring which were subsequently approved by the
administrative council of the UNEP. namely: a) an expanded warning system
concerning threats to the health of man; b) an evaluation of global
pollution of the atmosphere and its consequences on the climate: c) an
evaluation of the scale and distribution of pollutants in biological
systems. particularly those related to nutrition; d) an evaluation of
critical problem originated by the practice of industrial activity and
land utilization; e) an evaluation of the reactions of terrestrial
ecosystems on the ecological structure; f) an evaluation of the condition
of pollution of the oceans and its consequences on marine ecosysteu'

g) an improved system of warning of international natural disasters.12

The purposes and tasks of monitoring in the USSR are conditioned by the
needs of state agencies (including agencies that produce expert ecological
appraisals of plans for construction) for certain kinds of information
that is appropriately evaluated. This is information about the condition
of the environment and its elements during the present period of time;
about sharp changes in the level of pollution of the air and water basins;
about sources of such pollution: and about tendencies in changes in the

biosphere.

The practical usefulness of monitoring will depend on how close its
future organizational structure is to the optisal. It is now being
created on the basis of the statewide service for observation and control
of the level of pollution of objects in the environment. which has been
organized within the framework of the State Committee for Hydrometeorolcgy

FOR OFFICII‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Control of the Environment of the USSR in keeping with the decree of
the CPSU Central Connittee and the USSR Council of Ministers. "0n

Stepping Up Environmental Protection and Improving Utilization of Natural
Resources." of 29 December 1972.13

At the present time the hydroeeteorologicsl service conducts observations
of the level of pollution of the soil. water and air with industrial
wastes. of changes in the environment caused by the use of toxic chemicals.
and of the level of radioactive pollution of the locality. These functions
are performed by the following subdivisions of the service: a) in the
USSR-by the adainistration for study and control of pollution of the
environment (organization of the service. the USSR Hydrometeorological
Center (operational information). scientific research institutes and
laboratories of the hydrometeorological service (development of methods

of observations and preparation of reference materials): b) in the union
republics--by republic and territorial administrations of the hydrometeoro-
logical service. rayon radio meteorological centers. the Central Asian.
Hestern Siberian and Far Eastern regional scientific research hydrometeorological
services and operational and observation agencies under their jurisdiction
(weather bureaus. hydrometeorological bureaus. hydrometeorologicsl obser-
vatories. stations and posts). Thus the service for observation and
control over the level of pollution of objects in the environment now
consist of several levels. The first level consists of the territorial
agencies and observatories. laboratories and observation points under
their jurisdiction. The middle level consists of scientific research
institutes which. in addition to scientific research. provide scientific
and methodological guidance of the work for determining the levels of
environmental pollution. And the highest level consists of the State
Committee for Hydrometeorology and Control of the Environment of the

USSR, which coordinates the work of the statewide service for observations
and planning of its activity.

As of the beginning of 1976 there were 122 hydroeateorologicsl observatories.
3.410 stations and 8.000 observation posts in operation within the system

of the Uydrometeorological Service of the USSR. Under the current five-
yesr plsn it is intended to develop further the network of stations

for observing pollution of the air. water and soil. For example. it has
been proposed to organize the measurement of air pollution in 160 cities.
Thus 300 cities of the country with an overall population of more than

100 million people will be included in the measurements.

in addition to the Hydrometeorologicsl Service. individual functions of
ecological monitoring are performed by a number of other services. They
include. in particular. the sanitary-epidermiologicsl. hydrological.
seismological. ionospheric and geological services. the service for
radiation security. the veterinary and land use survey services. the
plant protection service, and so forth. But they operate individually and
only an insignificant part of :heir information regarding the protection of
nature enters into the overall flow of information received by the statewide
service for observation and control over the level of pollution of objects
in the environment.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR IWPICIM. USE ONLY

The depart-ental approach to the organization of observations of the condition
of the environment which predominates in this stage leads to a duplication
of the nctivity of the corresponding services and to an unjustifiable
dispersion of forces and funds. Observations of the quality of surface
waters. for example. are now being carried out simultaneously by posts

of the hydrometeorological service. invpection teams of the USSR Ministry
of land Reclamation and Hater Management. sanitary-epidimeological
stations of the USSR Ministry of Public Health. and posts of the USSR
Hinistry of the Fish Industry and the USSR Ministry of Power and
Electrification. In terms of many indicators the water analyses conducted
by these agencies coincide.

Further development of monitoring of the environment. in our opinion,
will involve a convergence of environmental protection information into
a unified flow. To accomplish this it is not necessary for all other
observation services to be under the jurisdiction of the USSR State
Oouittee for Hydroeeteorology and Control of the anironment. It is
apparently necessary to speak of the development of functions of monitoring
in the activity of each of the aforementioned services on the basis of a
single strategy. Hence there arises a need to determine the locations of
the services in the statewide system of Innitoring. to regulate their
interrelations efficiently and to coordinate their activity closely. in
our opinion. these issues can be resolved legal ly through adopting a
unified Statute on Monitoring the Environment in the USSR.

h'hen determining the basis of ecological monitoring in the statute it would
be expedient to begin with the idea that monitoring should be an input
source of objective intonation that is as complete as possible concerning
the condition of the environment for agencies of various levels belonging
to various branches. The system of monitoring. consequently. should be
oriented. in the first place. toward determining the quality of the
environnent and the prospects for changes in it on the global. unionwide.
regional and local levels and. in the second place. toward observing the
level and nature of the utilization of natural resources. This orientation
is useful from the point of view of combining the principles of territorial
and branch control of the environment in the USSR and also the codination
of the interests or our country with the interests of other countries in
investigating and maintaining the ecological balance in the biosphere.

it is essentially imrtant to reflect in the statute the regular and
daily nature of the observations. including the entire territory of the
country and all elements of the environment. which will make it possible
to note proeptly forthcoming negative changes in the environment where man

lives.”
Along with the introduction of an ecological monitoring service. it is

necessary to resolve the issue of creating a s'ngle unionwide information
center concerning environmental protection. having properly determined its

legal status.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In it should be concentrated not only information about the quality of the
environment and the condition of the utilization of natural resources which
are obtained from the monitoring service and state statistical agencies.
but also information obtained from scientific institutions (about

scientific and technical solutions to problem of the environment).

from environmental protection agencies and public organisations (about
advanced work practice). from procurators‘ agencies. courts. the Ministry
of internal Affairs. courts of arbitration (about the condition of the fight
against violations of environmental protection legislation) and so forth.
The duties of the center should include the compilation oi informational
abstracts concerning environmental protection. consultations and responses
to questions. distribution of selected information. publication of reference
materials and collections of information. dissemination of experience

in environnental protection work. notification of the public concerning

the condition and protection of the environment through mass media.
and so forth.

IIIIprovement of the institution of comprehensive expert ecological appraisal
and the introduction of monitoring of the environment are s part of

the larger issue of improving the uchanism for insuring rational
utilization of nature.

mmzs
I. See MBOOIAYA GAZETA. 5 June 1977.

2. See SP SSSR. 1909. No 15. p 83.

3. See the appendix to the book by J. Sloan. "Environment and the Law."
New York. 1971. pp 88-89.

ls. See "Preparation of environments! impact statements: guidelines—-
Environmental Quality." Hashington. 1976. pp 506-560; ”BBC Symposium
on questions of the environment." Nev York. 1971. pp 239-261.

5. "UN Program 0n the Environment" (MP Document (cc) 90. is Hatch 1977.
p 12).

6. Sec Yu. A. ltrael'. "A Global Observation System. Prognosis and

Evaluation of Oranges in the Condition of the Natural Environment.
Fundamentals of Honitoring" (HEIFDROWIYA I GIDROInCIYA. 197‘. No 7.

P ’t).
7. See I. P. Gerasimov. "Scientific fundamentals of Hodern Honitoring

of the Environment" (IZVZSTIYA AWE"! RnJK SSSR. SliRlY/i GBOGMPIGIBSKAYA.
1975. No 3. P lb).

11

FOR "FFICIIJ. iSE UNLY
9.

10.

11.
12.

13.
16.
15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

See “Mulnlotndvnoye puvo" [Mdnlotuttvo low]. «I. by A. Ya.
Lunev, Hoocov. 1970. p 6.

"Sovoukoyo outnutnuvnoyo provo" [Soviot odntniotnttvo In].
«I. by Yu. M. balov. Hoocov. 1973. p 17.

Sec 14. s. swam". ”mood-ntnnnyy kontrol' v oforo uprulontyo“
(Stu. control in the when of Maturation). mom. 1976. p 7.

I. P. Carat-av. op. cit" p 14.

See ”In! Prouu on the hadron-one" (UNI? noon-at. (00) 90. 1S "Arch
1977. p ‘1).

Soc SP 8881!. 1973. No 2. “£1.21. 6.
Soc "mom!" I GIDWIYA. 1976, No 7. p 7. 10.

Soc 0. S. tolbuov. "analouya: ”lulu-wan" (Dooley: volley-
1w). Hoocov. 1976. p 220.

comma: Izutel'otvo ”Noun". ”Sontokoyo mmutvo 1 pm”. 1978

11772

60:

$000

12

m 0"“:th USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY
’

NOR‘MY

SHALL moms SEA OIL SPILLS CABS! INCREASING DANCE
Oslo RORSK 01.!!! W in Norwegian in Norwegian No l. 1979 pp lJ-lo

[Knit-1c by Professor John 5. Grey: "Herine Life: Snell Dsily Oil Spills
More Dangerous then horse Onesl'j

Professor John 5. Grey is e nerine biologist who works et Oslo University.
Presently he is on s Norwegien expedition in Antsretice.

[T057 The Aeoco-Cediz eccident focused the news eodie's ettention on the
denser of oil to nerine life. how greet is this denser really? The insten-
teneous effect scene cetestrophic. end the sight of seebirds covered by oil

inevitehly produces strong feelings. This erticle cleies. however. thet
such e picture is not representetive in the long run.

In reelity continuous sesll diecherges of oil ere for core hernful then
lerge spills. The Torrey-Cenyon cetestrophy resulted in over 60.000 deed
seebirds. and current figures indicste thet the Anoco-Cedir eccident will

enceed thet. But if we use e globel scele criterion such cetestrophic spills
heVe o reletively ninor effect on Isrine life.

in the North See elone 150.000 seehirds die every yeer heceuse of sull
oil spills. These sesll. end seeningly insignificent discherges constitute
the nrestest potentiel danger for chronic negetiwe effects on urine life.
glohelly speeking.

aofish-Oil lieletively lisrnlene. but not Always

it is ieportent thet we not overresct in regerd to the densers of oil-pollution.
The neturel hreelulown process results in e repid "detoxificetion" of the oil
in ereee where weves. winds end currents prevail. One eueple of this wee
the Drove-blowout. The urine-biological investiutions cerried out efter
this eecident in the Bluefish-field reveeled very little effect. Actuelly. e
lritieh study showed thet the eeount of zooplenkton wss greeter in the eree
of the eccident. Thus the only neesurehle effect wee e stieuluei "hen the
Brews-blowout heppened the Denes did not hswe eny reseerch vessel reedy to he
sent out. Then deys efter the blowout they got hold of e ship end took off
with e full crew of scientists. This ship crisscrossed the Eltofiel: eree for
10 deye without finding eny trece of oil. So it eppeers clcer thet st leest

anoint-oil is reletively her-less I(gr urine life.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In that regard thie confine that oil ie a natural product which nature
itaelf handlee and breaka down. Fortunately thie happene rapidly with North
Sea oil and it becoeee nontoxic in a ehort tine. Crude oil. which containe
:reater aeounte of aroeetic-and aaphalt cowonente. takee auch longer to
reek down.

The fact that North See oil ie eore hareleae than. for exaaple. oil free the
Hiddle Beet doee not nean that it doee not cauee extenaiwe dange.

If the Bravo-blowout had happened a few weeke later. the reeult could have
been very different. The Bkofiek-area ie a center for epawning neckerel
and nobody knowe--or ia willing to predict-what would have happened if the
blowout had occurred during the apawning aeaeon of the eeckerel. In the
woret caee. fiahing eight have been eharply reduced for a nuber of yeare
in the future.

Cleaning Coupounde hey Poae Greater Danger then Oil

Oil epille in theeeelwee lay not he the greateat danger to narine life.
Chenicale ueed after the Torrey-Canyon accident in 1967 caueed exteneiwe
and longlaating damage to fauna and flora on the Iritiah coaatline. In
locatione where thie could be aecertained it wae clear that the oil itaelf
had been leee toxic to urine life than the chenical coqaounde which were
ueed. In placee where the oil cane aahore flora and fauna returned to nor-
eel after two yeara. But today. then yeara after the accident. there are "
neny rocky areae etill covered by light-green algae which were not there '
before the accident. Theee are the areae where cheeicale were ueed to
dieaolwe the oil. Theee chenicele killed the liqeta (patella wulgata)
which nor-ally "graze" on theee algae and thereby keep the rocks clean.

it ehould be added that exteneiwe reaearch wae carried out after the Torrey-
Canyon accident. Thia in turn led to the developeent of cleaning cowomde
which are juat ae effective. but only 1/1000 ae toxic an the earlier onea.

Greateet Danger in Cal- Vatere

here an ieportant point ehould be nade. if we look at the recoloniration
of an area auhjected to cataetrophic oil epille we eee that in placee where
waver. tidee and currente prevail. a rapid return to the statue-qua ie
attained. In any areae of Brittany it in already difficult to find any
effecte free the A-oco-Oadir accident. whereae effecta in cal-er watere eey
retain for a long tine. And in eandy areae the oil lay retain buried for
yeare. In placea like there it takea a wen [in boldface] long tile.
eeybe decadee. to return to the original etate.

In Heat Fol-outh. USA about 7.000 litere of fuel oil nr. 2 waehed aahore in
Septenber 1969. Heat fallouth in t!.: city where the Hood'a hole Oceanographic
lnatitute haa ite headquartere. Thie eeall oil apill. relatively apeaking,
waa etudied wery throughly over a long period of tine by both che-ieta. nicro-
hiologiete and eoologieta. It wee denouatrated that in areae with atrong

16

YO! onxcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

waves and currents, the flora and fauna rapidly returned to noraal, hut in
an area with low tide there were great aberrations fron nor-a1 even ten years
later. Since no oil nninln. anywhere in the world. have been followed up
over a longer period of tine. we really do not know how long the affect of
oil spills will reasin visible. especially in sensitive areas.

Dranatic Natural Variations as Hell

The amount of herring along the Norwegian coast varies periodically. when
there is a large aaount of skagerrak herring the aaount of Rogaland-.Stadt-
and Lofoten herring is greatly reduced. And when the nuaber of the three

last aentioned herring species is greater than noraal. there is a reduction
in the Skagcrrak herring.

Studies in regard to the number of fish have been going on in the English
Channel for quite some tine. During the 20's there was heavy fishing for
herring and the number of herring declined dramatically in the years 1928-30.
around 1933 there was extensive fishing for pilchard (brisling) instead of
herring. But in 1965 this changed again. and there was nore herring and

less brialing. Off the California coast the nu-ber of sardines and anchovies
have varied over asny centuries. This has been established froa fish-scales
preserved in sedinant. The age of the aediaent was daternined through carbon-
dating lb. and in this asnnar the periodic fluctuations have been reconstructed.

This can lead to practical probleas. it could happen. for instance. that

the aaount of one kind of fish would begin to decline in an area at the sane
tine as a new production-platforn was put into operation. in all likelihood
the oil coapany would then be blaaed despite the fact that the fish population
deaonstrates decsdcvlong periodic cycles.

There is no definite explantion for these fluctuations. But the ssount

of plankton in the North Sea has changed draaatically between 1950 and 196].
and it is clear that this will inpact on the fish population. Changes in

the wind conditions in the North Sea area probably cause changes in the anount
of plankton and in turn also affect the saount of herring. The iaportant
point is that fluctuations in clinatic factors cause drsaatic changes in

the quantity of aarine organiaaa. and that these variations take place over
decades.

Marine biologists are just beginning to discover the coaplexity of such
variations. And it is against this background of continuous fluctuations

in stock that one aust atteapt to seasure the long range effect of oil
pollution.

Norwegian Pioneer Project

If the generalization is aade that oil daasgc not presents a aerioua
problen. it can only be aadc in connection with definite. local conditions.
One cannot use data froa the Mexican Cult as an srguaent for what night happen
in Norway. This is the reason that we in Norway should invest large aaounts
of aoney for studies of the possible effect of oil on nnrine life.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Environmental Protection Dopertaent has its POI! Expansion unknow37
prograa dealing with pollution of sea water. The objective of this progras
is to study pollution in general and not the affect of oil in particular.
But oil is of course a central these and the develop-ant of ecologically
relevant technology is the seas for all types of polluting substances.

in order to neaaure the effect of sany, but essll. oil spills one has to
know the correct background conditions. Therefore studies of the content

of hydrocarbons (which cone fron petroleun) of sarine organism are underway.
These organises today live in clean areas which could becoae polluted in the
future. The variations of decades will be registered. as will the variations
between species.

But what would happen if there were to be a large oil spill in Norwegian
coastal waters? Although ouch research is in process as to the effect of
oil spills. nest of the data have been collected after the discharge. And
there are very few quantitative data available. The Norwegian plan site for
developing quantitative data for areas which night be exposed.

The plan is not to study what happens in areas chosen at randos but to wait
until the oil spill is a fact. One can then observe the course taken by the
polluting oil. and only when there is reasonable certainty as to what stretch
of the coast will be affected will the plan go into effect. Experienced
ecologists will i-ediately aove out and aka a rapid investigation along

a stretch of several nilea. Altogether there are seven groups of scientists
who stand ready at all tines to carry out such an assign-ant. They cover

the entire Norwegian coast. fro- Svinesund to the Grense Jakob River. by
means of photography and test sanes for later analysis. they will sake a
quantitative survey of the asount of iaportant opeciea in the area. After
the oil spill has produced its effect. this can then be seasured quantitatively
over a larger area.

Even if these data cannot be said to he collected along the classical scientific
lines. they will reflect a very good quantitative picture of the effect of

oil spills. Until now such experisents have not been undertaken in any other
place in the world. They are. however. of decisive inportance for collecting
those data which will provide us with the possibility for assessing the effects
of oil spills along the Norwegian coast in a precise and rational unner.

The only question reuining when one things of the cowlexity of the urine
cnvironnent is: Can sufficient data be collected while there is still tine?

COPYRIGHT: lngeniorforiaget A/S. Oslo 1979

9369
£50: 5000 m

16

FOR OFPICIIJ. USS ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040012-3

; [NI 0/
“CHE
DATE Fl”

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040012-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040012-8

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-ROP82-00060R0001000‘0012-3