FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10568
7 June 1982

Worldwide Report

ENVIRONMENTAL QUAUTY
(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing ‘and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ”RS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itens are as

given by source .

‘ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

OOPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNLNG MERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? 11-115 PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLDHIDE REPORT
Euvxaomenm. QUALITY
(POUO 4/82)

Commas

LATIN AMERICA

Ill-71100

(hichonal Volcano Eruption Affecting ‘Ihree States .
(ANSA, m m 82) 00.0.00...0.000000000IOOOOIOOO0.0...

VEST EUROPE

FEDERAL REPUBLIC 0? 0mm

Measures Against Acid Rain Damage to Forests
(Hana-Josef Joest; CAPITAL, Am 82) 000000000oo00 0 0 0.0
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500070014-4
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070014-4
STATINTEL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC 01' GERMANY

MEASURE AGAINST ACID RAIN DAMAGE TO FORESTS
Hadmrg CAPITAL in German Apr 82 pp 281-282
[Article by Hans-Josef Joest: "Asrsted",]

[Text] Saving the German forests. Sulfuroue precipitation threatens the

German forests. Experts react helplessly and perplexed. But a tinker-er from
the Hunarueck discovered a technique to keep the trees from dying.

The German pine forest is beginning to falter. Sulfuric acid rain from fac-
tory snokestacks, exhaust pipes and house chimneys is thinning its evergreen
top. poisoning its life-giving roots. Manet gases from coal and oil furnaces
are attacking pines, firs and beechtrees—in the northern Ruhr district, the
Rhine-Main region, the southern Black Forest and the Bavarian Forest. For

a long time the acid rain has been eating at the sandstone facades of his-
torical buildings, causing coats of oil paint to fade or is corroding the
unslloyed steel of autobahn bridges.

The econonic loss by such clouds of sulfur smoke is set by the OED at

three to five percent of the gross social product of a country. For the PRC
that meant an annual loss of DMO to DM70 billion. ".3 Federal environmental
office in Berlin considers 60,000 to 70,000 hectares of German forest to be
damaged by acid. Losses of 20 percent in felled trees cause losses amounting
in the millions today.

In addition to forest owners and strollers, forestry experts also join in

the song of ace, "0 Tannenbaum." For so far they have been able to code: the
environmental damage in the forest soil only with a radical method. They
must fell the trees and then try to neutralize the acid rain by applying line.
The effect is limited because the line does not reach the places where it is
neat needed: the root system in the subsoil.

Therefore, the soil scientists are forcefully demanding vigorous cures. In
the long run the acid rain can, of course, dissolve heavy metals in the soil
and release aluminum-deadly poisons for the woods. For that reason, Karl-
Friedrich Hentzel, chief director of forests of the Hesse Land office for
environment senses unrest over all the treetops: "A time has!) is ticking
'here in our forests." For Dr Wilhelm Knsbe of the North Rhine-Hestfalian

Land office for ecology the character of the forest is no longer in order:

2

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"For all practical purposes there are no longer any completely unpolluted
areas in our country." Forest director Bruno Sponsel of the Bavarian Forest:
"In my entire career I have never felt so helpless toward nature as I do now."

In this threatening situation assistance is promised by a tinkerer from the
Hunsrueck. Eugene Zinck, business manager of Zinck Motor Technology Ltd in
Bad Kreuznach, has developed a portable compressed air probe. Comparable to

an air ha-er, it can bring the saving lime to the sick roots. up to 1.50 m
deep in the acidified soil.

Engineer Zinck, who came into contact with the soil as a student of Professor
Gerhardt Preuachen at the Ham-Planck Institute for Per-work and Agricultural
Engineering ("the soil is my great passion“), has so far designed 30 different -
field and garden devices. Thus, he invented a complete harvesting machine for

tea for the shah of Iran and made weeding easier for amateur gardeners with a
hand-held motorized hoe (Black and Decker has the license).

The idea for his compressed air probe case to the 60~year old businessman

4 years ago upon growing nubers of cmlaints by farmers about heavy tractors
that were increasingly compacting their fields and choking yields. Therefore.
Zinck pondered over a plow which could break up the topsoil without being
heavy itself and by doing without a heavy tractor. The desired plow force was
literally in the air: in a traditional compressor from the Swedish pneumatic
specialists Atlas Copco AB.

Laboriously Zinck figured out a new kind of air hauler which rams itself into
the soil without any external pressure. By pressing a button approximately
500 liters of compressed air can then be blasted into the subsoil in a frac-
tion of a second in order to break up the impermeable structure. BASP styrene
pearlettes, moreover, carried along by the comresaed air. kept the cracks in
the earth open for a long time. For effective use in the sulfuric forest,
where right off the dense stand of trees hinders any kind of soil treatment
with mechanical plows, now, instead of plastic pearls, the saving lime had
then to be pressed into the subsoil.

This Zinck probe signifies for geoscientist Dr Manfred Krister of the Univer-
sity of Heinz a "very great help." As director of a research project in the
Soonwald with excess acidity he wants to show scientifically for the first
time that with the help of this new kind of technique the forest soil can be
effectively cured: "The probe has perhaps arrived in the nick of time." At
the same time in the Alpirsbach Forest in the southern Black Forest efforts
are underway to blast lime into the threatened root zones using Zinck'e
pneumatic pump. Zinck recalls: "When we made the first beginning, there was
sheer enthusiasm." Observers clearly feel an air blast at 504: depth from
the shaking of the earth's surface in e S-m range.

While for the present the forest experts are carefully checking whether in
the probe they have the long sought weapon against concentrated sulfur air

pollution, the German Society for Large 'I'ree Transplanting Ltd, Hofheim,
Hesse, appeared convinced of the success from the outset. This unbrells

organization of German nurseries innediately ordered 20 probes although
Zinck's assembly lines have not yet started. They baptized the invention the

"Terralift" which has great publicity appeal.

FOIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soil scientist Krister shares the optimism of the merchants. He considers
the'probe to be a simply "ingenious idea" as an aid against acid rain in

German forests.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr A6 5 Co.

12126
CSO: 5000/2102 gun

h
FOR!0FFKJA1.US£1DNLY