FOR OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10047
13 October1981

USSR Report

SPACE

(FOUO 4/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
SPACE

(P000 4/ 81)

CONTENTS
MANNED MISSION HIGHLIGHTS

Monograph by Nikolayev on Cosmonaut Training and Spaceflight . . . .

Monograph on Manned Flights in 'Intercosnos' Program . . . . . . . .

Twentieth Anniversary of Gagarin'a Flight: A Collection of Articles
SPACE SCIENCES

Franco-Soviet Arcad-3 Magnetosphere Experiments. . . . . . . . . . .

thremality, Stability and Resonance in Astrodynanics and
comomuticsoo000000000000...loo-cocoon

Spacekesearchinthellkraine....................

ManandSpaceAstronavigation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
INTERMETARY SCIENCES

Monograph on Development of Interplanetary Stations. . . . . . . . .

Geodynanics and Astrometry: Principles, Methods, Results. . . . . .
LIFE SCIERCES

Monograph on Possibility of Extra-Terrestrial Life . . . . . . . . .

Rats' Reactions to Behavioral Tasks Differing in Difficulty After
Flight Aboard Tomas-782' Bioaatellite. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ll

15
18
25

30
33

36

(00

- a - [III - ussa - 211. Star r000]

F0" (ll-11"“ ' "SF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPACE ENGINEERING

Adaptive Algorithms for Controlling Descent of Space Vehicle With
High Aerodynamic Quality Into Earth's Atmosphere . . . . . . . . . . 67

Tests of Space Electric Rocket Propulsion Syst-s. . . . . . . . . . . 53
Liquid'Fueled Rocket Engines o o o o o o o o o o a o o o s o o o a s o 67
Control of Space veh1CIese s o o o o o o o o o

sdeOfLunarSOi-lcooocooooococonoooooooocos 7"

SPACE APPLICATIONS
Satellite OceanOgraphy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
'Soyuz-ZZ'StudiesEarth... ....... o .. .. . ...
Aerospace Methods of Studying Soils. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Using Aerospace Intonation To Investigate Land Haters . . . . . . . . 96
Device for Dynamic Analysis of Hultizonal Images . . . . . . . . . . . 99
SPACE POLICY 6: WISIRAIION

'AIR & COSMOS' on Possible Soviet Lunar Program for 1980's . . . . . . lOl

'AIR & cosms' on Possibility of Soviet Hats-Venus Flights . . . . . . 107

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICLlLIﬁSBtMNLY

EARNED MISSION HIGHLIGHTS

HONOGEAPH BY NIKOLAYEV 0N COSHDNAUT TRAINING AND SPACEPLIGET

Moscow KOSMOS--DOROGA 382 KONTSA in Russian 1919 (signed to press 20 Jul 79)
pp 2-5, 240

(annotation, foreword for second edition and table of contents from book"Space-w
a Road without End",byAndriyan Grigor'yevich Nikolayev, maj gen avn, pilot-
cosmonaut of the USSR, twice awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union,
("Lyudi i kosmos" [People and Space] series, Book 3), 2d edition, enlarged,
Izdatel'stvo "Holodaya gvardiys", 100,000 copies, 260 pages, illustrated]

[Text] This pilot-cosmonaut of the USSR, Major General in Aviation, who was
awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet union twice, tells in his book about the
training of cosmonauts for long-term flights in space, about his flights aboard
Vostok and Soyuz spacecraft, about the work of the crews of spacecraft and
stations in orbit. In the final chapter, the author has a conversation with the
reader about a new occupation, that of cos-onaut. The first edition of this book
was awarded first prize in the competition imeni N. Ostrovskiy.

Foreword for Second Edition

Time is passing uncontrollably and intensively. It would appear that it was not
so long ago that we were admiring the flight of the world's first artificial
earth satellite, and now the third decade of the space age has begun.... A new
generation of people has grown up. The boys and girls who were born the year

of the launching of the first satellite have graduated from school and have
started on the broad, work-filled path of life.... Our manned cosmonautics has
also traveled over an enormous road in these years: From the world's first
space voyage of Yuriy Gagarin, which lasted 108 minutes, to the many months of
work in orbit of Vladimir Lyakhov and Valeriy Ryumin. From the first Vostok
spacecraft to orbital laboratory-stations, outfitted with thousands of unique
instruments, complicated units, scientific research equipment, that could be
envied by ground-based scientific institutions. From the first visual observa—
tions of earth's surface to in-depth scientific research and experiments that
are conducted in orbit in the areas of astronomy and meteorology, geodesy and
cartography, geology and hydrology, medicine and, finally, industrial technology.

In the 18 years of manned cosmonauticssnre thanl90 people have been in space:
45 Soviet cosmonauts, 63 American astronauts, l cosmonaut each from CSSR,

Poland, GDR and the People's Republic of Bulgaria. The total time spent by
people in space is more than 5 years.

1

FOI.0I1ﬂ(]Al.lEﬂE(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Each space flight is unique and inimitable. When telling about any flight, one
can boldly use the term, "for the first time." Each flight adds something new
to the development of cosmonauts, and makes it possible to take one more step.

Yuriy Alekseyevich Cagarin performed the first space flight in the history of man-
kind. He proved that man could live and work in space. German Titov was the
first to make a 1-day flight in earth's orbit. Pavel Popovich and I were the
first to make a group flight in two spacecraft. Valentina Vladimirovna Tereshkova
was the first woman to fly in space. Valeriy Bykovskiy was the first to fly for

5 days. The crew of Voskhod, consisting of Vladimir Komarov, Konstantin Feoktistov
and Boris Yegorov, were the first to test a multipassenger spacecraft, and for the
first time, a scientist-cosmonaut and physician-cosmonaut flew in space together
with the pilot-cosmonaut. Aleksey Leonov was the first man to exit from a
spacecraft in orbit and engage in extravehicular activity. Neil Armstrong and
Edwin Aldrin were the first American astronauts to step on the surface of earth's

natural satellite, the moon. For the first time, an international experiment
was conducted on the ASTP program, etc., etc.

Today, as we tell about the new space flights, we use, again and again, these
words, "for the first time." When the Salyut-6 was put in orbit with two docking
units, the orbital station was serviced simultaneously by two crews for the

first time. For the first time, vital products, new instruments, spare parts and
fuel were delivered to the station by a space "truck." For the first time, inter-
national crews consisting of pilot-cosmonauts of the USSR and socialist countries
(CSSR, Poland, GDR, People's Republic of Bulgaria) departed to work in space....
And we could continue on with this list of what has been done for the first time.

However, many elements of space flights are also typical, repeated from flight to
flight. All cosmonauts undergo rather lengthy training for flights. waiting

for a scheduled lift-off is exciting for everyone. The cosmonauts experience

abut the same sensations at the moment of lift-off and insertion of a spacecraft
into orbit. We all have to work in space under the same conditions of long-

term exposure to weightlessness, the small cabin or station, without direct

.ontact with the rest of the people. Each of us cosmonauts, who have worked for

a long time in orbit, must undergo a rather lengthy and difficult readaptation pro-
cess, i.e., readjustment to conditions on the ground, to earth's gravity.

It is about these elements in common, inherent to any space flight, that I should
like to talk in my book.

Its first edition was published 5 years ago. A received an enormous number of
thank-you letters from young (and not only young) readers.

At the request of the "Holodaya gvardiya" publishing house, I have prepared a new
edition. There have been so many events, pertaining to the exploration and
exploitation of space in 5 years, that I have had to enlarge the book with new
data and reinterpret the experience gained through the flights.

Much of what I wrote about hypothetically 5 years ago has now become reality.
And it will always be so. Cosmonautics will never stop in its aspirations for
new deeds. For expressly this reason, I called my book "Space-~a Road Without
End."

FOR‘OFFK]AI.USE(NVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060024-5

FiﬂltﬂﬂHCJAl.USEIJNLY

Contents

J-

Foreword for Second Edition
Part 1. Before Lift-Off
Part 2. In Orbit

Part 3. Back on Native Land
The Cosmonaut Profession and Its Distinctions
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Holodaya gvatdiya", 1979

10,657
cso: 1866/999

liliCHﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060024-5
l-‘on own-"Ian use ONLY

UDC: 629.78
MONOGRAPR 0N EARNED FLIGHTS IN 'INTEROOSHOS' PROGRAM

Moscow KOSMICHESKOYE SODRUZHESTVO in Russian 1980 (signed to press 28 Mar 80)
pp 4, 181

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Collaboration in Space" by V. A.
Alekseyev, L. A. Gorshkov, A. A. Yeremenko and A. V. Thachev, Izdatel'stvo
"Hashinostroyeniye", 30,000 copies, 181 pages, illustrated]

[Text] This book deals with one of the most important directions of collaboration
of socialist nations in the study and use of space for peaceful purposes on

the Intercosmos program of manned flights by international crews. The reader will
find here information about the equipment developed in the Soviet Union and

used during the flights of the space crews on the Intercosmos program.

Thebookchronicles the flights of space crews consisting of Soviet cosmonauts and
cosmonauts from CSSR, the Polish People's Republic, GDR and People's Republic of
Bulgaria; it tells about the scientific technological experimental studies con-
ducted on joint programs. The significance and prospects of international
collaboration in the field of manned space flights are demonstrated.

This book is intended for a wide circle of readers.

Contents Page
Foreword (A. S. Yeliseyev) 5
1. Earth--0rbital Salyut—6-Soyuz--Progress Complex 7
The Salyut-G—Soyuz—Progress orbital complex 10
Salyut-6 orbital station 10

System of material and technical supply and servicing for
the Salyut-é station 16
Manned Soyuz spacecraft 17
Automatic Progress spacecraft 20
Carrier rocket for Soyuz and Progress spacecraft 20
Ground-based equipment for preparing and supporting space flights 21
The Baykonur spaceport 21
Command and measuring complex 25
Mission control center 26
Search and rescue complex 28
Center imeni Yu. A. Gagarin for cosmonaut training 29

4

FOR OFF1CLALIASE(NVLY
FOR_0FF1CLAL.USE!0NLY

2. First International Crew in Orbit
2 March. Lift—off of first international crew
3 March. Docking accomplished!
'Chlorella' experiment
a March. Routine work-research and experiments
'Morava' experiment
'Interrogation' experiment
5 March. Press conference in orbit
'Oxygen' experiment
6 March. Observation of stars and earth
'thinction' experiment
7 March. In the interests of science and the national economy
'Beat transfer-2' experiment
8 March. Day of active rest
9 March. Preparations for the return trip
10 March. Voyage completed
3. Second International Crew in Orbit
27 June. Second international crew in orbit
28 June. Salyut-6-Soyuz-29-Soyuz-30 complex in flight
29 June. First investigations
'Oxygen' experiment
30 June. Medical experiments
'Cardiac leader' experiment
'Interrogation' experiment
1 July. Another day of medicine
'Heat transfer—2' experiment
'Custation' experiment
2-3 Jul. Close up of earth
4 July. Crew gets ready for the finish line
5 July. Second international crew on earth
4. Third International Crew in Orbit
26 August. The third international crew lifts off
27 August. International crew on the station
28 August. 'Start' of scientific program
'Berolina' experiment
'Tissue culture' experiment
'Linkage of microorganisms' experiment
'Growth of microorganisms' experiment
'Bacteriai metabolism‘ experiment
'Reporter' experiment
29 August. Experiments continue
'Time' and 'Interrogation' experiments
30-31 Aug. Earth in the lens
'Audio' experiment
'Gustation' experiment
'Photographing earth,’ 'Polarization,’ 'Biosphere' and
'Aurora borealis' experiments
'Polarization'
'Biosphere'
'Aurora borealis'
1-2 Sep. Completion of scientific program
'Speech,’ 'Leisure time [recreation],' 'Cardiec 1eader,‘ 'Ozygen'

3 Sep. Return from orbit
End of second main mission 5

IN)! OFIWCJAl.lEﬂE(H¢LY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060024-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Fourth International Crew in Orbit
10 April. Fourth international crew in space

_ ll April. Encounter with the unexpected
12 April. Night landing
24 April. Coauonauts in Zvezdnyy

End of second main mission
Graphics

Epilogue

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hsshinoatroyeniye", 1980

10,657
cso: 1866/999

. FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400060024-5
FOR OFI-TCIAL USE ONLY

TUENTIETH ANNIVERSARY 0F GAGARIN'S FLIGHT: A COLLECTION 0? ARTICLES

Moscow 20 LET POLETU GAGARINA: SBORNIK STATEY in Russian 1981 (signed to press
23 Mar 81) PP 2-7, 64

[Annotation, compiler's the and table of contents from book " Twentieth Anniversary
of Cagarin's Flight: A Collection of Articles", compiled by Vladimir Iosifovich
Prishchepa ("News in Life, Science and Technology." "Cosmonauticsand Astronomy"
series, No 4), Izdatel'stvo "Znaniye", 28,640 copies, 64 pages]

{Text} This collection is dedicated to the 20th anniversary of an outstanding

event in the history of mankind, the first flight into space made by Yu. A.

Gagarin. The articles it contains tell about the role of S. P. Karolev in pre-
parations and performance of the first flight into space, the history of estab-
lishment of the Cosmonaut Training Center, inception and development of space
medicine, a discipline whose history is inseparably linked with manned space flights.

This pamphlet is intended for lecturers, propagandists and a broad circle of readers.
Compiler's Note

On 12 April 1961, history's first manned flight into space was initiated in the
Soviet Union. The spacecraft, Vostok, with pilot-cosmonaut Yu. A. Gagarin on
board, entered into a near-earth orbit.

The spacecraft, which weighed «725 kg, was launched from the Baykonur spaceport

at 0907 hours Moscow time; it attained an orbit at an altitude of 181 kn in perigee
and 327 km in apogee, with an inclination of 64'57'. Throughout the period of
injection of the spacecraft, the cosmonaut was in radio telephone communication
with the ground-based mission control center. He distinctly confirmed the times
when G forces changed, separation of carrier rocket stages and, after ejection of
the nose cone, he reported his first observations of earth from space.

After insertion into orbit, a state of weightlessness appeared, and the cosmonaut
soon adjusted to it. The entire flight program, wrich included monitoring the
instruments and equipment of the spacecraft, observation of earth and the stars,

as well as intake of food and water, was accomplished by Yu. A. Gagarin. He re-
ported the reaults of his work to earth, entered them in the log and recorded them
on tape. At 1015 hours, when Vostok was approaching Africa, the cosmonaut reported
that all systems were operating well and the automatic systems of the spacecraft
issued the command to prepare for landing. Ten minutes later, the rocket brakes were

7

FOR OFFICIAI.USEZ(H§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

applied, the spacecraft moved into the descent trajectory, and the descent module
with the cosmonaut separated from it. Yu. A. Gagarin landed on USSR soil at
1055 hours.

The first manned space flight lasted 108 min, and these minutes shook the world. The
address to the Soviet people, to the people and governments of all nations, made

by the Central Committee of the CPSU, presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet and

Soviet government stated that the flight of Yu. A. Gagarin is an unprecedented
victory of mankind, the greatest scientific technological achievement and represen-
tation of the powerful force of socialism. The feat of the first cosmonaut became
the feat of our entire people, the outstanding result of selfless years of work

by large teams of scientists, designers, testers, engineers. technicians and blue-
collar workers.

Let us recall the main events directly preceding that notable day in April. In
the middle of 1946, the party and government made the historical decision of
developing a powerful rocket-building industry in our country, for which large
funds, material and manpower were allocated. Within a short period of time,
existing scientific research institutes, designer bureaus, plants and testing
sites were expanded and new ones produced; the institutes of the USSR Academy of
Sciences and other scientific centers were involved in solving the problems.
Through the joint efforts of all these organizations, a guided ballistic rocket

with a range of several hundred kilometers was developed in the USSR In the late
1940's.

High-altitude geophysical rockets outfitted with scientific equipment were developed
on its basis. A program of research on the upper layers of the atmosphere started
to be implemented with their use starting in 1949. Soon after this, in 1951, the
first rocket with living things-two experimental dogs--was launched.

In 1955, it was decided to build a new testing site in the Kazakhstan steppes,
the future Baykcnur, for launching high-power rockets. On 21 August 1957, there
was a successful launching of a ballistic rocket with a range of several thousand
Kilometers. 0n 4 October of the same year, the world's first artificial earth
satellite, which inaugurated the space era of the history of mankind, was
launched, in the form of a modified variant of that two-stage rocket, which was
named Sputnik.

This launch confirmed the validity of solutions to such problems of space flight
as creating a sturdy and light construction of the carrier rocket, high-power
energy-efficient liquid-propellant rocket engines, developing compact precision
systems for controlling the flight, etc. The USSR Academy of Sciences mentioned
the special role of S. P. Korolev--chief designer of space rocket systems, V. P.
Glushko--chief designer of rocket engines, and N. A. Pilyugin-chief designer of
carrier rocket control systems, in solving the above problc :. The first gold
medals imeni K. E. Tsiolkovskiy, "For Outstanding Uork in the Field of Inter-
planetary Travel," were bestowed upon them.

After the first, "simplest satellite," an experimental dog was delivered into
near-earth orbit on the second satellite, in 1957. In this experiment, some
valuable data were obtained on the effects of long-term weightlessness and other
space flight factors on a living organism. At the start of 1960, there were

FOR OFF1C1AI.(EHE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

already several artificial earth satellites and automatic stations in space. Everyone
waited for man to go there.

The launching into space of man, rather than an automatic vehicle, required solving
several cardinal problems. It was necessary to assure the cosmonaut's safety in
case of malfunction of carrier rocket systems, to protect him against the environ-
ment and assure normal vital functions in orbital flight, reliable operation of
equipment in space and, finally, a safe descent of the spacecraft in a specified
region to return to earth. In the course of solving all these problems, five
satellite spacecraft were launched into space, in four of which there were dogs
and other experimental beings.

These satellites were launched with a modified Sputnik carrier rocket with an
additional, third stage (subsequently, this three-stage variant of the carrier
rocket was named Vostok). The liquid-propellant rocket engine in this stage was
developed in the experimental design office of S. A. Kosberg. The retrofire
rocket [engine] designed in the experimental design office of A. H. Isayev was
used to return the spacecrafts from near-earth orbit to the descent trajectory.

In 1959, before launching the sallites, work began on the screening and training
of the first crews for manned spacecraft. The pilot, Yu. A. Gagarin, who had
graduated from a military flying school in 1957, was among the many thousands

of cosomonaut candidates. It was his fate to be the first man to rise into space.

This pamphlet, which is dedicated to the 20th anniversary of the flight of

Yu. A. Gagarin, consists of articles by four Soviet specialists who were directly
involved in preparations for this flight. The collection begins with the article
of B. V. Raushenbakh, a prominent scientist in the field of cosmonautics, who
specializes in control of carrier rockets and space vehicles. Demonstrating the
outstanding creative contribution of S. P. Korolev to the solution of the problem
of manned space flights, this author also shed light on the main technical prob-
lems that had to be solved by Soviet scientists and engineers, the developers of
space rocket technology.

The second article was written by Ye. A. Karpov, one of the first organizers and
first head of the Cosmonaut Training Center. This article, which is written in
the form of a lively story, gives us an idea about the "routine" difficulties
that were encountered in creating this center, in screening and training the first
cosmonauts, and how these people came to be.

The collection ends with the extensive article by N. N. Gurovskiy and A. D. Yegorov,
who witnessed the inception and were among the first representatives of space
medicine. This article tells us about the development of this new branch of
science, which was born to ordinary terrestrial medicine and absorbed the advances
of the most diverse branches of natural science and engineering.

At the end of the pamphlet, there is a list of all of the manned space flights
made in the USSR. Starting with Yu. A. Gagarin, 49 Soviet cosmonauts have been
in space, and with them 7 cosmonauts from socialist nations. There have also
been 43 cosmonauts from the United States in space.* N. Armstrong, the first
earthling to step on the moon, in giving credit for the feat of Yu. A. Gagarin,

 

*These data apply up to 1 January 1981.
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wrotc the following words in the "Book of Memory" at the museum in the village

of Zvuzdnyy: "He called all of us into space!" Th1s is a profoundly symbolic
statement.

Very recently, our country made a new conquest in the exploration of space. The
Soviet cosmonauts, L. I. Popov and V. V. Ryumin were on a flight that lasted 185
days. They worked for almost all of this time aboard the Salyut-6 orbital station,
which has been in earth's orbit for more than 3 years. This station was guided into

space by the high-power three-stage Proton carrier rocket, which was developed
under the guidance of V. N. Chelomey.

A large volume of information was gained on natural resources of earth and the
environment in the course of the longest manned space flight. Considerable time
was spent on experiments on space materials technology, as well as astrophysical,
technical and biomedical experiments. The advances in exploration of space are a
Substantial contribution to development of science and national economy of our
country, and they became a worthy gift for the 26th CPSU Congress.

The "Main Directions of Economic and Social Development of the USSR in 1981-1985 and
for the period up to 1990," approved by the 26th CPSU Congress, provide for con-
tinued investigation and development of space in the interests of science, techno-
logy and the national economy. Of course, manned space flights hold an important
place in implementing this program. This is evidenced by the launching of

Soviet cosmonauts right after conclusion of the 26th CPSU Congress, on the eve

of the 20th anniversary of the flight of Yu. A. Gagarin.

On 12 March, at 2200 hours Moscow time, Soyuz T-é was launched into space, with
cosmonauts V. V. Kovalenok and V. P. Savinykh on board. After docking with the
Salyut-6 station, the cosmonauts started on the work watch of the 11th Five-Year
Plan. And on 22 March, the eighth international crew was guided into orbit
around earth, aboard Soyuz-39, in accordance with the Intercosmos program, con-
sisting of V. A. Dzhanibekov (USSR) and Zhugderdemidiyn Curragcha (Mongolian
People's Republic).

Contents Page
Compiler's Note _ 3
S. P. Korolcv and Manned Space Flights (3. V. Raushenbakh) 8
0n the History of Training the First Cosmonauts (Ye. A. Karpov) 22
Some Problems of Space Medicine (N. N. Gurovskiy, A. D. Yegorov) 37

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Znaniye", 1981

10,657
CSO: 1866/999

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPACE SCIENCES

FRANCO-SOVIET ARCAD-3 MAGNETOSPHERB EXPERIMENTS
Paris AIR & cosms in French No 869, 18 Jul 81 pp 53-54

[Article by Pierre Langereux]

[Text] The Soviet Mead-3 satellite, which is to be launched on or after 20 August,
by the USSR, is. up to now. the most ambitious production of Franco-Soviet coopera-
tion. This satellite, constructed and operated jointly by CNBS [National Center
for Space Studies] and lNTBRCOSIDS, is intended for the Franco-Soviet ARCAD [Arctic
Auroral Density] program for studying the physical phenomena of the polar magneto-
sphere at high latitude (60') and especially the relationships between the atmos-
phere and the magnetosphere.

The Arcnd-3 program, officially decided on in October 1974 at Kiev (USSR), was es-
tablished in Marseilles (France).. It is a continuation of the French Arcad-l and

2 experiments onboard Soviet Aureole-l and 2 satellites, launched on 27 December
1971 and 26 December 1973, respectively. by the USSR. Arcad-3 was to be launched
originally in mid-1979, within the framework of the International Magnetosphere
Study (M). which took place from 1976 to 1979 with the launching of several sa-
tellites (6308-1 and 2, 1822-1. 2 and 3). rocket probes (Subtorm. IpocaIQ-B, Porcu-
pine programs) and stratospheric balloons (Samba-2 program).

Mead-3 is the first satellite actually produced jointly by the USSR and France,
which devoted 26 million francs to the operation.

It is a satellite in the "Soviet universal automatic stations" (A008) series
developed in two versions depending on the missions: the AIDS-T oriented toward
the earth and the AUOS-S oriented toward the sun.

The AIDS-T satellite in the Arcad-3 program is a satellite stabilized on the three
axes by gravity gradient and magnetic anchoring, with two inertia wheels in addi-
tion. It weighs close to 1 ton, including 150 kilograms of scientific payload,
consisting for the most part (around 100 kilograms) of French equipment. This
equipment includes the scientific experiments, as well as important service equip-
ment: an infrared horizon sensor (SODBRN) for altitude control, s (211215 onboard
computer (Crouzet) for controlling the satellite and a l36-megahertz telemetering
system (EBB) for direct transmission of data from the French experiments to France.
It is the first time that a Soviet satellite carries that kind of French equipment.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Arcad-3 is to conduct about 10 scientific experiments determined by three French
laboratories--the Center for Study of Radiation in Space (CESR) in Toulouse, the
Environment Physical Research Center (CRPB) in Orleans and the External Geophysics
Laboratory (LC!) in Saint-Maur--in addition to two Soviet laboratories: the Spgce Re-

search Institute (IKI) in Moscow and the Magnetism and Atmosphere Institute
(IZMIRAN) in Moscow.

Certain experiments are devoted to a study of charged particles (Spectro of CBSR.
FON. Kukuchka and Pietschanka of the IKI) and in particular of electrons (Isoprobe
of the CRPE), ions and thermal plasma (Dyction of LGE). Others concern a study
of the magnetic and electrical fields of very low frequencies (TBF of CRPE. LG!
and IZMIRAN) and fluctuations of the magnetic field (TRAC of LGB and IKI), as well
as a photometric analysis of the aurora borealis (ALTAIR of the IKI).

This is the first time that the payload of a Soviet satellite has been assembled
jointly and the integration of the complete satellite has been conducted jointly
by French and Soviet specialists. in France and in the USSR.

The Soviet satellite underwent space environment and electromagnetic compatibility
tests in 1979 and 1980 in the facilities of SOPEMEA in the Toulouse space center.
The acceptance tests of the satellite were conducted primarily at Toulouse and Mos-
COV- Finally. the whole payload underwent detailed tests, in May 1981, in the IKI
before being incorporated in the satellite by the Kapustin-Yar space-launching site
near Volgograd by French and Soviet specialists. Next, Arcad-3 was sent to the

top secret north launching field. located near Plesetsk, at about 200 kilometers
from Arkhangelsk, where the launching will take place, because Arena-3 is to be
placed in a 400-2,000-kilometer circular solar orbit, inclined 82.5° with a period
of 109 minutes. Then, the French teams will return to Moscow where they will re-

ceive magnetic tape recordings of the latest tests conducted at Plesetks where the
French are not admitted.

The satellite's life is nominally 6 months, including 1 month for acceptance and

5 months for operation, which will be conducted jointly by France and the USSR for
the first time. The remote-control programs will be prepared both in France on

a Cyber 170-750 computer (CDC) and in the USSR on a French Solar 1606 computer
(CIMSA) and on a Soviet computer. Telemetry signal reception will also be handled
jointly by a network of eight stations distributed around the world. On this oc-
casion, the CNES is using the Toulouse (France) and the Kourou (French Guiana) sta-
tions, in addition to two stations in the French Southern and Antarctic Lands
(TAAF) in Adelie Land (Antarctica) and on the Kerguelen Islands (Indian Ocean),

and a station of the Norwegian Scientific and Industrial Research Council (NTNF)

at Tromsoe. The USSR is furnishing three stations, respectively at Moscow
(IZMIRAN), Apatity (Kola Peninsula) and Norilsk and the foot of the Pontorana Moun-
tains (central Siberia). An agreement was also concluded between ONES and
INTERCOSMOS, in March 1979. to handle jointly operational processing of the scien-
tific data at Toulouse (CNES) and at Moscow (IR! and IZMIRAN).

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060024-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"At-cad 3'

in the (
TMINSE

 

French t

mte mu )
satelllt

 

13

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-OOBSOR000400060024-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3”".

 

"trend 3" satellite

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 629.78.523.001.5
EXTREHALITY, STABILITY AND RESONANCE IN ASTRODYNAHICS AND COSMONAUTICS

Moscow EKSTREMAL'NOST‘, USTOYCHIVOST'. REZONARSNOST' V ASTRODINAHIKE I KOSHONAVTIKE
in Russian 1980 (signed to press 28 Apr 80) pp 2, 307-309

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Extremality. Stability and Resonance
in Astrodynamics and Cosmonautics" , by Al' bert Hikha lovich Chechal' nitskiy, Izda-
tel' stvo "Hashinostroyeniye" , 696 copies, 312 pages]y

ﬁns] ANNOTATION

This monograph contains a sequential explication of problems of optimization, sta-
bility and resonance in astrodynamics and cosmonautics. Special attention is given
to extreme variational methods of analysis. There is a discussion of the possibil-
ity of investigating problems concerning the Solar System's structure within the
framework of the wave concept of astrodynamics: megaquantum wave astrodynamics (us-
ing wave equations that are analogs of Schrodinger's equation). This book is in-
tended for specialists in the fields of astrodynamics, cosmonautics and heliogeo-
physics.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

Foreword ........... . . . . . . ...... . . . a . . . . . . . . . 3
From the Author ........ . . . . . . . .......... . . . . . . . 6
Symbols . . . ....... . ....... . . . . . . . ........... 21
Part I. Extremality . . . .'. . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Chapter 1. Hamiltonian Systems and Aatrodynamics. . . . . . . . ...... . . 26
1.1. Dynamic Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ......... . . . . . . 24
1.2. Canonical Hamiltonian Systems. . . ........ . . . . . . . . . . . 30
1.3. Nonlinear Canonical Hamiltonian Systems ..... . . . . . . ...... 35
1.6. Conjugated Systems ..... . . . . . . . . . . ............ 60
1.5 Perturbation Theory. . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . 42
Chapter 2. thremality, Variational Principles and Optimization Problems. . . . 65
2.1. Extremal and Variational Principles and Physical Reality . . . . . . . . 65
2.2. Controllable Dynamic Systems . . . . . . . . ......... . . . . . 49
2.3. Regular Optimization Problems. . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
2.4. Degenerated Optimization Problems. . . ................ . 55

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An Optimum Degenerated Problem with Many Special Controls. . . .

. Necessary Conditions for Optimality, Based on Variation II . . . . . .
. Reduced (Occulting) Controllable Dynamic Systems . . . . . . . . .

.The Problem of Synthesis . ..... . . . . . .....

.0. Analytical Dynamics and Extremal Principles. The Hamilton Principle.
1. Other Principles of Classical Analytical Dynamics -- as Optimization

Problem .......

Chapter 3. Some Applied Extremal .Problem in Cosmonautics and Astrodynamics .

3.1.
.2.

3

wuw
unbw

Part 11. Stability. . . . ..... .

Goddard‘sProblem ........... ...............

Movement in a Planetary Atmosphere at a Constant Angle to the Horizon
(with Optimum Tangential Thrust). . ..... . . . . . .

. The General Problem of Optimal Spatial Interorbital Transfers. . . . .
. Optimal Spacecraft Movements Relative to the Center of Mass. . . . . . .
. Dynamics Extremums in the Solar System and Sun-Earth Connections . . .

alsoaoaaaoaoao

Chapter lo. Stability as a Problem in Extremality ..... . . . . . . .

l.

bbb§
VIS‘UN:

l.

I.

.6.

. Lyapunov Stability ......... . . ....... . . . . . . .
. Lagrange Stability ............. . . . . ......
. . Extremal Theorems of Stability in classical Analytical Dynamics. . . .
. Extremal Theorems of Stability -- Generalizations of the Langrange-

. Stability of a Satellite' s Motion Relative to the Center of Mass . .
. Dynamics of a Rotating Solid -- a Satellite (Analytical Aspects).

. Stability of the Rotation of a Dynamically Symetrical Satellite . . .
. Dynamics and Stability of a Satellite's Motion, Allowing for Gravita-

Extremal Energy Criteria for Stability in Classical Mechanics. . . . .

Dirichlet Theorem. . . . ......

ofMotion ...... . ......

. Dynamics and Stability of the Orbital Motion of a Satellite in a Cravi-

tationalI-‘ield... .......

tional Perturbations ....... . . . . . ..... . . .

. The Problem of the Solar System's Stability .........

PartIII.Resonance.... ...... ..
Chapter 6. Some Nonclassical Aspects of Classical Celestial Mechanics, Astro-

uuuuuugmoao
a‘vIwar-‘rvéwNH

dynamics and Cosmonautics (Observations, Facts, Anomalies, Paradox-
es). . ...... . . . ..... . ..... . . . .

. The Science of the Motion of Heavenly Bodies —- Successes and Problems
.‘I'heSolarSystem....... .....
. Resonance Phenomena in the Solar System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. Resonance ~- Analysis of the Concept and Existing Ideas. . . . . . .

er 7. Megaquantum Have Astrodynamics . . . . . . . . . ...... . . .
Nonclassical Aspects of Astrodynamics. . . . . . . . . .....

. "Actio in Distans" or Nearby Action in Astrodynamics2. . . . . .
.HaveDynamicSystems............. .......
. Dynamics and Geometry of Motion ..... . . . ...... . . . . .

.FundamentalEquations ......
. Fundamental Wave Equations ..... . . . . ..... . . . . . . . .

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. An Optimum Degenerated Problem with One Special Control. . . . . . . . .

Page
57
61

66
69
70

73
77
77

79
82

92

. 105

. 128
. 128
. 128

..129

. 131
. 131

. 136
Stability and Extremality of lntegrsla in Nonlinear Hamiltonian Systems.

Chapter 5. Some Applied and Fundamental Problems in the Dynamics and Stability

139

. 161

. 1&2

..149
..162

. 166

. 170

173

186

187

. 187

191

. 197

207
218
218
219

. 221
. 226

228

. 233
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
7. 7. The Problem of Eigenvalues . . . . . . ..... . . . . ..... 280
7. 8. Have Dynamic Systems and Quantization. . . . . . . . . . ...... . . 2&2
7. 9. Astrodynamics and Have Dynamic: Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 248
Chapter 8. And Some More Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 253
8.1. Hegaquantum Astrodynamics and the Problem of the Solar System' s Struc-
ture . . . .............. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 253
8.2. The Law of Planetary Distances in the Light of Hegaquantum Astrodynamics 256
8.3. Other Objects in the Solar System and Hegaquantum Astrodynamics. . . . . 268
8.4. Hegaquantum Effects in the Solar System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278
8.5. Resonance Rotation of Heavenly Bodies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283
8.6. Hegaquantum Astrodynamics and the Motion of Artificial Satellites
(Spacecraft, Orbital Stations). . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . 288
8.7. Megaquantum Astrodynamics and Possible Preferable Hotions of Artificial
Satellites . . . . ........ . ....... . ....... . . . 295
Conclusion .......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296
Bibliography ............ . ..... . . ........ . . . . . . 299

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye", 1980

11746
C508 1866/95

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 629.78

SPACE RESEARCH IN THE UKRAINE

Kiev KOSHICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA NA UKRAINE in Russian No 12, 1978 (signed to press
18 Oct 78) pp 2, 95-98

lzhnotation and abstracts from collection SPACE RESEARCH IN THE UKRAINEt
Committee on Space Research, Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences, Izdatel stvo

"Naukova dumka", 700 copies. 98 page§7
[1}ng mom-non

This collection contains works encompassing many aspects of space research: the
investigation of space near the Earth; the development of the equipment needed for
the study of physical phenomena in space; the study of the properties of the mater-
ials used in space technology and so on. There are also articles devoted to biolo-
gical experiments, with special emphasis on plants and micro-organisms grown during
actual space flights.

It is intended for scientific, engineering and technical workers, as well as stu-
dents in senior courses at higher educational institutions in the appropriate areas.

ABSTRACTS
UDC 629.784:576.851.47:576.8.095.l9
RESULTS OF THE 'HICRO-ORGANISM GROWTH' EXPERIMENT ON THE 'SOYUZ-ZZ' SPACECRAFT

libstract of article by Kordyum, V.A., Polivoda, L.V., Han'ko, v.c.. Babskiy, V.G.,
Kon'shin, N.1., Gavrish, r.c.. Polishchuk, L.P., and Hashinskiy, A.L.._7

[Tex57 The authors present the results of an experiment with the bacteria Proteus
vulgaris, which was grown under anaerobic conditions in a ROST-3 unit on board the
"Soyuz-22“ spacecraft. They show that the conditions of spaceflight proved to have
a noticeable inhibiting effect on these bacteria that was expressed as a reduction
in cell size in comparison with a laboratory control and a deterioration in the
characteristics of postflight biological tests. These tests included an investiga-
tion of hemotaxis to the characteristic products of the metabolism in the flat cap-
illaries, growth in linear units of the ROST type. and swarming in solid nutritive
mediums with different agar contents. Figures 10; references 13.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI(MHWCJAI.USEINNLY

UDC 629.620:187.576.851.47

I
ULTRASTRUCTURE OF CELLS 0F PROTEUS VULGARIS CROWN DURING AN ORBITAL FLIGHT ON BOARD
THE 'SOYUZ-22' SPACECRAFT

[Absﬁract of article by Bogachova, 0.P., Kon'shin, 3.1., Kordyum, Ye.L., and Popova,
A.F.

[Text] The authors present the results of an electron microscope analysis of the
cells of Proteus vulgaris culture grown in a 808T unit, in a medium supplemented
with 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazole bromide, under anaerobic conditions on board the
"Soyuz-22" spacecraft and under laboratory conditions. They point out the common
regularities of the growth of the culture in the experimental and control variants,
as well as certain differences in the ultrastructure of the organization of the
cells in the experimental variant. This experiment differs from the "Micro-
Organism Growth" experiment conducted on the "Soyga-l9" because of the number of

cells with deposits of readily soluble formasan [translation unknowg7. Figures 5;
references 2.

UDC S82.288.43.035.2

SURVIVAL RATE OF SEVERAL TYPES OF DARK-COLORED FUNGI UNDER THE EFFECT OF ARTIFICIAL
SOLAR RADIATION

[Abstract of article by Zhdanova, N.N., Lyulichev, A.N., Vasilevskaya, A.I., and
Antonenko, A.L;/

LTexg/ The authors establish the high resistance of several melanin-containing,
filament-type fungi to high-intensity artificial solar radiation; the more melanin
there was in their cell mentranes, the higher their resistance. The nature of the
survival of these fungi in all the variants of the experiment is described by com-
pleXIaslticomponent curves with an extensive resistance plateau. The phenomenon
that was discovered is explained by special features of the melanin pigment's
light-shielding function. Figures 3; references 18.

UDC 629.784:576.8.093.3:576.8Sl.47:54.l.lh8:578.088.2

EFFECT OF SPACEELICHT FACTORS ON THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NUTRITIVE MEDIUM FOR
THE BACTERIA PROTEUS VULCARIS

lzbstract of article by Babskiy, V.G., Han'ko, V.G., Polivoda, L.V., S"yedin, A.A.,
and Kordyum. V.A=7

£Tex§7 A "Nutritive Medium" experiment was conducted for a period of 3 months on
board the “Soyuz-20" spacecraft for the purpose of investigating the effect of
spaceflight factors on the characteristics of the nutritive medium that was used

repeatedly to cultivate Proteus vulgaris bacteria in units of the ROST type on
board different spacecraft. Transportation and other mechanical effects result in

a noticeable change in the physicochemical properties of the weak agar gel that is
the nutritive medium (viscosity and sedimentation characteristics). Protracted

l9

FOR!OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR 0H1CIAI. USE ONLY

storage of the nutritive medium under any conditions results in the deterioration
of its properties that are necessary for maintaining the growth and mobility of
Proteus vulgaris. Figures 3; references 18.

UDC 629.783:578.08

SOME QUESTIONS ON THE DESIGNING OF INSTRUMENTS FOR SPACE BIOLOGY AND EXAMPLES OF
THEIR REALIZATION

lgbstract of article by Kon'shin, N.I;7

[Texg7 The author explains the basic principles of the designing of instruments
for biological experiments under spaceflight conditions and analyzes the flaws in
the instruments previously used. As examples of the realisation of the described

principles, he presents instruments of the IFS and ROS? type. which were developed
at the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences' Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics. References 18.

UDG 629:58l.1.035.23

EFFECT OF SPACEFLIGHT CONDITIONS ON THE CELLS OF HIGHER PLANTS IN A CULTURE IN
VITRO

LKbstract of article by Sidorenko, P.F., and Mashinskiy, A.L_/

/Tex£7 The authors explain the results of an investigation of the effect of a 10-
day orbital flight in the "Soyuz-22" spacecraft on a culture of higher plant tis-
sues. The study of the culture of gaplopappus (Caplopappus gracilis (Nutt) A.
Gray) tissues, grown in solid nutritive mediums at the ship's cabin temperature of
18°C, did not discover any substantial differences in growth, formation of cell re-
production foci, and several cytological features (frequency of mitosis, nucleus
dimensions, cariotypical composition of the population) in comparison with a con-
trol at the same temperature, but in a control at the optimum temperature of +26°C
a greater increase in biomass was noted. Figures 2; references 5.

UDC 629:581.3.582.57+582.89

EFFECT OF ORBITAL FLIGHT CONDITIONS ON THE FORMATION OF THE REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS 0F
MUSCARI RACEHOSUH AND ANETHUM GRAVEOLENS

ixbstract of article by Kordyum, Ye.L., Hashinskiy, A.L., Popova, A.F., Uvarova.
6.5., and Khristenko, L.A;7

liex£7 The authors present the results of optical light investigations of the ef-
fect of orbital flight conditions on the development of the grape hyacinth's male
gametophyte and the formation of the reproductive organs of dill plants, grown from
seeds, that were under actual spaceflight conditions on the "Soyuz-20" spacecraft
for a period of 3 months. They show that under orbital flight conditions there is

acceleration of the development of the grape hyacinth's male gametophyte in
20

FOR OFFNJA1.USEGDNIN'
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

comparison with a control under natural conditions. They also note a lowered ger-
minating capacity for dill seeds that have been under orbital flight conditions for
3 months, as well as a certain percentage of loss of sprouts.

Experimental dill plants that reached the blossoming and fruit-bearing

phase as far as height and number of racemes and leaves were concerned were identi-
cal with the control plants. The basic features of the embedding of the reproduc-
tive organs, sporo- and gametogenesis. the development of the male and female
gametophytes, the fertilization process, and embryo- and endospermogenesis in the
experimental plants did not differ from those of the control plants. In weight and

size, the seeds of the first-generation experimental plants were analogous to those
of the controls. Figures 3; references 2.

UDC 613.693:S8l.l

STUDY OF THE EFFECT OF SPACEFLIGHT FACTORS ON THE EHERGENCE FROM AN ANABIOTIC STATE
OF TURIONS OF A HULTIROOTED SPIRODELA

Lsztract of article by Kutlakhmedov, Yu.A., Sokirko, 0.5., Grodzinskiy, D.H.,
Hashinskiy. A.L., Nechitaylo, 6.8., and Kon'shin, N.I;7

[Text] The effect of flight conditions on the process of the emergence of turions
from anabiosis was studied in biological experiments per-

formed on the “Soyuz-12" and "Soyuz-13" spacecraft and the "Kosmos-656" artificial
Earth satellite. The results showed that the initial stages of the activation of
turions are extremely sensitive to spaceflight conditions, which resulted in a reduc-
tion in the rate 0f activation of the turiona in comparison with a control exper-
iment. A significant excess in the sizes and numbers of corresponding cymes was
observed in the control variants in comparison with the experimental ones. Turi-
ons. which manifest clear and variegated reactions revealing the effect of flight
factors on the emergence of the organism from a state of rest and on the biorhythm

processes, are a convenient object for the performance of biological experiments in
space. Figures 3; references 3.

000 613.693:58l.l

EFFECT OF SIHULATED HEIGHTLESSNSSS ON THE REPRODUCTIVE CAPACITY OF A HULTIROOTED
SPIRODELA UNDER NORMAL CONDITIONS AND UNDER IRRADIATION

Libstract of article by Kutlakhmedov, Yu.A., Sokirko, 6.5., and Crodzinskiy, D.H;/

[Text7 The authors investigated the effect of simulated weightlessness on the gen-
eration of offspring of different generations of a multirooted spirodela.

The study showed that when cultivated in a klinostat,

more generations are generated, as well as offspring in the different
generations, and there is also an increase in the rate of offspring generation.

The authors compared the radiobiological reaction of apirodela under cultivation in
a klinostat and when at rest. It was shown that the radioresistance of spirodela
increases noticeably when it is cultivated under conditions of simulated weight-
lessness. The data that were obtained indicated that this is a promising object
for investigating the biological effect of gravitation. Figures 3; references 7.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 538.69:S76.355:582.739

EFFECT OF LOU-INTENSITY MAGNETIC FIELDS ON THE REPRODUCTION OF PLANT CELLS

[Abstract of article by Fomicheva, V.H., Bogatina, N.I., Verkin, 3.1., and Rudenko,
N.B./

[Text] The autoradiography method was used to investigate the effect of conven-
tionally zero magnetic fields (“her - 0.2 mOe, “39!: = 0.5 mOe) on the reproduction
rate and number of proliferating cells in the ra ical meristen of a pea. The au-
thors show that a reduction in the intensity of the surrounding magnetic field has
a substantial effect on the proliferative activity of meristematic cells. In con-
nection with this, the duration of the reproductive cycle is almost 30 1 longer in
comparison with its control value, which is basically the result of the expansion
of the presynthetic phase of the cycle. Under the conditions of a hypomagnetic en-
vironment, there is also a significant decrease in the value of the proliferative
pool, which is 68% as opposed to the 96% control value.

Against a background of increased lability of the 61-phase, the high stability of
the duration of the synthetic phase of the cycle calls attention to itself. These
facts indicate the complexity of the regulation of cell proliferation, depending on
changes in environmental conditions. Figures 3; references 28.

UDC 561.15+539.412

STUDY OF THE EFFECT OF PROTON BOMBARDMENT ON THE MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SEVERAL
POLYMER MATERIALS

lzbstract of article by Markus, A.M. Udovenko, V.F.. Velichko, N.I., Vinokurov,
V.A.. Romanov, 8.5., and Turov, v.6;7

[Texg7 The authors investigated the effect of proton bombardment, with particle
energy of up to 200 keV, on the mechanical characteristics of a number of polymer
materials under high-vacuum conditions. They show that for radiation doses on the
order of 1016 protons/cmz, some polymer materials lose 40-50 1 of their strength.
Even in those cases where the protons' path is only a small percentage of a test
piece's total thickness, the mechanical properties can change substantially because
of damage to the surface layer. Figures 5; references 5.

UDC 536.b5+(536.3:535.34)

INVESTIGATION OF THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE THERMAL DESTRUCTION OF MATERIALS UNDER
INTENSE RADIANT HEATING

lﬁbstract of article by Pasichnyy. V.V., Dvernyakov, v.s., Podlesnaya, Ye.S., and
Kondratenko, A.D;7

£Text7 The authors describe a solar power unit and the technique they used to in-
vestigate the characteristics of the destruction of thermal insulating materials
under intense radiant heating. For radiant thermal heat flows ranging from 100 to

1,100 H/cmz, they derived experimental dependences of the normal radiating capacity,

22

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

surface temperature. and rate and effective enthalpy of the destruction of a mica-
crystal material on the magnitude of the supplied heat flows. They also present

the results of a petrographic analysis of the tested material. Figures 3; refer-
ences 6.

UDC 620.171.3:620.172.251

ANALYSIS OF THE THERMALLY ACTIVATED PLASTIC FLO” OF ELECTRON-BEAM HELTBD MOLYBDENUH
AND SOME HETBROGENEOUS MOLYBDENUH-BASED ALLOYS IN THE (0. 05-0. 3) Tpl TEMPERATURE
INTERVAL

[Abstract of article by Nadezhdin, 6.“;7

[Text] In the temperature interval encompassing the brittle-to-viscous transition,
the author investigated the parameters of the thermal activation of the elementary
act of the plastic deformation of molybdenum and heterogeneous alloys of it by
electron-beam melting. The results obtained make it possible to identify the mech-
anism of the plastic deformation of the investigated materials in the (0.05-0.3)

Tpl temperature band as a mechanism for overcoming the (Payyerls-Nabarro) barriers.
Figures 7; references 13.

UDC S36.3.68l.2.389
THERMOHETRIC INSTRUMENTS FOR MEASURING RADIANT ENERGY IN A VACUUM
[Abstract of article by Gerashchenko, 0.A., and Sszhina, S.A;7

[_Tex57 A complex of thermometric equipment for measuring the density of radiant
energy flows in a vacuum has been developed. The instruments have high temporal
stability characteristics, are heat and vacuum resistant, and have an autonomous
energy discharge system and remote control facilities. They were developed on the
basis of a thermoelectric converter that acts as the heat flow sensor. The range
of measurable flows is 0. l- 30 kH/mz. The authors also describe radigmeters with
circulation cooling that are used to measure flows of up to 200 It'd/m. The instru-
ments have metrologicslly substantiated calibration. Figures 10; references 1.

UDC S36.3.681.2.389
THIN-FILM THERMOHETRIC DEVICES FOR MEASURING RADIANT ENERGY
_I'Abstract of article by Snzhina, S.A_._7

/Tex_t_/ Two types of thermometric devices for measuring the density of radiant en-
ergy in the 0. 05-0. 3 and 0. 5- 600 kw/m2 ranges, at an operating speed of no worse
than 0.1 s, have been developed. They are based on a thin-film, thermometric,
battery-operated heat flow sensor. Thermal stabilization is achieved with the help
of a special electronic temperature regulator or a cooling radiator. The

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

instruments have metrologically substantiated calibration and are used in biology,
medicine, solar power engineering and many other areas. Figures 6.

UDC 551.510.535

DETERMINATION OF THE ALTITUDES 0? THE LOWER EDGES 0F ARTIFICIAL AURORAL RAYS IN THE
'ZARNITsA-l' EXPERIMENT

(Kbstract of article by Nesmyanovich, A.T., Zhulin, I.A., Lazorenko, P.P.,
Dzyubenko, N.I., lvchenko, V.N., Drofa, V.K., and Dokukin, v.84?

/Text7 The authors present the results of a determination of the altitudes of the
lower edge of artificial polar auroras that were observed during the "Zarnitsa-l"
experiment. They give a brief explanation of the technique used to define more
precisely the trajectory of the rocket and the orientation of the magnetic force
line in the area where the experiment was performed by minimizing noncorrelations
in the calculated and observed values of the luminescences' coordinates. Attention
is also given to some regularities in changes in the altitude of the lower edge of
auroral rays as a function of the electron injector's altitude and its operating
mode. Figures 5; references 3.

UDC 551.510.535

OPTICAL EFFECTS IN THE 'ZARNITsA-l' SPACE EXPERIMENT

/Abstract of article by Nesmyanovich, A. T. , lvchenko, V. N. ,Bliznyuk, N. N.
Vashchenko, V. N. ,Dzyubenko, N. l. ,Dokukin, V. S. , and Smelyanskiy, V. N _7

lTex£7 In May 1973, the "Zarnitsa-l" controlled experiment on the injection of
electron beams from a space rocket was conducted successfully at a station for the
rocket sounding of the atmosphere near Volgograd. The authors present the operat-
ing program for the electron accelerator and the electron beams' parameters, as
well as the program for the optical terrestrial observations that were made with
highly sensitive television units. They describe and give the general character-
istics of the following phenomena that were observed during the experiment: lumi-
nescences of artificial polar aurora rays in the upper atmosphere; the luminescence
around the rocket; the light "tail" following the rocket, which was moving on a
ballistic trajectory. Figures 6; references 6.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka", 1978

11746
cso: 1866/96

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000: 629.78.05.001.24
MAR AND SPACE ASTRONAVIGAIION

Hoscow CHELOVEK I KOSHICHBSKAYA ASTRONAVIGAISIYA in Russian 1979 (signed to press
26 Jan 79) pp 2-6, 220-222

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Han and Space Astronavi-
gation", edited by Valeriy Pedorovich Bykovskiy, candidate of engineering sciences,
pilot-cosmonaut of the USSR, V. P. Herkulov, doctor of engineering sciences, and

L. S. Khschatur'yants, doctor of medical sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye",
1700 copies, 224 pages, illustrated]

[Text] This book deals with the inception of astronavigation; it demonstrates the
link between aviation and space astronavigation. There is discussion of the
equipment for space astronavigation, methods of assessing the accuracy of various

astronavigation techniques. Analysis is made of cosmonaut work during space
flights. ,

This book is intended for engineering and technical workers involved in development-
and use of systems of navigation and control of manned space flights.

Introduction

Celestial navigation is an ancient science, that mankind used to solve numerous
practical problems for many centuries. The famous seafarer, Christopher Columbus,
who discovered America, realized even than, in 1692, the great importance of
astronomy in determining the location of a ship at sea. He said: "There is only
one error-free naval calculation, astronomic: fortunate is the one who is familiar
with it" [67]. Without the help of celestial navigation it would be extremely dif-

ficult for man to orient himself, not only in the open sea, but, in many cases,
on land as well.

For a long time, celestial navigation was an area of applied astronomy. With the
development of all types of transportation and, in particular, aviation, sstronavi-
gation gradually developed into an independent branch of science dealing with the
patterns and methods of spatial orientation with the help of heavenly bodies.

Aviation astronomy is a relatively young discipline, which took over many of its
methods from naval astronomy. However, because of the differences in aviation, as

compared to the fleet (for example, higher speeds), these methods underwent sub-
stantial refinement and changes.

For example, it is considerably more complicated to measure the altitude of heavenly
bodies above the planet's horizon in aviation. The reasons for this are, in the

25

FOR OITWCJAI.USE‘ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

first place. the great distance from the horizon, which makes it difficult to super-
impose precisely the image of such a body on the horizon due to atmospheric haze;
in the second place, inaccurate knowledge about the aircraft's altitude above the
surface of the earth and irregularity of the earth's topography at the horizon, as
well as bumpiness of the aircraft in some cases, which makes it difficult to take
precise readings. These differences are so significant, that they led to the use
in aviation of sextants with an artificial horizon, which is formed on the basis

of diverse pendulums, often of the liquid type. In order to reduce reading errors
related to bumpy flight, special integral averaging devices are also used. In
addition, by now some high-precision automatic and automated (i.e., those operating
with the participation of an aircraft navigator) navigation systems have been de-
veloped and constructed, which permit continuous determination of the geographic
coordinates of an aircraft in flight, automatic astronomic course instruments,
astrocorrectors for inertial guidance [navigation] systeas and many other.

Launching in the Soviet Union of the Vostok spacecraft, manned by Yuriy Gagarin,
inaugurated the era of manned space flights. As time passes, the duration of

space flights is increasing and their programs are growing more complex. The
knowhow gained in flying aboard modern aircraft and manned spacecraft showed the
great importance of operational and accurate navigation support. The increasing
complexity of space flight programs makes it necessary to develop and use autonomous
ways and means of space navigation involving the use of modern onboard computer
equipment.

Itis.an1mportant task to develop and improve effectiveness of the ways and means
of astronomic navigation of mlnned spacecraft. In this regard, cosmonautics must
determine the duties of a spacecraft navigator, his role and place when performing
the main operations for autonomous navigation.

There are a number of distinctions to solving problems of celestial guidance of
spacecraft, and they affect the professional performance of the cosmonaut.

The navigation methods that are guided by the sun, stars and planets, which are
very accurate and unrelated to distance or duration of flight are quite promising.
Astronavigation systems are autonomous in nature, and they require no additional
information from ground-based equipment. They can operate at infinitely long
distances from earth. These systems, which use heavenly bodies as reference
points, are quite resistant to possible artificial interference.

Development of celestial guidance systems is a complex technical task, and it
requires work on a wide range of interrelated problems referable to optics, light
engineering, precision mechanics and a number of other branches of modern science
and technology. The difficultyofguidance support of spacecraftflightslies in

the fact that each flight must provide for laying out the optimum trajectories for
effective performance of the set assignment with the specified energy resources.
This means that there is a rigid flight schedule that is planned on earth for

each mission. However, because of errors in guidance [into orbit?], use of correct-
ing maneuvers and possibility of "overshooting" in flight, it becomes necessary for
autonomous calculation of many navigational data aboard the spacecraft. In this
regard, the effectiveness of performing the set assignment aboard a manned space-
craft will depend significantly on the specifications of its navigational equip-
ment and the crew’s ability to solve navigation problems at different stages of a
flight.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In recent times, the development of navigation equipment resulted in the use of
inertial guidance systems with and without platforms. Those without platforms
have several advantages over those with them. Development of such systems, with
the use of inertial elements based on new physical principles, will make it possible
to create inertial systems that will provide for a high degree of precision in de-
termining piloting-navigational and orbital parameters of flights.

Pressing problems of theory of inertial systems have been studied comprehensively
by Soviet and foreign authors [2, 36, 62, 66].

The requirement that the accuracy of inertial navigation systems had to be increased
first led to an effort to make use of classical statistical methods, such as the
method of least squares or of maximum plausibility. Subsequently, to improve the
accuracy of inertial navigation,recurrenceanthods of statistical evaluation be-
came popular. Analysis of the error factor of inertial elements (accelerometers,
gyroscopes) revealed that it is impossible, at the present time, to assure the
necessary precision of solving navigation problems, by inertial systems with or
without platforms, without making use of additional external information.

The following sensors of external information can be used to correct inertial
guidance systems aboard manned spacecraft: automatic astronavigational devices
(astrotelescopes); Doppler flight speed and altitude indicator; unit for determin-
ing the direction of the local vertical (IK [true course?) vertical, radio vertical);
visual optic device for determining direction toward heavenly body reference points
(optical sight); optical visual devices for determining altitude of heavenly bodies.

For a long time. space flights will continue to be unique events, and the capabi-
lities of the spacecraft will remain limited. For this reason, the developers of
space equipment will be faced for a long time with the specifications of low
weight, small size and low energy consumption. In this respect, the use of

optical visual means of correction (sights and sextants) is the most acceptable
variant. The expediency of such devices is also due to the fact that the operator-
cosmonaut can determine with their help, independently and without communication
with earth, not only the coordinates of the location of his spacecraft, but can
control [or check] such navigational parameters as the direction of the local
vertical and altitude of flight.

Man aboard a spacecraft will remain for a long time as the principal link in a
semiautomated system of self-contained astronavigation.

As we know, the psychophysiological functions of a cosmonaut change during flight,
and this is manifested the most obviously by the change in sensorimotor fine
coordination functions which constitute the foundation of professional skill

in astronavigational orientation [38, 73, 75].

A designer planning and designing some system or other that operates with the
participation of a human operator 'mst take into consideration the psychophysio-
logical capabilities of man, not only under conditions of normal function, but
with exposure to the different space flight factors which alter the level of his
fitness.

Thus, space astronavigation of today is based on many branches of knowledge, which
often appear to be very remote from one another at first glance. For this reason,

27

FOR OFFICltLlﬂSEiﬂﬂLY
FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE(MNLY

this monograph is the collective work of different specialists-~engineers and psycho-

physiologista. cosmonauts and physicians. psychologists, mathematicians and
methodologists.

The authors concentrated primarily on shedding light on questions of improving the
effectiveness of operation of a semiautomated system of self-contained astro-
navigation and formation of recommendations on optimizing its operation.

Contents Page
Introduction 3
1. Genesis of Space Astronavigation 7
1.1. Space astronomy 7
1.2. Systems of celestial coordinates 9
1.3. Astronsvigstion in aviation 18
1.4. Correlation betueen aviation and space astronavigation 20
2. Man in the Space Astronavigation System 31
2.1. Structure of work of a cosmonaut involved in astronavigation system 31
2.2. Visual analyzer of cosmonaut during flight 32
2.3. Photometric conditions under which cosmonaut solves
astronavigational problems 37
2.4. Motor analyzer and operative memory of cosmonaut in flight 44
3. Problems of Engineering Psychology in Development of Optical Visual
Means of Space Astronavigation 51
3.1. Use of optical visual devices 51
3.2. Specifications for space sextants 52
3.3. Navigational parameters measured with space sextants and measurement
error factor 58
3.4. Methods of evaluating potential accuracy of solving astronavigation
problems with a space sextant 65
4. Methods for Optimum Information Processing in Space Navigation 72
4.1. Conditions 5:: determining 2;:imuc estimates of nav13ﬁtionﬂl
parameters of flight 72
4.2. Mathematical models of observations 75
4.3. Methods for optimum data processing 87
4.4. Analysis of flaws in recurrenoemethod of astronavigation with the
use of a space sextant 96
5. Modeling Conditions of Operator—Astronaut Performance in Solving
Astronavigation Problems 103
5.1. Methods of simulating the celestial map 103
5.2. Photometric conditions for simulating earth's surface 105
5.3. Modeling the visual situation when flying to the moon 109
5.4. Modeling of mental states of operators 112
6. Evaluation of Effectiveness of Aatronsvigation Systems With a Human
Operator 125
6.1. Research-training astronavigation unit 125
6.2. Evaluation of dynamic characteristics of navigation and control
systems 132
6.3. Methods of evaluating time characteristics of the process of
taking celestial measurements 149
6.4. Evaluation of the effects of different space flight factors on
accuracy of celestial readings 158
6.5. Algorithm for evaluating the accuracy of solving astronavigation
problems by the recurrence method 162

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.6. Standard evaluation of operator performance while taking
celestial measurements with a sextant

6.7. Evaluation of operator training according to quality of performing
astronavigation problems

6.8. Psychophysiological characteristics of an operator with the manual
mode of navigation

7. Method for Overall Evaluation and Forecasting of Quality of Operator
Performance in Solving Astronavigation Problems (According to Charac-
teristics of His Psychophysiological State)

7.1. The question of generalized evaluatings in psychophysiology of
space-related work

7.2. Evaluation of psychophysiological state of an operator and
forecasting the quality of his performance

7.3. Methods of devising quantitative criteria of the results of
operator performance

7.4. Algorithm for evaluating and forecasting the quality of operator
performance with consideration of characteristics of his
psychophysiological state

7.5. Simplified flowchart [or block diagram] for forecasting the
quality of operator performance aboard space vehicles

7.6. Examples of forecasting professional performance of an operator
. 8. Autonomous Navigation in Interplanetary Flights

8.1. Instruments for interplanetary navigation
8.2. Future system for interplanetary navigation

8.3. Professional duties of cosmonaut-navigator in interplanetary
flights
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye", 1979

10,657
cso: 1866/999

29

FOR o'mau. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERILANETARY SCIENCES

UDC: 629.788.523.4(023)
WNOGRAPH 0N DEVEIDPMENT 0P INTERPIANETARY snnoss

Moscow NA KOSHICHESKOY VERPI (POISKI I SVERSHENIYA) in Russian 1979 pp 2, 4-6, 167

[Annotation, preface by S. Sokolov, doctor of engineering sciences, foreword and
table of contents from book "On the Space Dock (Research and'Achievements", by
M. Borisov, 2d edition, revised and enlarged, Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye",
168 pages, illustrated]

[Text] This book tells, in popular language, about development of automatic space
stations. the problems that are solved in this regard, as well as people that

are developing these stations. A special place is reserved for a description of
development of the Luna-16 [Moon] station, which was the first to automatically
collect and deliver to earth samples of earth soil, the Lunokhod [LEM] and
automatic stations that have landed on Venus.

Unlike the first edition (1976). this one offers the most complete information
about the multifaceted process of developing automatic interplanetary stations;

it acquaints the reader with chief designer G. N. Babakin, under whose guidance many
automatic stations were developed for exploration of the moon, Mars and Venus.

This book is intended for a wide range of readers.
Preface

In the short time that has elapsed form the start of the space age, inaugurated
on 4 October 1957 by the launching of the first artificial earth satellite,
various types of space vehicles have been developed in the USSR, ranging from
automatic stations serving different purposes to manned spacecraft and orbital
stations.

Practical cosmonautics has created new conditions for in-depth and comprehensive
study of the solar system. The information scientists have gained about the moon,
Venus and Mars in the first 10-15 years of development of cosmonautics exceeds,
both qualitatively and quantitatively, the entire volume of information gained
about these heavenly bodies before the start of the space age. We have turned
from the study of different properties of the moon and planets by astronomic and
astrophysical methods to new methods, which make it possible to solve basic
problems of the origin and evolution, not only of the moon, Venus and Mars, but
our own planet, the entire solar system as a whole.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following is a list, which is far from complete, of the achievements of
Soviet cosmonauts in the matter of developing automatic vehicles--these price-
less research tools in the hands of scientists: many months of operation of the
self-propelled "Lunokhod-l" [lunar excursion module-LEH] and "Lunokhod-2" under
the difficult conditions of lunar day and lunar night, at temperature gradients
of 300 degrees, delivery to earth of soil samples from the maria and continental
regions of the moon, the artificial satellites of Mars and descent vehicles, two
of which landed on Mars, the automatic "Venera" [Venus] stations with descent
vehicles, which transmitted rather valuable information about this planet,
including the world's first television panoramas of the surface in the landing
region and the world's first artificial satellites of this planet.

This book brings the reader into the work environment of one of the design bureaus,
which developed automatic stations for exploration of the moon, Venus and Mars;

it acquaints him with the designers, radio operators, controllers, ballistics
specialists.... The reader will see the multifaceted nature of the creative
process in the routine work days.

On its pages, the reader will meet Georgiy Nikolayevich Bahakin, chief designer,
an enthusiastic proponent of development of automatic stations for the explora-
tion of space. Many automatic stations for exploration of the moon, Mars and
Venus were created under his guidance.

Foreword

Something new, on a more sophisticated level than before, is created each day,
each hour in any design bureau.

This is also very typical of a "space" design bureau. New space stations are in-
tended for solving increasingly complex problems. This is expressly how space
builders are directly involved in overall scientific and technological progress.

It is not easy to grow grain crops; it is complicated to build a CBS, and it is
difficult to erect a television tower many hundreds of meters tall. It is also not
a simple matter to develop a space vehicle which, having overcome the extremely
difficult conditions at inconceivable cosmic distances, would obtain the informa-
tion needed by man. For this reason, dozens of design bureaus, research institutes,
plants, thousands of engineers and blue-collar workers, scientists and technicians,
talented and enthusiastic people are involved in creating space stations.

In this book, I shall talk about only one of the design bureaus, about how the
designers and engineers of this bureau are solving the problems put to them
routinely by life. I should like to tell about more than the tasks or specific
situations in which specialists were placed, more than and not mainly about the
stations that they are developing.

I viewed my task differently: not to simply demonstrate how 2T0 [expansion unknown]
was done, but to explain with specific examples and situations why 3T0 was made

in expressly this way; in other words, to involve the reader in the creative
process.

By far not all of those who participated in developing and were instrumental in
the successful operation of the automatic interplanetary stations, "Luna" and

31

FOR‘OFFH1AI.US£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Venera" [Moon and Venus] were talked about in this book; here, only some were men-
tioned, of those whom I had occasion to encounter in specific, described situations.

Not all of the episodes described here are equal in importance, and probably not
all ofthem are the most important elements in the process of creating our space
stations, starting with the design and ending with flight.

I wish that the different aspects of research and achievements presented will be
helpful in allowing the reader to comprehend, at least to some degree, what the

"space“ design bureau routine is prior to the departure of the next automatic
station on its unique journey.

This book is not an offical account of the work done by the design bureau over a
specific period of time. These are the notes of a designer and, like any notes,
they are subjective in some way and express the author's personal point of view.

I hope that my colleagues (and among them are "literate" talented narrators) will,
in time, also submit their notes to the reader. The more such works are published,
the more fully will be disclosed the entire multifaceted work of people who dedi-
cated themselves to the noble cause of exploration of the mysteries of the universe.
Academician B. N. Petrov stated that development of ANS [automatic interplanetary
stations] of the "Luna," "Venera" and "Mars" series, which was begun under the
guidance of S. P. Korolev, was successfully continued by the team (headed by the
gifted designer, G. N. Babakin, corresponding member of the USSR Academy of

Sciences), which developed the next generations of these extremely complex space
machines. The book is dedicated to these people.

I am profoundly grateful to all those who found the time, in spite of being loaded

with work, to help in the publication of this book with their advice or recollec-
tions of some episode or event.

Contents Page
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 52(092):521+522

GEODYNAHICS AND ASTRGIET‘RY: PRINCIPLES, MEMOS, RESULTS

Kiev GEODINAHIKA I ASWTRIYA: OSNOVANIYA, MINDY, RBZUL'TATY in Russian 1980
(signed to press 22 Aug 80) pp 6-5, 165

Zinnotation, editor's foreword and table of contents from book "Geodynamics and
Astrometry: Principles, Methods, Results", edited by Academician Ye.P. Fedorov,
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 1,000 copies, 168

pagesl
[fexg' momma"

The basic theme of this collection of works is the study of the rotation and tidal
deformations of the Earth in connection with the construction of models of its in-
ternal structure. These phenomena were the subject of the research done by A.Ya.
Orlov (1880-1954) throughout his more than half a century of scientific activity.

In several articles there is a discussion of A.Ya. Orlov's scientific legacy and
the prominent role he played in the development of geodynamic and astrometric re-
search in the Ukraine. In this collection of works there is also a discussion of
the principals and interrelationships among those sciences, facilities and methods
that are enlisted in the study of the Earth's rotation and deformations. In con-
nection with this, special attention is focused on new techniques that are just now
being mastered, such as radiointerferometry, or on techniques that are still in the
development stage. The latter include astrometric instruments on artificial Earth
satellites. A description of the plan of such an instrument is published in the
Soviet press for the first time in this book.

This book is intended for specialists in astrometry, geophysics and geodesics, as
well as the broad circle of readers who are interested in the principles, the con-
temporary problems and the future of these sciences.

EDITOR' S FOREWORD

This collection is dedicated to the 100th anniversary of the birth of Aleksandr
Yakovlevich Orlov, a great scientist who made an especially large contribution to
the development of research in astronomy and geodynamics in the Ukraine.

In the years when he began his scientific activity, a transition from surveying to
a planned offensive was taking place in the study of the Earth's internal structure.
Systematic observations were organized for those phenomena in which the effect of

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deformations of the Earth and changes in its gravitational field are manifested;
these observations were then analyzed and compared with the results of theoretical
calculations that were based on different models of the Earth's structure.

A.Ya. Orlov became one of the most active participants in this work: in this coun-
try he organized observations of tidal tilts in the Earth's surface and various in-
vestigations of the variability of latitudes and the movement of the Earth's poles.
A summary of his scientific legacy gives us a sufficiently full picture of the de-
velopment of the study of the Earth's mechanical properties by means of astrometry
and gravimetry in the first half of this century. We can also see how A.Ya.
Orlov's ideas and concepts affected the further development of this work. His
ideas will undoubtedly also be of assistance in selecting paths for future geo-
dynamic research based on the use of new observational facilities and techniques
that did not appear until after his death.

The term "geodynamics" was first used by Schiaparelli in the famous lectures he
gave at the Russian Academy of Sciences in 1889. This te m is encountered again in
the title of a monograph by the English geophysicist Love , in 1911, in which he
discussed, given the various hypotheses about the mechanical properties of the
Earth as a whole, such global phenomena as its general tidal deformations, natural
oscillations and so forth. That is the same meaning attached to the term "geo-
dynamics" in the title of this collection and the articles published in it.

A.Ya. Orlov was educated as an astronomer, and he always related the study of the
Earth's rotation to other fundamental questions of astrometry and celestial mechan-
ics. He thought a lot about plans for the development of astrometric work in the
Ukraine, but he was able to set about implementing them only in the last years of
his life: in 1954, by his initiative, the Main Astronomical Observatory of the
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences was founded. In the field of astrometry. this
observatory has now become one of the leading scientific establishments in the
Soviet Union.

In this collection there are articles illuminating the life and activities of A.Ya.
Orlov, as well as the development of work in geodynamics and astrometry begun by
him at the Poltava Cravimetric and Main Astronomical Observatories of the Ukrainian
SSR Academy of Sciences. A significant place is also occupied by an analysis of
what has been achieved, an evaluation of the possibilities and a definition of the
basic problems in those areas of natural science with which A.Ya. Orlov was occu-
pied. Thus, on the whole this collection is more a glance into the future rather
than the past of geodynamics and astrometry.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

Editor's Foreword . . . . . . .................. . . . . . . . S
Aleksandr Yakovlevich Orlov: Life, Creativity, Scientific Legacy

(Ye.P. Fedorov) . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

1Love, A.E.H., "Some Problems of Geodynamics", Cambridge, 1911, 88 pages.

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
A.Ya. Orlov's Activities in Odessa
(V.P. Tsesevich). . . . . ...... . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . 26
Development of A.Ya. Orlov's Ideas on the Study of Tidal Tilts in the Earth's
Surface in the Work of the Poltava Gravimetric Observatory
(P.S. Hatveyev) . . . . . . . . . ........ . . . . . . . ..... . . 27

A.Ya. Orlov's work in Gravimetry and Its Development at the Poltsva Observatory
(I.A. Dychko, v.0. Bulatsen. v.0. Balenko). . . . . . ....... . . . . . 52

Some Results of Observations of Fluctuations in Latitude at the Poltavs
Cravimetric Observatory
(N.I. Panchenko). . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

The Study of the Earth's Rotation -- a CompIex Problem in Geodynamics
(Ya.S.Yat8kiV)......... ...... ................63

A General View of Astrometry
(Ye.P. Fedorov) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....... . . 74

On the Basic Coordinate Systems Used in Astrometry and Geodynamics
(Ya.s. Yatskiv. v.s. Cubanov) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110

Periods in the history of Astrometry
(1.6. Kolchinskiy) ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . 120

Astrometry and Celestial Mechanics
(V.K. Abalskin) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130

Radiointerferometry as a Technique for the Joint Solution of Basic Problems in
Astrometry and Astrophysics
(A.P. Dravskikh. A.H. Finkel'shteyn). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137

Astrometric Investigations with the BSA Satellite
(Eric Hog). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...... . . . . . . . 158

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks". 1980

11746
680: 1866/96

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIFE SCIENCES

000 523
MONOGRAPH ON POSSIBILITY OF BXTRA-TBRRBSTRIAL LIFE

Moscow VSELENNAYA, ZHIZR', RAZUM in Russian 1980 (signed to press 12 May 80)
pp 2-6, 13-14

[ﬁnnotation, table of contents, foreword and excerpt of introduction of book "The
Universe, Life and Intelligence“, by Iosif Sanuilovich Shklovskiy, 3th edition, re-
vised and enlarged, Izdatel'stvo “Nauka”, 100,000 copies. 352 pages]

[fag ANNOTATION

unis book is devoted to the problem of the possibility of the existence of life,
including intelligent life, in other planetary systems. At the sane time, it con-
tains a quite full and easily understood explanation of the results achieved by
modern astrophysics. The author has included in it a number of original ideas and
hypotheses. At the "Znaniye" Society's competition. this book received the first
prize for the bext popular scientific book. The fifth edition has been reworked in

accordance with the author's new point of View. as put forth by him in the nasa-
zincs VOPROSY PILOSOPII and ZNANIYE -- SILA.

This book is intended for a broad circle of readers with a secondary education who
are interested in the urgent problems of contemporary natural science.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
Part2 L1fe1ntheUn1verse... 169
11. Conditions Necessary for the Appearance and Development of Life on Planets 151
12. On Defining the Concept of "Life". . . . . . . . .......... . 160
13. On the Appearance and Development of Life on Earth. . . . . . . . . . . . 170
14. Prom Blue-Green Algae to Man . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....... . . 1810
15. "Is There Life on Earth?". . . . . . . ..... . ........ . . . 191
16. "Is There Lifeonllars or Isn' tThere. ..". . . . . . ...... . . . . . 200
17. The Possibility of Life on Other Bodies in the Solar System. . . . . . . . 210
Part 3. Intelligent Life in the Universe. . . ...... . . . . . . . . . . . 231
18. General Remarks. . . . . ..... . . . ..... . . . ..... . . . 233
[9. Man' a Conquest of the Solar System ............... . . . . . 243
20. Radio Com-nication Between Civilizations Located in Different Planetary
Systems. . . . ......... .254

21. The Possibility of Realizing Interstellar Communication by Optical Methods 273
22. Communication with Civilizations on Other Planets by Means of Automatic

Probes.. ...... . ..... .282
23. Theoretical- Probability Analysis of Interstellar Radio Comunication; The

Natueofthesignals..... . ....... 288
21.. On the Possibility of Direct Contacts Between Civilizations on Different

Planets. . ...... . . . . . . . . ...... 308
25. Remarks on the Tempo and Nature of Han' s Technological Development . . . . 318
26. Intelligent Life as a Cosmo Factor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...... 3M

27. Where Are You, Our In .elligent Brothers? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3410
FOREWORD TO THE FIFTH EDITION

The first edition of this book was written in the sunset of 1962. The publication
of the book was timed for a great celebration: the fifth anniversary of the
launching of the first Soviet artificial Earth satellite, an event that, at the
suggestion of H. V. Keldysh, who was then president of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
had to be mentioned widely in our national press. Iwill never forget the high
heat of the passions and the marvelous nervousness we were constantly feeling dur-
ing the time of our -- witnesses and participants in the Great Enterprise -- first,

still timid, steps on nan' 3 long path to the conquest of space. Events unfolded
with fantastic rapidity. The first Soviet "Lunniki " the fantastic feeling caused

by the first, extremely incomplete pictures of the far side of the Moon, Gagarin' s
magical flight and Leonov' s first walk in space. And even then we had the first

working plans for long-distance space voyages to Mars and Venus. It is unfortunate
that in our era we grow accustomd to everything so quickly; the generation of peo-

ple born at the beginning of the space era has already grown up. They have become
witnesses of ever greater and more daring feats. However, man 's first breakthrough

into space will undoubtedly always remain the greatest landmark in his history.

I write this so my readers can understand the atmosphere in which I created this
book. To some extent, it demonstrates that long-known phenomenon that man' a
thought always outstrips his actual capabilities and thereby serves as a kind of
guiding star pointing to new goals and problems. Prom man's first, "childish"
steps in space, witnesses of which we were, to the future reorganization of the
Solar System by man is a huge distance. But no matter what man has already organ-

ized, he still has to have prospects.
37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The subject of this book is as old as human culture itself. However, it is only in
our time that we have seen the first possibility of making a truly scientific anal-
ysis of the problem of a plurality of inhabited worlds. It is already obvious that
this problem is a complex one that requires the most serious attention of the
broadest spectrum of the scientific professions: cyberneticists, astronauts.
radiophysicists, biologists, sociologists and even economists. Unfortunately, pre-
viously this problem seemed much simpler to us than it has turned out to be. From
the epoch of "juvenile enthusiasm," which was of such a black-and-white nature
(Well. we'll just build a great big radiotelescope and establish contact with peo-
ple on other planets"), the investigators have advanced to a more nature analysis
of this extremely difficult problem. And the deeper the understanding we bring to
it. the clearer it becomes that intelligent life in the Universe is an unusually
rare phenomenon and may even be unique. This means that the greater the responsi-
bility laid on man that this spark of consciousness not be extinguished by his un-
intelligent actions, but blazes into a bright bonfire that can be seen even from
the far edges of our galaxy.

INTRODUCTION [éxcerpg

The purpose of this book is to acquaint a wide ci.cle of readers who are interested
in the fascinating problem of life in the Universe with the modern status of this
problem. Let me emphasise the word “modern,“ since the development of our ideas
about the plurality of inhabited worlds is going forward quite rapidly right now.
Besides this if in contrast to other books devoted to this problem (“Zbizn' vo
Vsclennoy" 1 Life in the Universe"7 by A.I. Oparin and V.G. Fesenkov, "Life on
Other worlds" by G. Spencer Jonesy, where the primary question discussed is that of
life only on the planets of the Solar System -- Mars and Venus — on the basis of
hopelessly unreliable data, I have given quite a bit of attention to other plane-
tary systems. Finally. insofar as I know, in no book before 1962 (when this book
was written) was there an analysis of the possibilities for intelligent life in the
Universe and the problem of establishing cot-unication between civilizations sepa-
rated by interstellar distances.

This book consists of three parts. Part 1 contains the astronomical information
that is necessary in order to understand the modern concepts of the evolution of
galaxies, stars and planetary systems. In the second part there is a discussion of
the conditions for the appearance of life on some planet. In addition, here I dis-
cuss the question of the inhabitability of Hare, Venus and the other planets in the
Solar System. In the conclusion of this part there is a critical discussion of
modern variants of the panspermia hypothesis. Finally, Part

3 contains an analysis of the possibility of intelligent life in different areas of
the Universe. Special attention is given to the problem of establishing contacts
between civilizations in different planetary systems. By nature, Part 3 of this
book differs from the first two parts, which present specific results and the re-
sults of the development of science in the appropriate areas. By necessity, in
this part the hypothetical element predominates, and this will be true until we do
establish contact with a civilization on another planet and, plainly speaking, it
is unknown when this will happen or even if it will. however, this in no way means
that this part is devoid of scientific content and is pure fantasy. 0n the con-
trary: it is here that I analyze -- and rigorously, where possible -- the most re-
cent achievements of sciences and technology that may lead to success in the future.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same time, this part of the book makes it possible to give some real idea
about the power of human intelligence even at its present stage of development.
Actually, man has already become a factor of cosmic significance by his activities.
What awaits us a few hundred years from now?

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", Glavnaya redaktsiya fiziko-uatenaticheskoy lite-
ratury, 1980, s iueneniyalni

11746
cso: 1866/99

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 612.821.6

RATS' REACTIONS TO BEHAVIORAL TASKS DIFFERING 1N DIF?ICULIY AFTER FLIGHT ABOAHD
'COSHOS-782' BIOSATELLITE

Moscow ZHURNAL VYSSHEY NERVNOY DEYATEL'NOSTI INENI I. P. PAVLOVA in R08818n
Vol 30, No 3, Hay—Jun 80 (manuscript received 5 Mar 79) pp 507-512

[Article by N. N. Livshits, Ye. s. Heyzerov, Z. I. Apanasenko and H. A. Kuznetaova,
Moscow]

[Text] The studies of rats conducted within the first 2 weeks after their flight
aboard the Cosmos-782 biosatellite revealed that they had appreciable difficulty in
retaining and regaining a previously developed skill in maze tests, but it was
totally restored by the llth postflight day.

Our objective here was to demonstrate finer changes in higher nervous activity (RNA)
at both the early and late stages. For this purpose, we gave the animals tasks
differing in difficulty at different stages of the study. It was equally important
to determine both impairment and preservation of different functions of higher
branches of the central nervous system (CNS).

Methods

Experiments were conducted on Histar rats free of pathogenic flora, which weighed
215 g at the beginning of the flight.

The experimental animals (7 rats) flew for 19.5 days aboard Cosmos-782. The data
pertaining to upkeep conditions aboard biosatellites of this type were published
previously [3]. After the flight, the animals were kept in aaperate cages.

Control rats were kept in the Vivarium during and after the flight of the bio-
satellite; some were kept in separate cages and some in groups of five animals.
Since we failed to demonstrate substantial differences between these control
groups, we took seven pairs out of the entire number of control animals in such a
manner that each flight group rat had two control partners similar to it with re-
gard to preflight parameters.

The RNA tests before the flight and during the first 20 days after it were con-
ducted using a maze of the type described by Ya. Dombrovska [2]. The maze con-

sisted of five parallel pathways, each of which contained three locked doors and
one tightly shut door (but not locked). through which the rat could pass into the
next run. The fifth pathled to the feed compartment. There was only one way to
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reach the feed compartment in this maze.

ran through the maze three times.

In the standard experiment, the animals

Adaptation of the rats to experimental conditions and development of skill in finding
feed in the maze were started 2 weeks before the flight and ended 5 days before the
flight. we resumed work with rats in the experimental and control groups on the

third day after the biosatellite landed.

The following tests were conducted with the above-mentioned maze after the flight.

We tested the reaction to a special stimulus on the 6th-7th day against the back-
ground of restoration of the previously developed maze skill, for which purpose we
turned on a bell for 3 s«while the animals ran through the first path during the

second passage through the maze.

0n the llth-l3th day, we conducted the experiment with an increased functional
load in order to examine fatigability of higher branches of the CNS: the number of
runs through the maze was increased from 3 (standard experiment) to 16, while the
amount of feed was reduced appropriately to avoid satiation.

 

Figure 1.
Diagram of maze proposed by the authors
Key:
3) start
F) finish (feed compartment)
I-VII) runs
A,B) open ("gates")
1,2,3) unlocked
a,b) locked doors
c) entrance to maze

0n the lSth-20th days, we tested the
animals' ability to develop a new
behavioral skill in the same maze,
but with a change in alternation of
locked and unlocked doors. The task
put to the animals remained essenti-
ally the same as the preceding one.

As a rule, there is faster develop-
ment of the second skill, since the
animals use the same rules of behavior
they acquired when learning the first
skill. The ability to use prior ex-
perience in a new situation is a more
complex form of RNA than simply the
development of a skill. In the litera-
ture it is called generalization of

experience [7] or Gmore often) trans-
fer thereof [9].

He recorded the following parameters
when testing reactions in a maze of the
type described by Ya. Dombrovska: re-
fusal to go through maze, time in
which the rat passed from the first

to the feed compartment and mistakes

made. when processing the data, we also took into consideration the percentage of
neurotic reactions, as manifested by inadequate behavior in the maze: shuttling
back and forth on one path, refusal to pass through an unlocked door, return to a

pathway already traveled, etc.

On the 21st-25th days, we used a more complicated maze that we developed, which is
basically of a different design. The maze consisted of a starting compartment,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

main working part consisting of seven parallel pathways, and a feed compartment. A
system of blind alleys and successive passages from onepathto another was created
in the working part by means of locked and unlocked (but tightly shut) doors, open
gates, longitudinal and transverse dead ends (Figure 1). Unlike the maze of the
Dombrovska type, the rats could travel over many routes in our maze to reach the
goal. The length of the route, measured by the number of working blocks traveled,
each lOXlO cm in size, arbitrarily called "steps," served as the criterion of de-
velopment of skill. The shortest route was considered the optimum, when the animal
found unlocked doors situated in eachpsthat the shortest distance from the goal.
Its length constituted 10 "steps." Obviously, the use of doors and "gates" that
were farther away, entering into blind alleys, returning and moving in the wrong

direction extended the animal's route. During the experiment, the animals were
put in the complex maze twice.

Along with testing of RNA, we graded the animals' feeding activity in the feed com-

partment of the maze on a 5-point scale, and we also kept a record of feed intake
in the Vivarium.

We submitted the results to statistical processing with the use of criteria for
comparison of two series of regression according to quantitative and qualitative
tags [6) and, in some cases, Student's criterion.

Results and Discussion

The behavior of rats in the flight grOup was more active than that of control ani-
mals in the tests conducted with the relatively simple maze of the Dombrovska type.

A special stimulus extended time of passage through the maze in all animals. How-
ever, the reaction to the bell of rats flown aboard the biosatellite was appreci-
ably milder than that of control partners. There was negligible slowing of their
passage through the maze immediately after the bell, and in the next run through
the maze it did not differ from the standard test in any way. In the control,
however, movement through the maze was substantially slower in both tests (Figure
2). The differences between these groups are reliable (P<0.05).

The animals flown aboard the biosatellite endured the increased functional load
on the CNS better than control animals. There was reliably less increase in
number of refusals with increase in number of runs in the flight group than the

control group (P<0.01; Figure 3). No differences between these two groups were
demonstrated with regard to other parameters.

The flight group of rats were also somewhat superior to their control partners in
ability to transfer experience. Development of the second behavioral skill in the
Dombrovska maze occurred without failures in both groups, with the same accelera-
tion (according to number of mistakes and time required to reach their goal), as
compared to development of the first skill. However, acquisition of the new stereo-
type of behavior by animals flown aboard the biosatellite was associated with mani-

festation of experimental neurosis in a significantly smaller percentage of cases
(P<0.001).

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-~

The opposite relations were demonstrable
between groups when developing skill in
finding feed in the complicated maze.
1 1- All of the animals started the first
' run through the maze in each experi-
ment (Figure 6A). However, there was
I
Figure 2.

a substantial difference between the
flight and control groups (Figure 43)
Effect of special stimulus (bell) on time
of passage through maze; y-axis, time, s

in the second runs through the maze:
the former chose the longer route to
I) control partners
11) rats flown in biosatellite

the goal and made more "steps" in
moving through the maze (P<0.001).
1) run through maze prior to bell
B) run when bell is on

A) run after bell is turned off

   

      

.\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\‘

 

h\\\\\\\\\V
ﬂ \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\

The following fact merits special atten-
3 A tion. 0n the last day of the study,
the experiments in the complicated maze
were conducted in the morning, rather
than the afternoon, as usual, in view
of the fact that the animals were to
be sent off to be sacrificed. More
people were in the laboratory, and
more work than usual was being done.
This change in the situation did not
have an appreciable effect on control
animals' however it caused considerable
worsening of passage through the maze by rats that had been on the flight, and this
only when the runs were repeated. Along with a marked increase in number of "steps,"
there was a significant increase in time taken to run through the maze, and this
was related more to the animals' general inhibition than to the change in the first
parameter. The flight group of animals had traveled over a route of the same length
when they first ran through the maze on the first 2 days of developing this skill,
but they spent considerably less time on it.

‘

A

73
70

.‘0

.10

I0

    

Q) J Q) J Q) J 5 7 s - n 73 m

Figure 3. Mean number of refusals to run through maze by rats in the presence
of greater functional load. x-axis, numbersof run-starts; the
circled digits refer to first start in each experiment; y-axis, mean
number of refusals to start run, 2

Key: A) last 2 days before experiment with increased functional load
B) experiment with increased functional load, arrow showing when it started

1) flight group of rats
2) control partners «3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are no grounds to relate the

 

hteps.. poorer development of behavioral skill
in the complicated maze to either a
change in alimentary excitability or
7” muscular weakness, which develops after
the flight [11. The latter circumstance
5, should have been manifested, first of
all, in the experiment involving a
J, larger functional load on the CNS,
where the rats had to perform more
exercise. Yet in that experiment, the
’0 flight rats achieved better results
I _ J 5 I J idsys than the controls.
Figure 6. The alimentary activity of rats in the
Mean length of route during development flight group was reliably di'dni'hed
of skill in complicated maze. X-axis. only when '2 tested their behavior in
day at test; Y‘axis. lenSth of route to :he Dombrovska type maze (diminishen
goal ("steps”). Other designations are sad intake was recorded in the vivsrium
the same as in Figure 3. for 9 days, and diminished intake in the
A) first start through maze feed compartment of the maze was ob-
3) second start " " served for 12 days after the flight.

However, it is expressly in this maze
that the flight group of animals
performed the tests used better than their control partners. The difficulties they

had in adjusting to the complicated maze occurred against the background of com-

pletely restored alimentary excitability, and they could not have been attributed
to diminished motivation of their behavior.

Thus, there are grounds to believe that the demonstrated changes in maze behavior

of animals in the flight group are attributable to processes in the CNS. In rats
flown aboard the biosatellite, we found retention not only of the capacity to trans-
fer experience to a maze of analogous design, but capacity to develop a new, more
complex behavior stereotype (absence of differences from control group with

regard to parameters of first starts through complicated maze; Figure 6A) on the
lSth-ZSth postflight day. These facts are indicative of complete preservation of
linking ["closing"] function of the cerebral cortex during the time period studied.

maze is indicative of increased depletion of the main nervous processes of the CNS.
The increase in depletion was not very significant, since it only had an effect
when solving a complex problem. However, the flight group of animals ran through
the simple maze. which they knew quite well. even better than control animals,
even on the 16th run (Figure 3). Development of a second skill in a maze of the
Dombrovska type is a task that does not require as complex processing of informa-

tion as passage through the complicated maze, and these animals also performed it
better than the controls.

Such findings, when along with difficulty in solving complex problems there was
facilitation of solution of simple ones, have been reported in the literature.
They are described with reference to exposure of animals to ionizing radiation and
some pharmacological agents [4, S]. as well as humans in a stress state [8]. This

1.].
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

phenomenon is attributable to the fact that there is attenuation of reactions to
random stimuli with exposure to adverse factors of a certain force. Such "narrow-
ing of attention" makes it possible to perform simple tasks normally or better:
however, it is not sufficient to assure the solution of difficult problems.

The probability of manifestation of such a compensatory mechanisms in our experi-
ments on the flight group of animals is confirmed by the test with the use of a
special stimulus [bell]. Evidently, because of this mechanism, the reaction of
flight rats to the bell (a stimulus that is not of vital importance and present
for a brief time) was appreciably milderuthan that of controls.

The above-described changes mm were less marked than those we demonstrated after
the flight aboard the Cosmos-605 biosatellite. In the latter case, there was

both an increase in number of refusals and drastic worsening of the ability to trans-
fer experience. Such attenuation of the effects could have been related to the
improved upkeep conditions for the animals aboard Cosmos-782. Nor can we rule out
the influence of individual distinctions of the organism, since rats from different
colonies were used in the compared experiments.

There are no grounds to consider the demonstrated changes in RNA in rats under the
influence of the space flight and readaptation to be pathological. Nor can they
be considered severe; they were manifested only when performing more difficult
tasks. Nevertheless, they are indicative of the adverse effect of the above fac-
tors on efficiency of the higher branches of the CNS. Special consideration must
be given to the fact that this change in efficiency in the presence of an unusual
situation could impair a skill that has already been developed.

Conclusions

1. The reaction to a special‘timulus (bell) on the 6th-7th postflight day was
less marked in rats that participated in the space flight than in control animals.

2. Endurance of an increased functional load referable to a relatively simple
maze was better in flight rats on the llth-l3th postflight day than in controls.

3. The capacity to transfer experience, tested in the relatively simple maze on
the 15th-20th postflight day, remained intact.

4. When acquiring a new skill in a complicated maze, increased exhaustion of

the main nervous process was demonstrated on the 21st-25th postflight day in

the flight group of rats, while linking function of higher branches of the CNS
remained intact.

5. The above facts are indicative of diminished efficiency of higher branches of

the CNS after a space flight, which is manifested in the reactions to complex
behavioral tasks.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Gazenko, 0. 0.; Adanovich, B. A.; and Il'in, Ye. A. VBSTN. AN SSSR [Veatnik
of the USSR Academy of Sciences], No 9, 1975, p 62.

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

8.

9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Donbrovalta, Ya. in "Nervnyye nakhanizly dvigatel'noy aktivnoeti" [Neural
Mechanisms of Motor Activity], bacon, Nauka, 1966, p 199.

Il'in, Ye. A.; Serova, L. V.; and Noskin, A. D. KOSMICH. 8101.. I AVIAKOSMICM.
MED. [Space Biology and Aerospace Medicine], Vol 10, No 3, 1976, p 9.

Kinel'dorf. D., and Khant. B. "Effect of Ionizing Radiation on Central
Nervous Syaten Functions," Moscow, Atonisdat, 1969.

Neuenov, M. I. "X-Ray Therapy Involving Effect on the Nervous System,"
Leningrad. Medgiz, 1950.

Plokhinakiy, N. A. in "Bioaetricheekiye netody" [Biometric Methods], Moscow,
Izd-vo MGU [Moscow State University], 1975, p 63.

Pirsov, L. A.; Znamenakaya, A. N.; and Mordvinov, Ye. F. in "Voprosy
zoopsikhologii, etologii 1 aravnitel'noy paikhologii" [Problem of Zoopsycho-
logy, Ethology and Comparative Psychology], Moscow, Izd-vo mu. 1975.

Levine. S. SCI. AMER” Vol 226, No 1, 1971, p 20.

Sheldon, M. R. in "Analysis of Behavioral Changes," New York-London, 1968.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Mauka". "Zhurnal vyaahcy nervnoy deyatel'nosti", 1980

10,657

CSO:

1890/115

66
FIHICHWWCJAI.USE¢MNLY

SPACE ENGINEERING

UDC 629.7.015.3

ADAPTIVE ALGORITHMS FOR CONTROLLING DBSCBNT 0F SPACE VEHICLE "11“ HIGH
AERODYNAHIC QUALITY INTO BARTH'S ATFOSPBERB

Moscow KOSHICHESKIYE ISSLBDOVANIYA in Russian Vol 19, No 3, Hay-Jun 81 (manuscript
received 26 Mar 80) PP 359-366

[Article by V. L. Balakin and L. V. Horozov]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of the descent of a
space vehicle with high aerodynamic quality
(Ital), controllable with respect to banking
angle, into the earth's atmosphere with a lat-
eral maneuver. Adaptive algorithms for autono-
mous terminal control with prediction of the
final state of motion, partying constantly op-
erative perturbations, are investigated and an
evaluation is given of their effectiveness on
the basis of compensation of the deviation from
the stipulated landing point.

1. In [1] the authors proposed multistep algorithms for forming a command banking
angle for a space vehicle making a descent into the earth's atmosphere to a stip-
ulated landing point and an evaluation of their effectiveness was given in the
presence of perturbations on the basis of the initial conditions for entry into
the atmosphere.

Constantly operative perturbations caused by deviations of the aerodynamic charac-
teristics of the space vehicle and atmospheric parameters exert a strong influence
on the difference between the actual landing point and the stipulated landing
point. In order to parry their effects it is necessary to carry out corrections of
the control program during the entire time of descent.

In a general case the operative perturbations have a random character. They result
in a change in the form and extent of the "region of attainability,“ being a set

of space vehicle landing points on the surface of the sphere of reduction. There-
fore, it may be found that the stipulated landing point C(Ls, 03), situated with-
in the region of attainability with nominal values of the aerodynamic characteris-
tics, as a result of their perturbation will be beyond its limits. Computations
reveal that the linear control correction algorithm considered in [1] does not give
satisfactory results in this case.

47

FOR OFFICIAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to ensure the greatest accuracy in landing when there are constantly op-
erative perturbations in this study we investigate quasilinear and nonlinear ad-
aptive descent control algorithm.

2. 1f the stipulated landing point C(Ls, D.) is situated within the region of at-
tainability. the space vehicl. can make a landing at this point since it has an
"excess" of maneuvering capabilities. With a location of the point C(L,. 1),) out-
side this region a landing can be made only at the boundary of the region of at-
tainability. '

In this connection we will use the following control strategy. When the point 60.3,
03) is situated within the region of attainability the comand program for control
of the banking angle Yc°n(t) is determined from the condition of a zero deviation
of the predicted landing point [(Lp, DP) from the stipulated point:

Pp(Ycon(C)) ' 0. (1)

and with the presence of the point C(La. D.) outside the region of attainability,
from the condition of the minimum of such a deviation

’OP( Y¢°'(t)) I min. (2)

Here Pp is the distance on the sphere of reduction of the radius r between the
stipulated C(Lg, 03) and predicted K(Lp, DP) landing points lying on this sphere.
determined using the formula

0 D 0......“

[K _ p; c _ 8] p.—r.arccos[sin7.=sinr—:+cos:cos:-cos(L'+L‘)]. (3)

For evaluating the effectiveness of the proposed control algorithms we will con-
struct a region of attainability determined by the aerodynaaic quality. With fix-
ed initial conditions for entry into the atmosphere and for the adopted structure
of the reference program for control of the banking angle Yref(t) (Pig. 1) the
boundary of the region of attainability, syuetric relative to the trajectory of
descent with a zero banking angle, consists of three parts (Pig. 2). The boundary
8 of the region corresponds to the maxim of the lateral range of descent D with
different fixed values of longitudinal range I.

bum.) - max n(Yr.f(c), L). (4)
ref
The boundaries A and 1! correspond to descent with nominal control programs (Pig.
1) with different moments of switching of the sign of the banking angle t“,
(to. tp]: -A
D(L) - D(Ymn(t3ga t): L): (5')

3
ML) ' N Ynon(tsw. t). L). (6)

The reference programs on the basis of which the nominal programs YnoAm(t”,t)

and 7ngm(‘aw' t) are formed ensure (respectively) the maximum of the lateral range
of descent with an unfixed longitudinal range and a maximum of the longitudinal
range with an unfixed lateral range.

48

FOR OFFICIAL LEE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

am ma non

 

t, *1 t: in '1 t pt

Fig. 1. Control program. 1) reference pro- Pig. 2. Region of attainability. l) k -
gran Yref“): 2) nominal program f“. 0.816; 2) k - 0.903.
(t).

3. 0n the basis of a prediction of the coordinates of the final landing point we
will carry out a nultistep control correction for the forming of the contend de-
pendence of the banking angle using the modulating function w - "0'1, "2, )I H) [1].
In each N-th correction interval AT“ - t“ - t“.1 (N - l, 2, 3....) the new com-
mand dependence for the banking angle for the descent segment remaining to landing

Y com (“1) (t? t“)
is computed in conformity to the rule
713:1) 0? t“) ' "3?. (V1*. "2 9 A") Ycom opt (t? ‘10- (7)
The control program 1'30). opt (t) tn) is formed on the basis of the preceding com-
mand control (N)

from the condition of ninimizing of the predicted final nisa relative to the time
of switching of the sign of the banking angle tngItu, tp]:

{“1}... PI] K0“ - con; Pam-(1a:- ”4‘3“”- miip:(1.(1::.:l(lu131.-.)» . (8)
"’ (1.. :>t.)-1...(:)

Since the con-land control program in each of the correction intervals is dependent
on the parameters of the modulating function, the deviation of the landing point
will also he a function of these two parameters

1% - Pptwl. "2). (9)

In each current correction interval AT" it is necessarx to determine such values
of the parameters of the modulating function ”1* and “2 which in accordance with
the selected control stategy either reduce to zero the 2deviation of the predicted
landing point from the stipulated landing point

Ppml*’ "2‘5 - 0. (1o)

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or minimize it a *
,Opwl , H2 ) - min. (11)

Here we will assume that the point C(Ls, D.) falls within the region of attain-

ability if the coordinates of the predicted landing point Rap, DP). corresponding
to descent with the conInand control program

7832 opt (t 3 ‘8)

and the nomiml modulating function
umIn - "(1, 1, A"). (12)

satisfy the condition
Lp)LBo 'DPI>IDB l ' (13)

In the case of impairment of condition (13) the point C(Lg. by) will be considered
as falling outside the region of attainability.

lo. Thus, the problem of forming the conInand control program is reduced to a deter-
mination in each correction interval of the parameters of the modulating function
"1* and wz in accordance with the adopted control strategy.

For the purpose of ensuring convergence of the correction process with removal of
the stipulated landing point beyond the limits of the attainability region we will
examine a quasilinear method for determining the parameters of the modulating func-
tion ”1* and wz", using the results of of the linear nethod for the correction of
control [1]. It is based on an approximation of the dependence of the longitudinal
11,011, U2) and lateral 090.1,. DP) ranges of the predicted landing points by the

parabolas __ _.
1.90:) - .an + be + cL. 0,.(x) - anZ + box 4» en. (14)

in the neighborhood of the point of the reference prediction of the coordinates of
the landing point with the nominal modulating function (12). The at value is the
distance in the coordinate plane 0H1H2, measured from the point “(1,1) in the di-
rection of the point P(l + Awl, l +AU2). Its coordinates are the values of the
parameters of the modulating function determined by the linear control correction
method. The constant coefficients of the parabolaa (16) are determined from the
condition of their matching with the corresponding coordinates of the target func-
tion p (11,. up) at three points: n(1,1), m +Aw1. 1 + Ana) and m «may,

1 +AHZF). The F point is the intersection of the segment HP with the straight
line passing through two points on the coordinate axes 0111 and 0112:

(1+t.+£'-. 0) and (0.1+¢:+-¢1 .
ct CI
The £1 and 5 values are small increments of the parameters of the modulating
function used in computing the partial derivatives in the linear correction meth-

od. The values of the coordinates of the target function at the point P are found
under the condition of approximation of the surfaces (H1. "2) and D9011. Hz) by

planes in the neighboer of the nominal parameters 0 the modulating function
from the expressions:

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

. all-(W...) amw...) _
L. -l~(Wu-)+T(Wn'-1)+ 3W.—_(W" 1).
[K - p; HON - noml D.'-D.(W...)+%(W{—i)+‘wg—:r)-(W{—i). (15)

From the condition of a minimum of the sum of the squares of the deviations
I 3‘ -mln 2' I
I...( ) . ,( )O (16)

where f(x) - [fp(x) - 1.312 + [31,“) - D312. we determine the sought—for parameters
of the undulating function

W.‘-l+AW.:'/1AW.'+AW.'. W.'—i+AW,z'/VA—W,’+AW.’. (17)

In order to determine the parameters of the modulating function (17) by the quasi-
linear method in each correction interval it is necessary to carry out a fourfold
prediction of the coordinates of the space vehicle landing point.

5. In order to ensure a higher accuracy in the landing of a space vehicle in the
case of positioning of the stipulated landing point ca... D.) outside the region
of sttainability we will exasine a nonlinear method for correcting control. It is
a nonlinear gradient-free method for finding the extremum of the nonnegative func-
tion of two variables (see Appendix). The method is based on an approximation of
the target function (9) by the surface of a hyperbolic paraboloid in the neighbor-
hood of the point of reference prediction with a nominal modulating function (12).
For determining the parameters of the modulating functions "1* and “2* by this
aethod in each correction interval it is necessary to carry out a fivefold predic-
tion of the coordinates of the space vehicle landing point.

6. we will examine the descent of a space vehicle in the nonrotating atmosphere of
a spherical earth under the condition of ideal navigation and stabilization of a
space vehicle relative to the center of mass. M perturbations we will use the
extremal values of variations of atmospheric density [Pmin and 55):“, on the av-
erage constituting 'V 402 of the nominal values for the ERA-65 mdefIn of the atmo-

sphere [2], and deviations of the values of the aerodynamic coefficients of drag
5 ex and lift Joy from their nominal values.

of control we will assume that the equations for prediction of the coordinates

of the landing point coincide with the equations of notion of its center of mass
[1]. In addition, the prediction is made with a nominal atmospheric density value.
we will carry out the modeling with a constant duration of the correction interval
and a constant value of the A" parameter, equal to 100 sec and 0.5 respectively,
and for a space vehicle with nominal aerodynamic quality values km. equal to 1.0

and 1.7. If the predicted miss becomes less than 1 km, no further correction is
made.

Table 1 gives the values of the final miss pp obtained as a result of correction
of the trajectory of descent in the atmosphere with perturbations of its density.
Without correction the miss is about 50-80 km. Both control algorithms ensure a

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sufficiently high accuracy of space vehicle landing. In the case of maximum per-
turbation of density Jpgg an increase in the deviation of ,0 for space vehicles
with an aerodynamic quality 1.0 occurs in the last correction intervals and causes
their relatively great duration. In order to reduce the final miss it is desirable
to carry out correction in the final descent segment more frequently.

Table 1
Influence of Perturbations of Atmospheric Density on Final Miss lop
Method for correcting control km. Pp, km

670%: 5P3:

Quasilinear 1.0 0.2 13.1

1.7 0.1 0.6

Nonlinear ' 1.0 2.6 10.8

1.7 0.1 6.0

Tables 2 and 3 give the values of the final miss P and the corresponding number
of corrections made ﬁg , obtained with different devgations of the aerodynamic
characteristics. An identification of aerodynamic quality assumes a' determination
of its actual perturbed value It

_ 1+6c . (13)
" hommzf

If no identification of aerodynamic quality is made, in the prediction of the final
landing point use is made of its nominal value. The results show that with iden-
tification of the aerodynamic quality landing accuracy increases. Control of the
descent of the space vehicle with correction of the comand control program by a
quasilinear method makes it possible to accomplish a highly precise landing with a
small number of corrections at the stipulated point lying within the region of at-
tainability; a nonlinear control algorithm is more effective in comparison with a
quasilinear algorithm in a case when the stipulated landing point is situated out-
side the region of attainability and ensures the landing of a space vehicle on its
boundary with a relatively snail number of corrections. For example. with the ac-
tual value of the aerodynamic quality 0.811. the landing point lies outside the re-
gion of attainability and its minimum distance 5.1,, from the boundary is 160 km
(Fig. 2). However, the uncompensated miss with correction by the nonlinear method
is 163.3 km (Table 2).

For a space vehicle with a nominal aerodynamic quality 1.0, Fig. 3 shows the process
of change of the miss with corrections for a nonlinear control algorithm with a

10% level of deviations of the values of the aerodynamic characteristics and Fig.

I. shows the reference and command programs for control of the banking angle. The
comnd program for a space vehicle with an aerodynamic quality of 1.222 corres-
ponds to the landing point being situated within the region of attainability and
with a quality of 0.811. -- outside its boundaries. It should be noted that the
nature of the comnd program for the control of descent at the boundary of the re-
gion of attainability corresponds qualitatively to an optimum program for the

52

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
continuous control of the banking angle [3]. obtained from the condition of a la!-
imum approach to the stipulated landing point.

    

z 2 i a; nén

its. 3. Convergence of correction process. 1) k - 1.222; 2) k - 0.816; It - 0.814,
on . 1.0.

I'- I!” degrees

 

0 mo MI 12001,: aeeonda

p13. 4. Programs for control of banking angle. 1) TLef. k - 1.0; 2) k - 1.222;
3) k - 0.311..

53

FOR OFFICIAL l8! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. 0n the basis of the results of modeling of descent of a space vehicle with
high aerodynamic quality with constantly operative perturbations into the
earth's atmsphere it can be concluded that the proposed algorithms are highly
effective. With the considered levels of perturbations and with identification of
aerodynamic quality the difference between the landing point and the stipulated
landing point, situated within the region of attainability, does not exceed 1 Ian.

With the stipulated landing point being situated outside the region the shifting
to its boundary is accomplished with an error not exceeding 3-5 km.

Appendix. Nongradient Method for Seeking the Minimum of the Nonnegative Function
of Two Variables

 

Fig. 5. Diagram explaining nonlinear minimum method.

We will examine a nonnegative function of two variables a - :(x. y), determined
on the plane Oxy in an orthogonal coordinate system Oxyz (see Fig. 5). It is nec-
cssary to determine the minimum of the function in the set for the entire coordin-
ate plane. Assume that the initial approximation 20 - z(xo. yo) is stipulated. 0n
the plane we select the points H2(xo, yz) and H303, y ) at which we determine the
values of the target function :2 and z . 0n the plane we find the unit vector
ho - (111°, hzo), indicating the direction of the greatest change in the target
function at the point M1(xo. yo) [1]. He will approximate the function 2 - 20:, y)
in the neighborhood of the point 20 by the surface of a hyperbolic paraboloid
(5'5” (i-i—P
4-
F i
The surface (A.l) was stipulated in the coordinate system 01:31:, obtained by rotat-
ing OXYZ by the angle ,0 relative to the point M100, yo) for the purpose of a more
precise approximation of the target function (Pig. 2). 3n order to stipulate the
surface (A.l) it is necessary to determine arm, m, 21., p, q from the condition of
its matching with the surface 2 - 2(x, y) at five points. In order to establish an-
alytical relationships between the sought-for values_and_the values_of the target
function we will select the remaining two_yoints who. ya) and H5(x5, yo) on the
straight lines parallel to the 01: and 01y axes. The target function at these point:
has the values :1. and :5. Subtracting term-by-term the expressions (A.l), written
for the points H1 and H4, M1 and M5, we obtain

 

 

- 20-1.). (L1)

 

(L2)
amass. p-cwr.
where A - 1:1. 3. L“ c- “'1‘. . n-r-_h_
2(8.-Iu) ”-1: 303-83) n-I.
56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ClA-RDP82-00850R00040006002M

-

2007/02/09.

0
0

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

33.30 0.3350
nouoo no cowuuowuuuaovu 0:050“:

~.H . see;

@050!
.303 Mac:
n ounce

- o. Non
mg a. “mg

mg H. n
mg n.-
«A o.o~
42 as .an\
vozuua
unocauuoa

>uuaa99 uuluchv
no.3: mo coaua0uuwucova 0:053

04

N 0.33.

vangu-

unoauduon=v

«A «a. ooo
mu «m. HmN
mu m. on
an n.o~
an ~.~¢
mz ax .an\
00:00:
unocundouSV

1C£LI 1‘16:
Mann.“ Hus

>0uu¢sv ouanahv
I800 no coauaouuuuauvu :33

x

N ah0% N .30”

.91 one! use: no 03030000338 3535.82 mo nuance—33w mo 00:03.35

.auudaauauuo «o 0:3 2.0 0:239 .6333 3 052. 9:33 056

n ¢n. no." .3 1n:
n." o. H me a. we
H n. o A o. o
o.— m. o e o. o
3 v. «N n o. o
a: 8. am .wz 5. at
0050-. 09.006
umosuncoc unocuuuunav

31—35 353:3
uouou mo 5.30330:me 5.“:

3&6
nooé
08.”
non..—
Nata

x

CHI OH+
ml n...
O 0
m+ M!
GA... cu!
.>U.W N .80 Q

I sono— .nQ\ 00.“: :5..— co «0330000358 0waa¢>vou0< mo acozwnusuuom no 0000555

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ClA-RDP82-00050R00040006002H

2007/02/09:

.
.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Similarly, subtracting expressions (A.1) for the points H1 and H2, H1 and H3 and
taking expression (A.2) into account, He will have

C.i.+C.i-. +c.2..i.+c.-o. D.:.+D.§.+D.M.+D.-0. (A. 3)
where C .-ZADx’—AB.-A,D. Cg-ZBCV-Agﬂ-Bﬂ.
C.-28Ds'-BD. -BsD. C.-ZACs’—AA . -A.c.
0,-2401" -AB.-A.D‘ o.-2sc;”- 4.8-8.6.
D.—280:"-BB.—B.D. D.-2ACt”-AA.-A.C.
A | -x.'-h'. A a- y.’-ia‘. AO-ZO" I". A I-Us'-is'. .
8.--8.+!;. Da--y.+fg. 83--h+§s. 8IC-U.+Fs.

l'-8|-8:. x"-u-n.

Using (A.3) we obtain an equation for ;m

' '+WI+1’0'

u” (AJo)
gherc cc- c2n3 - C302, [3- c2111 + 6403 - clnio- C204,, 7- ca - c104, and the
x1, value is determined from the second squat n 0 system (A. )

3 Dubbi-
- D|+Dgin . (A‘s)

We will examine possible variants of the form of the surface (A.l).

Variant 1. With 3>0, E>o expressign (A.l) describes the surface of an elliptical
parsboloid, convex_dov_n_wards. 31th zn>0 the minimum of the approximting function
is at the point “(1... ya). If z.<0, the algorithm of variant 2 is used.

Variant 2. With p< 0 and ;< 0 expression (A.l) corresponds to the surface of a con-
vex upwards elliptical paraboloid with a minimum (A.l) equal to zero. The vector ho
indicates the direction of the _greatest change in the target function and there-
fore the miniw point ”6?. y ) will be_sought in the direction of this vector.
Accordingly, y - yo, and the coordinate 1*, determined from the equation

 

s(§')‘+bi'+c-0, (A.6)
I 2" E + (5.-,.). 4' u-
where g-T, bun—T, c ’ ‘

should satisfy the condition: ;‘>;o.
Variant 3. ma. ﬁ< 0 expression (A.l) describes the surface of a hyperbolic para-
boloid. The cardinates of as minimum point are determined by the signs of the
values A - -2psIII and B - -2qsm. If A<0 and B>0 and the condition

i-- 1§<i.<i.+1§. I (A.7)

is satisfied} then the coordinate ;* is assumed equal to 3?... If (A.7) is not satis-
fied, then x is determined from (A.6) with the following coefficients

$6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

e--B. 6.28%.. c- -Bi’.'+ (io-ig)'IAI- IA ['8‘

If A>o and B<0, ;* is determined from (A.6) with the following coefficients
.-|s|. 5-283... c-Inlr-h'Go-i-PA-A'IBI.

Since equation (AA) has two solutions. each of then corresponds to its own mini-u:
point of the approximating surf-cg“ Aa the nought-to; point of the ninimn we use
a point for which the coordinate x is greater than x0 and is situated closer to
it.

BI BLIOGRAPHY

1. Balakin, v. 1.. and Hot-ozov, L. V., "Algorithm for the Formation of e_ Con-and
Banking Angle Upon Entry of a Space Vehicle with a High Aerodynamic Quality
Into the Atmosphere," KOSMICE. ISSLED. (Space Research). Vol 17. No 6. p 852,
1979.

2. Okhotainakiy, D. Ye., Goluhev, Yu. P. and Sikharulidze. Yu. 6., “.6011le
UPRAVLENIYA KOSHICBESKIH APPARA‘POH PR1 VKIIODE V ADIOSPERU (Algorithm for Con-
trol of a Space Vehicle Upon Entry Into the Atmosphere), Hoecow, Nauka. 1975.

3. Shkadov. L. 14., Bulthanove, R. S., Illarionov. V. F. and Plokhikh. V. P..
HBKHANIKA OPTIMAL'NOGO PROSTRANSTVBNNOGO DVIZHENIYA WATEL'NYIGI APPARATOV V
ATHOSFERE (Mechanics of Optimum Spatial Motion of Flight Vehicles in the At-
mosphere), Ibecow, Haahinoetroyeniye, 1972.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Koanicheakiye iaaledovaniya". _l98l

5303
cso: 1866/1252

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 629.7.036.7.001.6(075.8)

TESTS OF SPACE ELECTRIC ROCKET PROPULSION SYSTEMS

Moscow ISPYTANIYA KOSHICHBSKIKH ELEKIRORAKETNYKH DVIGATBL'NYKH USTINOVOK in Russian
1981 (signed to press 29 Sep 80) pp 3-11, 202-203

[Foreword. introduction and table of contents from book "Tests of Space Electric
Rocket Propulsion Systems". by Yevgeniy Aleksandrovich Yakovlev, Izdatel'stvo
"Mashinostroyeniye", 1900 copies, 208 pages]

[Text] Foreword

In the materials of the 25th CPSU Congress mention was made of the outstanding
achievements of domestic science and engineering in the mastery of outer space and
a determination was made of the most important trends in the further development
of scientific research. An important objective was set-of continuing the study
and mastery of outer space and of expanding research on the application of space
facilities in studying the natural resources of the earth. in meteorology, navi-
gation, communications and for other needs of the national economy.

The solution of many problems in astronautics in the inediate future will involve
the extensive utilization of space electric rocket propulsion systems (ERDU's).
Among these problems must be included problems of orienting, stabilizing and
correcting the orbits of artificial satellites and longterm orbital stations, as
well as enabling interorbital and long-range space flights to planets of the solar
system.

Much work has been done on the development of ERDU's of various types in a com-
parativcly short time (the beginning of work on space electric rocket propulsion
systems occurred in the second half of the 50's). Many space BRDU's created have
successfully passed bed tests simulating the effects of the conditions of outer
space and space flight factors. as well as space flight tests. Progress in the
development and creation of high-efficiency space 8890's was achieved on account
of the extensive utilization of the achievements of many fields of modern science
and engineering.

In the creation of BRDU's for spacecraft for different purposes great attention is
paid to questions relating to the methodology of bed and space flight tests in the
experimental trial process, to the equipment supply of test beds simulating the
influence of the physical conditions of outer space, as well as to the use of
diagnostic methods and equipment for making various physical studies and measure-
ments. In this textbook descriptions are given of the equipment for producing a

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vacuum, for simulating solar radiation, heAt transfer, cosmic radiation, zero
gravity, and streams of charged particles in solid matter. as well as of test beds
with vacuum chambers, the procedure and measuring equipment for performing various
measurements utilizing modern physical diagnosis equipment such as spectral. elec-
trophysical, radiophysical, etc.; various kinds of bed tests are discussed, in-
cluding tests for reliability, as well as questions relating to the automation of
tests by means of digital control computers (UVH's), mathematical statistical ae-
thods of processing and analyzing experimental data, as .well as aspects of con-
ducting space flight tests of ERDU's.

The objective of this textbook is to acquaint students in higher technical educa-
tional institutions with the methodological and engineering and technical aspects
of tests of modern space BRDU's.

Introduction

A space propulsion system (KDU) with electric rocket engines (BRD's) is called an
electric rocket propulsion system (mo) and consists of two main parts: the

power (electric power) plant (811) and the propulsion system (DU). Sometimes this
combination is also called the power plant or power system of a spacecraft (mu).

A modern airborne space propulsion system with electric rocket engines represents

a complicated engineering system whose structure includes sources of primary
energy, converters of this energy into electrical. units for the removal of high-
and lower-temperature heat, and various converters which are consumers of electric
power (ERD's and converters into electromagnetic radiation energy, thermal energy,
etc.). A block diagram of an airborne space BRDU is shown in fig 1. The structure
of an BRDU also includes a control. testing and regulation system which is con-
nected by means of a comand radio line and radio telemetry system to a comand
measuring complex. A distinctive feature of an ERDU is the fact that the thrust
developed by the_m's in relation to the use of the propulsion system equals a
total of only 10 2 to 10 3 N/kg. ERDU's come under the heading of low-thrust pro-
pulsion systems and their advantages are evidenced to the full extent only under
conditions of prolonged space flights; therefore they must possess high reliability
and long life.

The various types of ERD's used in ERDU's make it possible to obtain exceptionally
high (as coapared with chemical rocket engines) values of specific thrust momentum:
10" to 106 m/s.

ERDU's can be used for solving the following problems: 1) for correcting the orbit
of artificial earth satellites (182's); 2) for stabilizing 182's; 3) for orienting
152's; and 4) for accomplishing interorbital and crusing flights to other planets
of the solar system.

Modern space power plants (BU's) and propulsion systems (DU's) differ widely.
They differ both in design and characteristics and in the operating process.

EU's contain the following three main elements: a primary energy source, a con-
verter of primary energy into electrical (soutimas these two elements are com-
bined). and a unit for the removal into outer space of the heat unutilized in the
conversion process.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIN!(HﬂﬁC1Al.USE(ﬂVLY

 

Figure 1. Diagram of Airborne Space ERDU

Key:
1. Input of primary energy 6. Converters which are consumers of elec-
2. Primary energy sources tric power
3. Control and regulation 7. BID
6. Storage and supply of working 8. Kinetic energy of working medium

medium 9. Units for removal of heat
5. Converters of primary energy 10. Heat radiation energy
into electrical

Primary energy sources are subdivided into two categories: airborne, i.e., found
on board the spacecraft, and external, found outside the spacecratt. Under the
heading of airborne energy sources come nuclear and chemical. Two types of nuclear
sources--radio isotope and reactor--have received practical application. The

chief external source of energy is solar radiation. which can be used in the light
or heat form.

Converters of primary energy into electrical can be of three kinds: converters of
the thermal form of energy (heat), of solar light energy, and of chemical energy.

Converters of heat are divided into machine-type and non-machine-type (sometimes
also called direct or immediate converters). In machine-type converters the heat
is partly converted into mechanical work and then by means of electric current
generators into electric power; in direct converters the conversion of heat into
electric power is accomplished directly.

Steam turbine plants (PTU's). gas turbine plants (GTU's) and Stirling engines come
under the heading of machine-type converters.

The main types of direct converters of heat which are of interest for airborne
space power plants are thermoelectric (TEG's) and thermionic emission (TEP's).

60

FOR 0!1ﬂ(1Al.USE¢DNLY
FOR10FFKJA1.USE(MVLY

Under the heading of direct converters come fuel cells and storage cells, as well
as photoelectric batteries. The first and second types convert chemical energy,
and the third type the light energy of solar radiation.

The supply of heat energy to converters and the removal of energy from converters
is often accomplished by means of heat transfer agents (primarily liquid-metal)
circulating in closed circuits, as well as by means of heat pipes.

The following thre- main types of BRD's are differentiated as a function of the
mechanism for accelerating the working medium: electrothermal (ETD's), electro-
magnetic (EHD's) and electrostatic (ESD's). A distinctive feature of an 820 is
the independence of the delivery of the working medium and of the supply of energy
to it.

In ETD's heating of the working medium is accomplished either on account of the
Joule heat released in a solid high-melting conductor of electric current--an
ETD with resistance heating--or on account of an electric arc--arc-heating BTD's.

EHD's are subdivided into two groups: continuous-action and pulsed-action. Con-
tinuous-action BHD's can have an internal or external magnetic field. Two main
types of EMD's with an internal magnetic field exist: coaxial and end-type.

EHD's with an external magnetic field differ widely: those with acceleration of
a plasma in orthogonal (crossed) electric and magnetic fields; linear Hall—effect;

and end-type Hall-effect.

Pulsed EHD's (also called pulsed accelerators) are designed primarily according to
coaxial or end-type circuits. Liquid or solid working media are used in them.
Pulsed EHD's in which dielectrics are used as the working medium are called ero-

sion EMD's.

The operating principle of an BSD is based on the acceleration by means of an elec-
trostatic field of like-charged particles of the working medium. 380's are of two
types with respect to the kind of working medium: ionic and colloidal.

A space BRDU is characterized by the following: 1) by complexity, occasioned by
the presence of a great number of systems, assemblies, units and the like which

are functionally interrelated; 2) by high reliability (i.e., failure-free function-
ing) in the situation of the total absence of or limited ability for repairs in
space; and 3) by long life, i.e., longterm failure-free functioning reaching 10“
hours and longer.

Production uniqueness and singleness are also characteristic of the present stage
of development of ERDU's. The majority of 8800 models created are experimental
and do not have prototypes.

Tests are the most important part of development, experimental trial and creation
programs for high-efficiency, reliable and long-life BRDU's designed for space-
craft for different purposes. Problems relating to the organization, equipment
supply and conduct of tests of space ERDU's have a number of distinctive features
and are distinguished by sufficient complexity and labor intensiveness.

61

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet scientists and engineers have made a great contribution to the development,
creation and accomplishment of extensive programs for testing various types of
ERDU's. Pirst place in the development and creation of high-efficiency and reli-
able ERDU's belongs to them.

K.B. Tsiolkovskiy as early as 1911 in the “Future of Rocket Devices" section of
his celebrated study "Investigation of Outer Space by Means of Rocket Devices"
indicated the possibility of using electricity for the purpose of creating the
jet propulsion required for flights in outer space. Tsiolkovskiy was a staunch
supporter of the most extensive utilization of solar energy in astronautics. He
anticipated the creation of space airborne power plants utilizing the thermal
energy of solar radiation and developed a number of sketches of such plants. For
the purpose of concentrating solar energy in space he suggested that parabolic,
spherical or cylindrical mirrors with a metalized reflecting coating be used.
Tsiolkovskiy foresaw the two basic methods of producing electric power on board a
spacecraft: direct conversion by means of a thermoelectric battery, and the ma-
chine type by means of piston machines or steam turbine plants operating in a
closed cycle.

Tsiolkovskiy attached great importance to tests and trials of space systems under
test bed conditions, on the earth. He believed that the program of tests for a
space propulsion system should include bed tests and the use of rocket trolleys
and hydroplanes and then of rockets launched first in a ballistic trajectory.
Tsiolkovskiy believed a gradual increase in the loads and the duration of tests
of a rocket engine to be necessary.

Considerable attention was paid to BRDU'a by F.A. Tsander, who was a great scien-
tist and theoretician, a talented engineer and designer and researcher, and a
great enthusiast for the development in our country of work in the area of rocket
engineering and interplanetary flights. In his works Tsander paid great attention
to theoretical studies, questions relating to tests and to experimental trials

and final adjustment of rocket engines and spacecraft. Re attached great impor-
tance to bed tests which simulate the conditions of a space flight and the influ-
ence of the physical conditions of outer space on a spacecraft and its systems.

Tsander suggested the basic design of a power plant with the machine conversion
of solar heat energy into electrical.

The prominent scientist in the field of space rocket engineering, the founder of
Soviet rocket engine building, twice a Hero of Socialist Labor and winner of the
Lenin and State prizes, Academician V.P. Glushko, in 1928-1929 developed a project
for an interplanetary spaceship with electric rocket engines (ERD's) and a solar
thermoelectric power plant. A second division directed by V.P. Glushko was cre-
ated at the Gas Dynamics Laboratory (GDL) in Leningrad in 1929 for the purpose of
carrying out work on BRD's and ZhRD's [liquid-propellant rocket engines]. Tests
of an experimental pulsed thermal BED took place in the laboratory of the GDL
second division in the beginning of 1933.

An artificial earth satellite was launched into orbit for the first time in the
world on 4 October 1957 in the USSR. This historical event represented the natu-

ral result of the systematic development of Soviet society, of socialist economics
and of the enormous successes of domestic science and engineering.

62

FOR 0FFNJA1.USE!DNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Intensive research on ERD's began in the second half of the 50‘s. A powerful in-
centive for the development of these studies was the successes in the mastery of
outer space and the achievements of the physics of a high—temperature plasma.

The eminent Soviet physicists academicians I.V. Kurchatov and L.A. Artsimovich,
who headed research in the field of plasma physics. paid serious attention to the
development of studies on ERD's. Academician 8.2. Korolev rendered fervent sup-
port for these studies.

By 1963-1965 a number of experimental models of BRD's had been tried under test
bed conditions as the result of the performance of theoretical calculation, plann-
ing and design and scientific research work in the USSR. It was necessary to
solve a number of new complicated problems for the purpose of carrying out space
flight test programs for ERD's. Primarily there was the question of the supply

of power for BRD's. For such tests it was necessary to develop and create an
airborne space power plant taking into account limitations with regard to weight
and overall dimensions. The need also arose to develop a closed system for the
automatic control of a space ERDU through commands from the earth and through the
telemetric transfer of information.

All this required the development of an entire complex of complicated testing and
measuring systems for the purpose of checking the electrical parameters and thrust
characteristics of ERD's. the parameters of outer space. and the like. In the
course of carrying out space flight test programs it was necessary to discover how
effectively 3890's which had successfully passed bed tests would function in a
space flight.

Space flight tests of various types of space BRDU's, BRD's and 50's have been
conducted systematically in the USSR.

On 30 November 1964 the automatic interplanetary station "Zond-Z" was launched
toward Mars, and on board this station were installed six erosion-thermal pulsed
plasma-jet ERD's. The ERD's were supplied with power from solar batteries. The
test program included the problem of orienting the panels of the solar batteries,
which were designed for charging the storage batteries.

Fifteen 24-hour periods after the launch, when the "land-2" station was at a dis-
tance of 5.370 million km from earth, the system for orienting from the BRD's was
switched on through a radio command. The ERD's worked steadily for 70 min and
enabled orientation of the solar batteries.

Space tests of plasma-jet ion ERD's were carried out in the USSR beginning in 1966
in the "Yantar'" [Amber] automatic ionospheric laboratory. Tests of an ion 3RD
with the surface ionization of cesium on tungsten were conducted in the "Ion"
space laboratory in 1969—1970. Space flight tests according to the "Yantar'" and
"Ion" programs were conducted at altitudes of 160 to 400 km from the surface of
the earth during travel in ballistic trajectories. High—altitude vertically
launching geophysical rockets were used for the purpose of launching the research
laboratories.

63

FINICN"H(JAI.US€IMVLY
FOR OFTNCJA1.USE‘DNLY

At the end of December 1971 the "Meteor" ISZ was launched into orbit, on which
were installed stationary plasma-jet BRD‘s with azimuthal drift and an extended
acceleration zone (abbreviated, SPD's).

Space flight tests of pulsed erosion EHD's were carried out with high-altitude
atmospheric probes in the USSR at the beginning of 1974.

In 1975 the "Kosmos-728" 132 was launched, on which end-type EHD's were tested
(stationary end-type plasma accelerators).

On 30 June 1977 in the USSR the artificial earth satellite "Meteor-Priroda [Nature]"
was launched into orbit, designed for completing an extensive program of national
economic research. A variety of experimental scientific apparatus was installed

on board the 152 for this purpose. The 182 had an improved power supply system
utilizing solar batteries. ERD's were installed in the 182 for the purpose of
maintaining stability of its orbit.

Space flight tests of various types of power plants have also been carried out in
addition to space flight tests of ERD's.

The "Kosmos-84" 182 was launched in the USSR on 3 September 1965, and the "Kosmos-
90" 182 on 18 September 1965. "Orion-l" radio isotope power supplies with a

thermoelectric converter, which had successfully passed space flight tests, were
installed in these ISZ's.

Power plants with the direct non-machine conversion of nuclear energy into electri-

cal, which are of great interest for astronautics, are being developed and tested
in the USSR.

An example of a high-temperature reactor-converter employing fast neutrons with
thermoelectric converters is the 'Romashka" [Camomile], which was created at the

Institute of Atomic Energy imeni I.V. Kurchatov and worked at a rated power of
500 H for 15,000 hours.

An example of another highly effective type of power plant is the "Topaz" plant
created at the Physics and Power Engineering Scientific Research Institute. The
"Topaz" is a thermionic emission reactor-converter. Tests of three "Topaz" plants
have confirmed the possibility of the stable generation of S to 10 kw of electric
power. Uranium dioxide serves as the nuclear fuel for the "Topaz."

Systems for orienting and correcting spacecraft (the ATS-IV, ATS-V, LES-VI, SBRT-II,

etc.) in which various types of ERD's have been used have been tested abroad in
recent years under space flight conditions.

Let us mention in conclusion that work on the creation of plasma-jet and ion ERD's
has to a considerable extent stimulated the development of an applied branch of
plasma physics--the physics of plasma and ion accelerators. At the present time
electromagnetic plasma accelerators and charged-particle accelerators are of great
interest for thermonuclear research and for technological purposes, as well as as
sources for pumping lasers operating in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arc-heating, induction and microwave accelerators are used for applying coatings
and films, cutting, welding and remelting high-melting metals and their alloys,

in plasma chemistry, etc. Ion accelerators make it possible to accomplish the

process of ion-implanted doping of semiconductor materials.

COMM!)

Foreword

Introduction

Chapter 1. Methodology of Experimental Trials of BRDU's
1.1. Complex engineering system

1.2. Methodology of tests of complex engineering systems

1.3. Purpose, kinds and classification of tests of BRDU's

1.4. Methodology of tests of BRDU's

1.5. Tests for reliability

1.6. Control computers in automatic and automated systems for controlling

tests

Chapter 2. Physical Conditions in Outer Space

2.1. General characterization of physical conditions in space

2.2. Upper atmosphere of the earth and outer space about the earth

2.3. Influence of cosmic vacuum and low temperatures on construction
materials

2.1.. Influence of solar electromagnetic radiation on temperature of a
spacecraft

2.5. Influence of meteoric bodies and streams of charged particles

Chapter 3. Methods and Equipment for Simulating Influence of Space Flight
Factors

Tests for acoustical influence

Vibration tests

Tests for overloading and shock loads

Tests under conditions of dynamic zero gravity

Tests for influence of streams of charged particles

Tests for influence of micrometeor streams

. Thermal vacuum tests

pter 4. Beds for Thermal Vacuum Tests

Purpose and equipment of test beds

Test bed vacuum and cryogenic systems

Sources for simulating the spectrum of solar radiation

Simulators of solar radiation

Simulators of planetary radiation

. Simulation of radiant heat exchange when testing in a vacuum chamber

Chapter 5. Hetrology; Methods of Statistical Analysis of Measurement
Results

Hetrology and standardization of measurements

Kinds of measurements. measuring instruments and their metrological

indicators

too.
on. .o

a . . . 3- . .
uwaHbNOuwao—t

a-b§&~a~nwuuuwwu

o
o s a

b
0‘
o

0

WV!
.

NH
. .

5.3. Errors and indicators of measurement precision
5.4. Statistical analysis and representation of measurement results
5.5. Methods of testing statistical hypotheses using nonparametric stati-

stical tests
5.6. Automation of measurements in tests

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

3

5
12
12
lb
20
2 7
32

101
68
108
52

56

58
58

60
60
61
66
65
69
71
72
77
77
81
88
92
95
96

99
99

100
102
105

111
1110
Chapter 6.
6.1. Probe

Methods of Diagnosing a Plasma and Ion Beams
method of diagnosing a plasna

6.2. Corpuscular methods or studying a plasma
6.3. Microwave radio diagnosis of a plasma
6.6. Spectral diagnosis of a plasma

6.5. Laser

diagnosis of a plasma

6.6. Photographic recording of rapidly occurring processes
6.7. Methods of diagnosing an ion beam

Chapter 7.
7.1. Tests
Tests
Tests
. Tests
Tests

h pter 8.

Tests

Tests

Tests
h pter 9.

croonoooooooooooonuuuu

.2.
.3
.6
.5.
a
.1.
.2.
.3. Tests
.6
.5.
.6
a
.1
.2
.3

9. a. Space

Bed Tests of Space Pouer Plants and Their Elements

of solar power plants

of nuclear power plants (YaBU's)

of systems for converting thermal energy into electrical
of chemical current sources (KhIT's)

of heat pipes and radiant coolers

Bed Tests of Electric Rocket Engines (ERD's)

Key indicators and characteristics of an ERD
Bed equipment, testing and measuring and research equipment

of electrochermal engines (ETD's)

of stationary plasma-jet electromagnetic engines (EHD's)
of pulsed END's

of ion electrostatic engines (ESD's)

Space PIight Trials of ERDU's

. Structure of the space launch complex
. Methods of transmitting radio telemetry information
Determination of thrust of an 3RD in space flight tests

flight tests of an ERDU

Bibliography
Subject Index

COPYRIGHT:

8831

Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye", 1981

C50: 1866/156

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIQUID-FUELED ROCKET ENGINES
Tallinn TENNIKA JA TOOIHINB in Estonian Ho 2, Feb 81 pp 41-44
[Article by A. Kﬁnnapuu: "Liquid-Fueled Rocket Engines in Space"]

[Text] "To continue exploring and exploitation of space by utilizing the achieve-
ments of science and technology in the interest of science. technology. and
national economy." [in boldface]

Extract from the draft program on Soviet economic

and social directions submitted to the 26th

Party Congress. .
One of the most important aspects of space exploitation is the need for powerful
energy sources. The father of cosmonautics and rocket construction. Soviet
scientist K. Tsiolkovskiy showed as early as 1903 that the rocket engine was the
only possible power source for space flight. A quarter century ago Soviet scien-
tists and engineers successfully solved the problem of making such engines and
laid the foundation for the space age. A rocket engine is a power source in which
all components necessary for jet propulsion are stored within the rocket. The
working of the rocket engine is thus independent of the outside environment and
can be used in space conditions. Engine power does not depend on the speed of
flight and changes very little with increased altitude. Contemporary space flight
depend primarily on liquid-fueled rocket engines.

In a liquid-fueled rocket engine (diagram 1) the fuel is burned in conbustion
chamber 1 in the presence of an oxidizer. Fuel and oxidizer are forced into the
combustion chamber from tanks (5) by pumps (2) through valves (6) and atomisers.
The pumps are activated by a turbine (3), itself driven by a gas generator (7).
The emptying tanks are filled with an inert gas from a special reservoir with the
help of a motor (6). In snaller engines the fuel pumps can be replaced by gas
pressure in the tanks. The power of a rocket engine can be determined by formula
R - mc(Pa-Ph)F, with n being the volume of the gas emanating from the jet, c the
speed of the gas in the jet opening, Pa the pressure in the combustion chamber,
Ph the pressure of external environment, and F the area of the jet opening.

As the formula indicates, the efficiency of a rocket engine is greatly dependent
on the velocity of exhaust gases. To achieve a great exhaust velocity, high
pressure must be maintained in the combustion chamber by intensive burning at
temperatures from 3,000 to 6,000 degrees c. For example, the pressure in the
combustion chamber of the Soviet Vbstok space rockets of the type RD 107 rises

67

F0!t0F11C1AL.US£¢)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Diagram 1.

to 60 Atm, in some solid fuel engines it is as high as 300 Atm. The velocity
of exhaust from liquid-fueled rocket engines ranges from 2 to 4.5 km/sec, in
the RD 107 motors it is 3.0 to 3.1 km/sec.

One of the most popular fuels for liquid-fueled rocket engines is kerosene burned
in oxygen. Oxygen is stored in liquid form. Oxygen is preferred for rocket
engines primarily because of ample supply and low production costs. It is ob-
tained by compressing and cooling air repeatedly. Since the boiling point of
nitrogen (-1960 C) is lower than that of oxygen (-183°C) the nitrogen in the

air evaporates and oxygen remains. It is a non-poisonous and chemically non-
aggressive substance. Pure oxygen is generally non-explosive but an explosive
mixture can result when it comes into contact with fuel. especially oils. This
property of oxygen requires a careful degreasing of rocket tanks before filling.

Independently fed liquid-fueled rocket engines also use other substances besides
petroleum and liquid oxygen. Kerosene as well as a mixture of-aniline and ethyl
alcohol can be burned in nitric acid, petroleum in tetranitromethane, a mixture

of methyl alcohol and hydrazinehydrate in hydrogen peroxide, hydrazine in liquid
fluorine, etc. To achieve better mixing the fuel and oxidising agent are put

into revolution in the atomisers. In larger engines scores of atomisers are placed
in checkerboard fashion. Fuel coming into the engine is usually also used to

cool the combustion chamber. The placing of smaller engines inside fuel tanks

to achieve cooling is conceivable. Various methods are used to ignite the com-
ponents of liquid duel. Pyrocartridgea offer a relatively simple and reliable
ignition method. To a lesser extent electrical ignition is used, mostly in

smaller engines. The ignition system, however, can be eliminated by the use

of so-called unique fuels. This "liquid gunpowder" consists of substances igniting
spontaneously upon mutual contact. For example, the orientation and adjustment
motors of the "Salyut-G" orbital station are powered by asymmetrical dimethyl-
hydrazine and nitrotetroxide (an oxidizer) that ignite upon contact.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Liquid-fueled engines are widely used in space flight rockets. A rocket consisting
of several stages has separate engines and tanks for each stage. After the burnout
of the first stage the now useless engines are discarded and the secoad stage

takes over, then the third. Three-stage rockets are the most popular. The fol-
lowing comparison illustrates the need for multistage rockets. For achieving orbital
speed (almost 8 km/sec) with a one-stage rocket would mean that at least 93 to

96 percent of the starting weight would consist of fuel. The frame and payload

of the rocket would thus have to be unrealistically light. In multistage rockets
the share of fuel in the total weight can be reduced well below 90 percent. Fuel
tanks usually serve as structural elements, especially if internal pressure has
been used to have the tank walls exert tensile strength.

To characterize carrier rockets a few data of the Saturn V rockets used for the

US moon missions are shown. That rocket, 112 meters high including fuel tanks,
was able to bring a payload of 120 tons to orbital velocity. The launch weight

of the three-stage rocket was 2,890 tons. with 2.526 tons (87.3 percent) consisting
of fuel. Host of the fuel supplies were spent within 11 minutes, an average of
more than 3.8 tons per second. In the rocket's first stage the five engines burned
as much as 13.5 tons per second. Liquid oxygen was used as oxidizer in all three
stages of the Saturn V, with the first stage fueled by petroleum, and the second
and third by liquid hydrogen.

Engineers building liquid-fueled rocket engines encounter many problems posed

by weightlessness in space, especially in the case of half-empty tanks. In
weightless state there is no clear distinction between liquid and gas. The location
of fuel in the tanks depends greatly on the wetting properties of the tank walls.
Should fuel cost the inner walls of the tank, then gas will collect in the center
of the container. In a reverse situation liquid droplets would remain suspended
in the gas. Neither situation is acceptable in space engine fuel systems that
require extreme accuracy. Gas bubbles in fuel disturb a smooth, calculated

flow and combustion; in an extreme case they can even interrupt the flow of fuel
components into the combustion chamber. Mixing gas and liquid in space fuel sys-
tems must be avoided. Separation of gas and liquid in the tanks with the help

of movable membranes is not satisfactory, since each liquid contains dissolved
gas particles. Moreover, the greater the pressure under which a liquid is stored,
the more gases it contains. should such liquid be directed into ducts at high
velocity, reduction of pressure and separation of gas particles would result
according to the laws of hydrodynamics. For that reason, all dissolved gases
have to be removed from rocket fuel on the ground. Cleansing of the fuel from
gases in a vacuum chamber is not acceptable, since not only gaseous particles

but also lighter fractions of the fuel would escape into the vacuum, thus changing
the fuel's chemical consistency. 0n the other hand, if easily dissolved gases
such as oxygen and nitrogen are removed from the fuel by flowing insoluble gas
(such as helium) through it (the so-called deaeration method) the requirements

of space are entirely met. Before fuel that has been subjected to such cleansing
process is pumped into the tanks of a space vehicle, the tanks and the tubing of
the entire system must be vacuumed carefully to rid it of gases.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The above complicated requirements were successfully met by Soviet constructors
in the building of a new, unified engine systes for the second generation orbital
station "Sslyut-6." On-board engines are used in space stations primarily to
correct the orbit of the station. to stabilize the station's position, and to

join up with other orbital systems. An independent system of engines was previously

used for each of these tasks, and often they used different fuel components.
This made the fueling of space vehicles difficult even on the cosmodrome, not
to nettion resupply in orbit.

The two correction engines of the "Salyut-6" orbital station (with a force of
300 kgf each) and approximately 30 docking, orientation and stabilization engines
(14 kgf each) have all been joined to a COIIIOn fuel system. It consists of three
cylindrical fuel and three oxidizer tanks. Bath tank contains a hermetically
sealed accordion bellows that separates the liquid from the part filled with
pressurized gas. The pressurized gas consists of nitrogen that is stored in
separate tanks under a 200 Atm pressure. The pressure of nitrogen forced into
fuel tanks through reductors is 20 Atm. The action of the gas pressure forces
the fuel components into the engine. For engine starting only a valve has to

be opened, since the fuel consists of the above-mentioned spontaneously igniting
components. During space refueling the pressurized nitrogen is pumped back into
its container by a lit" compressor.

       
   
 

LMIKUOO Orsnaoi
lankimnne nvokosmososse

Pack 3

Jdreltonkimise

As the above diagram shows, for a fuel supply to the engine valve (1) in front
of reductor (3) and valves (4), (5), or (6) located in front of the fuel tanks
must he opened. Then valves (7), (8), or (9) on the fuel lines of the respective

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tanks must be opened, and fuel is supplied to engine groups (14) and (15). The

engine is started by opening starting valves (16) or (17). Directives for this
procedure arrive together with the task to be accomplished from the direction and
orientation control system.

For a resupply of fuel, valves (6), (5), or (6) and valve (10) are opened, and
compressor (11) pumps the pressurized nitrogen from the respective tank back into
container (2). Bxertion of pressure in the tanks of the fuel supply ship "Progress"
and with the opening of valves (12) and (7), (8), or (9) fuel is inserted into

the tanks of the space vehicle. Gas mixture that has become useless can be

expelled through valve (13) into open space in the course of cleaning of the fuel
system. This was necessary on board "Salyut-6" when a leak in a bellows was
discovered that had resulted in the entry of gas into the fuel. To avoid an entry
of gas into the other tanks cosmonauts V. Lyakhov and V. Ryl-in performed a com-
plicated repair operation in the orbital station. The fuel in the defective tank
was cleansed of gas particles by centrifugation (the orbital station was put into
a revolution of .5 revolutions per minute), the tubing was cleaned, the tank
filled with pure nitrogen, and then isolated from the remaining fuel system.

In the history of space travel liquid-fueled rockets have reigned supreme, although
solid-fueled rocket engines have been used in isolated cases of space flight.
Nuclear engines as well as electrical rockets engines could open new vistas for
interplanetary travel especially. But more of them in a later issue.

COPYRIGHT: Kirjsstus "Perioodika", "'l‘ehnika js 'l'ootnine", 1981

9240
(:80: 1815/1

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTROL OF SPACE VEHICLES

Moscow UPRAVLENIYE KOSHICHESKIHI APPARATAMI in Russian 1978 (signed to press
14 Nov 78) pp 2-4, 191

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Control of Space
Vehicles", by Gennadiy Dmitriyevich Smirnov, "Nauka i tekhnicheskiy progress"
(Science and Technological Progress) series, USSR Academy of Sciences,
Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 17,500 copies, 192 pages, illustrated]

[Text] The development of space rocket technology made it necessary to develop
intensively the methods, means and systems for control of different types of

space vehicles. 6. D. Smirnov, candidate of engineering sciences, tells about
this new branch of technology in his book. It describes the time and space, and
statistical characteristics of the space environment, defines the tasks referable
to ground-based support of space flights, describes algorithms for analysis and
decision making concerning the control of space vehicles.

Introduction

In our days, exploration of space is being deployed on an increasingly broad
scale; the practical use of space technology is becoming increasingly diversified
and effective. Near-earth and distant space is being traversed by various space
vehicles, which are launched to solve amny scientific and applied problems.

The intensive development of space technology is being stimulated by the fact
that its use is becoming economically justified. Cosmonautics has already fur-
nished some valuable results to, for example, geography, geology, meteorology,
navigation, communications, ecology, forecasting natural disasters, planning
transport networks and a number of other scientific and national economic direc-
tions. Studies of earth from space are of particular importance to comprehensive
detection of natural resources and investigation of geophysical processes.

Much attention is devoted to problems of development and practical use of space
technology for the nation's needs in the national economy inthe proceedings of
the 24th and 25th CPSU congresses. The 10th Five-Year Plan provides for fur-
ther increase in the network of space television and communications, weather
forecasting by means of meteorological satellites, as well as studies of natural
resources of different parts of our country.

Proper operation of a space vehicle would be inconceivable without constant and
reliable ground monitoring of its time-space and functional characteristics,

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFNJAL.USE(NNLY

consideration of which makes it possible to control them continuously and, conse-
quently to perform the targeted tasks put to them. The territorially scattered
"earth-spacevehicle"system contains all of the elements of complex systems:
hierarchy of organization, purposefulness [goal orientation] of operation, large

number of elements, existence of information connections and interaction between
elements.

Development of complex control systems of this type always involves some difficul-
ties, since one must combine in one complex many branches of science and technology.
In cosmonautics, this refers to rocket dynamics, ballistics, automatic regulation,
information theory, radiophysics, radio engineering, electronics and others.

On the whole, theory of "earth-space vehicle" control systems is viewed as a branch
of engineering cybernetics of the man-machine type, while the systems built on its
basis are referable to automated control systems with direct and feedback communica-
tion channels for giving information and commands. The aggregate of elements of

this complicated system forms a closed control circuit, which consists of informative
and measuring, informative-computer subsystems and controls. This construction
determined the contents and structure of our book. An attempt was made there

to describe the entire complex [set] of elements in the ”earth-space vehicle"

control system, the correlations and operation thereof.

The author expresses his sincere appreciation to Z. S. Karamov, doctor of
engineering sciences, whose numerous recommendations and advice were largely
instrumental in improving the book.

Contents Page
Introduction 3
Space and Motion of Space Vehicles 5
General Description of Space Vehicle Control Systems 33
Tasks Performed by Space Vehicles. Structural Distinctions of Vehicles 62
Composition and Purpose of Main Elements of Command-Measurement Complex 100
Processing and Analysis of Operative [Ongoing] Information. '
Decision Making 145
Conclusion 186
Bibliography 189

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1978

10,657
C50: 1866/999

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 629.785:523.3
STUDY OF LUNAR SOIL
Moscow GRUNTOVEDENIYE LUNY in Russian 1979 (signed to press 18 Dec 79) pp 2-6. 232

lznnotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Soil Science on the Moon",
by Igor' Ivanovich Cherkasov and Valentin Vladimirovich shvarev, Institute of

Physics of the Earth imeni 0.Yu. Shmidt, USSR Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo
"Nauka". 1,300 copies, 232 pages?

_/_Tex£7 mormou

This book summarizes the results of a decade of investigation of the Moon's soil.
considered as an object for human engineering activity. The primary attention is
focused on the lunar regolith. The specific methods used in lunar soil science are
described: direct and indirect, with optical and radiophysical tools and instru-
ments. automatic units, telemechanics and space equipment designed to operate in
the lunar environment.

The authors describe the research performed by the "Luna" and "Surveyor" stations,
the traveling "Lunokhod" laboratories and the "Apollo" expeditions, as well as the

investigations of samples of lunar soil that have been conducted in terrestrial
laboratories. The results of all of these are systematized and correlated. Spe-
cial attention is given to the use of terrestrial rocks and materials for modeling
lunar soil. The authors discuss possible methods for improving the natural proper-
ties of regolith, as well as the newest data on the properties of other planets'
soils.

This book is intended for the broad circle of readers who are interested in ques-
tions relating to the conquest of space and specialists working in the field of
Moon and Earth soil studies.

FOREWORD

The delivery to Earth of the samples of lunar soil taken by the Soviet "Luna-26"
automatic station in August 1976 marked the end of the first decade of direct in-
vestigation of the Moon's surface, which decade had begun with the soft landing of
the “Luna-9" in February 1966. During this time. automatic lunar stations, the
"Lunokhod" traveling laboratories (USSR) and the "Apollo" lunar expeditions (United
States) conducted many variegated investigations of the surface layer of soil on
the Moon, drilled to depths of up to 3 meters, and delivered hundreds of kilograms
of samples to laboratories on Earth.

74
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In connection with this, lunar soil science, which was born only 12 years ago, has
now developed into an independent branch of general soil science that is worth of a
summation of the results of its first stage.

As on Earth, soils on the Moon are any material that is available for human engi-
neering activity. Primarily, this means lunar regolith, which is a dispersed soil
that has been subjected to the effects of meteorites and solar and cosmic radiation.

In this book, our basic discussion centers on the mechanical properties of lunar
soils, which determine the conditions for landing and moving on the Moon and stipu-
late the possibility and methods for erecting various platforms, shelters and other
structures. He describe the indirect -- astronomical and radioastronomical -
methods that have been used to study the Moon's soil and the work performed by
automatic stations on its surface in areas where landings have been made and along
the paths taken by self-propelled equipment, as well as lunar expeditions and auto-
matic units that took samples for delivery to Earth. Special chapters are devoted
to the study of samples in terrestrial laboratories and experiments with terrestri-
al analogs of lunar soils.

The instruments and methods that were first specially created for these investiga-
tions utilise the most recent achievements in machine building, automation, tele-
mechanics and telemetry that have also opened new possibilities for the development
of instruments used to study the soil of Earth. The use of these instruments and
methods will make it possible to accelerate engineering-geological and soil science
work and make it cheaper and more reliable, particularly in hard-to-reach areas of
the Earth.

In connection with this, this book, which is intended primarily for readers who are
interested in questions relating to the investigation of the Moon, will also be of
interest for a much larger circle of people who are involved in soil science and
the study of the Earth's soils.

At the end of the book we present data on the prospects for the artificial improve-
ment of the engineering and physical properties of the Moon's soils by strengthen-
ing and compressing them, which may be of considerable practical importance in the
future stages of its conquest by man. An appendix gives a brief summary of the
first results of the investigation of the properties of soils on Mercury, Venus and
Mars.

Numerous Soviet and foreign sources were used for this book. The reference data on
the soils that are presented in it correspond to what had been published in the
scientific press as of 31 December 1977.

In connection with their research and the publication of its results, the authors
made use of the advice and support of Academicians A.P. Vinogradov and P.A.
Rebinder, who have always been interested in questions relating to lunar soil sci-
ence. The authors feel deep gratitude toward these scientists for their priceless
assistance.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
Foreword. . . . . ....... . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Chapter 1. Subject of the Study, Problems and Methods in Lunar Soil Science . . 5
Chapter 2. Investigation of Lunar Soils by Indirect Methods . . . . . . . . . . 16
Chapter 3. Investigations of Lunar Soils With Stationary Automatic Stations . . 36

Chapter 4. Investigations with the Help of the "Lunokhod-l and -2" Mobile Auto-
matic Laboratories . . . . . . . . . . . ....... . . . . . . . 84

Chapter 5. Investigations Performed by the "Apollo" Expeditions . . . . . . . . 97
Chapter 6. Study of the Physicomechanicsl Properties of Lunar Soils on Earth. . 119
Chapter 7. Terrestrial Analogs of Lunar Soils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
Chapter 8. Laboratory Experiments With Analogs of Lunar Soils ........ . 172
Chapter 9. Problems in the Technical Improvement of Lunar Regolith. . . . . . . 198
Appendix. Modern Conceptions About the Soils of Mercury, Venus and Mars . . . . 205
Bibliography. . . . . . . . . ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 226

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1979

11746
CSO: 1866/97

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SEAC! APPLICATIONS

SATELLITE OCEANOGRAPHY

Leningrad UCHENYYE ZAPISKI LENINGRADSKOGO GOSUDARSTVBNNOGO UNIVERSITETA IHENI A.A.
ZHDANOVA, NO 603: SBRIYA CEOGRAFICHESKIKH NAUK, VYPUSK 27: SPUTNIKOVAYA OKEANOLO-
GIYA in Russian No 2. 1980 (signed to press 16 Apr 80) pp 2, 163-167

[Annotation and abstracts from journal "Scientific Notes From Leningrad State Uni-
versity imeni A. A. Zhdanov, No #03: Geographic Sciences Series, Issue 27: Satel-
lite Oceanography", edited by V. Kh. Buynitskiy, Izdatel' stvo Leningradskogo uni-
versiteta, 559 copies, 167 pages7

ﬁexg ANNOTATIOR

This collection of works (No l was published in 1975) contains new data on the cir-
culation of seawater and ice in the southern polar area of the world ocean that
were obtained as the result of special processing and analysis of satellite obser-
vations. There are also discussions of questions relating to the determination of
the temperature field and dynamics of oceanological fronts and the possibility of
using satellite information for the operational support of commercial sea activi-
ties. Finally, there are explanations of new methods of analysing satellite photo-
graphs and processing then automatically, as well as making cartographic measure-
ments on satellite photographs.

This collection is intended for oceanographic specialists, as well as graduate stu-
dents and undergraduates at universities and hydrometeorological institutes.

ABSTRACTS
UDC 551.456.19551.456.7

NEH DATA ON THE CIRCULATION 0P SEAHATER AND ICE IN THE SOUTHBRR POLAR AREA OF THE
HORLD OCEAN

lzbstract of article by Buynitskiy, V.Kh., Dmitrash, Zh.A., and Kuptsova, L.N;7

[Text/ As the result of an analysis of satellite photographs, the authors demon-
strate that the concept of stationary cyclones as a characteristic feature of at-
mospheric cirCulation in the southern polar area and the previously accepted plan
of geostrophic surface water currents do not correspond to reality. They also pre-
sent new data on special features of the movement of surface waters and sea ice in
the southern polar area of the world ocean. Figures 10; references 15.

77

FOR OI11CJAI.UBELONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.456.l+551.456.7

EXPERIMENT IN THE STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF THE BRICHTNESS FIELD IN AN INFRARED
PHOTOGRAPH OF THE GULF STREAM REGION

lzbstract of article by Grigorkina, R.G., Likhachev, I.V., and Chistyakov, Yu.A;7

£1ex£7 A system has been developed for processing satellite information on a digi-
tal computer that provides for the conversion of an analog signal into digital

form, its entry in the computer's memory, and primary processing. With the help of
the theory of nonstationary random functions, the authors have obtained data on the
spatial nonuniformity of the Gulf Stream region's brightness field. Calculation of the
current spatial spectral characteristics of the brightness field makes it possi-
ble to investigate the statistical structure of the surface water's temperature

field. Figures 5; references 5.

UDC 551.515.2

NON-STEADY-STATE MODEL OF THE EKHAN BOUNDARY LAYER OF THE ATMOSPHERE IN THE TYPHOON
ZONE OVER THE OCEAN

libstract of article by Puke, V.R;7

litx£7 In order to determine the tangential wind pressure in the lowest layer of
the atmosphere over the ocean in the typhoon zone, the author realizes a non-
stcndy-state model of the Ekman boundary layer with an approximation of the pres-
sure field in the form of a bell-shaped function. The approximation parameters can
be determined with the help of television and infrared satellite information. Ref-
erences 7.

UDC 551.561.7(268+261)

ANALYSIS OF THE THREE-DIMENSIONAL THERMAL STRUCTURE OF GULF STEAM WATERS PROM
INFRARED IMAGES OBTAINED BY AN ARTIFICIAL EARTH SATELLITE

[Abstract of article by Andreyev, I.N., and Cuber, P.K;7

[Text7 Using infrared images obtained by an artificial Earth satellite, the au-
thors analyze the temperature field of the Gulf Stream'a surface waters. It has
been established that water temperature data obtained by a satellite that corres-
ponds to the results of actual temperature measurements also contains more detailed
information on the water's thermal structure than the actual measurements do. Pig-
ures 6; references 3.

UDC 551.66l.7

IDENTIFICATION OF THE UPUELLINC ZONE NEAR THE NORTHWESTERN COAST OF AFRICA ON THE
BASIS OF DATA FROM AN ARTIFICIAL EARTH SATELLITE

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0511”“. USE ONLY

ﬁbstract of article by Sokolov, B.I,_7

[Text/ 0n the basis of the results of a comparison of data on cloud cover obtained
by an artificial Earth satellite with data obtained during full-scale oceanological
observations, the authors demonstrate the possibility of using satellite informa-
tion to detect cold water upwelling zones on the ocean's surface. Figures 2; ref-
erences 5.

UDC 551.465

ON THE PROBLEM OF MEASURING THE OCEAN SURFACE'S TEMPERATURE PM AN ARTIFICIAL
EARTH SATELLITE

_/_Abstract of article by Staritsyn, 0.19]

[text-l The author discusses the problems involved in relating sea surface tempera-
ture as measured with a radiometer to the temperature obtained by the normal con-
tact method. He gives a brief review of experimental observations of the differ-
ence in temperature between the boundary molecular layer and the ocean's surface.
He also analyzes the special features of the thermal interaction of the sea's boun-
dary layers and presents a method for calculating the difference in temperature be-
tween the “cold film" and the surface. On the basis of an analysis of data ob-
tained in the Sea of Japan with a radiometer operating in the 8.0-12.5 m band and
quick-response thermoresistors submerged to a depth of 2-3 cm, he derives a regres-
sion equation between the radiation and kinetic temperatures. Figures 4; refer-
ences l7.

UDC 551 .461 .7(265)

VORTEX STRUCTURE OF THE SUBARCTIC FRONT IN THE NORTHWESTERN PART OF THE PACIFIC
OCEAN

ZA-bstract of article by Bulatov, N.v;7

[Text/ Using infrared iaages and the results of surface observations, the author
investigated the vortex structure of the thermal field in the area of the sub-
Arctic front in the northwestern part of the Pacific Ocean. He also presents new

data on the dimensions of the vortices and their development and collapse. Figures
2; references 17.

UDC 551.66.07/08

INTERPRETINC OCEANOLOGICAL PRONTS AND CURRENTS ON TELEVISION IMAGES ON THE BASIS OF
CLOUD INDICATORS

[Kbstract of article by Sokolov, 8.1;].

ﬁext7 The author makes reconnendations for interpreting oceanological fronts and
currents on the basis 0‘ an analysis of television images of cloud cover that have

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been obtained by an artificial Earth satellite. The interpretation methods are il-
lustrated by examples. Figures 7; references 9.

UDC 551.461. 7(265)

0N RELATING OPTIMUM REGIONS FOR LONG-LINE TUNA FISHING IN THE PACIFIC OCEAN TO THE
DYNAMICS OF THE NORTHERN TROPICAL CONVERGENCE

[Abstract of article by Bulatov, N.V., and Sokolov, B.I_._7

£Tex£7 The authors investigate the relationship between tuna catches and the dy-
namics of the northern tropical convergence. Analytical data enable them to ex-
plain a number of special features in the variability of catches in the regions
where connercial fishing is conducted. Satellite information was used to describe
the location of the convergence zone. Figures 10; references 7.

UDC 621.391.837.2

ON THE FEASIBILITY OF UNIDIMENSIONAL FILTRATION OF TELEVISION AND THO-DIMENSIONAL
SATELLITE DOT IMAGES

[Abstract of article by Movchan, B.N., and Derevyanko, V.G_..7

[I‘ext7 The authors discuss and evalute the form and magnitude of the distortions
that are characteristic of dot images. They evaluate the effect of spacecraft sta-
bilization errors on the degree of distortion of a dot image. They suggest uni-
dimensional filtration of dot images instead of two-dimensional filtration in order
to determine the structural features of an image. Figures 2; references 3.

UDC 551.46.07/08

CONCEPTUAL DIAGRAM FOR THE AUTOMATIC PROCESSING OF INFRARED SATELLITE INFORMATION

./_I_\bstract of article by Staritsyn, D.|(_/

LTexE/ A model of the automatic processing of results of artificial Earth satel-
lite measurements of outgoing radiation has been developed in the Oceanography De-
partment of Leningrad State University, and the author proposes that it be used to
compile surface temperature charts. In contrast to existing models, the plan for
this model contains a unit that allows for the effect of the "cold film" and a unit
that makes it possible to produce a temperature gradient chart as well as repre-

senting a temperature field in the form of statistical gradients. Figures 1; ref-
erences lo.

UDC 551.106.07/08

EXPERIMENT IN THE MACHINE PROCESSING OF SATELLITE OCEANOLOGICAL INFORMATION REGIS-
TERED IN THE DIRECT TRANSMISSION MODE

80

FOR OFFICIAL ' '7 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Libstract of article by Vinogradov, V.V., Likhachev, I.V., and Staritsyn, D.K;7

LTexg/ The authors discuss the results of the processing of satellite infrared in-
formation obtained from artificial Earth satellites in the direct transmission mode.
In the processing they used data obtained by satellites in the "NOAA-Z" series
(United States) during their period of operation over the test range for the Inter-
national Tropical EXperiment ATEP-74. The results of the processing are obtained
as radiation temperatures, profiles and temperature charts of the ocean. The au-
thors compare these results with synchronous data obtained by radiation measure-
ments made from an IL-l8 airplane and surface measurements made from scientific re-
search ships. Figures 6; references 11.

UDC 528.235
CARTOCRAPHY WITH SATELLITE SURVEYING MATERIALS
libstract of article by Zvonarev, K.A;7

liext? This article has two parts. In the first, the author reviews the carto-
graphic projections used in the practice of oceanography and meteorology, to which
maps the contents of space photographs are transferred. These projections include
Mercator, stereographic, equidistant azimuthal (Postel') and conformal conical.
The author discusses questions relating to the transfer of the contents of geo-
graphically correlated (as was described in a preceding collection of articles)
space photographs to maps using these projections. In the second part, he de-
scribes the determination of directions (azimuths), distances and areas on maps
using these projections. The second part also contains auxiliary tables. Figures
19; references lb.

COPYRIGHT: Izd.:el'stvo Leningradskogo universiteta, I980

ll7h6
CSO: 1866/106

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 629.7.014.18
'SOYUZ-ZZ' STUDIES EARTH

Moscow 'sowz-zz' ISSLBDUYET 2mm: in Russian 1980 (signed to press 25 Sep 79) pp
15-19, 230-231

[Introduction and table of contents from book "'Soyus-22' Investigates the Earth",
joint publication of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the 603 Academy of Sciences,
Izdatel'stvo "ﬂanks", 231 pages]

[Text] Introduction. The capacity for studying different phenomena and processes
while at a great distance from the investigated object was for a long time the
monopoly of astronomy. Everything which we knew until recently about the celes-
tial bodies, large and small, close and distant, was obtained by the measurement
and analysis of the electromagnetic radiation reaching us from these objects.

At first astronomers registered only the visible radiation of celestial objects:
planets, stars and galaxies. Radioastronomy was born later. New directions in
astronomical investigations developed as space technology was developed: submil-
limeter, infrared, ultraviolet, x-ray and gamma astronomy. The possibility of
carrying out direct experiments appeared - investigation of the composition and
structure of planetary atmospheres with instruments carried aboard spacecraft.
Then it was possible to take samples of lunar ground and deliver them to the
earth. Finally came direct photography and the transmission to earth of panoramas
of the landing sites of the descent modules of Soviet automatic stations and the
investigations carried out by the "Vikings" on the Martian surface.

It would seem that such a logical line -- transition from remote to direct inves-
tigation -- will also in the future predominate in space investigations. But in
actuality it is not all that simple. It appears that in the coming decades space
vehicles will be able to carry out direct investigations only at the surfaces of
the most accessible planets of the solar system. As before, the remote method
will play the predominant role.

During recent years the remote method has come into use in a field of knowledge
very distant from astronomy - in investigations of what goes on around us, on
the earth. It was found that by observing our planet from a distance, from the
orbits of artificial satellites, it is possible to obtain information on terres-
trial processes transpiring in the biosphere and atmosphere, information which is
necessary to geology, agriculture, meteorology, etc.

Among specialists in the earth sciences the first to use remote methods were the
meteorologists. By regularly receiving images of the cloud cover from aboard a

satellite it is possible to draw conclusions concerning atmospheric dynamics. The
82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

usefulness of such information is obvious.

The results of analysis of space photographs of the earth are used effectively in
geology. In particular, on the basis of observations from space it has been pos-
sible to discover new major faults in the territory of Kazakhstan and the Altay,
which made it possible to compile a map of dislocations of this region and clas-
sify them with respect to their ore content. Do the basis of the results a general
plan was drawn up for carrying out mineral exploration work.

A geological analysis of space information is used in a study of structure of the
earth's crust. It unquestionably will lead to a qualitative jump in the investiga-

tion of the patterns of structure of the earth's deep layers and mineral explora-
tion.

Equally important is the information received from orbit on the contamination of
rivers and the coastal regions of the seas and oceans and also the changes trans-
piring in the atmosphere of our planet. For example, atmospheric concentrations of
aerosol particles were discovered on images of the earth obtained at a distance of
hundreds of kilometers from its surface. It was possible to evaluate the nature of
atmospheric contamination by aerosol. which is exceptionally important. Under con-
ditions of intensive growth of the productive-economic activity of man there is

not only an increase in dust content, but also a change in the gas composition of
the atmosphere on which life itself on our planet is dependent. In order to pre-

vent any such shift. much less undesirable consequences on a global scale, it is
necessary to register it in its initial stages. How to do this? The "Salyut-a" sta-
tion carried a spectrometer which was used in registering solar spectra through

the atmosphere at the times of sunrise and sunset. Such measurements make it pos-
sible to monitor small aerosol impurities in the atmosphere and the dynamics of its
gas composition.

Observations from space made it possible to obtain data which are helpful not only
in the search for minerals and preservation of the environment, but also to solve
a number of problems in agriculture and forestry, power production, etc. It is
known that in arid and semidesert regions the development of agricultural produc-
tion is held back by the shortage of fresh water. However, this shortage in some
cases is only apparent. For example, the processing of photographs of the Hangy-
shlak Peninsula in the Caspian Sea indicated that within the limits of the studied
territory there is a sector with a total area of about 2,000 km? where the ground

water lies at a shallow depth. The exploitable reserves of fresh water there are
estimated at approximately 3,500-6,000 million cubic meters.

Remote methods make it possible to determine the moisture reserves in the soil,
which must be known for the planning of sowing work and determining the optimum
variety of agricultural crops. The use of remote methods is also extremely effec-

tive in making observations of the course of field work, stages in the maturing
of crops, timely detection of regions of damage to sown fields by predators, the
degree of lodging of grains, etc.

In forestry space observations even now are being used for detecting centers of
forest fires, sectors of aamage of the forest by predators and diseases, and also
for inventorying forest resources.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basis for investigations of the earth from space was methods for measuring

characteristic and reflected electromagnetic radiations. Naturally, it is neces-
sary to take into account the degree of transparency of the earth's atmosphere
for waves of different length and their interaction with terrestrial features.

The nature of reflected solar radiation is very sensitive to such physicochemical
and biological parameters of terrestrial features as the chlorophyll content in
the green mass of plants, temperature, moisture content and composition of soils.
water salinity and its contamination by chemical substances and mechanical suspen-
sions, its concentration of phytoplankton, etc.

However, a survey in the visible range can be carried out only during the daytime.
In addition cloud cover in many cases completely covers some sector of the earth's
surface. Accordingly, an entirely predictable solution of this problem was a
-broadening of the range of investigations in the infrared, submillimeter and micro-
wave spectral regions up to the decameter wavelengths.

The region of thermal IR radiation makes it possible to detect variations in the
Physicochemical characteristics of natural features on the basis of their temper-

ature changes. In particular. using IR instruments it was possible to detect sec-
tors of vegetation damaged by diseases and having a higher temperature, detect out-
flows of geothermal waters, deep faults in the earth's crust and much else. The
most important merit of the thermal IR range is the possibility to "see" during
both daytime and nighttime.

Radio waves carry less information than the IR and visible rays. 0n the other hand,
they are capable of penetrating through great thicknesses of terrestrial surface
materials and ice and are very sensitive to the geometrical characteristics of the
surfaces, and also to the moisture content in the soil.

The most complete data can be obtained by combining the information registered in
different ranges. as was the case, for example, in astrophysics, in the study of
the sun. What are the principal methods for obtaining and representing space in-
formation concerning the earth, taking into account the properties of different
ranges of electromagnetic waves and their statistics?

The stochastic nature of the characteristic and reflected radiations of the earth
and the normal distribution of probabilities of the received electromagnetic os—
cillations make it possible to assert that an exhaustive characteristic of such

a process is its energy spectrum or any other function proportional to it (spec-
tral brightness coefficient, spectral albedo. etc.). In this case it appears that
there is no need to register the intensity of the received radiation in the entire

spectrum; it is sufficient to use only several spectral zones selected in a defin-
ite way. The latter circumstance has also become the principal prerequisite for the
appearance of the so-called multizonal method for investigating the earth from
space.

In the optical range this method is realized by the use of multiobjective, syn—
chronously operating cameras supplied with different light filters and films and
scanning optical-electronic systems.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The exposed films are delivered to the earth; the results of measuranenta with

the scanning systems are transmitted through a radio channel and are registered

in a digital form. 0n the earth these digital records are decoded, after vhich
they are transformed into black-and-vhite images of the surface for each of the
spectral zones. Then using these photographs, assigning to each spectral zone its
arbitrary color, it is possible to synthesize color photographs. what are the es-
sence and merits of the method for the synthesis of color images? The method of
synthesis of images in arbitrary colors is a logical result of the multizonsl meth-
od for obtaining space videoinformation, the method for representing the results
of a multizonal survey. with the matching (synthesis) of several images obtained
in different spectral zones, and especially those in which the intensity varia-
tions are orthogonal, the spectral dependence of the reflective and emissive char-
acteristics of natural features is manifested most completely. The effectiveness
of such a representation of multisonal videoinformation is enhanced by the cap-
acity of the human eye to react more sensitively to color contrasts than to black-
and-white contrasts. In the opinion of specialists in the earth sciences, the in-
terpretation of synthesized images makes it possible to detect additional, fre
quently extremely important infomtion concerning the studied features in compar-
ison with ordinary black-and-ﬂhite and color images.

A key stage in remote investigations of the earth from space, carried out using
scanning systems, is the stage of processing of the collected information. Here,
first of all, it is necessary to contend with two very important problem: recep-
tion and registry of gigantic flows of information, on the one hand, and the need
for its rapid processing, on the other. For example, modern multizonal scanning sys-
tems ensure the output of videoinfomtion at a rate exceeding 1, and sometime even
tens of megabits per second. In addition, in many cases it is necessary to have an
extremely operational output of data from remote observations to users at virtually
a real time scale. Evidently, solution of these problem is possible only on the
basis of automated computer processing of information, taking into account the
presence of corresponding mathematical and technical support.

The mathematical support includes the development of specialized programs and algo-
rithms for the processing of multizonal information on the basis of the cluster
and divergent analysis methods, the maximum similarity method and other methods in
the theory of statistical solutions, and also a nuber of standard transformations,
for example, of the Fourier multidimensional transform type.

Technical support includes, first and foremost, high-speed processors and external
devices for the operational, magnetic and photographic registry of videoinforma-
tion.

A comparison of the speed and productivity parameters of modern computers with the
volumes of space videoinformation reveals that they cannot be used in constructing
systems for the processing of data at a real time scale on their basis. The need
therefore arises for a specialization of electronic computers applicable to the
specific peculiarities of such information. This specialization applies for the
most part to the external devices of the computers. Their make-up must be supple-
mented by devices for the input and output of images and means for operational "Inn-
machine" coununication of the type of displays with half-tone and color images.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI I'SF ONI.\'

The processing of space information is based on the same schematic diagram which
is well developed and widely used in astronomy. This is the conventional separa-
tion of stars into a finite number of classes on the basis of the characteristics
of their spectral radiation. However, there is also a definite scheme for the pro-
cessing of space videoinformation concerning the earth,related to the diversity
of types and states of the studied terrestrial features and phenomena, on the
basis of measurements of their spectral characteristics.

The processing of space videoinformation on the earth can be broken down into pre-
liminary and specialized. In the course of preliminary processing express informa-
tion is extracted, for example, information for the purpose of warning about var-
ious catastrophic phenomena; distortions and interference in the image are elimin-
ated; the data are represented in a form convenient for further processing. Spec-
ialized processing, carried out in the interests of different branches of science
and the national economy, involves primarily the identification (interpretation) and
classification of natural features on the basis of their spectral criterion, sim-
ilar to the classification of stars. The final product of this processing is spec-
ialized maps: geological, geobotanical, soils, etc. He will illustrate the methods
for the interpretation of space videoinformation in several specific examples.

The interpretation of space photographs, for example, for agricultural purposes,
is carried out in the following way. Sectors of the territory which are sown with
a definite crop are selected. The spectra of reflected and emitted radiation are
registered in each stage of its maturing. Such surveys are carried out directly

from the earth and from aircraft. The spectrum characterizing a particular crop
is stored in the computer memory.

A similar procedure is also carried out with other agricultural crops, forests.
water bodies, etc. An extensive "archives" of spectral images is accumulated in
the computer memory. A photograph of the earth's surface transmitted from a sat-
ellite is analyzed by the electronic computer. The latter finds the elements of
one and the same spectral type. outlines them, reckoning the areas, and then makes

a comparison with the spectral information present in the memry and comunicates
to users data on the state of the studied object and its dynamics. For example,

this can be information on the stage of maturing of crops, possible damage to
them by predators or lodging, course of harvesting work, etc.

The interpretation of information in the interests of geology and the search for
minerals is carried out in a similar way. It is well known that deposits of dif-

ferent materials usually are adjacent to definite geological structures, for ex-
ample, tectonic faults. For example, at the margins of arched uplifts petroleum
deposits are usually situated alongside faults. Typical examples of geological re-
lief are subjected to a multizonal survey, the results of which are stored in the
computer memory as keys. The geological structures discriminated on the images ob—

tained from space for the investigated regions are compared with examples gtored
in the computer memory. Those which appear to be close to some key are regarded

as promising for mineral exploration. The final checking is carried out by geolog-
ical prospecting parties.

True, one difficulty is encountered here. Extensive sectors of the earth's surface
are almost completely covered by vegetation masking the geological structures. It
is no accident that at the present time the most valuable results from space

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WHCI U l'h'l" ONIX

geological prospecting have been obtained in desert and semidesert regions. How-
ever, it is entirely possible to overcome this difficulty. The fact is that dif-
ferent geological formations correspond to a specific landscape which is charac-
terized by a very definite type of vegetation. This is especially conspicuous

on small-scale space photographs. Thus, the vegetation itself can serve as a sort
of indirect indicator of the presence of various natural features of interest to
geologists. Accordingly, a geological analysis of "overgrown" sectors of the
earth's surface is carried out in two stages, one might say: the nature of the
vegetation is used in determining the characteristics of the landscape, and these
are used in judging the presence or absence of minerals. Thus, here, as in most
other fields of application of space methods for studying the natural resources of
our planet, the progress of investigations is determined by the storage in the com-
puter memory of a larger and larger "archives" of spectral images.

The situation is somewhat different with respect to the interpretation of space
information in the interests of the fishing industry. In this case the users are
extremely interested in indirect indicators of regions where fish are probably
present, specifically: the boundaries of areas of marked upwelling of deep oceanic
waters, the presence of fatty spots left by the fish at the surface, the concene
tration of phyto- and zooplankton, water temperature, etc. By discriminating on
multizonal images of the sea surface the regions which are characterized by one
indicator or anorher or a group of indicators, it is possible to give recommenda-
tions to fishing ships on the optimum organization of the fishing enterprise.

FinaLly, several words concerning the development of the methods for the interpret-
ation of space videoinformation. In order to solve this problem in the territory

of the most representative regions it is the practice to select test polygons with
different standard sectors whose characteristics are well known. Then in these sec-
tors a "multistage" survey of their spectral characteristics is carried out from
surface towers, helicopters, aircraft and space vehicles. The result of such sur-
veys is a study of the influence of the atmosphere on remote measurements and the
creation of a so-called "archives" of spectral images characteristic for the par-
ticular regions.

For investigations carried out in different geographical regions and in the inter-

ests of different branches of science and practice it may be necessary to use dif-

ferent regions of the spectrum, different spatial, energy and spectral resolutions.
In the future it will be possible to create specialized survey instruments and sat-
ellites for special purposes - some for geology, others for agriculture, etc. Now,
however, there is a need for optimizing the requirements on the technical means for
investigating the earth from space in order to create a unified space complex which
to the greatest degree will satisfy all the needs of users for information concern-
ing the earth's resources and concerning the environment.

What has been said here is evidence that the problem of study of the earth from
space has two principal components: physicotechnical and geointerpretation. The
first is related to solution of the problems involved in the optimum synthesis

of on-board data-measuring complexes operative under the real conditions of solar
radiation, reflected radiations of the earth's surface and the influence of atmo-
spheric factors. Within the scope of the physicotechnical component of the problem
there are special problems in the processing of data along both technical and math-
ematical lines, together ensuring solution of the problems of conversion from the

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

totality of remotely measured parameters to the physical characteristics of the
investigated objects. Geointerpretation is a concept bringing together a complex
of problems related to the use of space information in the interests of scientific
and practical problems of study of the earth.

Space measurement complexes for the investigation of the earth's natural resources
and monitoring of the state of the environment can be divided into two groups. The
first includes instrumentation for the optical and radio ranges of electromagnetic
waves, information from which is transmitted to the earth through radio channels
and which must be processed automatically on the basis of the extensive use of com-
puters. On-board instrument couplexes of this type are carried aboard the "Meteor"
satellites (USSR), "Landsat" satellites (United States) and others. They are used
in the solution of problems requiring the routine collection, processing and use
of information concerning the earth.

The second group includes means for photographing the earth's surface from orbital
altitudes. In this case the exposed films are delivered to the earth and after de-
velopment are processed for the most part by visual-instrumental methods on the
basis of the broad use of optical photometric and photogrammetric equipment. The
photoapparatus makes it possible, in the visible and near-IR spectral regions. to
obtain images characterized by the highest detail and accuracy of representation
of the shapes and sizes of terrestrial features. This predetermines the desirability
of using space photoinformation concerning the earth for solving a broad range of
scientific and practical problems where there are no requirements for the opera-
tional collection and use of data. Space photoinformation makes it possible to re-
vise topographic maps and compile different special maps. For the latter, in par-
ticular, it is effective to use multizonal photographs from satellites.

The flight of the "Soyuz-22" spaceship and the "Radugs" experiment carried out on
the basis of this flight were devoted to the perfecting of methods and equipment
for photographing the earth from space. This experiment in its physicotechnical
aspects was based on multizonal photography. and in its geointerpretation aspect

- on the visual-instrumental interpretation of images of the earth's surface em-
ploying color images obtained by the optical-photographic synthesis of multizonal
space photographs. The EXP-6 multizonal space camera carried aboard the "Soyuz-22"
was used in obtaining thousands of photographs of the territory of the USSR and ﬁ-e
German Democratic Republic.

A special feature of the "Raduga" experiment was that in addition to perfecting
the methods of mnltizonal space photography it pursued the goal of creating stan-
dard apparatus for regular investigations of the earth's natural resources using
space technology and by means of carrying out a complex of surveys of extensive
territories in the interests of solution of specific problems in the national
economy.

This book convincingly demonstrates that the flight of the “Soyuz-22" spaceship

has successfully completed an important stage in cooperation under the "Intercos-
mos" program on the part of scientists and specialists of the USSR and the GDR in

the field of development of means and methods for making photographic investiga-
tions of the earth's natural resources.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Official Materials

TASS Commication. The "SOYUZ'ZZ" in Flightesooooeceeosoeoeaoocsoooeooosaces.

TASS Commication. Flight Successfully Coupleted. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . o .
To the General Secretary of the Central Oomittee CPSU Comrade Leonid Il' ich

BrezMeVOosoassooas.closesscoot.COO000.000000.0as...ooossoooooooeossosoosool

To the General Secretary of the Central Condttee of the Socialist Unified
Party of Germany Erich “oneCka.oooossoaoasses.assesoaooooaoaoseacocoa-sass.

To the Scientists , Des igners , Engineers, 'rechmciana and Workers, All the
Agencies and Organizations of the Soviet Union and the German Democratic
Republic Participating in Preparing for and Implementing the Orbital Flight
of the "Soyuz-22" Spaceship with a Hultizonal Camera. the Soviet Coamonauta
Comrades Valeriy Fedorovich Bykovakiy and Vladimir Viktorovich Aksenov. . . . . .

To the Central Committee CPSU, the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, the
USSR “mail of MinisterBOOOOOOOOOUUO..0..DOOOOOIOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOUOO3......

Scientific-Technical Aspects of "Raduga" Experiment

Introduction. Investigations of the Earth From Space..........................
Chapter 1. Scientific-Hethodological Basis of the "Raduga" Experiment.........
1.1. Prerequisites and Objectives of Experiment............................
1.2. Selection and Validation of Principal Parameters of mF-6.............
1.3. Selection of Zones of Spectral Sensitivity............................
Chapter 2. "Soyuz-22" Spaceship.......nun""no."nun..."”nun...“
2.1. ship ”819....O..0.................................'.................
2.2. ship “trier-“cutenesso-eocooosoaoaosecocoon-oases...-anaessseeoaoeo
2.3. Peculiarities of Installation of PIKE-6 Apparatus on "Soyuz" Ship......
2.4. Oil-board Equipmnt of Other Experiments.-cocoons-oeooscooooooeosososos
2.5. System for Contml of Motionooaossssacross.soonaspaosceesoaeoooooo-oaa
Chapter 3. Multizonal Callers.............-.u..."u.nu....u........u...u
3.1. Hultizonal Space Camra mP-éooeeasooooeceooooacasssoesocooocoo-oases.
3.2. Multichannel Synthesizing Projector ”SP-“oesoosaaaaosacaossaaccess-coo
Chapter [0. Preparation of Camera for P11ghtoo..OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOv0.0.0.0...

[0-1. Couplex TestsooomomODOOOODOOOOICQOOOIOQIIOOOOOIOOOOOOOOIIOIDIOOOOOI'O.

4.2. Calibrations of M’6eoooaoonssassoaoooooesosaaaooosassoooooooesosauce
Chapter 5. Flight Support.......n.u.nun..."no“..."non-nuuoouuo
Solo Peculiaritiea of Blllistic Planning of nightaeooeooaooossscoso0000000
5-2. Flight Planning"...............ono.-"on...a..............u....u.
503. Flight Control..."......................no.on”....................o
Chapter 6. Scientific Program of Experiment and its Implemenmtion,...........
6.1. Preparations for and Implementation of Survey Program.................

6.2. Aircraft Program of "Raduga" Bxperiment...............................
6.3. Study of Optical Characteristics of Elements of Landscape.............

6.1.. Survey of Territory of German Demcratic Republic....................

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11

12

15
20
20
28
60
105
65
48
68
51
52
56
54
67

70
70

73
80
80
86

87
91

91
97
99
102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 7. Processing of Photographic Haterills........o.......o...............

7.1.
7.2.
7. 3.

7.4.

7.5.

Chapter
8.1.
8.2.
8.3.

8.10.

8.5.

Chemical-Photographic Processing of Materials.....................oo...
Obtaining Color Synthesized Images Using )BP-6 Instrlnent...........u.
Machine Methods for the Processing of Hultizonal Photographic
Infor'ationnoeo00090000000000.0000...sasson...oooeosoooooooooevoeoooe
Photometric Proth-s 1n Experilental Program.........-......o..........
Preparation of Multizonal Aerospace Photographs for Visual Special In-

terpretation.............o......o........o.................o...o.o...

8. First Results of Special Interpretation of Photographs. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Principal Interpretation Characteristics of Photographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . o .
Examples of Comp lex Geographic Study of Territory and Special

Mappings-see...sosocasoooooeeeooosoooooeoeoeossooonssoseoooosesooeoos
Some Results of Geological Interpretation of Photographs of the

Territory of the USSR...-tossesssooooososoooooooeoooosoooooeooosoosoe
Results of Geological Interpretation of Hultizonal Photographs of the

Territory of the GDRsosoooooeooaooooosooososeoesooocosoooosoooooossoo

Sons Examples of Special Interpretation of Hultizonal Photographs of
Test Sectors in the GDR.......oo...o..o.............-.....o..........

Conclusion. USSR-61m: Example of Socialist Integration in Space Investigations.

Documents and Chronicles of Flight of "Soyuz-22" Spaceship

0
.\

Flight Preparations..c.a...o.....oc...c..............--ooc. ocooooooococsoossol
From Concept to Launching.assesses-coo...eoeeooses-noose-sooosoosoosooooousees.
Before Flight and in Orbit.-.......o.......o.......o.o......o...u..............

Flight chroniCIGesooonsets-sooooooooooososococoons-eso.sosooesoooosoooosoeooooo

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka" 1980

5303

Akadenie-Verlag Berlin 1980

C50: 1866/51

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

105
105
108

110
120

124
135
135
1 36
155
164

176
178

185
190
191

196
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 631.4

AEROSPACE METHODS OF STUDYING SOILS

Moscow AEROKOSHICHESKIYE “£10m! IZUCHENIYA Pocnv in Russian 1979 (signed to press
1a Dec 79) pp 3-6, 279-280

lforeword, introduction and table of contents from book "Aerospace Methods of
Studying Soils", by Valeriy L'vovich Andronikov, Soil Institute imeni V.V.
Dokuchayev, All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences imeni v.1. Lenin, lsdatel'-
stvo "Kolos", 3,600 copies, 280 pagegj

liex£7 POREUORD

This book, which is presented to the reader's attention, is the first experiment in
monographic correlation of materials for studying soils that were obtained by aero-
space surveying. In connection with the rapid development of space methods for do-
ing research in the USSR, the United States and other countries, there have arisen
a number of new fields in this area: space meteorology, aerospace geology, space
cartography, space geography and others that have as their goal the further inves-
tigation of our planet's resources.

Materials provided by automated artificial satellites, manned spacecraft and orbi-
tal stations play a substantial role in the investigation of land resources. At
the present time we have developed a whole spectrum of photographic and television
systems and methods for surveying the Earth's surface with the help of aerial and
space equipment, with subsequent visual-instrumental and opticoelectronic process-
ing of the materials that are obtained.

By using remote aerospace methods, in the near future we may be able to solve many
problems relating to the quantitative and qualitative accounting for and studying
of the USSR's soil resources. This monograph will be of assistance in solving
these problems. It contains an analysis of the methods used to study the soil cov-
er from the experimental "Meteor" satellites, the "Soyuz" spacecraft and the
"Salyut" orbital stations. The capabilities of mnltizonal surveys with the "Kr-6
camera (the ”Raduga" esperiment) are demonstrated from the aerospace viewpoint.

The author presents the results of many years of research in using black-and-white,
spectrozonal, multizonal and multispectral serial and space photographs to study
the soil cover, as well as data from infrared, radiothermal and radar surveys for
soil and agricultural purposes.

Academician V.V. chorov, VASKhNIL lxll-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences
imeni v.1. Lenin7, and Doctor of Geographic and Agricultural Sciences Yu.A.
Liverovskiy 91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTRODUCTION

At the present time, the use of aerospace materials for studying soil cover is
attracting the attention of Soviet and foreign investigators.

In the "Basic Directions for the Development of the USSR'o National Economy for
1976-1980," the necessity of expanding research in the use of space facilities for
studying the Earth‘s natural resources is pointed out. Remote aerospace methods
involve objective, high-speed, automated systems for collecting and processing in-
formation about the state of soils and agricultural lands and crops. Control of
agricultural production can be organised more efficiently on this basis.

One of the new fields in the area of utilizing aerospace methods to study soils and
plantings of agricultural crops is the development of multizonal and multispectral
serial and space surveying. The essence of this is that the same section of land
surface is photographed simultaneously in several narrow bands of the spectrum. As

a result, pictures are obtained that carry the most information about the soil cov-
er and agricultural crops.

Infrared photographic, photoelectronic and radar surveying are promising for use in
agriculture, to study the soil cover and plantings. The latter can function in the
absence of visibility (through clouds and even at night). Radar pictures can be

used to determine moisture, some structural elements and the complexity of the soil
cover, the composition of the soil's upper levels, and types of agricultural crops.

In comparison with aerial surveying, surveying of the soil cover and plantings of
agricultural crops from space makes it possible for the first time to see. both ob-
jectively and simultaneously, soils and agricultural crops over large territories,
along with separate mountain systems and the vertical zonality of the soil and ve-
getative cover, and the nature of irrigation and drainage systems as a whole.
Another important feature of space surveying is that in space photographs there is
an objective generalization of the soil cover and, in addition, these photographs
make it possible to interpret the soil cover in separate regions that are frequent-
ly hard to reach. The utilization of space materials will help us conduct a more
thorough and objective study of soils.

One of the basic and principle features of surveying from space is the timeliness
with which we obtain information about the state of the soil cover, the nature of
the snow melt, the development of erosion processes, and the state of agricultural
crops on a countrywide scale. Yet another special feature of space surveying is
the possibility of a rapid repetition of a survey. This is especially important
studying rapidly developing, dynamic soil and agricultural processes taking place
on the Earth's surface.

On the one hand, aerospace (remote) methods using the appropriate receivers in-
stalled in flying (both aerial and space) craft register the reflection of sunlight
from soils and vegetation and, on the other hand, intercept the intrinsic radiation
from the soil and vegetative cover on the Earth's surface.

The use of aerospace methods is based on the fact that the absorption, radiation,

scattering and reflection of electromagnetic energy by different soils and plants
is selective and specific for each type of soil and agricultural crop.

92

FOR OFPI( '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The soil cover is "decoded" according to its image in aerial and space photographs,
including multizonal ones. In connecting with this, we are studying decipherabili-
ty and the possibility of using aerospace photographs obtained in different bands
of the electromagnetic spectrum to investigate the soil cover, and are working out
determinants for decoding soils.

Research in soil decoding has been conducted in the steppe, dry-steppe and desert
areas of our country.

Research in decoding the soil cover, agricultural crops and virgin vegetation has
been conductai using black-and-white, color and spectrozonal aerial photographs,
multizonal aerial photographs (green, red and infrared bands) obtained with the
AFA-39M complex during surveys in 1973-1975, multispectral aerial photographs ob-
tained with a scanner, black-and-white space photographs taken from the "Soyuz-9",
"Salyut-l" and "Salyut-A," and multizonal space photographs taken from the
"Soyuz-12," "Salyut-h," "Soyuz-22" and the experimental ”Meteor" satellites.

In this work we also analyzed foreign black-and-white and color space photographs
taken from the “Gemini" and "Apollo" ships and multispectral space photographs in
four spectral bands taken from the "Landsat" ERTS satellite over the territory of
the USSR and other countries.

The combined use of serial and space photographs is the most optimum variant for
interpreting soil cover and vegetation images. In connection with this, the inter-
pretation of aerial photographs is used most successfully in key sections to study
elements of the soil cover's structure, since in the interpretation of space photo-
graphs soil scientists run into a generalized image of the soil's surface. The in-
vestigation and interpretation of aerial and space photographs begins with a pre-
liminary period of lab work, the value of which increases with the use of multi-
zonal photographs and stereoscopic, opticoelectronic and photometric equipment for
processing the photographs and films.

The interpretation of aerospace photographs includes terrestrial field work to ex-
amine the soil cover and plantings of agricultural crops and check the results of
lab interpretation. In this work, materials from the book on the fields' his-
tory, allowing for productivity data, are used. In addition to the field investi-
gation data, in both the lab and field interpretations the researchers use ex-
isting soil and topographic maps on various scales, plans for the allocation of ag-
ricultural crops and materials available in the literature.

The stereoscopic investigation method, with a stereoscope and an interpretoscope,
is used to analyze aerospace materials. The spectral reflective capacity of soils
is measured by an SF-lo spectrophotometer, using air-dried samples. An MP-b micro-
photometer and the quantitative visual-instrumental method of decoding, using a
modern “Kvantimet-720" electronic-optical image analyzing instrument, are utilized
in the investigation of aerospace photographs. Chemical analyses of soils are per-
formed in the Soil Institute's Mass Analysis Laboratory. In addition to the exper-
imental surveys performed by the Soil Institute, extensive use has been made of ma-
terials from experimental multizonal flights made by the USSR Academy of Sciences'
Institute of Space Research. A significant part of the space photographs were ob-
tained from the "Priroda" State Center of the Main Administra-

tion of Geodesy and Cartography of the USSR Council of Ministers and the GosNITsIPR
of the USSR State Committee for Hydrometeorology and Monitoring of the Environment.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P03 OFYICIAL US! ONLY

IABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
Foreword. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Introduction. . . . . ...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

Chapter 1. History of Aerospace Methods for Studying Soils. . . . . . . . . . 7
Formulation and Introduction of Aerial Methods for Studying the Soil Cover

(1927-1950) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . 7
Aerial Methods in Soil Cartographic Work in Different Natural Zones in the USSR

(1950-1970) . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
The Contemporary Stage of Aerospace (Remote) Methods in Soil Science and Agri-

culture (l970-l979). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

Chapter 2. Aerospace Surveying of Soil and Agricultural Resources and the
Equipment for Conducting It. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... 15
Types of Aerial Photographic Surveying of the Earth's Surface . . . . . . . . . 18
Types of and Equipment for Space Surveying to Study the Earth's Natural Re-
sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Aerospace Surveying Materials and Tools for Interpreting Them . . . . . . . . . 26

Chapter 3. Theoretical Principles of Interpretation as a Method for Studying

Soils ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
General Principles of Soil Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

Spectral Reflectivity of Soils. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Interpretative Features of Soils. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . 53
Photographic Image Tone and Its Visual and Quantitative Evaluation. . . . .'. 56
Color of a Photographic Image of the Soil Cover in "Natural” and Spectroronal
Photographs . ....... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
size and Shape of a Photographic Image of Soil Contours . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Texture (Pattern) of a Photographic Image of Soil Cover and Its Classifica-
tion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Relief and Elements of Hydrography and Their Role in Interpreting Soils . . . 81
Vegetation and Agricultural Activity and Their Indicational Role in the Study
of Soils ....... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86

Chapter 4. Effect of Changes in Natural Conditions on the Photographic Image of
Aerial and Space Photographs . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . . 97
Investigation of Changes in the Photographiclmageof Soils and Agricultural
Lands, Using Materials Prom Surveys Made in Different Years . . . . . . . . . 98
Investigation of Changes in the Photographic Image of Soils and Agricultural
Lands, Using Materials Prom Surveys Made in Different Seasons . . . . . . . . 100

Chapter 5. Investigation of Soils Using Space Photographs . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Field of View of Space Photographs and the Study of Soils . ....... . . . 113
The Small-Scale Nature and Generalization of a Photographic Image of Soils. . . 118
Interpreting and Monitoring the State of Soils in Different Natural Zones. Us-

ing Space Photographs . . ....... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Agricultural Interpretation of Space Photographs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167

FOR OPPI( '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

Chapter 6. Features of the Interpretation of Soils and Plantings Using Multi-
zonal Aerial Photographs . . . . . . ....... . . . . . . . . . 151
Interpretation of Multizonal Aerial Photographs of the Steppe Zone. . . . . . . 153
Interpretation of Multizonal Aerial Photographs of the Dry-Steppe Zone. . . . . 168
Interpretation of Multispectral Aerial Photographs of the Desert Zone . . . . . 188

Chapter 7. Multizonal Space Methods for Studying the Soil Cover . ....... 193
Interpreting Soils From Multizonal Space Photographs Taken Fran the "Soyuz-l2"
and "Salyut-b". . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19b

Interpreting Soils and Vegetation Prom Multispectral Space Photographs Taken
From the "Landsat" ERTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 196
Interpreting Soils and Vegetation Fran Multironal Space Photographs Taken Frau

the "Soyuz-22" ...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
Interpreting Soils Fran Multispectral Space Photographs Taken Pro. the Superi-
mental "Meteor" Satellites. . . . . . . . . . . . . ...... . . . . . . . 221

Chapter 8. Infrared and Radar Methods for Investigating Soils . . . . . . . . . 226
Infrared Surveying of Soils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227
Radiothernsl Surveying of Soils . . . . . . . . . . ....... . . . . . . . 230

Radar Surveyirg of the Soil Cover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232

Chapter 9. Effectiveness of the Utilization of Aerospace Methods to Study Soil
Resources. . . . . . ........ . . . . . . . . . ....... 236
Soil Cartography From Aerial and Space Photographs. . . . ........ . . . 236
Effectiveness of the Coapilation of Soil Maps Fran Aerial Photographs . . . . . 246
Effectiveness of the Compilation of Soil Maps From Space Photographs. . . . . . 251
Prospective Areas for the Use of Aerospace Methods to Study Soil and Agricul-

tural Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
Conclusion ............... . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . 262
Bibliography ......... . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . ....... 271
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel‘stvo “Kolos”, 1979

11746
CSO: 1866/98

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(MNLY

UDC 528.74(202):S$6.5.04
USING AEROSPACE INFORMATION TO INVESTIGAIE LAND HATERS

Leningrad TRUDY GOSUDARSTVENNOGO ORDENA TRUDOVOCO KRASNOGO ZNAHBNI GIDROEOGICNESKO—
GO INSTITUTA: ISPOL'ZOVANIYE AEROKOSMICHZSKOY INPORHATSII V ISSLEDOVANIYAKH VOD
SUSHI in Russian No 276. 1980 (signed to press 8 Aug 80) pp 2, 130

Izhnotation and table of contents from journal ”works of the Order-of-the-Labor-
Red-Banner State Hydrological Institute: Using Aerospace Information in Investiga-
tions of Land Waters" edited by V.V. Kupriysnova, Gidrometeoizdat,

650 copies, 131 pages?

ﬁexg mom-mu

Various authors present different aspects of the use of information obtained by ar-
tificial Earth satellites in hydrological investigations related to the determina-
tion of the characteristics of snow and ice covers, in addition to explaining ques-
tions concerning the investigation of land waters with the help of aerial photo-
graphic surveying and radar studies of the Earth's surface.

This collection is intended for hydrologists and specialists in allied fields who
utilize aerospace information in their research.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
Basic Questions in the Use of Satellite Information in Solving Problems of Land
Hydrology
V.V. Kuprianov, v.6. Prokacheva . . . . . . . ....... . . . . . . . . . 3

0n Training Specialists to Use Aerospace Information for Hydrological Purposes
D.H. Kudritskiy . . . ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

Requirements for Satellite Information Resolution for Studying the Dynamics of
Snow Cover in Mountains

3.x. Tsarev ......... . . . . . . ....... . . . . . . . . . . . lS
Mapping the Snow Cover in Plains Areas on the Basis of Aerospace Surveying Ms-

terials
v.0. Usschev, L.P. Bsbkins, V.H. Zvereva. . . . ...... . . . . . . . . . 21

96

FIHICNHHCJAI.IEHECMNLY
IND! OFIWCJAl.lﬂSE2(MNLY

Page
Using Satellite Photographs to Study Snow Cover Dynamics and Evaluate the Aver-
age Vegetation Flow Rate on the Amudar'ya River

M.V. Dzhordzhiu. M.V. Sitnikova, B.K. Tsarev. . . . ............. 30

Evaluation of the Accuracy of the Mapping of Snow Cover Boundaries in Mountains
on the Basis of Television Pictures From a "Meteor" Satellite (on the Basis of
a Ground Experiment in the Stanovoye highland)

v.c. Prokacheva, V.F. Usachev .......... . ............. 35
Experiment in Using Aircraft and Satellite Information to Study Ice Conditions
in the Aral Sea

S.M. Iemnikov . . . . . ......... . . . . . . . . . . ..... . 64
Experiment in Using Satellite Information for Purposes of Predicting the Drain-
age of Mountain Rivers (Using the upper 0b' and upper Yenisey Rivers as Exam-
pies)

N.V. Vostryakova. . . . . . . ...... . . . . . ....... . . . 52
Using Space Information in Glaciology

L.V. Desinov. . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . . ........ . . . 59
Interpreting Avalanches on the Basis of Aerospace Surveying Materials on Vari-
ous Scales (Using the Western Altay as an Example) .

v.1. Kravtsova. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . 66
Interpreting Ice Build-Up in the Baykal-Amur Main Line Zone Prom Aerospace Sur-
veying Materials

V.P. Abakumenko, A.Ye. Abakumenko, L.I. Gryazeva, V.M. Korolev, V.F. Usachev,

A.M. Chmutov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......... _. . . 75
Studying Swamp Systems on the Basis of Multiapectral Space Photographs

B.V. Vinogradov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Study of the Structure of Intrasvamp Drainage Systems on the Basis of Aerial
Photographic Surveying Materials and Its Relationship to Maximum Drainage

1.8. Savel'yeva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Experiment in Using Aerial Photographic Surveying Materials to Evaluate the
Branching Process of Rivers Along the Baykal-Amur Main Line Trace

D.V. Snishchenko. . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . ............. 100
Determining the Location and Sizes of Active Soil Erosion Zones Prom Aerial
Photographic Surveying Materials

N.M. Bobrovitskaya, I.I. Vorozhbitov. . . . . . . . ....... . . . . . . 108
Distribution of the Thickness of the Ice Cover on the Lena, Vitim and Olekma
Rivers, as Determined From Aerial Radar Ice Thickness Surveying Data

A.N. Chishov, V.V. Borodulin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112

97

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFTNCJA1.USE¢NVLY

Page
Using Annlog-to-Digital Units for the Primary Processing of Aerospace Informa-
tion
v.A. "inlaylov . . O U U C . O C . O O U 0 O C O . I O O O O O C C . C . O O 12:
COPYRIGHT: Gosudaratvennyy gidrologicheskiy institut (GGI), 1980

11746
050: 1866/105

98

FORIOFFKJAI.USEIMVLY
F08‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

UDC: 911.2:629.78+528.96

DEVICE FOR DYNAMIC ANALYSIS OF HMLTIZONAL IMAGES
Moscow ISSLEDOVANIYE ZEHLI IZ KOSHOSA in Russian No 3, Hay-Jun 81 pp 113-116.

[Article by Yu. L. Kravchenko, G. H. Hamontov and G. F. Sitnikov, Special Design
Office for Scientific Instrument Building, Siberian Department of the USSR Academy
of Sciences. Novosibirsk, submitted 11 Feb 80]

[Text] The Synthesizer, a device for dynamic analysis of multizonal photos, is
being developed in the Special Design Office for Scientific Instrument Building,
Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences, and it will become part of

the equipment of the Geophysical Data Processing Center of the Computer Center

in the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences. The Synthesizer makes
it possible to analyze the color image obtained from three multizonal photos, sorting
various transformation combinations, examining the result and making dynamic
corrections when necessary. The controls of the Synthesizer enable the operator

to rapidly select the required conversion and make the necessary measurements. The
feasibility of altering numerous parameters and instant observation of the result
on the synthesized image makes it possible to distinguish even images with minimal
contrast, for example, to distinguish species of trees in a forest.

The photographs are placed on ground glass, which is lighted from the bottom by
an illumination system. The photos are superimposed according to reference points
using mechanical alignment devices with precision of 0.052. 'hree objectives with
variable focal distance transfer the images of multizonal photos to the targets of
videocameravidicons [photoconductive camera tubes}.. Use of objectives with
variable focus distance operating synchronously makes it possible to dynamically
alter the conversion scale by b times. This permits viewing both the entire image

and fragments thereof. The location of all photos on one moving carriage permits
processing an enlarged fragment of any section in the working field of the photo.

In the video camera, which operates in the standard television mode, the optical
image is transformed into an electrical video signal. After preamplification,
video signals from three video cameras pass into the control unit of the video
cameras, then through coaxial cables to the input of an analog processor.

The analog processor permits protessing in two main modes: synthesis of the
color image from three multizonal photos and pseudocoloring of the overall signal
from three, two or one video camera..

In the first mode, the output video signals Uk’ “6 and U3 (input video signals
for color monitor) are described by the following equations:

99

‘FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FIHICHﬂﬁCJAL.USEIDNLY

UR . Kr(K1rUI+Kzruz+KsrUs) + ur bv
U6 - K8(K1801+K28U2+K3303) + us W

U; ' Kb(K1501+biUI+K3bU3) + 05 by

where 0,, "2, U, are video signals from the first, second and third video cameras,
Kr, K8, Kb, K1,, K18, K15 are coefficients of summation of video signals (i-video
camera number), Ur bv: Us by and 05 by refer to bias voltage.

Any of the coefficients of the matrix can have either a positive or negative value
from 0 to 1.5. By altering the coefficients, the researcher is able to synthesize

the color image. examine the result on a real-time scale and distinguish information
in the analyzed image in the best manner.

In the second mode, voltage at is analyzed:
U; - K101+K2U2+K3Us

Coefficients x,, K: and K, can also change from 0 to 1.5 and have either negative
or positive values. The video signal of U; can be flashed on the monitor screen

in black and white or artificial colors. When showing U: in artificial colors, the
video signal is pseudocolored on eight levels. The size and position of each level
can be changed by the operator. The area of image section on any of the eight

levels of the video signal can be measured with a digital gauge contained in the
analog processor.

Processing of images and measurement of area can be confined to a rectangular
"window." The position and size of the "window" are set by the operator.

The linear dimensions of the object can be measured with a controllable cursor.
The cursor is displayed on the screen in the form of a horizontal and a vertical
line, the position of each of which can be measured with a digital gauge.

The analog processor permits measurement of the U videosignal at the point shown
by the cursor and formation on the monitor screen of the section of "Z video signal
along vertical line of the cursor.

Multizonal photos taken with an HIP-6 camera and scanning equipment can be pro-
cessed on the Synthesizer.

There is a mode of synchronization of the Synthesizer for plugging in to other
devices for processing images and self-contained operation.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Issledovaniye Zemli iz kosmosa". 1981

10,657
cso: 1866/139

100

FOR OF1ﬂ(141.USE{3NLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPACE POLICY & ADMINISTRATION

'AIR 6: (”908' ON POSSIBLE SOVIET mum moms FOR 1980's
Paris AIR 5 cosmos in French No 848, 21 Feb 81 pp 37-38.“

[Article by Albert Ducrocq: ”Soviet Program for This Decade: Approach to Manned
Lunar Hissions': passages enclosed in slantlines in boldface]

[Text] Paralleling the pursuit of their Salyut progran, the Soviets will very
likely make a dash, during the 1980's, along the road to outer space: We must ex-
pect to see their manned space vehicles making incursions into the lunar domain...

We base this presumption on several considerations, the first being the posses-
sion by the Russians-with their Soyuz 'r--of the appropriately maneuverable
vehicle to enable then to carry out the operations they had to abandon at the tine
of the Zond spacecraft. It is reasonable to expect that the Soviets. armed now
with the Soyuz, will seek their revenge: They were compelled to remain virtually
earthbound while the Americans carried out their Apollo program The Soviet
thrust is all the more to be expected in that in the coming years it is the
Americans who will find themselves compelled to renain in near circunterrestrial
space. Certain statments by Soviet leaders noreover appear to us entirely
characteristic: They make clear. in a manner totally devoid of ambiguity. the
Soviet intention to travel far from the bounds of earth.

To effect what operations?

Therein lies the question. A program of manned lunar flights would not fail to
make mentary headlines. nut disappointment would set in very rapidly if the
Russians showed themselves capable only of effecting, 12 years later. a mere part
of the feats accomplished by the Asericans long ago.

Soviet astronautics officials are of course the first to have understood this,

and we can therefore wager that their lunar program will in no way resemble the
Apollo missions, the psychological considerations we have mentioned being can-

pounded by technological imperatives.

We must understand. actually. that in its time the Apollo program represented an
impressive technological breakthrough in terms of the aeans used to carry it
out--the Americans having omitted their entire avant garde industrial potential
to enable their astronauts to go for a walk on lunar soil--as well as a specifi-
cally spatial breakthrough. For its Apollo program. “ASA did not hesitate to

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

build a rocket capable of placing in orbit payloads /10 times greater/ than those
that had long been satisfactory for other programs; nor, generally speaking, did
it hesitate to put into production specially designed equipment for the moon
landing .

Relentless Progressivity

The Russians show no such intent. They build rockets having a certain capacity
and spacecraft having certain maneuverability characteristics, and their space
policy consists of doing what they can with the two. The means are not designed
to a specific end; the end is chosen according to available means, so that to
each generation of means there corresponds a certain category of missions. And
this has the inprint of a relentless progressivity. At this point in time.
although the Soviets are currently able to orbit the moon, we doubt that they
could contemplate landing manned spacecraft on its surface. A lunar walk
requires a powerful additional impulse. It demands a leap in the size of
launchers and involves moreover ”razor-edge precision work" that is conceivable
only after a profound mastery of the maneuvers, a mastery the Russians are only
now in the process of acquiring.

We must add: From a purely scientific viewpoint, new lunar walks do not appear

to be a near-future necessity. The astronauts installed five ALSBP stations on
the lunar surface, 23 of whose apparatuses continued transmitting, until 1977,

a vast amount of information: it was /voluntarily/ that an end was put to further
reception from them, because the specialists estimated they already had too much
information to evaluate. Moreover, only a small fraction of the lunar samples
being kept at Houston has been utilized. A new edition of the Apollo missions
could hardly be justified...

But this only lends greater interest to the question: What,-then. will the
Russians do if they are not even contemplating a lunar walk?

Well, there are many interesting things to be done. And these become evident if
we consider the ”pinpoint” nature of the Apollo program. with the equipment at
their disposal, the Americans could have done an enormous number of things, and
they had indeed contemplated doing them: Let us recall the Apollo Applications
program, which the United States abandoned to finally settle for /one/ use to

be made of their equipment, unquestionably the most outstanding of its possible
uses and at the same time the use for which that equipment was indispensable.
But in doing this, they deprived themselves of the opportunity to carry out a
very large number of operations for which inconparably less sophisticated
equipment would have sufficed.

This means that the Americans have left many firsts up to the Soviets. And the
latter will also not fail to make the best possible use of the trump card they
now hold: /endurance/.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Apollo missions, it will be recalled, were actually of short duration. They
were designed not to exceed the limits of the timefrane involved in an earth-moon-
earth flight, allowing for some tens of hours to be spent on lunar soil. And in
any case, the medical studies conducted in the United States prior to the Apollo
missions had not been approached from the standpoint of long flights in space:

The record was the Geaini 7's 15-hour flight by lovell and Bornah. It was only
thereafter, with the Skylab flights, that this situation changed. The Russians,
on the other hand, now enter their lunar-missions phase straightaway after having
effected flights of even over 6 months duration, armed with all the experience
these flights have given them.

Initially, of course, the Soviet long-distance flights will be of short duration:
They will essentially be testing the techniques of flying over long distances
and returning. But it is reasonable to suppose that the Russians will very
quickly seek to benefit from this asset bestowed on them by their Salyut program,
and that their longodistance missions will be designed around their endurance
capability.

a priori, within the dimensions of the lunar domain, the endurance characteristic
can be exploited in two ways.

Selenostationary Points

To begin with, it is possible to contesplate sending manned spacecraft for earth
to benchmarks in the earth-lunar system and /having the- remain there for a
certain time/.

During the first years of the space age, attention was drawn to these benchmarks.
But strangely, they were soon somewhat forgotten. We expect them to be brought
out again to the foreground of coming events. These bench-arks, which celestial
mechanics specialists prefer to call Lagrangian points, are four in number:

Point 1, the best-known, located between the earth and the moon, is the so-called
point of equilibrium at which the gravitations of the two spatial bodies neutral-
ize each other. This takes place /not/ at 346,000 km from the earth (and at
38,000 km from the moon, for a configuration involving a total distance of
384,000 kn between the two bodies) as was thought by Jules Verne, but rather
slightly closer to the earth. Actually, the point cannot be reckoned as one of
static equilibrium, but rather as one of dynamic equilibrium, since the point

in question, situated in the earth-moon segment, revolves around the earth as
does the noon. Thus, the equilibrium under consideration is between:

--on the one hand, the earth‘s gravitation, and

--on the other, the moon's gravitation augmented by the centrifugal force gener-
ated during one rotation around the earth.

103

FOR‘OFF1C1AL USIZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The point of dynamic equilibrium thus defined is at 325,000 km from the center
of the earth and at 59,000 km from the center of the moon, that is, a some
57,000 km from the moon's surface. It is a /selenostationary point/ straight
above or below the center of the visible side of the moon, and is thus the ideal
point from which to observe constantly the visible side of our satellite. Such
observation, however, is being carried out today from the surface of the earth,
using considerable equipment and facilities, so that Lagrangian Point .1 is to
some extent the least interesting of the four.

Lagrangian Point 02 is straight above or below the center of the dark side of
the moon. It is the point, at 470,000 km from the earth, at which there is
equilibrium between:

--on the one hand, the gravitations of the earth and the moon, and
--on the other, the centrifugal force developed by the rotation around the earth.

This Lagrangian Point 02 is extremely interesting, in that it enables a study of
the dark side of the moon (about which much less is known than about the visible
side). Above all, a spacecraft situated at this point would be the specifically
indicated command post for unmanned spacecraft (second-generation Lunokhod) by
means of which a broad reconnaissance of the dark side of the moon could be
carried out.

A conceivable operation would consist of generating, from a low earth orbit, an
impulse of 3 km/s to transfer a manned spacecraft into a 280/470,000-km orbit,
at the apogee of which an impulse of l km/s would anchor the spacecraft at
Lagrangian Point 02, where it would remain for weeks, if not months, directing
the work of the robots on the dark side of the moon. Its return to earth would
be accomplished inversely, starting with a l-km/s impulse. This seans that the
total cost of the operation would add up to 5 km/s. A 7-ton spacecraft would
have to be associated with a module of some 20 tons. This operation would be
very interesting, spectacular, relatively low-cost and risk-free.

Lagrangian Point 03 is situated on the moon's orbit 60° behind it. It would be
slightly less costly to reach than Point 02. Its interest would be from another
standpoint: that of studying the fossil substances that may have accumulated in
this gravitational recess.

Lagrangian Point (4 is located on the moon's orbit 60° behind, symmetrically
about the earth-moon axis with respect to Point 03. Obviously, it could be used
to carry out the same studies as from Point 03. It is found, moreover, that
these Lagrangian points (even taking into account the slight displacements to
which they are subjected with variations in the earth-lunar distance) could
provide the nodes of an interferometric lattice for experiments in radio
astronomy. It will be noted that a 'milk run,“ starting from earth, would-enable
a visit to be made cheaply to Points 3, 2 and 4 successively.

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

This “milk run' diagram indicates how the three Lagrangian points
of most interest could be explored during a single mission. The

earth-noon flight would require an initial impulse of 10.9 kn/s.
followed by a 0.8l-km/s impulse at 484,000 km. After remaining

at [.3 a certain length of time. the flight from L3 to L2 could be
effected very economically over a period of 1 month at a cost of
0.09 Ian/s. And the return would be effected systematically in
accordance with the LZ-earth trajectory (via M. the symmetrical
of [.3 with respect to the earth-moon axis), so that the total cost
of the operation would come to 12.7 kin/s, or approximately the
cost of putting a satellite into geostationary orbit.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure-8 Orbit

The endurance factor will be exploited in another way if we assume the placement
oi a spacecraft in an earth-noon orbit and allowing it to effect a certain number
of revolutions, /which has not yet been done/. An earth-soon orbit would have

a spacecraft orbiting both the earth and the soon: it would describe a curve
which, in a frame of reference that takes into consideration inert space, would
be a rosette. Or, it could be conceived as a curve in the form of a figure 8,
whose loops would contain the earth and the moon respectively. Such figure-8
orbits can be can be perfectly stable (we have such examples in the asteroids on
the scale of the solar system). They are especially economical (from a low earth
orbit, they require an ispulse of only 3 ks/s) and obviously they can be main—
tained as long as desired. asking it possible to carry out a number of experiments
exploiting the large variations in velocity with respect to the moon and with
respect to the earth.

These figure-8 orbits wOuld of course enable studies of the earth and the moon.
But their real interest is another, in that, to begin with, such an orbit could.
if it describes a purely ballistic motion. constitute an /ultrasensitive
gravitational-variations indicator/ whose notional irregularities would bring out
in fine detail all the components of the earth-moon system, provided, of course,
the flight involved a sufficient number of revolutions (each lasting on the order
of 1 week); hence the interest in flights of long duration...

Once the scientists have acquired a certain experience with such ballistic
motions, it will be necessary to apply, at given times, path corrections to enable
fine-tuned exploitation of all the earth-moon system's gravitational resources

and the possibility of learning how to escape from it in a precise and less costly
manner. Let us consider the launching of a weight attached to a string: First,
one wields it in the manner of a sling, waiting then to release it at the precise
moment one senses the proper notion has been reached.

similarly, manned planetary missions could conceivably be prepared by first put-
ting a spacecraft into earth-soon orbit for a period long enough to check all
equipment and ensure that the injection of the craft into the solar system will
take place precisely as planned.

Be that as it may, this brings us to the subject of our next article: In the minds
of the Soviets, planetary missions and moon missions must be intimately linked
together in any program of flights into deep space...

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1980

9399
C80: 1853/6

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

'AIR & COSMOS' 0N POSSIBILITY OF SOVIET MARS-VENUS FLIGHTS
Paris AIR & COSMOS in French No 849, 28 Feb 81 pp “-105

[Text] Ever since it was first decided to leave the earth behind, planetary and
lunar missions have been closely linked in Soviet thinking.

Indeed, we know the cost of missions within the earth-moon system: they require
starting from low earth orbit, the creation of impetus of 3 to 5 km per second. Now
that is already enough to effectuate very nice trips in the solar system, if dura-
tion is not a problea, and it will not be for the Russians. We have continued to
emphasize this: unlike the Americans, who went to the moon before having conquered
the time barrier—we mean before having achieved long piloted flights-_-the Soviets
are going to undertake exploration of the earth-moon system with the advantage of
duration. And. to start, the first Russian mission thrOugh the solar system should
follow shortly on that exploration...

What mission?

Our faithful readers. who have followed us, will not fail to recall No 627 AIR 6 COSMOS.
It was 18 March 1972. At the time, some news was asking a great stir: the academi-
cian Vasiliy Pavlovich Mishin (director of the Central Institute for Scientific
Research on Medium Machine Building) had fact been given responsi-

bility for a space program which, one was given to understand, was intended to

prepare for an averflight of Mars by piloted vehicles. Mishin was responsible, it

was said, for recruiting a team of engineers and technicians to develop a module for

a voyage in the solar system, and also to head the training of cosmonauts for such

a mission.

Equitemporal Orbit

At that time we speculated that the Russians would try to exploit the possiblities
offered by "equitemporal orbit." The principle is simple: it exploits Kepler's
third law, by the terms of which the orbital period of a body revolving around a
gravitational center depends solely on the major axis of its orbit. Thus the earth
describes a very weak eccentric orbit around the aim, the major axis being 299
million km. That being the case, let us imagine that a rocket leaving the earth is
placed on a solar orbit. whatever its eccentricity, the orbital period will be 1
year if its major axis is 299 million km, and that is to say at the end of 1 year,
there will automatically be a rendezvous between the rocket and the earth. The rocket
and the earth will in the meantime have each have followed its own path, but they will
meet again at the same place at the same time.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Now this property of the equitemporal orbit certainly seems to be what the Soviets
have had in mind for their first missions outside the earth-moon system. One must
therefore sun-arize the scheme, but simply change the dates. In 1972, it was thought
that an overflight of Mars was plausible in 1978. Today one must be content to
envisage the operation sometime in the next decade or so. But it is remarkable that
one always continues to envisage it in the same way. And that is completely charac-
teristic of one Soviet trait: they persevere. For a long time they endured
disappointments in their planetary experiments with unmanned rockets: they studied
all aspects of the problem. until they arrived, with respect to Venus, at the success
which we all know, On the other hand, they had many problems in developing their
Soyuz: in 1981 they have the vehicle they had hoped to start using in 1966, but the
fact is that it is the very vehicle that they proposed to build. Their delay was
considerable, but they reached their goal, with no concessions, and particularly with-
out resort to the easy solution which would simply have consisted of enlarging the
cabin. It is the same with their planned piloted planetary missions. At the present
time all the information in our possession leads us to think that they are still
trying to fulfill the 1972 plan, a plan which in the meantime has been, needless to
say, studied in depth and optimized with all the ingenuity of which the Soviets are
masters, the preparation of these piloted planetary missions taking place in hopes
that they can follow the long-duration exploration within the earth-moon systu.

Starting Point

The starting point could be placement of a piloted vehicle in an orbit very close to
that of the earth.

The mission would be very economical, to the extent that the cost of placement in

such a solar orbit is low on the scale in terms of impetus: starting from low earth
orbit only some 3 km/sec. is required. If a vehicle starts from an earth-moon orbit,
it is enough to create 0.1 km/sec. when it is flying over the earth to transfer it
into an almost terrestrial solar orbit. In such an orbit our rocket will not diverge
in the course of a year by a distance of more than a few million kilometers. That is
not much on the scale of the solar system, but it is impressive in itself. For the

f i rst time men would have detached themselves from the terrestial domain: in fact
this has never been done, because the moon is a part of the terrestrial domain. And
such a departure would have the advantage of permitting, in case circumstances
required it, a premature return.

By consequence, it will only be a question of impulsion--that is to say, modules to
be added to the space train which constitutes the- vehicle—-so that the eccentricity
of our solar orbit can be whatever one chooses and so that an overflight of Mars can

be envisaged .

We are saying that since 1972, the Soviets have had all the time in the world to

imagine the various scenarios leading to such a journey. Some are extremely subtle,
requiring gravitational reactions at the time of the Mars overflight. Under certain
unusaal conditions, it is indeed conceivable, within the framework of an annual solar
orbit, to overfly Venus and Mars in turn, and as it turns out, that would be the most
advantageous order, because the larger mass of Venus translates into greater potential
for gravitational reaction. Certainly, even if the Soviets do not turn their plans

over to us, we too have the time to use computers as they do, to find the same solutions,
and to imagine those which they will find the most profitable.

108
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Without going into the detail of these fine points, we would only like to summarize
in detail the program for one such flight in an annual solar orbit.

One preliminary observation will require attention. If one intends to overfly Hare,
it is necessary that the aphelion of that annual solar orbit permit reaching the
red planet.

That being the case, we know that the distance between Mars and the sun varied
between 205 and 349 million km. That distance alone is deemed considerable under

the formulas of conventional flight. It assumes considerable importance with the
annual orbit, this latter only being conceivable if one can reach Mars when the planet
is in the neighborhood of its perihelion: this is in fact when the eccentricity

of our solar orbit is minimal. Now the cost of transfer of a rocket from the earth

to an annual orbit is obviously greater when the eccentricity of this orbit is to be
larger.

Earth-Venus-Hars-Earth

Let us therefore consider the configuration of the solar system which the diagram on
page 64, shows us, a diagram in which H stands for the planet Mars at its perihelion,
while T stands for the position of the earth at the time of the rocket launching
(or more precisely its injection into solar orbit). The earth may be considered, as
a first approximation, as describing a circle (C) of radius ST, 3 being the sun.

The annual orbit which our rocket will follow is an ellipse (E) with focus at 8
having MP for its major axis, the value of HP being defined as 299 million km. Its
minor axis is TB, T and B being the two points common to the earth orbit and the
annual orbit which we are giving to our rocket. The flight unfolds like this:

1--Injection of the rocket into the ellipse (E) requires, beyond the stage of its
escape from earth, a supplement of 11.5 km/sec. in a direction forming an angle of
some 11.1 degrees with the segment TS.

Near the earth, the creation of a speed of 15.9 km/sec. is sufficient (the sum of the
square of 11.5 and 11 is in fact the square of 15.9), and this is to say if a rocket
were in a low circular orbit (thus already having some 8 km/sec), 7.9 km/sec. must
still be created. This is a considerable amount (it requires a mass ratio of 12 to
40 depending upon the fuels used): that is not unusual. If one has already placed
the vehicle in an earth-moon orbit some 5 km/sec. will suffice, but in any case the
total expenditure will have been the same.

2-In its ellipse (E), our rocket requires 69 days to negotiate the segment T? which
takes it to the perihelion of its solar orbit at 97 million (km distance) from the
day star, that is to say inside the orbit of Venus. This circumstance explains to

us how one can hope to take advantage of a schedule that will permit (before or after
the passage of point P) an overflight, close or distant, of Venus. In the present
scenario, we are not taking into account this overflight and the gravitational
reactions to which it would give rise.

when our vehicle is at P, the earth is found at T-l: it is far behind for it is slow
by comparison with the rocket which has gained speed because it has been approaching
the sun.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

3--A period of 69 days is also necessary for our vehicle to traverse the arc P3 of
its ellipse (B). At B, 138 days after its departure it regains earth orbit, but
not the earth itself, which at that time is at T-Z.

4—-The traversal of the arc BM requires 113.5 days. The rocket is really quite slow
as it approaches its perihelion, the asymmetry of the velocities being large because
of the eccentricity of the trajectory.

At M comes the overflight of Mars at rather small relative velocity (a velocity
which will have been lowered as a result of a gravitational reaction judiciously
chosen during the overflight of Venus). At the moment of that overflight the earth
is at T—3: one sees that it has begun to catch up with the rocket.

S--Traversa1 of the segment HT requires the same time as 8H, or 113.5 days, during
which the earth is displaced from T-3 to T. In other words, it is at the rendezvous
point to welcome back the vehicle after the latter has completed its 365 days of
voyaging.

Conditions on arrival are obviously those at the start, we mean that our vehicle
enters into the terrestrial domain with a relative velocity of 11.5 km/sec, and it
is at the speed of 15.9 km/sec. that it encounters the dense layers of earth's
atmosphere, an aerodynamic brake being possible if the crew module has been designed
to that end.

Frequent Windows

Such a mission requires, naturally, absolute mastery of the techniques of maneuvering
and navigation in the solar system. This being the case, for whoever possess this
mastery, let us understand that it is achievable with the means which astronautics is
building today and will have at its disposal tomorrow. It is interesting in that:

-—two departure opportunities (from T or from 3) open up at each Martian window, so
that in practice one could count on one launching possibility per year.

--approximately one window out of three can be adapted to a program that will involve
a flight over both Venus and Mars.

In other words, the planets are already at our disposal. They have been waiting since
1978 for the cosmonauts who will fly over them. How much longer will the waiting
continue? The time may be shorter than one imagines. In any case, the Soviet pro-
gram between now and year 2000 seems to us to be sketched out very well, with
construction of low-orbit stations, platforms, and space trains destined to fly

both within the earth-moon system and within the inner solar system.

110
Key:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DIAGRAM

1 I /
Au- numb 0. C. It.

aLSOlJﬂ nun u I I
Tom «one. In ood- .

In... T. 1, 1,. 1.. Y.

tau-o ouo l'ml- no

MO I‘M-MI. net.-

olvom on Y (0-.- ‘ '-
00-! an lo "nu-u \ “
vol-In). P (Mo “on \
limo. room. a ‘.
Van. Don I'M \
w u oun- a M.-
noollom MOI. In \
ole-«0). I Id: ' ~
m rm do In \
tom ml. no- un \
and“). M (W to

Mllemwuv "
uvann \\\“-.______.."’//

 

1. At the points 0, 69, 251.5 and 365 days, the earth occupies in turn the
positions T, T-l. T-2, T-3, and T, while the rocket finds itself succes-
sively at T (launching into the solar system), P (after having traversed
the orbit of Venus, not shown in this diagram, and eventually overfloun

the planet), 3 (where it regains earth orbit but not the earth itself,
M (overflight of Mars) and T (return to the earth).
2. Orbit of Mars

3. Sun

a. 69 days

5. 138 days

6 251.5 days
7 365 days

COPYRIGHT: A 8 C. 1980

9516
C50:

1853/7