FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10257
15 January 1982

Translation

INDUSTRIAL ERGONOMICS

Ed. by

S.|. Gorshkov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. thterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10257

15 January 1982

INDUSTRIAL ERGONOMICS

Moscow PROIZVODSTVENNAYA ERGONOMIKA in Russian 1979 (signed to press
26 Jun 79) Pp 2-209, 298-312

[Annotation, introduction, chapters I-IV, VI and table of contents
from book "Industrial Ergonomics” edited by 8.1. Gorshkov, USSR
Academy of Medical Sciences. Izdwtel'stvo "Mediteina", 6,700 copies,
312 pages]

CONTENTS

Annotation ......... .......... ..... . ..... 1
Introduction ......... . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . 1
I. Origin and Essence of Ergonomics ................ . . . . . 4
£1. Methods of Studying an Ergonomic System ...... . . ..... . . . . 19
iii. Hygienic Criteria cf Ergonomics ......... . . ..... . . . . 54
:v. Pnynhophysioiogical Criteria of Ergonomics ..... . . . . . . . . . . 83

v1. The Contribution of Ergonomics to Research on Labor Hygiene,
physiology and Psychology ..... . . . . ..... . ......... 15;
Sub; :04: "Jphy ...................... . ......... 157
\‘UlllZlJth [original] ........ . . . . . . . . ......... . . . . 165
- a - [I - USSR - C FOUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ANNOﬂhTION

Successful development of ergonomics has been based, to a large degree, on its inte-
grated approach to the study of the "man-machine-indmtrial environment' system, an
approach calli-.g for analysis of the many factors characterizing this system in action.
The purpose of integrated analysis in industry is to reveal undesirable factors and
to brinrJ them in line with the requirements of ergonomics. '

The book "Industrial Ergonomics" reflects the fundamental stages in the development
of the mutual relationships between man and technology, the tasks of ergonomics and
the methods used in ergonomic studies. The hygienic and psychophysiological criteria
that must be accounted for when planning indmtrial equipment and organizing work-
places are analyzed.

As distinct from other monographs conceer with ergonomic solutions to questions of
purely operator forms of labor. this book focuses on the cczzpatibility of industrial
equipment design with human anatomical, physiological and psychological capabilities
in different industrial sectors: machine building, tube rolling, textile industry
conveyor lines, leather production and haberdashery and organization of the labor
of computer operators.

This monograph is intended for hygienists, occupational pathologists, physiologists
and labor psychologists.

The book contains 39 tables, 85 figures and a bibliography of 91 references.
INTRODUCTION

Scientific-technical progress, growing automation and mechanization of industrial
processes and introduction of new equipment into enterprises have altered the nature
of labor and the nature of the mutual relationships between man and technology. As
a result ergonomic research having the objective of integrated analysis of working
conditions and improvement of mutual relationships in the ”man-machine-industrial
environment" system is acquiring increasingly greater significance with every year.

L. I. Brezhnev noted in a speech to the 16th Congress of Trade Unions that the party
views rcequipment of industry as the decisive means for improving working conditions

and transforming all production operations into ones that are safe and comfortable

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to man. These are precisely the conditions that must be guaranteed to the working
man in socialist society.

the min purpose of ergonomics is to create an objective environment providing condi-
tions which would permit the process of social labor to proceed, speaking in the words
of Marx, with the least expenditure of energy (by the producers), and in conditions
that are most worthy of their human nature and are adequate to it.

This objective could be reached only on the condition that we create man's objective
environment--that is, the technology supporting nim--with reliance upon the entire
system of knowledge of man and with full account of his anatomical, physiological

and psychological features. This means that the objective of ergonomics is to opti-
mize man's position in the "man-machine—industrial environment" system, to humanizt!
technology while achieving correspondence between the design of industrial equipment
and workplace organization on one hand and man's anatomical, physiological and psycho-
logical features on the other. Consequently the principle of "correspondence,“ which
is implied by the unity of subject (man) and object (nature, technology) in labor,

is the fundamental principle of ergonomics.

In the USSR, ergonomics is now developing in predominantly three directions—-technical
esthetics, engineering psychology and industrial ergonomics. ‘llechnical esthetics

has enjoyed the greatest development in our country. *ts objectives are artistic
design of equipment and industrial esthetics. The main objective of engineering
psychology is to study the relationship between the design of control consoles supplied
to the most important national economic facilities (atomic, hydroelectric and thermal
electric power plants, airports, power supply systems and so on) and the particular
features of information perception and processing by operators. The objective of in-
dustrial ergonomics is to inplement the principle of correspondence between the design
of production equipment contained in factories, plants, mines and other enterprises
and man's anatomical, physiological and psychological features. 'me process of
gradually replacing man's production functions by technological resources has achieved
spec: -' significance in the modern scientific-technical revolution. However. the
success of scientific-technical progress, in addition to making labor less toil-
some and eliminating manual labor, often creates conditions that can lead to violation
of the ”correspondence“ principle. The reason for this lies in the difficulty of
accounting for man's anatomical, physiological and psychological features in the
design of complex modern equipment, which inposes high requirements upon man's psycho-
physiological characteristics. In a mulber of cases this is promoted by our insuffi-
cient knowledge of man's features-~of his anthropometric characteristics--in applica-
tion to the problems of ergonomics, his power and speed potentials, the unique
features of afferent synthesis, and the laws governing information perception and
processing. what we consequently observe among individuals servicing many forms of
equipment is an uncomfortable working posture, exertion of too much effort, the
necessity of performing a large quantity of operations and a higher volume of infor-
mation to be processed. Conditions for the arisal of monotony and hypokinesia are
often created. The design of industrial equipment may be brought into correspondence
with human features only if we know what these features are--that is, if we account

for the "humn factor“ in the planning and design stages.

In the long range, ergonomics will be an important means for raising the reliability,
effectiveness and economy of production. However, there are still may difficulties

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the path of its development, especially ones of mthodological nature. They are
basically associated to a great extent not with anthropometric problems of organizing
the workplace but with the problems of informational interaction between man and
modern couple): equipment, which are also discussed in this monograph.

The materials presented in this book were obtained by colleagues of the division of
labor physiology and ergonomics of the (SSR Academy of Medical Sciences Scientific
Research Institute of Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases in integrated physio-
logical-ergonomic research on the appropriate enterprises. Some of the material

was also obtained from experiments conducted when it was found necessary to simulate
a particular production situation.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL {SE ONLY

I. ORIGIN AND ESSENG Ol’ BWMS

Scientific-Technical Progress and the Origin of Ergonomics

within 60 years, the Soviet Union has completed a tremndous technological revolu-
ti..n and implemented a broad program of the national economy's reequipment.

Today as never before, the progress of science and technology is most intimately
' associated with social progress: They interact with one another, accelerating man-
kind's movement toward coununism.

Science is playing a continually increasing role in the life of society, transforming
production, administration and the life of the individual. It is transforming more
and more into a direct productive force; it is becoming enbodied within new equipment
and production processes, and in our knowledge of man and of his work capabilities
and skills.

Before our eyes, entire industrial sectors and new forms of material production have
been born of the womb of science. ‘me reequipmnt of all sectors of the national
economy, which is proceeding on the basis of modern scientific achievements, is
accomanied by growth in the productivity and culture of labor.

Scientific labor is penetrating more and more into the sphere of material production,
which is now requiring the participation of, besides laborers, a large nmber of
scientists and specialists. We are witnessing the merger of science and production,
of scientific and productive labor, which is accelerating the rate of scientificr
technical progress.

Stimulating progress in engineering and technology, science has promoted introduction

of ever-larger amounts of new, highly sophisticated machines and mechanisms into
production. It would be sufficient to point out that just in 1977 alone, 4,000

models of new types of machines, equipment, apparatus and instruments were created

in the USSR, as compared to 3,600 in 1976: moreover the ussnproduced 236,000 machine
tools, 569.000 tractors. 734,000 trucks, 41,500 excavators and much other equipment.
Scientific-technical progress has led to formation of a nmber of new industrial
sectors such as petrochemical, electronics, atomic energy and production of ultrahard,
polymeric and other materials. Pull automation and mechanization of production is

a general direction of technical progress. There are now more than 60,000 mechanized
flow and automatic lines, more than 15,000 fully mechanized shops and more than

3,000 fully mechanized enterprises in industry, and each year more than 6,000 flow

and automated lines are being placed into operation.

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mat and of production, economic and social processes.

The extremely swift development of science and technological progress are transforming
man's life, his leisure and, what is especially important, his labor. Introduction of
the achievements of science and technology into production through mechanization and
automation of production processes and through the use of programmed devices, calcu-
lating and problem-solving machines, electronic conputers and automated control
systems (asu's) in production are altering the conditions and nature of man's labor.
Al. a consequence, modern science and technology are raising a new social and philo-
sophical problemnthe relationship between “man and technology."

In addition to social and philosophical aspects, this problem also has the important
biomedical aspect, which permits us to examine this problem from its narrower, bio-
medical aspect, namely as a "man-machine-environment" problem. In this statement of
the problem, the broader concept ”technology" is substituted by the narrower "machine"
and, moreover, the concept “environment," which is closely associated with man and
mchine, is added. Thus this problem assumes a position equal with those of anthro-
pology, physiology and labor hygiene. Here, "machine” is understood to imply
“machine design," and when put together with man and environment, the resulting
concept signifies working conditions, the convenience of servicing and controlling
a machine. In other words the social-philsophical problem “man-technology" has now
become one of optimizing the relationship between man and technology, or one of
humanizing technology. This problem has acquired the special name of ergonomics.

The Greek roots of the term "ergonomics' are 'ergon'—-work, and ”nomos"--law. V. M.
Munipov (1970) explains this term as follows: Ergonomics is a science studying man's
functional possibilities in labor with the purpose of creating optimum working condi-
tions for him-that is, conditions which, while making labor highly productive and
reliable, would at the same time ensure the necessary comfort to man and preserve
his strength, health and efficiency. 'lhe Polish scholar Jan Rosner offers a sane-
what different but similar definition: Ergonomics is an applied science having the
purpose of adapting labor to man's physical and mental possibilities in order to
ensure the most effective work-work which would not be hazardous to human health
and which would be performed with a minimum outlay of biological resources (73).

What these and a number of other definitions of ergonomics basically boil down to is

possibilities. In this century of scientific-technical revolution, it is no longer
enough to study some single aspects of labor. The entire labor process--that_ is,

the entire “man-machine-environment" production system—must be evaluated integrally,
turning special attention to its main link—«man. B. F. lomov (1966) notes: ”It is
only on the condition that the characteristics of the machine and the environment

are made consistent with man's characteristics that we can count on high effectiveness
and reliability in the labor process, and consequently, on high labor productivity.
Humanization of technology and the working environment--this is the noble principle
which ergonomics has proclaimed. "

(the implements of labor) and the surrounding conditions to the anatomical, physio-
logical and psychological possibilities of man, then we could assert that the roots
of ergonomics extend deep into the past. E. R. Tichauer notes: "Ergonomics is

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

probably just as old as man himself.“ It could be said that when man began using
stone tools, adapting them to the shape of his hand, spontaneous development of
ergonomics began. In 1473 Bllenbog noted in his treatise that chemical substances

and improperly designed equipment have an undesirable effect on human health. In
the 17th century Ralnaszini focused on the undesirable influence a strained work

posture has on persons in uany occupations. At the beginning of the 20th centry,
in 1911, Gilbreth noted that as with the health of a laborer, the economic success
of an enterprise depends on man's interaction with the environment.

Ergonomics began taking on the clearer outlines of a modern science during World
War I, but the lost tangible need for broadening research in ergonomics arose during
World War II in connection with intense technological development. It was discovered

during that period that military technology often exceeded man's psyche‘physiological
possibilities. as a result of which it could not be utilized effectively, it tended
to break down, and accidents occurred.

An integrated approach must be taken toward the entire "man-machine-enviroxnent"
system with the purpose of ensuring optimum working conditions. Such an approach
requires contact between the technical sciences and the science of man and his labor.
In connection with this need's arisal, in 1949 a group of scientists in England repre-
senting different specialties made it their goal to study the I'hmnan factor“ in the
working environment, at production. somewhat later the “ergonomic research society“
was created. ' In the USA at that time, this problem was mainly within the province

of psychology. A society to study the 'hunan factor," which came to be called "human
engineering,“ arose in 1957 in the USA.

'lhe concept "ergonomics'I was first suggested by the Polish natural historian V.
Yastshenbovskiy, who published the work "The Traits of Ergonomics-Jamar. Is, the
Science of Labor" in 1857 in the weekly PRISON I pmmsmsmos'r' . In our country,
during the 1920's, when a rather considerable amount of attention was devoted to '
studying man's activity in an industrial situation, V. N. Myasishchev proposed iso-
lating the study of labor as a special scientific discipline-argology (the teaching
on work). V. H. Bekhterev proposed calling this discipline ergonology. But this
scientific direction did not enjoy adequate development in those years. Following
the war, in the late 1950‘s, introduction of automation connected with swift develop-
ment of science and technology made ergonomic research necessary. This research
began developing on a new scientific foundation.

Presently ergonomic research is being conducted systematically in many of the

world's countries. The bulk of it is being carried on by European countries (England,
Bulgaria, Hungary, GDR, the Netherlands, Italy, Poland, Romania, PEG, France,

Czechoslovakia, Switzerland, Sweden, Yugoslavia).

Ergonomics views the 'man-nachine-environment" system as a single whole, within which
it would be inadequate to study just some one link, since all of the links interact
with one another. that is needed is integrated research, conducted by different
scientific disciplines. Because this system functions in specific production condi-
tions, these conditions must be studied. all the more so because, as we know, the

conditions of the production environment are determined to a significant extent by
the work of machines. For example factors of the production environment such as noise

at the workplace, dust and gas contaminants in the environment, and frequently the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thermal factor depend on the work of machinery. If these factors exceed maximum
permissible limits, they may have an undesirable influence on the body of the worker.
hence arises the need for conducting hygienic research with the purpose of eliminating
this influence.

Ergonomics includes anthropometric research. Such research is necessary to ensure
correspondence between the parameters of the workplace and production equipment
undergoing planning on one hand and man's anthropometric and biochemical character-
istics on the other. It must ensure proper design and arrangement of controls on
equipment, and so on.

When planning and designing control consoles and, in particular, information displays,
we must not only ensure their sensible arrangement, but we must also account for

the absolute a ~d differential sensation thresholds of the visual, auditory and other
analyzers, and their capacity. All of this is necessary so that the operator would
react correctly and prouptly to work signals, so that the flow of incoming signals
would not exceed man's psychophysiological possibilities. This problem is being
worked on by specialists in engineering psychology.

‘lhe relationship between ergonomics and labor physiology is of major concern in
ergonomics. “men are many tasks for labor physiology to conpleteuevaluating the
influence exerted upon workers by the correctness of workplace organization, the
convenience of equipment maintenance and the effort applied to manipulate equipment
controls, and determining the sensibility of work movements, the size of the physical
load and the degree of nervous tension.

Artistic design, which follows ergonomic analysis of an industrial article, has
important significance. The artist-designer must consider the consents and recountin-
dations resulting from ergonomic research. 'me main task of artistic design is to
create a machine or a machine tool which would correspond to esthetic requirements,

produce positive emotions and create a good mood. And as we know, a good mood has
a positive influence upon the individual's performance.

Examining some methodological problems in the development of ergonomics, v. P.
zinchenko, A. N. Leont'yev, B. P. tomov and v. H. mnipov (1972) note that its
arisal was a natural process in the development of scientific knowledge, in the
course of which the sciences are undergoing not only differentiation but also inte-

gration, mutual penetration. Anthropology, physiology, psychology. labor hygiene
and the technical sciences all interact in ergonomic research to solve the problems

of optimizing human labor in modern production. Because so many sciences are in-
volved, some authors (90; Roger, 1959) call ergonomics a multidisciplinary or inter-
discwlinary science.

Ergonomic analysis of labor does not mean duplication of individual physiological.
psychological and hygienic studies. Ergonomics relies upon these sciences, it
accounts for the degree of their importance in each concrete case, and it pursues
its objective--ensuring optimum effectiveness in the function of the “man—machine-
environment" system--on an integrated basis.

Now that a certain amount of experience has been accumulated in ergonomic research,
certain qualitative changes can be discerned in the objective of ergonomics. Today,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nrqrmmlucs is corrective in nature. 'lhe task of corrective ergonomics is a practical
one--providing an ergonomic evaluation to some concrete l'Iun-machinc-environment"
system with the purpose of raising its effectiveness. However, ergonomics is also
beginning to participate in planning: It is subjecting huan labor to multifactorial,
integrated study with the purpose of developing integral optimum criteria to be used
as a basis for planning effective "man-machine-environment' systems and ensuring the
system's high productivity, precision and reliability, its correspondence to man's
anatomical, physiological and psychological possibilities, the individual's minimum
exertion and tiring, and a positive emotional influence upon him.

Ergonomics is presently enjoying extensive development. Conferences and syxposiums

on ergonomics are being conducted in our country as well as in other countries.

countries. The first International Conference of can and Yugoslav Scientists and
Specialists on the Problems of Ergonomics was held in Moscow in 1972. The second
conference was held in 1975 in Burgas (Bulgaria), and the third was held in 1978 in
Budapest.

'lhe all-union conference "Designing Machines, Mechanisms and Equipment With Regard to
the Physiological and Hygienic Criteria of Ergonomics,‘ held in November 1969 under
the sponsorship of the Council of Ministers state Comittee for Science and Technology
and the auccru, promoted establishment of a correct understanding of the essence of
ergonomics and its mutual relationships with other sciences. The resolution adopted
by this conference states: "... planning and design institutes do not always consider
the influence of physiological, hygienic and psychological factors when designing

new machines and mechanisms. At the same time, experience shows that solution of the
problems of ergonomics, which relies upon integrated research in labor hygiene,
physiology and psychology, the theory of machine design and the requirements of

labor safety and technical esthetics, in many ways promotes improvement of labor
conditions in industry, easier labor and its greater productivity.“

Technical progress and its economic impact will become increasingly more dependent
on development of different sciences, including ergonomics, and on the pace and scale
of introduction of its achievements into all sectors of the national economy.

The Mutual Relationships of Man and mchnologynthe Fundamental Problem of Ergonomics.
Main Stages in the Development of These Ritual Relationships. The Tasks of Ergonomics.

techno logy .

The mutual relationships of man and technology (from the‘political, economic,

ergonomic and other points of View) are subordinated to the basic laws of Marxist-
neninist philosophy. These include, first of all, the law of constant development
of these mutual relationships, the law of development of the subject (man) and the

object (nature, technology) in the labor process, and the law of objectivization of
the personality (the subject) in the result of labor-~that is, "transformation of

the ideal into the real," and subjectivitation of the result of labor in the person-
ality (in the subject) «that is, the law of change of the personality (the subject)
itself in the process of labor.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was mentioned above that from the standpoint of these laws, the main objective of
ergonomics is to create an objective environment in which the process of social labor
would proceed, using ~Marx' words, ”with the least expenditure of energy (by the
producers), and in conditions that are most worthy of their hunan nature and are
adequate to it.“

Marx' directive could be fulfilled only on the condition that we create man's objec-
tive environment--that is, the supporting technology--with reliance upon the entire
system of knowledge of man, and with full consideration of his anatomical, physio-
logical ané psychological features. This means that the task of ergonomics is to
optimize man's position in the "man-machine-environment" system, to humanize
technology, to achieve correspondence of the design of production equipment and the
organization of workplaces with man's anatomical, physiological and psychological
features. Consequently the principle of "correspondence," which is implied by the
unity of the subject (man) and the object (nature, technology) in labor is the
fundamental principle of ergonomics.

Ergonomics is presently developing in USSR in three directions-~technical esthetics,
engineering psychology and ergonomics specifically, or industrial ergonomics.

That part of ergonomics which is concerned with the grounds for hygienic, physio-
logical and psychological requirements on the design of industrial equipment--that is,
industrial ergonomics--had still not enjoyed broad development in our country. In‘
light of the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress, which foresee creation of new,
progressive technology, the role of industrial ergonomics must grow. It is the task
of industrial ergonomics to implement the principle of correspondence of the design
of industrial equipment in factories, plants, mines and other enterprises with man's

anatomical, physiological and psychological features.

Although ergonomics itself formed as a new scientific direction just 20-25 years ago,
the mutual relationships between man and technology have a long history from the
standpoint of the fundamental principle of ergonomics--the principle of “correspon-
dence."

The diverse implements of labor used by man in his work, beginning with the rough
stone implements of primitive people and ending with modern machinery, represent the

iuplcmcnts of production which, jointly with the objects of labor-“that is, jointly
with that toward which man's labor is directed, make up a most important socioeconomic
catcgory--the resources of production.

Together with the people placing them in motion in the production of material
blessings. the resources of production make up the productive forces. Productive
forces are the most important motive and revolutionary elemnt of production. Develop-
ment of production begins with changes in productive forces, and mainly with change
and development of thc implements of labor. Development of the inplements of labor,
meanwhile, is intimately associated with development of man.

 

'Marks, K., "Kapital" [Capital], Vol 3, Moscow, Politizdat, 1955, p 833.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR Uri-ILIAI. USE. UNLV

Man's origins lie somewhere in the beginning of the present Quaternary Period of the
earth's history. The transition from fossilized humanoid monkeys to man proceeded
through a number of intermediate beings combining the traits of monkeys and man--
man-monkeys, or Pithecanthropes. Manufacture and use of the first implements of
labor are associated with the Pithecanthropes, which lived, according to different
sources, 2-10 million years ago. Primitive stone scrapers and drills have been found
in the same strata as the bones of the Pithecanthropes. since that time man's
ancestors developed an erect posture and. as data collected by anthropologists show,
it was precisely from this time that tool-using became a cause of man's swift trans-
formation, particularly of his skull and brain structure. Thus arisal of labor was
a powerful impetus to development of the brain of the first people.

Complete skeletons of adults and children of other human ancestors-~the Neanderthals--
were discovered in the lowest strata of cave deposits in Europe, Asia and Africa.

The Neanderthals, who lived 300,000-500,000 years ago. possessed stone and bone tools.
They apparently also had wooden tools.

The first modern people are the Cro-Hagnons, who lived 100,000-150,000 years ago.
Their implements of labor, made from horn, bone and flint, were very diverse, and they
bore carved ornamentation. The techniques used to manufacture tools and household
objects were more sophisticated than those of the Neanderthals. Cro—Magnons knew

how to grind and drill, and they were acquainted with pottery. They domesticated
animals, and they nude the first step toward farming. They lived in a tribal

society. Cm-Magnons and modern man make up the species Homo sapiensuintelligent
man.

The advent of man was one of the greatest turning points in the development of nature.
This turning point occurred when man's ancestors began making tools. Man began to
differ fundamentally from animals only when he began to manufacture tools, even the
most simple. Some animals, monkeys for exanple, often use sticks to knock fruits
down from trees and to defend themselves against attack. But no animal has ever

made even the most unsophisticated implement of labor. The conditions of day—to-day

life encouraged man's ancestors to manufacture tools. They were able to deduce from
experience that sharpened stones could be used for defense or to hunt animals. The

process of placing the spontaneous forces of nature under control proceeded extremely
slowly in those ancient times, since the implements of labor were primitive. The

first inplements of labor were in a sense an artificial extension of hunan organs:
The stone was a fist, and the stick was an outstretched arm.

As man underwent physical and mental development he was able to create more-
sophisticated tools. sticks with sharpened ends were used in hunting. Then stone
tips began to be attached to the sticks. Axes, stone-tipped spears, and stone
scrapers and knives appeared. These tools made the hunting of large animals and
development of fishing possible.

Stone continued to be the principal tool making material for a very long time. The
era dominated by stone tools, which lasted hundreds of millennia, is called the

Stone Age. It was not until later that man learned to make tools from naturally
occurring metals, beginning with copper. Being a soft metal, however, copper did
not enjoy broad use in tool making. Consequently tools began to be made of bronze

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(an alloy of copper and tin) and, finally, iron. In correspondence with this, the

Stone Age was followed by the Bronze Age, and then the Iron Age. The earliest signs
of pro-Asian copper smelting have been traced back to the 5th-4th millennial! B.C.
Copper smelting appeared in South and Central Europe in about the 3d-2d millennium
B.C. The oldest traces of bronze, which were found in Mesopotamia, date back to the
4th millennium 3.6. The earliest traces of iron smelting were discovered in Egypt;
They date back prior to 1500 B.C. The Iron Age began in west Europe about 1000 B.C.

The transition from stone to metal tools significantly broadened the limits of human
labor. Invention of the blacksmith's bellows made manufacture of iron tools of
unprecented strength possible. The iron axe made it possible to clear trees and
brush from farmland. The wooden plow with an iron plowsbare permitted development
of relatively large areas of land. All of this promoted arisal of social division
of labor, separation of the craftsman from the farmer, which brought about production
directly for the purposes of barter.

Man's first tools were a simple “extension“ of human hands. Many tools used today
are also an “extension" of natural hunan organs. From this standpoint these tools
fully satisfy the principle of "correspondence." However, as the transition pro-
ceeded from individual creation of tools for personal use to mass production of
tools for barter, the possibility formaking tools correspond to individual hunan
features dwindled more and more. A fundamental ly new factor came into being in the
mutual relationships between man and technology following transformation of hand
tools into machines. The mast important unique feature of the latter is that they
are less an "extension" of natural human organs and more a substitute for them.
Marx said: "Invention of a swivel support marked creation of a mechanical device
which replaced not some particular tool but man's hand itself." This substitution
of the hand by a machine represents objectivization of the subject's natural powers;
at the same time, penetration of the object into the environment of the subject in
a sense comes to completion in the machine. Transition to mechanical industry

marked a complete technological revolution in production.

The propulsive power of the first machines was man himself or working animals: then
appeared machines which were brought into motion by a water engine. The mechanical
loom was invented in .‘785, fully displacing hand weaving by the middle of the 19th
century. The first textile factories were built on the banks of rivers, and the
machines were placed into motion by water wheels. After the steam engine was
developed, ways to apply it in transportation were found. The first steam locomotive
was created in the USA in 1807, and the first railroad was built in England in 1825.
By this time mechanical hamers, presses and machine tools-~lathes, milling machines,
drills--were invented. New industrial sectors came into being--machine building

and metallurgy. Steam turbines were created in the 1880's. A new type of engine
was invented--the internal conbustion engine, first the gas engine (1887) and then
one using liquid fuel-—the diesel engine (1893). A new powerful force came into
being in the late 19th century--electricity. Machines meant mechanization of labor.
Use of machines facilitated tremendous growth of labor productivity and reduction

of the cost of goods. Processing an identical quantity of cotton into yarn with a
spinning machine required 180 times less working time in the 19th century than did

hand spinning.
*Marks, K., "Kapital." Vol 1, Moscow, Politizdat, 1955, p 391.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ihe process of gradual substitution of natural human functions by technological resources
attained special significance in the present scientific-technical revolution. In-
troduction of control consoles during the scientific-technical revolution has im-
parted a new quality to the mutual relationships between man and technology-«the
possibility for separating production control from production processes and replacing
direct observation of a production process by observation of warning systems on a
control console. when computers are used, it is also unnecessary to-observe warning
devices, because the couputer can analyze the incoming signals and transmit the
appropriate instructions to working organs. Such separation of the operator from
the real course of a production process, its substitution by a system of codes,
means that the operator acts, in the opinion of psychologists, concurrently in a
real world and in an artificial world--one of signs, codes, models and symbols. He
is deprived of the possibility for directly perceiving the objects under his control,
inasmuch as they are separated from him in space or their direct observation is
hazardous. The operator senses fully real responsibility and undergoes fully real
emotional experiences, but his states are the product not of the real world, acting
directly upon the operator, but rather a certain information model of this world.
Byery model, especially a meager, simple one created with the assistance of various
resources of expression--form, color, symbolism, possesses some degree of uncertain-
ty. In the end, an operator working on a one-to-one basis with an information model
adapts himself to the model and ceases to perceive it objectively-~that is, as a
model of the real world, and he begins to perceive it as the object of his activity.

Sometimes this may result in substitution of real motivation by feigned motivation,
in loss of alertness, and in apathy.

As a result the activity of an operator in modern automated control systems

cannot satisfy the efficiency and precision requirements. The main reason for this

is that information models are structured on the basis of the logic of the
realities they reflect, and not on the basis of the sort of activity the operator
engages in with these realities--that is, to put it another way, not in correspondence
with his physiology and psychology. All of this creates new problems in adapting

the labor of an operator.

lbreover computer functions are now beginning to penetrate into the subjective
domain--the hunan domain, the domain of the physiolOgical processes of higher ner-
vous activity. In other words the computer objectivizes certain "mechanisms" of
human thinking, such that it is becoming capable of replacing, and is already
successfully replacing, some of the farmer's manifestations.

A most important conclusion connected with this is that if information models are
to satisfy this highly important requirement of the “correspondence” principle,

research will have to be conducted on the objective structure of operator activity--
research that must be placed at the basis of the design of information models.

The grounds for subsequent development of ergonomics are substantiated in decisions
of the 24th and 25th CPSU congresses, which have posed the task of creating and
introducing fundamentally new tools, materials and technical processes superior in
their technical—economic indicators to the best Soviet and world models, and the

task of replacing manual labor by machines on a broad scale. In terms of labor
specifically, the task is to improve working conditions further. Because the docu-

ments of the 24th and 25th CPSU congresses link acceleration of the rate of

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tnchnnloqical progress in all sectors of the national economy with improvement of
working conditions, we will have to expand research aimed at optimizing man's position
in the "man-machine" system in application to the conditions in different industrial

sectors, and primarily in metallurgy, chemistry, mining industry, power engineering,
machine building and so on.

The proceedings of the all-union conference ”Designing Machines, Mechanisms and
Equipment With Regard to the Physiological and Hygienic Criteria of Ergonomics"

developed these guidelines further by formulating the following basic requirements
on industrial ergonomics.“

l. Machines and industrial equipment must be designed in such a way that they
would not be a source of unfavorable sanitary—hygienic working conditions--that is,
their design must correspond to the hygienic requirements in terms of maintaining
the sanitary-hygienic working conditions Of the workplace at the level of the
standards established by public health legislation.

2. Machines and industrial equipment must be designed in such a way that they would
permit maintenance in comfortable work postures, and ensure that the efforts

exerted and the trajectories, speeds and quantities of joint movements would be
within physiologically permissible limits. 'lhe requirements of industrial ergonomics
also include those steaming from normal operation of hman senses--for example,
physiologically substantiated angles of vision, levels of signal intensity and
volumes of perceived and processed production information. What this means con-
cretely is that equipment design must correspond to the anatomical, physiological
and psychological features of the structure and function of man's organs and body.

These are the premises that have been placed at the basis of research conducted

by industrial ergonomics in various sectors of industry, and at the basis of the
accumulation of scientific data to be used to form the content of industrial
ergonomics.

The "Ergonomic System" Concept. Classification of Intrasystemic Relationships.

It was shown in the previous section that the mutual relationships between man and
technology have been so closely related and interdependent withallstages of histori~
cal development that they now form a single system which, fruu the standpoint of
necessary correspondence of industrial equipment and the design concepts it embodies
with man's anatomical, physiological and psychological features, may be referred

to as an ”ergonomic system." The concept 'ergonomic system” means that man, using
a particular implement of labor or servicing a particular piece of industrial
equipment, becomes a link in a ”man-tool” or "man-machine” system, or of a “man-
technology" system in general.

The inseparability and unity of this system stem from the fact that without man,
no tools and no production equipment would be possible, that tools arose simultane-
ously with man, and developed together with him.

 

'SCicntific Council on the Problem "Labor Protection“ under the USSR Council of
Ministers State Camittee for Science and Technology and the AUCC‘rU. 1971.

l 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus the ergonomic system is one of the most inportant concepts (principles) of
ergonomics.

Constant development of the ergonomic system, which we traced in the previous section
and which is. moreover, not sinply constant development but constant and accelerat-
ing development, is the second most important property of the ergonomic system and
of ergonomics as a whole. The stone Age, which was typified by the most primitive
and the roughest implements of labor, lasted about a million years, during which
time ordinary chunks of stone were transformed into nothing more than polished
chunks of stone, which were then secured to sticks to make stone axes.

The Bronze Age lasted about LOCO-4,000 years, and during this time axes, knives
and spears did not change in nature, remaining as they had been in their stony form,
becoming only more beautiful in their ornamentation.

The Bronze Age quickly gave way to the Iron Age. In 3,000 years, the assortment of
tools was basically enlarged only by the addition of farming tools-~the plowshare
and the sickle; nevertheless this was enough to raise the successfulness of farming
dramatically. Much was added to the assortment of household utensils and military
gear in the Iron Age. The 18th century--the century of the industrial revolution--
provided the people of our planet with the loom, the spinning machine and the water
wheel. ‘me 19th century-~the century of industrial mechanizatim--gave us the
steam engine, the internal combustion engine, the electric motor and a mamber of
machine tools intended for mechanical metalworking.

In just its first three-fourths. the 20th century--the century of the scientific-
technical revolution-ogave man radio, television, aviation, rocket technology,
nuclear technology, the electronic computer, the control console, automatic lines,
the conquest 0‘ space, and much, much else.

This examination truly does confirm the notion that the ergonomic system is charac-
terized not by simple constant development, but mainly by constantly accelerating
development, which is very important to an understanding of the unique features of
the ergonomic system that are typical of this period of scientific-technical
revolution.

The third main characteristic of the ergonomic system, mentioned in the previous
section, is the principle of “correspondence” between the design features of pro—
duction equipment and man's anatomical, physiological and psychological features.
This was the principal feature in the characteristics of the ergonomic system
throughout all stages of development of the mutual relationships betweenman and
technology, but it acquired extremely important significance in the time of accel-
erated technical progress, when machine designers first addressed requirements
which could not be satisfied without. an exact knowledge of man's features-~that is,
when ergonomic requirements develOped by specialists--physiologists, psychologists
and hygienicists--became necessary.

An example of the need for precisely this approach can be found in the difficulties

that arose in development of jet aviation. The speeds that were achieved were so
great that were pilots to orient themselves on the basis of their own senses during

flight, they would constantly be late in performing the needed control reactions
due to the limited speed of nervous reactions.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Having defined the basic characteristics of the ergonomic system, we must now
consider its content. An ergonomic system's content is defined as the list of

units it contains for production purpozes.

'1!) determine the content of the ergonomic system, we must once again proceed from
the historical standpoint—that is, with a consideration for the stages through
which the .uutual relationships between man and technology have passed. Most authors
examining this question answer it from the point of view of the typical mutual re-
lationships that have evolved in our times. In this connection N. P. Benevolenskaya
(1972) points out that a number of authors (8. P. Iomov, N. v. Onopkin, H. P. Erolov,
J. Rosner and others) view the ergonomic system as a two-unit system--"man-machine"
or "man-technology." Many authors believe it consists of three units--"man-
technology-environment" (K. K. Platonov, B. P. Lonov, V. F. Vanda).

Prikhod'ko introduces a fourth unit into the ergonomic system--the collective.
Benevolenskaya believes the ergonomic system to consist of four units: “man--
nachine--environment—-object of labor," or even five: ”man--machine--object of
labor--environment--persons involved with the system besides the operator or present

within the machine's zone of action."

The correct answer to the question as to the content of an ergonomic system may be
found by considering the history of the ergonomic system itself.

Considering the developmental stages which the mutual relationships between man and
technology have undergone, we may presume that the content of the ergonomic system
would never be established once and for all, but rather that it would change in
keeping with the stages of development of the mutual relationships between man and
technology. For a million years of man's existence these mutual relationships

were limited to only two units--man and simple implements of labor--that is, the
scraper, the axe and the spear. In this "man-tool" ergonomic system the working
conditions were predetermined by the natural conditions of the habitat, and they
did not depend on the quality of the tools. But even at this stage the nature of
man‘s mutual relationships with tools depended in some respects on the properties of
the object of labor-that is, on what the particular tool was applied to. Even at
this stage the heaviness of the tool and the power generated by the individual de-
pended on the sort of tree that had to be chopped down with the axe, the sort of
soil that had to be worked with the primitive wooden plow, and so on. 'merefore it
would be more proper to include man, the implement of labor and the object of labor

within the content of the ergonomic system in this early stage.

Benevolenskaya justifies the need for including the object of labor within the
ergonomic system under modern conditions in the following way: The object of labor--
that which we refer to as worked articles andcatth. transported cargoes and so on--
significantly influences the intensity and nature of factors arising in work with

a machine, and in a nuwer of cases it may itself be a source of these factors. As
an example the properties of a block being riveted (the object of labor) may change
the vibration level at the grip of a riveting hauler by 20 db. When coal in a seam
is moistened, the amount of pressure a worker must maintain on a pneumatic drill
decreases by 5-7 kg. Higher firmness of coal means not only an increase in the vi-
bration levels and the pressure that must be applied, but also longer exposure to
vibration and noise and a higher physical load. while a person working softer coal
introduces the tip of his drill into it for a period of 3—4 seconds and then rests
for 1-2 seconds, a person working with firmer coal alternates such 1-2 second rests

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with a drill working time of 15-20 seconds, which dramatically alters the structure
of the operator's working time. Consequently when we subject machines to ergonomic
evaluation, we must consider what the object of labor does to change the character-
istics of the machine, and possibly to injure the operator.

Following creation of the metal smelting furnace, which was the source of high
temperature, radiant heat, various sorts of gases and dust, besides man, the imple-
ments of labor and the object of labor, the ergonomic system came to include the
"environment“ as well--that is, the sum total of the conditions which are created by

the system's operation and which may enter into interaction with its links, and
mainly man.

In later stages of the mutual relationships between man and technoIOgy, the surround-
ing environment became the most important link of the ergonomic system. Regulating
the state of the environment, as an inherent part of the ergonomic system, became a
tremendously significant problem. Much significance was attached in such regulation
to setting hygienic standards--that is, the permissible levels of environmental

conditions, and to developing treasures that would keep these levels within the
standards.

"Persons drawn into the system indicated above but not connected with the control,
use or maintenance of the machine represent a special group in this system. 11:13
group is divided into four levels: machine-microcollective, machine-morocollective.
machine-region, machine-population, at each of which unique mutual relationships,
associations and tasks exist. As a rule the number of persons involved in this way
significantly exceeds the umber of operators. Research has shown that a special
danger arises at the first level, where persons drawn into the system may be sub-
jected to more-intense influence from 'machine factors' than the operator, receiving
no compensation for the possible deterioration of health." He can agree conpletely
with Benevolenskaya's ideas. Let us illustrate this with some examples. Weavers
and spinners are assigned to specific looms and spinning machines in modern weaving
and spinning shops. Besides the weavers and spinners, all other workers of the
shop--foremen, auxiliary workers, strippers, loaders, removers--are exposed to loom
and machine factors (noise, vibration). 'lhis happens because the loom and spinning
machines, being firmly cemented to the shop floor, form a single oscillating and
resonating system together with it. And while a weaver or a spinner experiences
vibration due to direct contact with the parts of the loom or machine, all of the
other shop personnel experience vibration due to contact with the floor. In chemi-
cal industry enterprises, all leaks in the joints of equipment. being sources of
contaminants that spread through the air of the entire shop, also influence all of
the shop personnel, and not just the opeators: in cases where these contaminants are
discharged by the shop's stack into the atmosphere, the surrounding population is
affected as well.

It includes man. machine, object of labor, surrounding environment. and persons
drawn into the system. Figure 1 shows a diagram of the ergonomic system as defined
by Benevolenskaya.

16

I-‘OI'! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'(1’) "

"wow-ul- ”was

  

      

 
 

4)

can! my“
\\\\\

9‘ \\ \\
~.\\

   

    
   
 

I.uen-¢a§‘

\ue Coachman)

t unam- I
Minerva-17’

(1) /

lineup-n- ema-

_—__——-. ....- ‘ - __
\./“ "‘ a

    

    

Figure l. Associations in a ”Han--Machine--daject of Labor--Environment"

System
Key:
1. Environment 4. daject of labor
2. Man (operator) 5. Persons within machine's working zone
3. Machine, machines 6. Effects not associated with this system

When the content of the ergonomic system is defined in this way, it is very important
to correctly classify the associations within this system. Such classification is

necessary so that we could understand the internal organization of the system, deter-
mine its vulnerable links and predict its behavior in different operating conditions.

In keeping with the content of the ergonomic system, three main characteristics
should be laid at the basis of this classification: the operator's associations
with the machine and the object of labor, and his interaction with the working condi-
tions.

When we study the operator's associations with the machine, we must keep in mind that

these associations are maintained primarily through informational interaction between
the operator and the machine. In this case, informational interaction itself accounts

for the particular features of the input functions upon which transmission of infor-
mation to the human senses depends, for the particular features of the control func-
tions performed by the central nervous system and dependent upon its state. and for
the particular features of the output functions, which in most cases are realized

by means of man's sensomtor organs and muscular system and which also depend on
their functional state.

Jan Rosner distinguishes three stages of informational interaction.

1. Perception of information either by direct observation of the production process
or by observation of the readings of monitoring and measuring instruments reflecting
the parameters of the production process. Perception is achieved by means of sense
organs, which transmit obtained information to the individual's central nervous system.
1111s phase of the labor process (perception of information and its transmission to

the central nervous system) is within the sphere of action of physiological and
psychological laws.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Processing (transformation) of the obtained information occurs in the central
nervous system and leads to adoption of a particular decision. Little is known yet
about the decision making mechanism. Not only the information entering from without
(from the machine, from the environment) but also internal information influences the
nature of the decision, its correctness and the swiftness with which it is adopted.

Internal information comes from the memory, which stores information and instructions
received previously. Inaddition to information contained in the individual's memory,
intuition, which influences decision making, also plays a great role.

"Stress” situations, or states of nervous tension that reflect the body's reaction to
injury and shock, and psychological difficulties such as fear, a state of intense
arousal and so on, play a role in information processing and decision making.

3. The last stage of the labor process is transmission of the adopted decision to
operating organs and implementation of this decision. This last stage is called con-
trol, and in a "man-machine" system it is achieved by exerting an influence on the
machine s controls with the purpose of making the necessary changes in the process
occurring within the system. In this case the output is represented by man's opera-
ting orguns, and the input is represented by the machine's controls.

Tnus perception, decision making and implementation of the decision form a closed
structure of interaction between man and machine in the ergonomic system. Interaction

between these two basic elements of the system--machine and man--essentially consists
of information transmission and control on the basis of the feedback principle.

In addition to informational interaction between operator and machine, there are
other types of interaction characterized by the working posture of the operator
servicing the machine, the effort expended and the speed, trajectory and quantity of
movements required, as will be discussed in detail below.

A classification of intrasystemic associations must also include the associations
between the operator and the object of labor and the associations between persons
drawn into the system, and especially the conditions created within the system.

As far as associations between the operator and the object of labor are concerned,

they are achieved through the machine, and they basically have an influence on the
degree to which informational interaction is expressed or on the hardness and intensity
of the work of the operators.

Before we can classify intrasystemic associations subjectively, we must analyze them
correctly. Such analysis begins with description of the system and subsequent appli-
cation of hygienic, phsyiological, psychological and special ergonomic methods of
analysis. This will be discussed in greater detail in the course of the material's
presentation.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II. ME’RIODS OF STUDYING AN IRQNOHIC SYSTEM

he follows from our analysis of the content of an ergonomic system and the classifi-
cation of intrasystemic associations, the methods of ergonomic analysis must be
aimed at establishing how men is influenced by the factors arising within the
ergonomic system, such that reconnendations aimed at optimizing man's position in
the system could be developed. Specifically, the analysis methods must be aimed at:
studying the working conditions and revealing the design shortcomings of the produc-
tion equipment that worsen the working conditions, such that by their elimination
the working conditions could be improved; evaluating workplace organization from the
standpoint of ensuring a normal work posture and permissible speeds, trajectories and
quantities of movements and efforts necessary to service the production equipment:
studying informational interaction between the operator and machine.

Thus the methods of studying ergonomic systems include hygienic methods concerned
with the working conditions, PhYsiological methods used to study physiological state,
anthropometric methods to determine the body's anatomical dimensions and special
ergonomic methods to study the design features of serviced equipment.

Hygienic methods used in ergonomics are essentially the same used in conventional
hygienic research.

Physiological methods, which are used to study physiological state, are also the same
ones euployed in research on labor physiology, the one difference being that in
ergonomic research, more attention must be devoted to . :occdures for evaluating the
state of the motor apparatus, the nervous system and the sense organs. In this
connection hygienic and physiological methods will not be described in this section.

Anthropometric Methods of Analysis

Special instruments are used with anthropometric methods of analysis--Hartin's
anthropometer and an angle gage. Many tables of anthropometric data are available.
They contain more than 300 different indicators pertaining to different anatomical

dimensions of the human body. In practical ergonomic research, however, only a small
part of the existing anthropometric data are used to evaluate the correspondence of

workplace dimensions and working instruments to the dimensions of the human body.
Standard 22315 was proposed in the 603 for this purpose. It includes 12 anthropo-
metric indicators, namely body height, shoulder height, thigh length, knee height,
thigh height. upper arm length, forearm length, width at the shoulders, seated body
height, seated eye level, seated shoulder height and standing eye level.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Having critically evaluated this standard, the ergonomics laboratory of the USSR
Academy of Medical Sciences Institute of Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases
developed its own proposals for a standard on anthropometric indicators used in

ergonomics.

Table 1.

Measured

_————_——_———-

Standing Body length
(height)

Body length
with up-
stretched

arm
Dcltoid
shoulder
width
Length of
arm
stretched
forward.
Length of
arm
stretched
to the
side.
shoulder
length

Leg length
Thigh
length
Standing
eye level

Shoulder
point
height

 

'Hith hand clenched

0553
Men women
M30 “:0

167.eas.8 156.715.?

213.8:8.4 l98.lt7.6

4h.6:2.2 41.822.4
64.223.3 59.3:3.1
62.2:3.3 se.e:3.o
32.721.7 3o.2:1.e
90.1:4.3 83.524.1
155.9:5.e 145.8:s.s
137.3:5.s 128.1:5.2

20

171.5

35.5

141.7

into a fist (grasping position).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

159.8

32.7

132.1

These proposals are represented in tables 1-3 and in figures 2 and 3.

Anthropometric Dimensions Used in Ergonomics, in Centimeters

W

To determine tool
height for work
while standing,
and the height of
the work space

mo determine verti-
cal reach with the
purpose of locating
controls

To determine work-
place dimensions

To determine forward
reach

To determine height
of controls and
height of work

surface

To determine height
of work surface
and location of
displays, and the
field of view

To determine height
of work surface
and height of con-
trols
84.3

73.6

56.6

32.0

To determine height
of work chair

to determine height
of machine tools,
controls, die-
plays

To locate controls
and displays, to
determine height
of work Surface

1‘0 locate controls.‘
to determine height
of work surface

To locate elbow
rests, to deter-
mine workplace
height

‘Ib determine for—
ward reach and
workplace dimen-
sions

To locate manual
controls

To determine seat
dimensions
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Basic Dimensions of Human Hand

Table 3 .

 

 

 

 

“$.13,“ ___. _____1'L"_".!'_fﬁ)_- _._-_—
_:3 udolmuﬂ(3) “4"“... “5) unite-Luna

A 21) '85 17

I; 9 8.2 7.6
H I'Z, I I I .2 9.9
I' 7.3 7.3 6.8
f l 7.3 6,6 5.8
I: 12.1 I L? 9.9

- Note: When protective gloves are worn, the width
and thickness of the hand are increased by 1-1.5 cm.

 

Points on Figure 3 4. Average
Dimension, an 5. beast
Greatest

Basic Dimensions of the Human Head

 

 

Tom- " Pun». cu _——-—

A 23.3 21,8 18.6
5 16.5 14.8 13.!
B 20.2 18.8 16.8
I" - - ll.2 - -
ll I19 l'.’ 9.7
H II! [0.8 8.2
K 6.5-6.8 --
II 7.6 6,3 4,9
M - - I25 —-
ll I14 ll ~| l0

Points on Figure 3 4. Average

Dimension, cm 5. Least

Greatest

22'

FOR Off-1C1“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Basic Dinensions of the Head and Hand (See Tables 2 and 3)

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OI'I'ILIAI. USE. UNLV

As we can see from these data, use of 28 anthropometric indicators for the torso,
six for the hands and 10 for the head (44 anthropometric indicators in all) is fore-

seen for the purposes of ergonomics. Concrete uses of each anthropometric indicator
for the torso are stated in Table 1.

Every anthropometric characteristic is known to be a random variable having a normal
distribution represented by the qaussian curve. Knowing the probability distribution
and the average of a characteristic (M) and the standard devidtion (c), we can deter-

mine the percentage of people for whom that anthropometric characteristic fits
within in a given interval.

For example 99.7 percent of all characteristics having a normal distribution, or to
put the same thing in another way, 99.7 percent of all people fall within the
H230 interval. The following relationships are valid for a normal distribution:

The interval M120 corresponds to 95\
.0

mi . 650 " 9m
" m1 . 150 ~ 75‘
" um " 68\
" .420. 67a ' 50\
" no. 320 - 25.

Using these data, in each case we could calculate the percentage of people having
dimensions in keeping with a particular structure (a seat, a cab, a console, etc.).

The methods of special ergonomic analysis may be subdivided into different forms
depending on their purpose. It should be kept in mind, however, that special ergo-
nomic methods of analysis are still in their developmental stage. The greatest diffi-
culties lie in evaluating the workplaces of machines such as tractors and combines,
and cabs housing control consoles. The difficulties encountered here by ergonomists

will be discussed below.

'me dimensions of equipment are given as metric and angular measurements to permit
assessment of their correspondence with the anatomical dimensions of the human body.
This is easily done for a sinple office desk or chair. However, ergonomics has yet
to scientifically substantiate the choice of methods for determining the linear and
angular parameters pertaining to the location of controls and the work seat, and the

dimensions and shape of levers, pedals and so on, for exasple in tractor cabs.

Methods of Determining the Quantity of Movements, 'lheir Speeds and Trajectories

There are considerable difficulties in evaluating the speeds, trajectories and
nunbers of movements made by the arms or legs when servicing a particular piece of

production equipment. what we use here are tensoretric (recording force and time
characteristics) and potentiometric sensors (recording biomechanical parameters and

movements of controls), requiring employment of special amlifiers and recorders.

We can describe as an example a system for mechanical time-and-motion studies pro-
posed by P. I. Gunener. It uses a rheostat sensor, contained within a bridge circuit,
and a recorder (Figure 4A). 'lhe sensor consists of a variable resistor (470 ohms)

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one strip secured to its shaft and another to the main body of the resistor. One of
the sensor strips, along which wires are secured, is fastened to the operator's
shoulder, and the other is fastened to the forearm in such a way that the shaft of
the variable resistor would be in line with the axis of the elbow joint (Figure 45).
ﬁne multistranded conductors are braided into a single cable 2-meters long having
a plug at its end. when the operator must be disconnected from the instrument for a
short period of time, rather than removing the sensor the operator need only remove
the plug from its socket. This is especially convenient when we study not all of an
operator's work but only individual moments of it. he conductors leading from the
sensor to the recording instrument may be of any length (20-30 meters and lore). A
recording N—370 or N-375 ampere voltmeter is used as the recording instrument. This
instrument is simple, and it may be assembled in the laborath from readily avail-

able components. Figure 5 shows an example of recordings made of different work
operations.

 

Figure 4. Circuit of an Instrunent Used for
Mechanical Time-and-Hotion Studies:
A: lip-variable resistor (470 ohms)
of the mechanographic sensor: 82--
variable resistor (470 ohms) used to
balance the bridge: R3--variable re-
sistor used to set nominal voltage;
B--battery, mA—-N-370 AH recording
millianpere voltmeter; D—-mechano-
graphic sensor; V1, v2--voltmeter
terminals; B: position of. sensor
for recording movement mechanograms

 

When necessary, a multichannel system for group mechanical time-and-motion studies
may easily bu ussunbled from such single-channel system. Such a system (Figure 6)
can be used to simultaneously study several operators or record the work of several

joints. A multichannel system consists of 8-14 rheostat sensors and an N-lOZ or
“-700 loop oscilograph, which can be connected to terminals I-II, III and so on

(see Figure 6). An exanple of a recording made during a group mechanical time-and-
motion study is shown in Figure 7. In this variant of. the instrument the

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WM 0
in

Figure 5. Mechanical Time-and-Hotion study of Work (perations in a
Mechanic's Shop (I) and a Carpentry Shop (II): I—-principal
operations: (twining; b,o-cutting; d—-working tin with a
mallet; auxiliary operations: e—tightening a vice; f--
taking measurements. n--principa1 operations: a--planing;
b--saving; c--filing: auxiliary operations: dnsandpapering;
e--taking measurements

mechanochronograms must be processed by hand. However, Gusher also described an
instrument intended for automatic mechanochronogran recording (1967).

A tensOmyographic method for determining muscle tension when working with various
controls, developed by V. I. Golovan' (1972) , can be used successfully to record the
novements of joints and to keep track of muscles performing a movement. In this
method muscle tension accompanying a natural work process is recorded by tensoresistor
sensors secured to the subject's skin over the target muscles with adhesive strips.
me sensors are secured firmly enough so that they would not slip over the surface

of the skin, but not so firmly that they would constrain the joint's movement or

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 6.

figure 7 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    
 

ooooooor
l

l'

Diagram of the I'GM—l" Instrument for Group Mechanical Tine-
Time-and—Hotion Studies

.vvyw

 

Group Mechanical Time-and-Motion study: anneal cutting:
b--chopping; c--sawing wood; d--planinq; e--measuring parts

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

disturb circulation in the muscle. A light cable up to 25 meters long with a plug

at its end is secured to the subject's belt to permit free movement around the machine.
A TA-S anplifier is used to amplify the electric signal picked up from the strain
gages. Change in voltage picked up by the strain gages is recorded by a multicompo-
nent K-l2-21 oscillograph. which is a general-purpose electromagnetic instrument
capable of optical recording on photographic tape. me tensomyographic method can

be used to obtain data characterizing the tension of different muscle groups and

the extent of their participation in work movements, the quantity of the work done,

the rhythm of movements and the dynamics of fatigue development.

Researchers making biomechanical observations on an individual in the course of

ergonomic research often need to know the nuwer of arm movements. N. A. Kokhanova
and G. I. Barkhash (1972) used an ordinary pedometer for this purpose. As we know,
pedometers are used to count the mmber of steps an individual takes. They record

vertical jolts occurring while walking. Kokhanova and Barkhash adapted pedometer:
to record the number of arm movements in both the vertical and horizontal directions.

To record horizontal movements, the pedomter's spring was removed from its post
(Figure 8M), as a result of which its weight (Figure 83b) could make a horizontal
movement which would actuate a counter. 'lVo pedaneters are fastened to the individual
when the distal division of the right and left forearms must be studied. One of them
is located on the backside of the forearm, and it records horizontal movements,

while the other is fastened perpendicularly to the first in order to record vertical
arm movement. 'no make it easier to secure the pedometers to the arms, they are in-
serted into a special holder with their reset knobs facing each other (Figure 83).

'me authors used this method to record the number of arm movements made by two groups
of grinders performing circular and slot grinding. 'lhe research showed that in
circular grinding, the number of vertical movements made by both arms during a shift
averaged 6,260 and the matter of horizontal movements averaged 6,058, while with

slot grinding the number of vertical movements averaged 4,063 and horizontal move-
ments averaged 5,110. 'lhe tenporal dynamics of these data are shown in Figure 8C.

The results provide additional objective information on the activity of the human motor
apparatus during work in the course of a shift.

WCIO‘JI'GPhY'

Cyclography permits a more-accurate biomechanical evaluation of the movements of '

different body joints in ergonomic research. cyclography affords a possibility for
determining all of the main biomechanical indicators of joint movement--trajectory,
speed. acceleration and muscle force. '

The cyclographic method essentially entails registration of point images of the move-
ment trajectory. For this purpose lamps (from a pocket flashlight) are secured to the
points of the body to be analyzed. ‘lhe light of these lamps is periodically interrupt-
ed by a special device--an obturator. When motion picture photography is employed,
successively taken frames assmne the obturation function.

Rubber straps with sockets are the most convenient for securing the lamps to the
subject‘s body (Figure 9). Lamps are located above the centers of the joints between

1"this description is borrowed from the book 'Praktikum po fiziologii truda" [Hand-
book on Labor Physiology] (K. S. 'rochilov, Editor), Izd-vo L60, 1970.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

II

700

000
500
400

300 -
(1)

H‘cx rcouso-uauun .‘l-llIO-rl'i D"

 

(2) 9"“- "

Figure 8. Using a Pedometer to Count the Nunber of Arm Movements: A-
modification of the pedometer; B--a device for holding two
mdomters; C--dynamics of the nunber of horizontal arm nove-
nents made by workers performing circular and slot grinding
during a shift: 1--right arm 2--left urn

Key: .
1. Number of. horizontal arm movenents
2. Time, hr

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

articulating units. On the head and hands. the lamps are secured above their centers
of gravity.

'me obturator. which is needed to break down individual novenents into phases—to
obtain a chronocyclogran—is a necessary element of cyclographic recording. It is a
unique sort of chronoueter.

 

Figure 9. Strap Patterns for Different Parts of the Body: l--£or the
head: 2--for the shoulder joint; 3—for the elbow joint;

4-for the wrist and for the point corresponding to the
position of the band's center of gravity.

 

Figure 10. Obturator with Rosette and Mon Lamp

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

all
3‘ e
300 35 3' ‘. ‘10
24 '90 '
20 3:. ' '
700 - I g ' ~
2n 5" .2. In
«00 -° ~ '
:20 . .
' o
foo .. . O
."° , 7° no
0' .
‘00 0‘7," '
. e . .
30° .0” e
e "
. .
700 .‘I? '
‘ e
$.03. 0.,
mo ”"" .-
r- e '

 

Figure 11. Photographic Measuring Template for the nod Lifting
Movement (Scale--l :5) (A); Graph showing Successive
Positions, Spaced 0.1 Sec Apart, of Am segments While
Lifting a nod (40 Points Are Photographed Per Second) (a)

The obturator consists of a cardboard or soft metal ring. Holes are cut in the
ring eymetrically; their nunber can be arbitrary. The constancy of the obturator's
rotation rate is monitored by a special device consisting of two parts: a small
cardboard ring with rays drawn on it--the saw-called rosette, and a neon lamp that

° 31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI-‘I-‘ICIAI. USE ONLY

illuminates the rosette (Figure 10). The ring rests on the axle of a little motor
that rotates it smoothly. The obturator is placed in front of the camera' 3 lens.
Rotating, the ring of the obturator periodically covers and uncovers the lens. As

a result the photographic image of the trajectory would consist of points (Figure llh).

Constant rotation of the obturator is a mandatory recording condition. ally in this
way can it be used as a chronometer, and can we precisely calculate the nuber of
points taken by the film per unit time, which will indicate the total duration of
the movement.

'me rays of the rosette are always of the same size while the holes in the obturator
are not: when there are four or five holes, one of then is made narrower; with eight,
two are made narrower. The narrow holes are needed for synchronization of the points
of different trajectories: mey serve as. reference points with which to establish
serial mnbering. The ring is seated on the same motor axle to which the obturator
is secured. The device's principle of operation is based on the stroboscopic effect:
In this case the rays of the rosette produce the visual effect of motionless only if

the obturator is rotating at a particular speed. The rosette would appear motionless
if the tine for one ray of the rosette to move to the position occupied by the previous
ray coincides with the time the neon lamp is on (1/50 sec). For example were the
rosette to have only one ray, for that ray to appear motionless the rosette would have
to make one complete revolution in the time of one flashnthat is, in 1/50 sec; if
there are two rays on the rosette, the time would be 2/50 sec, and so on.

Consequently the more rays there are on the rosette, the fewer revolutions the
obturator would have to make to achieve a stroboscopic effect.

'Do determine the nunber of points (KI taken in 1 sec, the nunber of holes in the
obturator must be divided by the number of rays on the rosette and multiplied by 50
(the number of times the neon lamp is interrupted in 1 sec):

“5......

where d--nunber of holes in the obturator; e--mnber of rays on the rosette.

K is the principal photographic indicator because it tells us how many points the
trajectory of motion is broken down into within 1 sec. Thus if [(-40 (for example
at d=4 and 6-5), each point would stand for 1/40 sec, and if the trajectory of the
given motion is represented by 20 points, the duration of the entire movement would
be 0.05 sec.

'Do photograph movements, the camera must be arranged in relation to the object in
such a way that the image of the object would be in the center of the photograph.

the photograph must be supplied with a scale. which is why a stand supporting two
lamps 50 cm apart is placed behind the subject within the plane of movement.

The procedure is as follows:

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1) Set up the camra;

2) set up the obturator in front of the lens, use the rheostat to get the obturator
rotating at the needed speed, and achieve the stroboscopic effect:

3) locate the distribution box in a convenient place near the experimenter;
4) have the subject put on the belt, and connect it to the distribution box:

5) prepare the subject for photographing. For this purpose secure lamps with the
straps to the shoulder, elbow and wrist joints, and at the center of gravity of one
of the hands in the case of profile photography;

6) measure and note down the distance between the lamps on all arm segments, using
the following symbols: for the shoulder; b-a, for the forearm, a-m; for the hand,
m-gm; here, b represents the lamp at the shoulder joint, a is the lamp at the elbow
joint, In is the lanp on the wrist and gm is the lap at the hand's center of gravity;

7) photograph several movements, develop the negatives, and make prints having a scale
one-fifth of the actual trajectory magnitude;

8) remeasure and note down the distance between the lamps on the photograpted segments
of the body.

'Ihe principal document used to process the data is the photographic measuring template
(see Figure 11A). It is obtained from the negative produced by projecting the cyclo-

gram on graph paper through an enlarger.

'lhe measuring template is obtained as follows:
1) Superimpose the scale points over the thick line on the graph paper:

2) select a scale, for example 1/5 or 1/10; consequently the distance between the
scale points on the graph paper would have to be 10 or S (m, since the real distance
was 50 cm; .

3) use a thin-leaded pencil to reproduce the points representing the trajectory of
movement on the graph paper;

4) nmnber the trajectory pointer-the center of gravity of the hand and the centers
of the wrist, elbow and shoulder joints; apply a serial nulber to every fourth point:
0, 4, 8 and so on (if 40 points are photographed in a second, every fourth point
would represent 0.1 sec of lapsed time);

S) draw coordinates a: and g on the measuring template in such a way that all points
would fall between these two axes;

6) label the coordinates in their full-scale values, taking account of the scale.

Example: If the photograph is reduced by a factor of S (if the
scale is 1/5), the values of the coordinates would have to be
increased by five times (10 mm would represent 50 m in full scale).

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI ONLY

In this form, the photographic measuring template is ready for use.

Using the photographic measuring template: 1. Determine the total time of movement.
For this purpose the number of points taken in 1 sec must be known.

Example: If there are 31 points on the distal trajectory (gm)
and if 40 points are taken per second, the time of the movement
would be 31/40 sec. or 0.775 see. 'me distal trajectory is
chosen because the points on the trajectories of the proximal
segments may fuse together owing to low speed.

2. Determine the average rate of movement (approximately) on the distal trajectory--
in this case this would be the rate of movement of the center of gravity of the hand
holding the weight. A curvimeter or a piece of thread can be used to measure the
trajectory of the band's center of gravity. The obtained value is converted to the
actual value in correspondence with the scale, and it is divided by the total time
of the movement.

Example: If the trajectory of the hand's center of gravity is
measured to be 139 cm on a measuring tanplate with a scale of
1/5 and if the time of movement was 31/40 sec, the actual
trajectory would be 695 mm and the average speed would be

695x40
31

 

= 900 Inn/sec.

3. Graph the successive positions of the body segments. For this purpose transfer
the numbered points of all trajectories from the measuring template to tracing
paper and connect them with straight lines (Figure 113). If the number of points
taken in 1 second is 40, then it would be best to connect every fourth point of all
segments on the graph. Then we would have a 0.1 sec interval between each position
of the arm as it lifts the rod.

4. Determine the angles and graph the movement of the wrist and elbow joints. By
doing so. we can establish whether or not the movement had been performed in accord-
ance with the instructions (for example the elbow and wrist angles of the outstretched
hands had to be 180° as they lifted the rod). This determination is made from the
graph of successive segment positions. For this purpose the center of a protractor

is located on the apex of the angle to be measured and its straight side is aligned
with the axis fo the proximal sequent. the obtained data are used to plot a graph
(Figure 12A): The serial nunbers of the points (that is. time) are plotted on the
abscissa and the angles are plotted in degrees on the ordinate.

5. Check the coordinates of points on the trajectory of gm; the trajectory of 91:

is chosen because the kinematic characteristics of a movement (speed and accelera-
tion) best characterize this movement in relation to its distal trajectory. Determine
the coordinates (x and y) of each point on the photographic measuring template. The
coordinates are measured with an accuracy of up to 5 an actual value at a 1/5 scale

(1 an on the measuring template). Enter the data in the table. 'Ihese data will show
how the movement progressed in every fortieth of a second.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'1 1 Mo
'.' 1 7!“
'_~ u 200
m I80
I 6 so
I 4 Ml)

I') DO
2" mu

(0 n no
(H'- "II
0 4 an
n .v '10
.1. l—L..L—l—L.—l—H—L.I—L—l—L
v a u. nmmd mumm'u-m'm m

(1) Huron- Ipm .
’ g (2)

 

I I l I I I.l L.‘ ._l_-
14 o.“ IIII’II‘IuII’IU7‘I

' I"
I 4-! Mg...- qm -
I- I'll
II "II

Figure 12. Parametric Graph of the First Differences and Speeds in Relation

to Component y (A). Parametric Graph of Second Differences
andAccelerations in Relation to Component y (B)

1. Meters/sec
2. Time, 1/40 sec

6. Calculate the speeds in relation to conponents a: and y. For this purpose find
the differences between the coordinates of the points (the so-called first differ-
ences--A'). 'me first differences are calculated for an interval of four points--
that is, the coordinate of point 0 is subtracted from the coordinate of point 4,

and the result is written, together with its sign, opposite the coordinate of point 2:
next the data for point 1 are subtracted frou the coordinate of point 5, and this

result is written opposite point 3, and so on until coupletion. In this case it
would be convenient to use a tenplate (see Figure 12A). The data are entered into

a table. and then on a graph of the first differences in relation to the mvement
component (a: and y) .

The first differences (A') are converted to speed in relation to, for exanple,
component 11 (Vy) using the following formula:

. .33! _ u/sec,

y .
Y [I x um:

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where ﬁnintetval between point coordinates (4 in our case); Yummber of points
in 1 sec (40 in our case); l,000--for conversion of millimters into meters.

Bxarple: If the first difference (A') is 20 In, then the speed
in relation to movement component y at the given moment would be:

)
V, = 721.1%”0— a 0.2 m/sec.

Similar calculations are made for oomonent .2, and the results are graphed.

The speeds need not be calculated for each point of a trajectory. It would be suffi-
cient to apply, to the graph of first differences, an additional scale of speed values
at the intervals calculated by the formula and corresponding to the values of the
first differences.

7. Calculate accelerations. Acceleration (ED-"that is, the rate of change of
movement speed--may be interpreted as the speed of change in speed. Therefore every-
thing said about speeds may be applied to acceleration, in which case we introduce
the concept of second differences (18") on analogy with the concept of first differ-
ences.

The first differences are the raw data used to calculate the second differences.
The second differences are also calculated for every fourth point. though on the
basis of the first differences and not the photographic measuring tenplate. The
obtained values are entered into the table.

Second differences are converted to acceleration values (if) using the following
formula:

"Y 1’ 2
W’ " Fxlmu “/9“ '

A graph of the second differences (Figure 123) is set up similarly as the graph of
first differences. and an additional scale for the acceleration values calculated

with the formula is applied on it (in In/secz).
This ends the kinematic description of the movement.

8. Calculate the dynamic characteristics--the muscle power required to surmount
inertia and gravity.

Inertia (F1) is equal to the mass of the segment (1»), which is itself equal to the
weight of the segment (gm) divided by gravitational acceleration (981 cm/secz).
Inertia opposes both components of movementnz and y (forward and upward).

Muscle force (F) is expressed in kilograms. In the case of surnounting gravity,

F9" 1]) X “7,.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where p--segment weight, kg; Wy--acceleration achieved during movement in relation
to component y. This formula can be used to calculate forces corresponding to
accelerations. Muscle force to surmount inertia (171) must be applied to both
movement canponentsnx and y. It also is expressed in kilograms.

Fl "- Fu + Fly.

In this case
I’. .mW/1 I",mm\V,.

where m-~mass of the segment and rod: ”3 and Elf-acceleration achieved during move-
ment in relation to components a: and y.

Thus the total force in relation to component y is equal tothe sum of forces FP+F1,
while only F1 is applicable to component 3.

We limit. the description of muscle force only to movement component y because the
kinematic characteristics of speed and acceleration are also analyzed only in rela-
tion to component y. 'I'ne absolute values of the variables indicated above are ob-
tained using known formulas. For speed for example, at each point we have

for acceleration we have [V r; V-‘V.' I- “7’1.

 

|/_ , V—V.‘ "WV".

9. The dynamic characteristic of movement is expressed by the muscle forces applied
to the segment's center of gravity (in our example, to the center of gravity of the
hand and rod). This indicator may be calculated on the basis of. cyclographic data
if the movement is opposed only by gravity and inertia (as in the case of lifting the
rod).

Gravity is equal to the weight of the segment, and it is directed vertically downward.
Consequently the muscle force required to surmount it must be applied upward in the
direction of movement component y.

The technique described above for planar cyclophotography is intended for recording
individual movements, or their phases, out of a series of repeating movements (other-
wise the movements would superimpose over one another). If a successive series of
movements must be analyzed, they would have to be photographed on moving film with a
motion picture camera (naturally, this method can also be used to record individual
movements or their phases). with motion picture photography, the number of frames
taken per second must be known. The photographic measuring template is obtained by
plotting successive points of the trajectory of movement on graph paper,

projecting the film frame by frame onto the exact same place on the graph paper.
This work must be done with special care so that subsequent calculations would come

out correctly.

The advantage of motion picture photography is that in addition to permitting micro-
analysis of movements, a possibility is created for observing the progress of a move-

ment in slow motion (using a high frame frequency). which is especially important to
studying work procedures.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Using Potion picture Photography to Study nave-ants

Motion picture photography is used in labor research to determine the time of indi-
vidual procedures and work "OWEN-8 and to evaluate the efficiency of work movements,
procedures and postures. The duration of individual procedures is determined fro-
thc number of frames on the. movie film. If the work procedure is represented on

240 frames and the shooting speed is 24 frames per second, the duration of the proce-
dure can be determined by calculation:

a timber of frames for procedure _ ﬂ _
Procedure duration Filming Speed 24 10 sec.

To evaluate the efficiency of work procedures and postures we lay a sheet of graph
paper over the screen of an editing table, and the starting positions of both hands
are marked on the paper. Then the film is advanced two or three frames, the new
position of the hands is marked, and so on. The direction of movements and pauses
in them are indicated concurrently. After the procedure is recorded in this way,
the points representing movement of the hands are joined together: a broken line for
the left hand and a continuous line for the right. Thus we obtain a cyclogram of
the movements. Following this we use a curvimeter to measure the relative length
of the movement paths. Figure 13 shows a cyclogram of two spinners, one less ex-
perienced (Figure 13A) and one more experienced (Figure 138). A curvimeter would
show that the length of the movement path of the less experienced spinner mending a
broken thread is 130 percent of the path length of the more experienced spinner.
Correspondingly the mending time is 13.1 percent longer for the less experienced than
the more experienced spinner.

 

Figure 13. Cyclogram of the Hand Movements of a Less Experienced (A) and
More Experienced (B) Spinner Mending a Broken 'mread: Continuous
liar-movement of the right hand; broken line—deft hand

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this way, we can also easily determine the effectiveness of teaching the best
work procedures. Thus after being taught efficient procedures, the path length of

Because movie film can be viewed more than once, we can study and make work procedures
and hand movements more efficient; by viewing a motion picture film, we can reveal
and pin down unnecessary, extra procedures and movements, and thus get rid of then.
s. zhunda, the author of this modification of the method, believes that by using an
intermittently switched-on movie camera we can also apply the "instantaneous obser-

Measurement of Forces

Measurement of the forces exerted by an operator while he is servicing equipment is
often a necessity in ergonomic research. However, the methods of taking these

may serve as a basis for developing reconnendations on their limitation. Of interest
in this connection is a method for recording forces applied to production equipment
developed by H. M. Speranskiy (1972). It entails recording the amount of force
applied .(by the palm and fingers) during the use of a control lever using several

design protects the recording system from artifacts that may arise due to movement
of the hand and fingers. within a certain range, the voltage (current) at the

mnplifier output grows in proportion to the force applied to the sensor. The

resulting dynanograms are subjected to quantitative evaluation (in kg) on the basis
of the calibration of the recording system.

quality of a seat depends on how uniformly pressure is distributed over the surface

of the gluteus muscles. The nature of this pressure's distribution can be determined
by distributing a large quantity of Speranskiy sensometric sensors over the surface

of the seat and subsequently recording the pressure applied to different parts of
the seat surface. The shape of the seat surface may be altered in correspondence
with this pressure distribution, so as to achieve more-uniform distribution of
loads on different surfaces of the gluteus muscles.

In a number of cases conventional dynamometers can be used to determine the forces
exerted on used equipment. Thus for exauple. dynammeters are used successfully

to evaluate forces applied when manipulating control sticks, steering wheels and

so on; a particular example is the spring dynamometer used by the State Motor Vehicle

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 14. Distribution of Tensometric Sensors Over the Surface of
the Palm in M. .M. Speranskiy's Method

Inspection to measure the force necessary to turn the steering wheel of a motor
vehicle. This spring dynanometer is secured to the rim of the steering wheel. 'lhe
force generated when turning the wheel is shown on a scale marked on bushings on
which the dynamometer rests. Presence of two springs permits measurement of forces
in ranges from 0.9 to 2 and from 2 to 10 kg.

Yu. G. shirokov and v. P. Silant'yev proposed a method for quantitative evaluation
of loads experienced by the hands. They designed a tensometric device that could
differentiate the points of application of forces, in kg, reveal the loads with

regard to the time of their action upon the muscle (indicator I, equal to the product
of force P. kg and the time of its action 1:: I -PXt kg-sec) and evaluate the loads
simultaneously experienced by many muscle groups of the arm.

By determining indicator I, kg-sec, we can describe the loads both on individual
muscles of the hand and on entire muscle groups during work.

Figure 15A shows a diagram of the device used to conduct myotensometric research.

This method is based on measuring forces by means of tensometric converters--tenso—
meters.

The device consists of a sensitive e1euent—-a glove (Figure 158), to which thin
metallic plates with glued-on tensometric resistors are secured within the zone of
the muscles to be analyzed.

The leads of all of the tensometers are located on the back side of the glove, and
they are connected by a long cable and plug connection to a bridge block, in which
each tensometer is the leg of a corresponding bridge.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

A , , u ngymuau

 

Figure 15. Tensometric Sensor Connection Circuit: A—-bridge block:
B--tensometric glove; 1-10--tensonetric sensors

1. Pwer 3. ShR25
2. signal 4. 'Ibsensors

Wpe PKB sensors without hysteresis and with resistance 1? depending insignificantly
on temperature t. °C, may be used.

The essence of the method is as follows: As a result of forces experienced by
different. regions of the hand in the course of physical work, electric bridge un-
balance signals are fed separately to the inputs of a direct current mltichannel

amplifier--a UPT. from the output of which the signals are fed to a recording block
(a cathode-ray oscillograph or recorder).

Before recording begins. a special device is used to “calibrate" the sensometers
which are subjected to a previomly known force Peal: kg.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The analysis of the myotensogran may be both qualitative and quantitative.

Tabular Method for Evaluating Workplace Organization

Among the methods for evaluating the organization of workplaces at which production
equipment is serviced, tabular analysis of the correctness with which handles,
buttons and other fixtures are located on a control console has great significance.

me chief problem usually solved by the method of tabular analysis is that of clari-

fying when and in what sequence the operator manipulates different controls. In
other words it is used to determine the number and sequence of the operator's con-

tacts with different controls. In this method, controls are coded by means of
certain symbols, and these synbols are entered across the top and down the left

column of a table (Table 4). Then the work of an operator is observed, in the course
of which all of the operator's contacts with the controls are recorded in

succession. After the observations are all made, the total mimber of the operator's

contacts with different controls and the sequence of these contacts are
determined at the bottom of the table.

Table 4. Table of Contacts

 

 

 

 

_ —__:_—upmu Wm

_ __Alu_|cIn|I-:lu=lolulIljlxll.
A -- 3 1 2 I0 9 8 — 7 — -~ 3
II 3 - I '2 — 5 -- 7 — H I0 —
I: 4 I — 4 20 I2 — I5 3 4 —- I5
0 2 2 4 - 7 I0 - I0 ‘— 5 9 —
I: I0 20 7 —- 7 6 I7 RI I0 I2 —
F 9 5 I? I6 7 — 8 - I3 -- — 20
U 8 — - n G 8 -- 3 B 20 9 —
II - 7 I5 I0 I7 — 3 — -- I3 4 -
I 7 —- 3 2| I3 8 - - 5 - ‘-
J - H 4 5 I0 - 20 I3 5 -- - -
K - I0 —- 9 I2 - 9 ‘ —- - - '—
l. a—Is——2o—————--—

(ﬁlm-Io

one! 46 62 78 55 110 90 62 7‘ 57 76 44 38

 

Key:
1 . Controls
2. Nunber of contacts

we can see from the-example of tabular analysis shown in Table 4 that the operator
nude the largest nunber of contacts with the control with the code letter B. In
Lurms of their sequence, they are usually contained into successive control manipu-
lations-writ, EC and so on. Hence we can conclude that control 8 must be located

in the most optimm zone, and the controls which the operator manipulates most fre-
quently following use of control B should be located near it.

42

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5. Relative Load in Response to the Bxistingandan Efficient Keyboard
Arrangement (Number of Times Struck by Bach Finger)

Keyboard Fingers of Left Hand timers of Riﬂt Hand
Arrangement _§_ L 3 2 2 3 4 5
Existing 803 658 1492 1535 1490 640 996' 296
Efficient 855 900 975 1028 1097 1096 991 968

 

As we can see from the table. the load experienced by different fingers (assuming
work with four fingers of each hand) using the existing keyboard arrangement varied
from 296 (the little finger of the right hand) to the 1,535 (fourth finger of the
left hand) and 1,490 symbols (index finger of the right hand). A very large
difference in the load experienced by each hand by different fingers is evident.
merefore the keys were redistributed in a new, efficient order; as can be seen
from Table 5. the load on the hands and fingers became more uniform. Other applica-
tions of the tabular analysis method will be discussed subsequently.

Determination of Field of View

One of the most important problems in ergonomic evaluation of equipment is that of
determining what the field of view is. This is especially important to evaluating
the visibility qualities of tractors, agricultural machines and other self-propelled
machines. A method used to determine the visibility qualities of these machines
must account for the way the driver perceives visual information (the manner in which
he switches his attention and fixes his gaze on particular objects of observation), his
physiological characteristics (quantitative data on movement of the driver's eyes.

meters of visibility. By comparing the characteristics of a driver's perception of
visual information and data describing the visibility qualities of machines and

the technological requirements of visibility, we can determine the optimun cab design
and location on the machine.

To evaluate the visibility qualities of tractors, we determine the angles of view
from the cab in the vertical and horizontal planes, the fields and areas of view

in angular and linear units, "dead zones“ that cannot be seen from the cab, and the
visibility of observed objects from the cab.

visibility parameters are determined for the cabs of tractors and agricultural
machines using a special level platform to which acoordinate grid is applied (the

sides of the squares are 1 meter, the length of the platform is 20 meters, and its
width is 15 meters) (Figure 16A,B). This method entails the use of a panoramic
camera, a special tripod designed by the State Scientific Reseath Institute of

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rox UPIILIAL var. UNLI

Motor Vehicle Transportation, a 50 kg weight and a measuring instrument. 'no photo-
graph the pattern of visibility, the tractor or the given piece of machinery is
priced on the platform in such a way that the platform's axes would coincide with

the axes of the center of the camera's lens (point 0). 'ihe tripod and camera are set up
on the seat, with regard to its sag. in such a way that the camera lens would be at

a point corresponding to the position of the eyes of a driver with average anthro-
pological characteristics: a-77-78 cm, b819-20 cm (Figure 17). The 360° panorama
is photographed from the cab with the camera in eight positions (I-VIII. see Figure 16A).
The resulting 3( J' panoramic photographs are used to oospile a table and draw a
diagram (see Figure 168) characterizing the quantitative parameters of cab visibility.
Figure 18 demonstrates the significance of visibility (the contour of the invisible
zone) to selection of tractor cab design. The fourth variant is preferable in terms
of visibility (59).

"1254

I“

     

J
.
I.
O

  
  

    
  

OCQGUOUH-Q—QGO’CQ‘Ou-n

 
 
  

«mm-

W“
m

m\.
‘ISﬁa ’

—\

   
      

‘WW
mus-Ill— .

“\mm

 

     

c:ﬂ0:ﬂauo-O-e;as~=-ea:=

. / v,
3 niﬁ g" ’i
~3' . Igéégézgﬂ
M? I if»;
‘ iii! 5 Bay'é;
r7
0% fig/1.41.367; ﬁll/‘2

   
    

   

 

A a

Figure 16. Coordinate Grid on a Marked Cab Visibility Platform (A) and
Diagram of Visibility From the Workplace (B) x Cross-hatched
areas-~invisible zone

A cab's visibility may also be evaluated by means of special coefficients. mus
I. Trepenenkov (1969) proposed a total visibility coefficient and supplementary
partial indicators. The total visibility coefficient is defined by the expression:

=_FL
Kt Fi-Fo '

where Fouarea contained within tractor outline in plan View; Fiuarea of invisible
zone.

Good visibility is within Kt =0.25-O.3S.
Mention should be made of the light-shadow method for determining visibility. The

detr-rmination is made with this method in darkness. A lamp is supported by the
appropriate devices at the point where the driver's eyes would be. When the lamp is

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-l ONLY

   

Figure 17. Line Diagram of a Device for Panoramic Photography of cab
Visibility: l--camera; 2--graduated circle ; 3--guide strip;
4--tripod legs: S--tripod base

turned on, a black silhouette of the machine appears over the surface of the platform.
Shadows on the platform indicate presence of various opaque parts of the tractor's
structure within the field of view. The outlines of the illuminated zones are trans-
ferred to a graph. and the latter is used to determine the visibility parameters.

Evaluation of Operator's work Posture

Evaluation of the operator's work posture occupies a great place in ergonomic evalua-

tion of the mutual relationships between an operator and his equipment. It is a
summary evaluation of these mutual relationships. The assessment of work posture is
the sum of the general characteristic describing the position of the operator as
“standing,“ "standing-sitting’ or “sitting” or some other general characteristic,
and the characteristics describing the positions of individual parts of the body and
joints, and the angles between them. If the work of an operator requires different
work postures, we would have to know the distribution of the different work postures

in time in order to reveal the main ones.

There are several methods for evaluating work postures. Very often researchers limit
themselves to verbal description or photography. The angles of different articulations
may then be determined from the photographs. There are also instrumental methods for
evaluating work postures and their dynamics. A. G. Sukharev (1961) proposed the
photogoniometric method for evaluation of the work postures of students working at
drafting tables. In this method a student working in close-fitting clothes bearing
identification points is photographed in profile. The identification points corres-
pond to the top of the cervical curvature, the top of the thoracic curvature, the

top of the lumbar curvature, the top of the head. and the humeral, radial and styloid

points on the arm. Photographs are taken 2 minutes apart. Thus a series of 22

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INN ill'l'lLlAL 06¢- \ll‘lsl

 

Figure 18. Field of View From Different Tractors: lhe fourth variant
is preferable

photographs is obtained in one study lasting the ties of a class period-45 minutes.
The identification points on each of the photographs are joined together by straight

lines, and the angle formed by each line and the horizontal line passing through
the given identification point is determined. These angles represent the tilt of
individual Parts of the bodies of the students during work. In this case the smaller

the angle, the greater is the tilt of the spine. By averaging the angles deter-
mined from 400-500 different subjects, to a certain extent we can exclude the possible
influence of ''chance" postures typical of the sitting habits of individual subjects,
and we can say that we have arrived at the typical work posture depending on the
height of the table and the particular features of the work. The periodicity of
photogonioaetry also allows us to trace the dynamics of changes in posture during a
class period.

The nature of work postures and their dynamics during work may also be determined
by motion picture photography using special flat dumies on which swivel joints repre-
sent the joints of the body.

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to permit continuous registration of the work posture in industrial condi-
tions, V. P. Silent'yev designed and manufactured a device recording the tilt of the
torso during performance of work operations, the nunber of times it is tilted and the
time the body maintains a work posture.

This small device converts angular displacements into electric signals proportional

to tilt, in degrees, and subsequently records these values on a recorder chart.

The converter consists of two halves of a fiber glass disk glued together and con-
taining grooves filled with mercury. Electric contacts connected to a voltage divider
are built into the disk. When the torso tilts forward or backward the column of
mercury closes the appropriate contact, and an electric signal passes to the recorder
input.

This device was tested at two tire plants on different assenbly equipment, and ex-
perimental results describing the effectiveness of the device's use for ergonomic
research were obtained. Work postures have been subjected to mathematical analysis
in a number of projects.

Testing Units

In many cases it is found necessary to evaluate an ergonomic system in its entirety

or its parts. In such cases we use testing units and mock-ups or models of the system.
Thus Kozlov (36) used a special ergonomic testing unit to establish, by means of
special ergonomic (see above) and physiological methods, the optimum parameters for
the location of tractor levers and pedals in relation to the seat and arm rests.

He also revealed that visibility plays a significant role in determining the nature

of the work posture. Because of certain defects in visibility that he revealed,
tractor operators were compelled to work in an asymetrical posture, tilted to the

right (Figure 19) .

 

A n

Figure 19. Efficient (A) and Forced (3) work Posture of a Tractor
Driver

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill OI'I'N'IAL USE ONLY

23m

:1

 

Figure 20. Location of aPerson and Equipment Ondugoing Testing to
Determine Basic Permissible O'onditions: 1--pneumatic
drill: 2--pressure gage recording applied pressure:
3--measuring platform: 4--pressure gage recording

compressed air pressure; 5—-coepressed air pressure
regulator; 6--friction absorber; 7--tool silulator;

8--contact ring

'me biomechanical conditions of maintaining an asymetrical posture can be described
by the amount the body's center of gravity is displaced to the right and by the
amount muscle static tension is increased due to inadequate visibility. A posture
would be undesirable from the biomechanical standpoint if the spine is tilted in
relation to the horizontal plane (a), if the shoulder girdle and pelvis are tilted
laterally in relation to horizontal, and if compensatory scoliosis of the spine arises
in the cervical and lumbar divisions.

N. P. Benevolenskaya (1972) ‘studied pulsed-action mining equipnent (riveting,
chopping and pneuatic banners) with testing units at the ($811 Academy of Sciences
Institute of Mining (Figure 20).

A mock-up of a grinder was developed at the ergonomics laboratory of the USSR Academy
of Medical Sciences Institute of Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases (38). This
mock-up simulates the work of a grinder with the purpose of establishing the optinum
location of the grinder's controls.and the forces exerted by the operator (Figure 21).

Method of Evaluating Informational Interaction.

'Ihe methods of ergonomic evaluation of informational interaction between and operator
and a machine are an important but little-studied area. An operator's work involves

'Described in ”Praktikum po fiziologii truda" [Handbook of Labor Physiolqul, edited
by K. S. 'nochilov. mu, 1970.

 

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 21. A study Performed to Optimize a Machine ‘nool (perator's
work Posture by (hanging Locations of the Principal Controls
on a Mock-Up: l—mock—up: a--existing work posture,
b--improved work posture, c--optinnn work posture; 2--electro-

autograph

recognition of displayed signals: therefore we must know the rate at which his
sense organs, and the visual analyzer in particular. perceive and process information.

'me recorded time of a choice reaction to a certain visual stimlus consists of the
time required to receive the information in the visual system. the time to form a
motor reaction in response to the obtained information and the time required for
the signal to travel efferent pathways to acting organsuthat is, the measurement
of the choice reaction time does not differentiate between information processing
time in the visual and motor areas. 'lhe tenporal characteristics of the work of the

visual system itself may be studied by presenting a visual image for a certain length
of time and determining the quantity of information obtained by the observer during
this time. This procedure is what is used in psychophysiology to measure the rate of

visual perception.

A tachistoscopic method can be used to measure the rate of visual perception.
Tachistosco'py is short-term presentation of images. A tachistoscope is an instrument

displaying an image for any desired length of time.

Because man‘s visual system includes a working memory that retains an image of an
object for more than 250 msec following its disappearance iron the field of view,
when images are presented by means of conventional tachistocopes without an attendant

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁr
___JLQ\

L..J

 

A
(1)
I a."
_--. . . . ...____.
(2) y Kin-m.
nn -
9, (3)
e.
.. . . .6 hl—I ——‘
. I Sun.
‘IU “
é;—
- oo
0 ° 3”“
3
m 3/;
o/- .
(III
/a°
_. 9‘ ‘l_..l.._...l._.l..—_l— ..|-_ _:___:._..|.
I" 'm In 40 so on 70 no no
Ln. (4)

I3

Figure 22. Diagran Showing Presentation of Test and ”Attendant“ Images (A):
t--test image exposure time. See text for explanation. Depen-
dence of Average Quantity of Information (I) Received by the
Observer on Image Presentation Time (t) (8): Sets of three,
five and ten unages had to be identified (V. D. Glazer. A. A.

Nevskaya , 1964)

Binary units 3. Figures
Binary units/sec 4. Hsec
50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

image, the time allowed for their identification is not really limited. If following
presentation of a given image, called a 'test" image, the subject were to be shown
another called an'attendant” image, the first ("test“) image could be "erased" from
the working memory, thus switching the visual system to solution of a new task. The

exposure time of this image would reflect the time required by the visual system to
process information about it.

s. s. Siklan was the first to propose a method for determining the time required by
the visual system to identify an image. he used television apparatus to present
images. This method was later improved. Then A. h. Nevskaya designed an optical
device permitting smooth change in exposure time from 3 to 700 msec. something the
television apparatus could not do. (beervation is monocular in this case. The
Leningrad University laboratory of labor physiology developed a similar binocular
observation device permitting presentation of an image for from 6 to 200 msec. The
image is projected onto a screen by two general purpose projectors.

A slide is secured in a convergent beam of light directly behind the last lens of the
condenser, near the focal plane of the projector's lens. This slide is projected onto
the screen by the projector lens. At the same point the light beam is interrupted by
a curtain secured to a relay. when a pulse of one duration or another is fed to the
relay the "test" image comes on and the ”attendant" image goes off; after this time
expires the ”attendant" image is flashed back on. The exposure time is set by means
of an ELS-l electrostimulator. The device's principle of operation is shown in
Figure 22A. While the "test" image is being presented the ”attendant" image is

shut off , and vice versa. An attachment permitting measurement of the latent period
(LP) of the combined sensory-speech reaction has been made.

Different sets of images can be presented to an observer for a particular amount of
time by means of this method. The object of the observer is to determine and name
the presented image. Following this. a formula is used to determine the average

quantity of information obtained by the observer in a given presentation time. When
the presentation time is long, no mistakes are made in identification and the quantity
of received information corresponds to the quantity given. If time' is short, the
observer is unable to receive all of the necessary information, and he gives wrong
answers.

Here is an example of calculating the average quantity of information received by an
observer in an experiment with a test object presentation time of 56 msec. Pour
lines of different lengths were presented: 1, 2, 3 and 4 angular degrees. All

images (1:) were equiprobable. A table describing the distribution of responses in
relation to the given presentation time was compiled on the basis of the obtained

responses (5;) (see below).

The average quantity of information received by the observer during this presentation
time can be calculated using Shannon's formula:

lull. +11, — 11., ,.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(mm-m. m (3)

 

 

 

 

- —.“'r"';'”r;."r'7m: M
I l0 0 o 0 2 l2
‘2 0 ll 0 0 I I2
8 0 0 II I 0 l2
4 0 0 0 , l2 0 l2
Ucclo...(3) IO II II III 3 43
Key:
1. Responses 3. ‘lbtal

2. "Don' t know“

where lie-8P. lug-11’, --entropy of the probability distribution of the presented
iwges.’ llp- '21’, log? I” --entropy of the probability distribution of the subject's
responses; ll._y=a 'Ell‘u log: P” --entropy of the joint probability distribution of
arisal of image 3 and response y. Because all four images are equiprobable in the
experiment,

llI --. lug,‘4 = 2 binary units (bits)

I0 II 3 -
”y 3.. _ (18— mg: 7': + .l. 44.8403, %‘-).—=2,20 bits
Ill-y " " lV’x-v '03:“ pm 3
lo M) 2 2 -
ﬂ.- _ (.55.. log, 713— I' T ‘08: 7g. ..l . . . -I- —:§- Iog;

I'Z .
7E ) r; 2.037 bit!

Thus the average quantity of information in this case would be 2+2.20-2.37= 1.83 bits

per presentation. In other words in 5.6 msec the subject receives only 1.83 bits
of information out of the signal's total information of 2 bits.

ﬁle calculations are similar with other presentation times.

The obtained data are used to plot the dependence of the average quantity of informa-
tion received by the subject on the image presentation time. Figure 223 shows the
results of experiments with different sets of images. The quantity of information

the human visual system is capable of processing and transmitting in a unit of time
‘The P log P values needed for the entropy calculations may be taken from the tables

in the book "Veroyatnost' i informatsiya' [Probability and Information) by A. M.
Yaqlom and A. I. Yaglom (Moscow, Pizmatgiz. 1960).

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

15 its capacity. Channel capacity (C) can be determined by the formula:

I:
0"?

where I--average quantity of information, bits; t--time, in seconds, during which

this information is received. For example we can see from Figure 213 that 2 bits
were obtained in 41 msec; hence 0-49 bits/sec; or if 2.7 bits are received in 55 nsec,

0-49 bits/sec. The slope of the curve reflects the capacity of the visual system
in binary units per second.

The image identification time and the capacity of the visual system can vary within
certain limits depending on the dimensions of the images presented, differences in the
brightness of the visual. field, the thickness of lines on the images and so on.
Therefore depending on the factor under analysis, care must be taken to keep all
experimental conditions as constant as possible.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

III. HYGIENIC CRITERIA OP BWCS

Physiological Basis of the Biological Action of Factors in the Production Environment

One of the most important objectives of ergonomics is to come up with requirements

on production equipment design and workplace organization which, when satisfied.

would ensure optimum hygienic working conditions in industry. These requirements

are founded on physiological data describing the particular biological effects of
hygienic factors upon the human body, and the hygienic standards based on these

data. Among the problems associated with the biological action of hygienic factors,
the most important include the laws of the body‘s reactions, reflecting the informa-
tiveness of the operating factors, the laws governing the strength and time of their
influence, the particular dynamics of the body's reactions to the influence of certain
hygienic factors and the laws of the body's adaptation to operating factors on the
basis of information received by functional integration system. A knowledge of these
aspects of biological action is what would permit us to confidently approach evaluation
of production equipment design and workplace organization in industry. Let us succes-
sively examine these most general laws of the body's reactions to the influence of
factors in the production environment.

Biological Action of Hygienic Factors Depending On Their Informativeness

' The mutual relationships between living organisms and the environment have great
significance to the vital activities of such self-regulating systems“ These mutual
relationships are structured upon perception of effects coming from the environment,
their transformation and coding into nerve inpulses, transmission of the latter through
diverse nerve pathways and formation of responding motions. It is belier in this
case that environmental effects introduce certain information into the body, the
content of which determines the response.

There are presently believed to be three possible means of information transmission:
transfer of information together with an information carrier, the matrix form of
information transmission and transmission of information via special commication

channels .

All of these intonation transmission methods are said to occur in living organisms

when they interact with environmental factors. We will see below how these methods
of information transmission manifest themselves in the organism in the course of
formation of responses to the effects of hygienic factors.

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

As Shalyutin pointed out (68), if we are to determine the quantity of information con-
tained in a given effect, we must know the quantity of qualities characterizing this
effect, for example the energy it brings with it, its dose, concentration, repetition
rate, duration etc. These qualities are what determine the modality of the effect.
Next we need to know the number of possible gradations or steps in each quality.
Shannon's formula, which accounts for these data and has its origins in information
theory, can be used to calculate the amount of information contained in each effect.

'lhe formula has the form I Inlogzm, where n is the nunber of qualities possessed by
an effect, m is the number of gradients of each of its qualities, and log is the base
2 natural logarithm.

Effects bearing the same information may also differ in relation to their code--that
is, the relationship between n and m. 'lhus at n = 3, m= 2 information would equal 3:
I- 310922 = 3. However, at nu l and m =8 information would also be equal to 3 units
of information (bits): I = 110928 a 3.

Using these data and knowing the particular features of a given effect, we can calcu-
late information contained in a given hygienic factor. 'l‘hus Shannon's formula allows

us to calculate the quantitative value of information introduced by a particular
effect into the body.

Given the enormous significance of the possibilities for quantitatively accounting for
information using Shannon's formula, it should nevertheless be pointed out that many
features of hygienic factors are ignored when their biological action is evaluated

in this way. Thus for example, when we consider the energy (intensity, dose, concen-
tration) of a given effect, we ignore its possible signaling significance. If the
appropriate conditional associations are developed, a signal having a negligible
energy level or negligible dose and concentration may elicit an unusually violent
response. In precisely the same way, stress reactions elicited by particular effects
do not adhere to specific energy and intensity (dose, concentration) relationships.

0n the other hand purely mathematical representation of information cannot account
for possible changes in formation of responses due to changes in the initial functional
state of the body, for example changes in attention level, presence of dominants.

tiring and so on. All of this indicates that a purely mathematical approach to
studying the biological action of hygienic factors without accounting for physio-
logical data cannot ensure a correct understanding of the relationship of a given
effect to a particular response. In this connection we will attempt to demonstrate
the dominant role played by the physiological approach to understanding the informa-
tiveness of hygienic factors.

Much research is presently being carried out on differences in the informativeness
of the continuous and int :rmittent action of many industrial and environmental
factors on the body. An example would be the stable and discontinuous (intermittent)
action of production noise.

Although we know from experience that the intermittent, flickering action of noise,
light, heat and so on is subjectively perceived by man as a stronger and more un-

plf‘asant influence, scientific research on this problem has not yet led researchers
to any firmly established explanations for this difference. But at
the same time physiological science possesses a number of established facts which

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ UI'I'ILIAL use UNL'

allow us to approach, from a scientific standpoint, the question as to why inter-
mittent action is more informative.

We should first of all point out the fact that as long ago as in 1843, the well

known physiologist B. De Bois-ﬁeymond established in research on the action of direct
current on a nerve that the latter is stimulated not so much by the intensity or the
power flux density of direct current as by the rate of their change. In other words
l36 years ago Du Bois-Reymond formulated the law of infomativeness of the action

of direct current not as I==kF-t--that is, not as a proportion between the informa-
tiveness of direct current of intensity (F9 and the time of its action (t), but rather
in the form Inlde/dt--that is, as a proportion between the informativeness of the
action of direct current multiplied by the intensity of the operating current, and
the time of its action. We can see from a mathematical standpoint that in the second
case an effect may achieve greater informativeness not only by increasing the intensity
of action but also by varying the rate of its change in time. Thus the data of Du Bois-
Reymond and mathematicians suggest to us a direction of research in which reliable
ideas on the greater informativeness of intermittently acting factors may be obtained.
Du Bois-Reymond's law, however, says nothing about the role played by the frequency
with which certain effects are interrupted in relation to their informativeness.
Nevertheless such data do exist in physiology, among which N. Ye. VVedenskiy's data
on parabiosis and on the optimum and pessimum levels of stimulation should receive
priority attention. Effects which are interrupted at a frequency lying within opti-
mum limits have the greatest force of action, and therefore the greatest informative-
ness to the organism. This premise is fully valid in relation to effects such as
constant current and the like--that is, nonoscillating effects. Another criterion

is used by physiologists wishing to evaluate differences in the informativeness of
oscillatory effects such as, for example, sound and light, operating continuously

and intermittently. This criterion is the critical flicker fusion frequency. We
know that intermittent light ceases to be perceived as flickering light at a flicker
frequency varying within 25-50 light flashes per second, depending on the individual
features of the organism's state. This critical flicker fusion frequency is said

to be an indicator of the lability of the visual analyzer. The critical fusion
frequency for sound is 40-100 interruptions of sound per second, while according

to some other data it is within 90-140 interruptions per second.

It becomes obvious from these data that differences in the informativenuss of con-
tinuous and intermittent effects may be discovered by interrupting the factor under
analysis within the limits of its critical flicker fusion frequency, since a stimulus
with a higher frequency would be perceived as continuous--that is, as stabie, with
its informativeness equal to that of a continuous effect. Evidence that inter-
mittent action is capable of increasing the informativeness of a factor under analysis
may be found in experiments performed by s. I. Gorshkov and Ye. A. Guseva back in
1932. As had been hypothesized, when a nerve in a neuromuscular preparation with

its circulation intact was stimulated by a frequency of 200 oscillations per second,
the muscle reacted with minimum contraction. However, when this minimum stimulus

was interrupted 20 times per second, during these breaks in stimulation the muscle
reacted with a contraction having an intensity that was, judging from the myogram,
50-100 times greater than in response to the initial stimulus; consider this in light

of the fact that following the interruptions, the frequency of the stimulatory pulses
remained equal to 100 pulses per second-—that is, also at the minimum level (Figure 23).

$6

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-J '20!) I-..._.l200 na

70 man

Figure 23. Results of Stimulating a Herve in a Neuromuscular Preparation
at a Frequency of 200 Pulses Per Second, and by 20 Pulse
Trains Per Second With Five Stimuli in Each Train: Dramatic
intensification of muscle contraction can be seen

Key:
1. 200 in 20 trains

 

Irradiation of an Assimilated Rhythm in the Rabbit Brain (EEG
Recorded in the 40th Minute Following the Start of Stimulation
of the Right Sciatic Nerve): 1-1 second time marks; 2-3--££G's
of the anterofrontal and posterofrontal cortical regions;
4--respiratory center potentials; 5--pneumogram, stimulation

marks

Figure 24.

Physiological data provide a way for narrowing down the frequency of interruptions
at which the biological action of intermittent stimulation is greater than that of
continuous stimulation. Other features of the central nervous system's reaction
must be considered here, particularly its ability to assimilate a rhythm.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rm Urn-ulna. oar. URL!

Assimilation of the rhythm of external effects was first described as a phenomenon

by A. A. Ukhtomskiy at the Third nil-Union congress of Physiologists in 1928 in his
report ”Rhythm Assimilation in connection with the Teaching on Parabiosis."

Ukhtomskiy demonstrated that the functional nobility of nerve centers, receptors,
muscles and other excitable formations may be altered by rhythmical stimulation, and
that rhythm assimilation has important coordinating significance to the activity of
the central nervous system and the integral organism. Later on, ukhtomskiy's students
and colleagues showed that an activity rhythm may be imposed upon any organ by exter-
nal rhythmical stimuli (Figure 24). Thus a rhythm of bioelectric activity may be
imposed upon the cerebral cortex by rhythmical light and acoustic stimuli: this
method is now being used extensively as a means for evaluating the functional state
of the cerebral cortex. Rhythmical effects can be used to change cardiac and respira-
tory rhythm, blood pressure and motor activity in man. Everyone has experienced

assimilation of the rhythm of march music, or has observed involuntary motor acts
within himself during a concert.

electroencephalographic research has shown that if a rhythmical light or sound
stimulus is turned on at the time an EEG is being recorded, some of these stimulation
frequencies that are close to the frequencies of the 886 are assimilated and can be
revealed in the recording. As a rule those frequencies of light and sound stimuli
which correspond to the level of the subject's functional state are assimilated best.
At the same time, light and sound stimuli can be used to impose a stimulation rhythm
upon the subject's central nervous system and thus shift his functional state in one
direction or another. slcwtd- and O-rhythms (1.5-3 and 4-7 oscillations per second)
are known to correspond to a decline in functional state of the central nervous
system, the a-rhythm (8-13 oscillations per second) corresponds to a resting central
nervous system, and the B-rhythm (14-35) and y-rhythm (up to 90 oscillations per
second) correspond to heightened activity of the central nervous system. Hence impo-
sition of an external stimulus having a certain rhythm may promote establishment of
a particular level of the organism's state. Consequently the significance of inter-
mittent stimuli may depend on the rhythm with which they are interrupted, and on
whether or not this rhythm coincides with a certain rhythm of bioelectric activity
in the cerebral cortex, typical of the current state of the organism.

These physiological facts allow us to approach, with valid scientific grounds,

organization of research on intermittent and continuous effects and analysis of the
obtained results.

Thus the physiological effects demonstrate that the frequency of pulsations in exter-
nal effects has informative significance, as a rhythm assimilation factor, basically
within the limits of the critical flicker fusion frequency, and that the most pro-
nounced biological action is observed at frequencies assimilated by the organism's

excitable formations, and particularly when the external rhythms correspond to the
rhythms of the bioelectric activity in the cerebral cortex.

while rhythm assimilation phenomena may be enormously significant to determining the
informativeness of factors in the surrounding and work environment, work on this
problem has only just begun. There are absolutely no scientific data in the litera-

ture on the particular ways rhythm is assimilated or on the particular features of
the pulsating action of chemical, thermal. tactile and other effects. As was shown,
however, these problems have a direct bearing on the informativeness of their

58

FINI(”NH(JAL.US£|)NLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. USE ONLY

biological action, particularly when we consider that these and other effects are
frequent sources of information from the surrounding and work environment, owing to
which they should become an object of special investigation.

It must be pointed out specifically in regard to the biological action of noise that
the present information on noise has to do only with the biological action it exerts
when adequately perceived by the hearing organ. However, as we can see from Figure 25,
noise acts not only through the hearing organ but also, when it attains a certain
intensity, through the entire body surface, as is shown in the upper part of the
figure. According to experimental data published by s. I. Gorshkov and R. H.
Nikol'skaya (1978), the threshold for perception of 2,000 32 acoustic oscillations
through the body surface when the organ of Corti is damaged is 120 db, while the
threshold for 10,000 Hz is 110 db. In this case, as we can see from Thble 6, percep-
tion of noise through the surface of the body, without the car's participation, pro-
duces manifestations of its biological action upon the state of the organism which
differ fundamentally from the changes caused in the state of the organism by percep-
tion of noise through the hearing organ.

(2)
ﬂ}
mu

  

mo
' “0

(3) rs

Figure 25. Sensitivity of the Human Bar to Different Frequencies of
Airborne Oscillations ((Vegel'-Gil'demeyster) Curve, From
A. A. Ukhtomskiy): See text for explanation.

Key:
1. ergs/(cn7-scc) 4. Pressure sensation threshold
2. db 5. Audibility threshold
3. Hz

While changes in the state of the nervous system occurring in response to supra-
threshold, one-time, 1-hour adequate noise with a frequency of 2 Or 10 kHz

elicited a one-time lengthening of the latent time of the reaction to painful
electrocutaneous or elevator” stimulation only on the day of

 

“Elcvator“ stimulation 18 defined as stimulation of the vestibular apparatus by a
sudden fall.

59

FK”l(Hﬂﬂ(]Al.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6. Comparative Data on the Particular Features of the Biological Action of

Acoustic Stimuli Perceived Adequately (by the Bar) and Inadequately (by
Other Than the Bar)

Physiological Means of Perception of Acoustic Effects
Indicator Adequate _ Inadequate
Latent time of re- Monophasal lengthening of Biphasal lengthening of
action to electro- latent time on the day latent time: lst phase--
cutaneous stimula- of exposure on the day of exposure,
tion 2d phase--on the 3d-6th

Latent time of days after exposure

"elevator" re—

action

Pulse frequency Decrease Increase

Respiration fre- Usually an increase Decrease

quency
Bioelectric

activity:

Cortical regions Activation Inhibition on 3d-4th

days
Reticular No change Pronounced activation
formation on the 3d-4th days

exposure to it. suprathreshold, one-tine. 1-hour inadequate exposure of the body
surface to this noise (the organs of Corti of the experimental animals were destroyed)
elicited biphasal lengthening of the latent time of the reaction to the same stimulus,
with the first phase occurring on the day of sound exposure and the second phase
occurring on the 3d—6th days after exposure, which in the opinion of the authors

is a consequence of a transition of the response from the analyzer level to the level
of physicochemical chain reaction. We can also see from Table 6 that while the pulse
frequency decreases in response to adequate noise stimulation, it increases in re-
sponse to inadequate stimulation. We can also see distinct differences in the respira-
tory frequency and in the 286's recorded from cortical regions in the reticular forma-
tion. The authors point out that depending on differences in the means of perception
of sounds and the pathways of their propagation within the organism, the nature of
their action upon body functions changes. 0n the whole, the nature of the action of
inadequately perceived acoustic stimuli is similar to the previously studied nature of
action of low frequency ultrasound perceived by man, rats and rabbits through the
entire body surface without participation of the hearing organ. This action has two
phases. with the second phase falling on the 4th day after exposure. The second phase,
which coincides in time with biochemical changes, is obviously associated with
development of chain reactions. As far as the particular ways inadequate acoustic
stimuli and ultrasound influence autonomic functions, particularly the pulse frequency.
are concerned, they are associated with differences in the pathways of propagation of

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY

suuuury effects, and NIL“ absence of cphaptic‘ influences on the nucleus of the vagus
nerve when acoustic and ultrasonic oscillations are inadequately perceiVEd.

Attention should also be turned to the fact that these data actually extend the
vegel'-Gil'demeyster curve (see Figure 25) in the direction of greater frequencies,
such that we can determine the location of point n at which auditory sensitivity,
which decreases as the oscillation frequency increases, intersects the curve for in-
adequate sensitivity to acoustic stimuli. An important property of this point is that
within its vicinity, adequate and inadequate sensitivity are quantitatively equal, and
a stimulus located at this point has a double effect upon the body--adequate and in-
adequate. Beginning at this point, adequate sensitivity becomes less inadequate.

This point is also apparently the starting point for reading ultrasound values on the
Vegel'-Gil'demeyster curve. Another point on the vegel'-Gil'demeyster curve is

point A, at which the two branches of the curve intersect on the left, in the low fre-
quency range. Infrasonic oscillations obviously begin left of this point. Stimuli
corresponding to this point are also of considerable interest to physiologists and
ergonomists because they would affect both adequate and inadequate sensitivity simul-
taneously. Beginning with this point, and to the left of it along the trend of the
Vegel‘—Gil'demeyster curve, sensitivity to inadequate infrasonic stimulation becomes
greater than sensitivity to adequate auditory stimulation.

Significance of the Intensity and Time of Action of Hygienic Factors to
Formation of Responding Reactions

Goingon motheproblems associated with the intensity and time of action of hygienic
factors upon the body and formation of responses to these effects, we must keep in mind
that the overall quantitative evaluation of this interaction must account for three
types of quantitative dependencies: intensity-effect, time-effect and intensity-time-

effect. Investigation of these dependencies showed that the intensity-effect associ—
ation may manifest itself in different ways. In some cases a response to the action

of a hygienic factor increases in proportion to growth of intensity (concentration,
dose), which is graphically represented by a straight line. In other cases the in-
tensity-effect dependence manifests itself more intricately: Slight changes in in-
tensity may elicit greater changes in the response, and vice versa. At the same time
the curve describing the intensity-effect dependence may have an S shape in many
cases (Figure 26). As far as the time-effect dependence is concerned, it has the
same form as the intensity-effect dependence, since on the whole the time of action

of any hygienic factor is proportional to the intensity of action, which was demon-
strated quite well in conditioned reflex experiments performed by I. P. Pavlov's

colleagues. Intensity-effect and time-effect dependencies of this sort may be inter-
preted as a manifestation of the laws of optimum and pessimum stimulation (as
defined by N. Ye. vvedcnskiy). The case in which the expressiveness of a response

to a hygienic factor grows as intensity or time of action increases is nothing more
than the preliminary stage of parabiosis, which is in fact typified by growth in a
responding reaction as the intensity or time of stimulation grows. In this case the
operating hygienic factor remains at a weak stimulation level as the intensity (dose,

'Ephaptic influences are those which arise owing to the proximity of excited formations.

In this case an ephaptic influence would arise owing to the proximity of the centers
of the vagus and auditory nerves to the medulla oblongata.

61

FORGDFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

concentration) or time of its action increases. If the nature of the reaction is
described by a sigmoid curve, the response subsequently achieves the balanced stage
of Vvedenskiy's parabiosis, and as the strength and time of action of the hygienic
factor increase. the expressiveness of the response does not change; then the sigmoid
curve reaches a plateau. Of course, it is much more difficult to reveal Vvedenskiy'a
laws in the intact organism than in an isolated nerve or a neuromuscular preparation
owing to mutual superimposition of responses occurring simultaneously at different

levels; nevertheless the sigmoid curve is obviously nothing other than an expression
of the optimum and pessinum.

 

Figure 26. Sigmoid Dependence of a Response on the Intensity of an
Effect: Area A—"growth in response; B--gradual decrease of
the response's increment during growth in intensity. and
transition of the response to the balanced phase: ordinate--
expressiveness of the response; abscissa--intensity (dose)
of the operating factor

Because of mutual superimposition of reactions occurring at different levels of
integration, the paradoxical phase of vVedenskiy's parabiosis cannot be revealed

in the intact organism in response to the action of hygienic factors, though in many
cases the paradoxical phase can be revealed by measuring the latent time of reflex
reactions or the intensity of responding reactions. It is always observed in rela-
tion to these indicators in research on the dynamics of conditioned reflex development
in experimental animals subjected to the most diverse factors. We can cite as an
example :4. N. Konovalov's data (1965) from research on the biological action of. low
frequency ultrasound, and s. M. Pavlenko's data (1976) from research on the effects

of chemical factors.

Thus we can conclude that although the intensity-effect and time-effect laws are
masked by mutual superinposition of reactions occurring at different levels of inte-
gration, nevertheless detailed analysis our. reveal their subordination to the general
laws of the stimulation optimum and pesciwtm.

in regard to the relationship between the intensity and time of action of hygienic
factors required for attainment of a certain response, for exasple a threshold response.

a lethal outcome or some toxic effect manifesting itself as the beginning of illness
or as certain changes in the state of certain body functions or systems, in all of

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

these cases detailed analysis of the phenomena would show that they follow a hyper-
bolic law, usually expressed by the equation

9 0
l = T ”lb.

where i--intensity of action; t--time of action; a and b--oonstants.

Presence of constants a and b, which differ for different cases of the hyperbolic
law's application and for different forms of effects, means that extensive research
must be performed before the law can be established. However, the strictly mathe-
matical form of the intensity-time-effect law permitted the French physiologist

(L. Lapik) (1909) to develop a method that significantly simplifies determination of
a concrete form of the hyperbolic law. As a strict mathematical curve. the hyperbola
can be plotted on the basis of two points. Lapik found a method for determining

these two points to be used in plotting a hyperbola. These points are the well known
rheobase and chronaxie. The rhcobase is defined as the threshold intensity of a
long-acting factor of the surrounding or work environment. and chronaxie is defined
as this factor's minimum time of action for achieving a threshold (or some other)
effect at an intensity of action equal to double the rheobase. Braces in Figure 27
show the rheobase and chronaxie values. Using these points, we can plot an intensity-
tinc curve for any effect and for any excitable formation. As we can see, Lapik's
suggestion of the rheobasc and chronoxie is nothing other than a means of mathematical
simulation of the intricate process of determining the intensity-time-effect law, and
the intensity-time-effect curve itself allows us to discern the relationship between
development of a response to a certain effect and the particular features of the
operating factor. and to predict, at any time, the reaction that forms in response

to a certain effect. After the intensity-time-effect curve is established, we can

use it in particular to predict the consequences of possible efforts to improve
working conditions, and thus ensure their high usefulness, as had been done in relation
to predicting the consequences of protective measures against radioactive effects.
In the latter case this involved establishing the 50 percent lethal dose of ionizing
radiation. It is, as we know, 500 r for general irradiation. Doses at which certain
symptoms of radiation sickness arise have been established. Now a personal dosimeter
keeping an exact record of the irradiation dose is furnished to all workers in all
institutions in which exposure to ionizing radiation is possible. In these cases

the intensity-time-effect law has enjoyed full application.

There are indications that hygienists are close to establishing a maximum load, beyond
which a transfer to other work is mandatory, in relation to another hygienic factor--
silicosis. In this case a relationship has been established between accumulation of

a dangerous quantity of stone dust in the lungs on one hand and the dose of this dust
in the atmosphere and the time of working under these conditions on the other.
Establishment of this relationship has made it possible to determine the safe time

of work in a work zone subjected to stone dust: this is done by keeping a record of
the dose and the time of presence within its zone of action.

It follows from the above that by keeping track of the intensity and time of action of
factors in the work and surrounding environment and by establishing the intensity-
tine-effect curve, we can create new and important prospects for studying their bio-
logical action and the basic principles of hygienic prediction of the consequences

of preventive and, in particular, ergonomic measures.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
  
   
 
    

(3)

 
 
  
  
 
   
  
     

lo

9 funepboaa no ypaeueumo
8 nuo

7 _ a=l0

8 I‘o

gunman

‘NQLC‘

.. _~ _ -ﬁ.

"—Poouaa 2)

123450'III9IOI

Figure 27. The Hyperbolic Law

Key:
1. Chmnaxie 3. Hyperbola for it - 10, a = lo, I) - O
2. Rheobase

Biological science has established another form of nonspecific interaction between
the organism and hygienic factors, namely the general adaptation syndrome discovered
by Selye. This syndrome is a stress reaction, and according to Selye himself, it
may be defined as the sum total of the general features of the reactions of living
organisms to all stimuli that have a tendency to disturb the dynamic homeostasis of
psychological, biochemical and physiological processes. If stress factors operate
intensively and for a long period of time, they will elicit a large number of re-
actions which Selye referred to as the general adaptation syndrome. These reactions
fall into three phases: the alarm reaction, the resistance phase, and exhaustion.

Particular Dynamics of the Body's Reaction to Hygienic Factors

The first thing that should be pointed out here is that formation of responses to
production factors requires a certain amunt of time. This time, which extends from
the start of action of a particular effect to the moment a response to it arises,
has come to be called the latent time. It may vary fro... fractions of a second to
many hours and even days, depending on the nature of the effect and of the body's
response. Because it is during the latent period that all aspects of the body's
response are formed, this latent time is believed to be one of the most imortant
physiological indicators of response formation. In the intact organism, a short

time is typical for formation of responses to effects perceived by exteroreceptors
(eye, ear, receptors of pain, touch. heat and cold, olfactory and vestibular

analyzers and so on). The latent time of these reactions (Table 7) is within the
limits of the duration of responses associated with controlling production equipment.

As we can set- from Table 7, visual and auditory receptors react the fastest. the

vestibular analyzer reacts more slowly, the temperature analyzer reacts even more
slowly. and the slowest reaction is exhibited by the olfactory analyzer. Concurrent-

ly the slowest reactions arise in response to radiated heat and cold. The receptors
for these effects are in subcutaneous veins.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Latent Time for Different Sensomotor Reactions

Latent
Reflex Reactions Time, msec
mdon reflexes
Hand extensor 65-70
Knee-jerk reflex 70-100
Achilles reflex 120-190
Biceps relfex 140-160
a painful electrocutaneous 100-120
atinmlation
3 auditory stimulation 140-160
3 light stimulation
Central part of retina 160-180
Periphery of retina 180-220
0 auditory and light stimula- 220-340
tion, with a choice (differ-
cntiation)
o painful thermal stimulation 360-400
0 thermal contact stimulation 500-800
0 cold contact stimulation 350-450
0 thermal radiant stimu- 1000-1400
lation
0 cold radiant stimula- 2-5 min
tion
’estibulomotor reactions
To positive angular acceleration 260-270
To the right 260-270
To the left 270-280
To negative angular acceleration
'no the right 250-260
To the left 270-280
To positive linear acceleration 360-380
To negative linear acceleration 320-340
.‘0 olfactory stimulation by
vapor from:
(Relin) 900-1000
Linoleum 700-800

Wood chip panels 900-1000
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Responses by skeletal muscles are fast. As a counterweight: to this, we can cite

the [act that responses by the heart taking the form of change in pulse frequency,

the size of the vessel lumen, blood pressure, skin temperature and sweatinq--that

is, responses controlled by the autonomic nervous system--are slower. Their latent
times are in the seconds. These data, shown in Table 8, were compiled from material

in a candidate dissertation written by Yu. P. Khvorov for the Ivanov Medical Institute
(1973).

Table 8. Latent Times of Some Autonomic Reflexes

 

Latent Latent

Indicator Analyzed Time, Sec Indicator Analyzed Time, Sec
Latent time of the 5.2 10.3 Latent time of 7.8:l.0
cardio—ocular vessel lumen dila-

reflex in response tion reaction in

to change in response to dosed

pulse frequency physical load

Latent time of 1.2 .'. 0.1 Latent time of 8.9203
change in pulse vessel lumen con-

frequency in striction reaction

reSponse to in response to

dosed physical dosed physical

load load
Iatent time of 4.3 10.2

sweating reac-
tion in response
to dosed physi-
cal load

Formation of responses to the effects of factors perceived by other than the sense
organs proceeds even more slowly, as can be deduced from the time of arisal of
particular responses in different body systems. In this case the intensity of the
operating factor also plays an important role in the rate of formation of the response.
As we can see from Figure 28, which is based on R. M. Nikol'skaya's data (1978) and
which shows the dynamics behind the concentration of hexuronic acid in the aorta of
albino rats poisoned by inhalation of dimethyldioxane (as percentages of control) ,
when the dose is large (0.35 mg/liter) a significant increase in hexuronic acid does
not occur until the 19th day after poisoning, while with a smaller dose (0.04 ng/
liter) a significant increase in hexuronic acid is not observed until the 9lst day
[allowing the start of poisoning. This figure also shows the phasal nature of the
chanqc--thc difference in the direction of changes occurring in response to different
doses of the operating factor. This is an indication that phases of conpensation
and toxic action follow one another.

However, the phasal nature of certain changes may also be the result of transition

of formation of a response from one functioning system to another. Such a transition

occurs, for example, in response to radioactive emissions. Imediately following
irradiation, a response arises in pronounced form at the level of the central nervous

66

non OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I'll)

"0

I00

I10

 

Figure 28. Dynamics of the Concentration of Hexuronic Acid in the Aorta
of Rats Inhaling Dimethyldioxide (Percent of Control)

Key:
1 . Control 3 . Days of poisoning
2 . Mg/l i ter 4. Recovery

system, as may be deduced from the dynamics of the latent time of the reflex reac-
tions. However, following a latent period of 2-3 weeks these changes in the state

or the central nervous system give way to other manifestations of radiation sickness,
ones manifesting themselves in the particular dynamics of changes in blood couposition.
'Ihe transition of the response's formation from the level of the central nervous
system to the level of physicochemical reactions is also observed in relation to

the biological action of low frequency ultrasound and other hygienic factors.

We can see from the above that the dynamics behind formation of the body's responses
to factors in the work and surrounding environment are extremely crucial to an under-

standing of their biological action, and thus their hygienic standardization, which
is at the basis of any protective measures, including ergonomic , that may be developed.

Laws of the Body's Adaptation to Hygienic Factors Based on Our Ideas About
the Body's Functional Systems

Some laws governing formation of the body's responses to factors in the work and
surrounding environment were presented above. However, if we look at these depen-
dcncies of the body's reactions, taken separately, we are unable to discern the path-
way for Which integration and interaction of different systems and organs in their
responses to an effect. This process has been viewed differently in different

stages of the development of biological and medical science. There was a time when
oui understanding of this process was based on the idea that individual organ systems
act independently during formation of a response to an effect. mis is the well known
theory of cellular pathology created by R. Virchow. Starting with a false interpreta-
tion of the cellular theory, from the very beginning Virchow rejected the organism's

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI'l'llJAL use ONLY

integrity and its unity with the environment, and he asserted that a complex

organism is a set of cells reacting independently to environmental factors. Owing

to the efforts of, especially, Soviet physiologists, pathophysiologists, clinicists
and hygienists, this idea gradually gave way to growing acceptance of the notion that
the organism is in unity with the environment, that the organism's reactions are
integrated. The reflex principle of integration was founded on this idea.

The theory of functional systems developed by P. K. Anokhin is a further development
of the idea that the organism's reactions to environmental factors are integrated,

and of the reflex principle of integration. The essence of this theory is that any
compensation of the body's disturbed functions--that is, recor- my of its homeostasis--
can be achieved only by mobilization or integration of a significant number of physio-
lOgical components, located in different parts of the central nervous system and the

working periphery but always united functionally on the basis of the final adaptive
effect needs-J at the given moment of interaction with factors of the surrounding and

work environment.

This vast functional association of variously located structures and processes,
existing with thepurpose of producing an adaptive effect, is what Anokhin called the
"functional system." Functional systems may be inborn (species-specific), acquired
in the course of individual development and created for one-time reaction to some
single effect, a stress factor for example. Inborn functional systems include those
supporting the organism’s vitally important functions--respiration, circulation.
digestion, reproduction and many others, while acquired Emotional systems are those
which support the habits of the organism and which are developed through training

and learning. An association of many body systems may be created in extreme situations
in response to stress factors. Functional systems may occur at different levels of
integration: the population, the organism. the system, the organ, the tissue, the
cell and the molecule. The population level of integration occurs whenever the
effect of a factor of the surrounding and work environment directly affects the
population of an entire region and when responses are genecated simultaneously in
many organisms within this region. An example of such reactions would be adaptation
by people moving to northern regions for a long period of time. Reactions at the
level of the organism include changes in its performance and its health, for example
in response to recent acceleration. me systemic level may be represented by adaptive
changes in a certain isolated system or simultaneously in a nunber of functions--

for example the cardiovascular system and the thermoregulatory system. Understanding
the cellular level of integration raises no difficulties. In this case we have in
mind the responses of cellular structures, mitochondria for example. Research at the
molecular level is presently the main achievement of biological and medical science.
memory processes and transmission of hereditary information are associated with the
molecular mechanisms of nucleic acids.

We can see from this section that adaptation to the effects of factors in the work
and surrounding environment occur in the organism with a consideration for the in-
formativeness of the operating factors, the laws governing the intensity and time of
their action, the particular dynamics behind formation of responses and the mechanism
of integration of the manifestations of all particular aspects of the studied factors.
By considering all of these general characteristics of the organism's reactions to
hygienic factors, we can scientifically substantiate standards for such factors and
develop ergonomic recommendations concerned with the design of production equipment
and the organization of workplaces.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IM. USE ONLY

he Ergonomic Approach to Standardizing Factors in the Work Environment

ne of the principal requirements of industrial ergonomics is the premise foreseeing
hat the design of machines and production equipment must not be a source of undesir-
ble sanitary and hygienic working conditions. What this means concretely is that
quipment design must correspond with hygienic requirements in regard to maintaining
he sanitary and hygienic conditions of the workplace at the level of the standards
stablished by public health legislation (S. I. Gorshkov, 1971).

In accordance with this premise, an ergonomic approach to standardizing the factors
nf the work environment must regard the following: In the case conditions deviating
from the established standards are discovered in a particular production operation,

steps must be taken to improve the design of the production equipment, such that
:he standards for the involved hygienic indicators would be met.

iccording to 005? (All—Union State Standard] 12.0.003-74, hazardous and harmful
iroduction factors affecting a worker at his workplace are subdivided into the

following groups depending on their nature of action: physical, chemical, biological
1nd psychophysiological.

Physical factors are in turn subdivided into the following subgroups: the temperature
if equipment and material surfaces; air temperature, humidity and circulation, its
ionization, and its dust and gas content; levels of noise, vibration, infrasonic
>scillations, ultrasound, static electricity, electromagnetic emissions, and the
intensity of electric and magnetic fields; a dangerous amount of voltage carried by

an electric circuit that may come in contact with the human body; natural and artifi-
cial lighting; brightness of light; direct and reflected glare: pulsations in light
flux; contrast; level of ultraviolet and infrared radiation.

The chemical factor: group is subdivided into the following depending on the nature
of the effect on the human body: general toxic, irritant, sensitizing, carcinogenic,
nutagenic and influencing the reproductive function: these factors are also subdivided

in relation to the means by which they enter the human body: through the respiratory
tract, the digestive system or the skin.

lhe biological factors group includes biological objects which cause injury to workers
3: make them ill: microorganisms (bacteria, viruses, Ricketteia. spirochetes, fungi,
protozoans) and macroorganisms (plants and animals).

the psychophysiological factors group is subdivided into the following subgroups in
:erms of their nature of action: physical overloads (static, dynamic), hypodynamia,

mychoncural overloads (mental overexertion, overexertion of analyzers, monotony of
Labor, emotional overloads).

any of these factors, especially biological and psychophysiological factors, do not
nave clear maximally permissible levels of expression, while the norms of some others
equire clearer definition.

eta on hygienic indicators associated mest often with the workplace are presented
elow. If a given factor is not dependent upon equipment design, its indicators at
.he workplace must be within optimum limits.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK 0"“.th U3!— UIVLI

Air in the Work Zone

This section is based on SN [Construction Norm] 245-71 and GUST 12.1.005-76, which
contain the general sanitary and hygienic requirements on the microclimate and on
the concentration of toxic substances in the air of the work zone.

The microclimate is represented by a complex of physical characteristics imparted

to an enclosed space by meteorological factors; these physical characteristics pre-
determine thermal exchange between the body and the environment of the workplace,

and they include the temperature of the air, its humidity and circulation, and the
temperature of surrounding objects (equipment and structures within the room). Micro—
climate standards are closely associated with the heaviness of labor.

In accordance with the existing classification, all jobs done at enterprises are
subdivided into three heaviness categories.

Light physical work (category I) is represented by jobs performed while sitting or
standing, or jobs associated with walking but not requiring systematic physical

exertion, or the lifting and carrying of heavy loads; energy expenditures have a
maximum of 150 kcal/hr (172 j/sec).

Moderately heavy physical work (category II) is represented by jobs involving forms
of activity requiring energy expenditure from 150 to 200 kcal/hr (172-232 j/sec)--
category IIa.and from 200 to 250 kcal/hr (232-250 j/sec)--category IIb- Category
contains jobs requiring constant walking, and jobs performed standing or sitting but
not requiring movement of heavy loads. Category IIb contains jobs associated with
walking and with carrying small loads (up to 10 kg).

Heavy physical work (categoryIII) is represented by jobs associated with systematic
physical exertion, and particularly with continual movement and transport of sizeable
loads (over 10 kg); the energy expenditures are greater than 250 kcal/hr (293 j/sec).

Optimum microclimatic indicators for the workplace are shown in Table 9.

Workplace requirements that need to be considered include the temperature of heated
surfaces, equipment and enclosures, which must not exceed 45°C: for equipment having
an internal temperature of 100°C or lower, the surface temperature must not exceed

35°C.

If for technical reasons it is impossible to meet these temperature requirements

near the sources of significant radiant and convective heat (heating and melting
units, molten and red-hot metal and so on), measures to protect workers from possible
overheating must be foreseen: water-air showers, screening, highly dispersed
spraying of water on irradiated surfaces, radiatorrcooled cabs or surfaces, break

rooms and so on.

Air showers must be foreseen at permanent workplaces at which workers ;re subjected
to radiant heat totaling 300 kcal/m2~hr and more.

Hand warmers must be foreseen at workplaces involving continual contact with wet and
cold objects (for example frozen meat cutting and fish dressing).

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 9. Optimum Norms for Temperature, Relative ﬂuidity and Rate of Movement of
Air in the Work Zone of Production Buildings (6061' 12.1.005-76)

 

 

Relative Air Movement
Work Tempera- Humidity, Rate, m/sec
Season of the Year Category ture, °C \ Not More Than
Cold and transitory Light--I 20-23 60-40 0.2
periods of the year Moderately 18-20 60-40 0.2
(outside air temper- heavy--IIB
uture below +10‘C) Moderately 17-19 60-40 0.3
heavy-~IIb
Heavy--III 16-18 60-40 0.3
Harm part of the year Light--I 22-25 60-40 0.2
(outside air temper- Moderately
azure +10°C and heavy/“Ila 21-23 60-40 0.3
higher) Moderately 20-22 60-40 0.4
heavy--llb
Heavy--III 18-21 60-40 0.5

As zinchenko ct al. (32) validly note on the basis of published data, a dynamic
climate typified by certain variations in its indicators that train the body's
thermoregulator apparatus and improve the tone of the nervous system should be —
created in production. It has been established that "mild, comfortable tenperatures"
and "hothouse conditions“ may operate as a monotonous stimulus, eliciting an inhibi-
tory state. However, the difference between the air temperature at the floor surface
and the temperature at head level must not be more than 5°C.

A discussion of microclimate requires mention of an ergonomic indicator: 0n the
average, a 1°C deviation of air temperature from the standards corresponds to a
1 percent decrease in labor productivity (19).

The group of chemical factors encountered in the air of a work zone is represented
by toxic substances and aerosols of predominantly fibrogenic action. Hygienists
of recently developed maximally permissible concentrations for 646 toxic substances
and 57 aerosols. In view of the large numbers of substances contained in these
two groups, we will not list them here, instead referring the reader to the GOST

cited above.

We do believe it necessary, however, to turn the reader's attention to the approach
which must be taken when several toxic substances exhibiting like action are simul-
taneously present in the air of the work zone. In this case the sum of the ratios
between the actual concentrations of each of them (C1, C2, ..., C") in the air of
the work Space and their PDK's [maximum permissible concentrations] (90%;, PDKZ,
..., PDKn) must not exceed unity:

pug +pr2 + +905, ‘1'

71

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USEZONLN
FUR UI'I‘ILIAL Ubl‘. URL!

As a rule, toxic substances of like action have similar chemical structure and nature
of biological action upon the human body (8. D. Karpov, 1976).

When several toxic substances of unlike action are simultaneously present in the air

of the work zone, the PDK‘s are treated in the same way as if they were acting indi-
vidually.

Illumination

This section is based on standards SNiP Il-A.8-72 and SNiP II-A.9-7l, and papers
written by P. M. Chernilovskaya (1971, 1976). In this case we deliberately limited
our standard lighting indicators to visual work classes I-VI, which are encountered
most frequently at stationary workplaces.

1he productivity of each worker is directly dependent on the efficiency of the
particular form of lighting and its intensity at the workplace, since these are
factors governing the effectiveness with which the visual and motor systems function,
and the state of the central nervous system.

lhree forms of lighting are used in production buildings: natural, artificial and
combined.

The action of natural light upon the human body is typified by diversity of form
and level: He encounter biological action, which is a product of phylogenesis and
ontogenesis, psychological action responsible for the direct visual relationship to
the environment. and the effect of natural light on production, dependent on the
uniformity of illumination.

Natural lighting is achieved in production buildings through lateral light openings,
windows (lateral lighting) and through overhead light openings and lanterns (over-
head lighting). Combined lighting is used in multiple-bay buildings: Lateral
lighting is provided to places in a building with overhead lighting located farthest
from the lanterns.

Combined lighting is euployed in buildings that do not provide enough natural light
for visual work-tnat is, inadequate natural lighting is always supplemented by
artificial lighting.

The level of natural illumination at workplaces is defined by the coefficient of

natural illumination (e), and it indicates what proportion diffuse light from the
sky contributes to illumination at a point of evaluation within a room. As with

illumination in general, this coefficient is standardized primarily depending on the
nature of the visual work done (Table 10).

Artificial lighting is subdivided into general, local and combined. General light-
ing is intended to illuminate the entire room; it may be uniform (when jobs of

the same kind are performed throughout the entire area of the room and when the
density of workplaces is high) or localized (when bulky shadow-casting equipment

is present and when directional light is required). Local lighting is intended to
illuminate only the work surfaces. Combined lighting consists of general and local.
Its best use is with high precision jobs, and when fixed or variable directional
lighting is required.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 10. Values of e for Production Rooms in Keeping with the ”Work Surface
Conditions" (SNiP II-A.8-72)

Value of 3 in Presence

 

 

 

beast Dimension of Natural Illmination

maracteristics of of object to be Visual Hark Overhead and

Visual Work Distinglished, mm Class Combined Lateral
work done:

highest preci- less than 0.15 l 10 3.5

sion

Very high pre- 0.15-O.3 II 7 2.5

cisian

High precision 0.3-0.5 III 5 2

Moderate pre- 0.5-1 Iv 4 1.5

cision

Low precision l-S V 3 1

Rough More than 5 VI 2 0.5

Luminescent lighting is becoming universally accepted in modern production to
illuminate workplaces, no matter what the method for ensuring standard illmination

in the work zone. This problem is solved uniquely in each concrete case. An example
of such a solution can be found in Chapter V of this collection--development of a new

workplace for a sewing machine operator.

Luminescent lamps are low-pressure gas—discharge mercury lamps, the inside surface

of which is coated with a layer of phosphor. When the law is turned on. electric
energy in the mercury vapor is converted to the energy of shortwave ultraviolet
emissions with 254 and 185 nm wavelengths. Phosphor transforms ultraviolet radiation
into visible light, the spectral characteristics of which depend on the conposition
and method of preparation of the phosphor. High economy is an advantage of luminescent
lamps: Their light output is 324 times greater than that of incandescent lamps.
Moreover luminescent lamps have many hygienic advantages over incandescent lamps.
Their glowing Surface area is larger, meaning that they provide more-uniform light
within the field of view of the workers. They produce little radiant heat. Their
emission spectrum is close to that of natural daylight (for We and Lars lanps) ,

and hence they produce an almost-natural color. luminescent lamps create favorable
conditions for illumination of the visual organs as well as the human body as a

who? :. Luminescent lighting helps to reduce eye fatigue, to improve the functional
st‘ 2 of the central nervous system, to raise labor productivity and to improve

pr. .nct quality.

more has been interest shown in recommndations by P. H. Olemilovskaya (1971) to
vary the intensity of illumination in a production room during the day, as a reflex
factor iwroving the general performance of the individual, delaying the onset o‘.
fatigue and relieving it if it is already developing. These recommendations now
await their technical development.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-‘ll'lAl. USE ONLY

Different types of luminescent lamps distinguished by the spectral distribution of
the light flux are now being produced.

1. Daylight lamps (ID) are close in the spectral characterstics of their emissions
to those of diffuse daylight.

2. Daylight lanps with improved color reproduction (mm) are closer to natural
light in the spectral comosition of their emissions.

3. Type LYe luminescent lamps are closest to the spectrum of natural sunlight.

4. White lanps (in) produce emissions with a lower concentration of blue-violet
rays than daylight lamps.

S. The emission spectrum of cool-white lamps (LKhB) occupies an intermediate posi-
tion between those of LB and LD lamps.

6. Warm-white laws (LTD) produce a light with a pinkish white hue.

7. DRL lamps (mercury arc luminescent) are high-pressure lamps with corrected
chromaticity intended for roots with a ceiling height greater than 12-14 meters;
their use would be unsuitable in rooms less than 6 meters high.

8. DRI lanps are high-pressure mercury lamps to which metal iodides have been
added. They were developed out of Bill. lamps, the chromaticity of their emissions

is inproved, and they are one of the most economical sources of general-purpose
light.

Luminescent lamps are used predominantly in multiple light fixtures. This makes
special wiring patterns which reduce pulsation of the light flux possible.

Table 11 shows the norms for the intensities of artificial illumination at workplaces,
in correspondence with the visual work class and the contrast of the object of
diserimination in relation to its background.

As a rule, gas-discharge laups (luminescent lamps, DR! and om. lamps) should be
used in a general lighting system for production rooms in which class I-V jobs are

done.
A combined lighting system should be used with class I'IV. Va and Vb work.

A general lighting system can be used when it is technically impossible or unfeasible
to install local lighting.

As a rule, gas-discharge lamps should be used in general lighting within a contained
lighting system, irrespective of the type of light source enployed for local

lighting.
The illumination provided to work surfaces by general light fixtures in a conbimd

system must be 10 percent of the standard for combined lighting, but not less than
150 lux when gas-discharge lamps are used.

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and

com
can

00”

can

can
con

can

con
omb

om~u

oov

oooH

om~H
00mm

Evumxm

mcﬁuzodq
HGNUCS

 

Gov

00m
omh

oov

Omh

000A
OOON

oooa

OOON

000m

000?

coma

000m

ooov
ooom
aouuxm
mnwusoqq
cocaneoo

xsd .cowuucussaau

Eugen:
unowum
xuua
3539a
xuua

Eﬂﬁﬁos

.-
uzmuum
xuon
guano:
unadum
guaa
suave:
xuua

Eﬂﬂvut

3
ugmaun
sumo
agave:
usmuum
sung
anion:
xuan

Eswvo:

unoqun
xuuo
sage”:
unmaum
xuaa
sauna:
xuuo

oauuu
uuwuoaudno
unsouuxoom

2m“:

 

35H6u:
3S 0
abacus
z n >H
SOJ 6
gm“:
sawuu: a
no“:
sag
30A 0
sauna:
; n man
5 4
no“:
inﬂow: 0
gm“:
Esau»:
§ 0
andvo:
: n
39g a HH
8
no“:
esﬁouz u
swam
endow:
30g 0
asaomz
x n H
30H 0
vasoumxoum ou mmmmmmmm mmMHU
:ouuaauz ca xuo: xuoz
nonmasmcqumuo Anamu> ~u=mw>

on o» uouhno
uo umuuucou

acumuo

Him.o noun Ouauooo:
m.oum.o ceamnomum now:
cammwoaum
n.0uma.o nu“: >uo>

m~.o cdzu mmmq godmuoonm umwnwwn

SE .omnwusmc«umdo xuoz Hmsmq>
on 09 uuwnno no mo ousuaz

GOA Wang—3.0 UMﬂS

AHhIm.¢IHH mwzm. mﬁoox coauuauOum :H muoomunm xuoz new mEhoz noduucuﬁsuan .ua manna

75

INDR OFINCJAL USE2CNVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020026-6

run Uri-u MI. war. ‘1th!

ooa

OOH

OOH

on."
DON

om."

omH

oo~
COM

COM

oov

ogouuxosn 05 on .3330...
:4 owing—.00 u.u00nno

6:1 unnuuuuouoauozo
vggmxoan mo unaccomoocn

55.302

8
203m
«.an

55094.

"£33
.33
5.3a:
.38

35.30:
233

I
5.30:
unmuun

I
no“:
233:
:3:
5:6:
30A
5:5:

304

v.
:3:
:33:
so“:
.58»:
:3

all

was.» Bo:

25%..“on 30.—
.C03 £962

:ouadooum 30a

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600020026-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

local lighting requires light fixtures with opaque reflectors with a shielding
angle not less than 30 degrees.

Reflectors with a shielding angle of 10-30 degrees may be used in light fixtures
if they are located below the worker's eye level.

Noise

Noise is a factor that accompanies almost all production operations today, and its
presence remains a reality despite the efforts by designers and developers to
eliminate or at least limit it.

There is an extensive Soviet and foreign literature on the effects of noise on the
human body. The pattern of its influence is distinguished by high polymorphism:
from its primary influence upon the central nervous system and the accompanying

broad spectrum of asthenicsuatesandaction upon almost all body systems, to organic
injury of the auditory nerve.

According to published data, noise can reduce labor productivity by 60 and even 40
percent.

The general requirenents on safe noise levels are spelled out in 005? 12.1.003-76.
This standard establishes the classification of different noises, the permissible
noise levels at workplaces and the general requirements associated with the noise

characteristics of machines, mechanisms, transportation resources and other equipment
(referred to in the subsequent discussion as machines) and with noise protection.

Noise is subdivided in relation to its spectrum into wideband, having a continuous
spectrum with a range of more than one octave,and tonal, with audible discrete
tones in its spectrum. Noise is said to be tonal if the intensity of one third-
Octave frequency band is not less than 10 db greater than that of the adjacent
bands.

Noise is subdivided in relation to its temporal characteristics into constant,

for which the acoustic intensity does not vary by more than 5 db-A during an 8-hour
work day, and variable, for which the acousticintenSitYVEIieSby not less than

5 db-h in the course of an 8-hour work day.

Variable noise is subdivided in turn into: continuously fluctuating in time:
intermittent, with acoustic intensity dropping sharply to the level of background
noise, and with intervals of 1 second and more in which the noise intensity remains
constant and above the level of background noise3P0133dv consisting of one or several
acoustic signals, each with a duration less than 1 sec and with their acoustic in-
tensities differing bv not less than 10 db.

the equivalent (in terms of energy) acoustic intensity, in db-A, as defined by
GOST 20445-75, characterizes variable noise at workplaces.

dideband noise is characterized by permissible levels of acoustic pressure in octave
frequency bands, acoustic intensities and equivalent acoustic intensities in dva
at the workplaces (Table 12).

77

FOR<0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
>nah=nunnwnw<o ~u
noosm~ Oman:
nom

camon<mnwo=

pan noBOno
noannoH

nooam“

:wnsocn <oonw ma

«manageam
ceasespnmnpoa
lﬂﬂl0FFﬂ1Al.USE(NVLY

Permanent work- 99 92 86 83 80 78 76 74 85
places and

work zones in

production

rooms and on

the enterprise

territory

Permitted until 103 96 91 88 85 83 81 80 90
1 December
1979 in con-
ditions typi-
fied by high
noise levels
and requiring
implementa-
tion of
special
noise re-
duction
measures

Technical noise control resources can be applied with the purpose of reducing noise
attheworkplace to a permissible level: reductionof the sources of noise in machines,
application of production processes satisfying the maximum permissible level require-
ments, structural soundproofing measures, remote control of noisy machines, manda-
tory use of personal protective resources by workers when the noise level at the work-
place is greater than 85 db-h; organizational measures (sensible work-rest schedule,
limitation of time workers are exposed to noise).

Vibration

Being a factor of the production environment, vibration is encountered in most in-
dustrial sectors: as a means of transferring energy to and acting upon a processed
object (compaction, molding, pressing, drilling, loosening, transportation etc.),
and as an accompanying factor of movable and permanently installed mechanisms making

rotary or reciprocal motions. Oscillatory movement is created by oscillations of
interacting equipment parts, the article being worked and other elements. In this
connection the resulting oscillatory movement is aperiodic, and it often has a pul-
sating or jerky nature. Vibration is subdivided depending on the nature of contact
between the worker's body and vibration into local, transmitted through the worker's
hands, and general, transmitted through a supporting surface to the standing or
sitting worker. certain jobs may cause a worker to be exposed to combined vibration,
with local or general vibration dominating.

Vibration has an unfavorable mechanical influence upon the body at 3-30 Hz in connec—
tion with the presence of resonance peaks related to both the entire body as a whole

and individual parts of it; it is also connected with the position of the worker during
work. As the oscillation frequency rises (above 30 Hz), mechanical transmission of

79

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

vibration over the human body weakens. In this connection local nervous and reflex

disturbances begin to dominate (vascular, neuromuscular, skeleto—articular and
other disturbances).

While local low intensity vibration has a favorable action upon the human body and
is employed in medicine, intensive and prolonged exposure to vibration in production
conditions leads in a number of cases to development of occupational pathology--
\“bration disease.

When a worker is subjected to general vibration of varying parameters, pronounced
changes occur in his central and autonomic nervous systems, cardiovascular system,
notabolic processes and vestibular apparatus.

Restric .ions on vibration at the workplace can be found in the following guidelines:
local--GOST 17770-72 and others, general--SN 245-71, 1102-73 (tables 13 and 14). In
addition there are now a number of narrow-profile public health norms applicable

to agricultural and motor transport mechanisms, to seagoing and river vessels, to
railroad transport and so on.

Table 13. Permissible Vibration Levels for Hand-Operated Machines (GUST 17770-72)
—-—————ﬁ”————_m—
fun-mus «qu noun-nun IWIclwll

(1) onto-nun honor. l'u “some

(illegal: I! -

 

 

    
 

 

swimmer-Ill ' (6)
21:35: :: (a: w m..." ,....
not. l‘u lune Deﬁance «In. ale

8' 5.6 ”.2 500- I0" I20
IG ”.2 22.4 5.0040" I20
3|.5 22.4 45 3,5040" H1
m 45 90 2.50~ IO" I I4
I25 90 no Lao-.10“: l l I
1250 I80 355 1:20-10” ma
500 355 no 0.9040" l0!»
[000 NO 1400 051- m " IO?
20"" 1400 2800 0.6- IO" 99

1In the octave band with a mean geometric
frequency of 8 Hz, only the oscillatory
speed of hand-operated machines with a
turning or cycling rate less than 11.2

per second is considered.

1. Mud" geometric frequencies 5. Permissible oscillating speed
uf‘ octave bands. Hz 6. Virtual values. m/sec
.r. Limiting frequencies of 7. Intensities of virtual values, db
octave bands, Hz
J. LOUC!‘
:1. [inlet
80

FOR OFFICIA. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’omissible Values for Workplace Vibration Parameters (SN 245-71)

na- ﬂue-lama I
mmpmaumu lo-
«am:

in- medalll c woe-usual nylon-«nan
mranmml. In can-nun mum:

wuemuuuccm III-

........£§l....... ”-93%?"- m (7) (a)

can u run-mum .-_._. um "'1"!!! In"

“on“ a can . r am sunning)
2:1“qu Lona. f: n‘aLm. ’m’ n I Immune-u. ma

 

 
   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

null: no
0-104 m: c
- 2 _ 11,2 ' 101 1.4 3.1100
(13-2-3) 1.5 2.2200
2.0 1.2800
2.5 0.1300
2.0 0.0100
3.2 0.1400
__4__. . 5.0 100 4.0 moo
(2.8 - 5.0) 5.0 0.1000
5.0 0.1300
__§_.. 2.0 92 6.3 0.0000
(5-0 — "-2) 8.0 0.0500
10.0 0.0460
11.2 0.0110
___16 2.0 92 12.5 0.0360
1' l3 — 22.0 10.0 0.0280
20.0 0.0225
22.4 0.0200
25.0 0.0180
_3_'_-5__. 2.o m 31.5 0.0m
(”-4 — ‘5’ 40.0 0.01 13
45.0 0.0102
60.0 0.0090
as __ 2.0 92 63.0 0.0012
' (‘45. ~90)” 80.0 omm
90.0 0.0060
: oscillations with several 5. Intensitg (db) relative to a thz
monic components or with a of 5°10“ Inn/sec
itinuous spectrum 6. For harmonic and polyharmonic
in geometric and limiting oscillations
'1 parentheses) frequencies 7. Frequency, Hz
octave bands, 11: 8. Movement amplitude (peak value)

111 square value of
.:illati:\g speed
:tual value, urn/sec

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE O. .
I'UK UI‘I'ULIAL 03!. URL!

Preventive measures aimd at reducing the effects of vibration upon the worker’s
body should primarily include replacement of production processes characterized by
dangerous vibrations with safe processes, and eliminating the worker's contact with

vibration or its influence upon him. here is a boundless range of possibilities
for inventiveness in this area. Effective ways to reduce vibration include developing

tools producing lower vibration and requiring less muscle force for their operation,
using various shock—absorbing devices and subjecting existing equipment to planned
preventive maintenance. Special emphasis should be laid on hygienic preventive measures
that call for specific work-rest schedules depending on the intensity of vibration and
the nature of the work, and on therapeutic and preventive measures aimed at raising

the body's protective capabilities and performance.

Concluding this section on the ergonomic approach to standardizing factors in the
production environment at workplaces, we should once again emphasize that the existing

standards are being made stiffer as biological facts are accumulated. Evidence of
this can be seen in the relative swiftness with which mST's are superseded (5 years)"

that is, the “man--machinc--production environment" ergonomic system is undergoing
continuous optimization. Industrial workers no longer need to be persuaded that
failure to comply with the hygienic requirements of ergonomics means poorer working
conditions, lower efficiency and labor productivity, and occupational pathology.

82 \

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IV. PSYGIOPBYSIOIDGICAL CRITERIA OF anemones

Dimensional Considerations at the Workplace

Correspondence of production equipment design and workplace organization with
anthropometric data and man's physiological and psychological possibilities is an
important prerequisite of optimizing interaction between man and equipment in a
“man-machine" system. Assurance of this correspondence promotes better individual
performance and higher effectiveness in fulfilling a production assignment.

It would be interesting to note that the design of production equipment in application
to the "human factor” had been the focus of attention as far back as in the 15th
century. Thus in 1473 Bllenbog noted that improperly designed equipment has an
undesirable effect on human health (cited in (90)).

Today, owing to growing technical complexity of machines and mechanisms and the
increase in their operating speeds, ergonomic requirements on equipment design and
workplace organization are rising.

Physiological studies have shown that failure to comply with these requirements means
work in an uncomfortable posture, arisal of undesirable physiological changes and
earlier development of fatigue.

The principal work postures are sitting and standing. For a number of jobs the
sitting-standing posture is the most suitable. When planning for a particular work

posture, the designer should base himself on the size of the muscle forces applied,
the precision and speed required of movements, the nature of the work being done,

the minimum energy expenditure and the maximum productivity of movements.

Preference in the choice of the principal work posture should be given to sitting
over standing. A sitting posture is less tiring, since owing to a lower center of
gravity over the supporting area, the body's stability is higher; this decreases the
muscle tension needed to maintain the posture, hydrostatic pressure and the load
imposed on the cardiovascular system. Work movements are more precise when the

work is done while sitting. The amount of weight lifted during seated work must not
exceed 5 kg.

work standing up is found to be preferable when the operator must move about freely

in the course of a shift, when the work involves production equipment such as grinders,
milling machines, looms, heavy presses and so on, or when the work consists mainly of
tuning or adjustment. When standing, the individual enjoys maximum field of view and
maximum possibilities for locomotion; he can perform movements of greater amplitude,

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and he can generate larger forces (more than 10 kg). when a workplace is organized

Ear work in standing position, controls and various indicators may be located along
a broader front.

It should be kept in mind, however. that work in standing position increases the load
on the muscles of the lower limbs and on circulatory organs. and it raises the pulse
rate. Figure 29 shows the levels of muscle bioelectric activity in a relaxed standing
position. Activity levels are designated, in decreasing order, by solid shading.
cross-hatching. dots and crosses. As we can see from the figure, the muscles in the
vicinity of the ankle joint exhibit the greatest activity: the tibialis interior,
the peronius longus and especially the gastrocnemius. Muscle bioelectric activity

is less pronounced in the vicinity of the knee joint, and even less so about the hip
joint. Although the size of the recorded biopotentials is smallincomparison with
that at maximum possible tension. the tension of the muscles is nevertheless greater
in standing posture owing to the high center of gravity and the small supporting

area. As a result the energy expenditure associated with a standing posture is
6-10 percent greater than that of a sitting posture.

 

anurn 29. Muscle Bioelcctric Activity During Relaxed Standing (26):
A--Eront: B--back

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF-THAI. USE ONLY

During work, the posture is varied depending on the nature of the work movements
associated with the particular production operation, and its physiological cost

varies correspondingly. If the individual must work with his hands stretched forward,
to maintain this posture he must raise the tension of muscles of the pectoral girdle
and torso. Standing erect with hands stretched forward increases the tone of the
biceps by 25 percent over that when the arms are lowered. Tone increases by 70 percent
when a 2 kg weight is held in the hand (v. S. Parfel', 1956). When the body is
slightly tilted the energy expenditures increase by 20 percent, while when it is
tilted significantly they increase by 45 percent in comparison with a relaxed erect
posture (O. H. Nemtsova, 1940).

Remaining in the same posture for a long period of time may be tiring to the body

due to the constant static load imposed on certain muscle groups; this is especially
manifested in an uncomfortable work posture (27; s. I. Gorshkov, N. A. Kokhanova,

o. M. Mal‘tseva, 1970; N. A. Kokhanova, A. A. Abdikulov, 1978; Yelizarova,v. V-. 1979)-
In seated work, static tension is experienced mainly by the neck. pectoral and back
muscle groups. stooped shoulders, traumatic radiculitis, spondylosis and other
problems may arise in response to extended work in a forced posture (48, 87, etc.).

Static muscle tension disturbs normal circulation in the muscles, causes stagnation
of blood, deforms the locomotor-bearing apparatus and so on. Extensive work while
standing can lead to varicose veins, flat feet and so on.

In many cases a workplace permitting work in a sitting-standing posture may be more
sensible. Under these conditions the worker can voluntarily change his posture, as

a result of which the loads on different muscle groups are redistributed, and circula-
tion is improved in those portions of the body in which it had been inadequate owing
to static tension of muscles helping to maintain the needed posture. Changes in

posture introduce a certain amount of diversity in the performance of monotonous
work.

In order that work can be done in a comfortable, correct posture, anthropometric
data must be accounted for when planning production equipment and workplaces; it
should be kept in mind in this case that these data differ for the populations of
different countries, and they may even differ for people of the same nationality but
residing in different regions of a country.

The limits of workplace zones have been established on the basis of anthropometric
data and research on the laws of the locomotor system's work. Different authors
divide work zones into several zones--fr0m two to seven, giving different names to
them. But all au;hors agree on the main zones-~the optimum zone and the reachable
zone. Work within the limits of these zones ensures an optimum work posture--that is,
a free and relaxed pasture, one in which the torso is not tilted to the side. The
worker's body stays vertical in this case, or tilted forward slightly, up to 10-15°.

It should be noted. however, that lengthy work within the reachable zone involving
frequent arm movements is tiring, because this raises the tension of muscles in the
pectoral girdle and the shoulder and increases the energy expenditures. Moreover
rnvnmonLu made by outstretched hands are not distinguished by high precision and
unwed. Work movements in which the limb is maximally flexed or extended are energet-
Irnlls and neurologically unprofitable because when a limb is moved to one of its
limiting positions the lever arm of certain muscles increases, as a result of which
these muscles must exert greater force to surmount the resistance of antagonist

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oil-«mu. use ONLY

muscles. In this connection there must be an optimum, most comfortable zone in
each workplace, within which work may be performed throughout the entire shift without
significant tensing of muscles (M. I. Vinogradov, 1969).

Because incompatibility of the parameters of a workplace to anthropometric data
manifests itself in the body's physiological reactions, which often indicate stressing
of functions and development of fatigue, the basic workplace parameters must have a
physiological basis. After they are afforded the proper physiological grounds, they
may be introduced into practice confidently.

The physiological grounds of some work zone parameters may be determined through
investigation of workplace models.

Laboratory research has been conducted using specially developed experimental testing
units permitting simulation of a workplace intended for a sitting or a standing
posture (V. v. Yelezarova, N. A. Kokhanova, E. P. Shardakova, 1978).

Testing units with horizontal work zones were located at a height optimum for easy
work while sitting (750 m) or standing (1100 mm). The workplace for seated work was

supplied with a chair having an adjustable seat and back and a footrest. The work
zone was simulated in the vertical plane by means of a collapsible experimental
testing unit (38).

The experimental testing units were divided into three zones, within which the work
movements were planned depending on the precision of the work being done, the fre-
quency with which production operations were repeated, the sizes of the applied
forces, the importance of the controls employed and so on.

The efficiency of the movements perfomd and of the locations of controls in the
horizontal plane were determined by the time it took for the hand to reach simulated
controls located in different sectors of the zones. In their initial position the
hands of the subjects were at the edge of the work surface, 7-8 cm apart.

Because controls are sometimes switched by the worker in production conditions without
visual monitoring, the precision of hand movements made without visual participation
was studied depending on the location of controls. This research was conducted using
the procedure suggested by Kekcheyev and Pozdnova (cited in (60)).

in a study of the efficiency with which controls were located in the vertical plane,

the subject responded to an arbitrary signal by raising his hand as fast as possible

from its initial position to a control located at a particular height. The biopoten-
tials of muscles taking part in the hand movements were recorded in this case.

It was established from simulation of the zones of seated work in the horizontal
plane that the right and left hands reached controls located within zones 1 and II,
and especially within zone I, the fastest (Figure 30A,B,C). When hands were moved
from their initial position to controls located in zone III the time required to
complete the assignment increased significantly in relation to all sectors within
that zone. This time increased to the greatest extent when the control was located
beyond the zero line (point 6). when the hands are moved in this direction, the
subject turns his body to a certain extent in the same direction. In this case the

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()Fl-‘K'lAI, USE ONLY

the movement time was 234.5 26.7 uec for the right hand and 245.5245 meet for

the left. Calculation of the average speed of hand movement showed that as the control
is moved farther away from the margin of the work surface, the speed of the movement
rises.

Hand movements within zone I were the most precise. They were least precise when

the target points were located in zone III, especially if they were behind the zero
line. In this case the right hand missed by an average of 27.9 t 1.1 m, while for
the left hand the figure was 32.4 21.3 mm. The amount the hands missed the target
points in zones I and II differed significantly from the errors recorded for points in
zone III (p <0.01). It may be surmised from these data that movements of the right
hand (for persons with a dominant right hand) are more precise and faster than move-
ments made with the left hand.

 

._._. _ um
vou mm .100 women 500 son 700 n.

5 c

M”, .a_a.. I—a "U.th

quun: 30. Time of Hand mvcment Prom Initial POSition to Simulated

Controls Located in Different Areas of the Work Zone in the
horizontal Plane (A); Precision of Hand mvementsunmount

by which Target Points Located in Different Sectors of the
Work Zone in the Horizontal Plane are Missed (8); Control
Location Zones (C)

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UN \lfl‘l‘ IMI. \l-‘l’u \Il‘hl

The limits of these zones increase somewhat when work is performed in I'standing"
position--150-200 m in front and 100-150 mm in depth.

Electromyographic research conducted with the purpose of arriving at the physiological
grounds for zones of standing work in the vertical plane showed that the lowest bio~
electric activity is observed in hand muscles when the hand is moved from its initial
position to a control located from 900 to 1100-1200 above the floor (zone I)
(Figure 31). When the height of the controls is reduced to 600-750 (In above the floor
and when the worker must bend down to operate a control, the amplitude of muscle
biopotentials rises. It also rises when the hand must be med higher than 1200 mm,
and especially significantly at heights beginning with 1400-1500 mm (zone III). When
the hands are moved to controls located at a height of 1800 m the biopotential
amplitude reaches its peak.

HV
"’00

non ‘

600 '

400

200

 

(I
WAIAJ-LJA—L‘hh.

o u o o o o o o
o o o o o o o g
0 w 9 I! :l 9? 0

Figure 31. change in Amplitude of the Biopotentials (uv) of Different
Muscles Daring Movement of Hands Toward Controls located at
Different Heights (m) From the Floor: lu-pectoralz 2--interior
deltoid; 3--medial deltoid; 4--upper trapezius; 5--lower trapezius

'mus zone I (figures 32,33) is the most convenient--that is, optimal--in both the
horizontal and the vertical plane. The most precise and very frequent moves may be
pcrformd and the most important and very frequently utilized controls may be located
within this zone. Sufficiently precise and frequent movement may be performed and
important and frequently used controls may be located in zone II (easily reachable
zone). less precise and less frequent movements can be performed within zone III
(reachable zone) , because owing to the greater amplitude of movements, more time is
required to perform them, and if made frequently, such movements become disadvantageous
from an energy standpoint. The less important and the rarely employed controls may
be located in zone III. Arm movements behind the zero line requiring turning of the
torso should be the rarest.

88

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

500 _—L_L_l _|_ l..— I ._4._ 1—1—1... “5—; 600
7(\()|I00g_(m4003w700 IOO 0 l00700.ml0|h_W00700

Figure 32. Zones of Control location in the Horizontal Plane: See text
for explanation

  

200 400 000 In
Figure 33. Zones of Control Location in the Vertical Plane: See text
for explanation

0m: in'q‘ortant workplace parameter that influences formation of the work posture is
the height of the work surfacc—-the vertical distance from the floor to the horizontal
Ham: (run! or imaginary) at which the principal work movements are performed. If
the work surface is lower, the worker must bend over considerably, and when it is
higher he must rise on the balls of his feet and stretch his arms upward to do his
work. in both cases the work posture is uncomfortable, the arm movements are

89

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1:. HiuumL, the body's energy expenditures increase, and the field of View is
inadequate. All of this reduces the body's performance, and consequently decreases
the effectiveness of the work. The latter is shown graphically in Figure 34, which
demonstrates change in the work posture and labor productivity of masons depending
on change in laying height-~that is, the height of the work surface.

The height of the work surface is determined from the nature of the work being done,
its heaviness and its precision. Figure 35 shows the height of the work surface at
which the principal work movements of two forms of standing work are performed (9C0
and 1000 m). In both cases the main work movements are performed within the optimum
zone. For work requiring significant forces, the height of the work surface may be
somewhat lower (700-800 In) , while jobs of higher precision require a somewhat higher

work surface (1200-1300 an).

 

Figure 34. Change in Mason's Labor Productivity Depending on Laying
Height: I--labor productivity: II--laying height

  

A

93;;

 
     

Figure 35. Height of Work Surface for 'No Npes of Jobs

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 36. hecomended Heights for work Surface Depending on Job hype
and Precision: l—-very precise and delicate operations:
2--precise work with machines; 3--office work; 4—-typing

The workplace would be most comfortable when each worker using it could change its
parameters to correspond with his ovm anthropometric data. In most cases, however.
it is still impossible to adjust the height of the work surface. The individual

can adapt a workplace with a constant work surface height by adjusting the height
of the foot support in standing work and the height of the seat and foot support in
sitting work. In these cases the height of the work surface is selected for persons
of average height.

The most precise and delicate work (assenbly of very small parts, engraving etc.)

is usually done sitting down. Such work usually requires visual concentration, and
therefore it is often done with the help of optical attachments. In these cases

the height at which the main manual work operations are performed must be greater
than that for other types of work--900-1020 an (Figure 36). Because the forearms
are raised above the horizontal and the elbow angle is less than 90° in such work,
the muscles of the arms and pectoral girdle remain under static tension for a long
period of tire. To reduce this undesirable factor we install movable arm rests that
my be tilted to different degrees in relation to the horizontal plane.

The height of the work surface for precision jobs (assembly of small parts, some
machine tool operations and so on) may be 800-900 an. Arm rests are also installed
when necessary in these cases. The optimum range of work surface heights for manual
production operations not requiring visual Concentration is 70-750 mm above the floor.
The desk surface is set at this height for various clerical jobs.

The luriqht of the work surface may be decreased to 630-680 nan for typing and for the
use of other keyboard equipment requiring a large number of finger movements. This
lcducus the static tension of muscles supporting the forearms, since the latter are
lam-red downward somewhat during work (the elbow angle is greater than 90°) .

When organizing a workplace for "seated" work, care should be taken to see that
machine parts or structures do not protrude forward and hang above the head within
its limits. 'lhe height of overhead structures must be not less than 200!) mm. This

excludes the danger of bumping the head against such structures when the worker rises.
C

leq space must be foreseen to ensure the most convenient and closest appregach to the
inblr, machine tool or machine, and to ensure work in a normal posture. Pﬁot space
0

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.5 inn-errant in standing work. The room allowed for the feet must be not less than
L50 m in depth, 150 an in height and 530 m in breadth. 1‘0 allow normal conditions

for seated work, the leg space must be greater so that not only the feet but also the
mees would fit comfortably.

lf production equipment does not provide the leg space, the body must be positioned

away from the work zone. The worker is forced to bend over and to stretch his arms

forward. causing his center of gravity to shift frontward. A forced, uncomfortable
work posture is created, maintenance of which requires higher muscle static tension.

An efficient workplace for seated work must afford leg space that is not less than
650 m in depth and 5-2‘0 mm in breadth. If it is inpossible to build in a recess of

the required depth throughout all of its height, its depth may be reduced to 450 m
near the knees, increasing it to 650 In at a point 320 mm above the floor. The height

of the leg Space must be such that the legs of the seated individual would not touch
the lower surface of the table-—not less than 600 m. Many authors believe 100 m

to be the most favorable leg space height.

the shape and tilt of the seat, its

The design of the chair-its overall dimensions,
nee to correct organization of a work-

height adjustment and so on-—has great significa

place [or seated work with an optimum posture. Research by Moykin et al. (55) showed

that owing to unsensible work chair design (insufficient seat surface, absence of a
in muscles

back, too hard a seat), sewing machine operators experienced static tension
f the head

of the upper part of the body and waist due to considerable inclination o
and body.

Depending on their purpose, work chairs may vary in appearance and in the shape of the
seat. back and arm rests. However, the seat height of all work chairs should be

adjustable. The seat dimensions must be within 380-420 In in depth and 400-420 mm in
breadth. Its forward edge must be rounded downward so that it wOuld not put pressure

on the lower part of the thighs.

Despite the fact that very much research has been performed on the work chair. es-
mous. Some authors

Specially abroad, opinions on seat shape are still not unani
recommend tilting the seat 3-5° from front to back (84,88), while others suggest the

same angle but prefer the seat tilted forward (K. E‘. Schlegel, 1956: A. s. Mandel, 1975).
Zolinu (34) suggests a flat seat. A number of authors feel that the seat must be

Lilted in back and in

gostcrior taper is required for support of
the body from slipping off (74,79 etc.). Strokina and Plyushkene (63) , who studied

the bioelectric activity of muscles responsible for maintaining the ”seated" posture

in relation to different angular sitting parameters, showed that the least back muscle
tension is observed when the angle of the anterior taper is 4° and that of the posterior
taper is 10-12°. When the posterior angle is 10° the position of the spinal column and
s is close to natural, and the body's weight is distributed more uniformly. Work

pclvi
seats are furnished to machine operators (COST 21889-76).

chairs with such

t'uﬂSldL'r-an the intricate anatomical and physiological mutual relati0nshipsexisting
ill the eervmal and lumbar divisions of the vertebral colum and muscle groups in
.htfcreut work postures, the design of a work seat must accou for the nature of the

work, it must be fitted comfortably to the y, and it must a low for voluntary change
in posture. Ex rimsntal research on seat sh pe in relation t particular types of

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

work, conducted by Kryuko-Ja (44), showed that a work seat with a slight backward
tilt is best for workers using keyboard devices and for workers in occupations
calling for a similarly organized workplace. A flat, horizontally situated seat is
the most comfortable for assenbly and installation jobs, for clerical work and for
other types of labor at a table requiring little physical effort.

The back is an important part of the work chair. Its presence is found to be es-
pecially necessary when the forearms have no support such as the work surface of a
machine tool, a table and so on (working with typewriters, table model keyboard com-
puters, card punchers and so on). The significance of the back of a work chair was
demonstrated by I. s. Lundervold (1951), whose research established that the bio-
electric activity of the trapezius and latissimus muscles of the back is significantly
higher in seated work on a backless chair than in work with the back supported. The
shape and structure of the back may vary. Thus the back of a chair proposed by

n. Akerblom (1948) has two supports: one at waist height (a spinal curvature) and
another displaced further to the rear in the vicinity of the scapulas. The lumbar
curvature of the back is called "Akerblom's line."

The height of the chair back must be adjustable so that each person could make the
back compatible with his anatomical features. In the opinion of most authors it must
have an adjustment range of 100-250 Inn, and its tilt angle must be adjustable within
1-1”. The height of the back varies from 100 to 150 mm, and its width varies from
275 to 400 m. The seat and back of a work chair must be semisoft.

In cases where the arms of a worker performing production operations must remain sus-
pended for a long period of time, such that they experience static tension, the design
of the work chair should foresee arm rests; however, the latter should not get in

the way of the work. Making arm rests semisoft is recommended. So that they would be
comfortable, their width must be not less than 50 run, their length should be not less
than 200 m, their height should be adjustable within 70-200 mm, and the space between

them should be 400-500 mm.

Foot rests are important in seated work, especially for short people. They illow the
worker to choose a position of the legs at which their muscles are relaxed: otherwise
when the leg muscles of a seated person are tensed, conditions favoring congestion

of blood in the lower limbs and in the pelvic region are created, leading to rapid
tiring. A foot rest must be not less than 300 mm wide and 400 m deep. The height of
its front edge should be adjustable within 260-350 m, and its tilt should be adjustable
within 15-30". In order that the worker's feet would not slip off, the upper surface
of the foot rest is grooved, and a rim 10 mm high is built up on the edge facing the
worker.

A support is absolutely necessary with a sitting-standing workplace (Figure 37).

In this case the height of the work surface of the table, machine tool and so on must
be the same as for standing work, and it must correspond to the nature and heaviness
of the work. The seat of the chair is usually made somewhat smaller than that of a
«Emir of normal fit. The adjustable foot rest is built higher. In some cases a

hot rest may be substituted by a leg support takir‘g the form of a fooi-lmard. The
upper part of the footboard is raised 400 mm above the floor, and its height is

adjustable within 1100 m.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run UI‘I'RJAI. USO. UI‘LI

   

2000

    

700-540;}

Flljute 37. "Sitting-standing“ work Posture

Special significance is attached to workplace organization in the control cabs of
machine u; its (motor vehicles. excavators. tractors, hoisting cranes and so on).
'lhe driver's alertness and performance depend on how comfortable his work posture is.

how freely he can use the levers. pedals and other controls and how well his comforts
are seen to for long hours of work in the cab.

“is choice of optimum seat dimensions and location of levers, pedals and instruments
of the cab workplace is based on the anthropometric data for a person of average
height. visibility from inside the cab has great significance to the normal work of
the driver. An important requirement iaposed on seat design is to create a supporting
structure which would not cause discomfort and which would realiably support the
driver in the course of his control operations. In order that the driver would not
bump his head against the roof when the cab bounces vertically, a clearance of

50-100 m should be provided above the head.

Research by Kozlov (36) showed that if these dimension requirements are not met for
a tractor cab, a tractor driver wishing to avoid bunping his head against the roof
is compelled to work bent over. Moreover because of inadequate cab visibility the
tractor driver must often work in an asymetrical position, with his body tilted to
the right. 'lhis means that the body's center of gravity is shifted to the right of
the supporting surface, and the static tension of the muscles consequently increases.
The undesirable features of such a posture include tilting of the body toward the
horizontal plane, the side tilt of the pectoral girdle and pelvis and arisal of
compensatory scoliosis of the vertebral column in the cervical and lumbar “V1810“-
Electromyographic studies have shown that the bioelectric activity of muscles kt eping
a tractor driver's body in an asymmetrical position is seven to eight times greater
than that recorded with the body in the normal 'posture recommended by the author.

As he controls the vehicle, the driver imparts certain forces to the levers and
pedals. meeting levers at a height between the shoulder and elbow is recommended
in cabin design, since this permits the operator to exert the greatest force. The
size and shapes of levers must correspond to the dimensions and. gripping features of
the hand. When locating levers relative to the floor. preference should be given to
vertical levers over horizontal ones. Being a support to the hand, a vertically

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oriented lever supports its weight. Depending on the particular features of the
cab workplace, the height of levers may be 750-1060 In above the floor.

Consideration of the Functional Characteristics of Analyzers

As he works, the individual constantly receives information on changes in the object
of labor as a result of its processing, on the work of the machine, on change in the
production process and the environment, and so on. Il'he effectiveness of labor depends
to a significant extent on how correctly and quickly the operator perceives incoming
information. This in turn depends on the functional state of analyzers taking part
in perception and processing of signaling information.

The olfactory and especially the gustatory analyzers are useful to work relatively

rarely. The visual, auditory, cutaneous and proprioceptive analyzers have important
significance to work.

When planning equipment, organizing a workplace and designing the control and infome-
tion display resources, we must correctly choose the main and auxiliary indication
systems and determine the loads experienced by different analyzers in correspondence
with this. If the functional state of the analyzers is to be kept at the optimum
level their physiological characteristics must be considered, and an attempt should

be made to create favorable conditions for their operation.

For the visual analyzer to work effectively, general illumination and illmnination

at the workplaces must conply with the established public health norms, light fixtures
must be located correctly in relation to the work zone, and the object of labor and
the indication resources must be located optimally.

when organizing local lighting, care should be taken to see that the light source
does not hinder the workers. For this purpose the light fixture must be located not
less than 35-40° above the horizontal line of sight (Figure 38). In cases where the
light source is located below this limit it hinders the operator and reduces the
effectiveness of vision by 40-50 percent; when the angle is reduced to 23° rapid
tiring can he noted. and visual effectiveness decreases by 50-70 percent. Location
of the light fixture at a 10° angle elicits painful sensations in the eyes. Cbnstant
uniform illumanation of the workplace is recommended. When lighting is nonuniform,
shifting of the gaze from a lighter area to a darker one or vice versa is accompanied
by adaptation of the visual analyzer. The time required for adaptation may have an
effect on the rate of signal detection.

Also unfavorable is location of the light source in such a way that light reflected
from the work surface strikes the eyes. Following intense blinding by light, it
may take up to 10 minutes for vision to become normal again. Disturbance of visual
monitoring during work has an influence on the speed and quality of the work done.

The functional characteristics of the visual analyzer must also be considered when
locating controls on production equipment, laying out various control consoles and

distributing displays on them. Optimum working conditions may be achieved if the
console design accounts for the spatial-temporal structure of the visual analyzer.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
  

. .- ..-. ._—_.-——

(1)

Famous-«ems news-sue. can.

Meauv(4

 
 
 
 

  

33.1335

 
 
  

Du
an£5;:&6

    

Figure 38. Effect of the Location of a Light Source on Visual Effectiveness
Key:
1. Location of light sources 4. Hinders
2. Decrease in visual effectiveness, t 5. Elicits tiring
3. Degree of influence 6. Elicits painful sensation

visual field; all other points are in the periphery. As the distance from the center
to the periphery of the visual field increases, '

and their colors become less distinct. As a light stimulus moves farther from the

center of the visual field toward the periphery, the latent period of the oculomotor

reaction increases (22). The extent of the change depends on the qualifications and
functional state of the operator. This should be ' '

workplace, when installing various indication reso

individual perceives the arisal of a dynamic light signal,

it in order to evaluate it and make a decision.
trailsgxort drivers.

he turns his gaze toward
This is especially important to

According to the data of different authors
' . Visual perception is restricted

As the eyes perform microuovements, microsignals arise as the initial stage in forma-

tion of the image of an object. The duration of discrete eye jumps is in the hundredths
of a second. and the interval between then is 0.2-0.5 seconds. The more complex the

object being exaained, the more complex is the route taken by the eyes. A study of

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK’IM. USE ONLY

a number of simple routes of identical length but differing in direction and angles
(30°, 90°, 150°) showed that the time to travel the route depends on its direction

and the size of the angle (Table 15). The position of the angle in space has signi-
ficance (52).

Table 15. Average Total Traveling Time

Route Traveling Time, msec
.T m
TX “5
. 890
§7‘
‘/___ 925
r- 965

Eye micromovements are associated with functions such as search, fixing the eyes in a
position for optimum information reception, identification, measurement and control
(31; B. F. Lomov, 1966). The optimum or effective zone for these functions is one
delimited by a 30° angle in the horizontal and vertical planes (15° to either side,
and upward and downward from the normal line of vision) (Figure 39). within this
zone perception is sufficiently clear and the shape and color of an object are
readily distinguished; this is why locating the main and emergency indicators and the
main controls of production equipment within this zone is recommended,

The total time T is the sum of several components:
T= t1+t2+t3+*u.

where t1--latent period of the first jump: t2--time of movement along the first side
of the angle; t3--1ength of pause with the eye fixed on the apex of the angle:
tn--time of movement along the second side of the angle.

Less-important information displays may be located in the zone adjacent to the optimum
zone. while rarely employed components can be located in a zone with even wider limits.
In the latter case the operator must turn his head and eyes to observe information

displays.

The three-dimensional structure of the working perceptual field may include several
concrete fields to which the operator successively shifts his gaze. As an example

a typist may deal with three fields in her work: the material being transcribed,

the keyboard and the typewritten text. Owing to development of an occupational habit,
the three-dimensional structure of the field of observation may become simpler: An

experienced typist rarely looks at the keyboard. In cases where an individual must
service several machine tools or automatic devices with information displays located

significant distances apart, the operator must move from one field to another.
97

FOR.0F11CJAI.USE13NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

35‘ canon: . _ lﬁ' mum»-

   

~ . A...
' k
?0‘ sen-Lev: ~ " I‘m,"

I5: mun-y. (3)

05‘ amen-syn

 

90' “new

    
    

|5' emu-rye
..- _ - _ ., ..:--__- ..... . ..
”5" m "1" (/ ‘ Dfl‘ :wéleml $4 2M..- ”a,
.. . _ Q
Is. cull-ya
'30' IMII'I

C

Figure 39. Visibility Zones in the Vertical and Horizontal Planes (32) :
A--when turning only the eye: 3“an turning the head;
C--wnen turning the head ard eye

1. Optimum 3. Norm}. line of vision
2. Maximum

A designer considering the lOcation of controls on equipment and of information
displays on control consoles should consider that horizontal eye movements are
faster than vertical ones. and that horizontal proportions and dimensions are

estimated more accurately than vertical ones; the latter are usually overestimated.
leftward and upward movements of the eyes are faster than in the reverse direction.

Straight lines are easier to follow than curved ones, and smooth changes in line
direction are perceived more easily than abrupt changes. Application of the vector-
clcctro—oculographic method to research on perception of elementary rhythmical
coupositions (circles, stripes and so on) on a plane showed that perception of
rhythmically repeating series occurs in a direction from larger to smaller elements,
from darker to lighter elements and from elements with smaller intervals between
them to those with larger intervals (45).

98

FOR 0H1CIAL USE ONLY
1he rate and effectiveness of information perception and processing rise significantly
when we introduce an auxiliary indicator to which the worker must turn special atten-
tion. Figure 40 shows that the time for determining the location of the pointer on
a scale bearing an auxiliary indicator is significantly shorter than without it.

t is often suitable to delineate the "normal" zone of a scale with a colored stripe.
since in this case an Operator checking a reading need only perceive and evaluate the
mutual arrangement of the pointer and the indicator mark. The effectiveness of an

indicator mark's perception rises if it diffeiv from other marks not only in color but
also in shape (32; w. Schultetus, 1974).

   

r:_'tl w mac mm mm“ D " -' mm

Figure 40. Display Reading Time in the Presence of an Auxiliary Indicator
and without It

In cases where the operator's visual analyzer is overloaded with information or where
visual perception is difficult owing to unfavorable conditions (poor illumination,
intense vibration and so on) it would be suitable to switch part of the information to
the auditory analyzer.

Acoustic signals are used to transmit simple information of short length, for example
if additional information must be transmitted or if the operator must be warned that
a Signal is forthcoming.

A tonal acoustic signal coding system must account for the fact that man can perceive
16-25 gradations of tonal signals differing in pitch or.loudness. The absolute thres-
holds of the auditory analyzer depend significantly on the frequency of the acoustic
signal and the differential thresholds in relation to intensity and frequency-~on the
initial values of these characteristics, that is. In the acoustic range, the differ-
vuciai intensity threshold is about a tenth of the initial signal intensity, while the
diffcrHRCldl frequency threshold is 3—5 Hz at an intensity not less than 10 db. signal
uulnLiun has a significant influence on the thresholds. The minimum duration of a
sound which would permit evaluation of its quality is 20-50 msec. At lower duration,

a sound is perceived as a click.

The auditory analyzer deserves special attention in the planning of emergency warning
resources. Acoustic information is perceived faster than visual information by man.
Man‘s sensomotor reaction to an acoustic signal is 20-30 msec faster than to a light
signal. This difference stems from the difference in the rate at which incoming in-
formation is processed in the analyzers. owing to their morphophysiological character-
istics. Perception of a stimulus in the visual analyzer is associated mainly with

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

photochemical reactions within its peripheral unit. This reaction proceeds somewhat
more slowly than does information processing in the peripheral unit of the auditory
analyzer. To perceive a danger signal through his visual analyzer, man must keep the
location at which a signal may possibly arise within sight. The need for focusing
attention in this way is avoided when we plan in acoustic warning signal transmission.

In perception of an acoustic signal, the location of its source in relation to the
operator does not have a significant influence.

The auditory analyzer is able to receive a large quantity of information in the form
of spoken messages. Thin form of transmission acquires special significance when the
work involves the need for fast two-way information exchange. The main characteristics
of acoustic oscillations are intensity, frequency and shape, which are reflected in
auditory sensations as loudness, pitch and tone quality. The range of acoustic oscil-
lation frequencies perceived by the human ear is 16-20,000 Hz. Frequencies corres-
ponding to the spectrum of human speech-~200—3500 Hz--have special significance within
this range.

A deszgner working on apparatus to transmit spoken messages must know the basic
characteristic of speech, which is a combination of sounds varying in intensity and
frequency. The intensity of uttered vowels and consonants differs: Vowels are typi-
fied by greater intensity. Between the loudest vowel and the quietest consonant there
15 a 30-40 db range of sound intensity.

Production conditions are sometimes such that spoken messages are transmitted in the
presence of noise. In cases of not very loud noise, speech is usually comprehensible

if its intensity is 6 db above that of the noise. It should be kept in mind in this
case that words of two syllables are recognized 30 percent better than words of one
syllable, while words of three syllables are recognized 50 percent better. The maxi-
mum rate of message transmission is 250 words per minute. However, in order that it
could be perceived and understood correctly it must be transmitted at an optimum rate--

120 words per minute; in this case the length of a sentence must not exceed lO-ll words.
with longer sentences the effectiveness of reception decreases owing to the limited

volume of the working memory (G. K. Seredi et a1., 1976).

It should be noted, however, that use of the auditory analyzer to perceive information
is limited by the difficulty of receiving and analyzing information coming in simul-
taneously from more than one source of warning signals.

The cutaneous analyzer is important to man's work. Using tactile receptors, the
individual can receive information on the location of an object in space, on its
form, surface, the quality of the material from which it is made and so on.

Vibration arises rather often during work with production equipment. Han also senses
vibration by means of tactile receptors. In this connection vibration at the workplace
can serve (within permissible limits) as a source of information by which to monitor
the work of transportation resources, mechanisms, machine tools and so on.

The absolute sensitivity of tactile receptors to mechanical stimuli is defined as the
minimum pressure necessary for arisal of a sensation. Thus the absolute sensitivity

of the lip is 1-50 mg/mmz; that of skin on the back and abdomen is 10 gm/mmz, the
discrimination threshold being 7 percent of the initial pressure. Receptor elements

100

FOR OFFIC1A1.USE‘DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

n1hJuchd Lo archanical stimulation produced by vibration are most sensitive to
vibration frequencies in the 100-300 82 range (G. K. Sereda et al., 1976).

Efforts are now being made to find broader uses of tactile receptors to transmit
information to the operator. Vibrators mounted on particular areas of the skin are
used for mechanical warning signal transmission. Attempts are being made to use
painful and electrocutaneous stimuli as signals indicating an emergency situation.

Nevertheless, information transmitted by tactile receptors is not distinguished by
diversity owing to their morphophysiological characteristics. In terms of the quantity
of information perceived, the cutaneous (tactile) analyzer is significantly inferior

to the visual and auditory analyzers. we can achieve not more than 10 gradations of
vibrotactile or electrocutaneous signals by changing their frequency. Difficulties

in using tactile receptors to transmit information on the course of a production
process are also associated with the individual's rather swift adaptation to them.

and tho difficulty of storing signals in the memory.

The proprioceptive analyzer, which aids in control of motor activity, has important
significance. Information coming from muscle and joint receptors permits the indi-
vidual to determine exactly the location of body parts, changes in posture and move-
nents, determine the weight of objects, compare the force required to lift objects
of different weight and so on. Proprioceptors take part in automatic regulation of
posture and movements. operating on the basis of feedback between actuating organs
and the central nervous system. Acquisition of information on the results of an
action helps the operator to master an equipment control system faster and to adapt
to different characteristics of the controls.

The functional characteristics of the proprioceptive analyzer should be considered
when designing and locating controls that could be used effectively not only with
visual control but also without it.

This entire discussion permits the conclusion that when different information re-
sources and different methods of information presentation are used with a considera-

tion for the functional characteristics of human analyzers. the incoming production
information can be perceived more quickly and precisely, and it can be analyzed and
the appropriate decision can be made more correctly.

The Power and Speed Characteristics of the Human Body, and Their Consideration in
the Design of Equipment Controls

The working individual performs various work movements and applies forces of varying
magnitude. Work movements made by the hands may be associated with the need for
switching equipment controls or with lifting and moving the object of labor, and so
on. The effectiveness of work depends significantly on the quality of work movements,
on their efficiency. In cases where movements are efficient and economical. a pro-
duction assignment can be fulfilled with lower energy expenditure. It is precisely
in economical and efficient use of work movements that the principal reserves and
possibilities of decreasing fatigue and improving the performance of the individual

and increasing labor productivity lie.

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

While working. a laborer may ot'l-t-‘II spontaneously select a variant of work actions
which is often not optimal. This variant becomes habitual for him, and it persists

in this inefficient form for a long time. In order to prevent such cases, the
structure and possibilities of the human motor apparatus must be kept in mind when
planning the labor process, and the workplace should be organized with a consideration
for these characteristics.

First of all we need to comply with the principle of economy of movement, which in

its simplest form entails elimination of extra mvuents. In this regard correct
organization of the workplace acquires important significance: The main production
Operations should be performed within the limits of the optimum zone, while operations
of secondary importance should be performed in the reachable zone. Frequent bending
and shifting of the body can also be precluded by sensibly distributing office supplies.
Constancy of location of tools, attachments, intermediate products and so on at the
workplace has great significance. when work movements become habitual, they become
automatic, and they require less expenditure of attention, time and.energy for their
performance.

Extra movements can be eliminated by making a work process more efficient. This can
he done by excluding procedures that would not be missed.Thus exclusion of yarn cutting
in a sole stitching operation in footwear production reduced the number of movements
in the operation by four. In this case the umber of movements per shift decreased
by 2640, and the distance traveled by the hands decreased by almost 1 km (8).

At the same time a differentiated approach should be taken to eliminating extra
movements, as H. I. Vinogradov notes. In cases where production operations are too
simple, such as for example when working on certain conveyors. the physiological
significance of each movement must be evaluated. In these cases exclusion of a move-
ment as being technically unjustified may result in even greater simplification of
the stereotype and reduction of its dynamics, and consequently the uniformity and
monotony of the work would increase even more.

Economy of motion may also be achieved by efficient use of active and passive forces.
This means that a work movement must be controlled through sensible utilization of
the force of gravity and inertia. Thus if a work movement involves the lowering of
an arm, muscle force would be needed at first to surmount the arm's inertia: the rest
of the movement can be made on the basis of inertia, without exertion of muscle
force. in order that the movement would be economical, a high speed should be
generated at first (fast accumulation of kinetic energy occurs), so that the force
of inertia could be capitalized upon subsequently.

Depending on the nature of the work assignment. different elements of the human

motor apparatus may participate in the work movement. Thus certain jobs may basically
require only the use of fingers and a hand: a hand and forearm; a hand, forearm and
shoulder, with and without the body's participation. In each case the working
kinematic chain must correspond to the link-by-link distribution of msele masses
brought into action. An attempt should be made to make the greatest possible use

of snail muscles of the arms (hands, forearms) for light work, and rarer use should
be nude of large muscles (of the pectoral girdle, waist and torso). The greater the
participation of joints in a motor act. the more energy is expended on it.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFTWC1A1.USEIDNLV

ﬂhcrc are now fewer and fewer jobs associated with large forces, requiring the
participation of large proximal muscles of the limbs and torso. But even in light
work, for example assembly of small parts and work with keyboard equipment. besides
the small distal muscles of the hands, large muscles of the back and shoulders
participate, mainly by carrying the static load of maintaining the work posture.
thrcpossible, static tension is reduced by introducing supporting elements for
nonmoving limb segments, and the most laborious elements of the work are mechanized.

When planning a work process, it is important to know that the strength and speed

of contraction of different muscles are not the same. Table 16 shows the strengths
of different muscle groups of the man's and woman's arms, recorded from a large
number of persons by Uflyand (64). As we can see from this table, the strength of
the right arm is greater than that of the left; in this case the degree to which this

asymmetry is expressed by different muscle groups varies--4-8 percent of muscle
strength. .

Table 16. strength of Different Muscle Groups (kg) (64)

 

 

 

Indicator Hen_ "omen

Strength of the hand (squeezing a dynamometer)

Right 38.6 22.2

left 36.2 20.4
Strength of biceps

Right 27.9 13.6

Left 26.8 13.0
Wrist flexure

Right 27.9 21.7

Left 26.6 20.7
Wrist extension

Right 23.4 18.5

Left 21.8 16.7
Thumb strength

Right 11.9 9.0

Left 10.9 8.3

Standing strength (muscles straightening

the bent torso) 123.1 71.0

Muscle strength changes with age. The greatest muscle strength is observed at

20-29 years (at 25 years on the average); then it decreases gradually, and beginning
at nqe 50 it decreases more abruptly. The muscle strength of people in the 60-69
year age group is 20-45 percent lower_than that of persons in the 20-29 year group.

Muscle strength changes owing to prolonged work in a particular specialty. An
uccupation's influence on the strength of different muscle groups may vary. Thus
Uflyund, who studied the strength of different muscle groups among representatives
of different occupations. revealed that arm strength is highest among persons doing

heavy physicallabor and glass blowers, wrist flexing and extending strength is

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm "ENLIAL Uhl‘. URL!

highest among workers of a brewery, and thumb strength is greatest among painters.

Figure 41 shows the hand muscle strengths of persons in different occupations from
30 to 49 years old.

'l‘he force generated by the moving arm depends on its position. When the individual
is standing, the greatest force is generated at shoulder level, while when he is
sitting, it is highest at the elbow level.

             

I ‘.I II 4 ‘3 0 'I n 9 III II I2 III

Figure 41. Hand Muscle_5trength (kg) for Persons in Different Occupations
30-49 Years Old (64): l--persons in heavy physical labor;
2--longshoremen; 3--glass blowers: 4--bakers: 5--fitters;
6--brewers; 7--boiler makers; 8--type founders: 9--paintars:
10--pe’rsons doing metal work; ll--typesetters; l2--typists;
13-—ropemakers,- horizontal line-~average for all subjects--
39 kg

 

Table 17 shows the maximum force generated by the right and left arm in different
directions of movement (toward the body, away from the body. up, down, left, right)
in sitting position (85). However, it would not be permissible to demand maximum
effort in work; maximum effort should be applied for short periods of time only--
several seconds. At the same time, if we know the maximum possible effort that can
be generated, we can standardize permissible and optimum values more correctly.

yet. A certain amount of attention is being devoted to this question today. Applied
efforts have been standardized for some controls. Cornpliance with these standards

when planning and designing production equipment should promote optimization of hunan
labor (GOST's 21752-76, 21753-76).

which muscles take part in the given movement. 'l‘hus flexors of the arms contract
faster than extensors, but the latter can generate greater force. Consequently move-
ments toward the body and from right to left are performed faster (by the right arm)
than movements away from the body and from left to right, but they lose out in the
amount of force generated. Hence it is clear that it would be best to control speed

levers with arm flexors and power levers with extensors.

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" 1M. "SI-I ONLY

Arm Strength in sitting Position While Performing Movements in Different
Directions (85)

 

(2) nuns-n cm ”ale-ml. In

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) T3)Ill _--—-(I)10llalllr -—-
Ila-untrue "In Tsr——16)— 75,—
Au.“ unu- man I‘m-I
Pill 91!. MI: '1’:-
(”K toﬁc (8) 07 cch
180' 52.6 54.4 51.2 62.6
I W 511.8 55.3 50.3 55.!)
I 20‘ 42.6 41.2 44.9 46.7
90' 36.3 39.2 37.6 39.0
m“ 29.0 28.6 36.3 41.1
(911mm ”'0’an
1811‘ 111.6 19.5 16.9 18.6
151)“ 23.6 25.4 18.6 21.3
120' 21.5 27.2 23.1 26.3
90" 23.6 25.4 22.2 24.0
60“ 20.0 22.2 20.9 23.1
2 l 3 l4)
(llXZacu C(nlpaga heal) Bap-Io
1811' 19.5 22.1 13.6 ISA
150" 21.3 24.5 13.2 15.0
I 20’ 211,-! 2-1.0 13.6 15.4
90‘ 21.8 22.7 15.0 16.8
60' '22.? 23.6 14.5 19.0
mm position 8. Away from the body
‘orce of motion , kg 9. Upward
’ullin-Il 10. Downward
’ushing 11. From the left
eft arm 12 . From the right
tight arm 13. To the left
inward the body 14. To the right

:1 arm movements are faster and less tiring than vertical movements: when
movements are required, the arm should not be raised above the shoulder.

ectory of motion has important significance. Movements having long trajectc

more tiring; therefore we should try to keep trajectories short. Linear mov
owever, which are the shortest, are undesirable. Owing to the anatomical

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristics of the joints between arm segments, which have spherical, block and
elliptical form. movements on curved trajectories are more natural and efficient.
Straight trajectories require additional muscle tension to hold the joint still.

Arm movements must be rhythmical, simple and habitual, and they must be made within
the limits of the work zone and the visual field. Transitions from one type of move-
ment to another must be as smooth and comfortable as possible. Sanothly rounded move-
ments are faster than linear movements having abrupt changes in direction. Curved
movements and circular movements are preferable to movements following broken trajec-
tories. Skilled workers performing plastering, gluing and other jobs use curved
movements predominantly. Performance of movements along a smooth trajectory is

more efficient; it is more justified from an anatomical and physiological standpoint,
and the work proceeds more rhythmically.

In addition to the conditions for economy of motion cited above, we should keep in
mind that it may also be achieved by complying with rules such as simultaneous motion,
symmetrical and rhythmical motion, and so on. This means that both arms must begin
and end their work simultaneously. When working with one arm, it would be a good idea
to keep the other arm “busy.”

The simplest and fastest movements are symmetrical movements by both arms in the

same plane but in opposite directions (Figure 423,3). It is harder to make movements
in the same direction (Figure 42C. D), and still more difficult to make successive
movements, with one arm performing a movement that has just been performed by the
other. The hardest are movements made in different planes (Figure 413). The greatest
coordination is observed to be required in machine tool operations in which rotating
movements by one arm are combined with linear movement by the other in a different
plane (Figure 42?).

Here we to analyze movements performed during manipulation of controls indifferent

planes, we would note that clockwise rotary movement corresponds to straight
movement to the right, upward and forward (in relation to the operator) , while counter-

clockwise rotary movement corresponds to straight movement to the left, downward
and back (Figure 426,11).

Rhythmical performance of work movements is recommended, but the rhythm must be free,
or at least to some degree induced, for example by music played in the production
shop. Owing to development of fatigue, the movement rhythm of the workers may change
in the course of the shift. -

An effort should be made to create working conditions in which the habits of per-
. forming the principal work movements "automatically," without psychological loads,
would develop the fastest.

Comparative analysis of the work of laborers at different skill levels has revealed
that the work of a highly skilled worker is distinguished by high organization.

he prepares his workplace before starting work. Owing to careful study and analysis
of the work process, such a worker does not make unproductive movements. He works

rhythmically, performing his work movements along short, smooth trajectories. An
efficiency expert wishing to make a work process more efficient does so in integra-

tion with improvements in the production operation and assurance of full utilization
of the equipment's capacity (53; s. A. Kosilov, 1965).

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CC)
CBC)
CCC
3°C)

C

/

C p

 

6)
:1:

Figure 42. Nature of Different Work Movements: See text for explanation.

Owing to correct choice of work movements and improvement of the efficiency of the

labor process, worker tiring decreases significantly and labor productivity rises
by 5-25 percent (66).

The strength and speed characteristics of the human motor apparatus must be con-

sidered when designing equipment controls. Creation of manual controls with regard
to sensible efforts and directions of movements and with regard to the case with

which handles and various levers can be gripped would promote economy of effort or
the worker and faster performance of controlling actions.

10']

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When designing and locating the various controls, the designer must try to see that
their manipulation would be simple, that they could be easily reached and seen by
operators, and that their location is coordinated with that of indicators. All con-
trols and information displays must be located in a way that would exclude mutual
interference when performing control operations and accidental operations they must
have enough resistance to reduce the possibility of their accidental movement. The

work of controls must be maximally reliable even when unexpected directions of
movement occur.

When designing controls, rules such as optimln applied effort and minimum free play

must beobserved. Appropriately limiting the rotating speed of hand wheels and
cranks is recomended as a way to prevent the danger of injury to the operator
during automatic and accelerated operation.

Various ways to code controls are used to facilitate control and to decrease mistakes
and the time required to find the needed control.

Manual controls, which permit precise and fast adjustment, are used most frequently

to control production equipment. The greatest precision and speed are noted with
appropriately designed manually operated controls: use of large forces for a long
period of time is not permitted. Controls requiring application of considerable force
are placed into motion with two hands. When a control wheel is controlled with two
hands, the force required to put it into rotation must be doubled. A similar in-
crease in effort is required for movement of a straight lever or handle, located

near the body along its midline, with both hands (toward and away from the body).

If a lever is lecated far away from the body, the force advantage gained by working
with two hands is insignificant.

Manual controls intended for different purposes can be distinguished in relation to
shape, size and structure. Pushbuttons or tumbler switches are recanended for a
start-stop operation. Buttons are advantageous because they can be pressed quickly,
with little effort by the fingers. There can be three basic types of buttons in
relation to form of action: 1) press to turn on, release to turn off; 2) press once
to turn on. press a second time to turn off; 3) press to turn on and lock.

The optimum location for buttons when working in seated position is at the level of
the elbow when the arm is bent 90° at the elbow and the forearm is horizontal. It
is easier and faster to press a button that protrudes somewhat from the surface of
the table. In this case the angle between the hand and the table surface must be
30-45'. The optimum tilt angle of the keyboard of a push button console is 15°.

Rectangular buttons with rounded corners or a rounded upper edge are the most con-
venient when frequent use is required (Figure 43A). Rarely used buttons may be round.

The button surface must be somewhat concave or roughened, so that the finger would not
slip off when the button is pressed. The button should click to indicate to the opera-
tor that he has effectively operated the button. Buttons may be color-coded to facili-
tate discrimination. The optimum diameter of a button actuated by a fingertip is 13 m.
If a button is intended for emergency use or if it is intended to be pressed by the
thumb or the palm, its diameter should be increased to 18-19 m. The button should move

3-6 mm when pressed.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬁfriersﬂgmm 5.9.2:“. . .\

 

Figure 43. Manual Controls: A—-buttons; B--toggle switch: C—rotating
switches; D—-rotating knobs

Diameter of upper part of arm 3. Movement:
Length 4 . Diameter
5. Height
109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK UPI‘ILIAL use UNLI'

In addition to buttons, keys that may be located in rows are often installed in control
consoles and on other work surfaces to permit fast switching.

Permissible and optimm forces must be used as guidelines when planning various
types of manual controls. In cases where controls are used over and over again during
work, the permissible forces may be decreased. Thus rarely used buttons can have a

depressing force within 0.60-1.20 kg, while that of frequently employed buttons is
0.14—0.l6 kg.

Toggle switches are often used to turn components on and off and to switch them. It
would also be sensible to use toggle switches whenever controls must be located close
together: Their spacing can be 25 mm. 'me position of a toggle switch can be recog-
nized both visually and by touch. Toggle switches usually have two positions, and
sometimes three. The amount of resistance depends on the size of the toggle switch

am. Recommended forces are 0.3-0.5 kg for arms up to 30 mm long, and 1 kg for arms
50-100 m long (Figure 423).

The functions of a switch may also be performed by rotating switches. which are es-
pecially suitable when there are a large number of discrete working positions. In-
tating switches have from 3 to 24 working positions. Such switches must be located in
such a way as to ensure enough room for free manipulation by the hand.

Switch diameter may vary from 25 to 75 mm, and sometimes up to 102 m; the applied
force can vary from 0.3 to 1 kg (Figure 43C).

Rotating knobs that do not require considerable effort or precise movements are used
for precise and rough adjustment of mechanisms. 'mese controls can be easily coded
by color and shape. A collapsible arm can be secured to a knob so that it could be
rotated faster. The knob diameter is varied within a broad range depending on how
many fingers must grasp the knob to rotate it (Figure 431)). he permissible forces
in this case are 0.5-3 kg.

\
Operations in which switching is performed by a forward-backward or lateral motion make
use of levers and handles. levers usually require application of force to move parti-
cular equipment mechanisms. Levers with spherical heads having a 30-75 m diameter
or with pear—shaped handles are recommended (Figure MA) . Permissible forces applied
to levers during their control must not exceed 15 kg for one hand and 25 kg for two
hands (assuming back-and-forth movement). When levers are to be used often. actuating
forces are reduced to 2-4 kg. The amplitude of a lever's mvement must correspond with
the reachable zone of the operator‘s arm; in this case the arc traveled by the lever
must not exceed 90".

"and wheels are used for equipment control and for accurate adjustment (Figure 443) .
It would be desirable to impart a rippled surface to the rim of a hand wheel: the
rim diameter must not exceed 25 m. If a hand wheel is brought into motion by wrist
action, the applied force may be up to 1 kg: if the arm up to the elbow or the entire
arm takes part in the work movement. the force can be up to 4 kg. If a hand wheel
must be turned at high speed, it would be suitable to locate it in such a way that
its axis of rotation would be at a 60-90° angle in relation to the operator. Hand
wheels requiring application of considerable torque would best be located perpendicu-
lar to the operator.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

f @0

Figure 44. Manual Controls: A-w-levers; B—hand wheels

As with other controls, hand wheels that are used especially often should be located
within the optinun work zone.

In addition to manual controls, foot-operated controls can be made to place various
mechanisms and production equipment into operation and to make adjustments. Pedals
are the principal form of foot controls. They are used when sizeable muscle forces
are required (more than 9-13 kg), to reduce the load on the arms. and to achieve
economy of control time when a large number of controls must be manipulated and when
the work does not require considerable adjustment precision.

A designer planning pedals and locating then at the workplace must consider that the
force generated by the leg depends on its position. A seated operator exerts the
greatest force when his leg is extended forward with an obtuse angle at the knee.

If the seated individual is able to force his body against the back of his seat, he
can significantly increase the pushing force of his leg. The force developed de-
creases as the angle at the knee decreases. Maximum force can be developed when the
pedal is located not more than 100 m from the midline of the operator's body. The
pressure the leg can apply decreases as we move farther from the midline (Figure 45).

0 In on no 40 so no 70 on no mo no k9
I_._n__i__. -L_i__.1__L_L__J i7...|__l__.J

 

Figure 45. Change in Pushing Force of leg with Growth in Distance From
Midline

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urn-aunt. use. UNLI

es

 

L97. 2--

Figure 46. Basic ﬁrms of Pedals

Pedals would best be located syunetrically. Bach leg can control not more than two
pedals. A pedal may be depressed by the entire foot. by its middle part or by the
toes (Figure 46).

'me design of a foot pedal should account for the fact that the ankle should not be
turned more than 30° in working position. ‘lhe optimum alplitudu of ankle notions is
within 10-20° above the horizontal and 20-30' below: in this case the pedal stroke
must not exceed 130-l50 m in seated work and 300 an in standing work.

Avoiding pedal control in standing position is recommended, sincu in this case the
weight of the body would have to be shifted to one leg as the pedal is being pressed.

Maintenance of a stable position would require additional muscle effort. As a result
the muscles of the legs and body tire more quickly.

If pedal control in standing position cannot be avoided, the height of the pedal above
the floor must not exceed 150 am. At the end of its stroke. the pedal should be level
with the floor.

'me optimum force applied to a pedal by a standing operator is 10-15 kg. This force
is decreased to 8-3 kg during seated work depending on which part of the foot is
used to depress the pedal.

The pedal width must correspond to the width of the sole (not less than 90 m). 'lhe
minimum length of a pedal used for short periods of time is 60-75 m. If a pedal must
be kept depressed for a long period of time, its length may be 280-300 n. he shape
of the pedal may be square, rectangular or oval; in all cases the pedal surface must
make good contact with the sole. Inpartinq a rippled surface to its surface is
recommended. A special rim is made on its surface to keep the foot from slipping

off of the pedal when considerable force is exerted.

Some Characteristics of. Ergonomic Requirements on the Design of Equipment to be
Operated by Women

Physiological requirements on the design of production equipment are governed by
the characterstics of its use. and they include the confortableness of the work

posture. the amount of effort exerted, the speed and trajectory of work movements
their number per unit time and the characteristics of. intonation interactions.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'rhesc reuuirments are basicallv comon to male and female operators, but ones such

as comfortableness of the work posture, the proportions of workplace dimensions and
forces necessary to perform production operations depend on the anatomical and physio-
logical features peculiar to the sex of the operator. Thus the proportions of work-

place dimensions would differ for men and woun depending on anthropomorphic indica-
tors.

According to anthropological data the height of men and women in the USSR differs
by 11.1 cm (men (M) --167.8, women (HP-156.7), body length with an upstretched arm
differs by 15.7 cm (H—-213.8, H—-198.1). the length of the arm stretched to the side
differs by 6.2 cm (M—-72.3, w--66.1) , the length of the arm stretched forward differs
by 5.7 cm (M—-74.3, Elm-68.6), leg length differs by 6.6 cm (IF-90.1, H--83.5). eye
level differs by 10.1 cm (lb-155.9, W--145.8) and so on. 'lhese rather noticeable

differences would also mean pronounced differences in the proportions of the dimen-
sions of a workplace intended for work while standing.

The same sort of differences between men and women apply to seated work. Body length
differs by 9.8 cm (M—-l30. 9, w--121.1), eye level above the seat differs by 4. 4 cm
(M—-76. 9, "“72. 5) and so on, which has a bearing on the organization of a workplace
for seated work and on determination of the reachable zone and the clearances re-
quired.

According to S. I. Gorshkov's data, cited below, the brakes on wool spinning machines
used to stop the spindle with the purpose of mending broken strands of yarn are
located just 4-6 cm above the knee. however, this slight excess is quite enough to
make it necessary for spinners to raise their knee to this height in order to depress
the brake and mend a broken yarn strand while standing uncomfortably on one leg.

Because the spindle tie rod on spinning machines used to process cotton yarn is
located 5-10 cm below hand level, the standing spinner must incline her body to an
uncomfortable position 60° below the horizontal in order to mendbroken strands.

In cotton production this operation is performed 2000-2500 times in a shift, which
means a significant static load on muscles of the spinner's torso.

'lhe amount of effort exerted by particular muscle groups during use of equipment
must be determined on the basis of dynamometric data. However, these are different
for men and women as well.

The gripping force of the right hand differs for men aid women by 16.4 kg (BF-38.6,
w--22.2), the strength of the right biceps differs by 14.3 (VF-27.9, w--l3.6), the
flexing force of the right hand differs by 6.2 kg (Pk-27.9. W--21.7), the flexing
force of the right thumb differs by 2.9 kg (M--ll.9. w--9.0), standing force differs
by 62.1 kg (M--123.1, w--71.0) and so on. Differences in the one-time weight lifting
limit and in the amount of weight that can be handled within a shift are associated
with these differences in the strength of the muscle groups of men and women. Thus
while the reconnendcd one-time lifting limit for men is 20-30 kg and the shift norm
for weight handling at the level of the work surface is 10—15 tons and at the floor
level is 4-6 tons, the figures for women working under the same conditions are not

more than 40 percent of the figures for men.

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'IIILIAI. use ONLY

'1h..n .qu ullu- r differences between men and women must be accounted for when design-
ing production equipment, since otherwise the physiological requirements on the
proportions of workplace dimensions and on work effort would not be met, resulting
in uncomfortable work postures and in the need for women to exert effort that is too
tiring. Some other characteristics of the ergonomic requirements on the design of
production equipment intended for use by women must also be considered.

These differences between the male and female body are being considered now in the
planning of the "Volzhanka" tractor intended to be driven by women. The dimensions
of this tractor' s cab and the workplace. the locations of the levers and the amount
of force required to operate them, and the zones of visibility are being planned
with a consideration for the indicated characteristics of the female body. These

differences should obviously be considered in the design of many other forms of
equipment as well.

Number of Operations Required in the Use of Production Equipment

The number of operations performed during the use of production equipment is the
most important ergonomic characteristic of the mutual relationships between man and
equipment, and it is an indicator of the heaviness and intensity of the work. How-
ever, there are no substantiated standards applicable to this area today. Nor has
an approach been found to determination of the principle upon which standardization
of this ergonomic indicator should be based. The 'Unified kguirements on Scientific
Organization of Labor" coupiled by the Scientific msearch Institute of Labor (1967)
contain recommendations indicating that the maximum physiologically grounded repeti-
tion of operations is 180 per hour. In this case an operation frequency from 181 to
300 times per hour is said to be high, a frequency from 301 to 600 is said

to be above average, and a frequency more than 600 times

per hour is called very high. An excessive frequency of identical production opera-
tions makes the work monotonous, consequently leading to development of inhibition
in the central nervous system, a decrease in the speed of work novements and a drop
in labor productivity. But these recoumendations are in very considerable conflict
with facts concerning the nunber of Operations performed during the use of different
tvnes of production equipment. Inspection of firmly established facts concerning
the number of operations performed in different production conditions would show
that winders perform 500 operations per hour while servicing winding machines, while
cotton yarn spinners may perform up to 300 or more operations per hour if the fre-
quency of strand breaking is h:31h. Bulldozer and excavator drivers also perform an
enormous quantity of operations. The operator of an excavator supplied with a large
number of control levers moves the latter 12-16 times in a single work cycle (20
seconds) . and more than 15,000 times in a shift, which is equivalent to about 2000
operations in 1 hour of work. According to V. N. Kozlov's data the number of work
movements made by a Ltdctor operator in 1 hour of shift time while plowing exceeds
the recommendations of the Scientific Research Institute of Labor.

Despite the fact that production operations proceed in a strict sequence, the con-
trol consoles of a nunber of machines are still designed in such a way that each
operation must be controlled separately by the operator. This is so even at modern
automated enterprises, for example in automatic tube rolling mills. In such shops,
an operator working the control console of an annual furnace moves levers on the
control console 12 times to feed one billet into a piercing mill. This succession

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of movements is repeated with each of 250 billets processed in 1 hour of work. Thus
the operator of such a console makes a total of up to 3000 repetitive lever move-
ments in 1 hour while simultaneously performing other production operations that
will be discussed in greater detail below. Operators working on wine bottling lines
perform up to 2000-3000 repetitive manual operations per hour. In addition to these
instances in which the actual number of performed operations greatly exceeds the
recommended standards based on the "Unified Requirements on Scientific Organization
of Labor.” cases are known in which it is very difficult to perform much fewer
operations than the nutter suggested by these recomendations. Thus weavers mend
warp strands 50-60 times per hour with great difficulty, even though not more than
35-40 mendings per hour was adopted as the maximal permissible quantity back in 1961
at the First Conference on the Problems of Labor Hygiene and Physiology in Textile
Industry, held in Ivanovo.

Table 18 [missing from this translation) provides a detailed summary of the actual
numbers of repetitive operations associated with different types of production equip-
ment. This great diversity of the actual numbers of operations performed in the
course of different production procedures and their great deviation in both direc-
tions from the standards contained in the ”Unified Requirements on Scientific Organi-
zation of Labor" indicate the need for studying this question and, in particular, the
need for examining the physiological ideas about rate and rhythm typical of an indi-
vidual performing repetitive actions, about the significance of the rate at which
different neural reflex reactions proceed, about the differences in the complexity
and time of different operations encountered in production and about the significance
of these data to determining the permissible number of such operations during the

use of production equipment.

I. “I
ll

 

0'

mo ' mo uoo
" msec

Figure 47. Isotonic Contraction of the Sartorius Muscle in Response
to Different Loads: lebers above the curves indicate
the load, Io-27 mm, temperature 0°. Ordinate-~contraction
magnitude; abscissa--time after application of a single
stimulus (28)

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.-
”"
a’
,

   
 

\ llul

PP.“
900

Figure 48. Rate of 'netanic Contraction as a Function of Load (Given

Equal Initial Length): Ordinate--contraction rate: abscissa--
load (Hill. 1933)

Key:
1. cm/sec
2. gm

Let us first of all examine some of the physiological characteristics of muscle
activity. We should turn our attention first of all to the fact that the duration
of a single muscle contraction is not constant. depending instead primarily on the
size of the load inposed on the muscle (28). We can see from Figure 47 that the
larger the load, the greater is the time between the moment a single stimulus is
applied and the beginning of its isotonic contraction. An increase in the time
between the moment of stimulus application and the beginning of muscle contraction
does not mean an increase in the latent period of the muscle's contraction; instead,
it indicates that the time required to develop tension in the muscle necessary to
surmount the load applied to the muscle is added to the latent period. The greater
the load, the greater is the time, as Figure 47 shows. While at! load of 0.95 gm this
time is about 20 msec, at a load of 12 gm it reaches as much as 200 msec--that is,

a magnitude which becomes a significant factor in the rate of muscle contraction.
'me rate of muscle contraction also depends on the size of the load. As we can see
from Figure 48 the rate of tetanic mscle contraction decreases as the load increases.

According to calculations made by A. V. Hill (1938) this dependence is hyperbolic
and is described by the formula

(P-l-a) (V-l-b) =.- b(I’.-|—a) unconsl.

where V--rate of muscle contraction in the presence of load P; Po--weight at the
limit of the muscle's lifting strength; a and b--asymptotes toward which the branches '
of the hyperbola tend.

For the case of the curve shwn in Figure 48: 6-14.35 gm (357 gm/cmz); b-l.03
cm/sec (0.27 Io/sec); Po=66 gm (here, Io is the resting length of the muscle).

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Physiological data concerning the optimal: rhythm of muscle contraction and its
dependence on the size of the load are of considerable interest. As we know, this

question was studied by Hill. It is presented here as amlified by A. A. Ukhtomskiy
(1954).

Studying initial heat formation, Hill came across the fact that under otherwise
equal experimental conditions the most widely diverse muscles, when stimulated by
different methods, exhibit constancy in the relationship between heat formation and

the product of the length of muscle fibers and their maximum tension. This constancy
is expressed by the formula

II = (11.x,

where H—-heat formation; b--proportionality factor; L--length of muscle fibers;
(--mximum isometric tension.

Because the product Ll represent a muscle's energy of elastic tension--that is, its
mechanical potential, we can write the equation

w. -_- 0.1.1,

where bl--proportionality factor; Ho--muscle's mechanical potential.

Comparing these two expressions, we may conclude that heat formation in a muscle
serves as a measure of not its dynamic work but rather its elastic tension--that is,
its mechanical potential. The energy of a muscle's dynamic work (isotonic contrac-
tion), meanwhile, is a certain fraction of its mechanical potential. Theoretically,
all 100 percent of a muscle's mechanical potential may be used for mechanical work.
For practical purposes, however, part of the mechanical potential is expended to
surmount the muscle's internal friction--that is, its toughness. This fraction

is transformed into heat, and the greater the toughness in the muscle and the
faster the muscle contracts, the greater is this fraction. One can be persuaded by
passive stretching of a muscle that the smaller t1 is--that is, the shorter the
muscle deformation time, the greater is the amount of heat liberated due to stretching.
Representing the coefficient of muscle toughness by L, we get the following expression
for the actual amount of energy realized in the form of mechanical work:

it! =- W." -§-.

Hence we can see that H approaches No as: first, muscle deformation decreases--
that is, as opposition to contraction rises; second, as the toughness coefficient,
which is actually capable of decreasing in response to massage and exercising of
muscles, decreases; third, as the rate of muscle contraction decreases.

We can derive a large amount of new information from these data on the physiological
properties of muscles, and mainly on muscle efficiency. To calculate this efficiency,

we would need to know the total amount of energy released in the muscle in the
period of initial heat formation in response to stimulation. This total should

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consist of: l) mechanical potential #0, to uhich the constant quantity of heat
released by the muscle upon release of tension corresponds: 2) the amount 01’ heat re-
quired to maintain tension for time t, associated with liberation of lactic acid.

(Khartri) and Hill followed the course of total heat formation depending on time of
tension t. It is expressed (Figure 49) as almost linear growth of heat formation

in response to growth in t: the higher the muscle temperature, the faster heat forma-
tion grows, but no matter what the temperature of the muscle, heat formation begins
at the same constant value corresponding to the lowest t. This constant, shown in

Figure 49 equals
I.t

a - 7...!» .

 

0 I

Figure 49. Magnitude of Initial Heat Formation and the Dependence of
Heat Formation on Muscle temperature

Keeping in mind that potential energy developed in a muscle owing to stimulation
exhibits an identical dependence on In, and namely Ho aL'r/é, Hill believes it possible
to physically interpret the constant point of the ordinate's intersection (see

Figure 49) as corresponding to the thermal equivalent of muscle mechanical potential
at maximum tension.

As far as the slope of the line representing the dependence of heat formation on
growth in time t is concerned (see Figure 49), it clearly implies that for every
muscle temperature there is a unique proportion between heat formation associated
with accumulation of lactic acid and the time of this accumulation. Let us call
this proportion (or in this case the slope of the conditional lines drawn) b. Then
the general trend of total initial heat formation would be expressed as a function
of stimulation time in the form of a simple equation for a line passing the

ordinate at point Ho and slope b, which is constant for each temperature:

(irwovl-bl.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It would not be difficult to determine b from the amount of oxygen consumed during
maximum isometric contraction.

Delayed heat formation. which inplicates an entirely different chemical process than

that of initial heat formation. is approximately equal to the latter in a stretched
muscle. Consequently total heat formation in a muscle during stimulation would be:

0—2(W.+w).

'men the ratio of realized energy bl to total heat formation G would be:

h
w “'0' T .
"a "WWI-"5H- )

Certain conclusions can be made from this expression. vaiously as time t decreases

the numerator on the right side decreases, and when Ho -k/t, it becomes zero. On
the other hand as 1: increases the denominator grows, tending toward infinity. This

means that there must a maximuu productivity for each tuthat is, for each rate of
work. such that slower work, and faster work even more so, would inevitably cause a
decline in productivity. Hill determined the factors for man in special experiments:
H= 11.18 kg/m, k (toughness coefficient) -2.7 and b= 5. Then for man, W/G takes the
form of the equation

2:;
W _ nus—T
'0‘ ‘mlﬁ-TN)‘

 

quun‘ 50. Muscle Efficiency and the Dependence of the Optimum on the
Rare of Contraction and the Size of the miscle Force: See

text for explanation

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'I'Iu:l-' .uro: two variables in this equation, ”/0 and L. We plot H/G on the ordinate
and L in the form of a curve (Figure 50) having a critical point with coordinates
1.1/4. The branches of the curve drop downward asymmetrically to either side of
this point. very steeply in the direction of decreasing values of t (that is, in-
creasing speeds) and gently in the direction of increasing values (that is, decreasing
speeds). The coordinates of the critical point (1.1/4) tell us that maximum muscle
productivity corresponds to development of an active process within the muscle once
per second; optimum productivity, meanwhile, is 1/4, or 25 percent. 'lhese calcula-
tions, made by Hill, were confirmed by data obtained by Benedict and Gathcart indi-
cating that an individual does the most productive work on a bicycle when he pushes
the pedals 60-70 times a minute: maximum productivity. in the sense of mechanical work.
has been estimated for man at about 25 percent by former and recent researchers.

Important ccnclusions can be derived about the role of forces in the work of muscles
from the expression for ”/6. We know that when maximum force is exerted, the working
muscle develops tension in all of its fibers, while at submaximum force only a certain
fraction of the fibers contained within the muscles are tensed. Let n be a certain
fraction of muscle fibers, the total being 1. Obviously the mechanical potential for
)1 active fibers would be Mo; let heat formation be 0-2n(ilo+bt); let the loss due

to muscle toughness remain as k/t: that part of the tension energy utilized in the
form of mechanical work would be W-nHo-k/t. uence productivity would be

 

k at k
W .. an. — -’- nIVnm n! n(IV.—- T)
'(i' ' ' Him-TIT = 'ﬁﬂvﬁ-ii)’ = WP:
t
Wo~ 7?,
WWW“)

If for this last equation we plot curves (as we did above) for different )1, we would
get Figure 50--a series of curves with continually decreasing anplitudes and critical
points, and displaced more and more in the direction of greater values of t (in the
direction of slower work) as n--that is, the force applied--decreases. This means
that if lower force is applied in work, the latter is always less productive as well.
As the forces applied decrease, the productivity optimum decreases to slower rates

of work. As forces increase, the productivity optimum rises to higher rates of work.
But even here the most advantageous frequency of at .ive states in a muscle at maximum
force is once per second.

Such are the physiological principles behind our ideas about the most optimum condi-
tions of muscle work, at least in terms of muscle processes taken in isolation.

But because muscles are only one of the elements of man's complex motor apparatus,
there are some unique characteristics in human motor activity, whichwill be examined
below.

The discussion thus far has shown that processes that may influence the rate at which

production operations are performed and the frequency of their repetition occur in
the muscles themselves. Characteristics of nervous system functions have an even

greater influence.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reaction. The duration of the latent period of motor responses is mainly a factor of
the response rate.

greater is the latent period of the response, for example to a visual stimulus. In
this case the increase in the latent period would correspond to the increase in the

The greatest lengthening of the latent period is observed in a choice reaction, where
the subject must determine which stimulus he must react to. In this case the in-
crease in the latent period is lOO~300 msec.

In addition, faster responses are also possible. A decrease in the latent period is
observed in the response to a stimulus preceded by a warning signal, and to a stimulus
that had pieviously been tracked--for example the moving pointer of an instrument or

a light spot, with the reaction beginning when the moving pointer or light spot
reaches a certain position. In both cases the response is faster by about 100 msec.

Thus response time can vary within froad limits depending on the analyzer responsible
for the response on the length of the sensory and motor pathways, on the nature of
the signal, on the need for signal choice, on presence of a warning sign-l and on
some other features of the situation within which the response occurs.

We have been discussing muscular and reflex mechanisms of change in response rate.
It should be kept in mind, however, that tiring. arousal or inhibition and presence
of external influences may also have a actionable effect on human responses. This
will be discussed Specifically in our analy5is of concrete occupational situations.

ﬂhe time of a response also depends on the action within which this response ex-

presses itself and on the portion of the body participating in the response. These
data are shown in Table 19.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f0“ UI'I'IL'IAL Ubl'. ONLY

The trajectories of motor reactions also play a great role in their duration (Table

20) .

Table 19. Dependence of the length of a Response on Its Nature

Nature of msanse

Pressing down with the palm
Paving the fingers
Pressing with the "and
Plexing and extending:

Arms

Legs
Pressing a pedal
Turning, bending the body
Walking (taking a step)

Table 20. Time Spent on Motions Depending on Trajectory

1125 of Motion
Extending am, an
25

50
more than 300

Placing an object
Not in a precise spot
Porcefully, not in a precise spot
With great force
In a precise spot
Porcefully in a precise spot
with great force

Moving an object more than 180°
Pressing on an object
Compressing an object with the fingers

Taking an object that is
Light and easy to grasp
Light but hard to grasp
Light but from among other objects (depending
on dimensions)

Wrapping fingers around an object

Transferring from one hand to the other

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Minimum Response
Time! usec

330
170
720

720
1,330
720
2,000
"loo-1,400

Time Spent .
msec

 

70
140
210

360
720
1 , 800
550
900

2. 300
210
720
720

70
140

300-800
200
200
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Taking apart
Bffortlessly 180
With slight force 360
With significant force ' 1,100
Pressing
Witl. the toe 360
with the foot 720
Taking a step sideways without turning 7004.400
Turning the body
While sitting 720
with a step to the side 700-l.400
Bending over 1,000
Unbending 1.000
sitting down 1,400
Standing up -z',aoo
Taking a step 75—80 cm long ’ 600

._’__—-—-
note: The time indicated in all of these exanples does not
include the latent period of the reaction: only the time

spent on the notion itself is considered.

These data can be supplemented by the results of special experimnts performed at
the ergonomics laboratory of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences Institute of Labor
Hygiene and Occupational Diseases by S. I. Gorshkov. G. I. Barkhash and B. P.
Shardakova. The dependence between the duration of movements and the number of
joints participating in the movements was studied in these experiments. The experi—
ments are diagramd in Figure 51. In Figure 51A, the diagram labeled 1 shows the
joints of the human arn labeled as follows: a-vindex finger, b-ehand, Ic--forearn,
d—-upper arm, e--torso. This figure also shade the starting position of the are for
determining initial latent time. The latter was determined for a subject responding
to a light or sound stimulus by depressing the key of a reflexameter with his index
finger with barely noticeable force. Position 2 in Figure 51A shows that in this
case the initial position for determining the reaction tine was with the index finger
raised as high as possible above the surface of the reflexoseter's key. In position 3

the entire hand was initially raised as high as possible, in position 4 the entire
forearm was raised as high as possible, in position 5 the entire arm as far as the
shoulder joint was raised to the maxim. and in position 6 the entire arm was raised
at the shoulder joint as high as possible with the entire body tilted back. In all
cases the subject had to quickly depress the reflexoneter key with his index finger.

In Figure 513 the diagram labeled 1 shows the joints of the human leg, labeled as
follows: a—-big toe. b--foot, c--10wer leg. d--thigh. e--torso. The initial latent

time of the reaction to light and sound was determined in position 1 with the subject
depressing the reflexonleter key with his big toe with barely noticeable pressure.

In position 2 the starting position for determining reaction time was with the big

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI Ul‘flklhh USE UI‘LI

 

A
, . ,-/”:‘
I z
I I
. [I ° 5 ,’ 8
.' , c /
I I
I 9/
l I
6 J 3
a ‘ 9
" 0
‘ 0
3 \
\
\
‘o

 

Figure 51. Experiments Conducted to Study the Dependence of. Latent Time
on Distance Traveled by Joints :' See text for explanation of
positions 1-6. Broken curves show notion trajectories (A-B)

toe raised as high up as possible above the key, in position 3 the entire foot was
raised to the maximum, in position 4 the lower leg was raised as high as possible,
in position 5 the thigh was raised to the maximum, and in position 6 the entire leg
was raised as high as possible at the hip joint with the torso tilted back. The
results are shown in Table 21.

As we can see from these data, the time of the motor reaction increases as the
number of joints participating in the mvenent increases. Thus for exalple, if

the index finger is raised the reaction time to light is raised by 36 me, the
reaction time to sound is raised by 29 usec, and the time of the choice reaction is
raised by 29 msec--that is, it takes 29-36 nsec to move the raised index finger down

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 21. Dependence of Motor Reaction Tim (mec) on the Nature of the Motor

 

component
(1) ______._(£L"'"L_—
"7:..." on car (3)

 

 

 

u an (”I modem (5)

”t 5|) Man I 9 Man I 3» usual [I

 

mm- '
I. “61:9 ‘7) 15816 22516
‘2. 2221-5 .3). l--2 19713 (29. [—2 25414 Cp. 1—2
<0.01 <0.00I <0,0|
I. 2.10% Cp.2--3 21116 (tp.2--3 276:9.) Cp. 2-4!
<0.02 . <0.02 <o.or.
4. my; (:p.3 4 43424 (2p..1 4 506;:l5 Cp. 3—4
<0.00l <01!!! <0.00|
(mum:
I. 2l0t|l 18510 244:6
2 26618 Cp. 1 -2 25013 Cp. 1—2 2981-4 Cp. 1—2
<0.01 <0.001 <0.001
Key:
1. Positions (see Figure 51) 5. choice
2. Reactions 6. Arm
3. To light 7. Avg.
4. To sound 8. leg

to the reflexometer key. The increase in time of moveunt of the tip of the index
finger to the reflexometer key with the hand raised to the maximum is 53 me in
response to light. 49 msec in response to sound and 50 msec in the choice reaction--
that is, it varies within 49-53 msec. The increase in time of movement of the tip
of the index finger to the reflenometer key with the forearm raised as high as
possible is 293 msec in response to light, 266 msec in response to sound and 281
msec in the choice reaction--that is, it varies within 266-293 msec. If we assume

that the finger travels S a: when it is raised as high as possible above the reflex—
ometer key, in this case it would take

266 (293)

40 - 6 (7) mec

[or the finger to travel 1 cm. These data are doubtlessly of great interest to
ergonomic evaluation of movements.

The maximum possible frequency of movement of specific joints and body parts depends
on the duration of movements (Table 22).

liavinq analyzed all factors influencing the duration and speed of particular hman
motor reactions, we can generalize all of these data with the following equation:

T0=tr+tml

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where Toutotal duration of the motor act; tr-reaction latent time: tnr-time of
movement itself. Both components may be changed to a certain extent, as was discussed

above, and this change represents that reserve which may be used to make movements
more efficient.

Table 22. maximum Possible Movement Frequency
Maximum Frequency

Nature of Movements Per Minute

Applying pressure with the palm 180
Moving the fingers 360
Pressing with the hand 80
Flexing and extending

The arms 80

The legs 45
Pressing a pedal 80
Turning, bending the body over 30
Walking (depending on length of step) 40-80

It is obvious from this that the standard suggested by the Scientific Research
Institute oF Tabor for the number of permissible repeated operations can be viewed
only as roughly tentative. There obviously cannot be just a single standard;.there
must be several of them depending on the nature of movements used in the given pro-
duction operation. At the same time it is obvious that creating this standard is
one of Lhé pressing tasks of ergonomics.

characteristics of Informational Interaction During the Use of Production Equipment

As was discussed earlier, informational interaction between an operator and his
machine, being a source of production information, consists of the perception,
memorization and processing of information, and response formation.

Attention. which can be described as the orientation of consciousness upon a certain
circle of phenomena or actions, has great significance to information perception.
Attention can be described from a physiological standpoint as arousal of a certain
group of centers and inhibition of neighboring ones. In this sense the physiological
basis of attention is very close to A. A. Ukhtomskiy's dominant. when a pronounced
dominant is present, the stimulus to perceive certain information is so high that
attention becomes selective. A sleeping mother who is not awakened by cannonfire

wakes instantly to the quiet crying of her sick infant.
Attention is distinguished as voluntary, when it is actively focused on something,

and involuntary, when a certain suddenly arising event attracts cur attention. The
main properties of attention are its stability or is diffuseness. The span of

126

FOR 0FT1CJAI.USE¢)NLY
FOR ()I-‘l-‘II'IAI. USI-Z ONLY '

of stable attention may be long, as happens in interesting or easy work, or short
when the work is uninteresting or hard. aosner (86) believes that stabilization

is especially important to operations associated with seeking faults in yarn or
fabric. or monitoring the apparatus of an electric power plant with a control console.
Personnel performing such operations may experience a decrease in their attention,

or they may even fall asleep at the workplace. Investigation of the attention of
operators watching for signals to appear revealed that the degree to which attention
is concentrated, as determined from the number of missed--that is, unnoticed--signals,
clearly decreases with the 15th minute of observation and reaches a minimum at about
the 45th minute, after which it stabilizes at this low level (with about 25-35 per-
cent of the signal going unnoticed). The distribution of attention also has great
significance. Practice has shown that work with banked machine tools and the work

of transport drivers and air traffic controllers require a capability for distributing
attention among many objects simultaneously. Also significant, in addition to the
distribution of attention, is switching of attention, where special signals cause

the attention to be switched from one object to another, as happens in the work of
an operator at a control console.

Figure 52 shows how the pilot of a piston-engined training airplane distributes

and switches his attention (K. K. Platonov, 1970). According to B. A. Yakubov's
data (1970) the number of eye and head movements and, consequently, the number of
times the attention is switched is many times lower for experienced pilots than for
less-experienced pilots in the same flight conditions, as can be seen from Table 23.

Ana- union!

  

(l

(2’ illusion-OI 640906!

(3 _V_-anann mom

   

(4 VIIIJAIOM cancel:
. "'hbaﬂhﬁf‘
(: Queeuesneg-u
(6 Ma nun-u- "WC
(7 ' "“Tﬂéﬁréi
(8 . w-‘JquvP
(9 l'a‘m-uu'mu-ulp

n a. hull 3m: lmuhuému
IH'N.

Figure 52. Movement of Pilot's care in Horizontal Plight: Numbers indicate
gaze fixation time in hundredths or seconds (Yu. A. Petrov,
K. K. Platonov, A. P. Pospelov, 1954). Observation time is

30 seconds
Key:
1. Artificial horizon 6. Magnetic compass
2. Vertical speed 7. Radio compass
3. Turn indicator 8. Exhaust thermometer
4. Air speed indicator 9. Radio altimeter
5. Barometric altimeter 10. Looking at other than the instrument

panel

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR Ol-ML'IAL USE UNLY

Table 23. Motion Picture Photography of the Eyes and Movements of an Individual
in Flight (B. A. Yakubov, 1970)

 

 

Pilot's Filming Number of Movements
Class Time Eyes . Head
lst 14 min 08 sec 12 5
3d 17 min 50 sec 172 54

Attention volume-~that is, the number ’of objects enbraced by the attention simul-
taneously--has great significance. Research has shown that attention volume may be
equal to a maximum of four to six objects, simultaneously eubraced by the attention.
However, the literacy level has great significance to what is defined as the object.
To an illiterate person, every letter of a word is an independent object, while to
a literate person whole words rather than letters are objects of attention.

Interpreting the individual as a comunication channel with stinuli at the inputs
and responses at the outputs, and analyzing reactions from the standpoint of
information transmission rate, the well known English psychologist G. A. Miller
(1956) came to the conclusion that the volume of direct perception does not depend
on the quantity of information in the isolated stimlus, being determined instead
by the length of the series of units presented, the limit of which is 7:2. mm
premise is known in psychology as Miller's law. Many authors have measured the
volume of information reproduction using binary numbers, decimal numbers, individual
letters of the alphabet, syllables, one-syllable words not associated in meaning,
and shape. They all obtained data falling within the limits of Miller's law. When
presented once, an individual is capable of memorizing and recalling an average of
nine binary numbers, eight decimal numbers, seven letters of the alphabet, seven
shapes and five one-syllable words.

It was interesting to clarify, however, exactly what would happen when the series

of presented information exceeded Miller's law, andto trace the dynamics of accompany-
ing absolute information recall and the volume of relative information recall. This
work was done by s. l. Gorshkov, N. A. Kokhanova and L. A. Krastina (1967).

They used two types of visual stimuli: Individual words and figures not associated
in meaning but grouped together into sets, beginning with six and ending with 30
words and figures. An exanple of a set of figures and words is shown in Figure 53.

One set of words and figures was. shown successively to a group of five to eight sub-
jects, who were told to memrize them. Imediately after the showing all subjects
wrote down the words or drew the figures.

than five words or figures is recalled without error. Just by increasing the size of
a set to six stimuli, we can cause a 13-17 percent frequency of recall error in the
case of words and a 4-10 percent error in the case of figures. As the number of
stimuli in a set increases, this error grows, attaining a maximum of 35-48 percent
with 15 words and 6-17 percent with 15 figures. He can see on comparing sets con-
taining identical quantities of words and figures that the quantity of recalled

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘l-‘K'IM. USE ONLY

 

. 1;
2'1“ [wont-e41- )
EéL-o» We» a )
1mm: lion-m
«none III-nan. 15
9”:ku "nu-ml no 8(16)
mogul-l- Cum
Rampant l'aduu
9 mus-no thus-Inna.“
( (”Cum M90101.h((2 )

Figure 53. Sets of Figures and Words Used in the Study. Bach Figure and
Each Word Was Presented Individually

Key :
l. Microscope 11. Train
2 . POg 12. Heroism
3 . People 13. Freedom
4 . Art 14. umber
5 . Milk 15. Life
6. Source 16. Journey
7. Hypertension 17. Station
a, Repetition 18. Work
9. Continuation l9 . Linearity
lo . Advice 20. Benefactor

figures is always significantly greater than the quantity of recalled words. Be-
ginning with a set of 15 stimuli, absolute recall of both words and figures grows
(Figure 54) . reaching 57-68 percent for words in a set of 30 stimuli and 95-98 per-
cent for figures. In this case the percentage of recalled figures grows faster than
the percentage of recalled words. This property may be capitalized on when choosing

a method by which to present information: Visual information contained in figures
is memorized better than that represented by written words.

Analysis of relative recall of words and figures showed that relative recall per-

sists even after the limit of absolute recall is very much exceeded. By increasing
the number of stimuli in a set, we in a sense stimulate recall of a larger volume of
information. The possibility our brain has for receiving and recalling information,

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-HCML Ubli ONLY

when it is presented in a large volune, may be capitalized on successfully both in
training and in production activity. The value of this technique increases signi-
ficantly in connection with the possibility for reducing error in repeat experiments
involving the perception and recall of large quantities of visual stimuli.

The obtained data, indicating that the volume of information recalled increases as

the volume of information presented increases, may enjoy application in ergonomic
organization of signal information at control consoles, and in industrial safety.

Similar data were published by S. I. Bogarova in 1977.

The time of information presentation--that is, the time intonation is allowed to
affect human senses prior to its recognition--has great significance to its percep-
tion. As had been noted earlier, this time can be determined with a tachistoscope
(see above).

a

In addition we (10) studied the significance the total volume 'of the information
field or the total number of numerical symbols within it, the linear dimension of

the displayed figure and the nature and "strategy" of visual search have to percep-
tion of information and to the successfulness of visual search. The stimuli we
developed for this purpose were square nutter tables (Figure 55) with three density
1evels--5, 10 and 25 numerical stimuli, which were in turn subdivided into three
types depending on the linear dimensions of the numbers--5, 10 and 15 m. The in-
formation field consisted of four tables of the same kind arranged in pairs (two above,
two below); in one variant the subject was allowed to search for the necessary nun-
bers without restrictions, while in the other he had to inspect each of the four

square tables successively and independently.

In

7" .7
r.
.,
..r=--'-- "
I I - I l I I I..I I..I.I I.!.._-
b I. I ll ewl nun-amnion

Figure 54. Nature of Absolute mcall of words and Figures in the Presence
of a Constantly Increasing Hunter of Signals: l--figures:
2--words; ordinate-mmber of correctly recalled elements;

abscissa--number of elements in a set

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 55. Table Used to Determine Dependence of Speed and Precision
of Information Search on the Dimension of Numerical Stimuli

and on Their Nuuber (Bach Table Represents a Pburth of the
Information Field)

The research established that the average search time (Table 24) and the mnber of
errors grow significantly with an increase in the nunber of nunerical stimuli in
the information field; consequently the time and precision of search are a function

of the total number of signals and the volume of information in the information
field.

Next we discovered a dependence between search time and precision and the linear
dimensions of numerical stimuli in the table, expressing itself as growth in the
speed and precision of search with growth in linear symbol dimensions. In other

131

l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR UI'HCMI. USE ONLY

Table 24. Dependence of Information Search Time and Precision on the Linear
Dimensions of Signals, on Their Number in the Information Field and

on the Nature of Search

""1)

‘ «931. :1:-::.:':;:;::."::.:':.: (e) mu- m...»

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

...‘.?::.:.“'."’-,. 9:231. _ “31'1"“- __ ___'._°°‘_‘Z‘_L_
..::.?.%"“.'..‘32‘.'. ’11:? (4) “$32.... 4) A? ..
In 'W“'- ‘ own-Id“ ' '“- ‘ owl-Goa
5 5 I8.8 0,2 I035 0.2:!
to I32 0.! I02 0J0
IS 10.0 0.05 7.2 0.2
II) 5 22.0 0.36 IHJ 0.3
m 2|,» 0,30 15.6 0.0
If: 20,3 0.! 11.! 0.2
I5 5 «J 011*. 25.1 0.12
I" 42,2 Lla 34.8 0.52
I 5 40.5 0.65 l9,0 0.06
Key:
1. Nunber of signals in one 4. Time, sec
quarter of information field 5. Nuﬂaer of errors
2. Linear syubol dimensions, in 6. Searching the entire field
3. Searching each fourth of in- without restrictions

formation field successively

words we discovered these parameters to be dependent on the distinguishing character-
istics of the signal. However, the mater of signals in the information field is
found to have greater influence. Thus while decreasing the linear dimensions of

the numerical stimuli by a factor of three caused the search tine to increase from
40.5 to 44.1 see (by 9 percent), increasing the quantity of stimuli by a factor of
five caused the search time to increase from 13.8 to 44.1 sec (by 300 percent), or
in the other variant from 10 to 40.5 sec--that is, by a factor of four.

Search precision and primarily its speed increase significantly with unrestricted

search for the needed signal in the information field. Unrestricted search was
found to be more effective. The precision and accuracy with which information is

received in these cases depends to a significant extent on the perception 'strategy,‘
which is defined mainly by the route taken or by the sequence in which the objects
are perceived, and by the way the algorithm is optimized. Organizing the spatial
and temporal sequence of seaming the information field should be viewed as one of
the effective wave for optimizing information input (B. F. tomv). Apparently there
are “hidden reserves“ for increasing the operator's "capacity" in this direction. But

at the same time when the operator's activity is subordinated to rigid, unanbiguous
rules, conditions are created which may keep the operator from realizing his possi-

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Many researchers have come to such a conclusion. 'mus Hacker (80) conducted interest-
ing research that led to the conclusion that activity must be planned in such a

way as to ensure, figuratively speaking, a certain nunber of degrees of freedom to
the operator in the performance of this activity. An indirect confirmation of this
conclusion can be found in data of the west German flight safety service, which
established that one of the reasons for accidents in the air is "standardization

of pilot thinking" (3. 1’. iomov, 1977).

P. K. Anokhin provides the fullest possible description of the physiological
mechanisms associated with perception of particular signals.

Anokhin came up with his ideas about afferent synthesis with the purpose of revealing,
to the fullest extent possible, the way information is received and the conditions
responsible for formation of conditioned reflex activity, including that associated
with work. I. P. Pavlov himself felt that the afferent division of the nervous
system played the central role in reflex formation. The dominant role played by

the afferent function is also confirmed by morphological data, according to which

the quantity of afferent fibers is five to six times greater than the quantity of
efferent fibers. This vast afferent system allows the organism to receive detailed
information on events occurring both within and without the organism.

Anokhin classifies different afferent influences in relation to their significance
to formation of the organism's behavioral act in the following way: situational,
triggering, and afferent feedback. Situational afferentation is defined as the sum
total of all external influences affecting the organism during formation of reflex
activity, including that associated with work. When afferentation is defined in this
way, it should include the sanitary and hygienic conditions of the workplace, the
organization of the workplace itself, all production csthetics, the work posture
and so on. All of these afferent influences, which make up the situation within
which labor proceeds, significantly influence its course. If we use the latent
time of the auditory-motor reaction as a performance indicator, then intense pro-
duction noise may dramatically increase this time, as a result of which the speed
with which work operations are performed would be reduced significantly. An un-
comfortable work posture may have a similar affect. Thus according to data obtained
by Gorshkov and Kalinina (17) in research on the work of spinners, an uncomfortable
work posture associated with mending broken yarn strands, which happens l,500-2,000
times per shift, reduces the strength of muscles maintaining an erect posture by
10-15 percent, and endurance by 20-30 percent.

0n the other hand presence of normal sanitary and hygienic conditions, compliance
with the rules of production csthetics and proper organization of the workplace
create situational afferentation which promotes perception of the largest volume of
production information and the greatest speed of work operations while concurrently
maintaining high performance for a long period of time. Thus for example, use of
ear protection by weavers to reduce the effects of noise from the looms decreases
the latent time from 308 msec without ear protection to 255 msec; faster performance

of work operations is another result. Music broadcasts also help to create favorable
situational afferentation.

From this point of view the nature of situational afferentation acquires significance
as an important indicator of the sanitary~hygienic conditions, production esthetics
and real scientific organization of labor. Hence it follows that establishment of

133
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

situational affercntation at a level favoring effective perception of production
information and high performance is an imrtant task of labor physiology and
ergonomics.

111s second form of afferentation involved in afferent synthesis is so-called
triggering afferentation; it is defined as a stimulus which, by releasing an
arousal mechanism in the central nervous system, causes arisal of a reflex act

and, if the labor is the topic of conversation, a work act. In work, triggering
afferentation may be represented by a command, some sort of signal, a time-triggered
reflex and so on. Because the intensity and expressiveness of a reflex act depend
to a greater extent on the intensity and expressiveness of the afferent triggering
effect, by regulating the latter we could significantly regulate the reflex act
itself. The significance of regulating triggering afferentation in work may be
demonstrated by the following examples. 1f rhythmical supplementary signals, for
example acoustic or light signals, were to be transmitted during performance of
some sort of work act, operating as triggering afferentation, these signals would
make the work more rhythmical, thus significantly facilitating its performance, as
can be judged from the coupression seen on electromyograms--that is, from the de-
crease in duration of the electric activity of working muscles. Such data have been
cited many times, particularly in the works of s. A. Kosilov, N. N. Khavkina, 2. M.
Zolina and other researchers.

Labor physiologists have studied triggering afferentation in a nusber of production
experiments: Using special signals, they periodically informed their subjects about
their progress in a production assignment. 'mese signals also made the work more
rhythmical and raised its productivity. It is also known that when triggering
afferentation is expressed in the form of some sort of signal (light, sound, appear-
ance of the next part on a conveyor belt and so on), the way the corresponding work
act is performed will depend on the intelligibility of the signal and on its in-

tensity. Thus by adding a supplementary acoustic or light signal indicating
appearance of the next part on a conveyor belt, we can improve the coordination of

work on the conveyor.

It is also known that a supplementary light signal in the location of a loom that has
stopped or in the zone of a broken strand on spinning, warping and other machines
promotes faster mending and start-up (15).

Many more examples can be cited to show the great significance of triggering
afferentation and its significance to a reflex act, including a work-associated
act.

In particular, our research was aimed at studying not only triggering afferentation
but also supplementary preliminary afferentation in relation to the readiness of
central and neuromotor structures, the effectiveness of activity and information
interaction in a “man-machine“ system (9~ll,15; I. H. Volkova, B. H. Kulusbetov,
1974; I. M. Volkova, 1978: I. H. Volkova, s. I. Gorshkov, 1978).

Automation of different industrial sectors is increasing the importance of sensory
and mental Emotions in work associated with observation, signal anticipation,

information retrieval and so on. In this situation, preparedness for emergency
and effective actions, which are among the dominant factors defining the reliability

of a ”man-machine" system must be maintained.

134
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An operator's activity would be tense and uneconomical if he had to maintain a
necessary state of readiness for a long period of time (by means of nonspecific
activation ensuring a high level of functional mobilization). It was in this
connection that we studied one of the factors optimizing the psychophysiological
conditions and raising the effectiveness of the operator's work functions and his
functional comfort-~the influence of supplementary afferentation brought into motion
by stimuli preceding the triggering signal (by 0.5-15 see). In addition (using a
“Nihon Kohden” unit) we studied the optimum anticipation time of a supplementary
afferent influence, and the way a state of readiness and attention, viewed as a
psychoneural.process,affects electric activity in the central nervous system and
the neuromotor apparatus.

The research showed that when supplementary stimuli (sound or light) are included

in the experimental model prior to a signal triggering sensomotor activity, the
central and neuromotor apparatus are pretuned (Figure 56). This pretuning, this
readiness for action manifested itself as a shortening of the latent time of the
motor response by 30-50 msec (Figure 57), as an increase in the level of activation
(according to EEG data) predominantly in the precentral region, as a decrease in this
level in the temporal region coupled with a simultaneous increase in the total energy
of the 5- and e-rhythms and less so of the 8-rhythm and a decrease in the a—rhythms
of the occipital region, as arisal of intentional tonic sue activity in the preliminary
phase, and as a shortening of the time of bioelectric activity of muscles in the right
hand responding to the triggering signal (Figure 58). In this case the latent time
of preliminary bioelectric activity of the indicated muscles clearly increases as

the interval between the preliminary and triggering stimuli grows (Figure 59).
However, such a direct dependence between growth in the interstimulus interval and
the latent time of the response is absent. At the same time, as growth occurs in

the latent time of preliminary BHG activity, which in a sense coordinates itself with
the moment of the triggering reaction, the amplitude and frequency of oscillations
increase in parallel, indicating that postponement of an intentional reaction corre-
lates with growth in its intensity (Table 25). This is obviously a case of engagement
at the mechanisms of probabilistic prediction of events, of prediction of the moment
of their occurrence in time, permitting the operator to reduce his psychophysiological
attention, distributing his attention more efficiently and raising his functional
effectiveness.

Research showed that the excitability of cortical and neuromotor structures and the
degree of functional mobilization depend on the interval between the supplementary
and triggering stimuli, and that it is phasal in nature. Optimum anticipatory inter-
vals were 2 sec for the flexor of the right index finger, 3 sec for the extensor
and 7 sec for both muscles moving the right index finger, while 1, 5 and 15 sec were
found to be the least optimum. In this case the response to light was shorter and
the response to sound was longer.

Addition of supplementary signals in another type of activity of greater complexity--
information retrieval--reduces retrieval time by an average of 1.2-1.5 sec (20-25
percent) and the mistakes made by 56—78 percent--that is, by 2.5—4 times. It was
found in this case that 5 sec was the optimum anticipatory time of the supplementary

signal and that 10 sec was less acceptable (Table 26). Consequently the optimum
“anticipatory” intervals differ in relation to different forms of activity, and

they are apparently specific to each type of activity.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

,LLL+LF. H H c
"¢‘Lf*f" 4ﬁﬁagv
M ‘« Eiiim: -
'1 ii a Inna-u: I
la . m IIIII$=I 5%
;. ~ nﬁiiii~=ﬁﬁ~i
'“.'Nu, Egegﬂﬂ-wuan”
T, I ll alﬂﬂllﬂlﬂ
-n-.i:.:nz.ina::=::
:3. : «assumes-MM-
!!.!-!!.!!!!!:!2
S TEE L f—s‘ec

Figure 56. Electrographic Expression of the State of Readiness in the
Preliminary Interval: 1-4186 of temporal region of left hemis-
phere; lib-EEG of motor region of left hemisphere: 11-4 ,
Iz--0, 13-41. Il."8 , 15--8 2: principal EEG rhythms of the
temporal region; III-4, 112--6, Hana, II..--B, 115-62:
main EEG rhythns of the motor area; III-~EHG recorded from
flexor of right index finger: IV--Em recorded from extensor
of right index finger; V--BKG; VI--integral bioelectric
activity; VIP-SR; VIII--stimulation marks: Supreliminary
stimulus: Ir-triggering stimulus

We believe that the observed phasal activity reflects a fundamental biological

law, according to which the nature of changes in the organism's reaction is governed
by quantitative changer-by the 'anticipatory" time in this case, while the modality
and specific features of the stiaulus determine the level and absolute value of the
reaction.

During retrieva1--that is, during performance of a required assignment, the BEG
rhythms of different regions of the brain undergo complex alteration. he revealed
unidirectional changes in the bioelectric activity of frontal (the most pronounced)
and occipital regions of the brain: As the subject proceeded on his required assign-
ment, electric activity exhibited a higher level of integration, with the exception
of the a-rhythm, the level of which decreased. At the same time in the precentral
region, which differed in the direction of changes occurring, not only the 0- but
also the 31- and Bz-rhythms decreased, while the total energy of the 6- and @- rhythms
concurrently increased. This may be interpreted as a sign of a decrease in functional
possibilities, a reduction of excitability in the precentral region, which does not
participate in regulation of complex mental activity, and an increase in activation

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.Iull

WK)
'1‘”)
700 ‘
3'50 -
240
3210
77“ '

1m

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   

'100 '
D00
:00

I10 ~

IIIO
0 2- I 7 3

Figure S7. Dynamics of the Latent Time of Responses of the flexor and
thensor to a Single Triggering Stimulus and to a stimulus
Preceded by Preliminary Signals, Depending on Signal
Modality and the Interval Between Signals: A-- flexor;
B--extensor; l--light-light; 2--sound-light; 3--sound-sound:
4--light-sound; ordinateumotor response latent time, msec;
abscissa--interval between preliminary and starting stimuli,
sec; broken line in upper part of figure indicates latent
time of response to sound; broken line in lower part indi-
cates latent time in response to light

of mainly the frontal and then the occipital regions of the cerebral cortex, which

do take a direct part in psychosensory activity and in performance of logical opera-
tions.

Such a dramatic difference in the directions taken by changes in the EEG rhythms

within the brain regions analyzed was not revealed when a preliminary signal was
transmitted at the time the subject was in a state of readiness. An increase in

activation was observed in the precentral region in this case as well: Here again,
the conditions of the experiment were such that the neuromotor apparatus was brought
to a state of readiness, as was manifested on the EEG in the form of intentional,
tonic activity. When the central nervous system was in its stage of readiness--when
it was mobilized--the total electric activity of the main EEG rhythms, except the
é-rhythm, was typically higher, while in the stage of most effective search the inte-
gral level of the 5-rhythm increased as well. It was found that the direction of
changes in the 6-rhythm occurring in the stage of readiness and in the stage of
information retrieval was opposite. Perhaps in this case the G—rhythm reflects the
informational component of the mental act and carries the information load.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN!“ \II‘I'I‘ INL \h‘l‘a \Il‘hl

 

.130 I90
:00
?90
no
8 + L
750 I60
I50 -
210
MO /\
I'm mu 1, 4. L
5 +5
_.I__| ”1...: . _LJ..
usmu. 15,0.5

Figure 58. Time of are [espouac m. “cm; ”Br-Annulg on nullity of
signals and the Interval Between Thea: Ordinetenzm duration,

usec: ebeciesa--intetvale between preliminary and triggering
stimuli. sec

mum

uum
I'm"
MI)"

I900

A
H

GS. men n:

IOOO

p
a

"MI

000

4 "0

 

'Jl)"

._a_.._|._ ...-l__i.—_A———:.__.A_L——.
05 I 2 3 6 7 I0 I.

“I'M.“ G (2)

Figure 59. Dynamics of the Latent Time of thensor Intention Depending on
Modality of Signals and Intervals between Them: l--light-light;
2--sound-light; 3--red light-sound: 4-sound-sound

Key:
1. Latent tine, msec 2. Interval, sec

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 25. Frequency and Amplitude of Intentional Activity Depending on Modality
of Stimli and Interval Between Then

  
 

 

 

  

 

(2) Cuﬂmu (3! Putnam-s
(1) _ (1L—
Munnuocnv 2...”; .33}: . .331". c .n. .3. “$23.- ‘

_______________________._

0 0
3- l myx I 0 0
y (7) 5 6.3 ' 24 6.0 20.8
10 1.5 81 0.2 2H
l5 “1.0 31.0 1.6 26.2
Cnrrlcucr l 0 0 69 260
(8) 5 6,0 20,6 7,0 ﬂu}
H) 6.0 3H 1.0 “29.0
If: 0 0 (L3 30.0
Kparuuﬂ act I 0 0 5.0 2“,
anyx
(9) 5 1.0 25.2 8.0 28.8
N) 1.7 30.6 7.5 26.0
15 9.0 (".0 12.0 38.0
______________———————-—
____.__—
Kay:
1. Modality 6. Frequency, sec
2. Interval, sec 7. Sound 4» sound
3' Flcxor 8. Light + light
4. Extensor 9. ”d light + sound

5. Amplitude, uv

Table 26. Dynamics of change in Visual Search Time and Errors, Based on

(Gryunbaum's) Table. in the Presence of Supplementary Atterentation
and without It

————tl$-———_(-3-‘y—————

  

 

 

 

 

 

(1) I'm: no- C nun-en amount-venue! uneven-mm
"min In e(5)
p"... , venu- :-
pyf-uz-"gu .W' ———'
unna- “1"”
' ' "“ M m T p Mn- 1’ l'
Mun
:aﬂpm

noncxa.c 6.33:0.24 ‘.87:t0,36 3.3 <o.o2 5.1454150 2.2 <o.os
"bnmﬂxu uni-2.2: 2.00:0.“ 3.0 <om $0010.60 2.2 <o.os

 

Key:
1. mcorded indicators 5. In 10 sec
2. without additional afferentation 6. Search time, sec

3. With supplementary afferentation 7. Errors
4. In 5 sec

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f0“ UI‘I'IKJAL UDI'. UNLI

Of interest is the fact that when information retrieval is most successful (when the
anticipatory time of the supplementary signal is 5 see), the integral level of the
total energy of the analyzed frequency is higher than the level observed in the
readiness stage: on the other hand when information retrieval is less successful
(with an anticipatory interval of 10 sec). the integral level is lower. Moreover
when retrieval was most effective and. equally so, more complex, the total energy
of the main frequencies (especially the 6-, 0- andB-rhythms) increased more signi-
ficantly than when it was less effective or simpler.

And finally, while the level of activation increased in both the frontal and occipi—
tal regions when retrieval was more successful, when it was less successful this
increase was typical of only the frontal points of contact, with activation decreasing
in the occipital region. Apparently in the latter case the coherence of the poten-
tials recorded from the frontal and visual regions of the cortex decrease signifi-
cantly, especially in relation to rhythms of the B— and O—ranges.

The distinct relationship existing between the higher 0— and especially 6-rhythms on
the background of pronounced high frequency B-activity and the greatest successful-
ness and productivity of retrieval provides the grounds for hypothesizing that this
increase in the noted BEG components is a correlate of effective mental activity
(9).

Moreover it was demonstrated that in other types of activity as well, in which higher

mental functions dominate, the level of activation of cortical structures and the
degree of functional readiness also depend on the size of the interval between the

supplementary and triggering stimuli.

Anokhin's functional system theory (2.3) can be used as the starting point for re-
vealing the mechanism behind the state of readiness created by supplementary afferen-
tation. and its functional structure. According to this theory the interval between
a stimulus "triggering" some sort of activity, for example information retrieval,

and the response~-that is, completion of retrieval, must be when afferent synthesis
(predetermination) and decision making occur: these processes are systemic in nature,
and they require simultaneous-~and not successive-~activity of elements taking part
in these processes. In this case afferent synthesis may be interpreted as conver-
gence of different types of information at the same integrative neurons. Bfferent-
afferent conversion, which was found to play an important role in prediction of the
mmnofuuuw(mx.mﬁMmlWM,newunnymmmumg memuuw
at the output of these cells reflects. in processed form, integration of afferent
influences. Thus by tuning neurons to a state of higher excitability, by raising

the reactivity of neuron systems, a preliminary stimulus (information 1) promotes
more successful afferent-efferent integration: next, the triggering stimulus (infor-
mation 2) ”starts up" a particular system of mutual relationships between different

structures that had already come into being prior to this action in the form of
"preliminary integration” (71,72; P. K. Anokhin, 1949).

Thus our results provide the grounds for suggesting that a state of readiness for
activity, or ”anticipation," which is associated with higher reactivity of neuron

systems, promotes successful afferent-efferent integration, and that it may be used
to develop the criteria by which to evaluate functional mobilization and mental

tension.
140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

we believe thattheobtained data on the dynamics of cortical EEG rhythms and of the
ENG activity of working muscles, as well as the successfulness of performing different
forms of activity and their mutual associations, both without supplementary afferent
stimulation and with its influence, provide a way for objectively evaluating the
functional structure of the types of activity under analysis and for revealing the
mechanisms responsible for the operator's state of readiness and the effectiveness

of his work.

Our laboratory studies were tested and confirmed in production conditions, in which
supplementary afferentation, brought about by the inclusion of signals informing the
operator of problems in the production process, resulted in fast mobilization of
functions, faster performance of production operations, lower nervous and

emotional tension, and 12-18 percent greater functional comfort and work effective—
ness.

The obtained results attest to the need for broadly introducing supplementary warning
signals when organizing workplaces and planning equipment in different industrial
sectors with the purpose of raising the reliability of man-machine systems and in-
creasing labor productivity.

The last link of afferent synthesis--afferent feedback, which can be defined as the
sum total of adaptations by means of which the organism obtains information on the
degree to which reflex acts, including work acts, correspond to their intended pur-
pose--is no less significant to revealing the physiological mechanisms of information
perception. Anokhin attaches great significance to stage-by-stage afferent feedback,
considering that a reflex reaction, including one associated with labor, proceeds DOC
as a single entity but in the form of successive actions.

Our ideas about so-called chain reflexes must be reexamined from the standpoint of
stage-by-stage afferent feedback. Interpreting some work action consisting of a
number of successive operations (acts), we had formerly interpreted it as a chain

reflex in which the end of one operation is a stimulus for the beginning of another
operation. But this interpretation lacks a significant element-~afferent feedback

indicating the end of each link, without which the next link cannot proceed. From
this point of view a detailed analysis of a chain reflex, for example that made by
Prof A. I. Krestovnikov (1954) of jumping over a bar, must be supplemented by
afferent feedback indicating the end of a previous movement included within such a
3“”?-

That such stage-by-stage afferentation does in fact exist may be demonstrated with

the example cited by N. v. zimkin (in a report to the Fifth Conference on Labor
Physiology, 1967). Analyzing the simple operation of depressing a key in response
to a periodically repeated audible click, he discovered that the key may be pressed
before or after the click. The significance of stage-by-stage afferent feedback

is clearly evident here, because the time interval until the next pressing of the
key is corrected depending on whether the key had previously been pressed before or
after the click. Such correction can be performed only with the help of instantan-
eous afferent feedback.

These examples of the significance of different forms of afferentation, and of
afferent synthesis in general. developed by P. K. Anokhin in relation to labor,

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR UI'I'IL'IAL UBI'. ONLY

emphasize the significance of correctly understanding the physiological mechanisms
proceeding in labor activity and in the course of perceiving production information.
01 the other hand if we consider the significance of different forms of afferentation
and of afferent synthesis in general, and if we account for the unique features of
such afferentation, within certain limits we can achieve control over work acts,

make them easier, and create conditions promoting maintenance of high efficiency
over a long period of time. Such application of our ideas about afferent synthesis
makes them significant as a factor in regulation of labor; consequently labor physio-
logists and ergonomists should make broad use of afferent synthesis.

Asratyan's ideas about switching factors and tonic reflexes have great significance
to an understanding of the role of informational interaction in labor.‘ 'mese ideas
essentially entail the following. It was discovered in work with conditioned re-

flexes that the same conditioned stimulus may have different informational signifi-

cance depending on the conditions under which it is applied. Thus a metronome set
at 120 would be a conditioned feeding stimulus when used in the morning in the

presence of alimentary reinforcement, but when used in the afternoon together with
painful reinforcement it becomes a conditioned avoidance stimulus. In this case
change in the informational significance of the reflex-~that is, its switching,
depends on the time of the day in which the reflex occurs--in the morning it is a
feeding reflex, while in the evening it is an avoidance reflex. 'mis switching may
be elicited by other environmental factors, for example by the experimenter himself;
in Asratyan's conception, such an environmental factor was named a 'switchina" factor.

We all know for example that the bell at our places of work has different significance
depending on the time of day it is rung: In the morning it tunes us into work, while
at the end of the day it tunes us to quickly finishing our work and going on to other
things not associated with work. In this case the time at which the bell is rung is
the switching factor.

Evaluating the physiological significance of switching factors as stimuli, Asratyan
isolates them from triggering stimuli as a special group, the main feature of which
is their prolonged or, as Asratyan called it, their tonic action. Switching factors
or tonically operating stimuli are encountered very frequently in labor physiology
and ergonomics, as can be demonstrated with a nmber of examples.

The most typical example of a switching factor or tonic stimulus in relation to

man is preliminary instructions. once they are made known, they operate for an
indefinitely long time interval, for practical purposes until they are superseded by
other instructions.

Asratyan deserves credit for the fact that he and his colleagues were able to analyze
the physiological mechanisms behind development of switching factors and the per-
formance of tonic reflexes, since their work now allows us to understand the signi-
ficance of switching factors (instructions in particular) to the mechanisms behind
perception of production information and labor.

 

*Asratyan, E. A., 'Iektsii po nekotorym voprosam neyrofiziologii" [lectures on
Some Problems of Neurophysiology]. Izd-vo AN SSSR, 1959.

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It should be pointed out that all of the sensomotor reactions used in our experiments,
including visual-motor and audiomotor, are examples of reactions to instructions.
Although the instructions used in these cases were very sisple--"raise your finger
from the key when you see a light, hear a sound or sense some other stimulus'--never-
theless these instructions are an example of a tonic--that is, long-acting--stimulus:
While it does not elicit a response on its own, were it to be absent, neither would
there be a response to a light, sound or some other stimulus operating on its own.

The physiological mechanism of tonic stimulation was revealed by G. T. Sakhiulina
from Asratyan's laboratory. It was found that bioelectric activity rises in that
region of the cortex toward which the action of the tonic stimulus is directed.
Arisal of an excitation focus may obviously be explained both by the mechanisms of
switching and tonic action and by the previously revealed fact of the dramatically
shorter latent time of a reaction to the crossing of a certain point on the scale of
an instrument by a moving pointer, or in general to a moving light stimulus.

By accounting for the physiological mechanism of switching factors and tonic stimuli,
revealed by Asratyan and playing a major role in work actions performed in response

to instructions, we can examine, with greater understanding, a large category of
work acts and physiological mechanisms of information perception.

when we study the physiological mechanisms of informational interaction, we treat
the mechanism behind formation of the individual's responses as the last link in
such interaction. In our initial approach to this question we must keep in mind
that afferent feedback is at the basis of this mechanism. Thus A. P. Samoylov
pointed out as long ago as in 1930 that while a person holds a pencil and writes,
motor impulses travel from the spinal cord to the muscles of the hand, and that
impulses concurrently travel along nerves to the spinal cord from sensory terminals
contained in muscles; these impulses provide reflexive feedback, allowing the
operator to monitor muscle innervation. According to s. A. Kosilov (1938, 1954,
1955, 1957, 1965) feedbacks accompanying work actions are monitored consciously,
in accordance with the operator's idea as to the goal of his work and the correct,
most effective pathways of its attainment. Moreover operators guide themselves by
sensory stimuli below the threshold of their consciousness. These stimuli permit

operators to attain high precision in their work movements. Kosilov coined the
concept ”integral image of work actions" to represent theneuralprocesses occurring

in the cerebral cortex that make up the physiological basis of these ideas and the
unconsciOus correcting stimuli. In Kosilov's opinion the integral image of work
actions differs from the integral image concept introduced into science by

A. A. Ukhtomskiy (1923) in that his includes the goal of labor and participates
in the circular reflex cycle of the second signaling system. The integral image of
a work action is a concept having to do with the work acts of the individual as
part of society, while Ukhtomskiy's integral image has to do with the instinctive
behavior of animals and man.

P. K. Anokhin analyzed the response evolution mechanism more deeply in his functional
system theory, developed by him back in 1935 in the book ”Problems tsentra i
periferii v fiziologii nervnoy devatel'nosti' [The Problem of the Center and the

Periphery in the Physiology of Nervous Activity). Anokhin applied the concept
"functional system" to the product of integration of partial mechanisms--a principle
so necesSary to an understanding of the integral organization of nervous activity.

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The functional system is based on Anokhin's ideas on afferent synthesis discussed
above, and on the associated idea of the acceptor of action. me acceptor of action
concept is, in Anokhin's opinion (1968), the key mechanism of the functional system
which lies at the basis of decision making--that is, formation of a response to
incoming information. In Anokhin's opinion decision making is a logical process of
the functional system, but at the same time it is a result of fully determined
physiological processes. The essence of these processes is that the organism must
inevitably choose the sole possible line of behavior (reaction) fran numerous
possibilities facing it at the given moment. No matter what the conditions are,

the organism has a possibility for selecting a fully definite act and excluding
all other potential possibilities. Ukhtomskiy (1945) referred to this process in
application to the muscle system as “elimination of surplus degrees of freedom.“

In Anokhin‘s opinion the physiological meaning behind “decision making" in relation
to formation of a behavioral act can be stated as follows: 1) decision making is
the result of afferent synthesis; 2) decision making frees the organism from a large
number of degrees of freedom and thus promotes integration of efferent expectations,
ones necessary to the organism and having adaptive meaning to it at the given moment
and in the given situation; 3) decision making occurs in a meant of transition,
following which all combinations of excitations acquire an actuating, effector nature.

'00 understand how a choice is arrived at in decision making, how degrees of freedom
are eliminated, hnokhin created the idea of the so-called acceptor of action, which
he defines as the afferent machinery that monitors information on forthcoming results.
This machinery forms a response beforehand in its effector expression, and conse-
quently it anticipates the response by a certain interval of time. The physiological
mechanism behind the "acceptor of action' in application to man can be described as
arisal of the “intention to act“ at the moment afferent synthesis reaches a conclu-

sion. This predetermines the subsequent physiological role of the acceptor of action,
which accepts, in the form of afferent feedback, all afferent stimuli arising as a

result of actions. The "acceptor of action“ machinery compares the results of
afferent synthesis-~that is, the plan of action-with the results of the work act.
Coincision of these stimuli terminates the entire cyclic process of response forma-
tions, while their ”mismatch" elicits an entire series of new reactions which must
in the end lead to a reflex response corresponding to the nature of the "acceptor of
action." The mechanism behind formation and operation of the “acceptor of action”
is shown in Figure 60.

Anokhin (1968) worded the law of formation of the acceptor of action and its role
as follows: "In all cases where the brain transmits stimli through terminal neurons
to peripheral working organs, simultaneously with the efferent "conmand' a certain
afferent model forms, capable of anticipating the parameters of the future results
and comparing, at the end of the action, this prediction with the parameters of the
true results."

11115 law has special significance in the case of complex human behavioral acts.

In this case the most diverse goals of behavior may be posed, but even so, the
”acceptor of action," formed at the mement of decision making, is still able to
subsequently determine the degree to which the plan coincides with the results.
Prediction of the results of action is a universal function of the brain that prevents
arisal of all sorts of "errors"--that is, it keeps actions not corresponding to the
goal posed by the organism from happening. The only way harmonious behavior could
be structured and mistakes could be avoided would be to constantly compare the

144

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Successive stages of Developing a Firm conditioned Reflex in

Response to a Conditioned Stimulus: stage I--synthesis of all
diverse internal and external afferent influences u n the
organism; A--triggering stimulus analyzer; A1 and A --situational
stimuli for different analyzers: a1 and a2--collatera1 action of
triggering and conditional stimuli upon the brain stem reticular

formation; Y.P.--conditioned stimulus; stage II--formation of the
acceptor of action on the basis of afferent traces remaining from

previous stimuli (PLIL); stage III--formation of the response
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(0.1L). which always develops after the acceptor of action:
stage IV—-arisal of afferent feedback from all aspects and

characteristics of the achieved results. In this example
afferent feedback from the results of action agrees precisely

with the nature of the acceptor of action--that is. the result
corresponds exactly to the plan (or intention) of performing

the action
Key:
1. Stage 4. cerebral cortex
2. Afferent synthesis 5. Suboortex
3. situational afferentation 6. Afferent feedback

results of that which has been done with the formerly predicted afferent parameters
of the results.

It is evident from this whole discussion that the physiological mechanisms of in-
formational interaction between man and equipment are rather complex. At the same
time we have been able to discern certain key factors in this interaction which

aid us in understanding this interaction, and subsequently accounting for and con-
trolling it. These key factors include our ideas about the role of attention. the
functions of memory, afferent synthesis and the acceptor of action. Using these
ideas, we can simulate informational interaction with a certain degree of probability,
and use the results of this simulation in our design of production equipment.

Man's psychophysiological and psychological characteristics must be studied not
only with the purpose of resolving traditional problems—-improving performance and

reducing tiring. learning about the laws governing information reception and pro-
cessing, discovering the memory and thinking processes associated with the control

and use of equipment and so on. We must also study these characteristics so that

we could develop the principles, methods and resources of controlling the individual's
psychophysiological state in the course of activity proceeding with the assistance

of technical devices. Development of this direction is just beginning.

The most adequate approaches are ones in which natural mutual relationships in a
"man-machinc-environment" system are simulated and in which man's interaction with

a controlled experimental environment proceeds according to the principle of a
closed loop with feedforwards and feedbacks. These requirements may be satisfied

in a so-called controlled exgeriment (M. N. Livanov et al., 1966; P. V. Bundzen
et a1., 1973; V. v. Trubachev ct al., 1973, etc.).

A physiological biocontrol experiment (biofeedback experiment) makes use of an
automatic system in which there is artificial. experimentally controlled, external
feedback between the "inputs" and ”outputs” of the biological object under analysis.
Interest in research methods using feedback grew significantly in the mid-1970's,

because their clear advantages not only permit us to reveal and describe certain
algorithms of the activity of the brain or some functional system with the help of

146

FOR!0FFNJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

modern methods, the theory of automatic control and computer technology, but they

also provide the grounds for highly effective training methods and directed influences
having the purpose of compensating for certain impaired functions (P. V. Simonov,

P. Ye. 'nemnikov, 1965; N. N. Vasilevskiy, 1972, 1972 etc.).

Biofeedback systems are used in automatic signaling systems to monitor man's
functional state, and they can be used to analyze the brain's functional states in
the clinic.

Biofeedback systems can be used to coordinate the characteristicsof an external
signal (or the moment of its influence) with the dynamics of certain characteristics
of brain bioelectric activity or other physiological parameters. However, most
authors have used the encephalogram to create closed systems controlled by changes
in physiological functions. The experimental design used most often in this case

is one in which illumination of the eyes is increased whenever an e-rhythm of any
stability whatsoever arises. This illumination is maintained until the o-rhythm
decreases, as a result of which the light source turns off automatically (T. K.
Hulholland, S. Runnels, 1961; V. G. Zhukov, 1963; P. V. Bundzen, 1965). The work
of such a system depends significantly on the attention of the subject. Experiments

have shown that stable, calm attention is more typical of a growing e-rhythm. De-
pression of the u-rhythm is more typical of anxious alertness (T. H. Hulholland,

S. Runnels, 1962; I. z. Dussailly, 1963). We can see that feedback systems can be
used to determine more specifically the EEG-correlates of nervous and emotional
tension in man.

Feedback systems were found to be a valuable tool for analysing the functional signi-
ficance of various EEG frequencies owing to a unique sort of 'instrumentalization
of self-observation." For example the individual is asked to maintain a tone de-

pendent on his (as-rhythm, and then he is asked how he was able to prolong the sound.
It turns out that most subjects perform this task by evoking a state of calm, of

general relaxation within themselves, by thinking about pleasant things and so on
(D. Nowlis, J. Kamiya, 1970).

In addition to the £36, a feedback system may make use of oscillations in skin po-
tentials (the GSR) and the electric resistance offered by the skin to an external
current. As an example the fact that resistance decreases in the presence of fear,
anger and an orientation reaction, and increases in the presence of tiring,
insobriety and drowsiness (E. z. Levy, 1961), made it possible to patent a device
monitoring the way a driver feels by recording the electric resistance of the palms
when in contact with the steering wheel. Growth in resistance or breaking of the
circuit turns on an alarm signal (D. H. Scheer, 1962). This principle may also find
broad application as well. The galvanic skin reflex may also be used in devices
performing the role of a unique "psycho-electronic amplifier” for detection of a
signal significant to the subject. In this case the galvanic skin response lengthens
the time of exposure to the signal or blocks performance of the operator's voluntary
commands (I. s. Ivanov, P. V. Simonov, 1965, 1969).

It should be emphasized that in principle it would be possible to create a system

containing technical units which undergo change as the individual learns to use them.
A certain amount of experience has already been accumlated in this direction--for

example systems which contain a unit that monitors the state of the operator

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(A. A. Vasil'yev, B. P. unmov, 1970) and systems in which a computer determines the
strategy of the individual’s activity and selects, on the basis of this strategy,
the information to be transmitted to the individual.

Application of the feedback principle, which ensures close cause-and-effect ties
between the current functional state of the system and the result of its activity,

is a fundamentally new approach, one extremely important to the creation of effective
monitoring systems. This is why intensive development of the scientific foundation
of ergonomics is so important.

Consideration of Psychological Factors in Ergonomics

In its recommendations, ergonomics relies on the data of the technical, social,
economic and biological sciences. Among the biological sciences, labor psychology
providesdata of great significance to ergonomics. Labor psychology studies the
psychological features of different forms of labor and their dependence on socio-
historic and concrete production conditions within which labor proceeds. By studying
labor psychology we can make use of the laws of general psychology to make work
easier and to raise labor productivity by accounting for psychological character-
istics in our ergonomic requirements on the designs of production equipment.

Among the problems of labor psychology having significance to ergonomics, psycho-
logists single out: '1) the psychological features of the personality; 2) the psycho-
logical features of attention; 3) evaluation and formation of occupational aptitudes;

4) psychological study of the causes of accidents: 5) determination of the signifi-
cance of initial psychological state: 6) the role of the volume of information

available about work progress; 7) the role of psychological climate in production
(N. N. Platonov and others).

The psychological features of the personality are defined as the sum total of
significant and more or less constant features of the personality. In accordance
with the dialectical-materialistic definition of psychology, the psychological
features of the personality are not inborn, and as the personality develops, these
features change; their expression varies depending on the concrete sociohistoric
conditions. The rest important psychological features of the personality are:
Philosophy--that is, the system of viewpoints on the surrounding phenomena of
society and nature; the interests of the personality--that is, the orientation of
the personality toward certain objects and phenomena; capabilities and endowments--
that is, individual features serving as conditions for successful performance of
one or several forms of activity; the temperament of the personality, which may

be choleric--that is, typified by fast arousal and strong feelings, sanguine--
characterized by fast arousal but weak feelings, melancholic--characterized by

slow arousal and intense feelings,and phlegmatic—-characterized by slow arousal and
weak feelings. According to I. P. Pavlov, the physiological basis of temerament
is associated with certain features of nervous system types, with nervous processes
of varying intensity—-arousal and inhibition, with the balance between arousal and
inhibition, and with mobility-~the capability for transforming arousal into inhibition
and vice versa. The psychological features of the personality also include traits
of character-that is, the sum total of basic psychological properties of the indi-
vidual, ones making an ispression upon all of his actions. Initiative and con-
scientiousness are ones having a bearing on ergonomics.

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘I-‘K 1A]. USE ONLY

All of the psychological features of the personality listed above play a great role
in defining'the position of a given personality in a social or work process. This
has significance to formulating the psychological requirements of ergonomics.

The psychological features of attention have great significance to all forms of
human activity. Attention can be defined as orientation of the consciousness toward
a certain object or activity. The main properties of attention include its stability
and diffuseness. Attention distribution has great significance. It is required,
for example, by an individual operating several machine tools, by transport drivers,
and by operators and traffic controllers. Also significant in addition to distri-
bution is the switching of attention--its transfer from one object to another in
response to special signals. Attention volume--that is, the quantity of objects
that may be within the individual's visual field simultmsouslynis an important
indicator. Research has shown that attention volume has a maximum of five to seven
objects simultaneously embraced by the attention. However, according to data cited
by s. I. Gorshkov et al. and s. P. Bocharov. this maximum may be significantly ex-

panded (see the section "Characteristics of International Interaction During the
Use of Production Equipment”) .

In its evaluation of the formation of occupational aptitudes labor psychology
basis itself on the premise that high indicators may be reached in a given form of
occupational activity by workers with highly different personalities, while failure
in a given occupation is usually distinctly dependent upon certain fully definite
characteristics. Finding the characteristics of psychological structure which pre-
determine failure in an occupation is an important task of labor psychology.
Correct evaluation of occupational aptitudes requires that we treat the personality
features listed above as central to such evaluation. The main factors of this
approach would be (K. K. Platonov, 1974): 1) understanding the psychophysiological
features of the given form of labor or occupation, and particularly the causes of
the most typical mistakes; 2) comparing the psychological structure of the
personality under analysis with these features of the occupation; 3) making an
expert conclusion on the basis of thorough comparison of these two structures, with
mandatory consideration of the personality's coupensatory possibilities.

If we are to evaluate an individual's occupational aptitude, we must study him in
different forms of labor, to include in laboratory psychophysiological experiments.

When it comes to emergency situations, labor psychophysiology is interested primarily
in the significance of the personality factors which had led to wrong actions leading
to an emergency. The most conmon causes of wrong actions may be: 1) poor training
of the worker, absence of the necessary knowledge, or its insufficiency; 2) incon-
sistency between the worker's individual psychological qualities and the requirements
of his work--that is, weak occupational training; 3) lack of discipline or careless-

ness.- 4) temporary deterioration of performance as a result of illness, tiring or
a negative influence of the working conditions (K. K. Platonov, 197 O).

In terms of research on emergency situations, labor psychology is especially
interested in causes falling within the second group--that is, inconsistency between
individual psychological qualities and the work being done. Their revelation is the
task of labor psychophysiology and ergonomics. The same psychological methods of
personality study that were indicated above in the discussion of occupational
aptitudes are used here.

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Initial psychological state has great significance to determination of performance
level. Psychological state prior to work and in its course is a complex phenomenon;
it is an expression of the personality's relationship to the work being done. It
depends on the circumstances under which the individual is prepared for this work,
on how stable the personality's attitude toward labor is in general, and on the
aftereffects of preceding psychological states, emotional ones in particular.

An initial state may have intellectual, emotional, and motor aspects (49,69). me
intellectual aspect is represented mainly by the degree to which the work is con-
prehended and the degree to which the attention is focused on it. The emotional as-
PGCV- is represented by the feelings accompanying the preparations made by each
worker-his sense of alertness, confidence and eagerness for work, or his sense of
tiredness, sluggishness, depression, reluctance to work and so on. the motor
aspect is represented by the individual's level of motor activity, by the speed of
his movementsand by their precision, or by their slowness, erroneousness and so on.

Upon inspecting the aspects of initial states. we find it possible to reduce the
latter to four forms: a positive state in active form, a positive state in passive
form, a negative state in passive form and a negative state in active form. Research
has shown that performance depends to a considerable extent on initial state. me
effectiveness of work rises as psychological state varies from a negative state in
active form to a negative state in passive form, and from a positive state in passive
form to a positive state in active form. Labor psychology is highly significant

in that it has a possibility for changing a psychological state from its negative
form to a positive form, and thus raising work effectiveness by 10-15 percent.

The following figures provide an indication of the important role played by a
knowledge of the volume of information on work progress. If we compare the labor
productivity of two groups of workers, where one knows the volume of an assignment
and the other does not, we find that the labor productivity of workers in the first
group is 5-15 percent higher than workers in the second group.

According to modern ideas, the psychological climate in the work collective--that
is, the sum total and nature of mutual relationships between menbers of the
collectiveuhas great significance to work effectiveness. The organization of

the production process itself, and particularly the presence or absence of monotony,
plays an important part in determining the characteristics of the psychological
climate. When the organization of labor is monotonous the nervous system is in-
hibited, the individual experiences a sense of boredom, and he lacks interest in
his work, as a result of which psychological separateness arises inthe collective;
taken all together, this leads to lower work effectiveness.

5. I. Gorshkov and I. A. Goncharov analyzed the state of psychological separateness
in leather industry, focusing in particular on the sewing of gloves in leather
industry. Leather gloves are made today as single items (as pairs) on automatic
conveyors with an uncontrollable rhythm, one for each sewing operation, and on
conveyors with an unrestricted rhythm, on which several workers (a maxim of eight)
perform the same operation on batches of gloves. The workplaces of the workers

are located along the conveyor lim. and at a 90° angle to it, such that throughout
the entire work day the workers see only the backs of the heads of their comrades
in work. Their work is characterized by a large number of fine operations and

by sharp division of labor between the workers. As a consequence the workers ex-
perience reduced functional mobility of the nervous System, the boredom that arises

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is aceompanied by frequent. yawning, their notion of the end result of collective
labor vanishes, their sense of responsibility for the work decreases, and the
workers become separated from each other technologically and, what is especially
important, psychologically. This separateness of the workers leads to periodic
underioading and overloading of the workers, disturbance of the predetermined
rhythm of product manufacture and the need for redistributing operations between
workers. Because several workers oomunicate with one another via a single-channel

transporter system when performing elements of the production cycle on conveyors
with an unrestricted rhythm, it is difficult to determine the output of each

worker, and delays can occur in the forward movemnt of articles for further
processing.

Considering these shortcomings as well as the small dimensions and weight of the
products being manufactured, an attempt was made to eliminate the shortcomings of
the existing lines by developing a combined group-flowline organization for the
glove making process. The basic unit of the new line is the sewing machine opera-
tor's workplace. It consists of an industrial tabletop of special configuration,
such that the worker sits at a 45° angle in relation to the moving product. The

workers are combined into groups. the meubers of which are closely associated
between each other by their common task. The work is organized according to the

batch principle, with an unrestricted rhythm. After performing her particular
operation, a worker moves a finished batch a distance equivalent to her outstretched
arm. This is enough for the batch to reach the workplace for the next operation.
Thus the need for a conveyor line is eliminated when the labor is organized in this
fashion. Direct multichannel comunication of the workers with one another ensures

technological and psychological interaction among the workers, which imparts disci-
pline to their labor and introduces elements of visible competition, made possible

by simultaneous sewing of the articles.

As time-and-motion studies of the work of sewing machine operators in the new work
system showed, unwarranted breaks and departures from the workplaces disappeared
entirely. The workers received a possibility for Seeing one another in different
positions without leaving their work, and for periodically exchanging various infor-
mation that could supplement a lack of information at a particular workplace. A
benevolent, friendly situation is created within the group.

These data show how much the psychological climate and psychological state are
associated with labor organization and workplace design--that is, with satisfaction

of the psychological requirements of ergonomics.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VI. NE CONTRIBUTION OF anemones '10 RESEARCH ON
LABOR HYGIENE, PHYSIOLOGY AND PSYGIOIDGY

It has already been noted in the literature that the position of ergonomics among
other sciences, and particularly its relationship to hygiene, has not been determined
adequately yet (5. I. Gorshkov, A. V. lbshchin, 1974; S. I. Gorshkov, 1974). But the
way things actually stand now, research in ergonomics often intersects research in
physiology and psychology, and especially hygienic research in production. Because

the domains of these sciences are not clearly delimited, there are difficulties in
formally describing the obtained scientific information, in determining its meulber-

ship to one science or another, particularly from the standpoint of Universal Decimal
Classification indices. 'no make matters worse, we often hear it said that ergonomics
is the science of sciences, one called upon to synthesize the achievements of economics,
hygiene, physiology and psychology (K. x. Platonov, 1973). The same point of view is
stated by (zh. sherrer) in his book “Pisiologiya truda, ergonomika" [Labor Physiology,
Ergonomics]. A nutter of authors define ergonomics as a universal science of labor
in general. 'mus in his foreword to "Brgonomika' [Ergonomics] written by Polish
authors, V. Venda writes that there is the IWidespread opinion that ergonomics is

the sum of a nutter of sciences of labor...." Other authors, for examle (V. 'r.
Singl'ton) in his “Vvedeniye v ergonomiku" [Introduction to Ergonomics] and-H; de
Monmollin in his book “Han and Machine Systems," reduce ergonomics to general labor
technology or to general communications technology in a “man-machine" system.

Of course, such fundamental differences in the definition of the essence of ergonomics
cannot promote success in its application; on the contrary, they can be a reason for
mistrusting its possibilities. Such is the position, for example of hygienists, who
believe that such broad interpretation of ergonomics diminishes the role of hygiene
and increases the danger of competition in solving the age-old problems of hygiene.

In this connection the time has come to arrive at a more-objective definition of the
positions of ergonomics and its mutual relationships with other sciences with which
it must maintain contact-—labor psychology and physiology, hygiene and engineering--
having in mind the prospects for development of scientific research in particular.
In this case we need to account for the present ideas of scientific theory on the
criteria that may be used to objectively describe the role and place of both hygiene

on one hand and ergonomics and labor physiology and psychology on the other within the
system of sciences.

In scientific theory today. B. H. Kedrov has proposed three such criteria which he
called cementation, pivotation and fundamentation. Cementation is defined as the

152
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possibility a certain science has for uniting, and cementing about itself--that is,
binding--associated scientific disciplinesfor solution of certain problems. Pivota-
tion, or vertelization, is defined as the capability a certain science has for intro-
ducing itself into a system of sciences examining a certain problem through gradual
emersion into it. Pundamentation is defined as how well grounded the scientific
premises of a certain science are by fundamental research methods. particularly from
the standpoint of methodology and their mathematical support.

If we examine ergonomics from the standpoint of these criteria, we can gain an idea

of its objective position within the system of sciences and of the way it interacts
with hygiene. physiology and labor psychology.

An analysis would show that cementation is expressed to the greatest degree in hygiene

and in ergonomics. Both of these sciences cement many associated sciences about them-
selves for solution of their problems.

Thus ergonomics is in a close relationship with engineering, hygiene, physiology
and labor psychology. It cements these sciences of human labor, which is studied

by them from their own unique positions. Ergonomics is unique in that it studies

the correspondence of the design of production equipment and workplace organization

to human anatomical, physiological and psychological features. Hygienic, physiological
and psychological requirements on production equipment and on workplace organization,
which are formalized today as state standards, have been developed as the criteria of
this ergonomic correspondence. In this case ergonomics views this correspondence as

the most important and mandatory principle of designing production equipment and
organizing workplaces, violation of which would immediately cause difficulties in

using equipment and workplaces, or make such use impossible without harmful consequences

to labor productivity or even the health of laborers.

Thus for example there are entirely obvious consequences to violating the correspon-
dence of certain dimensions of production equipment to anthropometric dimensions of

the human body, and of the design features of equipment to the strength and speed
possibilities of man; nevertheless, such incorrespondence is in fact encountered today.
Also entirely obvious are the consequences of failing to meet hygienic requirements on
the design of production equipment, which manifest themselves when due to design
shortcomings the equipment becomes a source of intense production noise, excessive
vibration, release of toxic gases and dust, and so on.

Protruding corners and levers, sharp edges, awkward composition and unattractive
colors of equipment are sources of negative emotions and reduced performance, and
hence we can understand the need for designers to create equipment having an appear-
ance which would be the source of positive emotions.

Thus to solve its own problems, ergonomics cements about itself hygiene, labor physi-
ology and psychology, and engineering--that is, all sciences which can provide con-

crete material that would permit us to comply with the principle of correspondence
in the design of production equipment and in the organization of workplaces.

As a Science, ergonomics also fully satisfies the requirements of the pivotation

or vertelization criterion. Its fundamental principle--mandatory correspondence of
the design of production equipment and the organization of workplaces to human ana-
tomical, physiological and psychological characteristics--assumed concrete forms in
different stages of man's historical development, though always remaining the main

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

principle behind the structure of the implements of labor. Historical sciences,
archeology in particular, indicate that the history of the mutual relationships
between man and equipment has been characterized by growing conplexity of technology
until the time of the scientific-technical revolution of the 20th century.

In all of the stages of development of the mutual relationships between man and
equipment, the principle of correspondence has always been decisive to optimizing
these mutual relationships. Stone, bronze or iron tools were always made in accord-
ance with this principle to fit the hunan hand using them. Correspondence was deter-
mined quite simply by fitting the tools to the hand, and if this correspondence was
not satisfied, the tool was made to fit by the tool's possessor. The principle of
correspondence operated spontaneously but inevitably in these cases. As machines
were invented and as their complexity grew, and as computers and control consoles
were introduced, the assistance of ergonomics in attaining this correspondence became
more important. The design of production equipment had to evaluated in relation to

the hygienic, physiological and psychological requirements of ergonomics indicated
above.

It is evident from this that ergonomics reflects all of the historic stages in the
nature of the mutual relationships between man and equipment. It made them more
efficient, and it made labor easier and less detrimental to health, transforming it
into a source of joy and inspiration. Thus ergonomics fits within the unbreakable
chain of sciences--sociology, history, political economics, archeology, biology,
physiology. psychology, hygiene and engineering, gradually deepening the process of
cognition of the essence of the mutual relationships between man and technology,

going as far as now permitting us to predict these mutual relationships in the future.

Consequently ergonomics is in full correspondence with the requirements of the second
criterion of scientific theory--pivotation.

As far as the fundamentation criterion is concerned, its requirements were embodied
within the structure of ergonomics at the very moment of its arisal. The analysis,
made above, of the historical development of the mutual relationships between man and
technology from the ergonomic aspect indicates that the dialectical method is at

the basis of this development. This method is precisely what has provided the possi-
bility for using archeological data to demonstrate the inseparable unity of man,
technology, nature and society.

Studying human labor, ergonomics comes in close contact with labor physiology, and
in recent years it has been implementing the process of mathematical fundamentation
together with it. This process can be boiled down to the following order of
mathematical treatment of data acquired by investigation of physiological state.

It is based on the idea that physiological processes are subordinated to the mathe-
matical theory of random functions. In view of this idea, physiological processes
and production parameters may be classified in each moment in time as random vari-

ables, and the sum total of these random variables, obtained by analysis and organised
into a table or, as mathematicians would say, into a matrix, may be represented as a

discrete random function, the ordinates of which are the random variables found by
masurement.

Special algorithms have been developed to process such a matrix:

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1) the value of the current mathematical expectation m(t), indicating change in the

mean value of the physiological or hygienic parameter in the dynamics of the work
day;

2) the man of the mathematical expectation mm, which permits us to evaluate the
physiological functions of a single subject for the work day on the average;

3) the current deviation characteristic D(t) , which describes the extent to which

physiological or hygienic parameters deviate from the means within the dynamics of
a shift;

4) the mean of the deviation characteristic 00!), which indicates the degree to

which a physiological parameter of a single individual varies relative to its mean
(its mathematical expectation);

S) the current autocorrelation function Nthtz), which determines the relationship
between values of the parameter under analysis in different moments of time in the

dynamics of the work day. In the opinion of R. H. Bayevskiy (1965), the more homo-
geneous the internal structure of a certain series of values of an analyzed function

is, the more slowly the autocorrelation function attains zero and the greater is the
stability of the process:

6) the coefficient of the current mutual correlation Emotion, which establishes

the mutual influence among analyzed functions in individual moments within the
dynamics of the work day, calculated in relation to all observations made in the course
of their synchronous examination.

Data are processed on the basis of these algorithms by computer. As a result of such
processing we get an objective description of the correlation between different
functions, a description of the significance of deviations in certain functions re-
sulting from the influence of certain labor-associated effects, and an idea of how
much these functions would be optimized when certain recommendations are introduced.

This sort of mathematical fundamentation is employed extensively in ergonomics: This
attests to the great role of the fundamentation criterion in ergonomic research.

Thus in terms of all criteria of scientific theory, ergonomics can be characterized
as a progressive science, one occupying progressive positions in the system of
sciences. In addition to the tremendous importance of the object of study--the mutual
relationship between man and technology from the standpoint of the correspondence of
the design of production equipment and workplace organization to hunan anatomical,
physiological and psychological characteristics, the criteria of scientific theory
discussed above make ergonomics one of the most important sciences of modern times,
solving fundamental problems of the scientific-technical revolution in cooperation
with hygiene, physiology and labor psychology.

There are different points of view concerning the mutual relationships of ergonomics

with other sciences. At the same time, integration of the sciences and assumption

of an integrated approach to solution of practical problems are doubtlessly reflec-
tions of an obvious trend in modern scientific knowledge.

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We devoted significant attention in our work to the psychophysiological problems of
ergonomics, since it is precisely these aspects that are now acquiring priority
significance in the analysis and synthesis of man-machine systems. However. we have
not abstracted ourselves from many other problems arising in the study and creation
of man-machine systems. The systems approach basically requires ergonomics to main-
tain contact with other sciences that enrich it with new ideas, methods and approaches,
and generally promote its development. It should be emphasized that when we go on to

the study of man-machine-environment systems in general, the need for systems analysis
becomes obvious.

The properties of such systems are apparently not sinply the sun of the properties
of the components making them up. A system generates new properties. In this connec-

tion we face the inportant task of developing integral criteria which would permit us
to evaluate the parameters of man—machine systems namly as systems.

We believe that the systems approach should play an inportant role in development
of a unified theory of ergonomics and in solution of practical problems.

Implementation of ergonomic recommendations suggested for concrete production opera-
tions by the authors of this book has demonstrated their effectiveness. as is con-
firmed by normalization of working conditions andthe work posture, reduction of the
difficulty and intensity of the work of drivers, control console operators, the
operators of bridge cranes at tube-rolling mills, conputer operators, sewing machine
operators. pattern cutters. weavers and spinners at light industry enterprises. Other
confirmations can be found in the awards earned in various competitions, certificates
of participation and exhibitions, the medals and certificates for efficiency proposals,
and the inventor's certificatesreceived by the authors of the book, and their partici-
pation in the writing of ergonomic GOST's. All of this confirms the tremendous
effectiveness of industrial ergonomics and its promises for the future.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

3.

4.

‘J.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abdikulov, A. 15., “Effect of work Posture on Arm Movement Precision,” in "Voprosy

gigiyeny truda i profzabolevaniy" [Problems of Labor Hygiene and Occupational
Diseases], Karaganda, 1974, 300 pp.

Anokhin, P. K., "Biologiya i neyrofiziologiya uslovnogo refleksa" [Biology and
Neurophysiology of the Conditioned mflex], Moscow, Meditsina, 1968, 547 pp.

Anokhin, P. K., "Ocherki p0 fiziologii funktsional'nykh sistem" [Notes on the
Physiology of Functional Systems], Moscow, Meditsina, 1975, 447 pp.

Bel'gol'skiy, B. N.. Gliknan, E. s., chuklasova, G. '1'. et a1., "Ergonomic Rs-
quirenents on Workplace Organization in Metallurgy,“ son's. TRUD, Ho 7, 1970,
pp 69-72.

Benevolenskaya, H. P., l'Btyudy po ergonomike” [Essays on Ergonomics], Novosibirsk,
Nauka, Siberian Division, 1977, 141 pp.

Bocharova, S. 1., "Synbolic Inforlaation Processing in the Mallory.“ in
'Psikhologichesiye problemy pererabotki znakovoy informatsii" [Psychological
Problems of Symbolic Information Processing]. lbscow, Hauka, 1977, p 140-142.

Vasil‘yeva, A. v., "Ergonomic Problems of Control Consoles in Heavy Industry,
in "Doklady na Vsesoyuznom soveshchsnii 'Konstruirovaniye nekhanizmov i
oborudovaniya s uchetom fiziologicheskikh i gigiyenicheskikh kriteriyev
ergonomiki'” [Reports at the All-Union Conference “Design of Mechanisms and

Equipment With Regard to the Physiological and Hygienic Criteria of Ergonomics")
Moscow, 1971: PP 55-62.

vinogradov, M. 1., "Piziologiya trudovykh protsessov" [Physiology of Labor
Processes], 2d Edition, Moscow, Meditsina, 1966, 367 pp.

Volkova, l. H., "The EEG Correlates of the Effectiveness of Mental Activity,“

in "Materialy xxv Vsesoyuznogo soveshchaniya p0 problemam vysshey nervnoy
dcyatel'nosti" [Proceedings of the 25th All-mien Conference on Problems of

Higher Nervous Activity], 2d Edition. Moscow, Nauka, 1977, pp 26-267.

Volkova, I. 11., Gorshkov, s. 1., and Kullmbetov, B. M., "Informational Inter-
action in the 'Man—Machine' System," in 'Gigiyena truda v khimicheskoy promy-
shlennosti" [Labor Hygiene in Chemical Industry], Volgograd, 1975, p 115—122.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Volkova, I. M., and Kulumbetov, B. 11., “Electrophysiological Correlates of
'Psychological Readiness'," in 'Haterialy V11 Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po
elektrofiziologii tsentral'noy nervnoy sistemy" [Proceedings of the Seventh

All-Union Conference on Electrophysiology of the Central Nervous System],
Kaunas, K111, 1976, pp 85-87.

Volkova, 1. H., and Kulunbetov, B. M., “Informational Interaction in a 'Man-
Hachine' System,“ in “Problemy inzhenernoy psikhologii i ergonomiki" [Problems
of Engineering Psychology and Ergonomics], Zd Edition, Moscow, WIITE, pp 211-213.

Goncharov, 1. A. , modernization of the pvo-e-z-o Press to Improve Working
Conditions," KOZHEV.-OBUVN. Pl'OH—T', No 12, 1973, pp 34-35.

Gorshkov, S. 1., "The Means of Perceiving Low Frequency Ultrasound," GIG. 1 SAN.,
NO 1' 1969' PP 15-21.

Gorshkov, s. 1., Volkov, I. #1., and Kulunbetov, B. 14., "Physiological Grounds
for Using Warning signal Systems at Workplaces in 'nextile Industry," in 'Gigiyena
truda na predpriyatiyakh Moskvy' [Labor Hygiene at Moscow Enterprises] , Moscow,
1974, pp 41-45.

Gorshkov, S. 1., Volkova, I. M., and Kulunbetov, 8. IL, "The Role of Supplementary
Afferentation in Activation of Motor Reactions and Acceleration of Information
mtrieval," in "Haterialy sektsionnykh zasedaniy XXIV Vsesoyuznogo soveehchaniya
po problemam vysshey nervnoy deyatel'nosti" [Proceedings of Section Meetings of
the 24th All-Union Conference on Problems of Higher Nervous Activity), Moscow-
beningrad, Nauka, 1974, pp 110-112.

Gorshkov, s. 1., and Kalinina, N. P., "Ustraneniye neudobnoy rabochey pozy u
pryadil'shchits i s"yemshchits" [Correction of. the Uncomfortable Work Posture of
Spinners and Strippers], Mascow, 1964, 23 pp.

Gorshkov, S. 1., Kokhanova, N. A., and Hal'tseva, O. 14., "Some Ergonomic Problems
in Textile Industry," TEKSTIL'NAYA PROM., No 8, 1970' PP 8-12.

Gorshkov, s. 1., Roshchin, A. V., “hygienic and Physiological Requirements of
Ergonomics," in ”Doklady na Vsesoyuznon soveshchanii tiziologicheskikh i
gigiyenicheskikh kriteriyev ergonomiki,“ pbscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR, 1971, pp 5-28.

Gorshkov, s. 1., and Goncharov, 1. 5., “The Significance of Psychological
Criteria in Ergonomic Studies," in "Problemy inzhenernoy peikhologii i
crgonomiki," 2d Edition, Moscow, VNII'I'E, 1974, pp 221-222.

Corshkov, s. 1., and noshchin, A. V., 'Pormulation of the Tasks of Ergonomics,“
in "Problemy inzhenernoy paikhologii i ergonomiki,” 2d Edition, Ibscow, VNIITB,
1974, pp 221-22.

Oorshkov, s. 1., Zolina, 2. H., and Moykin, Yu. V., "Metodika issledovaniy

v fiziologii truda" [Research Methods in Labor Physiology], Moscow, Izd-vo
mditsina, 1974, 311 pp.

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
23.

21.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gorshkov, s. 1., Goncharov, 1. A., Azova, s. H. et a1., ”Hygienic Working Condi-
tions in Glove Production,“ KOZHEV.-OBUVN. P101!” No 11, 1972, pp 13-15.

Gorshkov, s. 1., Zavalishin, D., Zarakovskiy, D., et a1., ”The Present State of
Ergonomics in the USSR and the Socioeconomic Effectiveness of Introducing Ergo-
nomic Research," in "Metodicheskiye problemy ergonomiki. Mater. 1 Mezhdunar.
konf. spetsialistov stran--chlenov SEV i SPRYu" [Methodological Problems of

Ergonomics. Proceedings of the First International Conference of Specialists

Prom the cam Countries and Yugoslavia], Moscow, WII‘I‘E, 1972, pp 169-276.

Qunener, P. 1., Glushkova, Ye. K., and Sapozhnikova, R. 6., "ilharakteristika
vliyaniya fizichcskoy nagruzki na organize shkol'nika" [A Description of the
Influence of Physiological Load on the Schoolchild's Body], Meditsina, 1967,
247 pp.

Gurfinkel', V. S., Kots, Ya. M. and shik, M. L., 'Regulyatsiya pozy cheloveka"
[Regulation of Human Posture), Nauka, 1965, 256 pp.

Yelizarcva. V. v., ”Change in Some Physiological Indicators Depending on the
Efficiency of the Standing Work Posture,“ GIG. mm, No 4, 1979, pp 47-49.

Zhukov, Ye. K., ”Ocherki po nermo-myshechnoy fiziologii" [Notes on Neuro-
muscular Physiology], Leningrad, Nauka, 1969, 179 pp.

Zhunda, 5., ”Study and Dissemination of Progressive Labor methods by Means of the
Resources of mtion Picture, Photographic and Acoustic Technology," in 'Nauchnaya
organizatsiya truda v tekstil'noy promyshlennosti (Sb. statey)" [Scientific
Organization of Labor in 'Dextile Industry (Collection of Articles)! Moscow,

1970. pp 76-79.

Zbarskaya, 1.. Yu. , "Some Physiological Changes Occurring in Control Console
Operators at Tube-Rolling Mills," GIG. I SAN” No 7, 1965, pp 33-38.

Zinchenko, v. P., and Virgilis, N. Yu., “Formirovaniye zritel'nogo obraza"
[Fomation of the Visual Image], ibecow, Izd-vo H60, 1969, 106 pp.

zinchcnko, V. P., Munipov, V. 31., and Smolyan, G. L., "Ergonomicheskiye
osnovy organizatsii truda" [Ergonomic Principles of Labor Organization] , Moscow,
Ekonomika, 1974, 240 pp.

zinchenko, V. P., and Munipov, V. H., “Classification of the Forms of Operator
Activity," in "Psikhofiziologiya truda operatorov avtonatizirovannogo

proizvodstva" [Psychophysiology of the Labor of Operators in Automated
Production], Moscow, 1974, pp 25-29.

Zoiina, 2. M., "Fiziologicheskiye osnovy ratsional‘noy organizatsii truda na
konveyere“ [Physiological Principles of Efficient Organization of Labor at a
Conveyor], Moscow, Meditsina, 1967, 332 pp.

Ckhnyanskaya. L. G. (Editor), "K1iniko-fiziologicheskiye issledovaniya nervnoy
sistcmy pri professional'nykhzabolevaniyakh" [Clinical Physiological Investiga-

tions of the Nervous System in the Presence of Occupational Diseases], Moscow,
Maditsina, 1967, 216 pp.

159
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kozlov. V. N., “Ergonomic Problems in Agricultural 'nechnology,” in "Doklady na
Vsesoyuznom soveshchanii 'Konstruiravaniye mashin, mekhanizmov i oborudovaniya
s uchetom fiziologicheskikh i gigiyenicheskikh kriteriyev ergonomiki'.“ Moscow,
1971, Pp 101-108.

Kokorev, N. P. , ”Hygienic Evaluation of Production Processes and Equipment in
Ferrous Metallurgy," in “Doklady na Vsesoyuznom soveshchanii 'Konetruiravaniye
mashin, mekhanizmov i oborudovaniya s uchetom £1 ziologicheskikh i gigiyenicheskikh
kriteriyev ergonomiki',“ abscow, 1971, pp 122-129.

Kokhanova, N. N., and Abdikulov, N., ”An Experimental 'Desting Unit Used to
Simulate the Work Posture and Labor of Machine 'l‘ool Operators," GIG. TRUDA,
No 11, 1975. PP 45-46.

Kokhan0va, N. A., and Barkhash. G. 1., "Change in the Physiological State of
Grinders Depending on the Nature of the Work and the Design Features of the
Equipment,” GIG. TRUDA, No 4, 1973, pp 43-45.

Kokhanova, N. N., and Barkhash, G. 1., "Registration of the W! of Movements
by Means of Pedometers." GIG. I SAN., No 9, 1972, p 100-101.

Kokhanova, N. P... Yelisarova. V. V., and Abdikulov, A” "Ergonomics in Modern
Forge Production," in "Problem inzhener'noy psikhologii i ergonomiki," 2d Edition,
Moscow. VNII'l'E, 1974, pp 242-244.

-

Kokhanova, N. N., and Yelizarwa, v. V., “Orange in state of Higher Nervous
Activity During Work in the Presence of the Temperature Factor,“ in "Materialy
sektsionnogo zasedaniya XXIV Vsesoyuznogo soveshchaniya po problemam vysshey
nervnoy deyatel'nosti.‘ Moscow, Nauka, 1914, pp 117-118.

Kedrov, B. N., "The Dialectical Pathway of Theoretical Synthesis of Modern
Knowledge in Natural Science," in ”sintez sovremennogo nauchnogo znaniya"
[Synthesis of Modern Scientific Knowledge], Moscow, Nauka, 1973: PP 9-16.

Kryukova, D. N., “Electromyographic Analysis of the Degree of 'firing of Human
Posture-Maintaining muscles Depending on the Shape of the Work Seat," GIG. TRUDA,
No 4. 1977, pp 12-16.

Kudin, P., nomov. 3., and Mit'kin, A., "Perception of Elementary Rhythmical
Compositions on a Plane,” MN. BSTB‘HKA, No 8. 1969, pp 10-11.

Kulak, I. A., "Psikhicheskiye i fiziologicheskiye funktsii organizna cheloveka

i sistema NOT“ [Mental and Physiological Functions of the Human Body and the
Scientific Organization of Labor System ], Minsk, Belorus', 1974, 256 pp.

Kurashvili, M. Ye.. and Doyakhcheva. o. 8., "Influence of Microclimate on
Thermoregulation of Polling-L'ress Operators in the Conditions of the Me-RDIIUIQ
Mill of the mtavi Metallurgical Plant," in “Voprosy gigiyeny truda.
professional'noy patologii i promyshlennoy toksikologii' [Problems of Labor
Hygiene, Occupational Pathology and Industrial toxicology]. Tbilisi, 1966, pp 23-31.

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
48.

49.

SO.

51.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58 .

59.

60.

61.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Layz, 6., and Vyunsh, 8., 'Paraneters of Adapting Workplaces to Man,‘I in
"Psikhofiziologicheskiye i esteticheskiye osnovy NOT" [Psychophysiological

and Bsthetic Principles of Scientific Organization of Labor], Moscow, NIItruda,
1967, pp 323-341.

Levitov, N. D., "Psikhologiya truda" [Labor Psychology], Moscow, Meditsina, 1964,
215 pp.

Iomv, B. P., "Ergonomics and Scientific organization of Labor,” SO'I‘S. TRUD,
No 8, 1969, pp 113-118.

Medved' , R. A., "Influence of High Frequency Intermittent Noise on the Central

Nervous System and on the Hearing Organ of workers in the Principal Occupations
of Forge Production," TR. (DR’KOVSK. MED. m-‘rn IM. S. M. KIKWA, No 23, 1968,

pp 57-63.

Mit'kin, A. A., and Kossov, B. F. , "The [buts of Visual Perception and Some
Ways of Its Organization," in "Problemy inzhenernoy psikhologii" [Problems of

Engineering Psychology}, Moscow, Nauka, 1967, pp 2-55.

Moykin, Yu. V., ”Piziologicheskiye osnovy nauchnoy organizatsii truda" Physio-
logical Principles of the Scientific Organization of Labor], Moscow, Meditsina,
1971, 128 pp. '

Moykin, Yu. V., and Poberezhskaya, A. S., 'Electromyographic Criteria of Tiring
in the Presence of Static Forces,“ GIG. mum, No 4, 1973, pp 17-20.

Moykin, Yu. V., Poberezhskaya, A. S., and Kryukova, D. N., “Experience in Making
the Work Pastures of Sewing Machine Operators More Efficient," GIG. TRUDA,
No 7, 1971, pp 24-27.

Orlova, '1‘. A. , "Problems bor'by s shumon na pronyshlennykh predpriyatiyakh"
[Noise Control at Industrial Enterprises], Moscow, leditsina, 1965, 208 pp.

"Osnovnyye trebovaniya nauchnoy organizatsii truda pri proyektirovanii pred-
priyatiy, tekhnologicheskikh protsessov i oborudovaniya" [Principal Requirements

of Scientific Organization of Labor Associated with the Planning of Enterprises,
Production Processes and Equipment], macaw, 1967, 197 pp.

Person, R. S., "Elektromiografiya v issledovaniyakh cheloveka" [Blectromyography
in Research on Man], Moscow, Nauka, 1969, 231 pp.

Piskun, L. , "Future Developments of the Plowing Tractor,“ TBKHNICHESKAYA ESTETIKA,
No 2, 1972, pp 2-4.

Rose, N. A., “Psikhomotorika vzroslogo cheloveka" [Psychomtor Functions of the
Adult Man], Leningrad, Izd-vo L60, 1970, 128 pp.

sidorov, O. A., "Piziologicheskiye faktory cheloveka, opredelyayushchiye
kompanovku posta upravleniya mashinoy" [ﬂu-an Physiological Factors Determining
the Layout of a Machine Control Post], Moscow, Oborongiz, 1962, 117 pp.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
()2.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strokina, A. N., “Anatomical Problems of Work Seat Design," TEIGIN. ESTE‘I'IKA,
No 11, 1979, pp 13-18.

Strokina, A., Plyushkine, 1., "Anatomical and Physiological Grounds of Some
Angular Parameters of the Work Seat,” TEKHN. ESTETIKA, No 7, 1972, p 12-13.

uflyand, Yu. M., ”Piziologiya dvigatel'nogo apparata cheloveka" [Physiology of
amen looonotor Apparatus], uningrad, Meditsina. 1965, 363 pp.

mksman, A. Yu., and Gryzlova, ‘r. A. , "Organizatsionnyy rezhim raboty potokov

so svobodnym ritmom" [Organization of Work on Plow Lines with an Unrestricted
Rhythm), Moscow, Legkaya industriya, 1972, 126 pp.

chcrnyshev, A. N., 'Ergonomika v poligrafii' [Ergonmics in Polygraphy], Moscow,
Kniga, 1969, 168 pp.

Chuknasova, G. T., Zbarskaya, V. Yu., Ripak, E. N., et al., "Hygiene and Labor
Physiology in Tube Rolling Mills,” in "Gigiyena, fiziologiya truda i
profpatologiya v sovrelnennom netallurgicheskom proizvodstve i gornorudnoy
promyshlennosti" (Hygiene, Labor Physiology and Occupational Pathology in
Modern Metallurgical Production and Mining Industry], Kiev, 1970, pp 21-24.

Shalyutin, S. M., “cybernetics and the Sphere of Its Application,” in
"Filosof3kiye voprosy kibernetiki" [Philosophical Problem of cybernetics] ,
Moscow, Sotsekgiz, 1961, pp 3-20.

shelyakhovskaya, N. K., "The Teuporary Mental Starting State in the Labor of
Student Turners at a Vocational-technical School,” Dissertation, Moscow,
1965, 21 pp. '

Shirokov, Yu. 6., Silant'yev, V. P.. and zinina, s. A., "l‘ensonetric Investiga-
tion of the Loads Experienced by the Hands of Motor Vehicle The Asseublers."
GIG. TRUDA, No 12, 1977, p 53-57.

Shumilina, A. I. , ”Experimental Analysis of Formation of Systemic Associations
in the Cortex and in Subcortical Formations During Development or Conditioned
Responses," in "Sovremennyye problemy fiziologii i patologii nervnoy sistemy"
[Modern Problems of Nervous System Physiology and Pathology], Moscow,
Meditsina, 1965, pp 240-255.

Shumilina, A. 1., "Neurophysiological Analysis of the Systemic Organization
of the Conditioned Reflex,“ in "Kiberneticheskiye aspekty v izuchenii raboty
mozga" [cybernetic Aspects in Research on the Work of the Brain], Moscow,
Nauka, 1970, pp 47-62.

Venda, v. P. (Editor), "Brgonomika. Problemy prisposobleniya usloviy truda k
cheloveku" Ergonomics. Problem of Adapting Working Conditions to Man],
translated from Polish, Moscow, Mir, 1971, 421 pp.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Akerblon, 8., "Anatomic and Physiologic Basis for the Construction of Seats,“
EMOMICS, Vol 12, 1969, pp 120-131.

Coupcau, I... and Besancon, K., 'Industrie siderurgique. Un aspect de 1'evo-

lution des risque: an 1aminage,“ anal. HAL. PROF MED. mm, Vol 28, 1967, pp
164-166.

De Vries. H. A., "Method for Evaluation of Muscle Fatigue and Endurance Prom
Electromyographic Fatigue Curves," A“. J. PHYS. MBD., Vol 47, 1968, pp 125-135.

Paverge, J. 11., Leplat, J., and Guique, s. 8., 'Przystosowanie maszyny di
czlowieka,‘ Warsaw, 1963, 216 pp.

Grandjean, B. , ”Physiologische Arbeitsgestaltung. neit Padan der Ergonomic,"
Trim and Munich, Oct, 1967, 268 pp.

Grandjcan. 3. , and Burandt, U., "Untersuchungen uber das Sitzverhalten
Buroangestellten und uber die Auswirkungen verschiedenartiger sitzprofile,“
ERGONOHICS, Vol 12, 1969, pp 338-348.

Hacker, 11., ”Some Psychological Aspects of Establishing 'l-lman-Centered'
Han-Machine Systems," in "20th International Congress of Psychology," 'nokyo,
1972.

Heidcr, 11., and 61:011. 3., “Belastungsunterschiede bei freier Arbeit und Ban-
derbeit,“ z. panvmrnmo, Vol 11, 1966, pp 303-310.

Mandel, A. C., ”Work-Chair With Tilting Seat," 3W5, Vol 19, 1976,
pp 157-164.

(Honmollin, H. de) Monmollen lbris de., "Sistemy chelovek i mashina' [Han and
Machine Systems], translated from French, lbscou, Mir, 1973, 255 pp.

Hurren, K. P. H., “Ergonomics . Man in His Working Environment," London,
Chapman and Hall, 1965 496 pp.

okon, J., "Paluszkiewica. Psychologia inzynieryjna,“ Warsaw, 1966, 306 pp.

(Rosner, .J.) Rozner, Yan., ”Adapting Working Conditions to Man," in "Brgonomika'
largonomics), Moscow, Mir, 1971, pp 25-30.

Schneider, H. 'r., and zippert, 11., "Das Sitzproblem in funktionell-anatomischer
sicht., MED. KLIN., Vol 27, 1961, pp 1164-1168.

Schobcrth, 11., "Das sitzmobel an Arbeitsplatz, DTSGL GESBLISCH. UNFALIREIL"
V01 4, 1965, pp 340-446.

Von H. Schu1tetus, "Die Ergonomie als Hilfamittel zur Gestaltung von Produkten
fur dun industricllen Gebrauch." ERGONOMICS, Vol 17, 1974, pp 515-527.

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90.

91.

92.

run |Il‘l‘|\ nu. UM. Ul‘lJ

Tichaucr, 8. R., "Ergonouics: The State of the Art," AM. INDUS'I'. HYG. ASS. J.,
V01 28, 1967. pp 105-108.

(Woodson, w., Oonover, D.) Vudson, 0., and Konover, 0., "Spravochnik p0
inzhencrnoy psikhologi. c‘lya inzhenerov ikhudozhnikov-konstruktozov" [Handbook

of Engineering Psycholx for Engineers and Designers] , translated from English.
Moscow, Mix, 1968, 518 pp.

"Kellermann, F. 111., van Hely, P. A., and Willem, P. J. (Editors), "Vadenecum
Ergonomics in Industry," Bindhoven, Centrex, 1963, 92 pp.

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oowrsrrrs

Introduction--s. I. Gorshkov, N. A. Kokhanova. I. H. Volkova . . . . . . .

I. OriginandEssenceofErgonomics... . . . .. . .... .. . .. .

Scientific-Technical Progress and the Origin of Ergonomics--
N.A.Kokhanova.s.I.Gorshkov ...................

The Mutual Relationships of Man and Teclmologyn'l‘he Fundamental
Problem of Ergonomics. Main stages in the Development of These
Mutual Relationships. The Tasks of Ergonomics--S. I. Gorshkov . . . .

The "Ergonomic System" Concept. Classification of Intrasystemic
Relationships--S.I.Gorshkov ....................

II. Methods of Studying an Ergonomic System-S. I. Gorshkov . . . . . . .

III. Hygienic Criteria of Ergonomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Physiological Basis of the Biological Action of Factors in the
Production Environmentns. I. Gorshkov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

'Ihe Ergonomic Approach to standardizing Factors in the Work
Environment--I.A.Goncharov..... ... .. . .... .. ... .

IV. Psychophysiological Criteria of Ergonomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dimensional Considerations at the Workplace-4!. A. Kokhanova . . . . .

Consideration of the Functional Characteristics of Analyzers-- . . . .
N.A.Kokhanova .

The Power and Speed Characteristics of the Human Body, and Their
Consideration in the Design of Equipment Controls--N. A. Kokhanova . .

Some Characteristics of Ergonomic Requirements on the Design of
Equipment to be Operated by Homer-S. I. Gorshkov . . . . . . . . . .

umber of Operations Required in the Use of Production Equipment--
s.l.Gorshkov............................

Characteristics of Informational Interaction During the Use of
Production Equipmentns. I. Gorshkov, I. M. Volkova . . . . . . . .

Consideration of Pscyhological Factors in Ergonomics--S. I. Gorshkov,
I.h.Goncharov ...........................

165

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
V.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Scientific-mchnical Progress and Solutions of the Problems of
Ergonomics in Application to Certain Forms of Occupational Activity .

Machine 'nool (peretions in Machine Building-4!. A. Kokhanova . . . . .

Control Console Operators and Overhead Crane Operators in tube Rolling
Industry--A.N.Zelenkin.......................

Keyboard Computer Operators--E. P. shardakova . . . . . . . . . . . .

Conveyor Lines with Alternating Manual and Automated Operationsus. I.
s. I. Gorshkov, I. A. Goncharov, Ye. G. Zhakhmetov, P. P. Hozhayev . .

Spinning and Weaving Production--S. I. Gorshkov, I. M. Volkova . . . .
Leather Production--I. A. Goncharov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Contribution of Ergonomics to Research on Labor Hygiene,
PhysiologyandPaychology ......................

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Meditsina", 1979

11004

C80:

8144/1611 - END -

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

210
211

230
248

255
258
279

298