APPROVID FOR NIL-“I: ROOT/0210.: CIA-RDPOZ-OOCGOROOO"00030020-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030020-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8317

7 March 1979

PERISHING 0F WINTER CROPS

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE MLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030020-5
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or {Excerpt} in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itemslare as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNIIG WISHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
“”3" ' _— .—

390!" DOCUMENMMN ultimo-r no. a. Is lot-ensure him.» no
not -.:- JPRS L 8317
0. “I. W Mlle I m on.
7 March 19 '
PERlSlich 0F HlNTER CROPS s I
0. MM Consumes Int
9. W Mean” ”on one Home ] - A is. mun-mu UM In
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road a. Cont-um so am» as.
Arlington, Virginia 22201 an
m
umugwwuummlmu llfnssiloandhmcm

As above

It.

 

It WWII-us

WPRHVANIYE OleﬂlOl KUL'TUR, Leningrad. 1977

It “mm (w no no»

This report contains a sunary of the sunny years of experimental studies on
the physiological processes resulting in the loss of winter crops by rotting
during the winter and early spring period. Data is analyzed concerning the
growth and devoloplent of plants in the fall, winter and spring as a factor
affecting the wintering ability of winter wheat and rye. Agroneieorologicsl
factors causing the rotting of winter crops and lows effecting their seasonal
changes are also examined. Methods are described for long-term forecasting
in various zones of the USSR.

     
  
   
   
  
  
   
  

II. M Mun-e 0. W00

USSR Crop losses Snow
Hlnior wheat. Agroueteorological factors Rotting
winter rye Forecasting Hold

I. ism/Osman. Um

    
   
 

‘ W" W 020 06» car
10. new helm

For Official Use Only. Limited
Vuaber of Copies Available fro- JPRS.

   
  
    

IO. m cm m» m
UNCLASSIFIED

D. Strut-t1 Clue am has!

UNCLASSIFIED
Casual-lulu “Mam mm:

M, ans-)1

~.-‘.-.. .A A.—

ll. “ﬂing"
193

mm.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8317

7 March 1979

PERISHING 0F WINTER CROPS

Leningrad VYPREVINIYE OZIMYKH KUL'TUR in Russian 1977 signed

to press 22 Apr 77 pp 1-168

[Book by F.M. Kuperman and V.A. Moiseychik, Gidrometeoizdat,

3,200 copies]

Commas

Experimental Research on Physiological Processes That Cause
Perishing of “inter Crops Under Snou...............................

Research on the Processes of Growth and Developsent of Plants
in the Autumn-Hinter-Spring Period as Pastors in the Formation
of winter-Hardy "inter Crops.......................................

Main Agroneteorological Factors Causing Perishing of "inter
Crops Under Snow and Patterns of Their Seasonal Change...........H

Quantitative Evaluation of Agra-eteorological Conditions of
wintering and the Condition of Winter Crops in Regions Hith
a Deep Snow Cover..................................................

The Effects of Agroaeteorologicsl Conditions on the Cross YielJ
of Grain and the Area on Hhich Winter Plants Perish Under the

snov....u.......o.o..-u.on...nu..."u............uo..uuu.

Methods of Coaparing Long-Tern Predictions of Perishing of “inter
Crops Under Snow...................................................

The Probability of Perishins of "inter Crops Under the Snow in
Various Zones of the USSR..........................................

In Lieu of a Conclusion..............................................

Bibliography.........................................................

- a - [I - USSR - 8 F000]

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

PAGE

31

87

123

137
148

166
173
176
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00050R000100030020-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATION DATA

English title

PERISHM OP WINTER

Russian tit lo

0.

WPRBVANIYE OZIHYIOI

Author (a) F. H. Kupemn and ‘

Editor (s)

Publishing Rouse = Gidronsteoizdst
Plsce of Publicstion 3 Leningrad
Date of Publication 3 1977
- Signed to press : 22 Apr 77
- Copies : 3,200
COPYRIGHT : cidroleteoizdst. 197

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00850R000100030020-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH ON PHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSES THAT CAUSE PERISBING 0P
"INTER CROPS ORDER 8N0"

[Text] The perishing of winter crops under snow is an extrnauly couple: process.
It is observe] when the plan” renain for an extended tine at a temperature
close to 0°C (0, 13’0) and when the soil. under a heavy snow cover, is
without light and is frozen to a slight depth. Under these conditions the
plants intensely expend supplies of nutritive substances in the leaves

and tillering nodes and they becose exhausted. With s shortage of oxygen
and an excess of carbon dioxide in the plant tissues there is destruction

of the cells. undifferentiated. anoaalous growth of the vegetative cones.
deco-position of piglents and a nuaber of other phenonsna that lead to
damage and destruction both of individual shoots and of whole plants. Plants
like these that are weakened in the winter. after the snow is gone and
below-zero temratures return in the spring. are damaged by less severe
frosts than they are in the autum and winter. They are easily susceptible
to fungal diseases. the nest widespread of which when the plants have been
damaged under the snow are various form of snow mold and collar rot.

Damage to plants under snow is observed priaarily in the nonchernosem zone
of the RSPSR--on heavy soils with poor water penetrsbility. But in a nueber
of years it covers large territories. including the western regions of the

USSR.

A considerable thinning of winter plantings under an abundant snow cover
was observed as early as 1905 by V. V. Viner at the Shstilovskaya Bxperinental
Station [35]. According to his data, the deeper the snow cover, the more

severe the thinning.

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the winter of 1927/28 when there was mass freezing of winter crops in the
southern regions. in Hoacow and Ivanovsknya Oblasts. ‘in the Belorussian

SSR and in e nuaber of northern regions of the European territory of the
Soviet Union. winter plantings were severely hat-ed because of daaage under
snow. During this winter the snow fell on soil in which only the surface
layer was frozen and then, under a layer of AO-SO centimeters of snow, the

soil completely thawed out. The snow renained for sore than 5.5 aonths
that winter.

A considerable anount of destruction under an excessive snow cover is also
observed under mountainous conditions [‘6].

The ujority of researchers thought that the destruction of winter crops
under a deep layer of snow takes place either because of a shortage of
oxygen or because of suffocation with carbon dioxide gas that is discharged
by the plants.

In 1930/31 1. I. Tumanov and in the winters of 1931/32 and 1932/33 he in
conjunction with I. N. Borodina and 1'. V. Oleynikova [36] in Pushkin
(Detakaya Selo) conducted a large series of experiments. 0n the basis of
certain data concerning the content of oxygen in the dense firn snow
Tuunov expressed doubts about the possibility of the plants' destruction
because of a shortage of oxygen under the snow.

I. I. Tunnnov fornulated the problem in setting up his experiments in the
following way: "First. to test the generally accepted opinion about the
destruction of winter plantings under a deep snow cover from suffocation.
Along with this, we explained the conditions for the destruction of winter
plants under snow, established the causes of the destruction and the
physiological bases of of the resistance of winter crops to the snow cover
and developed Isthods of evaluating the resistance of winter crops to
damage under snow. In addition to past analyses, we periodically checked
the anount of danage and destruction of winter plantings under snow and
deter-ined changes in the frost resistance of winter crops as well as the
content of carbohydrates." [36]

Thus I. I. Tusanov outlined and implelented a large program of special
experinents for studying the perishing of plants under snow. The results
he obtained were verified under various conditions and augmented by many
physiologists and agroneteorologista and although by now a cooperatively
large anount of new Iatarial has been accumulated, the classical experiments
of I. I. Tumanov are still of great interest.

without discussing the sethodology of gas analysis of the air adopted by
I. I. Tunanov, let us note that when the oxygen content in the air above
the snow is about 90.2 percent, under a snow cover of 50 centimeters three
nonths after it has fallen the oxygen content at the surface of the soil
ranged between 20.8 and 22 percent and the «32 content did not exceed 1.85
percent. With note precise analyses the figures obtained were 02-21.6
percent and 002--0.9l percent.

2
FOR OH’ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the winter of 1931/32 the experiments were conducted when the snow cover
remained constant at 100 centimeters throughout the winter. The content of
02 gradually decreased but after four months it had decreased only by 1.5
percent and was no less than 20-25 percent. The tewersture under the
loo-centimeter snow cover during the course of four months ranged from

0 to :i- 2'c. the plants breathed intensively and they consumed oxygen.

The insignificant change in the 02 content show that even with a 1-meter
layer of snow the gas exchange provided for the vital activity of the winter
plants.

has the gas analogies showed that there was a sufficient quantity of
oxygen. but the winter plants died under these conditions. Consequently

it was proved with precise experiments that the destruction of winter plants
at a temperature close to 0°C takes place not from suffocation as was
previously supposed before the experiments of I. I. hmnov.

In order to explain the degree to which a SO-centimeter cover of snow
Ham winter plants, the minimum temerature of the air under the snow
was measured for three years (Figure l).

   

'“zoxmzaynmmn
I U _W /V

 

Figure 1. Change of temperature under snow cover of 50 cm (1)
and 10 cm (2) and air temperature at time of observa-
tions (3) [34]

As one can see from Figure l, in 1931/32 the air temperature under a
SO-centimeter snow cover did not drop below -6.5'C while the temperature
under a lO-centimeter snow cover. with severe frosts. dropped to -10 - -l6’C,
even though it was higher than the air temersture. me minimum air
temersture in the winter of 1932/33 dropped to -20 - ~21'C. but under a
lO-lS-centimeter snow cover it did not drop below -8 - -1o°c and under a
SO-centimeter snow cover it was not lower than 4°C. An increase in the
layer of snow from 50 to 100 centimeters had relatively little effect on the
teqersture conditions for the plants that were under the snow. Under

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

such a layer of snow it is detersined more by the freezing of the soil
before the snow cover was for-ed.

Very frequently when snow falls on thawed soil the plants spend a long
tine in the dark in an unfrozen condition bt o'c. According to
observations of N. N. Kalitin. cited by N. N. Yakovlev [M], 20 percent

of the radiation on the surface of the snow penetrates to a depth of

10 centimeters in dry snow and about 1 percent of the radiation penetrates
to a depth of 50 centiaeters.

K. H. Pyyklik [27]. in connection with research of the phenonena of plant
destruction under snow. also studied the total radiation that passed
through the snow to various depths. He established that while the snow
allows from 10 to 15.8 percent of the total radiation falling on the _
surface to pass through to a depth of 3 centimeters, half as nuch passes
through to a depth of 8 centieeters and no sore than 2.3-3.4 percent to
a depth of 15 centimeters (Table 1). According to the data of P. P.
Kuz'nin. as N. N. Yakovlev notes [(06]. even in the first S-centileter
layer of snow. from 36 to 88-percen: of all the radiation penetrating
the snow cover is absorbed. depending on its density and transparency.

Table 1. Total Radiation at Various Depths Under Snow Cover

 

  
 

CW maes-

  
  

 
 

 

"’°..':‘..°:..‘::‘°" __3_2_.H__ an
(2) canal-ml s .QL'mnl s mesh-III) s

(5)": nest-puma

cu We ”.0 I” 33.6 [W 5| .

(6)"; {insane I ‘ l0 . 1 5 100
- cu . . 6. [5.8 6.5 12.6
15 ca 0.3 2.3 La 3.4 1.5 2.9

1. Total radiation

2. Depth fron surface of snow
3. Cal/(cl2 ' Iin)

lo. 0n surface of snow

5. At depth of:

Autumn overnoistening of the upper layers of soil in a nuwer of regions
of the USSR also affects the wintering of winter plantings under a deep

snow cover—the probability of damage increases. Thus K. H. Pyyklik
[27] notes that under the conditions of the Estonian 5511, in order to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL HSI’. ONLY

diagnose the destruction of winter plants under snow it is necessary to

take into account the condition of the autumn moisture content of the
soil.

N. N. Yakovlev [4k] in 1937/38 beginning on 25 November. created an
excessive snow cover to a height of 60-70 centimeters; before that the
layer of snow remained at 20-25 centimeters. Under these conditions the
destruction of Hoskovskaya 2611 winter wheat, determined at various times
from 25 November through 25 March on plots with various degrees of moisture,
in February with excessive moisture was twice as great as with normal
moisture content. The longer the excessive snow cover remained, the
greater the destruction of the plants. When the plants remained under

a deep snow cover for an extended period of time (up to 150 days) the
destruction on excessively moist soil reached 57 percent and on naturally
moist soil-24 percent, when in all cases the soil was frozen by the time
the snow fell (down to 34-38 centimeters).

Consequently. under a snow cover of 50-100 centimeters with a temperature
that does not drop below ~5'c, the freezing of the plants. like suffocating
from a shortage of air, was ruled out in the experiment of N. N.

Yakovlev [54].

In order to explain the causes of the destruction of winter crops when they
remain under snow, it was necessary to turn to a study of physiological
processes that take place in winter plants. It was necessary to
investigate the dynamics of the sugars in the first and second halves of
the winter. to explain the respiration energy of the plants under a snow
cover and to take into account the importance of the age, stages of
development. bushiness, depth of tillering nodes and a nunber of other
indicators of the physiological conditions of the plants during the
autumn, winter and spring periods. It was necessary to explain the con-
dition of rest at temperatures close to 0°C and also to investigate the
growth of leaves under the snow. which was repeatedly noted by many
writers, especially the growth and differentiation of the vegetative
cone.

After it was established that the destruction of winter crops under an
excessive snow cover is not the result of suffocation of the plants from

a shortage of oxygen and that plants perish under snow with adequate

gas exchange, I. l. Tumanov [36,35] began research on the resistance of
plants to destruction under snow depending on their condition before the
beginning of the winter and also those processes that take place in winter
plants during the winter period. Here special attention was devoted to the
dynamics of the carbohydrate content during the autumn, winter and early
spring periods. He investigated plants that were planted at various
times. plants of various ages. plants that were well tempered and plants
that had not been tempered before the beginning of winter under the
conditions of various snow covers.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result of three years of experiments it was established that the
intensivcnesa of the expenditure of sugars under a deep snow cover in more
significant at a temperature close to 0°C than at temperatures of -5,
-8'c and lower. it also became clear that well tempered plants expend
sugar under a deep snow cover considerably more "economically" than untem-
pared plants do. Under these conditions the content of sugars in temred
plants decreased in the tillering nodes from 25 to 7.5 percent and in the
leaves. from 17.6 to 5 percent. while in untempered plants it decreased
to 2-2.5 percent. Moreover in tempered plants that have accumulated more
sugars since autumn. the "critical minimum" of the content of sugars
(about 2-5 percent) comes later than in untempered plants. Entering the
winter with a smaller supply of sugars, poorly tempered plants begin to
starve under deep snow considerably earlier than well-tempered plants do.

In a special experiment plants that were well tempered under natural
conditions were compared with plants that were preliminarily kept for
10-12 days in a warm greenhouse where tempering decreased significantly.
Almost all of the untempered plants died (only 6-11. percent of the plants
survived) while 61-52 percent of the well tempered plants remained

unt“ spring under these conditions.

The number of surviving tempered plants fluctuated somewhat in various
years but in all years there were significant differences in the
resistance to damage under snow between tempered and untempered plants.

Three years of experiments confirm that the length of time the plants
spend under the snow has a great influence on their damage. The longer
the period a deep snow cover remains and the later the snow disappears
from the plantings, the more sugars they expend and the more severely
they are exhausted and thinned.

A systematic analysis of specimens of plants that have been under a
constant snow cover of 50 and 90 centimeters showed that winter rye did
not die off for approximately 2 months. but in the third month the
destruction accelerated. With untemered winter wheat plants the
destruction proceeded throughout the entire winter and a typical picture
of perishing under snow was observed.

Thus even the early experiments of Tumanov confirmed observations of
agrometeorologists and agronomists that perishing under snow takes place
only when the plants spend an extended period of time under deep snow
cover.

Experimental investigations of the links between the dynamics of sugars
and the perishing of winter crops under a deep snow cover have been

conducted by many writers. K. H. Pyyklik [27]. for example. reports on
his experiments in connection with expenditures of sugars by plants during
the winter. His data are presented in table 2. From these data it is

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

clear that a connection exists between expenditures of sugars and the
temperature of the soil at the depth of the tillering nodes of the plants.
The most rapid expenditure of sugar took place in the winters of 1955/56
and 1958/59 when the temperature at the depth of the tillering node was
almost constantly elevated. The expenditure of sugars was auch less in

1956/57 and 1957/58 and least of all in the winter of 1959/60 when the
temperature was the lowest.

Table 2. Expenditure of Sugars in "inter Rye in the winter Period

   
   
   
  

 

 

2 9“ CM“ tyros-Mn par-u
(1) 3.3:; “h ""34"" has: I r
font in on vs, no a" “
yumgerwn s1 u-y-v
”65,56 0. —I 1.65 2.!6
”56/57 , -0.5. -2 Mo [.53
1957/58 0. —-1 LG! [.60
”58/50 0. —-l L66 “2.58
1959/60 —2. -5 0.90 0.9%
Key:
1. Years
2. Intervals of predominant tewerstures at the depth of the tillering
node ('C)

3. Average daily expenditure of sugars in the winter (“‘8 Per 1 g
of dry substance)

lo. In the leaves

5. In the tillering nodes

1has the beginning of wintering until the period of intensive snow aelting
in the spring.

Taking into account the fact that one cannot create a snow cover of the
necessary depth everywhere or every year. in 1935 l. I. Tmaanov [36]
suggested that when evaluating various strains of winter crops for
resistance to destruction under snow. experiments be conducted in dark
thermostatic rooms and that the boxes of plants be covered with a layer of
wet sawdust instead of snow. This way a temperature close to 0°C is
easily maintained for a long period of time at the level of the plants
and if necessary it can be regulated. Wet sawdust makes it possible to
maintain the moisture of the air at the point close to saturation as it
is in natural conditions under a deep snow cover. The results obtained
in the experiments with wet sawdust corresponded to the results of field
experiments under snow.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The condition of the soil during the winter-~thawed or frozen--has a
great influence on the expenditure of sugars. Thawed soil shows that
under the snow the temperature was O‘C or a little higher all the tine.
The expenditure of stored substances in the plants is especially great
under a deep snow cover when the soil is thawed.

In the winter of 1955/56 at the experimental basis in Kuuziku on one

plot of winter rye a thawed condition of the soil was artifically created
(by regulation of the snow cover) and on another-a frozen condition. The
difference in the temperature of the soil on the plots was insignificant--
an average of 0.5-1'c. The difference in the expenditure of sugars by the
plants that spent the winter in thawed and frozen soil, both in the leaves
and in (he tillering nodes. reached 60 percent. Considerably more plants
died in the thawed soil.

Horeover. during the course of three winters (from 1959 through 1962)

other experisents were conducted in Kuuziku. In order not to allow
freezing of the soil on the winter rye field. at the beginning of wintering
one plot was covered with a layer of sawdust 20 centiseters thick.

In the winter of l9S9/l960. as a result of an exceptionally severe freeze
in December, the soil even under sawdust froze slightly (3-6 centimeters).
but in the second half of the winter it thawed. At the end of the snow
thaw (20 April) one-fourth of the plants under the sawdust had died and

in the leaves of the reanining plants there was 2-5 percent sugars and

in the tillering nodes--7-9 percent.

In 1960/61 in the winter rye under sawdust even by 16 January the supply
of sugars had decreased to 7 percent in the leaves and to 12 percent in
the tillering nodes. A significant decline or the plants under sawdust
began at the end of February. In the beginning of March in the leaves of
the live plants there was 3-6 percent sugars and in the tillering nodes-
7-9 percent. By the middle of April all the plants had died.

Thus in thawed soil. that is. at a teaperature of 0°C and higher. the
expenditure of sugars takes place 2-6 times sore rapidly than in frozen
soil and after winter crops have been in thawed soil for 2-3 sonths they
begin to die-slowly at first and in the second half of March and the first
half of April. in large nusbers.

One of the main reasons for the intensive expenditure of sugars under a

deep snow cover is the accelerated expenditure of sugars for respiration.

V. A. Hoiaeychik [22]. utilizing the data of N. V. Sawinskiy. obtained

at the Sobakino Agroaeteorological Station, established that the expenditures
in winter rye with a reduced tesperature at the depth of the tillering

node from 6.0 to 1.5'C increased 1.6-fold when the initial supplies of

sugar were 10-18 percent. In plants with supplies of sugars of 26-28

percent in the middle of the winter the ease increase in the expenditure

of sugars was observed with a considerably lesser increase in the tesperature
at the depth of the tillering node (free 7 to 5'6).

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. a. Noiseychik [22]. like other researchers later. established that
a large supply of sugars in winter crops with a sore developed grass
stand is expended on respiration more rapidly (subsequently it became
clear that this is also true of growth processes). This is one of the
reasons [or the great thinning when overgrown planted areas spend the
winter under snow. l. i. Tumanov thinks that weakly tempered plants
expend sugars considerably sore rapidly at the same teaperntures (2-3
tines). I. M. Petunia [23] using the fomula for respiration

“6"1205 + coz 6602 + 6ll20 (1)

and the atomic weights of elements that comprise this formula. determined
the amount of the ratio between discharged carbon dioxide and expended
sugar (glucose). By dividing the weights of glucose molecules by the
weight of the carbon dioxide discharged during respiration. he established
that in terms or weight the sugar expended during respiration is 0.682

the weight of the discharged carbon dioxide. Taking into account the
dependency of the quantity of carbon dioxide discharged during the process
of respiration on the temperature. he calculated the amount of expenditure
of sguars by the plant on respiration during a day (in milligrams) per

l gram of dry substance (Table 3).

Table 3. Expenditure of Sugars by Hell-Developed and Tempered Plants of
winter Crops on Respiration Under a Snow Cover During One Day.
Depending on the Temperature

(1) Truman-pa. ’C 7 6 5 4 J 2 l o —l
(2) PICIOJ raxspus.
wt ...... 9.06 9.07 am 1.56 6.9! 6.3l 5.“ 5.23 4.13

(1)1’cwncpatypa.’C -2 -3 -¢ —5 —o -1 -a -9 —l0
(2) Panda rnspus.
. .. 4.27 3.04 3.43 3.05 2.66 2.30 1.97 [.66 1.31

llf

Key:
l. Tesperature. 'c
2. Expenditure of sugars. sg

The perishing of plants does not begin immediately upon the expenditure
or supplies of sugar. but considerably later. since the plants are
capable of augsenting then to a certain degree by transforming a large
supply of starch into sugars. But then plant starvation takes place
(expenditure of proteins and decomposition of the tissues of the plant
cells) and a second phase of perishing of winter crops under snow begins.
nae plants begin to expend protein when they have only 2-6 percent sugars

FOR OFFICU‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

left. This takes place usually at the end of the winter and during the
period of melting of the snow. The expenditure of proteins is dangerous
for the life of the plants also because the heat discharged in this process
creates favorable conditions for the development of licroorganisms and
the growth of mycelia of various fungi. The latter. growing rapidly and
powerfully on the starving plants. sharply accelerate the expenditure of
protein. which leads to death first of the leaves that touch the soil and
then the bottoms of the shoots and subsequently also the tillering nodes
of winter crops. The longer the period of starvation the more the plants
are damaged from being under the snow. The results of an analysis of
materials from many years of observations have made it possible for V. A.
Moiseychik to come to the conclusion that all or the majority of plants

die when the period of starvation is no less than 30-50 days and the
melting of snow takes a long time [22].

But. as l. l. Tumanov made clear as early as 1935. the exhaustion of
plants does not directly cause their death. Thus in special experiuents
in certain variants the leaves of winter plants were cut and removed
before they were covered with snow-only one tillering node and the root
system went through the winter. In this variant 85 percent of the plants
survivod and produced aftergrowth. In the second variant when the above-
ground part was cut off at the same time but not removed and left lying
on the plot. only 33 percent of the plants survived. The exhaustion of
the winter plants was the same but in places where the leaves were not cut
and also in places where the cut leaves remained on the plot. snow mold
developed. 0n the plots where the leaves were removed there was no snow
mold.

It is probably no accident that when there has been abundant growing of
winter crops in the autumn farmers have grazed animals on areas planted
in winter crops before the beginning of winter. And although the grazing
of animals on winter plantings also caused damage to the plants. it was
apparently less than the damage from spending the winter under the snow.

There are interesting experiments with cutting back the plants in the autum
under the conditions of three backgroundsna natural snow cover, an
excessive snow cover and without snow [‘6]. The plants were cut back at

the end of September to a height of 10 centimeters and the mass that was
cut was removed. 0n the background of a natural snow cover there were

no essential differences in the wintering; when there was no snow the
tillering nodes not covered by leaves suffered more; and under conditions

of an excessive snow cover the removal of the cut mes—the nutritive
environment for the development of funginled to a reduction of the death
of plants from spending the winter under snow (Table 6).

The mass appearance of snow mold on the planted areas usually coincides
with the end of winter when the plants are already weak and exhausted and
when. under the influence of starvation. there is an intensive decomposition

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or proteins and the quantity of nitrogen compounds necessary for the
development of snow nold increases. Moreover the smaller the uses of
leaves. the less the fungi develop. which is clear fro. experiments with
plants that have been cut back.

Table 6. Death of Plants that were Cut Back and Not Cut Back in the

 

  
   
  
  
 

Fall (7.)
Canvas stapes . ‘
(1) (nervousness I‘D-alumna S52 "cu."
““3“ alum." . Mull

 

 

(”Kanpoua. ms nu I‘M 24.5 42.6 0.!
$10 Inns. mm mm 24.0 no.0 35.4 64.6
11 Dylan-us. I959 32.! 26.9 '12.!) 24.! ”.9

 

 

Key:
1. Place of observations and year of experiment
2. Snow cover

3. Natural 8. Not cut back
lo. Excessive 9. Koatrosa, 1938
5. No snow 10. Ovtsino. 1960
6. Plants 11. Pushkin. 1959
7. Cut back

Thus it has been established that starving creates the necessary
preconditions and snow sold kills the plants under these conditions. Under
conditions favorable for the developsent of sycelie of fungi (taperatune
under the snow-about o‘c and higher, sir hueidity—about 90 percent).

the destruction of the plants begins within several days.

The experimental data obtained by l. I. Tulanov [36] enabled his to single
out three qualitatively different phases depending on the physiological
prorcssoﬂ predominating during the course of perishing of the plants:
first—carbohydrate exhaustion. seeond--starvstion and disintegration of
organic substances. and third--the death of the plants with the develop-eat
of fungal diseases.

As has already been confirmed by other researchers. the first phase of
perishing is characterized by hydrocarbon exhaustion of the plants. when
the tesperature under the snow is close to o'c the winter plants saintain
a marked respiration energy and the process of growth of the vegetative
cones and root systes continues alsost continuously. although weakly.
Each day even weak (especially with tesperatures somewhat above freezing)
expenditures of sugars on respiration and growth during the course of an
extended period under the snow cover are accusulated and finally lead to
an alsost cosplete exhaustion of the plants.

11
FOR OFFICII‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The process of exhaustion of the plants continues for 2-3 months. The
expenditure of sugars increases especially at the beginning of March, with
the exception of those years when the tenperature of March drops sharply
and the soil freezes to a deeper level.

Expenditure of sugars in winter crops increases sharply. which was
repeatedly observed by K. H. Pyyklik [27] during the period of intensive
snow eelting. especially at the end of this period (up to 5 milligrams and
more per 1 gram of dry substance). The perishing of plants increases
sharply during this period 5-6 days before the snow is gone. which frequently
has a decisive significance for the plants' survival through the winter.
Thus K. H. Pyyklik in 1951 conpared the results of an analysis of specimens
of winter rye planted at an optimum time which were taken on 12 and 20
March at the time of intensive snow melting on the fields. During these

8 days the quantity of sugars in the tillering nodes decreased from 20.1

to l3.2 percent and in the leavesm-from l2.8 to 6.5 percent, which amounted
to approximately 8-9 milligrams a day. In the subsequent days the content
of sugars dropped to 3-4 percent.

The works of other writers also confirmed that the most active expenditure
of sugars takes place under conditions of melting snow where the temperature
remains stable at about o'c and the high soisture content contributes to the
rapid hydrolisis of sugars in the damaged plant tissues. The quantity of
sugars in the leaves and especially in the tillering nodes before entering
the winter is of great significance for the survival of winter plants under
a deep snow cover.

The first experiments of l. l. Tueanov [3b. 35] showed that teepered plants
that accumulate a high percentage of sugars in the autusn remain longer and
the second phase, starvation. begins later in thee. Therefore one should
discuss the factors that determine the degree of autumn tempering of plants
under the conditions of the nonchernozem zone.

As we know. according to the theory of tempering developed by physiologists.
a considerable increase in the content of sugars in the leaves and
especially in the tillering nodes is a result of the fact that in the

autumn during sunny days the processes of photosynthesis proceed relatively
intensively in wheat plants and in the evening, night and morning hours when
the tespersture is reduced their processes of respiration and growth slow
down. which leads to the accusulation of sugars. The longer the transition
period from high temperatures in autumn to lower temperatures in the winter
and the more optieal these teeperatures are for tespering. the more inten-
sively the process of accumulation of sugars in the tillering nodes takes

place.

Table 5 gives figures from an cxperisent during which. after remaining
at a temperature of 5°C for 16 days. the plants withstood from 2 to 5 days
at temperatures of -2. -S and -7'C. From these data it is clear that the

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

maximu- Ionosugars were accmulsted in the variant with 16 days at a
temperature of 5°C plus 2 days with -2'c and the largest number of di-sugars
was accuaulatad in the variant with 16 days at 5'6 plus 2 days at -7'c.

Table 5. Accmulation of Sugars in Various Strains of Hinter wheat
(x of Dry Substance)

     
      

lluwsasal‘ C

   

(”h 22 4 .'
10 am?" 22.9 ..
1-1 Pswasy 22.J .1
12 111136: Ransom) l2.l 15.5

Key:
1. 110 days at 5'0 7. Di-sugar
2. control 8. Strain
3. + 2 days at -2'C 9. Hinkhardi
b. + 5 days at -5°C 10. Yanetaka
S. + 2 days at -7'C 11. Rinpan
6. Mono-sugar 12. Shtuhe Dikkopf

One of the essential factors that provide for good tapering of the plants
and accumulation of sugars is optisal planting tines that correspond to
the best agro-Iaeteorological conditions for the growth of the plants and
the strain peculiarities of winter crops [2, 7, 13, 16, 22. 27. 25. 29].

K. M. Pyyklik [27] notes that winter crops planted at the optilal tile
accumulate in the tillering nodes an average of 10-15 percent sore and
in certain years even 20-30 percent lore than plants planted at later tines.

The period of auto-n tmering of winter plants and the accumulation of

sugar» is usually observed when the average daily tempering of the air
steadily decreases to 8-5’0 with a large daily temperature range [22].

Observations of the dynallic accumulation of sugars in 1932/33 at the
Khar'kovskaya experiaental station in such strains of winter wheat as
Oyurahl'. Perrugineua 1239. Gostianua 237 and Ukrainlu showed that Inst of
the sugars were in the tillering nodes: up to 30-45 percent of then were
accumulated under conditions when the teaperature for 13-16 hours reached
lS-ZO'C and at sight dropped to 2-3‘0 [7]. Smary data are also given
for the Estonian 58R. Thus in the autum of 1961 during the third ten

13

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

days of September and the first five days of October there was dry sunny
weather. the average daily temperature was s-9'c. the maximum—l3-17'C and
the minimal-- -1 - +3'C. By the end of this period the winter plants
had accumulated about 30 percent of the sugars.

If the average daily temperature rises to above 9-lO'C or there is
considerable cloudiness, the accumulation of sugars is retarded and in a
number of cases the quantity of already accumulated sugars. especially in
the leaves. decreases considerably. with comparatively low temperatures
(average daily—34°C). the accumulation of sugars is already slowing up
even though this process continues right up to the time when the average
daily temperatures are below 0. K. H. Pyyklilt [27] in his work gives a
description of the conditions for the tewering of winter rye and the
course of accumulation of sugars for a number of years (Table 6. 7).

when analyzing days that are favorable or unfavorable for tempering. the
course of them and their distribution throughout the autum is significant.
If clear sunny days predominate over overcast ones throughout the entire
autumn. the process of tempering proceeds almost continually until the end
of the growing period. If after the days that are favorable for tempering
there appear overcast days and the temrature increases, frequently

the accumulated supplies of substances are used by the plants for growth
of the organs and the sugar content decreases.

It has been established that about 90 percent of the sugars in the tillering
nodes in the tempered plants are localized by buriers that are difficult

to penetrate. This property of tempered plants keeps the sugar firmly in
undamaged cells and is possibly one of the reasons for the reduced loss of
sugars under conditions where the temerature is close to o’c, which in
itself does not damage the cells. especially in the first half of the
winter.

The dynamics of hydrocarbons can show the degree of the plants' readiness
for wintering. But only after the temperatures begin to drop below zero
can one determine the content of sugars with which the winter crops will
enter the winter. "hen the temerstures drop below zero before the snow
falls in cold winters (especially in the first half of the winter). the
content of aucroses continues to increase and the more winter hardy the
strain. the higher it is. During warm winters the proportion of simple
forms of sugars increases. above all fructoses [31].

Hany writers have engaged in the development of methods for diagnosing
the condition of winter wheat in terms of the hydrocarbon content. Thus
N. I. Goysa, R. V. Gatsenho and I. I. Kovtun in 1975 published the results
of comprehensive research during 1967-1971. mey tested strains of the
Hironovskaya selection-~Himnovskaya 808. Hironovshaya Yubileynaya.
Lyutestsens 2A”. 2917. 2877 and also Bezostaya l and Odesskaya 16.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6. Connection Between the Conditions for Tenpering Sangostc Winter
Rye Planted at the Optinol Tine and the Quantity of Sugars at
the End of the Teapering Period

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) | £33.. W. : Yuan- maneuv-
I Ila!" IN".
... was: ..... «~- (22
In." ' 6 7 £«.& nun
‘ Cl run“ .502... m ml
1%5 3|? 4 I l a 3
1956 146 1 6 7 3
1931 192 5 H 9 3
1956 232 1 ll Id ‘l
[959 152 5 0 s 3
1900 I99 0 2 l 2
Key:
1. Year

2. Total effective temperatures from planting tine until end of
growing period

3. Tewering conditions

b. Quantity of sugars (Z)

5. Huber of days

6. Good2

7. Average

8. Expressed in term of good ones

9. Evaluation at end of period3

10. In leaves

11. In tillering nodes

1A "good" day is expressed as l and an "average" day. 1/2.

2A good day-clear, eunny. not cloudy weather; avenge—slightly cloudy or
with variable cloudiness

3Eveluation made with 5-point eyeten: l--very poor conditions for tempering;
S--excellent condi tions .

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 7. Connection Between the Conditions for Tcspering Sangaste Hinter
Rye Planted at the Optiael Tine and the Quantity of Sugars in
the Tillering Nodes

 

:3. {germ gas.

<8 I1 10m (25

l. Nader of good days for tempering
2. Evaluation of tempering conditions
3. Quantity of sugars in tillering nodes

lo. Good
5. Average
6 . Poor

It was established that the maximum quantity of total sugars accumlated in
the autulln period in the tillering nodes of winter wheat changes little
free: strain to strain and snounts to 38-“ percent of the weight of the
dry substance. There was no connection between the quantity of plants that
live through the winter and the total sugars (R - 0.06). Thus the maxi-um
content of sugars in the tillering nodes in the early autumn period does
not serve as an indicator of the level of frost resistance of the plants.

The authors revealed a close connection between the quantity of plants that
withstood the winter and the sun of sugars renaining in the tillering nodes
at the end of wintering (R - 0.76). A reduction in the content of sugars
is acconpanied by a united drop in the number of plants that withstood
the winter. If one can understand the connection between the niniaua

content of sugars in the tillering nodes and the yield of grain of winter
wheat (R - 0.65).

The writers think that the aaount of the ainiaun content of sugars in the
tillering nodes in the early spring can be recomended as a biological
indicator for diagnosing the condition of the planted areas after wintering
and. perhaps. can be utilized as a prognisticatory indicator of the harvest.
In the authors' opinion. the advantage of this aethod of diagnosing the
condition of the plants in the spring as col-pared to other widely known
aethods (sprouting the plants in core sa-plea of soil. freezing the plants
in refrigerated changers and so forth) is that it ashes it possible to

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtain in practice a simple (average for a given field) and operational
idea of,the relatively possible thinning after wintering and also to
determine'the need for replanting 1.5-2 weeks before the beginning of the
spring growing period.

But what is the nature of the process of tempering and the accumulation of
sugars in plants that are planted at various times or. more precisely.
plants of various ages?

A study of the effects of the planting times and winter warn periods on the
dynaeics of the sugars was made by P. H. Kupernan in 1935 under the
conditions of the Khar'kov experimental station for several years [7].
Analyses showed that when there was an overall drop in the content of sugars
in the plants under the snow, after the snow was gone during an extended
thawing period when the teaperaturea were above zero during the day

(even 3-10'6) the plants are capable of carrying out photosynthesis. The
content os sugars in them increases.

Many researchers have obtained similar data in the spring of years when
winter plants are relieved of the snow cover early and conditions are
established that are favorable for photosynthesis. In these years snow
mold does not manage to develop in the plants. despite the fact that they
are weak and exhausted from the lengthy expenditure of hydrocarbons under
the deep snow cover. still survive and begin to grow.

K. H. Pyyklik [27] each year compared the condition of winter plants

that came out from under the snow and those that were still under it. In
the plants that came out from under the snow and were in the light for
from 2 to 5 days there was 80 percent more sugars in the leaves and 60
percent more in the tillering nodes than in plants that were still under
the snow [Table 8].

Early in the spring when there is a considerable range of day and night
temperatures the plants can again be tempered and therefore withstand
the return of frosts. One can judge the content of sugars in the leaves
and tillering nodes in the early spring from the data in Table 9.

Even in his early works I. I. Tuaanov [36] published figures on strain
differences in winter crops in terms of their resistance to perishing
under snow [Table 10].

N. N. Yahovlev [66] established the various resistances to perishing under
snow of strains of winter crops with various origins. He noted a direct

connection between the resistances of plants and the ecological-geographical
conditions of their origin.

17

FOR OFFICIaL USE ONLY
F0" OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8. Quality of Sugars in Winter Rye in kuusiku in the Spring
(1 of Dry Substance)

      

 

‘22 new son-uses «Ines

III" | “I" l ”I"

( In“ came
I names ".9 - 6.5 0.2
its your system" — - 13.2 12.6
( I tony
E Isms: 20.5 21.0 ".3 20.7
5 I you: sym- - - 16.5 16.9
Key:
1. location of plants Io. In leaves
2. Dates of measuring of sugars S. In tillering nodes
3. Under snow 6. In the light

Table 9. Content of Sugars in Winter Plants in the State of Stem Extension
After Early Disappearance of Snow

 
 
   
  
  

Custom masts
3» s1 cysus In»

(1)
CF Ml

opus

  
 
 

 

    
 

I'assuue noocm (twins)

(6) Ours-mum .
{ 3501mm sodas (19:61:: am) 3|.8

acres ' m 6s.
(1 )P'Ipsoxsszm pus R n 32.1 ”.5
(7) Donna] muss s so syncs:
13- rp)’6|(°ll::l m) I 3.2 28.3

Key:
1. Planting time
2. Condition of plants in early spring
3. Content of sugars (Z of dry substance)
lo. In leaves
5. In tillering nodes
6. Optiml
7. Late
8. Main shoots (tubule)
9. Side shoots (no tubule)
10. Plants in which there has been no stee extension
11. Plants in the tillering stage (no stem extension)

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 10. Description of Wintering of Plants Under Deep Snow

     
 

(lOaqunmrwnss
~Jlmetuewcms7—20l826l—
(gimsm4llm-251lo44-

was pone
ﬁlms 856l655018786|
)

Key:
1. Number of days of vernalization of seeds
2. Planting tines
3. Winter wheat
1.. Lyutestsena 0329
5. Hoskovskaya 02611
6. "inter rye
7. Vyatlta

There is a lower mortality rate in plants from countries where winter crops
are frequently subjected to damage under deep snow covers than in plants
which rarely spend the winter under an abundant snow cover. Thus the
fewest specimens died in the group obtained from Sweden is frequently
combined with warn winters; strains that are resistant to damage under the
snow have also been formed in the mountainous regions of Austria.

0n the basis of experiments with an excessive snow cover which were
conducted in the All-Union Institute of Crop Growing (City of Pushkin near
leningrad) in a year typical for damage to crops under the snow cover,

N. N. Yakovlev [lo/o] gives the intonation which we are printing in table
11 .

From these data it is clear that the strains of wheat from regions where
there are rarely conditions which lead to damage to the plants under the
snow (Central Asian. Transcsucasian, Southern Steppe and Southern Forest
Steppe ecological groups) are less resistant to damage under the snow than
strains of wheat from the Northern Russian and Forest Steppe Volga
ecological groups.

Interesting data concerning the content of sugars in winter and spring
crops and their destruction after wintering in the Estonian SSR (Kuuziku

Agrometeorological Station) in the winter of 1957/58 are given by K. H.
Pyyklik (Table 12).

19

FOR OFFICII‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From table 12 it is clear that Ssngaste and Priyekuli winter rycs accumulated
approxiaately the same quantity of sugars in the tillering nodes. but
Sangaste had 10 percent more sugars in the leaves. During the time of
wintering Priyekuli expended relatively more sugars and approximately

twice as much of it was destroyed. Five strains of winter wheat were

tested. Puuk and Kuuziku accumulated more sugars than the others-an
average of 20 percent more than the strains of the second group--Luun'ya
Uluchshennaya and Gibrid 599. The results of the wintering showed that

an average of 30-40 percent more plants of the second group died.

Table 11. Resistance of Strains of Winter "heat to Perishing Under Snow
(points) (Pushkin, 1965)

9-10 5-6
Lyutcstscns 116 Ukrainka
Moakovskaya 21011 Odesskaya 3
Kolkhoznitsa Stavropol'ka 328
Priyekul 'skaya Voroshilovskaya
Borovichskaya
Kuuziku
Luun'ya

8-9 10-5
Ul'yanovka Novokryeka 206
Sandoairka leaks
Lyutestsens 329 Kooperstorka

7-8 3-1.
Lyutestsens 1060/10 Grekum 1033
Britrospermum 15 Dolis-Puri

6-7 1-3
Lyutestsens 17 Shark
Lesostepks 71o Surkhak
Perrugineum 1239 Irody

Eri t rospermum 91 7

In addition to the strains mentioned above. Handorf winter barley and
Kauka and Diamant spring wheat were also tested. The barley contained
approximately the same amount of sugar both in the leaves and in the
tillering nodes as Kauka spring wheat but 60 percent of the barley
plants died and all of the plants of both strains of spring wheat died.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

8—

n6

     
        

:x a. at

all! and}: I

.33..- u
3...: lining

                    

x- h
x. v—
x. v—
x- h
x. n
x. 5

5o
x-u
x—o

gushhnﬁwﬂmaa ACNV

9.3:: as

9.2:.- $550

3....oaesuwnwru nde
§ .13 :3

.5363: 2.5.30
535;!
5.53:... 5.5.3.0 and
.5, ﬁg
358:... 22:30 3:3
startin—
aloa 32:36 Avdv
2;:
2.385: 32:30 AnHv

iﬁﬁnwa Sc

A5

.53 I 1:32.;

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:

1. Crop and strain 10. Leaves

2. Planting tine 11. Plants

3. Stage of developaent at end l2. Sangaste winter rye
of growing periodl 11. Punk winter wheat

1.. Content of dry substance 11.. Pri‘yekuli winter rye
in cell sap lS. Luun'ya Uluchshennaya winter

5. Content of sugars (I of wheat
dry substance) 16. Kuuziku winter wheat

6. Death by the end of 17. Gibrid 599 winter wheat
wintering (Z) ' la. Kauka spring wheat

7. At beginning of winter 19. Hanford winter barley

8. At end of winter 20. Mount spring wheat

9. Tillering nodes
1in the tiilering stage only the number of shoots is indicated.

From the results of the determination of sugars it bees-e clear that

at the time of intensive growth of the plants in the autum they contained
3-9 percent of the sugars in the leaves and 7-12 percent in the tillering
nodes. From the beginning of the period of tempering the overall quantity
of sugars gradually increases both in the leaves and in the tillering
nodes.

When a deep snow cover lasts for a very long time the content of hydrocar-
bons significantly equalizes by spring. This happens under the conditions
of the northeast European part of the USSR and frequently in the western
regions of the USSR. The differences in the destruction of various strains
are evened out considerably (Table 13).

One of the essential reasons for the considerably smaller differences in
the resistances of strains of winter crops to damage under heavy snow

is that under a deep snow cover, especially when the snow begins to oelt
and the humidity in the plants' environment reaches 90-100 percent. fungi
develop on them.

H. I. Rybakova [31] suggested an indirect method of determining the degree
of winter hardiness of strains of winter wheat and rye-«observing the
dynamics of oligosaccharides. In addition to the plants' resistance to
freezing. she also studied the reaction of strains to fail and winter
thawing and the destruction of plants from renaining under a heavy anew
cover. As standards for various resistances of strains to unfavorable
factors of wintering she used Zhitkinskaya winter rye and Ui'yanovka winter
wheat-winter-hardy strains: wheat-wheat grass hybrid 186--a medium winter
hardy strain: and liotsinave winter wheat--a weakly winter hardy strain.
During seven years a total of sore than 50 strains and selection specimens
were tested.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI’ICIM. USE ONLY

Table 13. Effects of Length of winter Period on wintering of "inter
Wheat (1 of surviving plants)

 

Key:
1. Duration of winter (days) 6. Dyurabl'
2. Strain S. Lyutestsens 329
3. Kolkhoznitsa 6. Kooperatorkn

In the tillering nodes and leaves of winter plants under the conditions of
the hoscov area there are alcohol soluble hydrocarbons of oligosaccharides.
sucrose. glucose and fructose. In the outum there is usually a predoainance
in the winter plants of sucrose--froa 30 to 50 percent (depending on the
strain and sutuan conditions); fructose-dram 10 to 05 percent; oligo-
saccharidesufron 10 to 30 percent (in individual periods. up to 60 percent
in rye); and there was least glucose-tron 10 to 20 percent (Table 14).

Table llo. Content of Sugars in Tillering Nodes of "heat and Rye Plants
(: of total sugars)

 
  

g2; Bans norxoatxsa 36 l
humus 38.6
l'lllr-IM 37.5
9 Koomavopn “.7
Key:

1. Strain 6. Vyatka Moskovskaya

2. Oligosaccharides 7. Ul'yanovka

3. Sucrose 8. FPO-186

6. Glucose 9. Kooperatorks

5. Fructose

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-l ONLY

After cowleting the winter the nest regular connection with the winter
hardiness of the specimens of winter crops is found in the content of
oligosncchnrides. Were is a less clearcut. but predictable connection
between the fructose content and winter hardiness ('l'nhle IS).

Table 15. Content of Hydrocarbons in Tillering Nodes of Strains of Winter
Wheat and Rye (z of Dry Substance) 1!. April 1965

  
 

i6“ ”(unencu-
Vannosu 5.52
Na "earns-8w 6.3:
(10 gleaming- $153
Key:

1. Strain 6. 2hitinskays

2. Oligosaccharides 7. Ul'yanovka

3. Sucrose 8. Hironovskaya 808

b. Glucose 9. "6-186

5. Fructose 10. Hotsinsve

M. l. Rybakove [31). on the basis of any years of analyses of the dynaaics
of the content of oligosaccharides in plants. recoI-ends utilizing the- as
an indicator for evaluating the winter hardiness of various strains (Table
16). The change in the content of oligosaccharides and their significant
expenditure is unifested especially in winter with slightly frozen soil
and minimal teaperatures at the level of the tillering nodes that are close
to 0'6. Such were the winters of 1961/62 and 1965/66 (Table 17).

Since the lost significant changes in the content of oligosaccharides both
in winter rye and in winter wheat take place during warn winters. one

must presuoe that this indicator can be utilized for characterizing the
resistance of strains to daaage under the snow. In a colparative evaluation
of resistance to damage under the snow, the content of oligoaaccharides is
a considerably more reliable indicator than the content of sucrose and
fructose. But when deter-lining then it is necessary to take into account
the origin of the strains and their adaptability to one type of winter or
another. Thus analyses of oligosaccharides have confined already known
interaction to the effect that the nest frost resistant strains of steppe
origin. where the snow cover usually does not last long. are far fro. always
the lost resistant to tie-age under snow as well.

26

FOR OFFICIAL 0'35 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 16. Content or hydrocarbons in Tillering Nodes of Strain of winter
wheat and Rye (Z of Dry Substance) 15 April 1962

 
   
 

6 ”(annual I.“
7 Venues-a l0.”
Madman ll.“
anouosrnss one ".56
f Kynneernss 45 0.20
use LN
Key:
i. Strain 7. Ul'yanovka
2. Oligosaccharides 8. Alabassltaya
J. Sucrose 9. Hironovskaya 808
6. Glucose lo. Kuntaevskaya as
S. Fructose ll. Hotsinave

6. Zhitinsltaya

Table 17. Content of Oligosaccharides in Tillering Nodes of Strains of
"inter wheat and Rye in Various Years (2 of Dry Substance)

 

2 Berna IMORK-‘ll 5.9 2.7 l0.0 6.3 I2.I 8.3 9.4 3.8 2.0
immune-ta 3.0 Ll 4.0 L9 3.7 5.5 6.9 2.? 0.0
(""406 2.! 0.6 4.0 3.0 [2.8 2.7 9.4 Ll 0.6
3 ansrparcpu 2.0 Cae- 3.x 1.0 l0.9 3.0 5.! |.2 0.5
an
Key:
1. Strain 6. "6-186
2. Vyatlta Hoakovskaya S. Kooperatorks
J. Ul'yanovka 6. Traces

G. Salcheva [48] in Bulgaria studied the dynasics of free amino acids.

M n result of applying the method of unidisensional chromatography on

paper and visual detenination of the quantity of individual asino acids.

it was shown that in the process of tmerlng (with a reduction of the
tenersture in the autum and the beginning of the winter). the quantity of
free uino acids increases in the leaves and especially in the tillering
nodes. There was an especially sarked increase in the content of asparagine.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON ()l-‘l-‘lCMI. "SI-2 ONLY

serine. glutamic acid. alanine and proline. 111ere was also a positive
correlation between the accululation of proline in the tillering nodes
and the frost resistance of the strains of wheat.

G. Salcheva conducted experisents with reduced (65 percent). increased

(85 percent) and optiaal (60 percent) noisture content in the soil. 111::
research showed that in the process of tenpering with increased noisture
content in the soil the quantity of free amino acids decreases in the leaves
and tillering nodes. threover in plants grown with reduced moisture
content of the soil. seat of the proline is accuaulated in the tillering
nodes during the period of stages I and II of teapering.

Nith a lowering of the teapereture. in winter wheat there is a shift of

the enzyae reactions in the direction of a predeainance of hydrolysis

over synthesis. According to the research of N. N. Sisakyan. with a certain
depth of the shift of enzyne reactions in the direction of hydrolysis.
which he calls the "border of death." there is a deconpensation of
physiological processes which causes the plants to die.

1.. N. Romanova [30] conducted research on the coefficients of the shift of
enzyue reactions in strains of winter wheat with varying degrees of winter
hardiness. The coefficients of the shift were established-by dividing the
indicators synthesis/hydrolysis at each date of analysis with respect to
the sale indicator in the September sample (Table 18).

Table 18. coefficients of Shift of may-e Reactions with a Change from the
Nara Autuan to the Gold Nintar Period in Strains of Winter N'heat.

   

£2 J'lnrcraescm In I.”
Morsoscns 2053 Lo l.|5
”ﬁr-l“ LO 1.“
”Mamas LO 0.”
Key:

1. Strain 1.. Lyutestsens 230

2. Ratio synthesis 5. Hoskovskaya 2653

hydrolysis 6. PFC-186
3. Coefficient of shift 7. Kooperatorka

26

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

The data obtained by L. N. Romenova coincide with the results of the research
of A. V. Ilegoveshchenskiy. while for catalysis in winter hardy wheat

he obtained Q 0 - 1.35 and medium winter hardy wheat-oqlo - 1.78, in the
experiments of L. N. Romanova with the winter hardy wheat Lyutestsens

230 she obtained 010 - 1.59 and in the weakly winter hardy strain
KOOPONIIOKRO‘QIO " 2.02.

The research of L. N. Romenova also agrees with the ideas of B. A. Rubin
who showed that the quantity 010 is not a constant, but depends both on
the condition of the development of the plants and on the influence of
surrounding conditions.

Along with the accumulation of sugars and amino acids and the dehydration.
processes that are essential for the tempering of plants take place in stage
ii. They are related to the change in the hydrophily. the viscosity and

the permeability of the protoplasm. With a reduction in temperature the
viscosity of the protoplasm increases accompanied by a reduction in the
speed of biological processes in the cells. thus contributing to their
changeover to forced dormancy. The permeability of protoplasl and its
adsorptive capacity also change.

As one can see from a brief survey of the work physiologists and phyto-
pathologists conducted in the northeastern end northwestern regions of the
Soviet Union. the main reason for the death of winter crops is the
excessive loss of hydrocarbons, exhaustion and then starvation of the
plants which leads to a deconposition of proteins when the plants remain
for a long time under a deep snow cover and the temperatures are close to
O'C at the depth of the tillering node. Infection with fungal diseases

is a secondary cause of the death of plants when they are damaged under the
snow. since the development of fungi is possible only on plants that are
already essentially weakened and physiologically ill.

in the northeastern regions of the country's European territory during
years when there is a deep snow cover and deep freezing of the soil. winter
plants rarely suffer from damage caused by being under the snow and in the
southern steppe regions where there is almost never an excessive snow
cover the winter crops most frequently die from freezing and ice crusts;
but in the central belt of the country's European territory winter crops

frequently subjected both to the effects of strong frosts with lengthy
periods when there is no snow and to damage under the snow when the snow
falls on soil that is thawed or only slightly frozen.

The majority of research on the process of tampering winter crops involves
a study of the plants' resistance to freezing. Only a very small amount

of work has been devoted to clarifying the correlations between tempering
and resistance to perishing under the snow.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hany physiologists have been and still are engaged in research on sugars
in connection with the resistance of winter crops to low temperatures.

This research began with N. A. Haksimov. A. A. Rikhter and I. I. Tumanov.
Certain writers are fully convinced by their data that there is a direct
link bztween the content of sugars and the resistance of winter plants

[7] while others have made s number of adjustments in connection with the
strain and other peculiarities of winter crops and also agro-meteorologicsl
conditions of various geographical regions [64].

N. N. Yakovlev [#6]. without denying the role of tespering and accumulation
of hydrocarbons in increasing the frost resistance of wheat. cites the

data of a nuaber of researchers who think that the correlation between

the content of hydrocarbons before beginning the winter and the wintering
of winter wheat are not always clear enough. Like many other writers.

he thinks that the most significant thing for the wintering of plants is

not so much the content of sugars in the autumn period as the complex
of factors in the winter and early spring period.

One cannot fully agree with the conclusions of N. N. Yakovlev since,
although in a number of cases no direct connection is observed between the
resistance of unfavorable conditions and the content of sugars. the protec-
tive role of hydrocarbons is quite significant as is shown in the works

of physiologists and selection workers who deal with the change of spring
forms into winter forms [29] in the process of selection of such winter-
hardy strains as Nironovskaya 808.

The development of fungal diseases plays a decisive role in the subsequent
period of wintering of plants under an excessive snow cover. The period
of development of fungal diseases and the damage and death of plants
because of them, as was already pointed out. is the third and final phase
of the perishlng of winter crops under snow.

The damage to winter crops by snow mold and collar rot has been investigated
in greatest detail by A. V. Pukhal'skiy [26] and s. H. Tupinevich [36-38].
Sclerotia are solid formations which are black on the outside and white

or yellow on the inside. The size and shape of sclerotia are extremely
varied: usually sclerotia are 1.5-10 x 1-3.5 milliaeters. They are usually
circular or oval in shape but one does encounter sclerotia that are long
and irregular in shape. In the majority of cases sclerotia are flat and
their thickness does not exceed 1-1.5 millimeters.

In certain years sclerotia are formed mostly in the axillary part of the
leaf and less on the surface of the blade of the leaf. where they are
located under the epidermis. In other years sclerotia are for-ed only on
the surface of the blade of the leaf and there are none at all in the
axillary part. This is explained by the conditions of the year (depth of
snow cover. temperature and so forth). The nuaber of sclerotia on one
plant can be from 1 to 25 and more.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sclerotia of fungi that form in the spring require a certain period of
ripening in the light under natural conditions in order to germinate.

1hey do not germinate in the spring of the year they are formed. Conversely.
if early in the spring the young sclerotia of fungi are placed in the soil
at a depth of 3-6 centimeters. within 75-80 days they are fully decomposed
under the effects of saprophytic fungi, bacteria and nematodes. Sclerotin
germinate only in the autumn after the completion of ripening on the
surface of the soil. In order to germinate sclerotia needs light, a high
content of moisture in the air and soil and a fairly low temperature--
(2-12'c1. under these conditions the germinating sclerotia form an
afcoaycetous fruit bearer for the fungue-apothecia with each spores. In
Leningrad on the field section of the All-Union Institute of Plant
Protection the germination of sclerotia was observed during half of October
in 1937 and 1938. Under natural conditions at the Palensksya selection
station the germination of sclerotia and the formation of fungal apothecia
were observed at the beginning of October in 1936 and 1937 [46].

in the autumn with the alternating rainy and sunny days the mature fungal
sack spores are broadcast into the air. Falling on winter plants the sack
spores germinate easily and infect them. The infected plants enter the
winter this way. In the spring under the snow with a low temperature above
zero fungal mycolia develop on them. which at the end of their development
on the infected plants form new sclerotia. Consequently. the formation of
sclerotia is the final stage in the cycle of the development of the fungus.

In addition to wheat and rye. sclerotia infect many feed grasses (timothy.
rye grass. sescue. wheat grass, meadow grass, cock's-foot) and grass

weeds on which the fungus can maintain itself on the fields. Fungal
sclerotia can be retained in the soil for 1-2 years and do not lose their
capacity for germination and the formation of spothecia with each spores.

A. B. Pukhel'skiy [26] did a large amount of work to study the resistance
of strains of winter wheat to collar rot. He devoted special attention

to searching for forms of winter wheat that are resistant to collar rot
and characterizing various ecological groups of wheat with respect to

this indicator. During three years he managed to evaluate the resistance
to collar rot of more than 2.000 specimens of winter wheat from the world
collection of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Plant Growing.
During epiphytotic years sclerotia of fungi were found on all specimens

of the collection included in various ecological groups. which showed

their infection with Sclerotinia graminearum Elem. but the growth of the
specimens differed. Certain specimens developed satisfactorily despite the
infection with the fungus, formed young leaves and subsequently entered

the stem extension stage. bored spikes and produced a harvest. But the
majority of specimens of the collection either completely died off or only
part of them survived.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. V. Pukhal'skiy noted a fairly clear-cut grouping in terms of the degree
of spring aftergrowth of wheat among specimens from various ecological
group. The highest degree of winter hardiness and the best aftergrowth
during the spring period characterized representatives of the Scandinavian.
Western European hybrid. Altay and North American hybrid ecological group.
Somewhat behind then with respect to these indicators were specimens from
the northern Russian ecological group. The worst indicators (death and
poor aftergrowth) were observed in specimens from the northern European.
Danube. Balcan. eastern Asian. Kaahir and Kashgar ecological groups. He
included strains of winter wheat from the Northeastern Selection

Center (new Palenskaya selection station) among the specimens that were
most resistant to collar rot.

As a result of his study of the infection of winter wheats with collar
rot. the author came to the conclusion that the hardiness (resistance) of
specimens is determined by their capability to change over to intensive
growth in the spring period. to form new roots and leaves and thus to
survive the damage caused under the snow. In this respect the role of
agrotechnical factors is of exceptionally great importance. In the works
of s. H. Tupinevich [36. 37] he points out the significance of good agro-

technology in the fight against the destruction of winter crops by collar
rot.

Snow sold. developing strongly on starving plants and accelerating the
expenditure of proteins, leads to the destruction first of the leaves that
touch the soil. then the bases of the shortened stalks and subsequently
the tillering nodes as well. The leaves of infected plants bend down to
the ground and lose their color. An accumulation of mycelia appears on
them. which are white at first (hence the nase "snow" mold) and then the
fruit bearers cause a rose tinge. The mycelia of the fungi are spread
from one leaf to another and it is as if they are glued together. The
disease rapidly moves from one plant to another. covering ever larger
sections of the planted area.

There are various degrees of damage to winter plants. The first degree is
when the leaves are partially green. the tillering nodes are normally
turgid and with a rapid disappearance of the snow in the spring and the
beginning of sunny and warm weather new leaves grow. The damage to the
leaves and part of the severely damaged plants die. The plant stand on the
section becomes thinner. The second degree is when the leaves are partially
infected with snow mold and the tillering node is not very turgid. "hen
the temperature is about 2-3'c for a prolonged time the mycelia proliferate
and the winter plants are frequently severely thinned out. The third
degree is complete destruction: the leaves of the plants are dark brown in
the spring, sometimes with a white or silver film on them and with
sclerotia of fungi of collar rot. The bases of the plant and the tillering
nodes are yellow and not turgid. A typical sign is a slight separation in
places where the tillering node is attached to the root system which is
usually not infected.

30

FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another fungus that causes similar damage to winter crops. Fusariun nivale
(Fr.) Ces. is no longer widespread.

Snow mold is caused by a nutter of other pathogenic fungi as well. Many

of them are polythages which infect not only winter crops. but also many
species of wild grasses. Depending on soil condition. the species and

the strains of plants, winter crops are more frequently infected with
collar rot in some regions and there are various form of Pusarial wilt

in other regions. Agrotechnical measures directed toward protecting planted
areas from perishing under the snow reduce the harm caused by fungal
diseases in the majority of cases.

RESEARCH ON THE PROCESSES 0? CM AND DEVELOPMENT OF PLANTS IN THE
AUTUMN-NINTBR-SPRINC PERIOD A8 FACTORS IN 1113 FORMATION OF "INTER-HARDY
"INTER CROPS

It has long been known that increased growth of winter crops during a warm
and moist autum worsens the wintering of the planted areas. In order to
protect the plants from freezing and perishing under the snow. in agricultural
practice the crops have been mowed in the fall and it has been recouended
that potassium top-dressing be applied in the fall which somewhat impedes

the growth of parts of the plant that are above ground.

The connection between early curtailment of the growth processes in the
autumn and the winter hardiness of plants has been repeatedly noted by
I. H. Vasil'yev [3] and I. I. Tumanov [35]. It is known that the most
winter hardy strains grow more slowly in the autumn. form short, narrow
leaves and are characterized by a split bush which grows closer to the
ground than those of less winter-hardy plants [7. 12].

For a long time the idea has prevailed among physiologists. crop growers
and agrometeorologists that with the beginning of the winter period and
the curtailment of apparent growth of winter plants. all their organs and
tissues pass into a state of deep dormancy. just as they do in woody
plants.

Indeed. as the research of P. A. Genltel' and T. H. Zhivukhina [7] has
shown. in winter wheat there are not very prolonged. but clear processes
of separation of protoplasm from the cell walls which characterize a
condition of deep dormancy. But in the cells of leaves that are less
tempered and especially in "overgrown" plants of less winter-hardy strains.
the condition of dormancy does not last long. In the plants of less
winter-hardy strains under the conditions of the Moscow area. the nud>er
of cells in which there is a separation of the protoplasm does not reach

a maximum until Novelber and in the beginning of Narch the plants are
already cowletely out of the dormant condition.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During years with a long. were autusn when the snow falls on sod soil,

no changeover of winter plants to a deep dot-ant condition is observed.

In these years. as I. I. msanov has already noted [35]. even under a deep
snow cover the etiolated leaves of winter wheat grow.

Many researchers have observed a slight growth of vegetative organs under
the snow. noting that the balance of the overall expenditure of sugars
frequently does not correspond to the calculated figures for the loss of
sugars. Consequently, some of the sugars expended by the plants under deep
snow apparently go for growth processes. although insignificant ones.

The weakening of the growth processes. as sany researchers have noted.
is one of the necessary conditions for the plants' changeover free a
growing condition which is not resistant to unfavorable conditions of
wintering to a period of dormancy and the second phase of tempering for
low winter temeratures [35, 37] and this condition is also necessary
for the plants' resistance to wintering under a deep snow cover.

How are the growth regulators and stisulators of growth processes first
inhibited in the process of taspering the plants in the autusn period?
What is the interaction and relationship asong growth regulatorsnauxins.
gibberellins. kinins and various growth stimulators and inhibitors of
winter plants during the autum, ei-er and early spring periods?

Many scientists attach a great deal of importance to the role of auxins

in the process of tespering winter wheat. Until recently in the literature
little attention was paid to the question of the dynasica and relation-
ships of growth stinulators and inhibitors during the process of telpering
winter plants [6]. In the works of V. c. Konarev (1959. 1966) it was
suggested that the influence of all factors of the external environ-ant

is exercised through the functional activity of the nucleic acids.

More interesting experimnts to investigate the growth processes when the
plants are changing over from a growing condition to forced 60an have
been conducted in recent years by V. V. Vinogradova [5]. She investigated
the frost resistance of winter wheat in connection with the intensiveness
of growth and the content of endogenic stinulators and inhibitors in the
autusn. winter and spring periods; she studied the influence of treat-eat
with data-indolescetic acid on the growth and level of native auxins and
inhibitors under various tewerature conditions for tapering; and she
also investigated the changes in the condition of desoxyribonucleic acid
in the chrontin of the cell nuclei.

The intensiveness of growth in the experiments of V. V. Vinogradova was
detersined by the sizes of the leaves of 60 plants and the length of the
vegetative cones of 15 plants were sessured under a microscope. The
biological activity of the growth substances was detersined through
stimulation or inhibition of the growth of cuttings of the coleoptilas
of winter wheat.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A comparison of the data on the intensiveness of growth of plants and

the level of their frost resistance showed (Fig. 2) that the differences
in the level of frost resistance of the strains investigated by the
author--Ul'yanovks. Borovichskaye and Bezostaye l-depended on the
intensiveness of the growth of the plants' leaves during the autuen period.
Reduced intensiveness of growth in the antenna of 1968 and 1969 con-
tributed to the develop-ant of more highly resistant plants. V. V.
Vinogradova accoapanied the research on the dynamics of frost resistance
of plants with measurelents of the vegetative cones (Thble 19).

A reduction in resistance in the experiaents of V. V. Vinogradova [S]
coincided with the period of growth of the vegetative cones or. as the
author foreuletes it. with a period of "concealed growth" of the plants.

The results of the study of the dynasics of growth substances in the same
experiments showed that beginning in Autumn. during the course of
tempering. the stinulators in the tillering nodes of winter wheat are
aleost completely inactivated. Moreover. it is very interesting that
Ul'yanovka, a highly frost resistant strain, is distinguished by a lower
level of stimulators. high speed of their inactivation and earlier
attainment of the autumn physiological ssxinum in the content of
inhibitors (Figures 3. 6). For the weakly frost resistant strain
lezostaya 1, it was characteristic to have a slow inactivation of growth
stinulatora, later attainment of the autumn physiological maximum in the
content of inhibitors and the prevalence of their activity over that of
growth stiaulatore.

Free the data obtained by V. V. Vinogradove [b] it is also clear that
during the winter period there is a gradual reduction of the growth
inhibitors and alaost a complete disappearance of than free the tissues
of the tillering nodes during the period that precedes visible growth.

On the basis of these and figures from literature, the author arrives at
the conclusion that during the second half of the wincer. even with
negative tesperatures. there is a change in the intensiveness of certain
netabolic processes in the tillering nodes of winter wheat which lead to
a loss of the teepered condition.

This is also confirmed by an analysis of the condition of the DNA in the
vegetative cones. In the weakly winter hardy strain Bezostaya l, in the
differentiated tissues of the vegetative cone during freezing and
especially after thawing there is a aarked loss of sons of the nucleic
acids as a result of their degredation. Unfortunately the amount of
physiological research that uncovers the eechenias of growth processes
is not very great so far.

33

FOR OFFICIhb USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llh‘li ONLY

 
  

     

  

D ' g 45
v
s 3 W a, _/
EM? 4 .
:zs‘utzauc P‘x
., 4°\
0", \v
4:

ﬂllﬂl'.”

Figure 2. Frost Resistance of Winter wheat. Depending on
Temperature Conditions of the Soil and Intensiveness

of the Plsnts' Growth in the Mutant

n. Te-persture conditions of the soil at the depth of the plants'
tiller-ins nodes

6. Length of leaves (fro- first to sixth) at end of autumn growing
periods of 1967 (I) and 1968 (I!)

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key (continued):
a. Resistance of strains of wheat in various years critical t°c
(death of 501 of plants).
A. Ul'yanovka
B. Bezostaya l
B. Borovichskaya

l . 1967/68
2 . 1968/69
3. 1969/70

Table 19. sizes of Vegetative Cones (men) of "inter "heat in Autumn-
Rinter-Spring l’eriod (1968/69)

 

ax oxu um I mv mv l :v
. (1) Yuma
23610 [mili’l mil“ 253:!“ ”41:8 [3383!“ M3321
(2)5esocnal

M112 | ”Gill” 2181!!” Miml 3l2t2l| 3903;17l Mia

Key :
l . Ul ' yanovka
2 . Bezos toys 1

There is considerably more work and sore observations of the growth of
plants in which changes in the morphology, size and form of the vegetative
cone are investigated by the aicroscopic method and in recent years the
condition of the stages of organogenesis in the autum. winter and spring
periods has been studied.

Beginning in 1936 P. H. Kuperusn reputedly noted that under the conditions
of positive temperatures in the soil during the winter, especially during
the thawing period. there is a certain growth of the vegetative cones.
although insignificant [7]. Moreover. if the process proceeds nor-ally,
when the plants are transferred to a greenhouse the vegetative cones
rapidly begin differentiation of the rudilentary spike and enter stages
III-IV of organogenesis. Along the aethodological aids, in 1936 F. H.
Kupenaan reconnended diagnosing the condition of areas planted in winter
crops by observing the vegetative cones by the so-called lethod of "bringing
it to the rudiaentary spike." To do this sose of the plants in the

pore samples for 20-25 days (from the time they are reooved fro- the field)
were placed under conditions of 26-hour light and then the rudimentary

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

z of control

'88

 

”omawcoemoazatacmo

Figure 3. The Activity of Growth Substances and the Relationship
Between Stinulators and Inhibitors (figures over histo-
grams) in Tillering Nodes of "inter latest (1968-69)

2 of control
Increase in coleoptlles

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spike use enalyzed. This Iethod ans later described in were detail
in 1953-nnd 1956.

After the publication of the work which announced the Iain patterns of the
stages of orgsnogenesia [7] and the scheles we are presenting in figures

5 end 6. the peculiarities of organogenesis of vegetative cones during the
autuun and winter periods were investigated in detail by many researchers
[10. 12. 14. 18, 19. 22. 25. 65. 67].

2 of control

 

mas-egg
- -- -- -- - m‘
0 a: 4‘ a: an L0 0 a: a£ “5 a: b

Figure A. The Activity of Growth Substances in Extracts Fro-
Tillering Nodes of Winter "heat in the Process of
Tenpering, wintering and Renewal of Growth in the
Spring (1969-70)

Key =
I. Z of control
2. Increase in coleoptiles

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OWICML USE ONLY

The majority of strains or winter wlneat. under the conditions of the lain
regions where they are cultivated. are in stage II of orgnnogenesis before
they enter the winter. M P. H. Kupersan [7. 10]. V. A. Hoiseychik [22]
and may other authors note. at the beginning of autumn the vegetative cones
in various strains are characterized by relatively sisilar sires. especially
if the temperature drops rapidly (below -5-8°C).

'lhus at the beginning of Noveeber 1966 in Moscow (blast in such strains
at Ul'yanovita and PFC-559 the length of the vegetative tone was 0.19
an. in the less winter hardy strains hoskovskaya 2453 and Odessltaye 16
the length ssounted to 0.2 In. and in the relatively weakly winter hardy
strain Bezostaya 1 it was also 0.23 in. Pro- ‘l‘able 20 it is clear that
with various planting tins and in years with various neteorologieal
conditions. in plants of all strains (with exceptions. as will be shown
subsequently. of anolalous years and extra early planting times) the

vegetative cones are in stage II of organogenesis before entering the
winter.

Table 20. Growth of Vegetative Cone During "inter Period in Various

Woes of "inter wheat, Depending on Meteorological Conditions
and Planting Tiles [12]

 

' . X I966 . II II II I”
25"" I966 r I; IV I967rr. II I47 ll I45 II I”
. 29 X I966 r. II III) II IN — -

7 X I” r I? IV I251 I'. ll I24 II II9 — -
. 0 XII I965 r. II I” II Im II I“)

I0 X I” t 2'.’ III I” r. II IOI II I30 II I!)
I6 IV I” r. II IIS II NI II as

        
   
   
       

v use . u u
as u ' mvmn. u n m
1 star . mxmor. u no u too
at: " :2 w man. u no u m
. . a xu ms . u 100 u not
'0‘ M“ 2: m m'r. u m u no
16 l\' was r. u u m

38
FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Planting date 6. Stage
2. Date snaple taken 7. Increase (2)
J. Mironovakayn 808 8. Penn!
h. Kuntsevakaya AS 9. Kokhland

S. Ul'yanovka

In the autunn there was very little difference in the sizes of the
vegetative tonen of such strains as the winter hardy Ul'yanovakaya and
Hironovka 808 and the weakly winter hardy Kokhland and Panel. Under the
conditions of 1966/65 when there was an excessive snow cover in Moscow
oblast. in alnost all of the strains that were tested there was an
extension of the length of the vegetative cones and in February the
increase in their lengths significantly exceeded the note. But before the
disappearance of the snow all strains were in stage II and rarely in
stage III of organogenesis. The strain differences in terns of the
differentiation in size of the vegetative cone in strains with varying
winter hardiness were near easily revealed froa the aftergrowth of the
plants in a greenhouse during the winter or under field conditions in the
early spring (Table 21).

Sililar data concerning the change in the length of the vegetative cone
were obtained by V. I. Pena-arev. As one can see fron table 22 the
intensivenesa of the growth of the vegetative cone during the winter

period under a snow cover depends to a significant degree on the age of the
plants. the strain peculiarities and the weather conditions. Thus more
intensive growth of the vegetative cone in the sane stage of organogenesis
was observed in "older" plants with an earlier planting tine. Plants
planted in Septelber were distinguished by the slowest rates of growth of
the vegetative cone under the conditions of the Moscow area. The length
cf the vegetative cone changed equally predictably depending on the degree
of winter hardiness of the strain--the least increase in the length of the
vegetative cone was observed in the aost winter hardy strain. Ul'yanovka.
Winter growth of the vegetative cone also changed depending on the
temperature and water conditions of the autumn and winter. Thus in the

dry autusn of 1966 the plants of all strains and planted at all tiles
for-ed a shorter vegetative cone than in 1965.

The connection between the intensivenesa of growth processes (and especially
the intensivenesa of growth of the vegetative cone) in the early spring

and the frost resistance of the strain was excellently investigated in
experiments conducted in the winter of 1966/67. The nore intensive

the growth of the vegetative cone under the conditions of an excessive

snow cover in 1966/67. the greater the percentage of death of the

plants (Table 23).

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FQR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                  

i. l .«6 «a...
8 B 3. 8

> >— = >
0.0 l. 5.0 «~10

8 8 8. 8.
>. .: : z.
8.0 I: 3.0 8.0

>. :. z .:
v.0 I. 3.0 3.0

_«.0
8.

. .
3.0
8—

. _
5.0
8—

=
8.0
8—

.-

ll .38..
.2013 c&§.3xa «0
6588
.2. 3...... 885.. 8 w 8
«8:29.29 :20 c .quxxouaov

,. ‘5—
..Casa: 3.98.. 5.23 00
«5.2..
.2— :23 9.230 u: 4. av
2v «3.52.930 55 3 cauguaxanv

I. .38..
$62.2. 2.8.. «2...: o0

«:53

. a . av
. :ﬁwngﬁn “viiug...

a: .2...
.0632. 3.9.3 «:38. av
. A .8... gswnﬁohoﬂ 3
0 age: 83m 50 snoozuﬁhnv

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.,

Key:
1. Strain 6. Bezostaya 1
2. indicator 7. Stage of organogenasia
J. lll'yanovka 8. z of overall growth of plants
Io. liironovskeya 808 9. Length of vegetative cone. I-

S. Kunteevskaya 65

Note: Authe condition of the plants on the day the sonic was taken
froa the field: Bathe sane. after their growth for 30 days in
a greenhouse.

Table 22. Change in length of Vegetative Cones of Winter wheat Plants
of Various Ages During Winter Period

 

1965]“ r.
32mm... I % l :3 I g I :39 m | :33
196N611:
{immum | 31%| l% 23 | lg {33 I ll?
Key:
1. Planting Tile 3. Ul'yanovka
2. Strain lo. Hironovskaya 808

Note: A-l.ength of cone at beginning of spring growing period;
B-in 2 of length of cone before entering winter.

The influence of growth processes on the change in winter hardiness of
plants is noted in the works of A. I. Hitropolenko (1975). Table 2!.
gives his data concerning the frost resistance of plants of various ages
under the conditions of Kresnogrsd (Khar'ltovskaya (blast). Table 25
shows that during the course of the winter period a change in the length
of the vegetative cones of the plants was noted and the influence of the
age of the plants, the strain peculiarities and weather conditions was
clearly nnifested here.

Plants of the Kuntsevskaya 65 and Neachinovskaya 1.95 strain had a longer and
lore differentiated cone both at the end of the auttnn growing period and
at the beginning of spring aftergrowth than did plants of the Ul'yanovka
strain.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NO

   

Figure 5. Phases of Developnnt and Stages of Orgsnogenesis of
"inter "heat

Stage l--undifferentiated vegetative cone; stage Ilwdifferentiation of
rudiuentary stalk into nodes and internodes (beginning of the for-scion
of sheathes of stalk leaves); stage II—segpentation of lower part of
vegetative cone and for-ation of rudinentary covering leaves (bracts);
stage IV--beginning of rotation of spike tubereles: stage V--fornation
of blossom on spikes; stage Vwaonation of anthers and pistils:
stage VII--Eoruation of sex cells (gs-etophytes), growth of length of
segnents of spike shank; stage VIII-donation of spikes; stage IX"
blossoming. fertilization. formation of zygoes: stage anorlation of
earyopsis: stage Xt~ailky ripeness (accumlation of nutritive sub-
stances): stage XII-waxy ripeness (transfer of nutritive substances
into reserve) and ripening of seeds:

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key: 1. 2, 3 -- subsequent formation of pollen

u. Shoots d. Ste. extension 3. Blossoming

b. 'Ihird leaf e. Spike formation h. Milky. waxy

c. Tilloring E. Spike forsation ripeness
(l) on» (2) suns (3) nonvﬁfuagcrn

(z .':::.'..""*I II 'twww; r" w |—|(1;;::::.':..":.::~ I

I II nu II II to n Lﬁmxsuym:
(5) 's-um ° ramm- I am "
me
Ill. IIWII‘“ 1‘7”“... st-
39"" °"" '

:3_ IV. onus-um mess sonar #1:“. lessens
use I see (our more. mne-
tsssus unis-serve

     

    
 

I’M-m sun's-s
("KO"- est»
unto». nos...-

3} I‘D-O:&I’W.

 

‘huu um
mums ens-s-

 

 

(6) ”IE-.2?“

‘ ——

"mm m; H "t'mrmwrur 15)‘:"°...:::'.:~ |

 

 

 

0

VI. Oops-possess CW
seem

 

         

 

 

 

 

VII. remotes-teen. perv senses senses. smut»
Illl “muss. new us. use“. um
mama—Ll(17) seen

 

 

m m... 1-" aﬁgimmzl—J
r nos-sun
I“) W I“ "I II 2:?an . m I‘—-_18§mlosus I
I
I I the! s ”assess-so ”I I9r~mm ————Iu
_<___1........‘:::::.-.. “H " wTwzmrI—

i III. nuns-en: II'lttml so-
.ms s nous-v saunas
e mu «m-

 

       

 

lot-seas - «use
«use» I"

Figure 6. Pomtion of Productive Elements of Ilhests in Various
Phases of Develop-ant and Stages of Orgsnogenesis

"3

FOR OFFICMX. USE ONLY
1.
Z.
3.

5.
6.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

1‘.
15.
l6.
17.
18.
I9.
20.

II.

III.

IV.
V.

VI.
VII.

VIII.

IX.

X.
XI.
XII.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Phases

Stages

Productive elements_

Sprouting of seeds. shoots

Third leaf. tillering

Beginning of stem extension

Stem extension--beginning of stem growth
Nesding

Blossoaing

Filling in of seeds. milky ripeness

Waxy and cosplete ripeness

Field germination. density of plant stand
Nabitus of plants (height. number of leaves). tillering coefficient.
winter-hardiness

Number of segments on spike shank

Number of spikelets in spike. drought-resistance
Number of blossoms in spike

Fertility of blossoms. density of spike. heat-resistance
Grain content of spike

Size of caryopsis

Height of csryopsis: resistance to dry winds

Differentiation and growth of esbryonic organs

Differentiation of cone base into rudimentary nodes. internodes
and stalk leaves

Differentiation of main axis of rudimentary flower cluster and
bracts

Formation of vegetative cones of second order (spike tubereles)
Establishment of integumentsry organs of blossom, stamens and
pistils

Formation of flower cluster and blossom (micro-nacrosparogenesis)
Gsaetophytogenssis. growth of integumentary organs. lengthening
of segments os pike shsnk

Gametogenesis. cospletion of processes of formation of all
organs of flower cluster and blossom

Fertilization and zygote formation

Growth and cer;opsis formation

Accumulation of nutritive substances

Transformation of nutritive substances into reserve substances
in caryopsis (seeds)

when there is a long autumn and the snow falls on thawed or slightly
frozen soil at a teaperature close to 0°C. even at the beginning of
November the vernalisation processes are coapleted in the plants. the
tempering decreases and there is a sharp decline in the resistance both to
critically low temperatures and to conditions that cause perishing under
the snow.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

Table 23. intensiveneaa of Growth of Vegetative Cones During Winter
Period in Winter Wheat With Various Degrees of winter hardiness

Under Conditions of Meow Oblaat

I2 IV III 1.

 
   

1*" 1.3.2.... Wm:
(1) 117“ u. “for:

       

Vet-110.110 11 0.20
§" WM“ :1 3-3: 1’ 333 3:3
Kym-cm 41 11 0220 1: 313 3'3
Bum.“ 11 0.00 11-111 0.119 20'0
f gum-c 11 0.00 11 0.51 2320
0110.: II 0.313 n 0.59 10.0
Key:
1. Strain 6. Hironovokeye 808
2. Stage of organogeneaia 7. "0-186
3. Length of vegetative cone 8. Kunteavakeya 65
lo. 2 of live plants after 9. Bezoateya l
wintering without 011011 10. Kvmtae
S. Ill'yenovha ll. Fenal

Table 211. Front resistance of Hironovakaya 808 "inter Wheat Hith Various
Planting Tine: (February 1972)

           
  
  

 

(1) (2) (3) M
“w 10 10 :1 a

Mew-1“
negate-nu m—
sum ~10“ mm hp»)

5) MM M ($)

I7 VIII Cum 0mm. ) 81 9 55‘ 000 0

2.111111 am
. m
.m’u 171 00.0 01.0 00.0 1.1

11: Hm M’ 100.0 100.0 01.0 01.9 10.1
1m9')"'" 100.0 100.0 100.0 11.1 01.5

100.0 100.0 INA) INA) INA}

[Key on following page]
I15

FOR OFFICIIXL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE 081.?

Key:

1. Planting date

2. Condition of vegetative cone in stage II of organogeneeis
3. Without freezing (control)

a. Tespersture of freezing ('c) (26 hours)

5. Surviving plants (I)

6. thresely elongated leaf vallicula

7. Elongated leaf valliculs

8. Beginning of elongation and appearance of leaf vallicula
9. Beginning of elongation
10. Condition of changeover to elongation

Table 25. Change in length of Vegetative Cones of winter wheat Plants of
Various Ages During winter Period (Iain shoot). 1966/65

 

 

  

Cass: «so
I II I I! I! I8 VIII :3 VIII

       

  

uwﬂuvm
(3,“mycasasnsaeeeo |(‘)sssraauusnol

 
  

 
   
  

(1)

M seman- (n) [w I “I

 

 

 

5 loam-us am as 212 us 109
? Mum“ ‘95 320 297 224 I9! Ill
Venues-a 283 no I“ 169 IOI
Key:
1. Strain

2. Planting tises

3. Length of cone at beginning of spring growing period (see)
lo. In I of length before entering winter

5. Neuchinovska,'a US

7. Ul'ysnovka

It has been established [7] that when vernslized seeds are planted the
plants’ resistance to low temperatures decreases sharply and when they are
planted too early they suffer severely from freezing.

It has been explained that with early planting tiles the plants from
vernalized seeds enter stage in of organogenesis in the autumn and strains
of souther selection (Odesskaya Selection Station) cosplete vernalization
more rapidly than do strains of Hironovsksya and Khsr'kovskays selection
and therefore are lore severely daasged.

l. I. ‘l'unanov [36] also noted that the capability of tespering in
vernalized plants decreased apparently because of the fact that their growth

66

FOR OFFICIRL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was more intensive. It was allost the rule that plants from vernalized
seeds grew more rapidly and the leaves were longer: I. I. Tunanov did not
check the condition of the vegetative cone.

In the vinte. of 1964/65 we studied the wintering of five strains of winter
wheat: ‘Ul'yanovka. Mironovskaya 264. wheat-wheat grass hybrids 186 and 559
and Bezostaya l. Planting was done with vernalized and dry seeds at

(our tines: early for Moscow 0blast--$ and 15 August; optinal--25 August;
and late--lO September. He also planted the Vyatka strain of winter

rye. The winter of 1966/65 had a lot of snow and the winter crops-~not
only those planted at the earliest tile. 5 August, but also those planted
on is August--were significantly damaged even by the end of February.

In the spring the plants planted at all tines with vernalized seeds had

all died and there was intensive development of snow sold on then while

70-90 percent of the control plants. planted on 25 August and 10 Septesber.
survived the winter.

The results of this experiment convincingly prove that after the conpletion
of vernalization processes there is a sharp reduction in the plants'
resistance to damage under the snow.

with intensive growth of the vegetative cone even during 1-2 nonths. there

is also a sharp reduction in the plants' resistance to periahing under a
snow and ice cover. which is clear fro. the data of 1970/71 (Figure 7)
[10]. '

3. .,
a!
'2
60 l J
06
VS
a V
‘0
10
0

 

Figure 7. Dependency Between Thinning (X) of "inter "heat of the
Hironovsksya 808 Strain as a Result of Freezing and the
Ice Crust and the Length (an) of the Vegetative Cone

Thickness of ice crust: 1) In. 2) 10-20 an. 3) 21-60 In. 6) 61-60 In.
5) Iinilun soil temperature at depth of tillering nodes ~15 - -l7‘C:
lg u - 1.5277 lg l + 0.3696 lg n + 2.0360.

‘7
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the winter of 1970/71 the winter hardiness of eight strains of winter
wheat (Ul'yanovka. FPO—186. Hironovskaya 808. Yubileynaya 50. Bezostaya l.
Avrora. Rannyaya 12. San-Pastore, Tsezius 39 and the Vystka strain of
winter rye) was investigated on the experimental plot of Moscow State
University. The planting was done at eight times. beginning extra early
(from 29 July through 3 October 1970). Three conditions of the snow cover
were created: l) natural-~10-20 centimeters; 2) excessive-mp to 60-70
centimeters: and 3) without snow from o to 2 centimeters. Each day the
minimu- teaperature at the depth of the tillering node was taken with Ali-17
remote control thermometers and the depth of the snow cover and the depth
of freezing of the soil were measured. In the winter the condition of the
vegetative cone was deterained and the plants were then grown in a
greenhouse with subsequent checking of the vegetative cone. At the same
time samples of wheat and rye from various regions of the USSR were
investigated: in December. January. February and the first of “arch.
Information about the condition of planted areas was processed and
compared with agrometeorological conditions of the winter and the results
of aftergrowth and spring investigation of the planted areas.

The winter of 1970/71 was unusual in the European part of the USSR. The
snow cover in the northern belt of the territory (northern Vil'yus. Bryansk.
Saratov. Ural'sk) was established very early-~in the third ten days of
October. The soil under it was thawed or slightly frozen. In the second
ten days of November. as a result of very warm weather. the snow cover
disappeared and the soil thawed everywhere except for the northeastern '
oblasts and the Oral area. A slight snow cover (2-5 centimeters) remained
on the fields in the majority of western and central oblasts throughout

the winter. The mini-um temperature at the depth of the tillering node
ranged from 0 to -1o’c.

Even in the autumn the intensive growth of the vegetative cone in October
led to a reduction in frost resistance. A comparison of the sizes of the
vegetative cones of the main shoots of the plants with the agrometeorological
conditions of wintering of winter crops showed that they have a great
influence on the change in the sizes of the vegetative cones during the
winter [18).

In the plants planted at optimal times. as one can see from figure 8. the
length of the vegetative cone on 20 February had a sufficiently well
expressed direct linear dependency on the minimum temperature of the soil
at the depth of the tillering node t3 and the depth of freezing of the
soil N. The coefficient of the correlation between the sizes of the
vegetative cones and the freezing of the soil was 0.70 1- 0.03.

Analytically the dependency between the length of the vegetative cone 1
of the main shoot of plants that had bushed normally in the autum. the

minimum teaperature of the soil at the depth of the tillering node t3
and the depth of the freezing of the soil I! on 20 February. according to

68

FOR OFFICII‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

date iron the winter of 1970/71. is expressed by the following multiple
regression equacions: for Vyntkn winter rye

1 I 0.025t3 - 0.006" + 1.377. (2)

— - - I lawn-cum tram
——n t-Wu we: a; 01.17!

   
 

[.0

ISO "(It
a -s -n «5m:

 

Figure 8. Dependency of Length of Vegetative Gone 1 on Minimum
Soil Temperature at Depth of Tillering Node :3 and
Depth of Freezing of Soil H on 20 February

1. 3—winter wheat; 2, lo—winter rye
for winter wheat of the Hironovskaya 808 strain
1 - 0.0370t3 - 0.0005“ + 0.10839. (3)
1he coefficients of the multiple correlation are 0.91: t 0.01 and 0.91 1-
0.02. respectively; the standard deviations of the equations a are
:t 0.013 and 0.028 III. The equations are valid with mini-u. aoil teaperatures

at the depth of the tillering node of 0 - -1o'c and with a depth of
freezing of the soil of 0 - 150 centi-eters.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
HIM "FFIUIAL "HE nNLV

Au one can see [re- the equations and curves in figure 8. the higher the
einieus temperature of the soil and the lesser the depth of freezing of
the soil. the longer the vegetative cone of plants that have developed
nor-ally in the autunn.

An analysis of the spring investigation of the planted areas. free which
plant specieens were taken. confireed the: the intensive growth of the
vegetative cone in the autumn and winter reduces the frost resistance of

the plants. The thinning of winter wheat and winter rye was considerably
greater in places where the sizes of the vegetative cones were significantly
greater than usual.

The frost resistance of wheat. according to data fro. observations in the
winter of 1970/71 fro- neteorological stations located in the central and
eastern oblasts of the European part of the USSR. correlates with the
lengths of the vegetative cone. The coefficient of correlation between
thinning and the sizes of the cone on 20 February was 0.71 [18].

“need on data concerning the reverse dependency between the intensiveness
of growth processes and the degree of hardiness of the plants, in the
experieent with Hironovskaya 808 winter wheat special attention was

devoted to an analysis of data concerning the length of the vegetative cone
and the connection between this indicator and the degree of thinning of the
plants. Pro- Table 26 one can see that here too this dependency was
clearly coniirsed.

Thble 26. Thinning (Z) of Hironovskaya 808 Plants. Depending on Length of
Vegetative Cone with Various Planting Tiees and Depths of Snow

 

Cover
Key:
1. Planting times a. Excessive
2. Snow cover 5. h of cone (In)
3. Nature] 6. Z of thinning

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘? FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Siailar data were obtained with other strains as well. Moreover in the
early ripening. less winter hardy strains (Bezostaya l. Avrora. Rannyaya l2.
San-Pastore). especially with early planting times. there was more intensive

growth of the vegetative cones and. correspondingly. considerably greater
destruction of the plants.

Thus the data obtained in the experiment and the results of the analysis
of mass observations of the condition of winter wheat and winter rye at
meteorological stations showed that the winter hardiness of winter wheats.
both under the conditions of a normal and an excess snow cover. along with
other physiological-biochemical processes. depends on the condition of the
vegetative cone. The quantitative dependencies of the thinning of planted
areas on the harmful effects of unfavorable winter conditions confirmed the
great significance of growth processes during the period of the autumn and
winter and the size of the vegetative cone which. in turn. is determined

by the planting time and the agrometeorological conditions of the autumn-
winter period.

The question arises: does increased growth of the vegetative cone when there
is a prolonged. warm autumn at a time of prolonged thaws always and in all
years lead to the death of the plants?

As our research showed. in these cases one should distinguish. on the one
hand. types of growth of the vegetative cone and agrometeorological
conditions in which processes of the growth of the vegetative cone takes
place and. on the other hand. temperature conditions in the second half

of the winter and in the early spring. An analysis of the vegetative

cones showed that it is possible to distinguish four types of autumn-winter
growth of the vegetative cones of winter crops.

The first type of growth of the vegetative cone in the autumn and winter
(figure 9) is more widespread in all regions where winter crops are cul-
tivated. in all years before the temperatures at the depth of the tillering
node stabilize below -5’C. the growth of the vegetative cone in the autumn
is of the first type. The longer the period of positive temperatures. the
greater the size of the vegetative cone. Moreover in the majority of years
the growth of the cone takes place in stage II of organogenesis and is
measured initially in millimeters and then parts of a millimeter. In

the second half of the winter when the temperatures at the depths of the
tillering node are close to -5 - -10'c. the growth of the vegetative

cone continues almost until spring. although it is insignificant and
retarded. If during the winter or early spring period the plants have not
been subjected to the effects of temperatures that are critical for the
strain. usually in the spring when the average daily temperature rises

to +3 - +5‘C the vegetative cone very rapidly moves into stages III-IV of
orgnnogenesis. the rudimentary spikelets are differentiated and the plants
develop normally in keeping with the agrotechnology of planted areas and
the course of spring-summer meteorological conditions.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30$ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 9. First Type of Growth of Vegetative Cone of Hintsr "heat

a) at beginning of autumn growing period-~stsge I of organogenesis:

b) before entering winter-—atage II of orgsnogenesis:

c) at beginning of spring growing period--plants' transition to stage
III of organogenesis.

Insignificant growth of the vegetative cones according to the first types
within stage II of organegenesis is a widespread phenomenon. especially
in the second half of the winter. As the research of V. V. Vinogradova
showed. during this period there is a sharp reduction in the centent of
growth inhibitors in the tillering nodes. It is almost a rule that the
first type of growth is not a factor which causes thinning or death of
winter crops.

The second type of growth of the vegetative cone (figure 10) is typical

for the conditions of a long warm autumn. It usually takes place with

very early planting times on well fertilized fallow fields, especially

with strains whose growing plants quickly pass through the vernalizstion
processes with comparatively high temperatures of the air and the soil

at the depths of the tillering node. In these cases there is not only
increased growth of the vegetative cone in stage II of organogenesis.

but in plants in which vernalization processes are being completed. there

is a transition to stage III and in individual years, to the beginning of
stage IV of organogenesis. We have repeatedly observed cases like these

at strain testing stations of Krasnodarskiy Kray. Rostovskaya. Odesskays.
Khersonskaya and Krymskaya Oblssts, in the Dagestan and Kabsrdino-Balkar
ASSR's. and in individual years in Vinnitskays. Poltavskays and Kher'kovskays
Oblasts. The same cases of the plants' transition to stage IV of organe—
genesis in the autumn of 1976 under the conditions of Voronezhskays Oblast
were reported by the agrometeorologiat N. 6. Koleanikov and the physiologists
of the Hironov Scientific Research Institute of Selection and Seed Growing

of "heat. I. V. Hbroz and N. A. Kryshevich. A transition to stages III-IV
of organogenesis was observed in experiments of the laboratory of the

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

biology of plant development in the autumn on areas planted in Bezoataya
l and Odesskaya 51 winter wheat at early times in mass quantities.

 

Figure 10. Second Type of Growth of Vegetative Cone of
"inter Wheat

Key:
n) at beginning of autumn growing period--stage I of orgnnogenesis;
b) in February under deep snow cover; at beginning of spring growing
period--plants' transition to stage III of organogenesis.

If the temperatures in the winter period and the early spring do not reach
critical levels and there is no freezing of winter crops, the plants that
have passed through the winter in the condition of stages of III-IV

form a large spike with an increased number of multiblossom apikelets in
the early spring. In such years areas planted early in winter crops

under the conditions of good agrotechnology realized to a considerable
degree the potential productivity of the strain. The yields of winter
wheat and especially of winter rye are record high.

But if after a long warm autumn before the snow falls there is a sharp
reduction in the air temperature. the soil freezes rapidly and deeply
and the temperature at the depth of the tillering nodes and in the zone
where the vegetative cones are located (above the tillering node) drops
below critical. the main shoots and even whole plants die. Plants in
stages Ill-IV of organogenesis are usually poorly tempered and for them
the critical teaperatures are significantly higher (2-3'c and more) than
for well tempered plants which are in stage II of organogenesis. There-
fore if in the autumn plants appear whose growth takes place according
to the so-called second type. the fields with these plants must be kept

under constant attention. especially if minimum temperatures in the soil
at the depth of the tillering node approach critical level.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first type of growth of the vegetative cone (figure 11) is more
frequently obserVed and mainly in the winter period in those years when
the snow falls early on thawed or slightly frozen soil. The temperature
remains at a level of 0 - t 2°C under a deep snow cover for a long time.
Under these conditions in the darkness of vegetative cone grows rapidly
in length but does not move into stage III of orgnnogenesis. There is

a considerable elongation of the vegetative cone. a so-cnlled undifferen-
tiated growth of the cone in stage II of organogeneais. s kind of process
of prolification of the vegetative cone. The length of rhese cones
frequently increases 2-3-fold over normal (figure 12).

 

Figure 11. Third Type of Growth of Vegetative Cone of Winter
Wheat

Key:

a) at beginning of winter after snow has fallen on thawed soil in stage
II of organogenesis; b) in the middle of winter--under a deep snow cover
in stage II of organogenesis: c) before the disappearance of the snow--

at the end of winter "prolification: of undifferentiated vegetative
cone.

This kind of growth of the cones is observed when the plants are perishing
under the snow cover. They frequently die during the second half of the

winter from starvation when there is a snow cover for an extended time. but

more frequently in the spring when. being in a condition to enter stage

III of organogenesis. they are first subjected to an attack of fungi that
are changing from saprophytes into a parasitic form. Frequently these
shoots weaken the entire plant and sharply reduce their resistance to
frosts. As a result the plants die even with the return of relatively
frost in the early spring.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 12. Third Type of Growth of Vegetative Cone of Winter
Rye -

a. b) at end of long autumn growing period--in:ense formation of leaf
vallicula. stage II of organogenesis; c) in February under deep snow
cover; d. e) at beginning of spring growing period-~stage II of organo-
genesis--"prolification" of undifferentiated vegetative cone.

The undifferentiated growth of winter plants. first noted by F. H. Kuperman
as early as 19$l-l95b and then repeatedly observed by F. M. Kupernan.

V. A. Moiseychik and M. S. Bykovs [10], is one of the leading causes

(in addition to hydrocarbon exhaustion and disturbance of protein exchange)
of the death of winter crops under a snow cover. Perishing under a snow
cover is observed especially frequently on areas planted at early times

and most frequently in winter rye whose vegetative cone can grow at a lower
temperature than that of winter wheat can.

He discovered the fourth type of vegetative cone (figure 13) in Mironovsksya
808 winter wheat. It is clearly distinguished from all of the aforemen-
tioned types. It is known that in the majority of strains of winter

wheat which we investigated. like Kooperatorka, Bezostsya 1. Kavkaz.
Ul'ysnovka. Odesskaya Sl. Priboy. the wheat-wheat grass hybrid 186 and
others. the shoots coming out of the tillering nodes each form one vegeta-
tive cone which is subsequently formed into a spike. The points of

growth of the shoots of the second order in the axila of rudimentary leaves
(leaf vallicula) in the majority of strains of winter wheat die at the
beginning of stage II of organogenesis and thus a shoot is formed with a

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stalk structure that is specific for grasses--straw. In the majority of
winter crops branching takes place only in the lower nodes under the ground
and in the ao-cslled tillering zone. Hhen there is damage (for various
reason) of the vegetative cone. the shoot, deprivad of a normal Vegetative
cone. dies in stages IV-V. In strains of Hironovskaya 808 and also
certain strains obtained through hybridization with Mironovskaya 808.

in the sxils of the leaf vallicula when the shoots are moving into stage
II of orgsnogenesis. growth points of the second order are established.

By the end of the autumn growing period they form clearly expressed
vegetative cones in stage I of organogenesis. or. as F. M. Kuperman calls
them. "reserve buds" (figure 13). The significant content of growth
inhibitors in the vegetative cones of hironovskaya 808 leads to a
situation where growth is retarded early in the vegetative cones and
frequently when the temperatures at the depth of the tillering node are
-8 - ~10’C it practically stops. The retarded growth of the vegetative
cones is compared to Bezostaya l. Avrors and Odsaskaya 51 is also typical
of Hironovskaya 808 at temperatures close to 0 or t 2°C. This explains
the comprehensive frost resistance of this strain which is resistant

both to low temperatures and to an excessive snow cover.

 

Figure 13. Fourth Type of Growth of Vegetative Cone of
Hironovsksys 808 Winter wheat

Key:
a) vegetative cone of nain shoot (stage IV) and "reserve" vegetative
cone (stage I) at beginning of spring growing period; b) base of
vegetative cone and "reserve" buds.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The retardation and then almost complete halting of the growth of the
terminal vegetative cone leads to activation of the growth of side

reserve buds which come out of a state of dormancy in the autumn and spend
the winter in stage I of organogenesis. As one can see from the
photograph (figure 13) taken by A. s. Yaroshevskaya with a scanning
electron microscope. they are located at the bases of vegetative cones of
autumn shoots. in the autumn and winter they grow extremely slowly just
as they do in plants with very late planting times and at the same time.
as distinct from the dormant buds of the tillering nodes. vernalization
processes take place in them.

Thus vegetative cones with different degrees of frost resistance are
combined on one plant and on the same shoots. During years when the
vegetative cones of autumn shoots winter normally they change over early
to differentiation of the rudimentary spike and fora spikes with high
productivity. During these years the vegetative cones of the "reserve
buds" which are more than two stages behind. die without forming regrowth
when the upper vegetative cone moves into stage V of organogenesis. But
in years when the upper vegetative cones of autumn shoots are damaged by
frosts or "prolificate" when there is an excessive snow cover for a long
time. the vegetative cones of the "reserve" buds develop rapidly into
productive shoots and restore the plant stand that was thinned during the
winter. These shoots from these vegetative cones. like late plantings.
produce a somewhat smaller yield. but because of the peculiar properties
of the growth of the vegetative cones, restore the productive plant stand
without replanting or under sewing and suppress spring shoots of weedy
plants.

The discoVery of four types of growth of vegetative cones during the
autumn. winter and early spring periods made it possible to refine the
essential differences in the nature of the damage and death of plants
from freezing and fro- haraful conditions under the snow.

Hhen plants perish under the snow. as V. A. Hoiseychik notes [22]. the
temperature of the soil at the depth of the tillering node is high. a

deep snow cover is established early and the soil is not frozen to a

great depth. All these conditions contribute to the appearance of the

third type of growth of the vegetative cone \hich is characterized by
undifferentiated elongation and ”prolification" in stage II of orgsnogenesis.
Perishin; under the snow is a lengthy process; intense growth of the

vegetative cone. like the death of winter crops. takes place if favorable
conditions remain for no less than 80-100 days.

Conversely. freezing of the plants is observed when the temperature of
the soil is low and when there is no snow cover or when the snow cover

is shallow and the soil is frozen to a great depth. The growth of the
vegetative cones is very retarded. Under these conditions the first type
of growth is encountered most frequently. Damage to the cells by the

low temperatures and the rupture of the tissues lead to a rapid dying off

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the vegetativa cones. After the average tenperatures rise to o‘c

the dead tissues of the vegetative cones nacerste (figure 14) and the
plants which are dsnaged by the frosts are frequently subject to attacks
of fungi--snow aold. collar rot and so forth.

 

Figure lb. Necrosis of Vegetative Cones of Winter Wheat Damaged
in winter and Haceretion of Tissues

Key:
s. b) vegetative cones of different sizes: c) top of vegetative cone
(micro-photo-scanning electron microscope)

Freezing. as distinct from perishing under the snow, is most frequently

a short-term phenomenon and the plants die within 1-3 days. The effects

of low temperatures are especially dangerous for planted areas on which

the second type of growth has already been noted in the fall (figure 15).

The freezing of these planted areas takes place at comparatively high

degrees of freezing. For such planted areas the alternation of long

thaws with freezing weather is especially dangerous. This frequently

takes place in the soutern steppe regions of the Ukraine and not unfrequently
in the central nonchernozem regions. The death of winter plants is

observed in the second half of February and the beginning of March.

In the central regions of the nonchernozem zone damage and destruction of
areas planted in winter wheat are caused by a complicated complex of
unfavorable weather factors (figure 16). low temperatures in December
and January when there is almost no snow or a light snow cover and be

the cause of freezing of the plants. And. conversely. the early snow

in October and an excessive snow cover for a long period of time and
almost the same kind of snow (which is especially frequent in the north-
eastern regiona country's European territory) can lead to perishing of
the plants under the snow.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

0) '0
N

0 0
N

‘0

60

U

m

   

t
9

Figure 16. Growth Dynamics of Vegetative Cone of Hironovskaya
808 "inter "heat with First-Fourth Planting “fines and
Various Depths of Snow Cover ("inter 1972/73).
Moscow State University.

Conventional symbols 1k . h and ii. and also 1-6 see Figure 15.
"Natural" snow cover: 7--first planting tiae. 10 August; 8--second
planting tine. 25 August; 9-third planting time. 5 Septeaher; 10--
fourth planting tine. 20 Septeaher. "Excessive" snow cover: 11--
first planting tine. 10 August; lZusecond planting time. 25 August:
l‘l-third planting time. 5 Septubar; lbnfourth planting tine, 20
Septedier.

In individual years (such. for example. as the winters of 1973/76 and
1976/75) there is very little snow on the fields in the central chernozela
oblaste and the winter crops spend the winter in teaperatures of 0 e re.
The shortage of war-th liaits photosynthesis and the differentiation of
the vegetative cone. At the same tine the cones becole elongated and
”prolifitate." Plants with these cones are infected with root fungi in
the early spring.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the central regions of the nonehornozem zone in individual periods of
the wintering of plants one can observe the effects not only of individual
factors. but of an entire complex of then. The diversity of factors that
cause damage and death to areas planted in winter crops mnde it necessary
in this zone to search for strains which would have a comprehensive
resistance to low tesperatures. close to critical. (and in which the
growth of the vegetative cone is basically of the first type) and also

to temperatures of about 0 1- 1'6.

in order to establish maximum winter hardiness in this tone. it is
isportent to have strains with the first type of growth with a wide range
of temperatures from 0 to -8‘C. But the sajority of strains previously
regionalized in this zone have been characterised by the third and second

types of growth. It was important to find out which were characterized by
one type of growth or another and the nature of the growth dynamics of the

vegetative cone.under various wintering conditions.

Taking into account the diversity of the complexes of unfavorable wintering
conditions. the laboratory of biology of plant development in conjunction
with the USSR hydrometeorological Center during 1970-1975 [8-10. 16-22]
conducted morphophysiological research of the winter hardiness of winter
crops simultaneously against various backgrounds. the major ones of which
were: a) a natural snow cover whose depth usually ranged from 10 to 25
centimeters; b) an excessive snow cover with a depth of 50-60 centimeters
and more: and c) so-called snowlessnoes or more precisely little snow. with
a snow cover of no more than 1-3 centimeters. in all years the planting
was done at four times; the first. early--5-10 August; the second. optimal
for Moscow (blast-4045 August; the third. medium late-S September;

and the fourth. very late for these regioneuzo-ZS September. Against these
backgrounds they tested strains that were regionaliud in the USSR and
also a number of promising new strains of winter wheat: Ul'yanovka.
Hironovsltaya 808. bezostaya l. aerostaya 2. Hironovsltaya yubileynaya.
Odessltays 51. Priboy. Avrora. FPO-186 and Vystka and Khar'ltovskaya 60
winter rye [10].

in all the variants of the experiments Ali-l7 thermometers were used to
take the minimum. maimum and periodic temperatures of the soil and the
depth of the tillering nodes; frost meters installed on platforms at
various depths of the snow cover were used to measure the depth of
freezing of the soil and snow measuring rods were used to determine the
depth and miformity of the snow cover on the plots. The rest of the
necessary meteorological data (air temperature. precipitation. nusber of
hours of sunshine. moisture content of the soil and others) were obtained

in the observatory of the geograph" department of Hoscow State University
which is located 50 meters from the experimental plot of the laboratory
of bioloty of plant development.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the autumn and spring the nutter of plants and shoots were counted on all
of the plots.

Throughout the entire autumndwinter-spring period every 10-15 days. a
pneumatic drill with a spade was used to take samples of 25-50 plants

from each variant of the experiaent. They were subjected to a detailed
morphophysiological analysis in which the condition and sizes of the
vegetative cones. the tillering nodes and the leaves were taken into account.
The viability of the plants was tested in a greenhouse. To do this the
vessels 'qu the plants (5-10 fros each specimen) were forced to the phase

of heading and hlossoeing. Then in the greenhouse observations of their
passing through stages II-Ix of organogenesis were conducted regularly.

In recent years major attention has been devoted to an analysis of growth
processes of the vegetative cone under the conditions of various temperatures
in the autum-wintet-spring period and to the discovery (with the help

of a microscope photographic attachment on an Has-1 binocular magnifying
glass and also a scanning electron eicroscope of the Khitachi ll-B type

with various sagnitudes--froe X70 to X1600) of differences in the types

of damage from freezing and from perishing under the snow.

Data froe observations of the dynamics of the growth of the vegetative
cone were of greatest interest in research on the phenoeena of winter
hardiness. Regular observations were conducted for the first time with
various depths of the snow cover and various minimum and anxious: telpera-
tures at the depth of the tillering nodes and various depths of freezing
of the soil which were created in connection with this. In the first
place. these were observations of plants of the same age. planted at the
some title. on the same section and under identical soil conditions; in the
second place these were one-time parallel observations of plants of
various ages with intervals in planting time of 15-20 days. beginning with
very early tiles and ending with extra late times (20 September) for
conditions of the nonchernozee zone. And finally. which is also signi-
ficant. we investigated for the first time not only regionalized and
promising strains for the noacheraosem zone-Ul'yanovka. ”6-186, PPG-S99,
Hironovskaya 808, Hironovskaya yubileynays—but also strains used as
indicators of week winter hardiness which had been regionalized in the
southern obluts of the USSR--Bezostaya l. Bezostaya 2, Avrora and
others--and also the semi-winter strains San-Pastors.

Throughout the entire autumn-winter-spring period the winter plants were
subjected to detailed morphogeological analysis. The determined the
coefficient of tillering. the nuber of shoots in various stages of
organogenesis, the number of leaves on each sheet, the length and breadth

of the leaves and their condition; with a point evaluation they determined
the condition of the vegetative cones. their length and breadth. the nusber
of leaf vsllicula in stage II of organogenesis and the number of segments
and. in cases where they had entered stage III, also the nusber of

spike tubercles in stage IV of organogenesis.

62

NR OFFICIo‘d. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For mass samples the accounting was done on Table 27 [9]. Throughout

the winter period with unfavorable conditions. as a rule. the leaves were
damaged first. The degree of damage largely determines the condition

of the plants in the spring-summer period. In those cases where the leaves
were not damaged (green or partially yellow-green) after the disappearance
of the snow cover and the rise in the air temperature to above 0.
photosynthesis begins in the plants. The development of these plants

takes place normally in the spring. The condition of the leaves of these
plants is evaluated by points 5 and 6.

If in the winter and spring all leaves or a large part of them are yellow
and the vegetative cones are alive, a certain period of tile is necessary
for the appearance of new assimilating leaves after the resumption of the
growing period, as a result of which the growth and development of the
plants are retarded and the yield decreases somewhat. Then the condition
of the leaves of winter crops is evaluated with point 3.

Plants whose leaves are brown in the winter and spring are evaluated by
point 2 and dark brown-by point 1. In the majority of these cases
there is also damage to the vegetative cones and tillering nodes and
thinning or complete destruction of the plants.

Table 27 gives an evaluation of the condition of leaves of plants with
various degrees of damage by unfavorable wintering conditions. It takes
into account not only the color of the leaves. but also the number of
plants in percentages with various degrees of damage to the leaves (Table
27, columns 3 and b).

The vegetative cones have a greater resistance than the leaves do and,
moreover. in the majority of years in winter crops they are located in the
soil at a depth of 1-3 centimeters. The viability of the shoot, the
growth and development of the insipient spike and, consequently, its
productivity depend on the condition of the vegetative cone. Therefore
the condition of the vegetative cone, as was noted above, determines

the condition of the plants as a whole during the wintering period.

Depending on the degree of their damage in the winter, the conditions of
the vegetative cones can be determined in the following way: five points-—
the cone is transparent, alive. turgid and slightly opslescent; three
points--the cone is alive, white. turgid. dull and not opalescent; one
point--the cone is dead. brown, wrinkled and macersted. The condition

of the plants is evaluated taking into account the number of shoots (in
percentages of the overall number in the plants that are analyzed) which
have varying degrees of damage to the vegetative cone.

The indicators for evaluating the condition of the plants relate-mainly
to cases of damage of winter crops by low temperatures, the ice crust and
drenching. "hen winter crops perish under the snow one takes into account

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tanc 2‘). Hvohmtlon of the Condition of Leave: (A) and Vegetative Cones
(B) of Plant» in Autum-Hlnter-Spring Petiod.

 

nmu umuc (6) a too woo :00
1'66”" 155 "' ‘-°
3 15 5.15 + 4. 47
Kean-menu: (7) 4 23 Lima” " I“? ' ‘3
3cm 8 5 so .30 4.5a
Ranging»: (9) 4 60 bras—z " $ ' ‘v‘
4 too moo _ 4m ‘ o
W T65 " ‘
so 4- .
)Kmme (1°) 3 so Lioll'aﬂﬂ_%_3'5
a too 3400 son 3
'mr ' 1w " -°
3 25 3-25 + 2-15 :25
Sum (11) 2 75 —)-m——)‘ t - 766 -2.3
2 :00 2.100 zoo
Ta- " 13' -’-°
"optic-Own! (12) I IN moo -~}%—1.0

 

(17) Kouyc ulna. uptown“. 5 [W woo 500

‘ - - 5.0
.353" ””“W’” W 125'
(13) To me 5 75
)K non. 6m h. 3 - -
(19) 30%. ”15mm. 25 (5 ’5 +6, 25 -%"'5

cunrynoml
000.

0.0.0.00000

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
  

(16)
0

 

 

 

5
(MM "WWW-ll. m- 8 80 (5.50 443.50 no
.mmfw a so Jim—I‘m "°
(21) M. um:a.mnue.
”PM“ 3.100 300
0 - -
(22)*::.'.?°.'.’3'33“.‘:..‘:. ° '°° W w ’-°
(18)???" a 15 gang-+9.25; no
(2 imamoﬂgagua- ! 25 m
m
(22) MAW: .3133..." 50 3.m)+u.5o m 20
“9’". - - 0
<22>W.....°:3:*.::3. ' m "5
II.
(ZZMM “w“ “$3... a 25 (3.” +0." -‘30 15
mm“ '_)'lii.'t‘_z 163‘ '
(2 ”Menu. GypUI. esop- I 18
Mum-poun-
M moo loo
(18)‘|’o u 1 1w W-W- 1,0
Leave: 16. Evaluation
Description 17. Cone live, turgid. 9113!:
Evaluation (points) opaleacent
Percentage of plants with 18. Cone live. turgid, 3113}:
given points opaleacent
Overall points 19. Live. white. turgid, dul
Green leaves opaleacent
Yellow-green 20. Live. turgid. opaleacent
Green 21. Live. white. turgid, dul
Yellow-green opaleacent
Yellow 22. Live. trugid. white. dul
Brown - opalescent '
Black-brown 23. Dead, brown. wrinkled. n

Vegetative cone
Condition of cone

Percentage of ahoota with
cones with given points

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the number of plants with elongated vegetative cones that have undergone
"prolification." Here one determines the overall length of the vegetative
cones and. separately. the length of the elongated. undifferentiated part
of the vegetative cone. The vegetative cone is drawn (if possible. with

a drawing device). These data are also included in the table. An account
is made of each shoot on typical plants. The degree of deviations from
the norm and the percentage of markedly elongated vegetative cones are
also determined by points.

One can judge the way various depths of the snow cover are reflected in
plants of‘one and the ease strain planted at the same optimal time

(25 August for Moscow Oblast) from data concerning the changes in the length
of the vegetative cone of the Dl'yanovka strain (table 28). Thus under
a natural snow cover or when there is no snow. by the end of November
[972 the vegetative cones had reached 0.60-0.66 III and under an excessive
snow cover. when the snow remained on the plots in the beginning of
hovedaer. the growth of the vegetative cones continued and by the
beginning of Decedaer reached 0.50-0.55 In. Then in all variants with
various snow covers the vegetative cone remained unchanged, which was
typical for the first type of growth. It should be noted that in the
winter of 1972/ 73 there were no great differences between the natural

and excessive snow covers.

The effects of the planting times are very clearly traced in the same
experiment. ‘lhus with the very early planting time of 10 August and

a natural snow cover. the length of the vetegstive cone by 25 Decedier
had reached 0.50 van; with planting on 25 August-4.66 Is: 5 September-
0.35 mm; and with a very late planting time—0.20 -. While there were
considerable differences in the length of the vegetative cones determined
by the depth of the cover and the planting times, throughout the winter
period their sizes increased quite insignificantly. As one can see
from the figures. the first type of growth of the vegetative cone during
the winter period is typical for the Ul'yanovka strain which largely
determines the great winter hardiness of this strain which has been
regionalized in a number of oblssts that rarely have conditions which
cause perishing of winter wheat under snow (figure 15).

There was a similar situation during this same winter of 1972/73 on areas
planted in Hironovskaya 808 winter wheat. In variants with various

snow covers the vegetative cones differed little and in variants with
various planting times they differed quite distinctly (see figure 16).

During this same winter of 1972/73. with comparatively optimal wintering
conditions for winter plants (maximum teweratures at the depth of the
tillering node under a natural snow cover were mainly -2 - -5'C and only
for a short period of tine did they drop to ~11 - 12'c), even with the
first type of growth of winter crops it was still possible to discover
differences in the length of the vegetative cones of winter-hardy strains
which for the Hoscow area are Ul'yanovka and Bezostaya 808 and relatively

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.‘ \ .
tor hardy ones--0dessksys 51 and especially Bezosts

yo 2 (see

so uin

gore 15).
he winter of 1971/72

nsidersbly greater strain differences were noted in t

BVen under condit

in such strains as Hironovshsys yuhileynsys. Bezosteys
rkcd growth was noted

that the curves represent
diness fully co

nd less intensely
and Odessksys 51 en

train. it is interesting
ntrsins with varying degrees of winter her
or herdinsss. which shows the existence of certsin correlations
and the resistane to ice

:heir Hint
aetueen the in
teeperatnres (the
then in the winter of

tensiveness of growth processes
winter of 1971/72 use colder s

1972/73) .

 

Hith Optinsl Plsnting Tile,
"Nstursl" Snow Cover. ate University.

see fig. 15. 7nAvrors.

h. 1! and 1-6.
yubileysnsy. 11--

Ocnventionsl symbols: 11m 1
8-‘0desshsys $1, 9--Besostsys 2. 10-mironovsksys
Hironovsksys 808. 12~Ul‘ysnov . 13-1'seziom 39

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY
-- - FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I

In the winter of 1970/71 the snow cover in the "excessive" variant was
considerably than in the "natural" variant. The aininun tenperatures

at the depth of the tillering node with the excess snow cover did not
drop below -2'c. During this winter there was a very clear manifestation
of the third type of growth of the vegetative cones. especially in the
less winter hardy strains such as San Pastore. Avrors. Rannyaya 12 and
lezostaya 2 (figure 18).

One can judge the way early planting times affect the growth of vegetative
cones of weakly winter hardy strains of winter wheat from the curves of the
growth of the cone in the 8ezostays 2 strain. With an early planting

tile. even under conditions of a natural snow cover. the growth of the
vegetative cones continues until December and is renewed as early as the
second half of February. long before the snow disappears from the plot
(figure 19). Moreover. even under the conditions of a natural snow cover
the growth of the vegetative cone was considerably greater when the planting
time was early than it was with the third and fourth planting tiles.

The winter of 1973/76 was relatively warn and the snow cover was established
early. Under these conditions. even with Hironovskaya 808 planted at an
early time. there was almost continuous growth of the vegetative cone.
especially in the second half of the winter (figure 20).

It was possible to trace the effects of the winter conditions of 1972/73
even more clearly in the Odessksya 51 and Bezostays 1 strains. which were
tested as indicator strains. As one can see from figures 21 and 22, these
strains which are adapted to the steppe regions are unsuitable for the
central belt of the country's European territory since the relatively
rapid growth of the vegetative cones in these regions and their inadequate
winter hardiness lead to considerably more severe damage than Hironovskaya
808 sustained under the same experimental conditions.

The growth of the vegetative cone of Besostaya 1 proceeded approximately
in the same way as that of Odesskaya 51 throughout the entire winter
(figure 23) both under the conditions of a natural snow cover and an
excessive one. These data once again confirm that selecting even the
most productive new and promising strains in other zones, it is necessary
to examine them in detail under the conditions of various winters which
are typical of the nonehernozen zone.

The high growth rate of strains like Odesskaya 51 and Bezostsya 1. which
are comparatively resistant for the country's European territory. even

in snow winters under the conditions of the chernozen zone can lead to
"prolificstion" of the vegetative cones under the snow throughout the
winter and to severe daaage with the return of frosts in March during years
with an early disappearance of the snow cover. In these cases planting
times that are too early are especially inadmisssble.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
988338 aaaaaaa

60.6000 0000000

 

 

 

------ -_--~--
~--—-- ~_--~--
gunman 0”"“””"

 

assess 3838388

-------------

 

999999 9999999
-~---- ---—---
-—~--- —---_--
voauun “*0*‘“‘

 

338383 8888888

.........

 

 

 

999999 9999966
-_--—- -——-~--
-_--_- _-—---=
”0°00” 000.05..

. _-:: d ’

E xxxxxx __:::22

_ ggggzg _ :82§:”2

[Table 28 continued on following page]

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(5) is) {a (5)

(5) :(6) fr.

  

[Key on following page]

 

1

   
  
  

899983

000000

31000060“

888888

000000

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030020-5

m”

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

asaaaa 3
666666 0
000000 0
889883 3
666666 0
000000 “
8%8383 3
000000 0
000000 0

c xx§§=g c
g .-
E 282R:8 g =

70
FOR OFFICIAL "SR ONLY

Key:
1. Natural snow cover. 10-25 en lo. Nuaber of shoots u
2. Planting tiles 5. Stage
3. Date biological eminetion 6. length of cone (II)

conducted 7. Seouleeeneu (0-3 cl)

 

Figure 18. Growth Dynamics of ﬂegetive Cones of “inter Crops
in "inter and Early Spring Periods (winter "heat
and Rye with Various Degrees of Winter Hardiness) in
1970/71 with Optilel Planting Tine Under Conditions of
"Excessive" Snow Cover. bacon State University.

[Key on folloving page]
71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
 
 

C
A (II .......--—--'1 6
a? w 6
m I
0 0 0
N 2
‘0 6
w
Ila-

Figure 20. Growth Dynamics of Hironovskaya 808 Hinter "heat
with First and Third Planting Tiles and "Natural"
and "Excessive" Snow Covers in Hinter of 1973/76.

Key:
Conventional syabols lkn' h. h and 1-6. see fig. 15. First planting
tile: 7--"excessive" snow cover, 8-"natural" snow cover. Third planting
tile: 9--"exceusive“ snow cover. lO--"natural" snow cover.

0f especially great interest are data iron a uotphophysiological analysis
of Hironovskaya 808 winter wheat which in the last few years has been
regioanlised in the central regions of the nonchsrno:el zone. In plants
of this strain with various planting times the vegetative cone even in
stage II of organogeneais is sonewhat greater than that of Ul'yanovka

in the autumn and early spring, but they cone out of the state of dornancy
at slaost the same time as Ul'yanovka does. Consequently. in terms of
frost resistance (taking into account their caning out of the condition of
doraancy in the spring). the Hironovskaya 808 strain cones close to

the Ul'yanovka. In Hironovsksya 808 plants under conditions of an
excessive snow cover (with the first planting tile). even at the end of
February and the beginning of March one observes a transition to stage

III and even in the second ten days of April in 1974 the plants renained
at stage III in their developeent and there was continued nets-ere growth
of the segnents that subsequently conditioned the foraation of a large
rudiaentary spike. The transition to stage IV of organogenesis began
later. after there was no return to cold weather in the spring.

73

FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 21. Condition of Vegetative Cones With Inadequate Snow
Cover

Key:
Vegetative cone of Bezoetayn 1 strain: a) x23&. 6) x668; vegetative
cone of Odeaakayn 51 strain: b) x200. r) x600, 16 April 1973

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 22. Effects of Planting Times on Condition of Vegetative
Cones of Hironovakaya 808 Winter "heat Under
Conditions of an Excess of Snow (depth--sbout 60-70 cm)

Key:
s-—necrosis of central part and base of cone; 6--deep longitudinal
ruptures and necrosis of tissues.

Thus in terms of the condition of the vegetative cone (level of develop-
ment and growth rates), Hironovskaya 808 is very close to the Ul‘yanovka
strain. But anong the strains that are included in group 1 in terms of
winter hardiness, Hironovskays 808 plants. as we know, have one peculiarity
that is very important for the strain's productivity. Namely, as distinct
from Ul'yanovka and other highly frost resistant strains like Lyutestsens
329 and Lyutestsens 1060. Hironovskaya 808 plants are capable not only of
maintaining a live tillering node at critical temperatures when the

shoots above the ground die. but also of developing new productive shoots
in the spring. As was already noted. in the autumn one observes the fourth
types of growth of the vegetative cone in Hironovskays 808. It is
precisely this property of the plant that makes it possible when wintering
conditions are unfavorable to obtain yields that are close to average
while areas planted in other strains of winter wheat during these years.
because of the severe thinning of the plant stand, must be underaown with
barley in the spring or replowed and replanted with late spring crops.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 23. Types of Damage to Winter Wheat in winter of
1972/73 (planted on 25 August). Bezostaya 1 strain.

Key:
Transverse and longitudinal fissures in vegetative cone with "natural"
snow cover: a) x200, o) x400: b) longitudinal rupture of vegetative
cone in absence of snow (x400). 16 April 1973

As was already pointed out, one of the peculiarities of this strain is the
formation in the autumn of shoots that are in various stages of organo-
genesis. Even as certain tillering shoots are developing at the same time
in the autumn and providing for a uniform plant stand of productive shoots
in the early spring. another group of potential shoots (third and fourth
order of tillering) remain in stage 1. Th .e rudimentary shoots in the
form of so-called "reserve" buds pass through the winter well. When

the winter wheat plants have spent the winter well and their main shoots
have rapidly moved into stages IV—V of organogenesis. because of the

law of reduction the rudimentary "reserve" buds do not begin to grow and
completely die off. But if because of extremely unfavorable conditions in
the winter the main autumn shoots which are in stage II of organogenesis
are severely damaged and are behind in their development or have completely
died. then shoots from the "reserve" cones develop. which are better
protected since. in the first place. in stage I they are more frost
resistant than shoots in stage II and. in the second place. since they

are in a dormant condition. as is the case with Ul'yanovka. vernalization
processes have taken place in them during the winter. although slowly.
which has enabled them to move into stages IV-V and subsequent stages of
organogenesis in the early spring. Because of this they develop into normal
productive shoots.

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An account of the number of plants that have survived the winter in
relation to the planting times shows that the main shoots of the plants
which have been planted early in the majority of years. because of the
completion of the first stage of development in the autumn. are more
sunsitive to unfavorable conditions (low temperatures and excessive

snow cover). This was established in the comparatively severe winter of
1971/72. As one can see from the figures in table 29, in the early
spring of 1972. under the conditions of the variant with a natural

snow cover. in Hironovskaya 808 winter wheat 65 percent of the plants and
51 percent of the shoots remained (when planted on 10 August) and with an
optimal planting time-98 percent of the live plants and 95 percent of the
shoots: under conditions of an excessive snow cover with planting on 10
August 52 percent of the plants and 62 percent of the shoots remained alive
and with planting on 25 August-77 percent of the plants and 70 percent
of the shoots.

Table 29. Number of Plants and Shoots of Winter Wheat that Survived the
winter. Moscow. 1971/72 (2)

 

M l0 VIII 65 51 52 62
(8) M" "cm as vm ss 95 11 70
SIX 97 97 62 58
20 IX. I00 91 100 as
Mamet“ ”601- 0 VIII 62 58 50 62
(9) Mann so‘l as VIII 95 94 7a 1a
5 IX 6| 57 73 77
20 IX 18 O4 76 69
pesos IO VIII 82 49 4C 47
(10) y ea 20 VIII % 94 05 6|
5 IX 96 96 69 60
20 IX IN 98 76 86
(11) Boot-tall as vm a: 92 4o 44
5 IX 96 98 63 7!
As 25 VIII 8| 70 48 50
(12) W 5 Ix so 95 62 as
Key:
1. Strain 7. Shoots
2. Planting time 8. Hironovskaya 808
3. Natural snow cover 9. Mironovskaya yubileynaya 50
0. Excessive snow cover 10. Ul'yanovka
5. Live (2) 11. Bezostaya 1
6. Plants 12. Avrora
77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to get a better idea of the significance of planting tines and
wintering conditions. one should discuss the analysis of figures concerning
the reduction ("discarding") of autumn tillering shoots in various strains
with various planting tines. A norphophysiological analysis of the
tillering shoots reveals. in the first place. strain differences in term
of this indicator and. in the second place. the effects of the planting

time. All this is undoubtedly related to the question of the consequences
of winter damages.

Table 30 gives figures frost the autumn. spring and sunset accounting for
the author of tillering shoots in two strains of wheat--lilronovskaya 808
and Bezostayn l--with various planting times. As one can see from table
30. in the first place. Mironovskaya 808 plants bush considerably more
intensely in the autunn and lore shoots resain until harvest than with
Bezostnyn 1 plants. In the second place. the significant differences in
the number of autunn shoots with various planting tines disappear
throughout the spring and sun-er: the plants lose from 50 to 90 percent
of the tillering shoots as early as the end of July and the most autuam
shoots—both in absolute figures and in percentages-mm retained when the
planting time is optimal (50-60 percent). when the planting time is too
early .1 large nuaber of the shoots die as early as the end of May and by
harvesting time only 25 percent of then resain. With a late planting
time. Hironovskaya 808 plants formed no more than three shoots in the
autumn and tillering does not begin in Besostaya 1. and in the sunset
up to 50 percent of the plants die.

Thus in 1972/73 the plantings that were thinnest by harvest tile were those
on plots that had been planted very early and very late. It is interesting
to note that even at the end of May. especially with early planting times.
it was possible to observe a significant retardation in the developsent

of vegetative cones at the ends of the bush: while some shoots had already
passed into stages VI-VII of organogenesis. others remained in stages II-
lll and gradually died off.

me dying off of shoots in the spring is determined not only by the
unfavorable effects of winter conditions. when evaluating both the
winter hardiness of strains and the wintering conditions. one should take
into account the dynaaics of "discarding" of shoots: the more favorable
the conditions for the development of plants in the autumn-winter period.
the less “discarding" of winter shoots and the greater the productivity

of the plants.

l
In cases where winter wheat externally scene to have survived the winter

nor-ally. in plants that have been planted at earlv times and have been
under an excessive snow cover there is frequent... 1 deformation of the
spikes even in stage V of organogenesis (figure 26). Additionally. the
more snow resistant the strain. the lesser the consequences of winter
damage. This is quite clear from a comparison of the rudimentary spikelets
of Hironovsltaya 808 and Bezostaya 1 winter wheats.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 30. Dynamics of Reduction of Autumn Tillering Shoots of Various
Strains of Winter Wheat, Depending on Planting ‘i'imes

 

(2) Cus- nu

  
  

Ann yum Io VIII

(1) —_|—._——]_‘.—|‘._

 

I012 r.
I6 XI II) no 6 too 3 loo 3 I00
ma r.
2| V IO M 5 loo a 100 2 06
26 V 4 do 3 do 2 so 2 st
20 VII I lo a 60 I as I 33

 

 

Ans you.
(1)
Im r.
I6 XI 6 100 i IN 2 IN I I”
ma r.
V I 81 3 75 2 100 I IN
3; V 2 33 2 so I 50 0.5 so
20 VII I I7 2 50 I 60 0.3 33
Key:
1. Date of report 3. Hironovskays 808
2. Planting times Ia. Besostsys 1

Note: a—oversll number of shoots before beginning of wintering.
O-—number of reduced shoots a).

At the same time. plants that are planted late. which have smaller

vegetative cones. are significantly behind in terms of development and
the productivity of the spike in the spring. For this reason. despite
the better wintering. they cannot be recollaended for production. The

effect of the consequences of damage under a deep snow cover in the winter
depends considerably on strain resistance of the wheat (table 31). As
one can see from table 31. damage to winter crops under snow in the

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

winter of 1965/66 had a negative effect on the height of the plants. the

passing through the stages of organogenesis. the coefficient of bushiness
and the number of spikelets in the spikes.

Manifestations of damage to crops under the snow are observed considerably
more frequently on areas planted in winter rye in the northeastern. eastern
and northwestern regions of the European territory of the Soviet Union.
When the snow cover falls early end remains for a long time the hydro-
carbon exhaustion of the plants led to their starvation and then these
plants were subject to attack by fungi when there was a high moisture
content under the melting snow cover. And only in very recent years has

it become clear that undifferentiated growth of the vegetative cones is

one of the factors that lead to the death of shoots. primarily main shoots.

to laxears. and to a considerable reduction in the productivity of the rye
spike.

As one can see from table 32 and figure 25. the vegetative cone of winter
rye can reach large sizes even in the autumn when the conditions are
favorable for this but then under the snow with a temperature of 0 - +2°c
it continues to grow even in the winter months. as was noted in the winters
of 1972/73 (figure 26) and 1973/76. By spring the shoots of these plants
have died off (figure 27).

As was noted in the experiments with various strains of winter wheat. in
winter rye the growth of the vegetative cone took place more intensively
under the conditions of an excessive snow cover and with early planting
times (figure 28). Thus. for example. in the winter of 1972/73 under

a natural snow cover the length of the vegetative cone of plants from the
first planting time had reached 1.5 mm by 28 February and under an excessive
snow cover-l.9 mm; and with a late planting time. although the length of
the vegetative cones was also unusual (0.9-0.93 mm) the differences

between their sizes under natural and excessive snow covers were not great.

The undifferentiated growth. elongation of the vegetative cone and its
necrosis in winter rye can be illustrated with photographs (figure 29).
Thus even at the end of March in stage IV of organogenesis there were
clearcut differences in the condition of the vegetative cones of plants
that had spent the winter under natural and excessive snow covers (figure
30). These differences were manifested even more clearly in April (figure
31) when the plants entered stage V of organogenesis. In the photographs.
even with plants taken from the variant under an excessive snow cover. one
can observe a loss of turgidity by the tissues of the undifferentiated

top of the vegetative cone and the appearance of dark spots. which is
especially clear on the upper parts of the vegetative cones in plants that
have come out from under an exessive snow cover. In figure 31 a and o

the tops of vegetative cones from an early planting time (10 August) in
stage V of organogenesis under different snow covers (natura1--a and
excessive--6) are shown for comparison. In the plants that have come

80

FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 26. The Effects of an Early Planting Time (10 August)

and "Excessive" Snow Cover (50-65 cm) on the Fornation
of Splkelets. Stage IV of Organogenesis.

(Key on following page]

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSli ONLY

Key:
Bezooteya 1 winter wheat (x333): a--the upper apikelato are behind in
develop-ent. have turned dark and are beginning to die off. 0-»
apikelete in the central part of the spike; one can see prolification
of the spike and apikelot axes: Mironovakaya 808 winter wheat: b--
upper apikelete are behind in develop-ent. their reduction is reVeoled
in stage V; r-norue1 epikelete. 27 April 1973.

Table 31. Effects of Winter Dense Under Snow on Growth. Development and
Orsenogenesia of Winter Wheat Plants in Moscow Area [12]

 

M an: I 75 3.3 VIII 93 I0 I.'.’
(9) x" 2 52 3.3 vu so 11 0.2
- 3 31 2.3 VII 25 I2 0.2
“Wanna I as 3.4 v111 [00 19 1.11
2 30 3.4 VII 1| I7 0.6
. ' 3 40 3.4 VII 20 I3 0.6
(11)I(y11mu 45 I 16 3.3 VIII l00 18.8 1.2
2 30 3.0 VII 50 15.2 0.0
3 .19 3.0 VII 49 16.5 0.0
4 (II 3.2 VII I6 l4.-I 0,0
(1213...... 1 33 4.2 v11 31 19.9 1.1
2 30 4.0 VII 23 ".0 0.3
3 38 3.0 VI—VII 24 I5.5 0.0
4 25 3.3 VI—VII 0 “.2 0.0
(13):)”: 1 u 3.5 v11 33 19.1 1.3
2 42 3.9 VII 20 l9.0 I 0.6
3 43 l 3.5 VII I3 I3.0 0.3
4 27 - 3.2 VI—VII 5 I3.3 ' 0.0
(1")Xoum 1 52 3.9 v11 47 19.9 ' 2.1
2 40 LI VII 20 IL? I.6
3 3! 3.9 Vl-VII 0 I5.2 L“)
I 25 3.2 IVI—VII 5 12.8 0.0
Key:
1. Strain 8. Number of side shoots
2. Group in terms of degree 9. Hirouovokaye 808
of danage 10. PFC-186
3. "eight of plants (ca) 11. Kun1aevskaya-4S
6. Number of green leaves 12. Fanal
5. Stage of organoseneeie 13. Bros
6. length of spike (an)| 16. Kokhland
7. Nu-bcr of spikelets in spike

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY


FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Natural snow cover. 20-25 cm
2. Date of biological exasination
3. Nuaber of shoots n

lo. Stage

5. Length of tone (I)

6. Excessive snow cover. 50-60 cm
7. Snowlessness (2-3 cm)

out from under a snow cover and begun to grow later. s small part of the
undifferentiated top of the vegetative cone remained until that date
(27 April--figure 31 6) but somewhat later (by 5 May) it dries up.

Thus. as a result of many years of experinent, it was established that
under a deep snow cover, in addition to processes of respiration on which
supplies of hydrocarbons accumulated in the autumn during the course of
tempering are expanded. in plants where the temperature is 0 :- 1'c and
higher in the zone where the tillering nodes are located there are also
growth processes. They are insignificant when the planting times are late
and extremely marked in well bushed plants with 7-8 shoots and more.

The increase in the length of the leaf blades and their etiolation do not
always lead to their rapid death although in a nutter of years one
observes that they die off prematurely. which somewhat iwedes the plants'
development, especially in years with a cold and dry spring. Frequently
these leaves turn green in the light and for some time participate in the
photosynthetic activity of winter wheat and winter rye. In the majority
of years abnormally elongated. etiolizsd leaves 2-6 (counting from the
bottoe up) completely die off.

Conaiderably more destructive for the plants is "prolification." undif-
ferentiated growth of the vegetative cone. Necrosis of even the uppermost
part of the vegetative cone leads to a sharp reduction in the productivity
of the plants and complete destruction of the vegetative cones leads to

a considerable reduction in the yield. There ‘has been repeated observa-
tions: of the so-called "white spike“ where some of the spike glumes are
deprived of chlorophyll; in these spikes the Mason are sterile. "Hhite
spike" can be caused by various factors-damage by concealed stalk pests,
n shortage of a number of necessary trace elements. and so forth. But

in the majority of cases. especially in winter rye. "white spike" is a
result of winter damage. including perishing under the snow.

If one is to generalize the data obtained froa physiologists concerning

the processes that take place in winter plants that retain for a long time
under a deep snow cover at tenperatures of 0 i- 2'C. one can classify them

as hydrocarbon exhaustion because of the plants' expenditures on respiration
and growth processes. starvation and decomposition of protein components

as we!) as undifferentiated growth of vegetative cones. Under conditions
that are favorable for the development of fungal flora. weakened. anomalously

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
Temperature of soil at depth of tillering node under snow cover:
l-"nstural". 2--"excessive": depth of snow cover: 3--"natura1".
b--"excessivo": depth of freezing of soil under snow cover: 5--
"natural". 6-"excessive." "Natural" snow cover. planting time:
7--first. 8--eecond. 9-«third. lO-fourth. "Excessive" snow cover.
planting time: 11-firet. 12--aecond. 13--third. 16-fourth. 1972/
1973. 1k --length of vegetative cone (mm). h--depth of snow cover
(cm), H--3epth of freezing of soil (cm).

"prolificated" organs of winter plants are infected with snow mold and
collar rot which destroy the entire above-ground mass of the plants and
attack and fully destroy winter crops.

MAIN ACROHETEOROIDGICAL FACTORS CAUSING PBRISHING OF "INTER CROPS UNDER
SNOH AND PAITBRNS OF THEIR SEASONAL CHANCE

A study of the results of the research on physiological processes on
perishing of winter plants under snow made it possible to come to the
conclusion that the destruction of winter crops when they perish under the
snow is determined mainly under the condition of the plants in the autumn,
the soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node and on the surface
of the soil under the snow. the depths of freezing of the soil and the
length of time a deep snow cover remains on the fields.

Investigation of the temperature conditions of the soil at the depth of
the tillering nodes of winter crops showed that with certain combinations
of the depth of the snow cover and the depth of freezing of the soil, the
temperature remains for a long period of time within the range in which
perishing of the plants takes place (0 ~ -5'C). From the results of
observations from 1965 through 1976 at the Nemchinovka Agrometeorological
Station in Moscow Oblast with slight freezing of the soil during the period
of the formation of a deep snow cover (depth 30 cm and more), the minimum
temperature of the soil throughout the entire subsequent period of the
winter was within the range of 0 - -3'c (Table 33. 1965/66. 1967/68,
1969/70 and 1970/71).

The soil temperature at the depth of the tillering nodes of winter

crops (an average depth of 3 cm) when there is no snow cover on the fields
depends mainly on the air temperature and the depth of freezing of the soil
[18. 22]. The daily and periodic changes in it are similar to the changes
in the air temperature. but the absolute amounts are higher than the

air temperature. With a slight freezing of the soil. the difference between
the soil temperature at a depth of 3 cm and the air temperature is greater
than when there is deep freezing of the soil.

87

VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘FICIM. USE ONLY

 

Figure 26. Growth Dynamics of Vegetative Cons of Vystka "inter
Rye of the First and Second Planting Times Under

Conditions of "Natural" and "Excessive" Snow Covers.

Key:
Conventional syabols l , h. H and 1-6. see fig. 25. First planting
tine. snow cover: 7-- excessive", 8--"natutal"; second planting tine,

anon cover: 9—-"excessive." lO--"natural". 1973/74

FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0)

 

Figure 27. Perishtng of Vyatka "inter Rye Under Snow in Winter
of 1965/66

Key:

External appearance of plants fro. specimens taking from agrometeorolo-

glcal statIons: a--Charozcro (Kaltnlnskaya 06133:). 6--I3ra (Udnurt
ASSR). b--Cherdyn’ (Per-okays Oblaat)

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 28. Condition of Vegetative Cone of Vystka Winter Rye
After Hintering on 3 April 1973. (Stage IV)

Key:
a--uith "natural" snow cover (normal conditions). 6-—with "excessive"
snou cover

Mnen the snow cover is established on the fields of winter crops the
effects of the air temperature on the soil decrease considerably since the
snow has great heat insulation properties (Table 36). Its heat

conductability is 10 percent of the heat conductability of the mineral
part of the soil.

The heat insulating properties of the snow cover become greater as its
depth and reflective capacity increase and its density decreases.

During the course of the winter the density of the snow cov r increases;
in January-February it amounts to an average 0.18-0.22 g/cm : and by

the end of the winter it increases to 0.25-0.35 g/cm3. The heat insulating
role of each centimeter of the snow cover turns out to be significantly
less by the end of the winter than in the first half. This is clearly
confirmed by the data prenented in table 36 (temperature gradient in the
grass stand of winter crops). As the depth of the snow cover increases
at the end of the winter and the air temperature increases. the soil
temperature at the depth of the tillering node in the second half of the
winter period in regions where the snow cover persists always turns out

to be greater than at the beginning of the winter [5. 16, 22], as a result
of which the processes of perishing of winter crops intensify during this
period. But when the snow cover is packed beginning at the time it is

90

FOR OFFICIA) USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formed on the fields. the soil temperature at the depth of the tillering
node is lower than when the snow cover is natural, not only in the winter,
but also in the spring during the period of thawing of the snow, which is
very important for protecting the plants. The results of our field
experiments for studying the role of the density of the snow cover with
the wintering of winter crops at the Belogorka Agrometeorologicsl Station
are presented in Table 35.

 

Figure 29. Condition of Vegetative Cones of Vyatka winter Rye
After H 1teringr 21 March 1973 (Beginning of Stage IV)

Key:
a--normnl condition with natural" snow cover, 6--e10ngation of
vegetative cone with "excessive" snow cover (X 140)

The soil temperature after the formation of the snow cover is almost
always higher than the air temperature. Only during significant warming
periods (up to thaws) with a deep snow cover and deep freezing of the soil
can it turn out to be lower than the air temperature [22].

A change in the depth of the snow cover has an especially strong effect
on the temperature of the soil at a depth of 3 cm when the snow cover is
initially not very deep (up to 5-10 cm) but when the snow cover is as
deep as 30 cm and more it does not have a great significance since the
gradient of the temperature with the depth of the snow cover decreases
sharply.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVID FOR NIL-AOI: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-O0OCOR000100030020-0
FOR OFFICIAL Uh'li ONLY

 

Figure 30. Condition of Vegetative Cone of Vyatkn Winter Rye in
Spring With Karly Planting Time (10 August 1972)
and Vatural Snow Cover of 20-25 cm. 15 April 1973.

Key:
a--rudimentary spike. beginning of stage IV of orgnnogenesis (X60).
o——top of spike is undifferentiated ncJ all spikelets are onc stage
behind those of the middle part of the spike (X222)

According to the results of our research. it turned out that ior each
centimeter of depth of the snow cover the soil temperature at the depth
of 3 ca under the snow increased in comparison to the air temperature

by 0.5'C when the snow cover was 5 cm deep, 0.3'C when the snow cover was
30 cm deep and 0.2°C when the snow cover was 60 cm deep.

with an increase in the depths of the snow cover to 30 cm and more the
soil temperature at the depth of 3 cm and on the surface of the soil under
the snow changed very little. regardless of the fluctuations in the

air temperature [17. 22}.

The daily fluctuation in the temperature and the snow cover rapidly
disappears. According to the data of B. P. Karol'. in January 1946 near
leningrnd the change in the daily fluctuation of the temperature depending
on the depth of the snow cover was as follows: on the surface of the snow--
10°C. at a depth of S cm--15.8 'C. at a depth of 10 cm--ll.l’C. at a depth
of 25 cu—v2.l‘C and at a depth of 40 cm——0.2'C.

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN ”Fl-'NIIM. USE UNIS

 

Figure 31. Condition 0: the Vegetative Cone nf Vyatka Winter
Rye After Hintering. 27 April 1973. End of Stage IV.

Key:
‘ Under conditions of snow cover: a--"natural" (normal condition).
6--"excessive" (top of cone is not differentiated).

The results of observations at meteorological stations for four years showed
that during periods of lowering of air temperatures in the winter. the

soil temperature at a depth of 3 cm when the snow cover is 30 cm deep and
the soil is slightly frozen decreases insignificantly. almost by the same
amnunt as when the snow cover is 50-60 cm deep (Table 36). with deep
freezing of the soil and a 30-cm snow cover there was a greater reduction

in the soil temperature. when the snow cover was this deep there was almost
no change at a depth of 3 cm. The maximum amount of the daily fluctuation
of the soil temperature at a depth of 3 cm when the air temperature ranged
from 2 to 27'C amounted to 0.8'C. In 83 percent of 190 cases the daily
amount of change in the soil temperature ranged within 0.0-0.3'C. And

when the snow cover was from 11 to 20 cm deep the amount of change in the
soil temperature was 20-40 percent of the amount of change in the air

temperature.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-Z ONLY

Table 33. Seasonal Change in Minim- Mr Tenpeuture t ('0). Depth: of
Snow Cover h (cm). Depth of Freezing of $011 a (CI) and
Hint” Sou resonance at. Depth of Tin-ring Nodes of Winter
Crops :3 ('C) a: Nonchtnovka Agra-eteorologicnl Station Pm

1965/66 Through 197M”.

 

 

E'a'; . 1'. . 31;;[1 . mn-
él aaaﬁﬁjaaaau a
él'*ﬁ§4§§ﬁﬂ“ﬁﬂﬁ§§
§W§ﬂ§§§:§3§ﬂ§ﬁﬁi?
2321' mggwazw
él§§ﬁﬁﬁ1§ﬁﬁjﬂﬁﬂﬁﬁ
alaaaaaaaajﬂaaaw‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

2313 Mm wag
é ﬁjjl$aﬁﬁ§§§§§§§

 

Key:
1. Indicator

The absolute soil temperature at a depth of 3 ca throughout the entire
period when a snow cover of 30 ca and more fell on slightly frozen soil
(less than 50 ca) retained within the range of 0 - -3'c. that is. within
the range that is east: favorable for the processes of perishing of
plants under the snow. men a snow cover of 30 cn and more was for-ed
after the soil was frozen to a depth of 50-60 cm. the soil teqsrature

near the tillering nodes of winter crops is considerably lower (down to
-6 - -8‘c).

with very severe cooling of the soil (when it freezes down to 120-100 cm
and deeper) before the establishment of a deep snow cover on the fields.
the mini-u: tewerature of the soil during the winter can be even lower
than -2o'c but when analyzing the laterials of observations from the past
25-30 years we did not discover any cases like this in regions where
plants perish under the snow. Therefore when a 30-CI snow cover is for-ed
on deeply frozen soil the plants are in a dormt condition throughOut

the entire subsequent period while it remains, respiration processes are
very slight. supplies of sugars are expended slowly and there is no perishing
of winter crops even when the snow cover reuins on the fields for a long
title.

The depth of freezing of the soil in the nonchernozem zone changes fron
year to year within a very wide range (from 0 to 150 cn and in the
northeastern regions. even more). But lost frequently at the end of

the winter it is less than 100 cm. A rapid increase in the depth of
freezing of the soil takes place when there is no snow cover on the fields
or it is not very deep and the air tenerature is abnormally low (Table
37. Torzhok Keteorologicsl Station. Saransk. 1952/63).

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Eel

“.9 “.0

«WM
h.~ﬁ+

a
B

8
o. _ I
QNI
r10]
«.8!

5.8+
5.3+
1m...

“‘88

eﬁl
0.»...
odul
n .onl

3.0 8.9 3.0

”a
tan?

cu
m—

w
0.8!
5.“...
n.3l
v.o_l

v
s
_

2.0 8..

0.9+
0.2 +
w.«—+

o—
o:

3
swan:
small
e6—l
Qal

0.8+
"a
a.
an
ndl
«5|
nan—I
n.3l

0.3+
5.8+
6.2...

a
nil
0.0]
0.2!
0.8!

S.N 8.“ :6

mm mm
a m
r.— a

o.v| 5.8!
°.n| 5.?
c.8l “.3!
0.9.! 93!

0.0+
«5+
—. _+
a.
0
«.ml
odl
oil
_.o|

. .33. 02...
6...: o In: :2.
«8.33.5... 588.. 5.. 35
I ~
_lo=
cl...
9:39:32 .833.— no.3
:5 coco-2.» :9an 8v
«:9. Into.
32.29:ch «2.6.3.. any
.13 .3
69.2. 08:12: «Sean 2v
3 :xauSAOV
.9. 2.6» 026?... 2.

.5: 2803.9!” ”any

382:: 28..- “has
~33 . 3.33-va

a
.0938: cnwwass‘ av
ES...
«.3...
_ .2 +

~62.
«.33.
06+

Qh

rial
0.0!
98'
0.8!.

«.8+
«.8+
«6+

0—
:-

o.v|
0.0]
0.?
0.8!

0.2+
0.2+
h.=+

0.0
0.0
a.” n

0.0—..-

3.0

add... 0.8+ «62.

3.0 «v.-

ﬁa... 0.8+ 0.3+

9.2+
e.
9
9
v.7
o6!
QT

n.8l

0.8+ —.0+
0— 0-
B a
8 .—
o.—| v.~|
0. TI oil
_.o| n.2l
0.3' 0.v«|

0.3+
_.3+
0.“...

0—

a

v—
u. —I
0. «I
0. 3|

_ .vul

v.0...
0.0+
0.0+

2

0.0!
0.0!
ﬁnal
«.2!

:6 85
6-2: a 3.2m“!!!

colt-2......- Eon-1.. .— Gav

Cl...
cl...
cl...

sap-928.. ‘89.»..- AoC

:8. 3582: :8...— as

7.3 .38..
8.3.9.6.... 2:6»!—

7: an
688.. 29.108 3830

.b. can» «gymnast A3

.8: .8039!“ u“ Any
.2332. 38... a.“ CO

9.56 a 3.2.3- Any

6.. as
.3888 canon-IE!

A8
5

A3

pa:- 1

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTIMAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. indicator 7. Depth of snow cover (can)
2. Mini-ma temperature ('c) 8. Depth of freezing of soil
3. Air in cabin 9. Height of grass stand
6. At height of grass stand :1. 10. Difference of tespernturaa
5. 0n surface of soil to 11. Gradient of ninim temperature
6. At depth of tillering node in grass stand ('Clcm)

Table 35. Influence of Density of Snow on Depth of Freezing and Minimum
Temperature of $011 at Depth of Tillering Node. Delogorko
Agronoteorologicai Station. Leningrad Obisst.

      
 
      
 

   

l 23 so 6

(”Wm mama?” "' u 20 34 1e
ﬂaomom men so noun no. I an 0.23 0.29
(8) can (rlru’) II 0.34 0.36 0.39

(9)“qu npouepuun man I 76 88 :00
“an noun seem (cal I: g a ”a 7 it: 1

I I I a - o I
“W mummy n —1.3 4.5 .2;
)C u um“ ) mm l 2 4 I 9 I 3
(11 mm" ”“35"" ' n :4'0 2332 2020
pa ( ) I 43.3 -N.D -2.5

M um: mt a a
(12) my” a mall:p '

8 I I2 9 1

‘7’ mmmrm " n :2 n :2
(8) "mm «an II m ne- 1 0.22 0.25 0.28
can (tltu‘) ll 0.!) 08 0.39

(9) mom npouepaanaa mu l 25 55 79

Mum-mas (on) I: 5:2 0:8 93
(10) mrt‘:";”:'m” n —1II -eIo -o.s
Cumm“, I ~06 14 +08

sun sec-«an m a - . - . .
“1’ .F- w m ”" " ': 331333 :99

nus-cusses mt a -s - . - . .

(12) my.“ :3 Interfap
[Key on following page]
98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Note:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Indicator

Section

January

February

Herch

April

Depth of snow cover at end of month (cm)
Density of snow at end of month g/cm3)

Depth of freezing of aoi‘. at end of month (cm)
Minimum soil temperature at depth of 3 cm during month ('6)
Average monthly soil temperature (’C)

Hinimu air temrature during month ('0
December

l--eection with natural anon cover; II-with packed anov.

Table 36. Limits of Drop in Temperature of Soil at Depth of 3 cm with
Various Drops in Air Temperature, Depthoa of Snow Cover and
Depths of Freezing of Soil.

Key

l.

3.

 

Depth of snow cover (cm)
Limits of drop in air temperature ('6)
Depth of freezing of soil (cm)

99
FOR OFFICH‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

s$2g avg? ggsﬁ a73§
332$ 378$ :feﬁ 872$
31°? 8735 agzg 218%
h a” " on an 0--

'T 7 '7-1 9? T 'I'T
3?“T ”737 97”? 3T9?

'- — °~°— ——
3I'1 |°° + “T“?
3?°T 3?°? ”7°? 37“?

:4.“ tatﬂu 14%.. tJQ‘n

2 8 8 8
~ ‘ \ ‘
S 2 S 3
. . =
g ' a
3: i E
3- 3% a s.
”E .< a *3
3.3 =5 38 ig
s .2" 5‘ .2
:: a; a s
v V V H
V

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

H

h:
l

‘

1mg“

when

(11) Eum (Ara-omen.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

' .. ﬁn": Eu”; §n°§ HIE 8°81
3 I 833°: $21 272: IIII 8%?
S,- 5121 me": 2781 °2°z “732

l 572%; gm; 2?”? we". 8%?
g . 5722, as? am, 2121’ 318:;
a —
:1 _ we"; 81%? 31‘s? 3112-.- 373:?

.. 5m. vim: 2.9:. 81v. 81‘5“?
3 ,, ﬁrst; 813;; 5132' ajazl 8738':
l 2%? m? 5.3? we was
5mm" tea- tea. tc... ta... re...

a a a a 2

E E E 2 S 3 ..

I I ' '

a a 3 3

A 2 a 8 E E

l H a E 9 5 u

a V x- 33 5 q- a-
"‘- A< E '§ 55

3% i: 3 Si 3%

IS 8 '3 ‘- u'a

E 5 36 § :5;

on following page]
101

FOR

OFFICE}. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Station 8. Yoahkar-Ola (Mari ASSR)
2. Year 9. Sarsnek (Hordovian Assn)
3. Indicator 10. Tikhvin (Leningrad Oblast)
lo. November 11. Yeaetsk (Arkhangel'sksya (blast)
5 . December 12 . February
6. January 13. March

7. 'i‘orzhol: (Kalininskaye Oblast) 16. April

A change in the depth of freezing of the soil. according to the data of
L. A. Razuaova [28]. depends mainly on the total negative temperatures
during the past period of the winter. on the depth of the snow cover. on
the level of ground waters and on the initial depths of freezing of the
soil (figure 32a and 6). In regions where the ground waters are deep.
when the snow cover is uore than 60 ca deep even with a very low average
daily air tewerature (down to -20‘c). the depth of freezing of the soil
does not increase. Nor does it increase at all when the snow cover in
30 ca deep and the average daily air teapersture is above -10'c.

  

nomwsarc

W woman: 8
(2) Wmmﬂw " m”

Figure 32a. Change in Depth of freezing of Soil (cm) in 10 Days
in Regions "here Ground "stars are Shallow in
European Territory of USSR.

Key:
1. Depth of snow cover during 10 days
2. Total negative average daily teweraturea during 10 days

Adjustments to initial freezing
Initial freezing. (2. 0-16 17-68 109-79 80-110 111-140
Adjust-ant. cm 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0

102
FOR OFFICIo'd. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A
H
V
no"
mu :0 *1“,

“mam

  

‘0 00 120 160 200 269 200 120°C
(2) W mammary: cneduur
my: nemaaluyp u daddy

Adjustments to 1n1t1a1 fraez1ng
In1t1al freezing, ca 0-2 3-9 10-16 17-23 26-30 31-37 38-66 65-51
Adjust-em, cm 0 -0.5 —1.0 -1.5 -2.0 -2.5 -3.0 -3.5

In1t1a1 freezing. cu 52-58 59-65 66-72 73-79 80-86 87-93 96-100
Adjustment. cm 4.0 4.5 -5.0 -5.5 -6.0 -6.5

majority of cases (80 percent) 1ncreaaed by no more than 20 CI and only
in 7 percent of the cases. by Iota than 30 cm. When the depth of the

snow cover was 20 cu 1t 1ncreaaed by 0-20 cu in 52 percent of the cases and
by more than 30 ca 1n 32 percent of the cases.

a temperature close to o’c at the depths of the t111er1ng node under a
deep snow cover. Ulth th1s depth of freezing of the 0011, u H. I

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Snagin’s research has shown [17. 32] in a zone with adequate and excess
moisture. the reduction of the temperature is retarded because of the
discharge of a large quantity of heat when the water freezes at the border
of the freezing of the soil and layers above it.

CH

 

0 to u :20 cu
amp. mu; c sun-«7 cum-
(2) am nous-max:-

Pigure 33. Connection Between Maximum Depth of Freezing of Soil
(cm) Dur'ing winter and Depth of Freezing of Soil
During 10 Days in which a Snow Cover of 30 cm and More
is Established on the Fields

Key:
:1. Maximum for winter
b. In first 10 days with snow cover of 30 cn and more

Agrometeorological stations: l--Sarapul, 1935-1962; 2--Gor'kiy,
1935-1962; 3--nonchernozem zone of RSFSR, 1945/65 and 1965/66.

0n the basis of the patterns that have been presented concerning the con-
nection between the depths of the snow cover, the depth of freezing and

the tcnperature of the soil, we have taken the length of time a snow cover
of 30 cm and more remains on the fields when the depth of freezing of the
soil is less than 50 cm as one of the nest inportant indicators characterizing
conditions for perishing of winter crops under the snow. Under these
conditions not only does the soil temperature at the depth of the tillering
node remain within the limits in which perishing of plants takes place,

but conditions are also created for almost complete darkness near the
surface of the leaves since the transparency (light penetrability) of the
snow cover in not great. The coefficient of the weakening of the penetra-
tion of solar radiation. according to N. N. Kalitin, is 0.197 for dry

snow and 0.546 for wet snow. The penetration of solar radiation into

dry snow is practically liaited to a depth of about 30 cm and wet snow--
10-15 ca. when a dry snow cover is 14 cm deep only 7-10 percent of the
radiation that passes through the surface of the snow cover reaches the
surface of the soil and the wintering plants under it. Research on the

10‘

FOR oi-‘ncm. use ouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

penetration of solar radiation into the snow cover which we conducted at
the Royka Agroneteorological Station (Gor'kovskaya Oblaat) confirms the
conclusions reached by other authors (table 38). Therefore photosynthesis

cannot take place in plants that are under a deep snow cover (30 es and
more).

Table 38. Penetration of Light (I) to Various Depths of Snow Cover,

Depending on Illumination of its Surface (Royka Agrometeorological
Station [22]

 

Key:
1. Title of measurement (hours)

2. llluaination on surface of snow (thousands of luces)
3. Depth of snow cover (ca)

Figure 36 shows the dependency between the thinning of winter crops and
the length of time they spend under a snow cover of 30 cn and sore,
without taking into account the depth of freezing of the soil. from
data of the Royka Agroneteorological Station for the period from 1936
through 1965. The observations were made on experiaental fields of the
Cor'kiy Agricultural Institute where the level of agrotechnology was
sufficiently high.

As one can see from the graph. the percentage of des' “action of Vystka
winter rye plants that are resistant to perishiuq; . .r the snow is less
than that of winter wheat. but the relationship is me sane. As the
number or 10-day periods with a deep snow cover on fields of winter crops
Increases. the thinning of the plantings increases. The large deviation
of the points from the lines of connection in individual years is
explained by abnorlally low (1961/62) or. conversely. abnorlally high
(1937/38. 1962/63. 1965/66) air temperatures throughout the entire winter
season. the different depths of freezing of the soil and the different
conditions of the areas planted in winter crops in the autum. When

they are in very good condition (bushiness--3-6 shoots) fewer winter
crops died than did winter crops in the phase of forsing shoots or the
third leaf or especially planted areas with aftergrowths.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON iWI’HHM. "SI-Z "NIX

 

10-day periods

Figure 31a. Dependency of Degree of Thinning u of Vyatlta winter Rye
(l) and Ul‘yanovka Hinter Wheat (2) on Duration
(in 10-Day Periods) of Snow Cover of 30 es and More.
Gor'kiy. Royka Agroneteorologieal Station

Key:
I. 2-4936-1964: 3--wintcr wheat. 1902/43. 1965/66: la--winter rye.
Niel/£2. 1947/68.

The connection between the thinning of the plants and the amber of 10-day
periods with a snow cover of 30 cn and more is aanifested soaewhat better
when one takes into account the depth of freezing of the soil. This
dependency. according to data from observations at the Gor'ltiy and
Sarapul Agroaeteorological Stations and a network of aeteorologieal
stations located in the nonchernozen zone of the European territory of the
USSR. are presented in figure 35.

As one can see iron the‘ graph (figure 35s). the tninning of Vyatka winter
rye increases with a reduction in the depth of freezing of the soil and
an increase in the duration of the period with a deep snow cover of 30

cn and sore. There is the least thinning (less than 10 percent) if the
amber oi‘ 10-day periods with this depth is less than 6 and the greatest
(more than 50 percent) when the snow remins for 12 10-day periods and
sore. Under the sane conditions the perishing of winter wheat was greater
(figure 350).

The number of plants that survive the dauge under the snow depends to

.1 considerable degree on the condition of the planted areas after the end
or the growing period in the autumn. According to the results of many
years of observations. this dependency was curvilinear (figure 36).

As one can see from figure 36. under the sane conditions. the greatest
percentage of plants survived in well developed (with an average bushiness
or four stalks) planted areas. In poorly developed planted areas and
areas with aftergrowth (with an average bushiness of less than 2 and lore
than 5 stalks). the number of plants that survived after wintering
decreased significantly and this decrease was especially great with poor
and very poor wintering conditions. Thus with satisfactory wintering
conditions on planted areas with an average bushiness of four stalks the

106

FOR OFFICIA& USE ONLY
I-‘OK OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0! 82

 

   
    

u.
I

  
     
  

‘3‘ :3 3
Q 3;
l
3' ‘ '3 8
z 2 .3 H
O
2 e 2 .2 t 3 o
o : N
O 7 I
1' 3 o 8 __
4' g : ‘3 o
:3 on:‘
2 ’n '2 2 3 3
Q ”on 0:. . ‘
.332: 15‘ '0'! :. ~
.35..“ ox. : ; a
:"2‘2
~~~ .
3‘2“ 3 o
g '2: 9 ¢ ‘ " "
pop“ (VP-OI

Figure 35. Thinning (1) of winter Crops Rich Various Depths

of Freezing of the Soil (co) and Length. of Time (10-
dny Periods) a 30-cn Snow Cover Remins

[Key on following page]
107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR Ill-'FICIM. IISH UNIS

Key:
u-Vyutkn winter rye (Innonclwrnoxem zone of RSFSR. 1950-1955. 2--
Gor'kly Agrometeorolouical Station. 3~nonchernozen zone of RSFSR.
1966-19“): ﬁ-Ul'yanovke winter when: (l--8srepul Agroneteorological
Station. 2--cor'|tiy Agroneteorological Station).

survival rate was 90-100 percent. on areas where the plants had two
stalks—80 percent. and where they had one stalk-45 percent of the plants
survived. There is also an increase in the percentage of perishing of
plants with an average of more than four stalks in the autunn. The letter
is explained not only by the reduced winter hardiness of plants with
aftergrowth in the autumn (as was shown earlier), but also by the

significant heat insulating properties of the grass stand when the plants
have aftergrowth.

 

2 6 6 0 8

Figure 36. Dependence of Number of Surviving Vyatka winter rye
plants (5) on Average Bushinesa of Plants in human
1: with Various wintering Conditions

Key:

wintering conditions: l--very poor, 2--poor. 3--satisfactory, 6--
good. S--very good.

As we showed with our field experilents conducted at the Belogorka
Agronoteorological Station. the freezing and minimal teeperature of the
soil at the depth of the tillering node and also the depth of the snow
cover on a field with overgrown winter crops (planted on 13 August 1963
with interrows of 15 ca) which hsd a very deme plant stand (average
bmhiness--7.52). differed essentially from these characteristics on
field-u with nor-ally developed winter crops (planting tine-2 Septedaer).

Even when the overgrown planted areas were sowed down in the autunn
(their height reduced from 50 to 10 on). the difference in the maxim
depth of free.ing of the soil during the winter enounted to only 50 CI

108

FOR OFFICli‘t USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the maximum depth of the snow cover--11 em and in the minimum temperature
at the hall at a depth of 3 cm--6.3°c (table 39).

1‘"th '3'). Influence of "malty of Vegetntlve Mass of "inter Crops on the

Depth at the Snow Cover. the Depth of Freezing and the Minimum
Soil Teuperntnre at the Depth of the Tillering Node.

°.".°.

as: 22” ??%
___ ___ ___.

".1".

an: 32‘ 3??

|
I

main ('0
4..
-OJ
-0.‘

 

 

 

..en
«pas -aae aTT
$3. 5 ___
3 3 éqee
3&2: 3:2“ 3???
: 3___
I ——“I
g E geeq
a o o l o a a ‘ ’ “
s—‘g—‘E
500° °°° g 3°
s——— 6“— g a
g 3
:2: :2: gﬁﬁﬁ
322 $22 “32

 

[Table 39 eonttnued on following page]

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
o. 21 «6| :6! odl ET .6! .6... «.nl ad... a; a. z.
0. 9| 9.: v.0l oél uﬁl oél o.«l ed! «._| a.“ 2 :
m6! 0.: v.9! «:l o..l «.1: «:l «J! 0.0.: a... 8 _
E .588? 3...» 2:6»! 2. 1.5.. agar. 5.252....“ A93
.u o o o. _ a- .u 2 en 8 2 Q. o. :—
3 o o h n. a 8 8 an om a.“ 2 ..
B a a = _ a a. 8 8 S 3 es 0... .
.3. 039.8 985.33 38:0 nav
3— .8. _ on. a. mu— 8. 2. =— 8. 8 a; o. . :-
3 o _ ﬂ 2. a 2. R n. 8 S 3 2 _ :
3 o 3 8 vs 8 s «a 3 a... 9.: on _

 

 

 

 

 

 

:6. :98 3.82.2.2... ~38».ka

 

8.1.5

aliyison

 

[Key on (01100103 page]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Section _ 9. Depth of snow cover (on)
2. Description of grass stand 10. Minimum soil temperature at
3. height depth of tillering node ('c)
6 . Business 11. february
S. Novenber 12. March
6. Decesber 13. April
7. January 16. During entire winter

8. Depth of freezing of soil (cn)

160mlete thawing of soil on 10 Hay

Note. ‘Sections: Implanted on 13 August with interrows of 1.0 en:
II--planted on 13 August with interrows of 15 en. but mowed down

to a height of 10 ca; III—planted on 2 Septanber with cross
sowing

With very poor wintering conditions, by spring about 50 percent of the
plants on well developed winter planted areas (with four stalks) survived
and only 10 percent of those plants of winter crops with two and seven
stalks survived. Thus while with satisfactory conditions the nunher of
surviving plants decreases by 10 percent when the number of stalks
decreases fron four to two. with very bad wintering conditions this
nuaber decreases by (.0 percent.

With good wintering conditions the degree of development of winter crops

in the autumn is not reflected in the nudmr of surviving plants by the

tine of renewal of growth in the spring. The nunber of plants in the spring.
regardless of the degree of development. is equal or close to the nuﬂer

of then in the autum (95-100 percent). The degree of their development

is not significant for winter crops under exceptionally difficult winter
conditions either since all of the plants die, regardless of their

condition in the autum. But these wintering conditions are very rare on
large planted are“ (80-100 percent) in the majority of regions where winter
crops are cultivated (once every 20-30 years).

As was already pointed out. lost frequently a reduction in the productivity
of winter crops when they are dansged under the snow takes place as a
result of the destruction not of the plants. but of a significant portion
of the stalks of wintering plants. There is a fairly close connection

(r - 0.91 t 0.03) between the nudaer of dead stalks and plants that perish
under the snow. The equation for the connection between these aaounts,
which was obtained from data from observations at meteorological

stations of the Upper Volga ministration of the Hydroneteorological
Service by c. N. Vasenina. has the for:-

y - 1.09: - 0.72. (A)

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where y--the percentage of dead stalks and x--the percentage of dead
plants. Figure 37 shows the change in the number of stalks in the spring
as compared to the autumn on surviving winter rye and winter wheat plants
with various wintering conditions. From this drawing it is clear that
when wintering conditions are good the number of stalks in the spring

on plants that have survived the winter is always greater than it was in
the autumn. regardless of the degree of their development in the autumn.

with weak development of the plants in the autumn (with one or two stalks).
the number of stalks on the surviving plants in the spring increases
because of additional bushing under any wintering conditions. The plants
that have stopped growing in the phase of shoots can produce up to 2-3
shoots and under poor wintering conditions when very few plants survive
and the grass stand on the planted areas is severely thinned. the bushing
in the spring of poorly developed planted areas proceeds more intensively.
Since the number of surviving plants is very small in this case (see
figure 36). the overall number of surviving stalks on the field turns out
to be less when there are poor wintering conditions on planted areas that
have developed poorly in the autumn than on well developed areas.

The connections represented in figure 37 were constructed from the results
of dependencies between the bushiness of winter crops in the spring and
autumn with various wintering conditions. The connection between the
bushiness of winter crops in the spring and in the autumn with identical
wintering conditions is linear and sufficiently close (the correlation
coefficient is r - 0.80 + 6). The evaluation of the degree to which the
wintering conditions were unfavorable when the plants perished under the
snow was determined in these connections from the amount of time the
plants remained under a snow cover of 30 cm and more which was
established when the soil was frozen to a depth of less than 50 cm.

The connection between the length of time the plants remain under a deep
snow cover with slightly frozen soil and the number of stalks that
survive the winter on planted areas that were well developed in the fall
is presented in figure 38. This dependency was obtained free the
results of five years of observations (from 1950/51 through 1955/55) at
33 meteorological stations and three years of special purpose observations
(from 1962 throagh 1965) at 25 agrometeorologicsl stations. It has

also been well confirmed by data from observations of the Gor'kiy
Agrometeorological Station over a large number of years: from 1923/24
through 1962/63. It was also confirmed by observations at the Sarapul.
Kostroma and Ielogorka Agrometeorological Stations over 20 years and
also materials from observations during 1970-1975.

As one can see from figure 38. the number of stalks remaining on winter
rye plants during the winter is inversely proportional to the length of
time a snow cover of 30 cm and more remained on the fields. The

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WHC'M. USP. ONLY

coefficient of the correlation between these amounts is r - 0.82 1- 0.26.

The regression equation with lisit values of from 1 to 16 10—day periods
nnd with D iron 20 to 130 percent has the for-

vhere Puthe nunber of stalks surviving the winter (ratio between number
of stalks per 1 square meter at time of spring and autum examinations

of planted areas expressed in percentages). x-the length of the the
deep snow cover remained on the field (depth of 30 on and note). The

neon square error of the equation is sp 1 12. 8 percent and the adnissable
error--(0. 670) + 15 percent.

0

A

200

' I00
'60
160

'20

100
80

‘0

50

 

Figure 37. Omnge in Newer of Stalks (Z) on Surviving Plants
in Spring. Depending on Their Bushing Coefficient in
the Autumn x and the Number of 10-Day Periods With
a Snow Cover of 30 co and More and a Depth of Freezing
of 50 cu and More.

Key:

Number of 10-day periods: l) 15 and nore (very poor wintering conditions).

2) 13-16 (poor). 3) 11-12 (unsatisfactory). ‘) 6-10 (satisfactory),
S) S 10-day periods and less (good).

113
FOR OFFICU‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
         

I J 5 9 I

7 I ”
Aeneas (2)

Pigure 38. Dependency of the Number of Stalks on Hell-Developed
winter Rye in the Spring (2 of Their Number in the
Autumn) on the Length of Time a Snow Cover of 30 cm and
More Remained on the Fields.

Key:
1. Number of stalks at time of spring examination. in Z of their
number in the autumn.
2. 10-day period.

Knowing the length of time a snow cover of 30 cm or more remained on the
field if it was established when the depth of freezing of the soil was

50 cm and less. this equation can be used to calculate the percentage of
surviving stalks on planted areas that were well developed in the autumn
with a precision of t 15 percent and a frequency of 80 percent. An error
of 20 percent or less of the stalks is ensured in 91 percent of the
cases 0

0n the basis of this dependency. we took the following indicators of
ngrometeorological conditions for wintering of planted areas when there
is perishing under the snow. The conditions are evaluated as good when
a snow cover of 30 cm or more which was established when the depth of
freezing of the soil was 50 cm or less remains for five 10-day periods;
sntisfactory--5-8 10-day periods; unsatisfactory-9-ll 10-day periods:
poor--lZ-lb 10-day periods; and very poor--when this period lasts 15
days and more.

Using these indicators. from the connections indicated in figures 36 and
37. one can determine the quantity (percentage) of surviving plants and

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stalks when there is periahing under the snow of poorly developed and
overgrown planted areas. For exaaple. if the nuaber of 10-day periods

with a snow cover of 30 cn and aore was 13. the conditions are evaluated

as poor: with planted areas that were well developed in the fall an average
of 63 percent of the plants survive: on planted areas with an average
bushiness in the fall of two stalks-b5 percent of the plants; and with

six stalks-~60 percent of the plants (figure 36). Under these conditions
well developed plants retain 90 percent of the stalks (figure 37) and on
planted areas with an average bushiness in the autumn of two stalks--

100 percent and with six stalks--70 percent.

The expected average nuuber of stalks in the spring per 1 square meter of
good plantings in the autumn will be 90 ' 63/100 - 572; on poorly

developed plantings-100 - 65/100 . 652: and on overgrown planted areas--
60 - 70/100 - 622.

As was already noted, the perishing of winter crops on the fields under a
snow cover takes place in spots--in low areas. near forest strips and
bushes and in small holes. This is explained by the fact that the snow is
retained here. the depth and length of tile it remains are longer and the
soil does not freeze to as great a depth as on the other sections of the
field.

Many agroneteorologiats [22. 23. 43] have engaged in research of the
spatial variability of the depth of the snow cover on the fields. It was
established that the less the average depth of the snow throughout the
field. the greater the irregularity of the coverage of winter crops by the
snow. According to data from an overall snow survey on fields with winter
crops which was especially conducted under the leadership of A. A.

Okushko at the Nelchinovka (Moscow Oblast) and Buzuluk (Orenburgskaya
Oblast) agroueteorological stations. it turned out that when the average
depth of the snow cover is great. the areas of fields covered by more than
30 cm of snow are equal even in various clilatic zones (Table 60). When
the snow cover is shallow its irregularity is less in the west than in the
east of the USSR European territory.

The coefficient of the variation of the depth of the snow cover on fields
planted in winter crops (C - Gin-100 percent. where H--the average depth
of the snow cover. 6--the average square variation of its depth) in the
nonchernozee zone of the USSR European territory. in the southern part

of Western Siberia and in the northern and central oblasts of Kazakhstan
reaches the greatest amounts when the average value for the depth of the snow
on the field is small. Thus with an average depth according to the snow
survey of about 5 cu. it is equal to t (55 + 75) percent. In the
nonchernozea zone (Torzhok station) with the sane average depth it turned
out to be t 50 percent and in the west (Minsk station) where the snow falls
at a higher air teaperature and lies on the fields sore uniforlly.

t (30 e 60) percent. With an increase in the depth of the snow cover

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the coefficient of variation decreases and varies within a small range
in the various zones. With an average depth of 10 cm in the central
Volga area it was 1- 30 percent. Oboyan'nt 61 percent. Minsk-~1- 69
percent. ‘l'orzhokut 60 percent and with a 15 cm snow cover it decreased
in Oboyan' to d- 17 percent. 'Hinslt--226 percent and in Torzhoknto 1-

10 percent.

Table 100. Number of Measurements (X) With Various Depths of Snow Cover
on Fields with Winter Crops in 1965

  

(6) Minoan 2

(7) 3mm 17 "

Key:
1. Station lo. Average depth of snow cover (ca;
2. Date of snow survey 5. Depth of snow cover (on)
3. Overall number of measureaents 6. Nemchinovka

7 . Buzuluk

The area of the field (percentage) with a given depth of the snow cover is
determined by calculating the number of measurements with this depth during
the snow survey. The depth of each measurement can be taken as an indicator
of the snow cover on 1 percent of the area of the field.

In regions where a deep snow cover remains for a long time and where
winter crops suffer from damage under the snow. it is inortant to know the
area on which its depth is 30 cm and more. Therefore from the results of
snow surveys on fields with winter crops from 1934/35 through 1966/65

at stations located in the upper Volga area and in the northwestern part
of the country's European territory. .1 probability curve was obtained for

weasurenents with a depth of the snow cover of 30 cal and more when there
were various average depths according to the snow survey (figure 39).

A snow cover with a depth of 30 cm and more lies on the entire area of the
field only when its average depth according to the snow survey is (05 cm
and when the cover is 16 cm its depth over the entire field is less than
‘30 ca. When the average depth from the snow survey is 30 cm. the winter
crops on 60 percent of the area of the field are under a snow cover of 30
cm and more. This distribution of the snow cover throughout the fields
is taken into account when determining the area of the field where there
will be possible thinning of the plants and when comparing predictions of
perishing of winter crops under the snow.

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 39. Change in Area of Field (2) With Depth of Snow
Cover of 30 cm and More With Various Average Depths
of It (cm) From Snow Survey.

The condition of winter crops in regions with a deep snow cover. however,

is influenced not only by the duration of the period when the deep snow
cover is on the field, but also by other factors. As was already noted.

they include primarily the air temperature, the depth of freezing of the soil
and the temperature of the soil at the depth of the tillering node. which
constitute a comprehensive indicator of the effects of all basic agro-

meteorological factors and the depths of the grass stand of the winter
crops themselves.

During years with very abnormally air temperatures (1951/42. 1967/48,
1968/69 and others) during the period when the snow cover is 30 cm and
more the percentage of surviving stalks turns out to be greater than

in years when there are abnormally positive air temperatures (1937/38.
1943/64. 1965/66 and others). This is explained by the fact that in these
years the temperature in the snow cover at the depth of the grass stand
of the planted areas also remains within limits that are lower than

usual.

The influence of the air temperature on the condition of the planted areas
during wintering is taken into account by introducing into the results
obtained from the formula P - 123.0 - 5.4x (or figure 38) the correction
At (percentage) whose amount is determined from table 61. The value of the
correction It is obtained empirically from the formula At - m (where
c--coeffieient, t--average daily air temperature) on the following basis:

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

Table lol. Correction 5: (Z) to the Quantity of Surviving Stalks with
Varioua Values of the Duration of the Period with a Snow Cover

n of 30 co and More and a Total Air Temperature It for 11.1:
Period.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.u- senate
au- $8388:
«1- smear
w- esters“
u snares“?
sasaaahewe
saaaa=~° T.
ease-z”°7§§q
g ..... asaaaeooﬁalng
; m- aasaeewﬁeleisﬁz?
; ~- 8w “T‘f‘Fr‘ﬁ‘f
W==°°'r=."za.$¥§
3 a =22”°"’2.’i’i§$‘?
===2"’°'r-°.-=.=.=.%
«— Warsaw
~- ="°17$-7-=."-.°$

 

Key:
1. it [or period .11 (’C)
2. Nuder of 10-day periods In

118

FOR OFFICII-L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
| I ll

1) the effect of the air temperature when the crops are perishing under the
snow is reflected in the plants throughout the entire period when the snow
cover is 30 on and more and therefore the value of the air temperature when

calculating the correction is expressed by an integral anount--the square
root of the sun of it for the entire period;

2) the corre: m. depending on the absolute value of the sum of teaperatures.
changes the u, since with very warn weather--a small sun of temperatures--
the processes of perishing under the snow intensify and with very cold
weather-m large war-conversely. they are retarded. Therefore the

correction is taken with the coefficient c whose value is calculated from

the equation: C . sin 3: where x-the sum of telperaturea during the

period then the snow cover is 30 cm and more. The anount c lies within
the limits from -1 ‘0 +1;

3) the sum of teqemtures depends not only on the average daily

air temperature. but also on the duration of the period with a snow cover
of 30 cn and more. Therefore At is calculated and given in lo].
individually for various durations of the period (from 10 to 160 days)
with a snow cover of 30 cm and more.

As one can see from the figures in table 41. during warm winters

(St - -500 - -900'C). the nulber of stalks of winter crops surviving after
wintering turns out to be 20-30 percent less than during severe winters
(ti: - -lSOO - -l900°c).

The mini-um temperature of the soil at the depth of the tiliering nodes

of winter crops is determined by a complex of agroneteorological factors
[13. 22. 63]. Its value is therefore an integral indicator of agro-
meteorological conditions for the wintering of winter crops both with a
shallow and with a deep snow cover. It was shown earlier that the condition
of the vegetative cones of the plants during the winter changes depending
on the temperature of the soil at the depth of the tiliering node. Hhen
the soil temperature under a deep snow cover is above -5'C for a long
period of time and especially when the tewerature is close to 0'6. the
cone grows without differentiation, as a result of which in sum of the
shoots that were more developed in the autumn no spike is formed at all

or else it is shortened and has a small nuaber of spikelets and kernels.
The majority of the shoots die off in the spring and the first half of the
sumaer (table 62). A certain number of plants also die completely.

A statistical analysis of the results of many years of observations at
meteorological stations of the condition of winter crops and agrometeorolo-
gical conditions [or their wintering have made it possible to establish
quantitative dependencies between the thinning of planted areas and the
crops are damaged under snow and the minimal soil temperature at the depth
of the tiliering node, taking into account the condition of the plants at
the end of their vegetation in the autum. ‘lhe regression equation for
winter rye (Vyatka. Vyatka uluchshennaya and Vyatka 2 strains) have the
form:

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Cl Oil“!
l Cl ”IMI
O ”IMI ’
9| “(MI
5| mm!
3 9919“!
M ”It!“
0| ”IMI
t! ”It“!
l ”[590!
. m,....|

om
91L
cool
92L
can
GIL
m:
m.
m:
92L
9»
9.9L
no:
GIL
cm
ML
cm
QL
coo
EL
mu

\—

‘2 as 21% al§ als =l§ 3% 21% Ag sli

M

Mg 21% 213 a: 39. Ag 2!: Ag Ag A§

“—

sdg §1§ A; alt d5 :13 Ag :13 a: 9%

am
2!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Year

2. Nueber of 10-day periods with snow cover of 30 cm or note
3. Nuaber of stalks per H2

b. In the autuan 12. Hoshga

S. [n the spring 13. Privalthsi
6. In the phase 14. Salty

7. Tillering 15. Kaluga

8. Milky ripeness l6. Hessl'sk
9. Shuya

lo. Sarspul

ll. Lukh

Note: The nusber of stalks per 1 N2 is given in the numerator in
absolute units; in the deeoninator in percentages.

u - 59.07 + 6.82t3 + 0.22tg + 5.15k - 0.60k2. (6)
where u--thinness of areas planted in the spring (percentage). t ~-
ainiaun teaperature of the soil at the depth of the tillering node during
the period with a deep snow cover of 30 ca and lore: k--average
coefficient of tillering of the plants in the autumn for the entire field.
The correlation ratio of the connection is n - 0.75 and an equation
error of 15 percent or less is guaranteed in 96 percent of the cases. The
equation is effective when t3 is greater than -1o'c and k - l e b. when
there are lore than four shoots the sine of the regression coefficient
at k reverses-othe thinning increases with an increase in the bushiness
of the planted areas.

From the equation it is clear that when dalage is caused to the plants
under the snow the effects of the soil teaperature on the plants is
reflected. as with freezing. by a parabolic dependency, but with a reverse
sineo-the higher the teaperature. the greater the thinning of the

planted areas in the spring.

The siniaun soil tenpersture at the depth of the tillering node is closely
related to the depths of freezing of the soil. The coefficient of the
correlation (r) between these elements. calculated from date from nuaerous
neasnreaents at meteorological stations. is equal to 0.80-0.90. Moreover.
with nn increase in the depth of the snow cover. the effect of the air
tc-pernture on the soil teeperature decreases and the depth of freezing
of the soil increases.

The dependency between the absolute ainiaun soil teapersture at the depth
of the tillering nodes of winter crops and the depth of freezing of the
sail during the looday period of the for-ation of a deep snow cover
(depths of 30 co and note) on the fields. according to data of aeteoro-
logical stations located in the nonchernozea zone of the USSR European
territory during the winter of 1965/66 is shown in figure 60.

121

FOR OFFiClﬁL USE ONLY
POI! (IPPICMI. "SI-2 ONLY

    

”MOOMMDOM

Figure 60. Dependency Between Absolute Nininua Soil Teaperature
During winter at Depth of Tillering Rode t ('C)
and Depth of Freezing of Soil (ca) During 10 Days when
Snow Cover Reaches Depth of 30 can or More.

As one can see iron the drawing, with shallow freezing of the soil (less
than SOce) the absolute ainieua tespereture of the soil at the depth of the
tillering node throughout the entire winter does not drop below ~8.S'c

and in the majority of the cases it was within the liaita of 0 - -6‘C).
With this soil teaperature the winter crops could not freeze. But the
thinning of winter crops was very great that winter (core thll 50 percent).

The seasonal course of the ainiaua soil teaperature at the depth of the
tillering node has certain patterns. An investigation of it iron the

data of 60 Ieteorological stations froe 1959/50- through 1969/70 and also

a nuaber of agroaeterological stations (Cor'kiy. Neachinovita. Belogorlta.
Chishuy and others from 1939/40 through 1969/70) showed that the ainiaua
soil teaperatures during the first half of the winter decreases and.
beginning with the second half of February. gradually increases. This
pattern was also confined by the results of observations of a uses network
of meteorological stations free 1970 through 1976.

A correlational analysis of the results of many years of observations made
it possible for us to establish that the absolute minim teqerature of
the soil at a depth of 3 ca during the winter in the country's European
territory in 97 percent of the cases is observed before 20 February and
only in 1 percent of the cases is it 2-3'c lower after this date. The
coefficient of the correlation between the absolute ainiwa teaperature

of the soil at a depth of 3 ca during the winter and its value on 1 January
turned out to be 0.68: on 1 February—0.73; and on 20 February-4.90.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ('NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in regions where the depth of the snow cover is greater than 30 cm the
daily and seasonal course of the soil temperature at the depth of the
tillering node evens out. The soil temperature during the period when the.
snow cover is 30 cm and more and was formed on the fields with a shallow
(less than 50 cm) depth of freezing of the soil ranges within the limits
of t 3'6. its absolute minimum during the winter is usually not dangerous
for winter crops at the beginning of the winter. before the establishment
of a deep snow cover on the fields. Thswing of the soil takes place
before the disappearance of the snow cover in the spring and sometimes
even in the winter. This intensifies the processes of perishing of the
plants under the snow since the teaperature in the upper layer of soil under
the snow remains equal to or somewhat above 0°C for a long period.

when utilizing information about the minimal temperature of the soil at the
depth of the tillering node. it is necessary to take into account its

great spatial variability. 111s degree of this variability is determined
primarily by the irregularity of the distribution of the grass stand of
winter crops on the fields. the moisture. the depth of freezing of the
soil and especially the depth of the snow cover.

The coefficient of the variation Cu. according to data from our observa-
tions at the Yelshnnka (Orenburgskaya (blast) and Nansen (Ssratovskaya
Oblest) agrometeorological stations in 1951/54. when there was no snow
cover at all. amounted to 12-10 percent. then a snow cover less than

10 cm deep was established on fields with winter crops. Ct; considerably
increased (to 20-60 percent) but when the snow cover became deeper

(to 20 cm and more) it again decreased to 12-11. percent [15. 16].

The nmunt of the mean square deviation oof the minimal soil temperature.
calculated from the results of its measurement at 30 points on one field.
according to data of the Dobele. Minsk. Glukhov and Chishmy agrometeorological
stations. depending on the depth of the snow cover and the values of t3.
ranged within the limits of 0.6-3.0'0. when the snow cover was are

than 10 cm. °t . according to the data of V. P. Nikitina (Institute

of Experimenta? Meteorology). amounted to 1.5'c. Such large values of
cof the minimum soil temperature .1 :3... 34.12. v: the tillering nods
indicate the great spatial variability of this element even on one field
and the need to take into account the value of this variability when
determining the expected area on which winter crops will have perished

in the spring.

QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF AGRONBTEOROIDGICAL CONDITIONS 0? NIN’I’ERING AND
'l'ler CONDITION 0? WINTER CROPS IN REGIONS HIT“ A DEEP SNON COVER

0n the basis of quantative links between the condition of winter crops
in the spring and the main agrometeorological factors (the duration of
the period when the snow cover on the fields is 30 cm deep and more with
slightly freezing of the soil--$0 cm and less-and a minimum soil
temperature at a depth of 3 cm during this period t3) we obtained a
quantntive evaluation of sgrometeorological conditions whereby perishing

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! (IFFICIM. USE ONLY

of winter crops takes place under the snow (Table 43). The conditions
are evaluated as very poor if a deep snow cover of 30 ca or sore is
established on slightly frozen soil (50 ca and less) and reanins on the
fields for 150 days or sore with t3 for that period being 0 - -1'c. Good
conditions for the wintering of planted areas are created when these
indicators are within the liaits of 1-5 10-day periods and -7 - -s'c.
respectively. Very good wintering conditions for winter rye and winter
wheat in the nonchernosea :one's European territory exist when the snow
cover does not exceed 30 es and the ainiaua soil teaperature at a depth of
3 ca during winter remains within the liaita of -8 - -1o°c [22].

Table Io]. Evaluation of Agroaeteorological Conditions whereby Perishing
of winter Crops Under Snow Takes Place

 
  

  
  
 

'iaras ems use unwary-e1
r a an en an I. as 3..

   
    

a) Oseas naoxae. I den
9m” ““3...
(9) Adams", °

1. Conditions

2. Nuiaer of 10-day periods with h of 30 ca or acts

3. Average mini-us soil tesperature t3 during period with h of 30 ca
or sore

Ia. Average for field

5. Thinning of planted areas in spring (I)

6. Nader of stalks in spring (2 of nuaber in autumn)

7. Very porr. 1 point

8. Poor. 2 points

9. Satisfacotyr. 3 points

10. Good. 6 points

ll. Very good. 5 points

The relation between the bushiness of winter crops in the spring and
butt-n with identical wintering conditions is directly linear and
sufficiently close [17]. the correlation coefficient being r - 0.88 e 0.96.

A certain condition of areas planted in winter crops in the spring whose
quantitative indicators are given in tables 63 and Mo corresponds to the
point evalmtion of the agroleteorologicsl conditions for wintering. The

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lntter have. been established taking into account the effects of winter
dnsnge on the plantu and the. reduction in productivity of winter crops
depending on their intensiveness ['19. 60]. in the nonchernozen zone the
dependency between the productivity of winter crops and the thinning of
shoots by the beginning of spring is expressed by the coefficient
correlation 0.75 1- 0.07 [6].

Table 66. Dependency Between Average Number of Shoots (Average Eushiness)
in Spring (10 Days After the Renewal of Growth) y and Autusn
x in Winter Crops with Various Hintering Conditions

 

XopouuU) 1-5 y-o.991+l.02 (7) 0.3%

Vases" o
muse 2%) 6-40 y - om; + 0.40 s 0.35 o
Mn(9) il-l2 y - 0.59: + I .02 :9 n
Iii-14 y -0,07.r .1. I. 1 0 0.3) 0

Oussaoaue‘ )als y--0.41.r+3.67 II; -o

-N€i&

Key:
i. Evolution (points)
2. wintering conditions
3. Heater of 10-day periods with h 30 to or sore
Ia. Equation
5. Mean square error of equation 3,
6. Coefficient of correlation r

7. Good
8. Satisfactory
9. Poor

10. Very poor

The relation between the productivity of the Vyatlta and Vyatka 2 strains
or winter rye and the Hironovskaya 808 and FPO-186 strains of winter
wheat. on the one hand. and a “We! of surviving stalks in the spring

as cnIpnrcd to the autumn. which was considered in the works [17. 22].
turned out to be sufficiently close (r . 0.80 e 0.86). ‘lhe nudaer of
atniltu on the 10th day after the renewal of spring growth characterizes
not only the condition of the planted areas in the spring. but also the
wintering conditions for the plants. It takes into account the degree
of winter damage and possible consequences for the renaining plants in the
subsequent period of their life. The nudaer of stalks in the spring as
conparcd to the outrun can increase under good conditions (as a result
of spring bushineas). according to our data. by 30-50 percent with

plants that were well developed in the sutuen (3—6 shoots) and by 100-200

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

percent in weakly developed plants (1-2 shoots). With poor wintering
conditions. especially with damage to winter crops as a result of perishing
under the snow. a number of stalks in the spring on an average for the field
turns out to be considerably less than it was in the autumn [22].

in severely thinned planted areas as a result of perishing of the plants
under the snow during the winter the consequences are manifested to a
greater degree. The reduction of the productivity of winter crops in the
nonchernozem zone during warm winters with little snow is explained
primarily by the death from perishing under the snow of a large quantity
of stalks which were formed in the autumn and are several times more
productive than stalks appear in the spring.

0n the fields of the Scientific Research institute of Agriculture of

Central Regions of the Nonchernozem Zone. with a high level of agrotechnology.
the productivity of PFC—186 and PFC-529 winter wheat ranged from 26 to 33
quintals per hectare when the number of live stalks in the spring amounted

to 65-93 percent of the number in the autumn and from 60 to £5 quintala

per hectare when in the spring the number of stalks was 139 and 154 percent
of the number in the autumn.

Many years of observations at the Royks Agrometeorological Station (Gor'kiy)
from 1933 through 1963 showed that the productivity of Vyatka winter rye
and Ul'yanovka winter wheat. with identical bushiness in the autumn. has

a directly linear relation to the quantity of stalks that survive after
wintering. The coefficient of the correlation between these amounts with
weak development of the plants in the autumn (in the phases of shoots and
the third leaf) turned out to be 0.88 t 0.02 and with well developed

plants (3-4 shoots). 0.80 a 0.03. This made it possible for us. with data
from observations of the mass network of meteorological stations (1962-1970)
to calculate on an electronic computer the dependency between the produc-
tivity of winter grain crops and the number of stalks on the 10th day

after the renewal of growth in the spring. The supplies of moisture in the
soil in the spring in the nonehernozem zone. as a rule. are good and
therefore they have not been introduced into the equations.

Analytically. this dependency is reflected by the equations:

1) with winter rye plants of the Vyatka and Vyatka 2 strains that are
weakly developed in the autumn

y - 0.108? - 1.3. (12)

where y—-produetivity (quintals per hectare). P--relation between quantity
of stalks in the spring and quantity of them in the fall on the average
for the field multiplied by 100: r - 0.80 t 0.03: n-the number of
instances. exactly 55. The mean square error of the equation - t 1.58
quintnlu per hectare: the amount of the coefficient at P--quint 1s per
hectare;

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2) with‘bushed plantings of winter rye
y - 0.063kP. (1

k--average coefficient of bushiness of plants in the autunn; n - 150.
r- 0.84 :l- 0.04: E? . 1- 2.3 quintals per hectare.

For winter wheat of the Mironovskaya 808 strain this relation is
expressed by the equations:

1) for planted areas that have not hushed out in the autumn
y - 0.12? + 2.00; (L
n I 65. r - 0.89 t 0.02. By - t 2.1 quintals per hectare:
2) with planted areas that have bushed out in the autumn
y - 0.0866kP + 1.02; (l
n - 180. r - 0.86 1 0.01. a, - 22.5 quintals per hectare.

The conventional syabols are the sane. The equations are valid when k is
equal to or less than 6 and P--£rom 30 to 200 percent.

The average number of stalks in the spring is determined by using these
equations from data of autunn and spring examinations of planting areas
and the equation

k5 usB
P-E-(lOO-To‘é). (1‘

where ka--the coefficient of bushing of winter crops in the spring.
ko--thc same in the autu-n. u--the average thinning of winter crops from
four repetitions (percentage) fro. data of a spring examination of the
planted areas, sB--the area of the field (percentage) with this amount
of thinning. These nnounts can also be calculated from the dependencies
presented-hbove (figures 36. 37. 38).

Free the results or analagous calculations made for various values of
hushiness of plants in the autumn and wintering conditions. quantitative
indicators were obtained for evaluating the condition of winter crops in
the spring on specific fields (table 65). Here one assumed. as was
already indicated. a certain ratio between the point evaluation of the
condition of the planted areas and the possible productivity of the winter
crops with optissl supplies of noisture in the l-neter layer of the soil
in the spring and the modern level of agrotechnology (table 66).

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 45. Quantitative Indicators of the Evaluation of the Conditions
(Points) of Arena Planted in winter Rye of the Vyatka Strain
(I) and "inter "heat of the Mironovshaya 808 Strain (ll) in

the Spring on Specific Fields

 

Key:
1. Area 53 with dead plants
2. Average nuﬁer of stalks on the field in the spring (2 of under

in autum)
3. Coefficient of bushiness of plants in auto-n (nutter of shoots)

Table 66. Relation Betveen Point Evaluation of Condition of winter Crops
in the Spring and Their Productivity (Quintsls per Heetare)

______________——-———-—_

M. m «an
III-'1»
(1) l I a I a c I t

< a 0-12 Ia-zs H
< 0 «Ho "-11

   

  

(3)010“: amen-as
(”Duns pom

 

 

 

Key:
1. Crop
2. Evaluation of condition (points)

3. "inter wheat
a. Winter Rye

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
( FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

s.|

by utilizing tables 65 and 46. one can give an objectiVe evaluation of the
condition of arena planted in winter crops in specific fields in the
autuan and spring. In the same way one can evaluate the condition of

winter crops on specific fields when asking predictions about the wintering
of the planted areas.

An evaluation of the condition of winter crops in the winter when they are
under a snow cover can also be given from the results of an analysis of the
condition of plant sanples taken from the fields at various periods of

wintering by the method of biological control or by continuing their growth
in soil aonoliths.

An analysis of the results of continuing the growth of apeciuens of winter
crop plants by the monolith aethod at meteorological stations during the
past 20 years has aade it possible to establish the precision of the
deteraination by this aethod. The results of continuing the growth of
plants after each tine when speciaens are taken in the winter (25
December. 25 January and 23 February) were coapared with one another and
with the results of a spring exaaination--the thinning of the planted
areas after wintering. It turned out that in years with favorable wintering
conditions the thinning of the planted areas according to the results
obtained from continuing the growth of saaples taken from the fields at
various times was close to 0 and did not exceed 10-15 percent at the tine
of the spring exaaination of the winter crops.

In the nonchernozea zone during years when winter crops were daaaged

under the snow the average percentage of thinning of planted areas. according
to the results of continuing the growth of seaples taken free the fields
in Deceaber and January. was also small (0-10). The thinning of these
planted areas increased subsequently. especially after the disappearance
of the snow cover in the spring (in April). This is clearly confirmed by
data for 1965/66 in the nonchernozea zone when the death of winter crops
froa perishing under the snow was great during the period free 1966 through
1975 (table 67). The snow cover was established in 1965 on sod or slightly
frozen soil as early as Noveaber and its depth for 10-16 10-day periods
exceeded 30 on (table 68). The minimal teaperature of the soil at the
depth of the tillering node remained throughout almost the entire winter
between 0 and -2°c and its absolute sininua on the aajority of the
territory did not drop below -8°c. The plants were severely exhausted

in the winter. the vegetative cones of the Iain shoots were very elongated
(up to 1.5 an instead of 0.30 In according to the nets). At the end of

the winter and in the period of snow thawing a considerable number of
plants. especially leaves and shoots. were damaged by fungal diseases

and died (table 49). Because of this. during the period from 1960 through
1975 the productivity of winter rye turned out to be the lowest in 1966.

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

Table 67. Averagc'nxinning of Vyatka "inter Rye According to Results of
Continuation of Growth and Spring Examination of Planted
in 1965/66 (2)

A
A A O A
R IN N h
N N V N
” V V“ ~
V 3 a 0
O I I o : I I I I I I
p he an

 

 

    
 
   
 
 
   
 
     
   
 
   

SSﬁ‘SSﬁ'““8$RRI-m$ R

 

$I8’:“°°“llll§l& 9

 
 
  

————-—-———-

8020:N.°O°=g=8©—° E:

:0002NWO—Oh8280—n0 s:

OOﬁ-FNVQOOGOOGHOO V

—_——-———_

oeuon-cawanncaenh 1'
. o o a o . - . . ...... . . .
-~---ﬂﬂﬂ-——---ﬂﬁﬂ n

 

 

eaassggsassssaaa a

 

ymuoo
Hum"
“mama

Capuya

ammo um t.)
I
0

“can
(I

Kylmm
"an"

I‘m!“
M

:1
Van

 

2
2

 

[Key on following page]

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Station
2. Number of 10-day periods with depth of snow cover h 30 ca or leaa

3. Depth of freezing of soil (em) with depth of snow cover h 30 cm or
loan

6. Bushineua of planted area in fall
5. Average thinning (l) of four saaples with:
6. Continuation of growth
7. Spring exaaination

8. Cause of death of plants
9. hakar'yev
10. Soligalich
ll. Koscrona

12. Shakhun'ya

13. Shar'ya

16. Royka

15. Kuruyah

16. Pchinki

l7. Arzaaus

18. Lukoyanow

19. Uni
20. Kuaeny
21. Nurashi
22. Votkinak
23. Sarapul

2b. Izhevsk

25. Volkhov (1966/67)
26. Yoshkar-Ola (1966/67)
27. Perishing under snow

is. Ihe sane

. reezing

The thinning of winter planted areas changed throughout the winter in a
siailar way during other years that were unfavorable for the wintering of
plants (1957/58. 1967/68. 1968/69. 1971/72. 1973/76). In regions where
the planted areas suffer from daaage under the snow. the results of
continuing the growth of plant speciaens taken free the fields in Decehber
and January certainly do not characterize the condition of winter crops.
The coefficient of the correlation r between the results of the spring
exnaination and the continued growth of plant saaples in December is equal
to 0.12 and in January--0.25. The continuation of the growth of plants
taken from fields on 23 February can be used for evaluating the condition
of winter crops both on this date and in the spring (r - 0.98 t 0.01).

"at it aust be taken into account that the thinning in the spring is
frequently significantly greater than in February (Uni. Hurashi. Sarapul.
lzhcvsk. 1965/66. see table 67).

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table (.3. Description of Conditions for wintering of Winter Crops in 1965/66

17.

 

(8) Apxnmnn Enema” SI 44 3.:
. 7‘ 3 .

(9) Donoroacuu gamuxgﬁarun 15R '03 as 4.0
7 76 37 4.0

(10) Ila-mu lily: (1Q8 9 72 67 _7.9
llunoao 8; 7 15 51 -I.:

' 83 an -I.
(lukewarm- mg?» I; 90 a 4.0
['qu 9 100 80 4.9

Cunt-am (23) IO 00 23!: 3.:

9 76 .

(mm H " ammﬁg) 1: nos 45 -4.s
Kpmnn «(26 a 94 so 3.:

(13)K'm" 312mm 3?; I: 3 3 ~10:0
Huopcn(2 la 12 a -9.1

Ypuyu(30) I2 89 CI 4.8

Oblaet
Station

Nader of 10-day perioda with new cover 30 and more ca deep
Maxim

Depth of snow cover (ca)

Depth of freezing of 0011

Minimum temperature in winter at depth of tillering node
Arkhangel ' akaye

Vo logodakaya 20 . Pyahug
Ivanovakaya 21 . Hakar 'yev
Koatronakaya 22 . Gelich
Gor'kovaknya 23. Soligalich
Kirovakaya 2!: . lbyka
Yeoetak 25. Vetlnga
Vologda-Holochnayo 26 . Kraanyye Bald
Babayevo 27 . Kotel ' nich
Sh uya 28 . Darovakoye
Yur'yeveta 29 . Nagorak
Ivanovo 30 . Urzhun

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Table 69. Description of Dcnslty of Plant Stand of "inter Crops in 1965/66

      
  
 

3 aa 853 8382 as: was:

88 858 $898 :8: 8388

 

   
 

a as age 238; sac gsaa

as g:

52 ﬁﬁﬁ EQES §§E ﬁiﬁﬁ

sg agg eaag a§a 25a:
53 :33 sags gas 355a

 

a: A 8
H A h v M
VA AA V! N A: FM
50 NM m v a MA
.8 $2 $3; ma W", a
3 3;; 83 8'3 5 V
s: a a * i
g :. ¢ 3: :‘I E ﬁ
3 555 5.3 as? xaes

 

: C
C I

is 5 3 s - .
i g 2 g z 2 -
<‘ 3 = x E :2

A A A A A A

N ('1 03 in V0 7‘

H H H H H v-l

v v V V V V

[Key on following page]
133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:

I. 0hlast

2e Station

3. Nuaber of stalks per 1 H2
6. Autum

5. Spring

6. 0n date of entering phase:
7. Stem extension

8. Heading

9. Milky ripeness

10. Muster of stalks (Z) in spring and su-er period as compared to

autumn

11. On date of entering phase:
12 . Arkhangel ' skaya

13 . Vologodskaya

lb . lvanovskaya

15 . Kos tronskaya

l6 . Cor ' kovskaya

l7. Kirovskaya

18. Yeaetsk

l9. Vologda-ﬂolochnaye

20. Babayevo
Zl. Shuya
22. Yur'yevata
23. Ivanovo

26. Pyshug

25. Haker'yev

26. Galich
27. Soligalich
28. Royka
29. Vetluga

30. Krasnyye Baki

31. Kotel'nich

32. narovskoye

33. Nagorslt

36. Urzhua

11|e condition of the planting; in the winter. just as in the fall and
spring. should be evaluated taking into account not only the thinning

of the plants in the specimens. but also the sizes of the areas on which
this has taken place [17. 18]. The latter is detersined fro. the degree
to which the fields are covered by snow of various depths. In regions that
have been subjected to perishing of winter crops under the snow. one

takes into account the area of the field (percentage) with a deep snow
cover of 30 co and sore which was established with slight freezing of the
soil (see figure 39). Table 50 gives quantative indicators of the
condition of winter crops fro. the results of continuing the growth of
specimens of plants in February and the area of thinning. taking into account
the dependency of the productivity of winter crops on the condition of
planted areas in the spring (froa equations introduced above).

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rou OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thble 50. Quantitative Indicators for Evaluating (Points) Condition of
winter Crops Hhen Damaged Under Snow Prom Results of Continua-
tion of Growth of Specimens Taken on 23 February

   
 

Comes naps-seems sets-so as maps an (S)

o g - .. - _
<80 - 5 4 3 2
81-60 - 4 3 2 I
)80 - 3 2 2 1

Key:
1. Area with thinning (l of total field)
2. Average thinning of planted areas from 6 specimens

Even with great thinning of the planted areas (31-50 percent) in February
the evaluation of the condition can be good if the area with this thinning
does not exceed 30 percent of the field. At the same time the condition
of planted areas should be evaluated as poor if the thinning. according
to the results of continuation of growth of plants. is equal to 30 percent
but the area with this thinning amounts to more than 50 percent of the
entire field.

In order to characterize the condition of the fields in the winter from
the results of the continuation of the growth of specimens. especially
for large areas (oblasts, krays. republics). it is necessary to take
into account the agrometeorological conditions under which the death and
damage to the planted areas took place.

In large areas (oblasts. krsys. republics) the condition of winter crops
in the winter can also be evaluated from the results of continuing the
growth of specimens of plants taken from the fields on 23 February. The
nunber of specimens with increased thinning (death of more than 10 percent
of the plants) when the growth of specimens taken on 23 February is
continued. expressed in percentages of all the speciaens taken throughout
the territory of the oblast. kray or republic. turned out to be
sufficiently closely correlated to the sizes of the areas planted in winter
crops that died by spring (in percentages of their overall planted area).
according to data of the USSR Central Statistical Administration (r -
0.66 t 0.03). The correlational connections that were obtained made it
possible for us to establish quantitative ratios between these amounts
and to give an evaluation to the condition of planted areas in the winter
[18. 22]. The evaluation is given individually for rayons where the main

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

causes or the death of plants are freezing and perishing under the snow
(taking into account the mean square error of the area with dead plants

n «luring the period from 19106 through 19M). Tahle $l given this evnluat inn
lur uhlmuu located In the forest zone where winter crops suffer in the
winter primarily from perishing under the snow.

This evaluation makes it possible to objectively compare the condition of
planted areas not only in various oblasts and republics. but also for
various years. Moreover it makes it possible to compare the condition of
planted areas in a specific year with the average indicator for a large
number of years, taking into account the peculiarities not only of
various soil and climate zones. but also the agrotechnology for the
cultivation of winter crops (majority of area planted in winter rye or
wheat. regionalized strains. the nunher of plantings with various
predecessors. and so forth).

Table 51. Evaluation of Condition of "inter Crops (Points) Hith Various
Quantities of Specimens With Increased Thinning of Plants on
23 February and Corresponding Area with Dead Winter Crop
Plants in Spring SB (1 of Overall Planted Area; 83 (00--
in Proportions)

 

   

(2) nuts 0 nape-nest». n Dos pom-ea is)

"-20 l 2|.” I

  
      
  

  

 

 

 

(”Ones-Ia soccer 5 i l
8. 000-300 3.1-5.0 5.I-I0.0 “Ll-".0 >I7.0
5.0) .5: 0.5 .00 l.0-2.0s 2.0-3.0. >30

   

Key:
1. Indicator
2. Specimens with thinning of less than 101 of the plants (2)
3. Evaluation of planted areas

Thus the results of continuing the growth of specimens of winter crops

can be fully utilized when evaluating the condition of winter crops both
on specific fields and on large areas. But here it is necessary for the
continuation of the growth of the specimens to take place at no less than
8-10 stations which are spread out evenly throughout the oblast (autonomous
repubic). With an increase in the number of plant specimens taken for
continuation of growth. the precision of the evaluation of the condition
of winter crops increases [20].

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The quantitative evaluations of the condition of winter crops in the

autumn. winter and spring that were given above characterize sufficiently

the sizes of the areas on which plants died after wintering. the productivity
and the gross harvest of grain. Therefore we used them when developing
methods for long-term predictions of the wintering of planted areas and
agroclimntic regionalization of the territory. They can also he used

when solving the problem of the expediency of replanting areas planted in
winter crops with spring crops in the spring.

THE EFFECTS OF AGROMETEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS ON THE GROSS YIELD OF GRAIN
AND THE AREA 0N NHICH "INTER PLANTS PBRISH UNDER THE SNOH

During years with unfavorable conditions for the wintering of plants.

as shown by an analysis of the results of many years of agrometeorological
observations (from 1949 through 1975). the gross yield of winter crops
decreases significantly. This takes place not only as a result of complete
destruction of all plants on part of the areas planted in winter crops. but
also as a result of thinning of planted areas and the death of a large
number of the more productive autumn stalks of plants that have survived
the winter [22]. Thus in a number of oblasta of the nonchernozem zone

in [961. I966. 1971 and 1976 there was perishing of winter crops under the
snow. The number of stalks per 1 square meter in the spring either
decreased significantly or almost did not increase at all as compared to
autumn and during the period of tillering. despite the good moisture
supply for the planted areas. the increase was even less. And only
according to the data of certain stations did the number of stalks
increase significantly in the summer as compared to their number at the
time of spring examination of the planted areas. The supplies of
productive moisture in the soil throughout the entire spring-summer period
were good. Thus. for example. in June 1966. although they decreased
sliuntly (table 52. nonetheless in the plowed layer the moisture supplies
amounted to 40-50 mm in Vologodskaya Oblast and 20-40 am in Kostromskaya
oblast. There could be no freezing of winter crops in 1966 since the
minimum soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node during the
winter did not drop below -1o‘c.

In (Mr'kovskaya. Kirovskaya and Arkhangel'skaya Oblasts on the date of
the spring examination. somewhat more stalks had survived the winter
(60-100 percent of the autumn number). the maximum depths of the snow
cover was less-o70-90 cm (only in the region of Vetluga station was it
105 cm). and the depth of freezing of the soil was greater (60-80 cm).
Moreover in these oblasts the planted areas were mainly in good condition
In the fall (in the phase of tillering with 3-6 shoots). And although
a snow rower of 30 cm and more remained here as well for 8~16 10-day
periods. the temperature of the soil at the depth of the tillering node
was lower and in places cropped to -lO'C. Conditions were created that
were more favorable than in other oblasts for wintering of winter crops.
Nonetheless. as the result of research using P. H. Kupermsn's method

[8) showed. the vegetative cones of the majority of the plants were

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

Tnhlo 52. Suppllou or Product-Ive Moisture (a) 1n Boll Planted in "later
Rye in 1966.

    
   

2!! [35 1‘5
218 209 I9!
328 154 [80
GS 20 11
la! [30 1‘5
[77 IGS '58
I05 I! 81
l57 I27 I28
79 67 83
16! l56 l3!
83 53 38
I‘d [05 99
I48 I25 "4

256
275
882
I"
lﬂ2 I55
235
ll! I29
253 119
28‘
I43 155

F

L,

838
[03
2l4
291
l95
29]
ISQ
26!
I79
I15
185

m
[09
m
231
m
292
m
m
m

I

no
85
I2
0
23
l6
l5
5
l0
8
23
I.

8 88 82 8838 298 8%
8 38 83 8898 88% 88
I 8 I 88 883 83'; 8'3

1

 

I 8| 98 IS! 893 33

 

 

A A
an. Q
III. N
”A as: V’n‘A
rs «a co pa ea ;~;?3 cap
a no aa—A \4;e~r cwzja ~vel
—¢ .~v rv-' c»: cw ~I
v p. N v
a v 3 £35
3 ' =‘ “'2;
.3 55 £3 33
l— xx:
:
I . I .
is a a 3 :
g I
= .g i i
:3 i .2 a?
as 3 .1: a a
V" 0-! H M H
V v V V

chy on following page]

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
pv-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:

1. Oblast 1a. Yenetsk

2. Station 15. Vologda-Molochnaye
3. Layer of soil 0-20 cs 16. Babaycvo

d. April 17. Shuya

5. May 18. Yur'yevets

6. June 19. Haker'yev

7. Layer of soil 0-100 en 20. celich

8. Arkhangel'skaya 21. Soligelich

9. Vologodskeya 22. Royks
10. Ivanovskaya 23. Vetluge
ll. Kostroaskaya 26. Krasnyye Bahi
12. Gor'kovshaya 25. Katel'nich
l3. Kirovekaya 26. Nagorek

damaged. During the spring-sunset growing period they died off. On the
date of the beginning of waxy ripeness only 35-88 percent of the autuun
nusber reanined.

The death of a large nunber of stalks (even with a swell number of plants
that had fully died off during the winter) is one of the main reasons for
a reduction in the yield of winter crops in the nonchernozes zone [6. 9.
22 and others]. In this zone large areas of winter crops that have been
dasnged during the winter are rarely replented in the spring. But when
even a small pert of the areas planted in winter crops are destroyed
(about 10 percent of the area), the resainder of then are severely
damaged and the grain yield of winter crops decreases significantly during
these years.

The dependency between the gross yield of winter crops H on the amounts
of areas with dead plants 83 for individual oblasts during the period
from 1957 through 1975. presented in figure #1, confiras this conclusion.
In order to coqare sateriala for various years the gross yield of winter
crops is reduced to a single planted area (average for the period) and
given in percentages of the average for 19 years. The destroyed area

is taken in percentages of the overall area planted in winter crops in
the oblast.

As one can see from figure 51. the gross yield of winter crops decreases
significantly even with an increase in the area with damaged plantings

to 5-10 percent. This begins to be especially manifested in the reduction
of the gross yield after wintering when the area of deaaged winter crops
is greater than 10 percent.

let us consider the dependency between the gross yield of winter crops and
the area of destruction for Kostrouskaya Oblast in which the range of the
gross yield alounts to 130 percent. The lowest yield (60 percent or less
than the average) is obtained when the destroyed area is 30 percent and
more. when the destroyed area is 10 percent. the gross yield amounts to

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

80 percent of the average. The largest yield (150 percent) up to 1970
was obtained when the destroyed area was less than 5 percent and during the
period of 1970-1975--when the destroyed area was less than 10 percent.

When there was no destruction of winter crops (53 . 0) the gross yield

was obviously even grea:er. wt
”0

no
on
so
no
m
so
ea
In
no
”a

 

Figure 41. Dependency of Gross Yield H (X) of Winter Crops on
Destroyed Area 88 (2)

Key:
l--Tul'sksya Oblast, 2--Kostroosksya. 3--Novgorodsksya

In Novgorodskaya Oblsst. in addition to perishing under the snow. winter
crops are dasaged by soaking. when the crops on 60 percent of the area

were damaged by spring the gross yield in this oblsst decreased to 67
percent of the average (l965/66).

According to results of observations at meteorological stations from
1969 through 1970. it turned out that in the nonchernosen zone where the
Iain cause of the death of winter crops is perishing under the snow. the
sizes of the areas with dead plants are directly proportional to the
depth of the snow cover and inversely proportional to the depth of freezing
of the soil [22]. The ratio between the depths of freezing of the soil
and the depths of the snow cover in the first 10 days after it increased
to 30 es and sore. designated by K. is what we used as a coaprehensive
indicator of the wintering conditions for winter crops in regions with
pcrishing under the snow (with a snow cover of more than 30 en). The
area with dead plantings S free 1949 through 1975 throughout the oblasts
of the nonchernozem zone 0? the country's European territory turned out

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to be closely related to this indicator (figure 1.2). The less the
coefficient K. the greater the area of destruction of winter crops. With
an increase in the coefficient K the area of destruction of winter crops
fros perishing under the snow decreases. This is explained by the fact
that in the nonchernozea zone when there is an increase in the depths of
the snow cover and a reduction in the depth of freezing of the soil.
conditions are created which accelerate processes of perishing of plants
under the snow.

 

Figure 62. Dependency Between Area of Destroyed winter Crops
5B (2) and Coefficient K.

In cases when in the first 10 days with a snow cover of 30 on and more

the soil has frozen to more than 50 on. the value Ki’l and. as one can

see from figure 42. the area with fully destroyed winter crops, decreases.
when K - 2.0 the effects of wintering conditions on the planted areas

are less. 1he value K<l is possible only when the depth of freezing of the
soil in the first 10 days after the establishment of a snow cover of more
than 30 cm on the fields with winter crops is not great-iess than the

depth of the snow cover. Most frequently the depth of the snow cover
increases gradually. Therefore one can consider that K is less than i in
cases where a snow cover of 30 on is established on soil that is frozen

to a depth of about 10 ca. Therefore the role of the correlation between
the depth of freezing of the soil and the depth of the snow cover increases
sharply. Even a small reduction in the coefficient K corresponds to a
significant detioration of wintering conditions and to an increase in the
sizes of areas with destroyed winter plantings. Thus if when K - l the
area of destroyed winter crops is about 10 percent. when K - 0.8 it increases
to 25 percent of the entire area of plantings in the oblast.

The quantitative connection between the sizes of the areas with plants that
are destroyed by the beginning of spring in the nonchernozea zone and the
value K is expressed by the equation

161

FOR OFFIClﬁL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

1; s. - -o.asas 13 x + 0.5012 (17)
or
3.17
33 ' “0.4a . (1°)

where s --the area with dead plantings in the oblast (percentage).

K--the Indicator of wintering conditions (ratio between depth of freezing
of soil and depth of snow cover). The coefficient of the correlation
between these asounts if l - ~0.79S t 0.011. The error of the equation
is 53, - i 2.62 percent. The equation is valid when a snow cover of 30
cm or sore resains on the fields planted in winter crops for five 10-day
periods and sore when K is within the lisits of free 0.40 to 3.0.

Not only wintering conditions. but also spring agroseteorological conditions
are very isportant for obtaining large and stable harvests. In individual
years when the snow cover disappears early the thinning can be
insignificant even though in the winter conditions were created whereby

it was possible for the winter crops to perish under the snow. A rapid
disappearance of the snow cover. the lack of sharp changes in the
temperature. good soisture supply and heat supply for the planted areas

in the spring contribute to the restoration of a good condition for the
plants. The third stage in perishing under the snow-the developaent

of aycelia of fungi and their infection of the leaves and stalks--does

not happen then. with top dressing and harrowing early in the spring.
even in such years the plants quickly improve their condition, especially
if in the autumn they were in the phase of the beginning of tillering.
Conditions like these existed in the spring of 1968.

In order to establish the significance of wintering conditions of winter
crops for the gross yield of grain. we analyzed aaterials for 27 years
(1969-1975) for 26 oblasts of the nonchernoses zone of the European
territory of the USSR. During all of the aforesentioned years a coup
prehensive indicator was calculated for the wintering conditions of

the planted areas K1. which is the ratio between the maxi-us value of
the depth of freezing of the soil during the winter and the anxious
value of the depth of the snow cover. The dependency between the gross
yield 9 and the coefficient K1 is presented in figure 63. Line 1 indicates
the connection between the gross yield of winter crops and the indicator
K1 for years when the serious depth of freezing of the soil during the
winter was 50 ca and less and the snow cover was sore than 30 en. The
dependency between these amounts and these years is expressed by the
equation:

y - 35.50x - 8.05x2 + 58.56. (19)

where y-—gross yield translated into unit planted area and taken in per-
centages of average; x--coefficient K1. The connection that was obtained

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was fairly close (correlational ratio n - 0.87). The guarantee of an

error of the equation equal to or less than t 20 percent of the range of
the gross harvest is 87 percent.

 

Figure b3. Dependency Between Gross Yield H (2) and Coefficient
K O
1

Key:
l--with eaxieua depth of freezing of soil of 50 on and less.
2--the same. with 51-80 on

in this drawing line 2 shows the dependency of the gross yield of winter
crops on K1 when the maxi-um depth of freezing of the soil during the
winter was 51-80 on and the nsxieue depth of the snow cover was 30 CI
and more. The coefficient of the correlation between the gross yield and
the coefficient K1 for these years turned out to be somewhat less

(r - 0.83). The equation for the connection has the for-

y - 14.00.. - 36.91..2 + 63.46; (20)

Conventional symbols are the same. The guarantee of an error of the
equation equal to or less than t 20 percent of the range of the gross

yield during 20 years is 83 percent. The equations are valid when “1 -
0.60 e 3.00.

The equations (19) and (20) are calculated frol data for 1969-1968 and
verified with the independent material for 1969-1975.

From figure 63 it is clear that when K1 is loss than 2.0 there is a
reduction in the gross yield of winter crops as conpared to the average
for 20 years. Hhen K1 changes from 2.00 to 0.30 the gross yield of
winter crops decreases from 100 to 10 percent during years with a

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MI'IIII depth of freezing of the soil of 50 cm and less and from 120

to 80 percent during years when the maxinun depth of freezing of the soil
is 80 cm and less. when Kl increases to lore than 2.0 the gross yield
also decreases. This is explained by the unfavorable effects on the
plants of additional factors (soaking of the plants and their death in

the spring). A comparison of curves l and 2 on figure 63 shows that the
gross yield in the nonchernosem zone is sufficiently closely correlated

to the depth of the snow cover and the depth of freezing. with an increase
in the maxi-um depth of freezing from $0 to 80 cm. it increases by 20
percent.

Hhen utilising the connection between the gross yield and K1. it is
necessary to take into account the conditions of the early spring period.
with a very warn and early spring in individual years even with a small
value of xi the gross yield can turn out to be high. especially with
proapt top dressing and harrowing of areas planted in winter crops.

Thus. for example. in 1968 in the Nari ASSR and Kirovskaya and Vladimirskaya
Oblasts the gross yield of winter crops was considerably greater than the
average for the period from 1959 through 1968 (table 53). The value

K1 for these oblasts in 1968 was 0.97-1.18.

The maximum depth of the snow cover on almost all the territory of the
nonchernozen zone of the country's European territory was greater than
50 cm (with the exception of the northwest and extreme north of the
country's European territory where it amounted to 30-50 cm). The maximum
depth of freezing of the soil in northern and central regions of the
nonchernozem zone ranged from 30 to 50 cm and in the south of the zone
and in the extreme north it increased to 100 cm.

A snow cover 30 cm deep and more remained on the fields with winter crops
in the northern and no: heastern part of the country's European territory
for 11-12 10-day periods. in Permsksya Oblast the Udmurt ASSR-13 10-day
periods and in the central and southeastern regions of the nonchernozem
zone--9-10 10-day periods.

(hnsequently in the winter of 1967/68 conditions were created that
contributed to the perishing of winter crops under the snow. But the
spring of 1968 was early and warm. and in the third 10-day period of

"arch in the northeastern oblasts of the nonchcrnozem zone of the
country's European territory and in the first 10-day period of April

in the central and southern oblasta all of the snow disappeared from the
fields (an exception was the northwestern regions where it disappeared

in the second 10-day period of Harch) and the weather became sunny and
very warm (maximum air temperature reached lo’c) with low air humidity.
Therefore not all of the winter crops died froe damage under the snow.
Hinter crops that halted growing in the autumn on 97 percent of the area
in a good condition quickly adjusted to the unfavorab1e winter and. despite
the loss of 20-50 percent of the stalks. produced a relatively large yield
(table 53).

160
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thole 53. Doocrlptlon of Favorable and Unfavorable Conditions for
Hintering or Winter Crops

         
   
 
  
 
     
   
   
 
   
   
  
    
   

OH? ﬂﬂﬂ-Nﬂ‘ﬂqﬁ 3.901%".

nnnnnnnn

assaseaeséeéeﬁazu

Q!ﬁﬁ€ﬂﬂ€ﬁﬂﬁ1ﬂﬁ°ﬁ'

aegsaaggazaasgiui
asaacaaeszasesaa:

-aase;;s;:a;;asad

h Canaan."
who ‘l "M m

 

 

 

  

up 'u use:
A on.“ "not“
gin-t u Irma-u"
V

eno33§gsssassansa

“——

8885888§883338828

 

l0. OM...) Um
I" I. I'MIw)“.

  

ooooooooooooooooo

 

ﬁﬁéﬁgﬁgﬂiﬁiQQEQQQ

Onﬁﬂnn-ﬁnn‘PO-u-ﬂ-

 

aaggggagasggasasn

 

wn'v
m Ono-u: cum
A [not It ”mum.

8888=S§938Q¥38393$

 

67
A5
61
G!
67
I6!
6‘
a
a
68
61
I67

I

I”!
l I
I”!
IWIGB
I”
INGIU

IWI“
“6
as:
W
W
m6
961
W I

 

ACCP

nlml ACCP
noun ACCP

aura-“nu
Human

was
man

Koctpouuo
H»

M»

£3

81

um-

Cumula-
"comm:
«unwou-

“peanut“.
Kama-uncut
Monoun-
II

i

B
ﬁ
{9
12
$2
a;

({3} Ken ACCP
32mg...

é

[Key on following page]

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Favorable conditions 12. Vologodskaya
2. Years 13. Kostroaskaya
3. Maxi-um depth of snow cover 16. Gor'kovskaya
during winter (ca) 15. Mari ASSR
6. Maximum depth of freezing of 16. Udmurt ASSR
soil H" (cm) 17. Hordov ASSR
5. Gross yield (1 of average) 18. Vladimirskaya
6. Unfavorable conditions 19. Ivanovsksya
7. Gross yield (2 of aaximun) 20. Yaroslsvskaya
8. 0b1ast and ASSR 21. Kalininskaya
9. Kirovsksya 22. Hoskovskaya
10. Noni A333 23. Seolenskaya
ll. Arkhangel‘skaya 26. Novgorodskaya

25. Leningradskaya

nut in a nuaber of oblasts not all of the potential of the winter crops
was utilized and the death of productive stalks decreased the productivity.
The yield was especially decreased in the northern and northwestern part
of the country’s European territory where losses of stalks turned out

to be the greatest. The productivity there in 1968 was lower than in

1967 by 10-20 percent.

During the period frol 1969 through 1975 when K was less than 1, the
gross yield of rye amounted to 60-90 percent of the average (taking into
account the tendency of a trend toward increase) for a number of oblasts
of the nonchernozem zone: Snolenskaya 0b1ast-1976. 1975; Yaroslavskaya
0blast--l971. 1975; Gor'kovskaya 0b1ast--1971. 1975: Kirovskaya 0blast-
1970. 1972-1974; and so forth.

The lost unfavorable conditions for wintering in the last 20 years.

when the winter crops suffered severely from perishing under the snow,
were created during the winters of 1965/66 and 1973/74. The maximum
depth of the snow cover in the northern and northeastern regions of the
country's European territory in 1965/66 was 80 es and more and in the
central regions of the nonchernozem zone--Sl-80 cm. The maximu-

depth of freezing in the northwestern and central regions of the
nonehernozel zone was less than 50 CI. In the southern part of the zone
it was 51-80 CI and in the northeastern regions of the country's European
territory it was more than 80 cm. A snow cover of 30 es and more renained
for 10-16 10-day periods and only in the central regions of the country's
European territory did it last for 6-10 10-day periods.

As a result of these conditions the winter crops were severely daaaged

tron perishing under the snow. In Leningrad and Kirovskaya Oblasts and

the Udmurt ASSR about 80 percent of the plants survived and in the southern
and central regions-on1y 30-70 percent of the plants did. An especially
small number of live stalks of winter crops remained in the spring.

Only in Gor'kovskaya and lvanovskaya Oblasts did 100 percent of them

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rennin-.and in the remaining regions of the nonchernozem zone-u-from 30 to
70 percent of them. But with normal wintering conditions the number of
stalks "of winter plants increased in the spring by 20-50 percent as
compardd'to autumn as the result of additional bushing.

The sizes of the areas with dead winter plants after wintering this year
turned out to be maximum for the period from 1969 through 1975. The
dependency between then and the indicator K1 is presented in figure M.
The areas with dead plantings were considerably greater in those areas
where the depth of the snow cover was greater during the winter and the
depth of freezing of the soil was least (K16 0.60). Points 1 (Novgorodskaya
Oblsst) and 2 (Kalininskaya Oblast) deviated somewhat from the curve.
There some of the areas planted in winter crops did not suffer so much
from perishing under the snow as froa over moistening of the soil and
flooding of the planted areas in the autumn. In these oblasts the

areas on which the plants died turned out to be somewhat less. But even
in those oblasts where the area on which the plants died was less than

10 percent and the gross yield amounted to 90-112 percent of the average,
in the majority of oblasts it turned out to be 50 percent and less than
in years that were favorable for wintering.

The change in the gross yield of winter crops H, the values of K and the
area with dead plantings $3 for the various years during the per od

f rolu 1957/58 through 1970/75 for individual oblasts are given in figure
1.5a, 6. In the drawings it is clear that the gross yield of winter crops
has considerably increased in recent years as carpeted to the beginning
of the period under consideration. This is explained by the significant
rise in the level of sgrotechnology in recent years. Large planted areas
are now being top dressed with mineral fertilizers in the spring. the
planting of winter crops is done prouptly, in a nutter of oblasts
(Moscow. Bryansksys and others) have introduced the production of new,
more productive strains of winter crops on significant areas, including
Hironovskaya 808 winter wheat.

The fluctuations in the yield during the period under consideration were
great: this is obviously explained primrily by unfavorable conditions
for the wintering of plants—mwishing under the snow. since in years
with the least K they were also least (1957/58, 1960/61, 1965/66.
1967/68. 1973/76 and in years with the greatest K they increased
(1958/59, 1962/63. 1966/65. 1966/67. 1968/69, 1969/70).

The areas with dead plantings ranged within considerably smaller limits;
in years with large gross grain harvests they were small and in years with
smll harvests they reached a maxim. This confirms the correctness of
the dependencies introduced above between the amounts of the gross harvest
and the areas with winter crops that perished under the snow in the
nonchernozn zone of the coantry's European territory, on the one hand.

and the depth of the snow cover and the depth of freezing of the soil,

on the other.

1147

FOR OFFICU‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 64. Dependency Between Area of Death of Winter Crops 8B (2)
and K1 During 1965/66 with Snow Cover 30 on Deep and
ﬂora in Nonchernozee zone of the Country' a
European Territory.

METHODS OF COMPARING LONG-TERM PREDICTIONS 0F PBRISIIING 0F "INTER CROPS
UNDER snow

The hare to the national economy caused by unfavorable wintering conditions
can be significantly reduced and soeetines fully eliminated if agricultural
planning agencies and agricultural specialists know ahead of tine the
degree of possible damage to winter crops and the regions where this

can take place as a result of perishing under the snow. Therefore long-
ters agroneteorologieal predictions for the wintering of winter crops

are of great practical significance not only in the steppe zone where

the plantings most frequently perish as a result of freezing when there

is no snow cover or a very saall one on the fields. but also in the

forest steppe and forest zones of the USSR where the death and deluge

of planted areas takes place because of perishing under the snow when a
deep snow cover resains for an extended period of tine on slightly

frozen soil.

The results of physiological investigations of the causes of the death of
plants when they perish under the snow which are presented above. the
established patterns of the change in the vegetative cones of shoots that
are formed in the autum under the influence of sgroeeteorological
conditions of wintering. the determination of the quantitative indicators
of the sale elements of these conditions and the patterns of their
spatial and tenperal changeability have lude it possible to develop
asynchronie connections between the meteorological conditions during a
predicted or preceeding period of the winter and. on the basis of then,
to create methods of long-ten agroueteorological predictions of the
perishing of winter grain crops under the snow [17, 18. 22].

1108

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since detailed long-term (for the season) synoptic predictions of the
weather are not drawn up at the present time. methods for long-term
prediction of the condition of winter crops in the spring are based on
patterns of inertia processes of the formation of agrometeorological
conditions of wintering that cause the perishing of plants under the snow.
The latter include correlations between the length of time a deep snow
cover remains on fields planted in winter crops and the time it is
established and also the maximum depth of freezing of the soil during the
winter and this amount at the time of the formation of a 30-cm snow cover
on the fields and the absolute minimum temperature of the soil at the
depth of the tillering nodes of winter crops during the winter and
during the proceeding period before the establishment of a sufficiently
deep snow cover on the fields. end many other things.

Methods of drawing up long-term predictions of the condition of winter
crops [17] have been developed for calculating the number of surviving
plants and stalks of winter crops by spring and the sizes of the areas
with thinned plantings (in percentages of the areas on which they are
planted) both on specific fields and on large territories (oblasts. krays.
republics). Hhen drawing up predictions for specific fields one uses
local agrometeorological information from these fields: the autumn
condition of the winter crops. the depth and compactness of the snow
cover. the depth of freezing and the temperature of the soil. the air
temperature and so forth.

In order to draw up predictions of wintering on large areas, a need has
arisen to establish quantitative indicators of the agrometeorological
conditions for the wintering of planted areas and to obtain prognostic
dependencies in terms of average indicators for the territory of the
oblasts. krays and republics and direct areas with dead plantings
according to data of the USSR Central Statistical Administration.

Predictions drawn up for specific fields can be utilized directly by
specialists in agricultural production (kolhhozes. sovkhozes. experimental
stations and so forth). 0n.the basis of them. with calculations from
several stations (6-10). one can also give a prediction of the condition of
areas planted in winter crops in the spring for the oblast, kray and
republic.

Long-term predictions drawn up for entire oblasts and republics can be
used by planning and agricultural agencies when developing measures for
caring for the planted areas and distributing mineral fertilizers, fuel.
agricultural machines and seeds that are necessary for undersowing and
replanting winter crops that have died or been damaged during the winter
with spring crops.

A method of compiling a long-term prediction of perishing of winter

crops on specific fields: when predicting the expected condition of
winter planted areas in the spring on specific fields one gives the

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nunher of nurviving plants and stalks and also the area (in percentages
of the entire of the field) on which the plantings have become thin

or died [17. 18. 23]. Predictions of the perishing of winter crops are
drawn up if a deep snow cover (h 2530 cu) has been established during the
first half of the winter with slight (less than 50 ca) freezing of the
soil. On these fields. as was pointed out above. winter crops reaain

for an extended period of tine under a deep snow cover when the teaperaturc
of the soil at the depth of the tillaring node is above -8°c and is
sonetimes close to o'c. Under these conditions the plants become
exhausted and in the second half of the winter and especially in the
early spring they are infected with various kinds of fungal diseases and
are significantly daaagsd or completely die off.

A ealculhtion of the expected degree of thinning u of winter planted areas
in the spring is aade taking into account their autumn condition
(coefficient of tillering R) free the equation (6)

u - 59.07 + 6.82t3 + 0.22:2?| - 5.1“ + 0.4013.

where t3--ainiaua soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node
during the period with a deep snow cover of 30 cn and more. Of the latter
is taken froa its actual value during the 10 days of the establish-ant of
the snow cover of 30 cn and more. taking into account a possible subsequent
change in t3. depending on the depth of freezing of the soil 3 (see figure
60). As one can see froa figure 60, the absolute nininum teaperature of
the soil at the depth of the tillering node during the winter when the
depth of freezing of the soil is 0-30 cn at the tine of the establishment
of a snow cover of 30 cn and more does not drop below -3 - -6°C; with

a depth of freezing of the soil of 50 on it is equal to -S - -8’C; and
when the soil is frozen to 80 ca, the absolute aininum is equal to -8 - ~12'c.
Therefore a calculation of the expected thinning of winter crops in the
spring and the prediction of their perishing under the snow according

to this equation is made not only for the 10 days of the establishment

of a snow cover 30 cm deep or nore on the field; it is refined again on

20 February since subsequently the ninilun tenperature of the soil in

97 percent of the years has been equal or greater (figure 66).

Hith this aethod of prediction it is also necessary to take into account
the distribution of the snow cover on the fields (see figure 39) and.
depending on it. to determine the area with perishing of winter crops
under the snow.

More reliable. although also more labor-intensive, is the nethod of
predicting the number of surviving plants and stalks on an average for
the field during the years when they perish under the snow [17]. In
order to make this kind of prediction it is necessary to know well ahead
of time how long a snow cover 30 on deep and more will remain on the
fields.

151

FOR OFFICIEL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

-2 4 '6 4 -0 -I2 4‘ -5 -0 ~20 8‘:

Figure ‘6. connection Between Absolute Minimum Soil Temperature
at Depth'of Tillering Node x Before 1 January (1),
1 February (2), 20 February (3) and its Absolute
Minimum During the Entire Winter y

In order to develop a method of long-term prediction of the length of

time a deep snov cover will remain on the fields. we used materials of
observations from snow surveys on fields with winter crops from 1932/33
through 1972/73 of meteorological stations of the northwestern. central

and northern oblasts of the USSR European territory and Western Siberia.
From these data it turned out that there is no instability in the

deep snow cover (30 cn and more) in the zone located north of the line
formed by Leningrad, Smolensk. Tula. Ul'yanovsk. Ufa, Omsk. Novosibirsk
and Kemerovo. Therefore we took the first 10 days of its formation as
the time of the establishment of a deep snow cover on the fields [17].

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The time of the establishment of a deep snow cover (more than 30 cm) ranges
In individual years within very large limits (up to 160 days). The earliest
time of its establishment. according to data from observations of all the
aforementioned stations. was the sase-the third 10-day period in November;
the latest time in the northern half of the USSR European territory was

the second lO-day period in March and in the forest and forest steppe
regions of Western Siberia--the first lO-day period in April.

The time of the beginning of the disappearance of the snow cover in the
spring ranges in various years within the considerably smaller limits
(loo-60 days) than does the time of its establishment. This is explained
by the different dates of the beginning of the snow thaw and therefore
its different intensiveness. when the thaw begins late the intensiveness
of the snow thaw is greater than when it begins early because of the
increased length of the day and the greater amount of direct solar
radiation on the earth's surface.

The length of time a deep snow cover remains on the fields ranges in
individual years within very large limits—from 0 to 160 days. But when
it is established at one and the same time in various regions of a large
zone (from the northwestern oblasts of the USSR European territory to
Tosskaya Oblast) it remains remains almost the sane. This nde it
possible when deducing the dependency between the length of time the
snow cover remains and the time of its establishment to generalize the
results of the snow surveys from various stations located in various
regions.

The dependency between these amounts is directly linear and inversely
proportional (figure 67). The earlier the establishment of a snow cover
of 30 cm and more. the greater its duration. The coefficient of the
correlation between them is r I -0.9lo 1- 0.06. 111s equation of the
connection has the form

y - 17.540 - 1.126x. (21)

where y--the length of time the snow cover of 30 cm and more remains.
x-the time of the establishment of the snow cover of this depth in 10-day
periods (for x - 1 we took the first 10 days of November). The mean
square error of the equation is By - :t 1.18 lo-day periods.

A verification of this equation showed that in 78 percent of the cases the
error of the calculation lies within the limits of the probable error

Ez and in 99 percent of the cases within the limits of $(t 2.3). On

t e basis of this equation. knowing the time of the formation of a snow
cover of 30 cm and more on the fields of winter crops. it is possible with
sufficient accuracy (1- 1 10-day period) and well ahead of time to give a
prediction of the time it will remain and. by utilizing the dependency
between the quantity of surviving plants and stalks (figures 36-38) to
draw up a prediction of the condition of area planted in winter crops

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P0" "VPICIAL "SB ONLY

5235!
3 a. 3

duration of Jenny
.

 

0
1 J I 1 J I 2 J I 2 J I 2 J I 2 3:
VI X! I U N N

Figure #7. Connection Between Duration of Snow Cover y (lo-day
periods) and Time x (lo-day periods) of the Estab-
lishment on the Fields of a Snow Cover of 30 cm and
More.

Key:
Figures at points--number of cases

at the time of renewal of growth. In years that are dangerous for the
wintering of the planted areas this prediction can be given from 100 to
160 days ahead 0! time.

A prediction of the nusher of surviving plants and stalks on areas planted
in winter crops is drawn up in the first 10-day period after obtaining
information from stations concerning the establishment of a snow cover

of 30 cm and more on the fields.

A verification of the correctness of the prediction from materials from
observations of 70 stations located in the zone where winter crops perish
under the snow in 1965/66 showed that the divergence between the predicted
and actual number of surviving stalks of winter crops. according to

65 (93 percent) of the stations, was within the limits of admisssble
error (1 15 percent). Horeover the actual number of surviving stalks

was taken to be the ratio (in percentages) of the number of stalks per

1 square meter obtained in the spring and autumn examinations.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But in individual years the divergence between the calculated and
actual number of surviving stalks was great. An analysis of materials
for these eyars showed that when making a prediction of the perishing
of winter crops under the snow. in addition to the length of time a
snow cover of 30 cm and more remains on the field and the depth of
freezing of the snow. one must take into account the air temperature.
in years with a great negative anomaly of air temperature during the
periods when a snow cover of 30 cm and more remains on the field. as

was pointed out above. the percentage of surviving stalks is greater than
in warm winters.

In order to calculate the correction for the severity of the winter

.At (table #0). when drawing up the prediction of the perishing of

winter crops under the snow well ahead of time. it was necessary to find
a dependency that made it possible to predict equally well ahead of time
the total negative temperatures of the air during the period when a

snow cover of 30 cm and more was on the field. An analysis of the
values of this sum for the last AO-SO years showed that this prognostica-
tional dependency can be obtained if one takes into account the sun of
temperatures for the period preceding the predicted ones when the

snow cover was 1-30 cm. The connection between the sums of air
temperature during the period with a deep snow cover of 30 cm and more
and with a deep snow cover of l-JO cm turned out to be directly linear
and inversely proportional (figure 48). The coefficient of the
correlation between these amounts is r - ~0.83 t 0.002. The equation
for the connectlon has the form

y - -0.9x - 1158. (22)

where y-the sum of average daily air temperatures during the period when
the snow cover is 30 cm and more. x-the same period when the snow cover
is 1-30 cm. The mean square error of the equation is E! I t 172'. the
equation is valid with values of x and y from 0 to 1800 C.

"hen material for many years was analyzed it turned out that the sum of
negative temperatures during the period when a snow cover of 30 cm and
more remained on the field for more than 100 days is greater in years
when more snow accumulates at the beginning of the winter than in years
with slower accumulation. Therefore in those years when the period with
a snow cover of from 1 to 10 cm was less than or equal to 20 days, its
value should be taken from the upper line of the graph (figure 48) and
when this period is equal to 60-60 days--from the lower line.

Finally a prediction of the number of surviving stalks of winter crops
after wintering when there is perishing under the snow is thus con-
structed from an account of the obtained patterns of seasonal change in
the soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node of winter crops.
the depth of freezing of the soil and the depth of the snow cover.
Moreover. one takes into accOunt the quantitative dependencies between the

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

condition of the planted areas in the fall and the conditions of wintering
and also asynchronic prognosticstory dependencies between the length of
time the deep snow cover resains and the total negative air tesporatures.

The area on which there will be possible damage or death of plants under
the snow is calculated. beginning with the 10-day period of the establish-
aent of an average snow cover of 16 ca and sore and ends in the third
10-day period of January (after which the period with a snow cover of

30 ca and sore will be less than 80 days) or with the establishment on
the fields of a snow cover with an average depth of #5 ca and sore
according to snow surveys when throughout the area of the field the depth
is 30 ca end sore (see figure 39). During the course of this period one
calculates individually for each 10-day period the expected average
nuaber (in percentages) of surviving plants and stalks per 1 square seter
on that part of the field where the depth of the snow cover is 30 cm and
sore. Then one calculates the average percentage of surviving plants and
stalks of winter crops for the field and deter-ines the area of the field
on which less than 50 percent of the plants have survived [l7].

  
              

o m-m-m-awmo uc
Snow cover'l-JO ca

Figure 48. Connection Between Total Negative Average Daily
Air Temperatures During Period when Snow Cover of 30
ca and More Relaiaed on the Fields and During Period
Hhen Snow Cover was 1-30 cs: Deep.

ﬂue sethod of predicting perishing of winter crops under the snow on the
territory of the oblast or republic: the expected area on which winter
crops will die throughout the territory of the oblast (kray) is detersined
by charting the results of the calculations for individual stations.

To do this. one enters on the chart which indicates the overall areas
planted in winter crops in various regions and the quantity of planted
areas in poor condition in the autumn. the expected areas from the various

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stations with an aVerage thinning or more than 50 percent of the plants
on the fields. Then one separates out zones with an expected area of
periahing of winter crops 33 greater than 50 percent and for each of
these zones One calculates the quantity of plantings (in thousands of
hectares). The sun of areas obtained this way for all zones will be the

area of destruction of winter crops in the oblast (kray. republic) as
a whole.

In a sililar way one calculates on a second chart the planted areas (in
thousands of hectares and percentages) for the oblast with thinning of
plants of 30-50 percent on which the areas have been undersown with

spring crops. The sun of these areas is taken as the most probable area
with winter crops in a poor condition.

when calculating the seat probable areas with a poor condition of the
winter crops. one takes into account the area of winter crops for each
region wlth a poor condition of winter crops in the fell. obtained by

an autumn ground tour and aircraft examination of the planted areas and
also when calculating the condition of planted areas in the autusn. taking
into account planting tines. heat availability and moisture availability
during the period of autunn vegetation [2. 17. 18. 23].

In addition to the nest probably area that will be in a poor condition.
one gives the limits of its range. These limits are calculated taking
into account the probable error of the method of prediction and possible
da-age to planted areas from other unfavorable factors (freezing in the
spring after the disappearance of the snow cover. soaking and so forth).

The prediction also gives the expected area on which the plantings will
be in a satisfactory or good condition in the oblast as a whole (in
thousands of hectares and in percentages of the overall area planted in
winter crops). Moreover. an the chart for all stations one enters the
expected average nusber of surviving stalks for the field and separates
out zones where their number per 1 square meter is: less than 350.
350-500. 500-100. 7SO-l.000 and sore than 1.000 stalks. These data.

like the areas with poor. satisfactory and good condition of the
plantings. are taken into account when taking predictions of the yield of
winter crops.

The prediction of the condition of winter crops in the spring is also
drawn up taking into account the actual condition of winter plantings in
the autumn. obtained fro. the results of an autumn examination of the
planted areas on individual fields. from the territory of regions and

in the oblast as a whole. and also free the results of the quantity of
plantings (in thousands of hectares and in percentages) with good.
satisfactory and poor condition for each rayon and the oblast as a whole.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A consolidated table is drawn up for all stations of the obiast (kray.
republic) from which one makes prognosticatory calculations of the expected
quantity of surviving stalks and plants after wintering and also the
expected areas with various conditions of the plantings in the spring.

The model for this consolidated table for Vologodskaya Oblast is given
in table 56.

This method of calculating the long-term prediction of the perishing of
winter crops under the snow is labor-intensive. A great deal of time

is needed to calculate it manually. Taking this into account, the USSR
hydrometeorological Center in conjunction with the Leningrad hydro-steere-
logical Institute and the Hestern Siberian Hydroeeteorological Center

in 1975 drew up a program for calculating this prediction on an electronic
computer [2‘]. The calculation on a BBSH-o electronic computer using

this program for one station takes less than one second of machine time.
The introduction of this program into the practice of operational work
considerably expands the possibility of increasing the precision and

the length of the advance notice of predictions of the perishing of
winter crops under the snow.

A prediction of the sizes of the area of plantings with poor condition

of the winter crops which require replanting with spring crops can also
be drawn up from the prognosticatory dependencies established by V. A.

Hoiaeychik [18. 22] between the area with dead plants during wintering

and the average for the oblaat (republic) values of the main elements

of the couples of agrometeorological conditions that cause plants to
perish under the snow.

The main factors on which the sizes of the areas with winter crops that
die in the winter depend were established with the help of an electronic
computer.

horned correlational matrices were calculated from materials for is
years. The coefficient of correlation and the correlationsl relations
were calculated for 18 elements that characterize both the condition of
areas planted in winter crops (the sizes of the areas with dead plantings
after wintering. the average bushiness. the area with poor condition of
the plants in the autumn and the average planting of winter crops during
the winter) and agroaeteorological conditions of their wintering. The
latter included minimum temperature of the air and the soil at the depth
of the tillering node during the various periods of the winter. the total
negative temperatures of the air. the depth of freezing of the soil. the
anximum depth of the snow cover during the winter (at the end of the November.
December. January and February). the duration of the period with a snow
cover of 30 ca and more. the total precipitation during the autumn and
winter periods. and so forth.

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR m-‘l-‘ICIM. llSli 0le

Table 5‘. Expected Condlllon or Arena Planted 1n Vyatkn Strain of Winter

Rye in Spring of 1966 According to Station. of Vologodoknyn
Oblalt.

(21)

   
 
    

m (21)
«My: (21)

( 20)

mm
(20)

On» mu:
may.)
”on:

y

Owns mne(20)

)‘m

0.6»

ﬂlnlc(23)
W

Y

    

        

    

933283898

  

3&9239838

°."."."'.°.°.°.°.“.

-«----ﬂ—N

5§E§§§§§§
3§§§§SEE§

 
 

   
 
 

 

 

;;5§§;;§§
8§“=°§3°”

 

Cut-me

Bean-ml Your

Info..-
Rum
III-mm

“max-M0300"
636m

yams».

mum

[in
I'm

'hroxfn

 

I
2
3
‘
5
6
1
8
9

[Key on following page]

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Charozero 13. Number per 1 M2
2 . Vologda-Holochnoye llo . Plants
3. Babayevo 15 . Stalks
lo . Us tyuahna 16 . Bushincss
5. Biryakovo 17. Expected average number of
6. Borisovo-Sudskoye surviving plants on field
'I. Velikiy Ustyug 18. Expected area (1) on field
8. Kirillov with thinning
9. Nikol'sk 19. Expected wintering conditions
10. Station 20. Very poor
11. Condition of areas planted 21. Satisfactory
in winter crops in autumn 22. he sass
12. Planting tine 23. Poor

The area with plants that have died during the winter was determined as
the difference between the area with dead winter crops (according to

data of the USSR Central Statistical Administration) and the area with

a poor condition of winter crops in the autumn, expressed in percentages
of all the areas planted in winter crops in the ohlast (33 - So). The
correlation between the amounts of area detersined this way and the
planted areas that died in the winter was established with average results
of agroaeteorological observations for the oblaat (kray. republic). -

The correlational matrices were calculated in terms of four soil and
clisate zones on whose territory strains of winter crops with various
degrees of winter hardiness are cultivated:

l) the zone of cultivation of weakly winter hardy strains of winter
crops (barley and wheat of the Bezostsya l strain)-southern regions
of the country's steppe zone with unstable winters:

2) the zone of cultivation of aediun and highly winter hardy strains of
winter crops (whoat—Hironovsksya 808. Hironovskaya yubileynaya SO,
Odesskaya 3, Odesskaya 51. Priboy. Priazovskaya, Belotserkovsltaya 198;
rye—Veronozhskayn SKhI. Khar'kovskaya 55. Vyatka ano others)--the remaining
regions of the steppe zone and the forest steppe zone;

3) the zone of cultivation of nedius winter hardy and highly winter hardy
strains of winter crops—western regions of the Ukraine, Belorussia and

the Baltic area;

6) the zone of cultivation of winter hardy strains of winter crops (wheat--
Ul'yanovka. FPO-186, Kuntsevskaya 65. hironovskaya 808: ryr-Vystka,
Vyatka 2. Kazanskaya and others)-—the sajority of the remaining regions

of the nonchernozen zone.

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Overall planted area (thousands of hectares)
2. Planted area on 15 January
3. With good and satisfactory condition
lo. Rich poor condition
5. Expected planted area in spring
6. with great thinning (more than 502)
7. With increased thinning (30-502)
8. Host probable area with plantings in poor condition
9. Possible limits of area with plantings in poor condition
10. ‘lhousands of hectares

As a result of the correlational analysis it turned out that in the first
and second zones where the main causes of the death of winter crops are

f reezing. the ice crust ground into the soil and autumn drought. the
sizes of the areas with dead plantings of winter crops mainly depend on
the average oblast minimum soil temperature at the depth of the tillering
node (correlational relation--n I 0.91.. coefficient of correlation--r I
0.86); the average oblast depth of freezing of the soil (n I 0.92: r I
0.71): the sum of negative temperatures throughout the entire winter
period (n I 0.60; r I 0.54); the average oblast depth to which the ice
cover is ground into the soil (n I 0.78; r I 0.78); the average oblast
thinning of planted areas with continuation of the grmth of sample
plants taken from the fields on 23 February (n I 0.92; r I 0.87); the
sizes of the areas (in percentages of the overall areas of winter crops)
with poor condition of the planted areas in the auto-1 (n I 0.60; r I
0.35): and the average oblast bushiness of the winter crops in the autuan
after the end of the growing period (n I 0.50; r I 0.38).

In the third and fourth zones. where the main reasons for the destruction
of plants are soaking and perishing under the snow. the correlational
dependency between the area with dead plants by spring and the average
oblast significance of agrometeorological elements turned out to be
sufficiently close and in the majority of cases, as could be expected.
inversely proportional. For example. the dependency between this area
and the average oblast minimun soil temperature at the depth of the
tillering node during the period from the first 10 days of November
through 20 February is characterized by n I 0.76, r I -0.71; the average
depth of freezing of the soil during the 10 days of the establishment
of a deep snow cover (30 cm deep and more--n I 0.77. r I -O.70; the
average number of 10-day periods with a snow cover 30 cm deep and more
during the period from the first 10 days of November until 20 February--
nonlinear and directly proportional. n I 0.70.

As one can see from the correlational relations and the coefficients of
correlation that are given. the average oblast values of sgrometeorological
elements characterize sufficiently well the sizes of the areas on which
winter crops have died in the winter and the greatest influence on the
wintering of planted areas is exerted by a minimum temrature of the

soil at the depth of the tillering node during the period from the first
10 days of Novednr until 20 February. In the zone where plants perish

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

under the snow. as in the zone of freezing. the correlational relationship
between the area with dead plants and the soil temperature at the depth of
the tillcring node is sufficiently great (n - 0.75). Therefore we took
as the main predictor in all prognosticatory dependency the minimum

soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node. averaged for the
oblast (kray. republic).

The precision of the determination of its average value is quite sig-
nificantly reflected in the precision of the prediction and in the amounts
of area with dead plants [15].

The prognosticatory dependency of the amounts 8 and the plants that
perished under the snow. on the one hand. and the average oblaat minimum
soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node up to 20 February
F3. on the other. has a parabolic nature and is expressed by the equation

s3 - 13.12153 + 0.855% + 56.86. (23)

The correlational relationship--n . 0.75; the mean square error of the

equationuB. - i- 4.‘ percent. Th3 dimension of the coefficient:
percentage/0°C and percentage/0°C . The equation is valid with '63 greater
than -10'C. n I' 65 [18].

But in individual cases the deviation of the actual sizes of areas with
dead plants from this theoretical curve reached great amounts (10 percent
and more, figure 69). This was the case in 1965/66 when in individual
oblasts the actual areas were somewhat greater than prediced according
to the curve of the connection and in 1967/68 when they were, conversely.
considerably less. This is explained by the fact that the equation does
not take into account the length of time a deep snow cover remains on the
fields or the pecularities of the weather conditions during the period
when the snow is thawing. As was already pointed out. the latter,
although in very rare cases (1968). can considerably reduce the area
with fully destroyed plantings (up to 5 percent and less. figure 69)

if the snow disappears from the fields within 3-5 days. On the basis of
this one can presume that measures for accelerating the disappearance

of the snow cover from the fields in the spring in the nonchernozem zone
could have a great positive significance. especially if the plantings
are promptly cared for also (top dressing from aircraft and early
harrowing).

The overall prognosticatory dependency of the amounts of area with winter
plants that have died under the snow 83 and the average oblast minimum
soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node before 20 February
E3 and the length of the period with a deep snow cover of 30 cm and more
if is nonlinear and can be expressed by a family of parablic curves.

The equation of this dependency has the form
163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5“ - «.12: , I 0.29131 r (mm + 0.07..2 + 10.91. (21.)

the correlational relation of the connection-m - 0.78, the nunber of
cases. n - 65. the error within liaits of no more than 5 percent of the
area is guaranteed to be 80 percent of the cases and equal to or less
than 7 percent of the area-~90 percent of the cases. The dimension of
the coefficients of the predictors are. correspondingly: percentage/'6.
percentage/'02. percentage/day and percentsge/dayz.

The calculation of the expected area with dead plants of winter crops

is aade according to this foraula on 20-22 February when the period

with a snow cover of 30 ca and acre has still not ended. Therefore

the overall duration of this period is predicted initially froa individual
stations and then from data that are obtained one calculates the average
value 5 for the oblast. In order to predict the length of the period

a for individual stations one uses the dependency presented in figure 1.7.

50%

  

-, .3 -: -o -: 4 -r -s -9 40 41m?

Figure 69. Dependency Between Area with Plants of "inter Crops That Have
Perished Under the Snow 83 (X) and the Average Oblast Soil
Teaperature at the Depth of the Ti llering node ?3 (‘0)

Until 20 February

Key:
1-l965/66. 2--l967l68. 3-other years.

The prediction of the amounts of area with plantings of winter crops
that have perished under the snow can be calculated from the two afore-
mentioned prognosticatory dependencies. The first connection (only with
the minimu- soil temperature) produces best results in years with a very
deep snow cover (maximum depth for the winter Iaore than 50 cn) and

a long duration (more than 100 days) when. obviously, there is not only

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

perishing of winter plants under the snow in the winter. but also soaking
of them in the spring (for example, in 1965/66 in the western part of
the European territory of the USSR) and the second--in all other years.

Judging from the nature of these dependencies and analogous prognosticatory
connections between the sizes of the areas and the areas planted in winter
crops that have perished under the snow [18, 22]. one can assume that

the optimal conditions for wintering of winter crops are created with

a minimum soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node within the
range of from -7 to -s°c. The sizes of the areas on which the plants have
died both from perishing under the snow and from freezing turned out to

be least with this minimum soil temperature at the depth of the tillering
node.

When the minimum soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node
increases above -7°C the area on which the plants die increases as a
result of the plant's perishing under the snow (of course. if there
is a sufficient deep snow cover on the fields for a long period of
time). “hen the soil temperature drops below -8‘c they also increase.
but as a result of freezing of the plants. Thus the dependency between
the sizes of the areas on which the winter crops have died and the
average oblast minimum soil temperature at the depth of the tillering
node before 20 February have an identical nature both for freezing and
perishing under the snow, but an inverse sine. Taking this into account.
when drawing up long-tern agrometeorological predictions for cases where
the snow cover on the fields is less than 20 cm. one should use the
prognosticatory connections we developed for freezing of planted areas
18, 22].

But if, according to snow surveys. the average depth of the snow cover
on the fields reaches 20 ca and more. even on part of the oblast's
territory. if the depth of freezing of the soil is not great (less than
50 cm) and if the minimum soil temperature at the depth of the tillering
node is above -10'c. when drawing up a prediction of the sizes of the
areas on which the plants will die, one should utilize the connections
obtained for predicting the perishing of plants under the snow.

Under natural conditions the minimum soil temperature. the depth of
freezing of the soil and the depth of the snow cover are interconnected.
1herefore one can usually determine easily the main cause of the death
of winter crops. To do this it is only necessary to have and take into
account data concerning these main elements of agrometeorological conditions
of wintering of winter grain crops throughout the entire winter period.

1he area on which the plants have died in the spring is calculated only
for the main grain crops as a whole (rye and wheat) since in the zone
where plants perish under the snow the main crops that are cultivated
are winter rye (80-100 percent of the area planted in winter crops) and
winter wheat of these strains which. as research has shown, are almost
identically damaged under the snow.

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In regions where crops perish under the snow the poor plantings are the
winter crops which will be written off and will not be included in the
harvesting area. They include plantings that have fully died off and
plantings with thinning of more than 50 percent of the plants on more than
half of the field (if they are poorly developed. on 30 percent of the
field). Plantings that have been damaged (even with thinning of 50 percent
and more) on a smaller part of the field (30-50 percent) under the snow.

as a rule. are not resown. despite the fact that they are evaluated as

poor in the spring after the disappearance of the snow cover from the
fields. After top dressing and harrowing (sometimes with undersowing)

in certain years they improve their condition and the dead above-ground
mass is restored. And although the main shoots die secondary shoots
produce some yield. In these years the actual area with poor plantings,
according to data from the spring examination (aircraft or ground tour),
turns out to be close to the predicted area with poor plantings as a

result of perishing under the snow and the planted area to be written

off. according to data of oblaat statistical administrations, turns out

to be less (as. for example. in a number of oblasts in 1971).

Long-term predictions of the perishing of winter crops under the snow

on the territory of the oblast (republic) are drawn up twice. The first--
from the results of calculations of the expected thinning of planted

areas and the area on specific fields--is given well ahead of time;

in the second 10-day period after the establishment of a snow cover of

30 cm or more on the fields. The second--from average oblast indicators-
on 20 February [18]. The second prediction is also given sufficiently
well ahead of time for prompt preparations for caring for the damaged
plantings and for spring resowing of dead winter crops with spring crops.

TNE PROBABILITY 0P PBRISNING 0? WINTER CROPS UNDER THE SNON IN VARIOUS
ZONES OF THE USSR

The perishing of plants under the snow takes place as a result of the
extended effects on them of a complex of unfavorable factors in the
external environment. As was shown above. the main elements of
agrometeorological conditions which cause winter grain crops to suffer
from perishing under snow are the snow cover, the depth of freezing and
the soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node of tillering
plants. The harmful effects of these elements on winter crops which
cause damage and death to the plants under the snow are manifested

when there is a snow cover of 30 em and more on the fields and the depth
of freezing of the soil is less than 80 cm and especially less than 50
cm for more than 50 days [17-22]. Under these conditions the minimum
soil temperature at the depth of the tillering node remains within the
limits of 0 to -S'C and contributes to the plants' extensive expenditure
of hydrcarbons. their exhaustion and their infection with various kinds
of fungal diseases and also to elongation of the vegetative cones and
destruction of the more productive shoots that have formed in the autumn.

166

FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The cold period of the year. during which the plants are in a condition
of forced dormancy has both in terms of duration and in terms of severity
a great spatial variability on the territory of the USSR which must be
taken into account when cultivating winter grain crops [63]. In the
north of the country’s European territory the wintering of winter crops
usually began 1.5-2 months earlier and ends that much later than in the
south. The duration of the period of winter dormancy of winter crops

in the northern oblast is more than twice as great as in the southern
oblasts (180 days instead of 80). In the Asian territory of the USSR

it increases from the southwest to the northeast within even greater
limits.

The severity of the winter. which can be characterized by the average
many-year total of negative average daily air temperatures. also increases
from the southwest to the northeast of the country. Thus in Permskaya

and Sverdlovskaya Oblasts it is 20 times greater than in Krasnodarskiy
Kray and Kryaskaya Oblast. The total of negative air temperatures during
the year in the south of the country's European territory is -100 - -200'c
and in the northeast-m -1800 - ~2000°C. The average of absolute minimum
air temperatures has the same spatial variability. In the north of the
country's European territory it is equal to -20°C and in Sverdlovskaya,
Kirovskaya and Permskays 0blasts- -60 - -64°C.

But agroclimatic conditions for the wintering of winter grain crops

are not under the influence of this pattern of change throughout the USSR
territory. 0n the contrary, in the north and in the center of the
country's European territory where the frosts are more severe the freezing
of winter crops is observed rarely. Because of the early establish-cut

of a snow cover on the fields and its great depth and duration. winter
crops there frequently perish under the snow.

The snow cover in the northeast of the country's European territory is
formed on the fields as early as the end of October or the beginning of
November. in the central oblasts of the nonchernozem zone--at the end of
November, and in the Ukraine (except for the southern oblasts)-at the
end of December. There are years when the time of its establishment on
the fields turns out to be 1-1.5 months earlier or later than the average
for many years.

The fields are cleared of the snow cover in Rostovskaya and in the south
of the Ukraine in the middle of March and on the territory that lies
south of the line formed by Leningrad. Smolensk. Kaluga. Tambov and
Saratow--by 10 April. But in Arkhangel'skaya, Kirovskaya. Permskaya
and Tomsksya Oblasts the stable snow cover does not break up until the
first 10 days of May.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tsblishsent and disappearance of the snow cover are of
winter crops. In the forest

e of the snow cover Eros
leads to perishing of the plants

me tines of the es
treat significance for the wintering of
tone an early forsation and late disappearanc

the fields. where it lasts for 160~l90 days.
under the snow.

The duration of the period with a snow eoVer of 30 cn and more in the
he of the country's European territory

central oblssts of the nonehernozes so
these: of the line for-ed by

is 60—80 days and on the territory sou
Ufa and Vechhotur'ye (Sverdlovskaya 0blast)-80-

of the snow cover during the winter is more than 30 en

the line for-ed by Pshov, Ssolensk, Hoscow and
ercent of the year and north of the line formed
by icningrad. Yaroslovl‘. Kazan' and Izhevsk in 80—100 percent of the
years. The average sari-um depth of the snow cover on fields with
winter crops and the number of times the sexisun depth of the snow cover
is 30 cm and more with various values for the average anxisun depths are

presented in figures 51 and 52. The maximum dept
for the winter, as one can see fros figure 52, increases Eros 10 en in

the southwest o

The naxisum depth
on the territory north of
Bugui‘ua in sore than 50 p

f the Ukraine to 60 en in Kirovs

  

Tins Snow Cover of 30 CI and
n Fields with winter Crops (Days).

"any-Year Average Length of

Figure 50.
More Lasts 0

Key‘
2) 21-50. 3) 51-80, 6) 81—120.

Nu-ber of days: 1) less‘thsn 20.
5) more than 120

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 51. Recurrence of Years (1) Rich Maximum Snow Cover
for Winter of 30 ca and More (3) and Depth of Freezing
of Soil H lees than 50 ca (1) and less than 80
en (2) with Various Values of ﬁ'end H

Because of this distribution of the snow cover throughout the territory of
the USSR. despite the great severity of the winter, in the northwestern
and central regions of the country's European territory the depth of
freezing of the soil is less than in the central chernozen zone, in the
north of the Ukraine and in the central Volga area. The maxi-u: depth of
freezing of the soil during the winter on an average for 20 years in the
north and northeast of the country's European territory turned out to be
equal to 60-80 cm. in the Upper Volga-80-90 cu. in the northwestern.
western and central oblasts-50-70 cn and in the central chernozem zone,
the Central Vblga Area and in north of the Ukraine-~80-100 cm and lore.

In the country's European territory the soil freezes aost deeply (100-

130 cu) in the Volga regions of Kuybyshevskaya and Seratovskaya Oblasts and
in Orenburgskaya Ohlast. In the steppe regions of the Western Siberia,

in the Urals and in the northern half of Kazakhstan it freezes to 120-150
cm and in p1aces-down to 200 cm.

In the nonchernozea zone of the country's European territory in individual
years the depth of freezing of the soil ranges from 0 to 150 cn and more.
when the snow cover is established early the snow remains unfrozen through-
out the entire winter or freezes to no more than 50 cm (1965/66. 1967/68).
In Arkhangel'skaya. Vologodskaya. Kostroaskaya. Yaroslavskaya. Ivanovekaya.
Klrovskaya and Per-okays Oblaste and in the northern part of Gor'kovskaya

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ohlaat. the soil freezes to less than 50 cu In 50 percent of the years
(nee figure 50, 1) and south of the 11m: tamed by Snolenek. Renata.
Moscow. Cor'ldy. Izhevsk and Verkhotur'--ln 30-50 percent of the years [22].

 

Figure 52. Average Maximum Depth of Snow Cover (cm) for
Winter on Fields with winter Crops

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
u FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The average nany-year nininun tenperature of the soil at the depth of the
tillering nodes of winter crops turned out to be greatest (-8 - -lO°C)
in the nonchernozen zone of the country's European territory (figure 53).
The recurrence of years with a nininun winter soil temperature at the
depth of the tillcring nodes of winter crops of -5°c and sore. when under
a deep snow cover it was possible for the pl nts to perish (according to
data fron observations of aeteorological sta ions over 20 years--fron
1956 through 1975) anounted to more than 50 percent of the years in a
nunber of regions of Vologodskaya. Kostronskaya. Kievskaya and Pernskaya
Oblasts; 31-50 percent of the years in Kalininskaya and Yaroslavskays
Oblasts. in the northern part of Gor'hovskaya Oblast and in the Udnurt
ASSR; and 20-30 percent of the years in the renaining regions of the
nonihernozen zone of the RSPSR and in the northern part of the Belorussia
22 .

1hc perishing of plants under the snow takes place. as was shown above.
when the plants rennin for a long tine under a deep snow cover. in the
dark and with slight freezing of the soil with its tenperature above -5'c.
Therefore we have calculated the recurrence of years with the nunber of
10-day periods during the winter of 8 and more with the depth of the

snow cover of 30 on and more and the naxinun depth of freezing of the soil
of 50 cm and less (figure 56). It turned out that this duration of
unfavorable win-ering conditions is observed nest frequently in the
northeast of the nonchernozen zone. East of the line forned by

Vologda. Gor'kiy, Izhevsk and Ufa these conditions for 8 10-day periods
and more recur in 30-50 percent of the years. The probability is also
great (10-30 percent of the years) for a long duration of unfavorable
wintering conditions in the majority of oblasts of the central region

of the RSPSR. In the southern and western oblasts of the nonchernozen zone
of the RSFSR and also in the Baltic area a great duration (dangerous for
winter crops) of a deep snow cover with slight freezing of the soil is
rare-leea than 10 percent of the years.

But in the western regions of the country's European territory the
temperature at the depth of the tillering node can rennin close to 0°C

not only when the snow cover is 30 cn and sore. but also when it is less.
since the air tenperature there is higher and the depth of freezing of the
soil is less. Moreover. winter crops in these regions undergo tenpering
during the autunn period with less favorable conditions, the quantity of
sugars in then is less and therefore a shorter period is required for the
expenditure of sugars on respiration. With an increase in the amount of
tine during which the snow cover on the fields is 30 cn and more with a
depth of freezing of the soil of $0 on and less there is an increase in the
percentage of thinning of winter crops and the gross yield of winter crops
decreases.

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 53. Minimum Soil Temperature at Depth of Tillering Nodes
of "inter Crops (Average from Absolute Hininums
from 1952 Through 1971)

In order to conpare our regionlng of the territory of the nonchernozen
zone with respect to conditions for perishing of plants under the snow
and actual data. we calculated the recurrence of years in which, according
to data of the USSR Central Statistical Administration. the gross yield
was equal to 80 percent and less than the nany-year average. These
calculations confirm our evaluation of the wintering conditions for winter
crops. The yield decreases most frequently (in 20 percent of the years
and lore) in the northeastern and northern regions of the nonchernozen
zone where it is lore probable to find conditions that cause perishing

of the plants under the snow. In the northwestern regions a certain
reduction in the yield of winter crops in 10-20 percent of the years

is explained by damage to the planted areas as a result of soaking and

in the southern regions of the nonchernozen zone-as a result of freezing
[22].

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oﬂ-‘ICIM. 083 max

 

Figure 56. Recurrence of Years (1) With 8 and Here 10-Day l’erioda
With Snow Cover of 30 cn and More and Haxiam Depth
of Freezing of Soil During “inter of 50 on and Less.

Key:
1) Less than 101. 2) 11-202, 3) 21-301. lo) 31—50:.

The reduction in the gross yield of winter crops as a result of perishing
under the snow in the nonchernosea zone of the RSI-‘51! can be fully
eliminated by taking into account the sgroseteorological conditions for
wintering and proaptly taking the necessary aeasuree for fighting against
winter death of the plants.

1N LIEU OF A CONCLUSION

Perishing of plants under the snow, as one can see from an analysis of
agroneteorological conditions for the wintering of winter crops. leads
considerably less frequently to the seas destruction of planted areas

the USSR where winter crops are the leading grain crops. Yet an average

under the snow has caused and new causes appreciable harm to grain
farming in the RSPSR. the Baltic republics and also in many regions of
the northwest and Belorussia. new when large tasks have been set for
the USSR nonchernozea zone for increasing the gross grain harvest.
eliaination of losses of the yield fro! perishing under the snow should

contribute to their fulfillnent.

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even in the very earliest works on perishing of winter crops under the
snow it was noted that a deep snow cover has a destructive effect on the
wintering of winter plantings. In the first stage when the factors
causing the death of plants were not clear certain devices were proposed
for cowacting the snow or removing it from the fields early.

Fundamental research on the physiological factors causing the death of
winter crops. the discovery of processes of intense expenditure of
hydrocarbons. starvation of the plants. and infection of weakened plants
with pathogenic organisms opened up new possibilities for scientific
development and searches for effective methods of fighting against the
phenomenon of perishing under the snow.

In recent years the attention of agrometeorologists working in the area

or the wintering of winter crops has been drawn to a study of the
phenomenon of plants perishing under the snow and diagnosis of the
condition of winter crops. Along with agrometeorologists who have

been investigating the comlex of factors leading to perishing of winter
crops under the snow. their distribution in various regions of the USSR
and abroad. there has been considerably broader research on phenomena

of perishing of crops under the snow by physiologists. morphophysiologiats,
phytopathologists and crop specialists.

Research on sgrometeorological conditions. physiological and biochemical
processes and also the study of morphophysiological peculiarities of the
condition of vegetative cones in the autumn, winter and spring periods
have considerably broadened and deepened our ideas about the causes of
damage and death to planted areas and about the predictable connections
between agroclimstic conditions that determine the perishing of winter
crops under the snow and the level of their productivity.

0n the basis of theoretical developments and experimental research a
number of agricultural measures have been proposed which considerably
reduce the harm caused to the national econom: by the perishing of plants
under the snow.

In the first place these are measures which in the autumn are directed
toward reducing the harmfulness of factors that contribute to perishing of
the plants under the snow. such as improving the structure and also the
physical properties of the soil by applying manure. peat and green
fertilizer; liming of acid soils; removal of excess moisture from winter
fields in the autumn and preparing field ditches for the flow of melted
snow in the autumn. winter and especially in the spring periods.

In the second place. these include sgrotechnical devices directed toward
creating favorable conditions for autumn tempering of winter crops, which
is important for increasing their resistance both to freezing and to
perishing under the snow and contributes to maximum accumulation of
sugars in the above-ground organs and especially in the tillering nodes.

171.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The agrotechnical devices include selecting and providing optimal planting
times, planting norms and also autumn top dressing with potassium and
phosphorus fertilizers; in cases where the soil is not infested with
lusaria. preplanting disinfection of the seeds and their treatment with a
tur preparation can be important. Selection of strains that are most
resistant to perishing under the snow is quite essential.

In the third place. these measures include regular agrometeorological
inspection, beginning in the autum. of the ”change in temperatures at
the depth .of the tillering nodes and on the surface of the soil under the
snow cover and also biological examination of the vegetative cones of
the plants so that. if necessary. the snow cover can be compacted, thus
contributing to reducing the temperature of the surface layers of the
soil to -'5 - -7'c.

In the fourth place. they include the creation of conditions that
accelerate the melting of the snow on the fields in the spring, which
reduces the harmful effects of snow mold and other pathogenic fungi and
also root rot. The snow can be removed when there is no longer any
danger of the return of frosts.

Early in the spring it is necessary to take special care of the areas
planted in winter crops that have been damaged under the snow. First
of all, it is necessary to use harrowing to remove leaves that have been
infected with snow mold. At the same time early spring top dressing
with mineral or liquid organic fertilizer intensifies the growth of
tillering shoots that are stage I of organogenesis and accelerate their
development; and a second top dressing during stem extension before
advancing to stages III-IV of organogenais will contribute to better
development and growth of the rudimentary spike.

Existing methods of diagnosing the condition of plants on specific
sections and on large territories make it possible to develop more
successfully scientific fundamentals for protecting winter crops from
perishing under the snow. mese same aethods make it possible to
promptly draw up predictions of the wintering of plantings and their
productivity, which is extremely important for economic and planting
agencies.

The main tasks under the new five-year plan are the selection of new
«trains of winter wheat and winter rye of the intensive type which are
resistant to conditions of wintering on the fields of the nonchernozem zone
and also further development of the system of agricultural devices for
protecting winter crops from perishing under the snow and their
application on the kolkhozes and sovkhozes on which the areas planted in

winter crops will be expanded in the next few years.

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

6.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Avdonin. N. 8.; Kuzina. Ye. V.; "The Effects of Soil Properties.
Fertilizers and Hin-ering Conditions on the hardiness and Yield
of "inter meat." VESTNIK M60. 1962. Series 6. No 3. pp 6-11.

Bondarenko. V. I. "The Effects of Age Changes on the Winter Hardiness
and Productivity of Winter meat." in the book: "Probleny
individual'nogo razvitiya c.-|th. rasteniy" [Problems of Individual
Development of Agricultural Plants]. Moscow. Kolos. 1972. pp 40-42.

Vasil'yev. I. M. "Zinovks Rasteniy" [watering of Plants]. Moscow.
Izd-vo AN SSSR. 1956. 250 pp.

Verigo, s. A.: Bazunova. L. A.; "Pochvennays vlags i yeye znacheniye
v sel'skokhozyaystvennon proizvodstve" [Soil Moisture and Its

Significance in Agricultural Production]. Leningrad. Gidroueteoizdat.
1963. 288 pp.

Vinogradova. V. V. "Growth Stinulstors and Inhibitors in the Process
and Teupering of Winter wheat." BYULLETIN VIR. 1972. Issue 26. pp
51-57.

Kulik. M. S. "Metodicheskoye poaobiye po sostavleniyu dolgosrochnykh
sgroaetsorologicheskikh prognozov sredney oblastnoy urozhaynosti
ozinylth zernovykh v nechsrnozennoy zone" [Methodological Aid for
Compiling long-Tern Agroseteorological Predictions of the Average
Oblast Productivity of "inter Grain Crops in the Monchernozeu
Zone]. Moscow. Gidrolncteoizdat. 1971. 24 pp.

Kuperuan. P. M. "Physiology of Resistance of Hheat" in the book:
"Fiziologiya c.-kh. rastcniy" [Physiology of Agricultural Plants]
lzd-e M61]. 1969. pp 601-500.

Kupernan. P. M.; Chirkov. Yu. I. "Biologicheskiy kontrol' za rszvitiyeu
rasteniy na seteorologicheskikh stsntsiyakh" [Biological Control

Over the Development of Plants at Meteorological Stations]. Leningrad.
Gld'nmeteoizdat. 1970. 156 pp.

Kuperlsan. P. M.; Moiseychik, V. I. "Metodicheskoye posobiye po
otsenkc sostoyaniya oziuykh kul'tur v osenne-zimne-vesenniy period
netodon biologicheskogo kontrolya" [Methodological Aid for

Evaluating the Condition of "inter Crops in the Autum-Hintsr-Spring
Period by the Method of Biological Controls]. " °ow. Gidroneteoizdat.
1973. 20 pp.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[0.

ll.

12.

13.

lb.

15.

[6.

l7.

l8.

19.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kupernnn. P. M.; Holseychik. V. A.; Bykova. H. 8. "Winter llnrdiness
ol' Strains of Winter Hheat Regionalized in the USSR Under Snow Free
Conditions and Norsal and Excessive Snow Cover." "Trudy

nnuchnoy kont‘erentsii MGU" [Works of the Scientific Conference

of ifDU]. Izd-ye H00. 1975. PP 210-222.

Lichikski, V. H. "Perezinovka ozinykh kul'tur" [wintering of Winter
Crops]. ﬂoscov, Kolos. 1970. 208 pp.

Hel'tser. R.; Ponosarev. V. I. "On Applying the Method of Horphof
Physiological Analysis in Research on the Productivity of Strains
of "inter Wheat" VESTNIK USU. Biology and Soil Science Series.
1967. No 6. pp 6-11.

Moiseychik, V. A. "Evaluation of Conditions for Hintering of Winter
Crops in the Southeast European Territory of the USSR," TRUDY TsIP.
1955. Issue lol (68), pp 3-20.

Hoiscychik. V. A. "The Significance of the Degree of Development of
Plants in the Autusn for Wintering of Winter Crops." MBTEOROLOGIYA
I (HDROLOGIYA. 1966. No 5, pp 26-31.

Noiseychik. V. A. "Precision of Agroneteorological Observations and
Correctness of Predictions of Wintering of Hinter Crops." TRUDY
GIDRGiE‘iTSEN‘l‘RA SSSR. 1968. Issue 14, pp 3-23.

Hoiseychik, V. A. "On Spatial Changes in Minimu- Soil Temersture
at Depth of Tillering Node of Winter Crops," TRUDY GIDROHB‘ITSBNTRA
SSSR. 1971. Issue 85, pp 33-46.

Moiseychik. V. A. "Hetodicheskiye ukazsniya po sostavleniyu dolgo-
srochnogo progioza vyprevaniya ozilsykh zernovykh kul'tur" [Methodolo-
gical Instructions for Compiling Long-Tera Predictions of the
Perishing of Winter Grain Crops Under the Snow], Moscow.
Gidroseteoizdst. 1971. (.0 pp.

Hoiseychik. V. A. "Hetody sostsvleniya dolgosrochnykh
agroneteorologicheskikh prognozov perezinovki ozinylth kul'tur ns
territorii oblastey. respublik i v tselon po SSSR" {Methods

of Compiling Long-Tern Agroneteorological Predictions of. the
wintering of Winter Crops on the Territories of Oblasts. Republics
and the USSR as a hhole]. Moscow. Gidroseteoizdat. 1972, 106 pp.

Hoiseychik. V. A. "The Effects of Agroneteorological Conditions on
the Condition of the Vegetstive Cone of Winter Grain Crops in the
winter" in the book "Problely individusl'nogo razvitiya s.-kh.
rasteniy" (Author's abstract of paper delivered at all-union
symposium in Odessa) Hoseov. VASKhNIL. 1972. pp 192-193.

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

'10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Molnuychik. V. A. "Ikmcription of the Condition of Winter Crops
in the Winter from the Results of Continuing the Growth of Plant
Specimens." TRUDY GIDRNBTI‘SEN'I'RA SSSR. Issue 130. 1973. PP 51-66.

Hoinoyclnik. V. A. "Methods of Agrocliuatic Regionalization of
wintering Conditions for "inter Grain Crops." TRUDY GtDRGiE'ITSENTRA
SSSR. 1973. Issue 130. pp 18-33.

Hoiseyc‘nik. V. A. "Agroneteorologichssltiye usloviya i perezinovka
ozisykh kul'tur" [Agrooeteorological Conditions and Vintering of
winter Crops]. Leningrad. Cidroneteoizdat. 1975. 295 pp.

Pctunin. I. H. ”Methods of Colpiling Predictions of Hintering
Conditions for Winter Vheat and Rye" in the book "Sb.
nstodicheskikh ukszaniy po nnalizu i otsenke slozhivshikhsys i
ozhidayenykh agroneteorologicheskikh usloviy" [Collection of
Methodological Instructions for Analyzing and Evaluating Existing
and Expected Agrometeorological Conditions], Leningrsd.
Gidroaeteoizdst. 1957. pp 105-129.

Polsgin. B. 6.; Moiseychik. V. A. "Calculation on Electronic
Computer of the Thermal Conditions of the Soil for EValuating the
Hintering of "inter Crops" TRUDY CIDWETI‘SENTRA SSSR, 1976,
Issue 176. pp 33-65.

Protsenko, D. P.; Flasyuk, P. A.; Kolosha. 0. 1.; "Zimstoykost'
zernovykh kul'tur" [Winter Hardiness of Grain Crops], Hoscow,
Kolos, 1969. 383 pp.

Pukhal'skiy. A. V. "Damage to Winter Grain Crops by Collar Rot
Fungi" SOTSIALISTICHESKOYE MSTENIYEVODSTVO, 1937. No 21, pp 53-61.

Pyyklik, K. H. "Agrometeorologicsl Conditions for Vintering of
winter Grain Crops on the Territory of the Estonian SSR"
SBORNIK NOT TALLINSKAYA UGMS ESTONSKOY SSR. 1964. Issue 2. pp 63-69.

Mzmva. 1.. A. “Rukovodstvo po kontrolyu pri obrabotke nablyudeniy
nad vlezhnost'yu i promerzaniysa pochvy” [Guidance for Control When
Processing Observations of the Hoisture Content and Freezing of the
Soil], Leningrad, Cidroneteoizdat. 1955, 30 pp.

Reneslo. V. N. et s1. "Hironovskiye pshenitsy" [Hironovo Hheatl.
Moscow. iiolos, 1976. 288 pp.

Ronanova. L. N. "Winter Hardiness of Winter Crops and Physiological
Fundamentals that Condition It" Author's abstract of candidate's
dissertation. Moscow. 1966. 16 pp.

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
31.

32.

33.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

100.

41.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ryhnkovn. M. l. "Dynnmicn of 01 igosnccharides as an Indirect
indicator of the Degree of "inter Hardiness of Strains of winter

"heat and Rye" NAUCHNIYB TRUDY NIISKIIU‘I‘SRNZ. 1970. Issue 25. Vol 1,
pp 1&127.

Sungin. H. 1.: Kachurin. 8. P.; Tolstikhin, M. 1.; Tunel'. V. F.
"Obshchaye nerzlotovedeniye" [General Geocryology], Moscow,
Izd-vo AN SSSR. 1960. 360 pp.

'l‘iunova. K. P. "Increased "inter hardiness and Productivity of Winter
"heat in the Southeastern European Port of the USSR" AGROBIOLOGIYA.
1959’ M 3. pp 11-16.

Tumanov. I. L; aorodina. I. 11.; Oleynikova, ‘1'. V. "The Role of
the Snow Cover in Hintering of "inter Planted Areas (Periahing Under
Show)" TRUDY P0 PRIKLADNOY BOTANIKB, GENBTIKB I SBLRTSII, 1935.
Series 3. No 6. pp 3-57.

Tunanov. I. I. "Pizlologicheskiye osnovy :inostoykosti kul'turnykh
rasteniy" [Physiological Bases of winter Hardiness of Crop Plants],
Leningrad. Sel'khozgiz. 1960. 366 pp.

Tupenevich. S. H. "Collar Rot on "inter Grain Crops in Kirovskaya
0b1aat and the Udlnurt ASSR" TRUDY KIROVSKOGO 0314511060 N11
KRAYBVBDBNIYA, 1939, No 16. 33 pp.

Tupenevich. S. H. "The Relationship of Strains of Winter "heat and
Snow Hold in Connection with Their Developmental Stage“ VES'INIK
znsucutrv ansrzutv. 1960, No 1-2, pp 260-267.

‘l'upenevich. S. H. "Perishing of Winter Grain Crops under the Snow
in the Spring" TRUDY VNIIER. 1966, Issue 28, pp 126-130.

Ulanova, Ye. S. “Hetodicheskoye poaobiye po sostavleniyu dolgo-
srochnogo prognoza urozhaya ozinoy pshenitsy v rayonakh chemozennykh
pochv Ukrainy. Severnogo Kavltaza i Holdavii" [Methodological Aid

for Compiling Long-Term Predictions of the Yield of winter

wheat in the Regions of the Nonchernozen Zones of the Ukraine. the
Northern Caucuses and Moldavia], Moscow, Gidroneteoizdat. 1965, 30 pp.

Ulanova, Ye. S. "Agroneteorologicheskiye usloviya i urozhaynost'
ozinoy pshenitsy" [Agroneteorological Conditions and the Productivity
of winter Wheat]. Leningrad. Gidroneteolizdat. 1975. 302 pp.

Chirkov. Yu. I. "The Application at Agroneteorological Stations
of the Method of Determining the Viability of "inter Crops from

the Condition of the Vegetative Cone" MOROWGIYA I GIDROWGIYA,
1955. No 5. pp 67-43.

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
42.

43.

6‘.

‘5.

d6.
(.7.

‘8.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shul'gtn. A. H. "Asroneteorologlcel Conditions of Hintertng of Winter
Crepe 1n the USSR" VESTNIK s-Kh. NAUKI. 1960. No 3. pp 109-115.

Shul'gln. A. H. "Klimnt pochvy 1 ego regulirovonlyc" [The ell-nee
of the 8011 and Its Regulation]. Leningrad, Gidroneteo1zdat. 1972.
342 pp.

Yekovlev, N. N. "Klinet 1 ztnoetoykoet' ozinny pehenitey" [climate
and "inter Hardiness of "inter Wheat], Leningrad. Gidroleteoizdet.
1966. 619 pp.

Benkove, M. A.; Repka, J. A. "Contribution to the Orgenogeneeie of
winter Hheut Under the Cond1t1one of Southern Slovekje. Sb.

vyeokej ekoly Polnohoepodereky v Nitre. Agronomicke fekulte. Nitra-
Prehe, 196‘, p. 65-72.

Stuchura. T. Hypzenie ozooz.-"Ochrone roalin". 1969. No 13. pp 16-18.

Spnldon. 8.; Repka. J. A.; Benkove. H. A. "Horphophieiological
Study of Hinter Hheut During Cryptovegetetion" Biologteke
Prece. 1970. Vol 16. No 7. pp 1-b9.

Selcheve, c. "V"skhu nyekoy prolenu ne evobodniyte andnokielini
prez vrelye na perezinuvenete ne zinnete pehenitee" Sofiye, Izd.
nu Bolsarekato Akadeniye na naukete. 1961. 60 pp.

OOPYRIGIIT: Gidromtcoizdet. 1977

11772

CSO:

8166l06b9

End

180

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY