APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00080R0001000100‘3-2
FOR UFFILIHL USE ONLY

JI’RS L/8236

22 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SchNces
(FOUO 4/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010043-2
Ni )‘i'l'Z

IPRS publications contain Information primarily from foreign
newspapers, perltnliealn and books. but also from news agency
lrnnsmlsninns and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; thoae irum English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original ﬁtrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
(l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but haVe been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reggrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.3. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, v.5. Government Printing Office, washington, D.C.
20602.

indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, wooster. Ohio, 66691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
i000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
I5. Nuwkunny Noun

    

 
 

Id. Mum-us

rlu- report contains information on aerospace medicine. asrotechnology. bionics
:qu bioacoustics. biochemistry. biophysics. environmental and ecological
problems. iood technology. microbiology. epidemiology and inunology,

marine biology. niiltnry medicine. physiology. public health. toxicology.
rmliohiology. veterinary medicine. behavioral science. human engineering.
psychology. psychiatry and related fields. and scientists and scientific
organizations in biomedical fields.
TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BIOMEDICAL ANO BEHAVIORAL SCIENces
(FOUO 4/79)

CONTENTS PAGE

GENETICS

Modern Embryology on the Road to Genetic Engineering in
Anilnls

(K.G. Gazaryan, A.A. Ynzykov; VESTNIK NOSKOVSKOGO
UNIVQRSITETA. No 3. 1978) ............................ l

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

Awarding of Gold Medals and Prizes of the USSR Academy of
Sciences

(VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR, No 11, 1978) ............ 13

Reference and Bibliographic-Abstract Publications of Scientif-
ic Research institutes Specializing in Biology (A Survey)
(6.5. Yukovs. 6.8. Lozovskayn; NAUCHNO-TEKNNICNBSKAYA
INFORMATSIYA. No 10, 1978) ........................... 15
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

GENEI‘ I (28

MODERN EMERYULOGY ON THE ROAD TO GENETIC ENGINEERING IN
ANIMALS

Moscow VESTNIK MOSKOVSKOGO UNIVERSITETA in Russian No 3, 1978
pp 36-44

[Article by K.G. Cazaryan and A.A. Yazykov, Department of
Embryology, Moscow University]

[Text] At the present time, we are more acutely aware of the

need to utilize breakthroughs in basic biology to solve applied
problems. For example, genetic engineering of bacteria promi-
ses in the near future to change fundamentally the technology
utilized in the microbiological industry. However, signifi-
cantly more important practical problems, which require solu-
tion, are connected to discovery of methods to alter the geno-
type of higher organisms, such as plants, animals, and man.
Current methods of genetic engineering used on bacteria as yet
cannot be directly applied to these higher organisms; neverthe-
less, individual attempts to introduce genetic material in so-
matic cells of higher organisms have already been carried out
(Aposhian, 1970; Qaspa, Aposhian, 1971). A more general approach
to genetic engineering in higher organisms is outlined in the
current methods of experimental embryology. These methods are
similar to those used in the fields of molecular biology and
molecular genetics, in which there have already been signifi-
cant achievements in understanding the structure and function

of the genetic apparatus. Experimental embryology has been con-
cerned for a long time with explaining the interrelationship and
interdependency between the formation of separate components
which comprise a developing organism--the multi-ccllular phase

of growth. Currently, embryologists have directed more atten-
tion to the period of development when an organism is represented
by a moneccllular phase--the reproductive cell. Based on compre-
hension of the fundamental importance of this stage in the develop-
ment of multicellular organisms, it has become increasingly more
evident that one potentially succcsful mode of intervention in

l

I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

the genome of animal-z hill be through the ovum.

EmbryOIOgists have already begun to manipulate ova and nuclei

of somatic Cells in animals. Research on transplantation of

the nucleus, done over the past 40 years, has led to the ela-
boration of precise methods for surgery on individual cells.
Successful experiments to enucleate ova of amphibians (Porter,
1939) and experiments to develop techniques for nuclear trans-
plantation (Lopashov, 1945) provided the foundation for expan-
sion of research in this direction. These experiments initially
led scientists to conclude that in order to understand the mech-
anism of cell differentiation in individual organs and tissues

of an organism, they would have to explain the genetic changes
which occur in the nuclei of cells formed by differentiated

ova in a multicellular organism. in 1952, the genetic potential
of the nuclei of frog blastule cells was successfully tested by
transplanting them in enucleated ova. These ova, which contained
the nuclei of somatic cells of early embryos, developed into
normal frog larvae. Thus, by using egg cytoplasm, it was possi-
ble to restimulate the nuclei of several blastule cells which
subsequently proved to be genetically capable of accomplishing
normal development (hrigvs, King, 1052). Recently, these ex-
periments to reprogram the somatic nuclei b using ova have sti-
mulated a series of studies in different la oratories. The con-
tinuing efforts of embryologists have been directed at working
out new research techniques, selecting new models, analyzing

cell nuclei which pertain to various organs, and explaining the
molecular-biologic basis for the reprogram process. Presently,
by transplanting nuclei to ova, scientists have succeeded, to ,
varying degrees, in reprogramming the genome of somatic cells

in at least nine amphiiian species (Briggs, King, 1952; Lehman,
1955; .‘itroyeva, Nikitina, woo; Gurdon 1962b; Siadeéek, Hazakova-
Stefanova, 1964; Subtelny, 1965; Nikitina, 1969; and others),

in one insect species (drosophila) (Illnensee, 1969), and just
recently, in one type of bony fish (loacn) (King, Gazaryan, 1978).

Even as early as 1957, scientists understood that, depending on
the extent of cell differentiation during embryogenesis, the
number of nuclei, which after transplantation to the ova could
assure develo ment, decreased. The more advanced the embryonic
stage to which the cell is connected-~the nucleus donor-- the
earlier the development of the functioning ovum can be interrupted.
in a majority of cases, development of such ova was halted at one
of the intermediate stages: from thebeﬁnning of subdivision to
the larval stage (hriggs, King, 1957). Similar results were ob-
tained in a number of recent studies. Gurdon (Gordon et. a1.,
1958) was the first scientist to obtain grown Spur frogs from

ova in which somatic cell nuclei, taken from embryos at differ-
ent stages of growth, were transplanted. Soon after Gurdon's

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICTM. USE ONLY

work was reported, a paper appeared which described obtaining
mature frogs from ova with nuclei taken from intestinal cells

of amphibious larvae (Curdon, l962b). Somewhat latter, it was
shown that ova with nuclei transplanted from the intestines of
amphibbui larvae could develop into sexually mature and fertile
specimens(Gurdon,Uch1inger, 1966). At the same time, in experi-
ments to achieve interspecies transplantation of nuclei in amphi-
bians, nuclear-cytoplasmic hybrids were grown which reached the
early stages of development (Moore, 1958; Gurdon, 1962a). The
important achievements of work in transplantation of somatic
nuclei in enucknted ova has broad application to mass production
of transplanted nuclei used in cloning techniques. Animals with
the same genotype can be obtained by cloning, i.c. genetic copies
of one species. The genetic identity of such animals was con-
firmed by cross-transplantation of skin sections to test tissue
compatibility (Simnett, 1964). Transplanation of nuclei from
cells of mature donors was accomplished in 1966: nuclei from
frog liver, brain and blood cells, and mouse liver cells were
tranSplanted in enucleated frog ova. These ova did not develop
but the inceition of DNA synthesis was recorded in them (Graham
et.al., 1966). Subsequently, this line of research was also
successful in our country. Kidney, lung, and skin cells were
placed in culture, and then were used as nuclei donors. As a
result, in 5-12 percent of cases, amphibian larvae were ob-
tained. Histological analysis of the larvae did not disclose
deviation from the norm. The basic theoretical conclusion

drawn from these studies was that cells of designated tissues
from a mature vertebrate animal contain nuclei which can be re-
programnd in ova and can msurc the development of all other
tissues and organs, at least until the larval stage (Lashey,
Gurdon, 1970). Just recently, it was successfully demonstrated
that nuclei from such highly differentiated (specific for the
synthesis of keratin) cells as those from the webbed f t of
mature frogs can be reprogrammed and can produce normal larvae
(Gordon, et.al., 1975). This line of research indicated that
the cytoplasm of an ovum is capable of altering the function

of a nucleus, which had previously undergone normal differen-
tiation. It has been suggested by researchers that the cyto-
plasm of an ovum acts to normalize the function of nuclei, sub-
ject to mutation or cancerous regeneration. Nuclei from adeno-
carciaomatous frog cells were transplanted in normal frog ova.
As a result, normal embryos were obtained and normal amphibian
larvae developed (MacKinnel et.al., 1969). Cytoplasm from ova
of a normal species of frog 9/+ was injected into ova of °/°
mutant axolotl, which in normal conditions develop only to the
gastrula stage. By this process, it was possible to partially
correct the genetic defects--the mutated ova acquired the abil-
ity to devc10p to the stage of amphibhn larvae (Briggs, Gustus,
1968). In mutant species of drosophila, researchers partially

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”bl-C ONLY

corrected the genetic disturnances (Okada, et.al., 1974). Based
on advances in research on amphibians, scientists are conducting
studies to perform similar work on mammalian ova. However, for
this model, it was necessary to overcome large numbers of techni-
cal problems, arising from tie small dimensions of the egg (in
amphibians an ovum is 1-2 mm, in mammals; in mic0\ 70 pH, in
rabbitsx 100 n“, in man ~lSQHMhnd0e specifics of intrauterine
deve10pment. Pregress in this direction was made posaible by
the development of relatively simple and standardized methods
for culturing, in synthetic media, of mammalian ova and embryos
inside an organism (Purshoftan, Pincus, 1961; hrinster, 1963;
New, Stein, 1964; Daniel, 1971). Also a reliable technique has
been worked out for transplanting early embryos in an organism
of an "adopted mother“ where their dchIOpment is then completed
normally. These systematic methods made possible earlier embry-
onic development in mammals by allowing direct observation of the
complete life cycle and use of the most varied kinds of experi-
mental intervention. Tarkowski (Tarkowski, 1961) suggested a
method for joining two early embryonic mice. Utilizing this
method, Hintz obtained more than 1,000 genetically mosaic mice
(allophenic mice), the tissues of which came from cells of two
different genotypes. Work with allophenic mice was based on
current clonal theories of organ and tissue development (Mintz,
1070). Experiments using surgical procedures on mammalian ova
were shown to be significantly more difficult. Such operations
required use of special apparatus and experienced handling of
microsurgical techniques. in 1966, Lin (Lin, 1966), using the
appropriate instruments, injected mouse ova with beef gamma-
globulin. The ova, after brief cultivation in artifical media,
were transplanted into the uterus of a mouse which subsequently
delivered a normal offspring. Soon after, Lin (Lin, 1967) suc-
cessfully extracted part of the cytoplasm from a fertilized
mouse ovum without harming its viability. After these studies,
Lin became interested in the possibility of conducting experi-
ments not only on embryos. but also on mammalian ova. In 1975,
surgical removal of one pronucleus from a fertilized mouse ovum
was accomplished. Haploid embryos which had reached the 50-
cell stage were obtained (Modlinski, 1975).

In the same year, hromhall (Bromball, 197$) succeeded by both
surgical and viral means in transplanting the nucleus of a so-
matic cell from an early rabbit embryo (a morula) to an ovum.
The transplantation was conducted without removing the nucleus
from the ovum recipient. Performing approximately 700 complex
operations, Bromhall observed that four spontaneously enucleated
ova developed normally and reached the 18-26 cellular stage.
After these experiments, scientists concluded that transplanta-
tion of a somatic nucleus into an enucleated mammalian ovum had
been successfully accomplished, evidenced by the resulting dee

I.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

velopment of an early rabbit embryo. Currently, experiments

on mammalian eggs are being conducted on the same methodologic
level used on amphibians. It is evident that the development

of surgical techniques appropriate for ova of laboratory mammals
will be an important step towards possible tranSplantation of
ova in agricultural animals and perhaps in man.

This series of experiments in embryology served as the founda-
tion of one of the most important theories in modern biology.
This theory asserts that a cemplete assembly of genes, required
for the construction of the entire organism, is contained in the
somatic cell of a multicellular organism. The genetic program,
contained in one somatic cell can be completely or partially
realized with the aid of the cytoplasm of the ovum. In essence,
this conclusion opens up new approaches to genetic engineering in
animals.

Two circumstances which have become practical reality in the
present day promise to sharply accelerate work to produce the
technOIOgy needed to perform genetic engineering in animals.

One is the wide spread application of basic advances in molecular
biology and molecular genetics, and the other is the development
of precision techniques, based on modern instrument technology.

The problem facing modern genetic engineering, no matter to which
subject it is applied, is comprised of two basic components: 1)
chemical enzymatic manipulation with DNA for the purpose of ob-
taining recombinant molecules and 2) selection of a "vector"
system which effects their introduction and integration into the
genetic apparatus.

This same complex of methods required to obtain recombinant mole-
cules apparently can be applied to both a pro- and a eukariotic
system. However, the limitations of their applicability to one
or another organism depends on the actual effectiveness of the
selected "vectors". Such limits are presently recognized and
these methods are used primarily for bacteria (Bayev, 1976).

It is still not entirely clear which will he the best vectors

to introduce elements into the genetic apparatus found in ova

and cukariotic cells.

ﬂased on the studies mentioned above, it is doubtful whether

the central mission of future genetic engineering in higher
organisms will be based solely on further understanding of the
ovum. At the present time, the ovum is the only monocellular
component during the formation of a multicellular organism through
which, by utilizing genetic engineering methods, one can effec-
tively influence the structure and genetic properties of an or-
ganism. Other suitable vectors are still unknown. This search

FOR OFFICIAL INF nmv
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-I ONLY

for vectors has led to experiments where animal ova were injected
with informational macromolecules, the components of the transcrip-
tional and translational apparatus. The ova were injected with
DNA, RNA, structural proteins and enzymes, regulatory proteins,
ribosomes and mitochondria; that is, any structural element of
the cytoplasm and nucleus capable of influencing in one way or
another the characteristics of the future species. It is parti-
cularly interesting to introduce components which could produce

a stable and specific influence on the reproductive apparatus;
DNA is such a component. Previously, studies conducted in many
laboratories to effect transformation in animals by means of in-
jecting DNA into a growing organism proved to be unsuccessful.
Experiments of direct or indirect introduction of DNA into ova
were significantly more promising. Successes Were achieved only
in experiments with inSeets. In a series of studies, carried out
in Fox's laboratory (Fox, Yoon, 1906; Fox, et. al., 1971) it was
clearly demonstrated that when drosophila eggs were injected with
DNA, the later penetrates them and appears to be included in their
genetic information. Authors came to the conclusion that the in-
tegration of DNA into a gene does not occur like the typical pro-
cess of transformation. Recently a report appeared about inacc-
tion of DNA inside an egg (Germeraad, 197C). Judging from t e
results, the injection was significantly more effective in this
experimental arrangement because DNA was integrated into the
gene. It is now clear that the technical obstacles have been
essentially overcome in experiments with insects. Evidently, in
the near future, we can expect successful transformation from
experiments where DNA is injected into ova of aher animals.

Following this work, it has been clearly shown that mRNA from
different animals (for v\nhplr, rabbits and mice) can be intro-
duced into the oocyte of amphibians and that this RSA is trans-
lated for a prolonged time (Gordon, et.al., 1973), forming com-
plete proteins. This resolved a very important question: the
translation apparatus in higher organisms does not possess a

high degree of speCificity and can be artifically combined with
mRNA, ribosomes, and translation factors from other, entirely
unrelated forms. Just recently, experiments were conducted to
introduce foreign mRNA into ova (Woodland, et.al., 1974). It

was shown that mRNA in rabbit hemoglobin, when injected in

large amounts into a frog egg does not impede the egg's develop-
ment and is actively translated in differentiated and mitotic
cells of an embryo. Evidently, in the near future, we can ex-
pect the introduction in ova of mRNA, an active substance which
may enter into specific structures or functionally interact with
components of differentiated cells. Considering that foreign
mRNA is not broken down in embryonic cells, one can expect a stable
manifestation of its effect for a significant period of embryonic
development. -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Experiments to introduce proteins into ova are still limited and
are preliminary in nature. We also expect interesting results
from this work. The introduction of proteins which serve as
functional regulators of genetic activity (histones, nonhistones,

proteins, RNA polymerase etc.) may alter dominant genes during
the course of early embryogenesis.

One of the most significant results from these series of experi-
ments on ova is the conclusion that an ovum is capable of re-
taining its potential for growth and formation of a complete
multicellular organism after quite appreciable interference with
its strcture, to the extent of replacing the elements of its
genetic apparatus. It is still not entirely clear how far one

can go in altering the structures and organization of ova, but it
is already apparent that nature does impose some formidable limits
on this, providing the ovum with both the ability to resist these
influences and with the ability for self regulation.

he now turn our attention to several of the most important basic

and applied aspects of developments ﬂithe field of genetic engi-
neering in ova.

Presently, great success has been achieved in research on the
molecular organization and structure of the genetic ap aratus

of the eukaryote. The structure of many proteins has Keen studied
in depth, the sequence of RNA nucleotides has been successfully
decoded and the sites for individual genomes appreciated. Many
protein and nucleotide components of the nucleus and cytoplasm
are now understood. These components participate in the mech-
anisms for storing,hterprcting, transfcring, and realizing re-
productive information. While significant progress has been made
in structural understanding, very little is known about the conv
crete function of the macromolecules which form the basis of the
genetic apparatus of a eukaryote (histoncs, nonhistone proteins
repeated in the DNA sequence, "redundancies" in the DNA sequence,
heterOgeneous nuclear RNA and others). At this time, the funda-
mental principles of gene function (recessive, dominant) in the
organisms they determine remain unknown. Also, it is unclear
whether genes act on their analogues as genetic regulators, in~
hibitors, or promotors. by experiments on bacteria, researchers
are now beginning to understand the function of different com~
ponents in the genetic apparatus of prokaryotic analogues. Ap ar-
ently, because the characteristics of the eukaryotic system (tie
diploid genome, characterized by a double set of chromosomes in
somatic cells, split between transcription and translation func-
tions and other arrangements) complicate the mechanism of gene
experession in higher organisms, the genetic-physiologic approach
to understanding the mechanism for gene expression in bacterial

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fun OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cells (a prukaryotic system) is not as effective when applied

to multicellular organisms. Thus, new approaches are required

to study the cukaryotic system. Further elaboration and improve-
ment of genetic engineering methods in ova will allow scientists
to trace in detail the function of genetic substances which are
introduced in oocyte structures. Also. scientists foresee the
elaboration of effective and precise methods for replacement of
the internal structures of mammalian ova from which an embryo
develops. The ovum is a convenient test system for study of

the structural components of the genetic apparatus and the po-
tential and latent reserve of genetic resourCes found in them.
Utilizing this approach, scientists may be able to trace how ex-
ternally introduced components are integrated into the genetic
apparatus of the recipient, how they interact with its components,
how they are transmitted to daughter cells in the course of cellu-
lar division, and what impact this will have on the viability of
the mature specimen. Thus, genetic engineering of ova opens up
uhroad possibilities for investigation into the function of com-
ponents in the genetic apparatus of higher vertebrate animals.
Jhe extensive study of the elements which make up the genetic
apparatus in ova aids in understanding which components appear

to possess "vector" properties. One can assume that viruses and
mitochondria will prove to have "vector" properties. Ribosomal
genes have not been ruled out as vectors nor have repeated se-
quences of DNA. Injection of viruses into ova-~a highly promising
way to identify which elements are candidates for vectors--will
aid in selection and then introduction of non-pathogenic (or
weakly pathogenic) viruses into the genome of forming tissues

and organs. Based on the selective character of the virus-cellu-
lar relationship, it is possible to transfer genes to different
tissues by this method. The mitochondria of a eukaryote, the
genome of which has relatively small dimensions and is not too
different in organization from the DNA of bacterial plasmid, can
become a good object for a plication of genetic en ineering tech-
niques. Reproduction of tne mitochondria is relat§vely automatic
by the nucleus and they can be propagated and transfened to a
number of generations of tissue and organ cells. The process

by which the mitochondrial genome is expressed provides a good
way to study the general process of genome integration of the
nucleus because the mitochondria lack histones which are capable
of nonspecifically suppressing the activity of the genes.

Research on transplantation of the nucleus from cancerous cells
to an ovum (McKinnel, et.al., 1969) and fusion of cancerous cells
with early embryos (Hintz, Illmensce, 1975) present extremely
interesting possibilities. In similar experiments, different
forms of cancerous cells are being tested to ascertain the re-
versibility of nonreversibility of changes which occur in their
genetic apparatus.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'tlll OFFICIAL "SIC (lii'lh‘

If recent progress in the field of transplantation of somatic
nuclei to ova of warm-blooded animals is continued successfully,
then genetic copies of higher organisms will give modern experi-
mental medicine unique models for solutions to therapeutic, immuno-
logic and behavior problems. The resulting genetic copies of agri-
cultural animals will allow retention and propagation of rare
genetic qualities, useful for man.

lbns, experimental embryology has already been used to solve some
of the fundamental and applied problems which face modern biology.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
bayev, A.A. 1970. Genetic engineering. --"Nature", No. l, 8.

Lopauhov, G.V. 194$. bxperiments to study the potential of the
nucleus in blastules of tritons by transplantation methods.
Abstracts of work of the biological section of the USSR Academy
of Sciences. Moscow, pp 88—89.

Nikitina, L.A. 1909. Studies of progressive Changcw 1a ti. ireleus
nf ectoderms and their off-spring by the method of nuclear trans-
ylantation (experiments on tailess amphibians) (H. viridis, B.

burn, a. arvalis, R. temporaria).--"Cytology", 11, No. S, 542-553.

Stroyeva, 6.6. Nikiiina, L.A. 1960. Transplantation of nuclei
frnn amphibians and its significance for study of the problems
of differentiation.~-"Journal of General biology", 21, No. S,
335-540.

King. 3.M., Gazaryan, K.G. 1978. Transplantation of nuclei of
somatic cells in fertilized eggs of bony fish (for example, the
groundling Hisgurnus fossilis (L.).--"0ntogenesis", 9, No. 1,
85-90.

Aposhian V. 1970. The use of DNA gene therapy--the need for
experimental approach and implieation.--"Perspective in Biol.
and Wed.", 14, S 1, 98-108.

uriggs, R., King, T. 1952. Transplantation of living nuclei
from blastula cells into enucleated frogs eggs.--"Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. USA”, 38, 455.403.

briggs, R., King, T. 1957. Changes in the nuclei of differen-
tiating endoderm cell as revealed by nuclear transplantation.--
"J. Norphol.", 100, 209-311.

briggs, n., Gustus, J.T. 1908. Partial characterization of the
component from normal eggs, which corrects the maternal effect

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of gene H in the Mexican Axolotl.-‘"J. hxp. :ool.", 147, 105-110.

hrinnler, R.6. 19h}. A method for in vitrn cultivation of mouse
uva from two-cell to h1astocyst.--"pr. Cell. Rea.", 32, 205-208.

hromhall, J.D. 1975. Nuclear transplantation in the rabbit egg.
--"Nature", London, 258, N 5537, 719-721.

Daniel, h.c. 1971. lethods in mammalian embryology. K.Y.--London.

Fox, A.S., Yoon, 5.9. 1900. Specific genetic effects of DNA in
Prosophila melanogaster.--"Genctics", 53, 897-911.

Fax, A.S., Yoon, S.h., Gelbert, W.M. 1971. DNA-induced trans-
formation in drosophila: Genetic analysis of transformed stocks.--
"Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.", Washington, 68, 342-356.

Germeraad, S. 1976. Genetic transformation in drosphlla by micro-
injection of hNA.--"Natnrc", 202, July 15, 229-231.

Graham, U.F., Arms, K., Gordon, J.h. The induction of "SA syn-
thesis by frou egg cytoplasm.--"Pevclop. 9101.", 14, 349-381.

Gnrdon, J.h. 1902a. The transplantation of nuclei between two
species of Xenopns.--"Dchlop. Biol.”, 5, 68-83.

Gordon, J.“. l962h. Adult frog derived from the nuclei of
sunnl somatic cc1ls.~-"Devclop. Biol.", 4, 256-273.

Gordon. J.U., ulsdale, T., Fischhcrg, H. 1958. Sexually mature
individuals of Xenopns laevis From the transplantation of singl
somatic nuclei.--"Naturc", 182, 64-65.

Gordon, J.h., Laskey, R.A., Reeves, 0.R. 1975. The developmental
capacity of nuclei transnlantcd from kcratinized skin cells of
adult frogs.--"J. Embryol. Exptl. Morphol.", 34, N 1, 93-112.

Gordon, J.a., Lingrcl, J.h., Harbaix, G. 1973. Message stability
in injected frog oocytes long life of mammalian alpha- and beta-
nlobin messages.--"J. ”01. “101.", 80, 539-551.

Gordon, J.B., Uchlinger, V. 1966. "Fertile" intestine nuclei.--
"nature", 210, 1240-1241.

lilmensee, K. 1969. Transplantation of embryonic nuclei into
unfertilized eggs of Hrosophila melangaster.--”Nature" (London),
219, 1208-12219.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ill-TIMI“. urn-2 ”NLY

Leakey, R.A., Gurdon, J.". 1970. Genetic content of adult 50-
matic cells tested by nuclear transplantation from cultured
cells.--"Nature", 228, 1332-1334.

Lehman, H.h. l955. 0n the development of enucleated Triton
eggs with an injected hlastula nucleus.--"Biol. Bull,", 108, 138-
150.

Lin, T.P. 1900. Microinjection into mouse eggs.--"Science", 151,
333-337.

Lin, T.P. 1907. Micropipettinn cytoplasm from the mouse cgg.--
"Nature", 216, 102-103.

Hckinnel, R.G., veggins B.A.. Lahnt, D.D. 1969. Transplantation
of plurhpotential nuclei from triplexd frog tumors.--"Scieace".
105, 394-390.

Mintz, h. 1970. Gene expression in allophenic mice.--1n: Control
mechanism in expression of cellular phenotypes. FyLr. Int. Soc.
Cell. Biol., v01. 9, N.Y.. p. 15-42.

Mintz, h., lllmensee, K. 1975. Normal genetically mosaic mice
produced from malignant teratocarcinoma cells. --"Proc. ﬂat. Acad.
Sci. USA", 72, 3585-3589.

Modlinski, J.A. 1975. Haploid mouse embryos obtained hy micro-
surgical removal of one pronuclcus.--"J. hmbryol. prtl. Morphol.",
33, H A, 897-905.

Moore, J.A. 1958. Transplantation of nuclei be. .en Rana pipiens
and Rana sylvatica.--"Exp. Cell. Res.", 14, 532-540.

New, n.A.T., Stein, K.F. 1904. Cultivation of postimplantation
mouse and rat embryos on plasma clots.--"J. hmhryol. hxptl.
imamoh",12,10h1n.

Ukada, M., Leinman, G.A., Schneiderman, H.A. 1974. Repair of a

genetically caused defect in oogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster
hy transplantation of cytoplasm from wild-type eggs and hy injec-
tion of pyrimidine nucleosides.--"lwvelop. Biol.", 37, N 1, 55-62.

Porter, K.k. 1939. Androgenetic development of the egg of Rana
pipiens.--"lliol. liull.", 77, 233-257.

Purshoftan, 5., Pincus, G. 1961. In vitro cultivation of mammalian
eggs.--"Anat. Rec.", 140, 51-55.

QaSpa, D.K., Aposhian, V. 1971. DNA and gene therapy. Transfer

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR (ll‘l'lClM. USE ONLY

of mouur DNA in human and nunsv embryonic cells by polyomn
pseudo-viruses.--"Pruc. Nat. Acad. “Cl. USA", hF, H 10, 2345-2349.

Simnelt, J.H. lﬂhd. Hintocnmnntihility in the Platannn, Xeno-
pnn lnevis lacvis (handin), following nuclear transplantation.
--"|xp. Cell. Ren.", 33, 731-239.

Slddeéek, 2., Mazaknvn-Qtefannvd. lﬂhd. Kuclear transplantation
in Triturus vulnnris (L.).--"Foliu Viol." (Prnhn), 10, 152-154.

bnhtelny,s. 1905. Single transfern of nuclei from llfferenti-
ntinu endoderm cells into ennelented and nucleate Rana pipicns
enga.--"J. Fxp. 2001.", l59, 47—58.

lurLuwskl, A.K. 1901. Mouse Chimaeres developed from fused
eug5.--"Natnre" (London), 19", 857-3ﬁ0.

noudlund, H.R., nurdun, J.n., Lingrel, J.ﬂ. 1"74. The trans~
lutiun or mammalian glohin mRNA injected Into fertilized eggs
or Xenopus lacvin. ll. The distribution of glohin synthesis
in different tissues.--"Dcve10p. Viol.", 39, 134-140.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Moslovskogo univer<itetn, "Vestnik
Hoskovskogo universitcta", 1978

9139
CS‘H 1870

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:Iifii’Lfi'i'lil'iii AND iiCil'ZIi‘l'lFlL' UN’MNI'AA'I'IHNS

AHAiiliiN-Z OF GOLD MHDAIJ'. AN“ i'liiZl-Iﬁ OF THE USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
Hoseov ‘f'rI-TNIK MADENH NAUK 553“ in Russian No ll, 1978 pp 139-li10

i'l‘vzt} Gold Medal lneni l. l. Hechnikov to M. S.
(Iilynrov. The Presidium of the Academv Of Science“
of the ”SC-H hm: awarded the ”old Medal imeni

l. l. i-iechnikov for 19'!!! to Academician M-rkuriy
:‘.«-r.:vyvrvlch GiLYMiUV for a series of papers on

”I" ”Obits "Patterns and Directions of i’hylo-
1"‘m‘:‘. :2.

Academician H. 5. (Silynrov is one of the greatest
:;|eeinli:zt:: in the field of evolutionary morphology. ’
phyiouenetics. taxonomy and ecology.

'i‘he scrim; that earned the medal deals with problems
nf the evolution of terrestrial invertebrates. Com-
parative mmlysir 0f materials obtained in recent
decades -- not only on the morpholouy of inverte-
brute-.2 on different stages of their ontogenesis. but also on their physiology.
biochemistry. ecology and ethology -- enables understanding of the paths of
evolution of invertebrates that are associated with the change of habitats

in the course of phylogenesis. with a transition from an aqueous mode of
life through habitation in soil and similar substrates to life on the surface
of dry land. convergent changes of organization have taken place in organi-
mtiuz. in different phylogenetic branches of invertebrates. These changes
are -.I'-'.-.'rmincd by Kenerul features of organization previously worked out.

and by the principles of maximum effectiveness of basic functions under the
new rnnaiitionn of the environment.

 

M. .1. ’iilynruv examined chances in coverings. the respiratory system. the
excretory system. paths of protein and purine cutabolism. methods of insemi-
nation and other peculiarities of representatives of different groups of
terrestrial arthropods that belomt to different phylogenetic branches. lie
:zhovnd that the process of phylogenetic changes with the transition to life
on dry land is characterized by a definite direction of the changes in organs
and me: be evaluated as renular. The course of phylogenesis is directed by
changes in relation: with the environment and is regulated by the feedback
principle.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR "FFICIAL "Sh HNLY

Prize inu‘ni l. l. Meclmikov in R. V. l'etrov. 'lhc Presidium
' of thv Avndvud nr Seivhcvn of th- 1E3” hnu awarded the
Prize inrrni I. i. Mrrvhnlk-w For l‘l‘!“ in the nmmzt of

:mm mini-7:: in lic-miwr ni In" Academy of Medical Sciences
ni‘ the iiiiﬁii lin‘m Vii:l..~--n-:il'h PHEIMV iinsJJtutl: of Biophysics
oi' the l-iinints-y -;i‘ i‘uhlln li-nl‘H) ni‘ tin- mm) for the
mnournph "Mannheim-z; nnrl illUﬂiiNMfLWIvLI(‘5.u

liem Viki-\t'wvivh i‘Mruv deal: with Iiw mm. tun-lea] innuer.
r-I' immunw'emtiuxa. incumpntil‘i lity of genetically differing
ti:=.-:uen (i-mumplnnta'inn lmmunugvrneticr.) nnd the genetica
of antibody wheels.

 

"Ju- mnunrm-h "immunrnlory and lmmmosemticn" :zherir. light on thr. current
::|.9|i." of theoretical ilrJnnnoiOPJ and it:' npplicntlon to clinical practice.
The hunk examinen the 'l'- uni il-ngatems or immunity. iymlhocytv.‘ receptors.
interactions of cells in immune "motions. mechanlnmc or tranaplantation
immunity. immunological tolerance. genetic control or the immune response.
'hc concept or immur..-loglcu.l nuperviuion and other emblem. The book given
:quwinl attention to those aspect: of modern theoretical and experimental
ixrmunuion than. actually may have (or already do hnvc) practical value.

Ui‘ conuitlcrnhle intercr-t From this standpoint are the lilvirionn or the book
that deal with functional evaluation or the T- anti B-syntcm of lymphocytes:
in clinical practice. with inborn anomalies iimunodcl‘icita) in children.
'iti'Mimihlm'.‘ disorders, immunolupy and immunoncneticu or tmorn. innunodeprea-
..mn therapy.

'i‘n-- anilmr of the book and his coworkers have made a great contribution to
the elaboration or nuch problems as the interaction of trunk cells vith
lymphocytes. genetic control of the immune response usainat leptoapirea
and against :zhcep erythrocytes. imunology of cellular chimcriam. inborn
inmunodei‘icltc. the lemma reopomie in aging.

' i‘xiliGiiT: izdatel'stvo "Naulin". "Veotnik Akadcmii nault SSSR". 1978

bole
(780: [8’0

16
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

UDC: 002.66:57

REFERENCE AND BIBLIOGRAPHIC-ABSTRACT PUBLICATIONS 0F SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
INSTITUTES SPECIALIZING IN BIOLOGY (A SURVEY)

Moscow NAUCHNO-TBKHNICNESKAYA INFORMATSIYA in Russian No 10, 1978 pp 21-27
[Article by G. S. Yukova and c. S. lozovskaya, submitted 20 Jul 77)

[Text] The Information publications of scientific research institutes spe-
cinlizinu in biology under the USSR Academy of Sciences and academies of

Union republics are usually represented by reference books, bibliographic

and abstract collections. All these publications are printed in few

copies and have limited distribution. Nevertheless, they are very important
to institutes, since they cover an'I actively disseminate the main achievements
in scientific research conducted at the institutes, they aid in coordinating
research and establishing scientific contacts. Reference and information
books are mainly departmental. The contents of such publications are
directly related to the activities of the corresponding institutions [1].

in this work, we shall discuss only reference-information and bibliographic-
abstract publications of biological institutes. There are no standardized
rules on compilation of such information publications. We have directed
ourselves more to drawing attention to the publications, to demonstrate

their importance and timeliness, rather than generalization of the knovhou in
publication of information collections by some biological scientific research
institutes, singling out their main structural and meaningful elements,
definition of their functional and goal-oriented purpose.

Development of standard plans for making up information publications of the
same type (optimization and unification of their structure) plays an important
role in refining information publications. The starting point is to classify
the information publications, and this is based on analysis of the flows of
original sources that are processed, methods of processing them, subject

[goal] orientation and area of application of the information publications [2].
The lack of unified specifications with respect to the structure of reference

and information editions results in loss of necessary information and un-
warranted increase in size of the publications.

15
FOR OFFICIAL PSE ONLY
FUR ilFl-‘li IM. lliil’ “NIX

Rvi't‘rt'nri- lhmkn

Several biological institutes (Table I) have published reference books [3-21],
in which information in given about the structure. scientific personnel.
scientific research and scientific organizational activities of institutes.
These publications have different titles: ”Reference hunk.” "Brief Informa-
tion." "Prospectus--Reforence hunk." "Prenpectnn." in some of the books.

the type of publication is not indicated, either in the title er introduc-
tion [6. 7. 9-12. 17-19]. Thin compels bibliographern to add explanatory
words to the bibliographic description. for example. "essay." The inaccu-
racy of the bibliographic description makes it difficult to search for
publications.

luhtnmltlun publications are a means at comnunlrntion between specialists of
nlmilar and related branches of science, a sort of guide book for institutes.
Since a reference book should make it easier for scientists visiting from
other countries to become acquainted with an institute and it snould aid in
establishing contacts, it would be reasonable to publish reference books in
several languages ind at least two. For example. the reference books of the
institute of Protein and institute of Developmental biology are published in
Russian and English [22, 23]. The annual of the Laboratory of Molecular
Biology (ltaly) [2A]. in which information reflected in domestic reference
books is included along with abstracted information. is published in two
languages also.

Retercnce books in which there is a separate heading indicating the address
of the institute. complete name. surname and patronymic of management per-
sonnel and their business telephone numbers are given are the most convenient
for users of information. Exclusion of such information from reference
books. as was done in publications of several institutes [17, l9]. minimizes
the communicative value thereof.

information about the scientific personnel of institutes is particularly im-
portant. it offers an idea about the scientific manpower and scientific
potential of an institute. It must be noted that the roster of scientific
personnel of an institute is of interest not only to scientific personnel

of other institutes. but information workers dealing with analysis of flows

of infornation and survey-analytical work. Such information helps obtain
a bearing on the flows of records. assess the significance of information

and, to some extent. determine the prospects of development of a problem
being worked on by a specific team.

The reference books of several institutes [3, 4. 8] list the scientific
personnel of laboratories (laboratory head. senior and junior scientific
workers), but in most such books inforsstion is given only about laboratory
heads [ll-id. [7-19], whereas no information about scientific personnel is

given at all in some reference books [21], which makes informal inter-
institute contacts difficult.

16
FOR OE‘FXCIM. l'SE OSLY
Table i.

Publishing organization
and title of reference
book
lnst.Developnentni Biol.
"Brief Reference Book"

[3|

 

 

institute of Protein,
"Drier Information:

[4|

inst. General Genetics.
"Brief Reference Book"

l5]
inst.Holec.Biology [6|

lnnt.Plunt Physiology [7|
lnst.Hvulution.Morph. &

Ecology of Aninnls [8]

institute of Physiology,
Kiev [9]

Institute of Biochemistry
[10)

inst.Botnny ineni N. c.
Kholodnyy Ill]

inst. of Physiology.
Yerevan [12]

insi.Cytol. and Genetics.
"brief Reference Book"
ilJl

 
  
  

+ essay(intro)

Information

about

management
personnel

   

     

Director
Deputy dir.
Sci.secret.
lnst.address
Director
Deputy dir.
Sci. seer.
Address

Director
Deputy dir.
Sci.secr.

Address
Director

Director

Director
Deputy dir.

Sci.secr.
Address

Director

Director

Director

Director

Director
Deputy dir.
hi.sur.
Chief en-
gineer

17

Information

about

       

scientific
personnel

   

 

Lab h

Sr sci.
Jr sci.

G.

0

Lab hd.
Sr sci.
Rr sci.

Lnb hd.
[head]

Lab hdc ’
group
leaders
Lab hd.

Lab hd.
Sr sci.

Jr sci.

Lab hd.

Lab hd.
Authors
of cit.
works

lab hd.
Stsff

Lnb hd.
Authors
of cit.

works
st hd.

FOR CFFXCIAL ESE OXLY

        

   

main direc- a

tions of
sci.res.

 

Reierence books or biological institutes of USSR Academy of
Sciences and Union republic academies

   
            
 

for some
labs

for some
labs

11st of main
publications
lust. of Hieruhiuluuy. + Director lab hd. + + u +
"l'ruupm'tuﬂ" I M]

Inst. of Photonynthesis. + Director lab hd.. r + - -
"Prospectus" [ibl Addless Group

leaders
lust. of Photosynthesis, * Director lab hd. + + - -
"urief information" |l6| ﬁroup

leaders
lust. prerim. Plant Biol.. + Director lab hd. + + - +
ll7l
institute of Zoology + Director Dept hda. + + - -
[IHI Deputy dlr.

Sei.seeret.
Address

Institute of Botany. + Director Dept hds. + + - +
Tashkent [19]
last. Physi0108Y. + Director Lab hd. + + - +
Novosibirsk. "brief Ueputy dir. Group
Reference Book." [20] Sci.secr. leader

Sr Sci.
lust.Proteln Research. + Director - + + - +
"Prospectus," [21] Address

_ _--— -—----—-——-- .---------_---------------_---—---------—----_-—----------

Most of the reference books analyzed had tne following structure: 1) intro-
duction (historical essay); 2) information about scientific research activity
uf different laboratories; 3) information about the work of general institute
departments (experimental stations, libraries, etc.); 5) main publications

of the institute (see Table l).

the introduction usually sheds brief light on the history of establishment

and development of the institute, main problems and directions of scientific
research at the institute. the most important achievements of scientific
research. scientific and public activities of the institute, introduction

of results of SR [scientific research} in the national economy, international
scientific ties. As we have indicated aane. information about management

and the administrative body of the institute is also given in the introduction
in most reference books.

information about SR in laboratories (departments) is the main part of the
reference books. There is a logical order of laboratories described. and
in some cases it is explained in the introduction, while in others it is
easy to comprehend from the meaning. Grouping laboratories according to
similarity of projects worked on is the most informative. and for the
users the most ronVenient presentation is to have problems that are worked
on by several laboratories listed in separate headings [10, 13].

18
FJR HYFlCINL ?$F ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"hen preparing reference books for publication. special attention should be
given to heading title». which reflect meaning and make the presentation
orderly. clear and understandable [25, 26]. and also activates the reader's
attention. accelerating the process of transmitting information [27].

in most of the reference books we analyzed. the main objectives of scientific
research activity in all scientific and scientific-engineering departments

of the institu‘e are reflected distinctly and rather briefly; there is indi-
cation nf the objects and methods of investigation, main achievements of SR.
HoweVer. in some reference books [6, 10]. very detailed and expanded informa-
tion is given about SR; the books are oversaturated with terminology. Super-
fluous details. like superfluous brevity. are equally detrimental to infor-
mativeness of the reference books. The degree to which the information is
condensed should depend on the object tr which it addresses itself [25. 26].

the reference books of some institutes contain information about scientific-
engineering departments and services [3-5]. international scientific ties.
introduction of scientific achievements in the national economy [19] and
experimental collections [16].

in some manuals [5. 7, lO. 12]. there is information about the prospects of
development of SR. and in some cases these are long-term forecasts (in the
manual of the Institute of General Genetics are given the long-term plans
for development of laboratory projects over a 25-year period: 1976 to 1999);
occasionally [12]. the plan for SR development covers a 5-year period; in

some cases [7. 10]. plans for future research at some laboratories are des-
cribed without indication of target dates. Such information is of interest
both to scientists and information workers; they aid in coordinating research.
establishing contacts. and they point to the possible routes of information
retrieval. Long-term forecasts are also of interest because they are made
with consideration of development of the ideas and methods of research. as
Hell as possible appearance of major discoveries in a given or related

branch of science.

In some reference books. at the end of the book or after the information
about individual laboratories. there is a list of the main publications of
the staff of an institute or laboratory. These bibliographies include both
major publications of institute staff members (monographs, collections.
textbooks) and articles in periodicals. and even papers and summmries of
papers submitted for publication [13]. In anniversary editions of reference
books [6. 10], there are extensive bibliographies (monographs. collections.
textbooks and educational aids. popular scientific pamphlets. surveys.
author certificates. etc.). starting at the time the institute was founded.

They are usually listed in the guides of institutes that do not publish either
bibliographies or bibliographic-abstract collections. When compiling a

bibliography of the main publications, some manuals do not take into con-
sldcratlon the timeliness of some work or other and obsolescence of informa-

tion contained in it. Evidently. it is desirable to list the main publica-
tions in the reference book only if the institute does not publish biblio-
graphic abstract publications regularly.

19
FOR “FFKCXAL U52 ONLY
l-Oli iib‘FliflM. llh'l". UNLY

Mont oi the rrlerenrr bonkn analyted are a3-7o panen In length. Of course.
line -.|/..- ui 'Illi'll a manual uln'm-mln on [In- rank ui ilu- In:-.i ltnir, number of
lahoIntntI-u..nnliu'huttiiIr—terhniral drpailnuuﬂru If the size in larger.
duo In nuperilnonn Information (uhleh rnnld he very interesting but not
eannntial to the reference book). it in difficult to use these publications
an institute golden. Quite often. the nlzl oi a reference book is
increased by invluslnn of photographs. which are usually not very in-
iermatlve and of poor quality.

For the cake of comparison to reference books published by Soviet institutes.
we analyzed too referenCe books of lorelnn institutes: the one of the
Japanese institute of Genetics [28] and Muhreeht Laboratory of the Inter-
national Embryological lnntitule [29]. The information in theguidcof the
Japanese institute of Genetics in given in the following order: location

at the institute with indication oi munnJ of transportation; brief essay on
foundation and deVelopmcnt oi the institute. administrative-executive
apparatus and scientific personnel. scientific-technical and ancillary
departments. scientific departments (main problems and results of SR in
laboratory departmtatn). periodical publications of the institute (annual
bibliographic-abstract collection). in addition. some very important in-
formation is given in this guide about experimental collections at the
institute (bacterial strains. mutations of drosophila. strains and mutant
stock of laboratory animals. breeds. varieties. mutants of plants).

in the reference book published by the hubrecht Laboratory. there are data
about the status and objectives of the laboratory. brief historical informa-
tion about it. location of different departments, structure of the labora-
tory. administrative and scientific personnel. topics studied by scientific
departments. international prograns of SR. working conditions in the labo-
ratory for foreign scientists. There is a detailed description of the
central embryological collection, information service. scientific library
and reproduction of scientific materials. There is a brief summary in

this book. in German and French, it serves as a good guide to the labora-
tory and really takes into consideration the information needed by foreign
scientists visiting this laboratory.

The knouhow of foreign institutes can also be adopted in Soviet practice.
Evidently. for us the most valuable factor is to take into consideration the
information needs of specialists who wish to learn about an institute and
establish personal contacts. Expresnly such information is least reflected
in Soviet reference books. At the same time. there is much more thorough
and distinct coverage of scientific research activities at the institutes

in the Soviet guides. Adoption of foreign knovbou to publication of

Soviet reference books would improve the quality of these publications.
which are important to institutes. as well as their informativeness.
relevance and communicative role.

20
FOR 0Fr1ClAL 95$ ONLY
Hm Ill-TICIM. Illil-Z UNLV

Contlnuing Bibliographic-Abstract Publications

Publication of blhllugraphlc-nbstrnrt collections is practiced both in the
USSR and abroad; In them, emphasis is laid on the results of SR activities
of institutes within a specific, usually short, period of time. As a rule
the bibliographic-abstract publications are continuing editions, mostly
annual. These publications are useful in the following respects: 1) they
permit rapid familiarization with the results and status of SR, not only
of individual scientists, but the entire scientific team of an institute;
2) they publicize SR achievements of the institute; 3) there is less loss
of needed information related to scattering of publications; 6) they help
establish scientific contacts; 5) they help single out author teams.

He analyzed the continuing bibliographic-abstract publications of eight
Soviet and five foreign biological institutes.

In the last few years, several Soviet institutes have published annual bib-
liographic-abstract collections under various titles: “Results of Scientific
Hark.“ "Results of Scientific and Scientific Administrative Activity,“
"Abstracted Information About Completed Works," "Abstracts of Scientific
Research Papers," "List of Publications on the Problem of....," etc., i.e.,
the titles of the annuals, like those of the reference books, are quite
diverse [30-37] (Table 2).

hisome of the collections we scrutinized, the main part is the introduction,
in which there is a brief description of the structure of the institute

and main directions of its work, as well as the principle of classification
of abstracted information and extent to which it is complete.

The annotation to the collection plays the role of an introduction in the
annual of the Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Department of
USSR AS [Academy of Sciences] [32]. There is no introduction in the
collections of abstracts of the Institute of Microbiology and Virology

imeni D. K. Zabolotnyy [34], Institute of Photobiology [31] and Siberian
institute of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry [37]. This makes it diffi-
cult to retrieve and classify information, as well as to single out the main
directions of activities of an institute.

The collection published by the Institute of Marine Biology, Far East
Research Center, USSR as [36], contains rather comprehensive information
about the history of establishment of the institute, its structure, adminis-
trative-management and scientific personnel, as well as a general descrip-
tion of directions and results of SR conducted in different laboratories,
i.e., information that is usually contained in reference books. Evidently,
annual repetition of such information is hardly expedient, and inclusion
thereof in the annual is related, apparently, in this case to the fact

that this institute does not publish a specialized reference book.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cowquMOucu dauncovcou uo Spam Ac

acuuauonca A” noun-nunna uxuo: An
uuuuuanu >o>uam no :ouuuBhOuCH wauzuummano uo vogue: AN
uumuumaw UN:QMuwocos an sowuoavouucu Ag “so:

 

::o«uaan0ucu
acouuau= .m< “mm: sucaun.uon«m

  
 

 

 

 

 

I I I + anon: uoz cu weavuouuc I .SUnuown a .Ao«a>:m .uncn cwquonam

IIIII ashes mm _on =¢uu on uuuwucoium:
muuou nonmuwnan Huﬁ vorouansncs uo acoauuouuv youcao suuuooox uaqm yum
uo umwﬂ Nauuuonunnd< I I + alwwnmudnam cu wcqvuouu< + .m< «mm: ..H0un ocuuu: .uacu

 

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII |IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIllllllllqlllllll
_nn Aquov
o>uuq5p0ucuv :nauua on» :a we“

 

 
 

      
 
  

 

 

mayo: mm Ivoonn van muauocuu uo neounoum:
taxmaanaaca no meowuuouuv .m< mmm: .uoucoo zonaooox Huh:
I I I + a nonmannam Cu weavuouu< L .amanuu Hwawc< a ucuam .uacu
II - II|I Illjwﬂ‘ en
vwnwuananca mm :muuuuumn< mm: :.mm vouoaasou
a vosmwanan uo acoauuouuv uaon< :ouuqauOucw vauuuuuu
I .I .. + “H vouoaaaou cu weavuouu¢ I Ia<: ..H0uu> a .noaAOuuwx.un:H
I..I «anon . . . IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
nagmqanam “Ma No
”mud .xwvca nonuna _ mmoun ouauuunnu uo mucus
womumnmnaﬂa van mew“ cu .mxno: Iunwaov Hauauuzuuu Hana :mxuoz an we nuuuuuua<=
u .uuouuu neauuumwmu I I + nonmuunnua: cu mauvuouu< + .xncuz .zono«n no .uocu
ﬂaw—ll :nouuocoo
.Uuuuuumcw we mucus mm vuuannd van Hwoauuuoozk mo naoa
uuumwu Hmuauusuum cu nxuon wwswua no cauuuouuv Incum: :.auo: uauuu¢0uum no muuau
wawnunuuu vuqmwmmwau I I + Isaac: can: cu mauvuouu< + lax: .muauonuo a amo~0u>o .uucm
xavcu nozusu an :mwmonuc mauosm co acouuuuad

I + + noxagdnsm Huo«uapa;nd< I Inam no ”nag: .amogoupouosm .ua:H

 
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

xuvcu ouauuuqu uo :xuoz
nonuum ﬂnuHuupunaud aucuauuamov Hausa uuuuucouum uo ouuaaom: .>no~
.mMnna nonmampaa HH< I + + vosmudnam Iusuum cu .vuouu< + Io«n Houcoenoao>oo mo wuauuuncn
I IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
moucmuouum Anv any Amy Any ANV Adv ceagnnuca no cunnqapsm

. Aqv
mmmu «mg no mousuuumCM Huuamouown uo macaunuuunaq nonhuman new uumuumnnIudsauuMOanun .N oqauh

2
2

FOR OFFICLAL “SE ONLY
FUR ill-'l-‘iiflnl. llllii llh‘l."

Moot oi the abstract and bihlim;r.-Ipllie-almltact publications coVer iniut‘ma-
Iinn about 5" activities of an Institute oVer a short period of time. In
Soviet annuals. the ninogrnphic abstract is the main form of condensing
information. lean often there are survey abstracts and annotations. Inclu-
sion in abstract publications of the results of unpublished works (works

submitted or prepared for publication) increases the currentness and time-
lluess oi the iniormation.

In the annuals of the Institute of Developmental Biology. USSR AS (iDb) [30)
and Institute of Phoiohiology [3|]. only published works are abstracted: in
the annuals of Ion. there are mainly survey abstracts and in those of the
Institute or Photobiology. only monographlc abstracts. in the annuals of
the Institute of Cytology and Genetics [32] and institute of Biology [33].
there are abstracts only of unpublished works; in those of the Institute of

biology there Is indication of where the abstracted work will be published.
There are no abstracts for published works.

both published and unpublished works are abstracted in the annuals of the
Institute of Microbiology and Virology [16]. institute of Plant and Animal
Ecology [35] and Institute of Marine Biology [36]. The annual of the
Siberian Institute of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry indicates whether
the abstracted works were published or not.

As a rule. the annuals abstract articles from journals and collections.
and they have annotations for surveys and monographs. In each instance.

the question of obstructing or annotating a work. or merely including it
in a list of publications. is decided on an individual basis.

Special mention should be made of the inclusion in the annuals oi proceed-
ings oi conferences. symposiums and congresses. According to information

of UNESCO [38]. proceedings of almost half of all conferences are published
only in the form of brief preliminary reports (summaries of papers). over half
the papers published in "proceedings of conferences. etc.." are not published
in other sources. for example periodicals [39]. The question of loss of
information reported at conferences. congresses and symposiuns is a very
acute one. Abstracting or at least annotation of such papers in annuals
could reduce somewhat the loss of such valuable information.

Some Institutes III, 35, 35. 37] published abstract collections. in which
there are no lists of published works. The informative value of such
publications ls considerably lower than that of bibliographic-abstract
editions. since they do not facilitate retrieval of information.

The abstracts and annotations in annuals of most Institutes are classified
according to the subject orientation oi SR and objects of investigations.
In only one of the abstract collections [31] the abstracts are listed in
alphabetical order (according to authors' names). and a bibliographic
description of the work precedes each abstract. There is no introduction.
separate list of publications or any other index in this collection. For

2)
?0R OFFIClAn V35 ONLY
lilll ill‘l‘li'lAl. I'l-ll Mil?

th|n unaann, in nplle oi the iarl that lhe Ahstratln and annotations in
Ihla Inllvrllvu are vntv rumpelentl; prepaled, and lhete Is also an English
version theta-M. the t'ullet'lion in nu! .nnvenieel I-.-r wet:- nl Information:
lln' extent to whi-h inmtittlle pnhliuatlon-a are Ith'l‘I'tl in the collection is
not Jppnrvnl, ll i2 dirliunil in alnllu out lh- arhithmenta referable to
individual nrlenllllr raxeatrh dlrvcllnna ul lh- institute. and the entire
t'ullc't'llull must be lulled ilnmmh to retrieve teqnln-ti iniot'matinn.

"The List «of (llanuilla-aliun ilca-limu- In the .‘iam intermation Publication-t

Hi the innit" [Ml] in an example ol ~H‘iilvlnilll2‘llldil of scientific information.
II in haaml on clamallieation ul imputation in accordance with the hierarchie
::tturlut'e at a specliie branch at wit-nee. lhr information publications of
inn! itutea hv no means presume to he univl-raal and complete to the extent

"I main information editions; however. the principle of ciaaniiication of
inlurnat inn. which hm. hes-n dt-Veloptd lnr the main inlormtiun publications.
ran alnu he used for the hthllcmraphlc-ahntrat‘l. publications oi institutes,
anti the informal ion should not he classified according to the ntructure

at Home hram hes; oi .rlence, but according to the direetinns of scientific
research being deVrloped at an institute.

One of the mm.t important parts of hihliographic-ahstract publications is
a list of Publl'illt'tl wnrlttl. As a rule. the livl In compiled in alphabetical
order of authors; orcanionally it in rlaunified according to probless or
'atructural departments of institutes.

Seldom is use made of ancillary indexes in annuals [30). however, it say
be anaumvd that with further refinement of the structure of annuals proper
attention will be given to then.

Sin-e annual abstract and hihliogtaphic-ahstract collections of many

Soviet biological institutes began to be published recently, we still do not
the standardized rules for compilation thereof, screening information and
forms of condensation. it is imperative to investigate the flow of informa-
tion from institutes, the information requirements of different categories
of scientific unrkers and management of institutes. as well as the many
years of experience gained by foreign biological institutes in publishing
analogous annuals.

We analyzed the annuals of five foreign biological institutes. The annual
bibliographic-abstract publications of foreign biological institutes have
the functional purpose of institute reports about scientific research work.
This is reflected in the titles of some of the annuals: "Annual Report."
"Scientific Report." etc. The functions of such bibliographic-abstract
publications are close to the functions of annual reports of foreign
companies [6 l l .

The structure of annuals of foreign biological institutes is stereotyped.
First there is brief information about the structure of the institute.
administrative and scientific pcrsonnel.trustees and consultant councils,

26
FOR OFFlClAI. (33!? 0.\'l.Y
FOR OFFICIAL "SH "NLT

lurelnu trainees and international nrlvnllllr ties. Special attention in

given to the results of SR. There in usually a list of published works at
the end.

In the annuals oi the Sirnugeways Laboratory (Cambridge. Great Britain) thI,
whirh consist of six scientific sections. information is given annually

only about three completed scientific research projects (one per department).
Review papers (in the form of expanded survey abstracts) of three members

of the laboratory staff are prepared on the basis of data both from works
published in the reported year, and unpublished works. The topics of
studies of other members of the laboratory staff are only mentioned.

The list of publications includes articles and brief reports of all members
of the laboratory staff.

In annuals published by the Laboratory of Molecular Embryology (Italy) [26]
there is annotation or abstracting of all published articles and those
prepared for publication. Monographic abstracts are given for some of the
articles that are considered the most important in the opinion of the
annual compilers, while annotations are provided for other works. The ah-
stracts and annotations are not accompanied by references to bibliographies.
which makes it difflcult to use this annual for retrieval of information.

in the annuals of the institute of Embryology and Experimental Teratology
(France) [63]. there are monographic and survey abstracts and annotations
for published and unpublished works. The abstracts and annotations are
accompanied by references to a bibliography, which includes articles from
periodicals, collections and monographs. There is a special listing of
survey and popular science articles.

in the annual of the institute of Animal Genetics (Great Britain) [to],
which coVers a 4-year period of institute activities. information about
SR is given in the form of survey abstracts, mainly of works published

in this period, and they are grouped according to problems and objects of
research. This form of condensing information, with a distinct heading
classification. makes it possible to obtain a rather complete idea about
the status of a problem. spending the least amount of time on reading.

in the text of the abstracts there are references to both published works
(articles in periodicals, in collections. monographs, papers delivered at
conferences) and those submitted for publication (with indication of the
journal to which the work was submitted). Bibliographies are compiled
according to different laboratories.

in the annual of the Embryology Department of Carnegie Institution (United
States) [65], information about SR is submitted in the form of reports.
which are based on survey abstracts of both published and unpublished.
completed works. Expanded abstracts, with graphs. tables. diagrams, photo-
graphs and figures. are furnished for studies in which much experimental
material is submitted on a completed research project. or an original solu-
tion is given for pressing problems with indication of routes of future

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
FUN iiHli'iM. USE ONLY

reneareh. 1hr lint ui [Illiiiil‘dilI-ll'l in: Imit‘d nttiricu fl'l‘m periodicals. col-
iertiunn. monograph" and paper» dailvered at conferences. etc.

Nunographir abstracts of published and unpublished works. which are classi-

fied according to ohiecln of inventinaliun and direction of SR, are giVen

in the annuals oi the ﬂuhrvehl Lahuravnrr n: the International Hmbryniogical
institute (66]. There In an alphabetical inder of puhllnhed works and those
prepared for publication.

Thus, along with Home dilferencea. there are also none cunmntfeatures in
annuals of foreign and Soviet institutes. Current inrornntion is included
in both Soviet and foreign annuals. Both abroad and in Soviet practice.
the abstract Is the main form on condensing information, and the survey
1hutract is used the most often.

Abstraeted information in tureign annuals is given along with data about the
structure of an institute and its scientific personnel. This plays an im-
portant rule in evaluating information. when one needs to know not only

what is repented, but who did the work and under whose supervision it was
done.

information about participation of institute staff members at congresses.
conferences and nymposiums is impvrtant. As a rule. such information is
included in foreign annuals and very rarely in Soviet ones.

Thus. analysis of bibliographic-abstract publications revealed that. along
with features in common. they are characterized by diversity of structure.
nature of information and form of condensation thereof. differences in
approach to classification of information. Determination of the most
reasonable forms of transmitting information is one of the first steps toward
upgrading these publications.

Conclusions

l. The reference-information and bibliographic-abstract publications of

biological scientific research institutes play an important role in develop-
ment of scientific communication. expediting exchange of information about

the results of scientific research conducted by large scientific groups.
determination of the routes for retrieval of information; they aid in coordi-
nating scientific research and in analytical-survey work. The information con-
tained in such publications is intended both for scientific workers and
information workers, as well as the sdministrative-management body of the

institutes. For this reason. we are faced with the pressing problem of
upgrading these publications, optimising and standardizing their structure,
clearly defining their functional and goal-oriented purpose.

2. The chief purpose of reference and information publications is to aid
in establishing scientific contacts. to serve as guides for institutes.

This must be reflected in the structure and appropriate screening of

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

information: attention should be directed chiefly to information about

the administrative-management body of the institutes. structure of an insti-
tute and its scientific personnel. Information about an institute's scienti-
fic research activities should be more general, so that the information

would be relevant for a long period of time and readily accessible to a wide
circle of specialists.

J. The main function of bibliographic-abstract publications is to provide
current information about the results of scientific research done at an

institute within a relatively short period of time. For such publications,
the best form of condensing information is the survey abstract. The best

form of classifying information is according to the directions of SR activity
of the institute. The bibliography of publications by the staff of an
institute is the most important part of such publications; if it is com-
plete, the annuals can be used in many aspects, there will be less less of

information and faster retrieval thereof.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Hikhaylov, A. 1.; Chernyy, A. 1.; and Gilyarevskiy. R. s. in "Osnovy
informatiki" [Fundamentals of Informatics]. Moscow. Nauka, 1968. pp 82, B7.

2. Zav‘yelov. Yu. N., and Tsukerman. E. H. "Standardization of Information
Publications," in "Voprosy sovorshsnstvovaniya sistemy informatsionnykh
izdaniy” [Problems of Upgrading the System of Information Publications},
Moscow, 1973. pp 27-32.

3. "Institute of Developmental Biology. Brief Guide," Moscow. Nsuha, l969,
56 pp; 1976, 55 pp.

6. "Institute of Protein (Brief Informstion)." Pushchino, Biological
Research Center. 1976, 22 pp.

5. "Institute of General Genetics. Brief Reference Book," Moscow, ﬂanks,
1976, 63 pp.

6. "Institute of Molecular Biology," Moscow. Nauka, 1971. 26 pp.

7. “InstituteofPlant Physiology imeni K. A. Timiryazev," Moscow, Nauka.
1976, 62 pp.

8. "Institute of Evolutionary Morphology and Ecology of Animals imeni
A. N. Severtaov. USSR AS [Academy of Sciences]. Reference Book."
Moscow. Nauka. 1973. 65 pp.

9. "Institute of Physiology imeni A. A. Bogomolets." Kiev, Naukova Dunks,
1976. 73 pp.

10. "institute of Biology imeni A. V. Palladin." Kiev. Naukova Dumka. 1975.
210 pp.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ll.

12.

1'3.

16.

15.

l6.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

25.

250

26.

FOR ilFFli'lM. US}. ONIY

inutituie of Botany (muni N. G. Khnlodnyy." Kiev. Nnukova Dunka. 1976.
78 pp.

Ayrapetyan. A. "Institute of Phyuinlduy invni Academician L. A. Orbeli.
Aroenisn Academy of Snieurusﬂ'vervvau. publinhed by Armenian AS. 196‘.

35 pp.

"institute of Cytology and Genetltu. B'iof Reference nook.“ Novosibirsk.
1968. 19 pp; 1969. 39 pp; 1972, Shgqn

”institute of Microbiology. USSR AS. Prospectus." Noacow. Nauka. 1966.
21 pp.

"institute of Photosynthesis. USSR AS (l966-I976). Proapectua."
Pushchino. 1976. 32 pp.

"inatitute of Photosynthesis, USSR as (Brier Information)." Pushchino.
197a. 23 pp.

“institute of Experimental Plant Biology." Tashkent. lad-v0 Khud. Lit-ry,
1968. 23 pp; Taahhent. FAN. 1970. 23 pp.

"institute of Zoology. Georgian AS." ibiliul (year not given).
Metanlyercba. 13 pp.

"institute of Botany. Uzbek AS." Tashkent. 1968. 16 pp.

"institute of Physiology (Brief Reference nook)." Novosibirsk. 1969.
51 Pp.

"institute of Biology of inland Haters. USSR AS (Proapectus)." Yaroslavl'.
1971. 23 pp.

"institute of Protein Reeearch. brief Information." Poustchino. 1976.
26 pp.

"institute of Developmental BioloBY. USSR AS.“ Moscow. Nauka, 1969-
1976. 50 pp.

"Laboratory of Molecular Embryology. Activity Report." Naples. Italy.
1968. 66 pp.

Sherukhin. D. Ye. "Accuracy. Logic and Objectivity of Presentation

of Scientific and Technical information." in "0 nekotoryhh voprosskh
redaktaionno-izdarel'skoy deyatel'nostl otdels inforaatsii Nil"

[So-e Proble-s of Editorial and Publication Hark of Iniorustion
Departments of Scientific Research Institutes]. Leningrad. 1966. pp 13-36.

idea. "Reasonable Forms of Publication of Achieve-onto of Science
and Technology.” Leningrad. 1968. 25 pp.

28
FOR OFFICIAL BSS CSLY
27.

28.

29.

30'

31.

32.

33.

3‘.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Novikov. Yu. A. "Optiliration of the Structure of Scientific Publica-

tions." NTI [Scientific and Technical Information]. Series 1. No 9.
1975. pp 12-17.

“National Institute of Genetics.” Misina. Japan. 1965. 28 pp.

"The ﬂubrecht Laboratory. Royal Netherlands Academy of Sciences and
Letters. International Institute of Babryology," Utrecht, Hubrecht
Laboratory, 1965. 28 pp.

"Institute of Developnental Biology. USSR AS. Results of Scientific
Research." Moscow, Nauka, 1970. 205 pp; 1971. 126 pp; 1971, 92 pp;
1972, 116 pp; 1973. 10% pp; 197a. 78 pp: 1975, 100 pp; 1976, 59 pp.

"Institute of Photobiology, Belorussian AS. List of Publications on
Photosynthesis." Minsk. 1976. 21 pp.

"Institute of Cytology and Genetics. Siberian Depart-ant of USSR AS.
Results of Scientific Research. Collection of Scientific Horhs.”

Novosibirsk. 1975. 114 pp. “Problees of Theoretical and Applied
Genetics. Current Information." Novosibirsk. 1975. 119 pp: 1976. 136 pp.

"Institute of Biology. Belorussian AS. Abstracts of Scientific Research
works." Minsk. 1956. 156 pp. "Bulletin of the Institute of Biology."
Minsk. 1957. 283 pp; 1958. 293 pp: 1960, 217 pp; 1960, 343 pp; 1961,

"Institute of Microbiology and Virology ineni D. I. Zebolotnyy.

Abstracted Information About Conpleted Scientific Investigations."
Kiev. Neukova Dunks. 1971, 67 pp: 1972. 36 pp; 1972. 58 pp. "Abstracts
of Scientific Research Works." 1974, 35 pp: 1975. 35 pp: 1976. 38 pp.

"Institute of Plant and Aniesl Ecology, Ural Research Center. USSR AS.

Problees of Genetics and Breeding in the Urals (Inforustion)."
Sverdlovsk, 1977, 196 pp.

"Instittue of Marine Biology. Par East Research Center, USSR AS.
Scientific Reports.” Vladivostok, Vyp 2. 1971. 255 pp.

"Siberian Institute of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry. Siberian
Department of USSR AS. Current Information (Physiology and Biochemistry
of Growth and Development of Plants, Physiology and Biocheuistry of
Crovth Regulators. Physiology of Plant Resistance)." Irkutsk. 1976. 67pp.

”Statute on Papers and Minutes [Proceedings] of Scientific Conferences."
BYULL. YUMESRO DLYA BIBLIOTBK [Unesco Bulletin for Libraries], 16. 3.
1962. pp 117-129.

"Disseninstion of Proceedings of Scientific Conferences," Ibid. 16, b.
1962. pp 173-186.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
«0.

b1.

#2.

‘30

6h.

65.

46.

mu nI-‘FllzlAl. "SF. "NLY

"List of Clonalficntion "ending" in the Main Information Publications
of the 088R." Huuenw, 197a.

Gurevich, Z. N. "Annual Reportn e( Foreign Companies nu a Source of
Information.“ er. Series 1, No 11. 1974, pp JZ-lh.

"The Strangevayo Renenrch Laboratory. Report for 1976. [975."
Cambridge. 1976, 28 pp; 1975, 13 pp.

“Institute of Embrynlugy and Euperlmcntul Teruiolngy of the National
Center for Scientific Research. Laboratory of Experimental Bnbryolosy
of the College of France. Activities and works." Nogent-sur-Hnrne--
Paris. 1960-1972.

"Institute of Animal Geneticu, Unlvvrqtty of Edinburgh, Scotland.

Research Report l958-l961,” prepared by C. u. Haddinstnn. Edinburgh,
1962.

"Carnegie inat.tutiou. Annual Report of the Director. Depart-cut of
E-bryology," 1976-1975; 1975-1976.

ﬂieuvkoop. P. D. "Annual Report of the ﬂubrccht Laboratory, Interna-
tional Enhryological Institute, Utrecht. (or the year 1960." reprinted
fro. Vcrhnndl. Koninklijke Nederlandee Akad. Heteachnppen. Afd.
Netuurkunde. 18, No 6. 1968. 19 pp.

COPYRIGHT: VSESOYUZNYY INSTITUTE NAUCHNOY I TBKHNICRESKOY INFORHATSII. 1978

10.657

C50:

1870 END

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY