APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00080R000100030017-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

JPRS L/8314

6 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(FOUO 9/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1. lecipuat’e Accession No

uiowxutcgu. mu umvzom. SCIENCES, (rouo 9/79) —
No
0. Pain-mg “Inﬂation No.0 and Acute”
Joint Publications Research Service

IOOO North lilcbc Road ll. mum/Gun No.
Arlington, Virginia 22201

I1. soon-ding (hp-inane. New and Mduss ‘3. Type oi Kevan a Psoiod
Coveted

rpm I u ‘
TRANSMTIONS 0N ussx SCIENCB mo rscuuowcv 6 March 19 79

An abovv

M. Abnnus

The report contains intonation on aerospace medicine. agrotechnology, bionics
.Ind biuacouuticu. biochemistry, biophysics. environmental and ecological
problvum. food technology. Iicrobiology. epide-iology and immunology.

marine biology. military medicine. physiology. public health. toxicology.
rndiobioiogy. veterinary aedicine. behavioral science, hulan engineering.

psychology. psychiatry and related fields, and scientists and scientific
organizations in biomedical fields.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPPS I.
6 Marc

TRMSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE MD TECHNOLOGY

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(moo 9/19)

CONTENTS
INDUSTRIAL MICROBIOLOGY

The Progressive Hethod of Shchekino should Be Used in the
Hydrolysis Industry
(I. P. Doshlygin; GIDROLIZNAYA I LBSOKRIHICHESKAYA
PROHYSHLENNOST', R0 & 1978)............................

Automatic Regulation of Yeast Suspension Level in
Perl-enters
(K. Kundev, et sl.; GIDROLIZIIAYA I LBSOKRIHICHBSKAYA
PMSHLENNOST'. lb 8. 1978)

INSTRUHBNTS AND EQUINE"?

Keene of Isproving Efficiency and Quelity of ﬂedicsl
Equip-est Production
(Yu. H. Tsentsiper; HEDITSINSKAYA tantrum. No 5.

197°).see-seesee-seeeseeeeeeseeeeeeeeesseeeeseesseeeles

NEUROSCIENCE

Consciousness and Evoked Electrical Activity in the
Cerebrel Cortex
(E. A. Kostsndov; ZHURIIAI. WSSIIEY NBRVNOY DZYATBL'NOS‘I'I.

m 6. 1978)eeeseeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeseeeseeseeeeoesoeesesso

The State of Prospects for the Long Ter- Scientific Project
'Brsin' To Study the Hechenisss of higher Neurologic
Activity

(E. A. Asrstysn. et. el.; 2mm WSSIIEY "RWY
DEYATn'NOS‘I'I. No 6. 1978)
CORTBNTS (Continued)
PINS IOWY

A Horphologic Study of Adrenal Glenda of Rats After Flight
on the Bioentellites 'cosuos-eos' and 'COSMOS-782'
(Ye. A. Sevina; ARKﬂIV ANATOHII. GISTOLOGII I
MRIOWII, "0 9. 1978)....oo-ooooooooooooooouooooooono

Another Discus-ion on the Mechanism. for ﬂiltological and
Cytochenical Changes in Manuela (Reta) During Orbital
Flights

(V. V. Portugnlov; WIV ANATOHII. 618701.061! I
EHBRIOLOGII. N0 9. 1978)....oooooooe00000000000000.0000.

PUBLICATIONS

Biological Damage to Materials and Prevention Thereof
(BIOPOVREZWENIYA MATERIALOV I ZASIICRITA 0T NIKE.

1978)....50000000000000oooeeoooooooooooooooooooooooloooo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL MICROBIOLOGY

UDC: 634.0.863:[658.2+658.3]
TUE PROGRESSIVE METHOD OF sumac snouw 33 US. IN THE HYDROLYSIS INDUSTRY

Moscow cmaouzmm 1 Lnsommwssma pmsummos-r' in Russian so 8.
1978 pp 1-2

[Article by I. P. Doshlygin, Glsvnikrobioproa (Main Adninistration for the
uicrobiological Industry) under the USSR Council of Hinisters: "One should

Work According to shchekino hethod")

[Text] In accordance with the objectives set forth by the 25th CPSU Congress.
workers in the hydrolysis industry should sugnent the productivity of labor

by loll in 1980, as conpared to 1975, and increase production by 1.5 times. -
Such rapid development is inlenented by opening new plants of production '
of feed yeast and furfurol. remodeling of existing shops at a number of

enterprises and reaching the planned capabilities at the new plants. As
for manning the construction projects. this is a problel that can be

solved only by asking available sons of the workers at existing plants.

It would be inconceivable to perfora this complex taslr. without implementation
of a set of aanagenent and technical neasures to augnent the productivity

of labor at each enterprises end without upgrading nsnagement of all

sectors of work.

One of the tested means of augmenting productivity of labor substantially
is the Shchekino method of inproving nanage-ent thereof, material incentives

and planning. enriched by the knowhow of the PolotdtPolinir Association

and Bashkir petrocheniste. At enterprises that work by the Shchekino
method. the plans for production and growth of productivity of labor are
being fulfilled and overfulfilled, there is actually no turnover of personnel
or absenteeism. and salaries are higher than elsewhere.

How are such results achieved, and what is the suit tance of this progressive

nethod? First of all, it involves creation of an atmosphere in which each
worker is spiritually and naterially concerned with finding and using the

deep-lying reserves for growth of efficiency of production and labor based
on cost accounting, as well as conbining the personal and collective

interests of workers in aupenting production with fewer personnel.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the nobruysk Hydrolysis Plant, for example, as a result of doubling up
occupations and positions, increasing servicing regions and volume of work
performed, mechanization of laborious operations, 47 people were released
in 1977 from functional shops and departments. This made it possible to
man newly opened production sectors. There was also an 8.6: increase in
productivity of labor. The savings in the wage fund. constituting 3b,000
rubles, were used for additional remuneration and bonuses for blue-collar
workers and technical engineering personnel, who overfulfilled the plans

for growth of productivity of labor. At this plant, the mean wages consti-
tute 168 rubles per month per employee.

A reduction in personnel was also obtained at the following enterprises:
Holdavgidrolisproa Associatixn, Kansk biochemical, Arkhangel'sk and Khor
hydrolysis plants, Shuuerliao Che-ital Plant and others. However, the
Shchekino method has not yet obtained due support and dissemination at
sost enterprises.

Instead of heading work to introduce this progressive method, with the
support of Party, trade-union, Koaaomol, as well as creative public organiza-

tions, some enterprise administrators hold on to old management methods,
they are governed by “the achieved level" and, let us confess, they are

afraid of innovations. This can explain in part the great fluctuations in
labor (labor input) per unit product at many plants. Thus, according to
reported data for 1977, labor expended per ton feed yeast at plants of the
hydrolysis industry was as follows (man-hours):

Zaporosh'ye [plant] 8.4 Volthsk 9.1
Bel'tsy 12.4 Hanturovo 11.7
Arkhangel'sk 8.9 Kirov h.‘
Volgograd 11.2 Bobruysk 7.9
Saratov 16.1 Gubakha 23.6
Lobva 12.0 Andizhan 9.3
Krasnoyarsk 13.7 Yangiyul' 13.4
Biryusinsk 7.7 Chi-kent 18.9

Such a difference in labor icput would not exist at the above plants, if

all administrators would really be concerned with introduction of the
shchekino method.

I

It should be the first and foremost objective of plant teams and their

supervisors to catch up to the best enterprises in the industry, with
regard to production per worker.

Aaong enterprises under the Soyusgidrolizprom VPO [expansion unknown], there
are some that will not cope with the tasks referable to growth of productivity

of labor (Onega, Lobva, Hanturovo, Volahsk plants). At the Tula, Chimkent,
Saratov and Kedaynyay plants productivity of labor has declined, as compared

to 1976. It is increasing slowly at the Volgograd, Zisa, Rechitsa and a

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

few other plants. lhc hydrolysis industry as a whole is logging in fulfill-
ment of assignments referable to growth of productivity of labor.

Productivity of labor is one of the most important indices of efficiency
of production. Comprehensive increase thereof is s first and foremost task,
on the performance of which depends continued expansion of scale of

production, starting up a large number of new plants and shops, as well as
development of the servicing area.

One should immediately catch up with respect to adoption of the Shchekino
method at ell enterprises without exception. All of the resources must be

put to the service of the Five-Year Plan, and there are quite a few such
resources [reserves] at hydrolysis plants. For example, let us consider
the number of workers per production sector. Quite often, even at pro-
gressive enterprises. there is excessiveness, with two operstors needlessly
assigned to one control console. Thus, in the yeast drying shop of the
Kirovo Biochemical Plant, the established personnel specifications provide
for 23 dryer operators, nlthoggh the diffusion dryers are automatically

controlled from three consoles. A simple calculation shows that 14 people
are enough to service this sector. and 5 more could be released when the

control and inspection instruments for the dryers ir. switched to a single
general console.

There are large resources for growth of productivity of labor in ancillary
shops of enterprises, which presently employ more than 50! of all workers.

At many plants, the personnel involved with major and routine repair of
the main technological equipment is still listed as part of the established
staff of the main technological shops. It is known that centralization of

such personnel in mechanical repair shops would not only increase the
productivity of labor of repair personnel, but would improve the quality

of their work.

The fear on the part of some enterprise administrators to convert to the
Shchekino work method is not to their credit.

In a speechat the 18th Romsomol Congress, comrade L. l. Brezhnev stated that
some management executives, who have a passive attitude toward adopting

the Shcheklno method, are apparently unable to abandon the established rules,
to revise and alter some principles of management and forms of organization

of production. L. l. Brezhnev further stated: "It is time, comrades, for
us to learn to be businesslike in adopting progressive knowhow and

following through with every useful matter."

It is imperative for us to derive sons practical conclusions from the

statements of comrade L. l. Brezhnev, general secretsry of the cc CPSU.
To work by the shchekino method does not refer to a short campaign, but to

a continuously practiced method of management, the effects of which are
achieved on the basis of utilizing deep-lying resources, developing and

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

implementing a composite plan covering more than a year, at least the period
to the end of 1980, and then the 11th Five-Year Plan.

At the first stage, the problem of releasing at least 10-12! of the personnel
in existing shops and sectors must be resolved, and then 5-72 of the workers
per year, in order to have the number thereof correspond to a scientifically
substantiated norm.

Of course, it is not enough for administrators alone to work and implement
such a plan, and the entire team of an enterprise must be involved in this
”the

It would be wrong to believe that the Shchekino method consists merely of
expanding servicing sectors, doubling up occupations and positions. It
requires a composite approach, a combination of management and technical
measures covering all aspects of production work,and consideration of the
resources at each work place; for this reason it is wrong to consider that
adoption of the method is a concern only for employees in labor and wage
departments, although their role in this matter should not be underestimated.

All services without exception, the entire team of an enterprise, must be
involved in preparaing for and implementing the change to the Shchekino
method. The measures in the composite plan for upgrading organisation of
labor, material incentives and planning developed for 5-year periods must

be confirmed annually, defining the target dates and individuals responsible
for implementation, and organizing constant inspection [supervision].

The detected resources for augmenting production and increasing the efficiency
of labor should be included at an early time, before the plan is approved,

in a counterplan or state plan, so that it would be possible to take them
into consideration and allocate the appropriate material resources to an

enterprise for issuing additional production. It is only under such condi-
tions that the expected effect can be obtained.

In preparing measures, special attention should be given to the following:

improved use of work time by each worker, introduction of progressive work
norms, expansion of servicing sectors, doubling up occupations and positions;
mechanization of manual labor, particularly in raw material shops, packaging
and stacking ready products, washing separators, loading and unloading,
repair and other work; intensification of technological processes and opera-
tion of equipment; introduction of new, more productive strains of industrial
microorganisms, engineering innovations that have justified themselves at

other enterprises, concentration of inspection and control instruments on
common consoles: centralization and reasonable organisation of work per-

taining to repair of equipment, power supply, laboratory and transport
services; introduction of scientific organisation of labor and improvement

of working conditions; advancement of qualifications and skill of personnel,
obtaining total interchangeability in a team or shift; upgrading the structure
of management, elimination of duplication and multiple elements in the

_ 5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

control systea; increased role of spiritual and asterisl incentives in
rem-lung high productivity of labor.

At the present tine, there are nine production and one scientific-production
associations in the hydrolysis industry. Use of the Shchekino nethod of

working on the association level could yield a particular perceptible result.

In April 1978. a new procedure was approved for applying the Shchekino
nethod at industrial enterprises: the decision to adopt this aethod is asde
by the Ianagenent of the association and enterprise, along with the trade-
union co-ittee. Making this decision guarantees a stable plan to the.
enterprise; the higher organization is deprived of the right to alter it
or to withdraw the wage fund savings forned as a result of reduction in
personnel.

The new procedure for using the Shchekino nethod enables association and
enterprise adninistretors to senior all the savings realised in the wage
fund, as converted to percentage of plan fulfillment, for additional pay-eats
over and above the wage and salary rates for blue collar workers,
engineering and technical personnel, white collar workers and junior service
personnel. as well as disburse-eat of luap sun payments and prizes, for the

purpose of providing incentives for enployeea who have achieved a higher
productivity of labor, as conpared to the norms and the plan. The additional

pay-ents asy constitute up to 302 of the wage (salary) rate, and up to 502
for workers engaged in heavy and unattractive work, as well as junior service

personnel .

In addition, lunp sun pay-ants [awards] can be nade to blue collar workers,
adainistrative and engineering-technical personnel for developing and in-
plenenting neaaures resulting in a reduction of personnel and increase in
productivity of labor, as coqared to the plan. In none cases. it is per-
nisaible to increase the prise to 602 of the piece-work earnings or scheduled

wage rate to workers who have achieved high productivity of labor. The
awards are increased to 251 for inventors and rationalizers who have
offered suggestions for reducing the labor input for nanufacturing the
product. At enterprises that have converted to the Shchekino nethod. addi-
tional paysents of 102 of the scheduled wage rate are established for workers

engaged in equipnent repair and up to 201 of the scheduled wage rate for
those who repair particularly coupler equip-eat.

The renainder of the wage fund that was not used for additional pay-ants,
awards and prizes is deposited to the asterial incentive fund.

Such favorable conditions sake it possible to activate intensively the contri-
bution of each worker and the group as a whole to achieve a high efficiency
of labor. They are a vivid lanifestation of the concern of the Party and

government for growth of productivity of labor and steady rise in the
material standard of living of the working people.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo ”Lesnaya pron-st", "Gidrolisnaya i lesokhinicheskaya
pron-st", 1978

10.657

cs0: 1870 5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL MICROBIOLOGY

UDC: [63‘.0.863.S.002:663.033:62-54]:
658. 2097.2)

MGM‘HC WIN 0? YEAST SUSPDISION LEVEL Ill MRS

Moscow GIDROLIZRAYA I Lssonumcnswm PMSELMOST' in Russian No 8, 1978
pp 28-29

[Article by K. Kundev, A. Tatsrski and B. Daayanov. People's Republic of
Bulgaria]

[Text] The rate of the process of cultivating feed yeast in feraentsrs
depends on my factors. Maintaining a constant yeast suspension level in
the unit should be considered one of then. It is known free the literature
that a PI regulator is used to stabilise the level [1. 2]. Bowever, there
are considerable expenses involved for development and introduction of

a systse using such sutoeatic regulators.

A constant yeast suspension level was asintsined aenually at the Rszlog skiy
hydrolysis and Yeast Plant (m [People' s Republic of Bulgerisl), and this
required such labor. Moreover. accuracy was low.

In order to develop a suitable systee of automatic control of suspension
level, choose the type of regulator and adjustment of SA! [autonatic

control system]. we investigated the dynaaic characteristics of the fer-enter
in the wort delivery—yeast suspension level channel. The study was con-
ducted by a known nethod [3]. The geoaetric volume of the fernenter is

600 n , it is 16 In in height and 76 a in diaeeter. The expeth was con-
ducted in the following established node: wort delivery 11. l 10" u’ls,

air delivery 138.8010- n’/(s’-s), pressure 6. 51010’ Pa, pll of the culture
eediue 4.2 and culture nediun tesperature 309. 65 K.

Turbulence [disturbance] at the input of the fernsnter was deter-ined accord-
ing to change in wort flow (me ’ls). He also recorded the change in voluee

(level) of yeast suspension in the unit (0. I’). During the experinsnt,
the yeast suspension level was first stabilized unuslly by leans of a

variable pressure gradient floueter. The change in yeast suspension level

was neasured with piesonetric and float level gages. He used the usth

of isolated, juap-type factors to study the object. The object was stabil-

ized at the specified level of variables,t then a disturbance was used at

the input and the change in output value was recorded. He conducted six experi-
experieents with disturbance of u - 1.1-1.0" ﬁle. We used data obtained

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with optlnus stabilization of all pnrnnetcra for processing. Figures 1 and
2 illustrate the irunulcni churneteriut lcu, which are close to exponential
and traneient functions of a first order aperiodic cosponent. For this
reason, the transient process can be approximated to a conbination of two
elucntary components: the conponsnt of net lag and first order aperiodic
cosponent, i.e.:

d !
1,—314. 9(0-Kng—r), m

where To is the object tine constant, a; e is the regulated parameter
(volms), s’; u is the regulatory operation (disturbance), n'la; T is the
leg, e; K. is the transfer factor of the object, s’l(s’-s) and t is tine, e.

    

     
     
       
    
   

 

     
    

      

      

NHL}; '1 “'8 .._..__.. _.....-________,

n I . - ._._--—..._..—— '1' mm of new 1 I;
Li g | estab .vaiue 153 ,1

ll " °estﬁéiﬁﬁﬁ value: a 5’5} '——"—" "" ""—

1! 140a: [

on

Disturbance -us"n'{
'Iul'ﬁll' :33

 
 
 
    

let rben . L!"
r “ (52,35...’II,§

 

RES '3

o: initnraluc, 140 n’ -

.. _._—_— .—

 

Line Saw esta-blwaiuolﬂn ’

 

 

m at no It; “is
Figure 1. Figure 2.
Transient characteristics, with Transient characteristics, with
u - 4.1.10“ -'/s u - +1.1-1o-' n'ls
l) experisentel 2) estimated

The object's transfer factor use deternined free the values of the coordi-
nates of the experimental acceleration curve and sagnitude of junp-type die-

turbance, ueing the following formula:

where 0. ie the new established value of regulated parameter, a’; ‘0) is
the regulated parameter at the tins of addition of disturbance, n’; no! is
s he

the value of regulation before addition of disturbance, n’le and u. i
sane after addition of disturbance, n’le.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the' Specific case of c - 13 .‘md u - 31.1.10" n’ls, transfer factor
K. - 11:81'10’ I”(I"I). Fro- the experimental acceleration curve, we
daternined r. - 22.8-10z a and 1' - 11.88-10’ a. Substituting the obtained
values of the coefficients in equation (1). as shall obtain a differential

equation describing the transient process of change in volule (level) with
junp-type change in delivery of wort to the fer-enter:

Il.as-lot1:#+.(q-
'1'.3'u“-‘)- (3)

The general solution of this equation is:

'(ﬂ- t ll." ' l0“.- X

_l-a..~lv
X(l -e xI.u-Ie)+'m- (4,

 

Coincidence of the experimental curve and exponent, representing the solu-

tion of the typical equation with constant coefficients taken from the
experinental curve is proof of the accuracy of approxieation of the tran-
sient characteristics to the standard differential equation.

The choice of regulator and estiution of the system for automatic regula-

tion of yeast suspension level in the fernenter were perfoer in the
follouins nanner.

Since the ratio of lag to time constant of the object is low and the tine
constant of the object is high, one can use a two-position regulator in the
SAR. In the presence of lag in the aysten and sy—etrical static charac-
teristic of the regulator with a zone of ambiguity. the fluctuations of

the level will he:

all-2(l + Kpﬁ). (5)

where 6 - 1 cu, half the aahiguity zone, and Q is the regulatory action
constituting 501 of the noninal value. Pro. the structural dinensiona of
the fernenter, we find a ratio of level to value of 2.35 cn/n’. For this
reason, a. - 11.31'10’i2.35 - 27.75-10' c- (I’m).

Thus, the level fluctuations constitute AH - 7.7 ca, i.e., 3.5 cu in rela-
tion to the noninal level. The fluctuation period is:

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

T.~I4(t+':(—°%‘)ui. 2| I03. (6)

The frequency of switching the regulator per hour will be:

_...K:9__. .
n- 2:.r.+K.q.; “5"“6' W

As a result of this investigation. a achesatic diagram was proposed for
automatic regulation of level of yeast auapension in a fernenter (Figure 3).
The 8M consists of a sensor to, wetrusent for level seasuresent 16.
container vith water 2, type R9-260 regulator lo and regulator valve 1:. The
colum of fluid in container 8 opens and closes access for air to the
connecting pipe 3 going to regulator a. Connecting pipe 3 ia installed

in the container 2 on from the preset level of the colum of liquid in the
container. corresponding to n norlal level of yeast suspension in the
fersenter. The regulator valve, 200 cu in diameter, is set to allow the
yeast suspension to pass into the flotation device. There is an electric
notor to the pulp in the hydraulic regulator, which is triphesic and has a
power of 0.13 I"; it drives the pup continuously. After establish-eat of
the set level, air passes into connecting pipe 3 and the pup doea not pu-p
oil. when the level of the yeset suspension drops; the fluid level in 2
rises shutting off air, and the pup does not punp oil. as a result of which
the regulator valve closes and the level of yeast suspension riaes. This
process of regulation continues until the level in 2 drops and air passes
into pipe 3. The process of level regulation is s fluctuating one.

rigure 3.
Schosatic diagras of syates for
autosstic regulation of yeast
suspension level

1) fer-enter

ls) level sensor

16) level seasuring instrusent

2) container with water

3) connecting pipe

la) type 89-260 regulator

1e) regulating valve
2a.26) suspension passage sensors
3s.36) suspension uae neasuring

instruments

 

FOR OFFICIAL. USE Oh'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Use of the system for automatic level regulation in industrial fermenters
at the Razlogskiy hydrolysis-Yeast Plant revealed that it vorks stably and

vith satisfactory precision. The mean and maximum deviations of level of
the yeast suspension from the specified level constitute tl-Z cm,

respectively.

Conclusions
I.

A study was made of dynamic characteristics of a fermenter as an object of
automatic control. An approximation was made of the transient characteris-
tics in the nor! delivery-yeast suspension level channel in the apparatus.

It use determined that it is purposeful to use a two-position regulator of
level in industrial fermenters. The analysis made of the system of automatic

control of suspension levels in industrial fermenters 600 m in size can be
used in designing analogous objects. The schematic diagram of SAR for yeast
suspension level was described. the SAR operates stably. and this meets the
technological specifications. The maximum deviation of yeast suspension
level from the specified level is 22 cm.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. 2vyagin, N.; Bareshevich. V.; and Subbotin. 3. “Automation of the
Yeast-Cultivation Process," GIDROLIZNAYA I LESOKHIHICHESKAYA PROH-ST‘
[Hydrolysis and Hood Chemical Industry], No 7. 1971. pp 26-26.

2. Pirkovich, V. "Automation of hydrolysis Industry and Sulfite Alkali
Processing." Moscow. Lesaaya prompst'. 1969, pp 209-215.

3. aslakirev, V.; Dudnikov, Ye.; and Tsirlin, A. "Experimental Determination
of Dynamic Characteristics of Industrial Control Objects," Moscow.

Energiya, 1967.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Lesnaya promvst'", "Gidroliznaya i lesokhimicheskaya
prom-st'", 1978

10,657
050: 1870

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INSTRUHMS AND EQUINE"

uoc: 615.57.002.237+615.47-6S.Oll.46
MEANS OF IMPROVING EFFICIENCY AND QUALITY OF MEDICAL BQUIPMERT PRODUCTION
Moscow MEDITSINSKAYA mum in Russian No 5. 1978 pp 6-10

[Article by Yu. M. Tsentsiper, Nedoborudoveniye Scientific Production
Association. Moscow]

[Text] The most important task for enterprises that manufacture medical
equipment. as well as for the entire industry of our country, is to fur-
ther intensify production. increase its efficiency and quality of product,
and ultimately meet in full the requirenenta of public health with res-
pect to medical technology that meets modern specifications.

lntenaification as a result of refinement of technology is one of the Iain

for-s of intensive developeent of existing production at the stage of
refinesent thereof, end this is the stage that is predoeinsnt in medical
equipment plants.

The Hedoborudovaniye [sedical equipment] Scientific Production Association
(NPO), some of the achievements of which are discussed in this article,
is asking a contribution to the solution of these problems.

There are a number of specific distinctions in the construction of medical

equipment, aside froe properties inherent in products of general machine-
buuding: certain specifications for construction materials. higher speci-

fications for reliability of construction. quality of finishing and others.

The use of progressive structural materials is one of the eeans of increas-
ing the efficiency of production and quality of medical equipment.

In the next few years. rolled steel end aluminum alloys with higher purity
of surface finish will be used on an increasing scale at enterprises that

manufacture nedicsl equipment. Thus, starting in 1978, cold-rolled curved
sections will be used, instead of the hot-rolled angle sections used
previously, will be used at the Dnepropetrovsk .edical Equipment Plant
for the manufacture of sedical tables. This will iaprove the quality of
the tsbiee and lead to a substantial reduction of laboriousness of unu-
fecture thereof . es a result of total elimination of work dealing with
clesning surfaces before painting. At the Pence Chemical Disinfectant

11
FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bquipsent Plant. tables for pathoanstonical examinations are being manufac-

tured since 1976 with the use of highly polished stainless steel sheets.
Bxpressly the use of such steel nade it possible to manufacture those

tables, since the purity requirements of their working surfaces are high
and the design and configuration of the table are such that the use of

ordinary nethods of final polishing and trimming could not neet these re-
quirenents.

Modern polymers will also find increasing application in the construction
of medical equipsent in the very near future. In 1978, The Doschatoye

Medical Equipment Plant will start running a highly mechanized line for the
.gnufﬂctﬂfl of support conponents (seat, back. arms of sedical chairs and

wheelchairs) nade of integrated foes polyurethane. The outside surface of
these parts will simulate leather. Enhancement of esthetic features of
the products. substantial reduction of labor input and, finally. greater
sophistication of production (the production line for these conponents
constitutes one of the latest achievesente in the technology of processing

polysars) will be the result of introduction of new material and technology.

of definite interest is the future replacenent of medical table panels,
presently Ianufactured of stainless steel, with panels made of ornamental

paper laminated plastic material. The savings realized with regard to
scarce stainless steel, the high hygienic qualities of such panels. nodern

appearance and progressive manufacturing technology leave no doubt as to
the desirability of such a change.

In general, the cost pressing problems are the ones dealing with the use of
stainless steel. Its increasing shortage, the change to the use of nickel-

free or low nickel content steel instead of trsditicnsl type 18-8 nickel-
chrone steel, which has high technological qualities, puts difficult

tasks to industry.

On the one hand, it is imperative to find nethods that would permit cold
eta-ping of nickel-free and low nickel content steel. welding and finishing
thereof and. on the other hand. it is apparently necessary to make some

structural alterations and replace stainless steel with binetals and other
nsteriala. Much attentionvis given to solving these probless in the

Hedoborudovaniye "PO.

The increasing use of progressive aethods of shaping parts stock is an
important scans of increasing efficiency of production.

For the last few years, the Hedoborudovaniye NPO is working on introduction of
casting fron snelted patterns at nedicsl equipnent plants. In 1977. this

technology was introduced at the Yelets Medical Bquipsent Plant for the
eanufacture of stock for conponents of operating tables, hoists. carts and

other aedical equipaent. In 1977, this plant produced over 18 tons of
castings. and this figure will increase by several tines in the next few

years.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 19'”, series production of components of anesthesia and respiration
equipment by the method of casting from smelted patterns was begun at
the Kraunogvnrdcyols Lenlnurnd Production Association (Ll'o). Efforts to
manufacture l'rna parts of this equipment by other mctlmda, In particular
pressure-die casting, were unsuccessful.

The Hedoborudovaniyc NPO developed and hooded over to the Krasnogvardeyets

Association not only the technology for manufacturing the parts. but complex
equipment, so that the enterprise was able to master series production in

a shorter time.

In 1979. sections for casting from seelted patterns will be set up at the
Doschatoye Medical Equipment Plant and Katan‘ Medical Apparatus Plant.
The projected economic effect of adopting this progressive technology will

constitute over 20.000 rubles per year at the Doschatoye Plant. This method
of casting from carbon and stainless steel will be used to manufacture

stock for parts of gynecological tables, operating tables, medical beds and
other equipment. Stainless steel is used extensively at this plant, so

that the use of steel scrap to cast parts is an example of a reasonable
solution of the problem of saving metal.

Pressure-ole casting and chill [pernanent mold] casting of parts made of
aluminum alloys are practiced rather extensively at sedical equipment plants.

The obtained purity of surfaces and precision of dimensions, in spite of
the complicated shapes of the parts, high productivity of the process-all

these advantages of precision casting resulted in its occupying firmly
the leading place in the production of stomatological and other medical
equipment at the Bologda and Doschatoye medical equipment plants,
Krasnogvardeyets LPO and other medical technology plants. The output of
pressure-die casting increased by more than 1.5 times in 1977, as compared
to 1971.

Manufacture of parts using thermoplast and thermosetting plastics is one
of the other methods of progressive shaping that occupies a most important

place in the manufacture of medical equipment. Hith each year, the output
of plastic parts is increasing at the Volgograd, Doschatoye, Yelets and

other medical equipment plants. The enterprises are essentially outfitted
with modern technological equipment. There has been some growth, though
not to the required extent, in instrument shops. The volume of production

of plastic parts at medical equipment plants also increased by more than
1.5 times in 1976, as compared to 1971.

Processes of manufacturing permanent joints, welding and soldering, are

important in the production of medical equipment. In the last 5-6 years,
all medical equipment plants have changed to welding in an environment of

shielding gases, including nemisutontic welding of low-carbon steel in

an environment of carbon dioxide and argon-arc shot welding of stainless
steel. There has also been a substantial improvement of the quality of

welded seam, with decrease in volume of tri-ing and increase in productivity

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of processes. as conpared to manual electric-arc welding. In the years of

the 9th Five-Year Plan. the level of nechsnisation of welding work in this
branch of industry has risen free 67 to 562.

However. soldering is becesing the prevalent tendency in the sanufacture of
aedicel equip-ant in the leading industrial countries of the world, and
it yields snooth scans. without pores and pits.

High-tenpersture soldering will also be Isstered in the next few years at
Soviet medical equipnent plants. Unlike the methods used by foreign fir-s,
where soldering is generally perfornad nanually with a gas-flane burner.
highly productive conveyer furnaces will be used at our enterprises. This
is related to the relatively high series production of iteas. and the

need for utnost sechsnization of labor and increase in sophistication of
production.

Dork has been done at the Hedoborudovaniye "PO to develop optinun designs of
soldered parts and experimental nodela have been nanufacturcd. The Doschstoye
medical Equipnent Plant. which will be renodeled in the next few years, will
be the first plant. at which furnaces for high-tenperature soldering will be
installed. This knowhew will be transferred to other plants in the future.

Hechanical processing occupies a leading place. with regard to its volune,
among other technological processes of manufacturing aedical equipnent.
The change to increasing use of sutonstic and seniautosatic lathes, intro-
duction of group processing nethods. as well as gradual introduction of

benches with digital progran control will be the nain tendencies in this
direction. It is quite obvious that it is only through this route that it

will be possible to achieve greater efficiency of production under conditions
where the shortage of nanpewer and. particularly, aschine (or lathe]
operators is constantly increasing. One of the nethods of cold plastic
deformation. rolling hydraulic cylinders with a roller. is a highly effective
process in the nanufscture of hydraulic systens of nedical equipsent. This

process, which is being introduced at the Yelets Medical Equipment Plant,
along with the specialized section outfitted with precision metal-cutting

equipsent and test stands, will nake it possible to inpreve significantly
the quality and reliability of hydraulic systess. which do not neet the

specifications for all para-eters at the present tine.

Heaters for resuscitation tables and those used to clean up neonates, developed
at the Hedoborudovaniye NFO are of great technical interest. These heaters
consist of a Getinaks [plastic insulator] plate, with a vacuun-sprayed

spiral-shaped resistance consisting of several layers of various naterials.
All the advantages of these heaters-uniform heating over the entire field

of the heater, low energy conausption and considerably saallsr size as cone
pared to the known tubular hesters-warrant the belief that there is great

pronise to their use.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The medical equipment industry devotes special attention to electroplating.
painting and varnishing processes. In the next few years. the vats in
electroplating shops will be replaced by modern automatic electroplating
units. the development and assembly of which are being performed by the

Hedoborudovaniye NPO, in accordance with the technical specifications of
the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Medical Instrument Making.

Within 5-7 years. all medical equipment plants will be outfitted with this
modern technological equipment.

In the pain shops, instead of chambers for traditional painting and varnish-
ing. there will be coaplexly mechanized lines for spraying epoxide and

other finishes in powder fora, consistent with the modern worldwide tendency
of develop-ant of finishing technology.

Already in 1978 the first such shop is to be started at the Dnepropetrovsk

Medical Equipment Plant. The use of polymers in powder form will improve
the appearance of the products, the finish will be long-lasting and the

finishing process will be more efficient.

Considerable attention is devoted to mechanization of processes of assembling

and testing products at the Hedoborudovaniye NPO. In the last few years.
conveyer lines have been developed for assembling and testing sterilizers

at the Tyuaen' Plant, for assembly of medical equipment at the Doschatoye
and Yelets plants. The x-ray television unit installed at the Tyumen'

Plant for inspection of welded seams is a graphic example of how the
modern achievements of science and technology are applied in industry.

work dealing to refinement of the technology of assembly and testing of
products. and development of mechanized production plans will be included

in the plans of Hedoborudovaniye NPO in the next years as well.

At the present time. two-thirds of the work done by Hadoborudovaniye NPO
is directed toward technological preparation of production, refinement of

technology, raising the level of mechanization and automation of main and
ancillary processes. The main task is to move from the development of

individual processes and individual types of technological equipment to
composite solution of all problems pertaining to intensification of produc-
tion of medical equipment. This includes specialization and organization

of labor, as well as setting up highly mechanized sectors, shops and
enterprises on the basis of modern technology. The solution to these
problems is a guarantee that the objectives of the medical equipment
industry will be reached.

COPYRIGRT: "Heditainskaya tekhnika", 1978

10.657
680: 1870

15
FOR OFFICIAL US? 031.?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEUROSCIENCKS

CONSCIOUSNESS AND BVOKED ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY IN T33 CEREBRAL CORTEX
Moscow ZHURNAL WSSHBY NERVNOY DEYATEL'NOSTI in Russian No 6, 1978 pp 1151-1159

[Report on the plenary session of the 25th Conference on Problems of higher
Neurologic Activity. Leningrad. Septelber 1977 by B. A. Kostandov. Central
Scientific Research Institute of Porensie Psychiatry ineni V. P. Serbshiy,
Moscow]

[lost] The physiologists who studies higher neurologic activity
in man is constantly and unavoidably confronted with the pro-
blem of consciousness. He studies the state of "clear conscious-
ness" in man who not only perceives the signals presented to him
but also arbitrarily decides on a chosen reaction based on his
conscious evaluation of the subject. In addition to the physi-
oloaist's attempts to explain the functioning of the central
nervous system for one or another psychic activity, he strives
to dispense with the use of "subjective" concepts of conscious-
ness. The role of consciousness in a neurophysiolouic approach
to the function of the more coaplex structures of the brain is
frequently not considered. In these studies, consciousness is
considered to be a subsidiary "subjective" phenomenon which does
not effect the “objective" electrOphysiologic and biochemical
processes in more complex structures of the brain. It is in-
diSputably recognized that consciousness is connected with the
material physiologic processes which occur in more complex brain
structures. however, we know little about them. Presently, we
are studying the critical changes in cortical processes which
are connected to perception of stimuli.

Information has been gathered on the specific sensory athways
in the related projectional zones of the neocortex. T ese data
apply to both a conscious and unconscious state of the subject.
Thus, evoked electrical potentials for auditory, visual, and
sonatosensory stimuli are registered in the related cortical

16
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVP‘ICIAL USE ONLY

projectional regions in individuals in a shallow general narcosis,
that is in a completely unconscious state (18, 2"). baring hys-
terical or suggested hypnotic anesthesia of the cerebral cortex,
an evoked potential is devoloped for external signals which are
completely unperccived by the subject (17, 24, 25). A conditioned
communication can be produced using unperccived external signals
(a, 9). All these facts indicate that perception of a signal

does not just occur in the corresponding projectional and asso-
ciative cortical zones. In all probability, an additional neuro-
logic mechanism exists which enables perception of a signal. This
mechanism must bring about integration of neuronal activity in
various iarts of the cerebral cortex and subcortical structures,
and provides the most optimal conditions for perception of the
significant external phenomena at a given moment. We know al-
most nothing about this neurologic mechanism which is a signif-
icant part of the physiologic basis of perception.

During experimental studies on the physiologic mechanisms of the
"unconscious" we concluded that in order to solve this Eroblem,
it is necessary to explain the critical changes in the rain
processes involved in perception of stimuli. Without a concept,
all be it hypothetical, of the neurologic process which guaran-
tees or accompanies perception of external stimuli, it is diffi-
cult to propose any ind of explanation for the physiologic basis
of unconscious psychic phenomena.

Ithe method of averaged evoked potentials was the instrument that mde it pos-
sible for us, along with Yu. L. Arzunanov, to study the characteristics of

the spatial-temporal configuration of the electrical activity of different
regions or sections of the cerebral cortex. Subjects were exposed
to visual stimuli which they were able to perceive and to stimu-
li which they did not perceive but which evoked autonomic and bio-
electrical reactions. Recording of the average evoked potential
(UVP) was conducted durin, the process of generating and streng-
thening temporary connections formed in the brain in response

to unperccived and perceived visual stimuli.

The text subJects (20-50 years old) ha". in the past committed illegal acts,

in the majority of cases out of Jealousy, and during the period of our research
were in a difficult life situation. :IVI‘ was recorded for visual

stimuli combined with key words--"ncutrar'ones (arm chair,
stairs, table, etc.) and "emotional" words (treason, wife,

shame, etc.) which corresponded to conflict situations for the
test subjects.

in one series of experiments, word stimuli were non-associative,
that is easy for the test subject to perceive. In these cases,
we observed in the occipital region clear cut divergence in the

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

amplitudinnl temporal characteristics of the evoked response to
neutral and emotional words. The late positive evoked potential
(component P300) is developed with a significantly shorter latency
period and is essentially greater in amplitude than the potential
developed for neutral words. This difference is noted only for
the component P300; the earlier waves of "VP did not change. Thus,
the late negative wave N200 (latency period of approximately 200
milliseconds) for emotional stimuli essentially does not differ
from responses to neutral words.

Significant differences in the amplitudinal and temporal parame-
ters of an evoked potential to neutral and emotional words was
noted in the vertex.

Consequently, activation of the cortical evoked response to a
perceived, visual, emotional word stimulus occurs in the occipi-
tal region, not in the anterior regions of the cerebral cortex.
in response to a perceptible stimulus for a given modality, ac-
tivation of evoked potential is localized in scope. it is also
limited in time because the late positive potentialgwith a la-
tency period of only 300 milliseconds is altered. In another
series of experiments, certain neutral and emotional vords were
used as stimuli, but unlike the previous series of experiments,
these words were not perceived by the subject. The test sub-
jects could not read them because they were shown on the screen
for a very short time. As expected, we noted that the test sub-
jects saw the words "dimly", "weakly" in the flash of light on
the screen.

in response to an urperceived word, a small but clear late evoked
cortical response is registered. The response reflects the sig-
naning significance of the word stimulus which corresponds to
the emetional experiences of the test subject. This relation-
ship is expressed in the amplitudinal differences between the
potentials for neutral and emotional words. However, in con-
trast to the experiments with perceived words for a given cir-
cumstance, the size of the late positive evoked response to an
emotional stimulus, in comparison to the potential for a neutral
word, is greater in the occipital and vertex regions. Another
difference is seen in the substantial differences in amplitude
of the late negative Have N200 for neutral and emotional stimu-
li. For emotionally significant unperceived words, this com-
ponent of UVP as well as the 0300 wave is larger in amplitude

in the occipital and vertex zones.

Thus, activation of an evoked cortical response, caused by an
emotionally significant unperceived semantic stimulus, is diffuse.
For a given stimulus, activation occurs in the erceiving cor-
tical zone and in the anterior half of the ceregral cortex.

[8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unlike the reSponso to a perceived stimulus, during unconscious
perception of the word stimulus, activation is not limited to
to the wave with a latency period of about 300 milliseconds, but
also involves the earlier negative oscillation.

Analogous topOgraphical differences in evoked cortical activity

for perceived and unperceived stimuli must be considered in
studzing the development of associative, temporary connections

in t e visual sensory s stem. Test subjects were Bresented two
stimuli in sequence wit a pause between them of l 00 milliseconds:
the first stimuli--a picture of an arrow pointed in a certain di-
rection; the setond stimuli--different neutral and emotional words
shown on the same screen. The picture of the arrow pointed in

one direction was combined with neutral words,and the same arrow
pointed in another direction was combined with emotional words.

In one series of experiments, the difference in arrow direction
was large and easy to rec0gnize. It was also easy to perceive
the semantic content of the second stimulus--the neutral or emo-
tional word. Given the occurrence of a temporary connection be-
tween these perceived visual stimuli, changes in evoked potential
for the first pair of stimuli were ambiguous and, to a certain
extent. depended on the emotional significance of the second
stimulus. The amplitude of the evoked potential for the first
stimulus--the picture of the arrow-~was clearly decreased in
comparison to the potential for this same stimulus when shown

in isolation. The decrease in the evoked cortical response for
the first stimulus was observed both in tests where a neutral
word was used as the second stimulus and in tests using an emo-
tional word. Depression of the evoked reSponse can he explained
by concepts about the role of counter temporary connections in
cerebral cortex activity (2, 4). With multiple consecutive com-
binations of two indifferent stimuli (in our experiments, the
picture of an arrow combined with a neutral word), direct re-
sponses to them are suppressed and, in the opinion of I.S. Beri-
tashvili (4), counter connections are developed which inhibit
cortical reaction to the first pair of stimuli.

There is a substantial difference between evoked potentials ob-
tained in tests using neutral and emotional stimuli: the late
positive component P300, registered for the picture of the arrow
combined with an emotional word, develops with a shorter latency
period and is larger in size than the component registered for

a picture of an arrow combined with a neutral word. By examining
activation of the late cortical response to a stimulus combined
with an emotionally significant word, we were able to explain
the function of the mechanism for counter temporary connections.
we will discuss this further in more detail. Presently, we are
interested in another important characteristic of the above men-
tioned changes in evoked potential for the first stimulus paired

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with erceived neutral and emotional words. These changes are
relat vely localized. They are observed in the visual region,
that is in the zone to which both stimuli are directly addressed,
and do not occur in the vertex, that is in the anterior parts of
the cerebral cortex. Results of the second series of experiments
indicated that the localized character of the changes in evoked
activity in reSpense to the emotional component of the second
associative stimulus was observed only in those instances when
its semantic content was perceived. In the second series of
tests, a temporary connection between unperceived visual stimuli
was uncovered. The stimuli and experimental conditions were
identical to those in the first series with two exceptions:
changes in the direction of the first stimulus (the arrow) were
so minute that the test subjects did not perceive them, and the
semantic content of the second stimulus was not perceived be-
cause it was displayed on the screen for a very short time.
In these tests, the late evoked potential for the first pair

of stimuli was clearly diminished when the word was emotionally
significant. Changes in the evoked response were noted not only
in the visual re ions of the brain, as seen in tests with per-
ceived stimuli, )ut also in the vertex. Both the amplitude of
the component P300 and the negative wave which preceeded it

were diminished.

Thus, we observed temporary connections between unperceived

visual stimuli. Changes in evoked cortical activity,which occur
as a result of the formation of these connections, are not limited
to the visual cortex and are more diffuse than in instances when
the combined stimuli were perceived. One would assume that the
difference in cortical response to the first stimulus was de-
termined by the fact that the subject did not perceive it. How-
ever, this assumption was disproved by the results of tests in
which this stimulus was also not perceived, while the second
semantic stimulus was well perceived. In these cases, the changes
in the evoked potential for the first stimulus were analogous to
those which occur in experiments with completely perceived sti-
muli (1).

Consequently, the nature of the evoked cortical activity, given
formation of a sensory temporary connection, to a large extent
depends on erception of the second associative stimulus. This
indicates tie validity of our concept regarding the changes in
cortical activity which develop in response to the effect of the
first combination of stimuli. These changes are determined by
the effect of the counter temporary connections.

Changes in the evoked cortical responses to perceived and un-
perccived emotional words, evidently occurs as a result of addi-
tional "nonspecific" impulses from the structures in which neuro-

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

logic mechanisms for negative emotional reactions are integrated.
These structures are incorporated in what is understood to be the
"limbic system". In a series of studies on animals, scientists
showed the influence of the functional state of the limbic system
structures on the evoked potential, registered for sensory stimu-
li, in the neocortex. In experiments conducted by Sierra and
Fuster (30) on electrical stimulation of the hippocampus and amyg-
dala, the amplitude of prolonged latent visually evoked potentials
of the cerebral cortex was increased. Depending on its intensi-
ty, stimulation of the posterior hypothalmus can cause both ac-
tivation and inhibition of visual cortical electrical reSponses
(3, 19). With stimulation of the septum, the amplitude of the

evoked response of the visual cortex to light flashes is dimin-
ished (27).

We found that the anticholinergic substance, amizil, prevented
local changes in the occipital region as seen in the amplitu-
dinal-temporary parameters of the late positive wave P300, e-
voked in response to perceived emotional words. It did not alter
the evoked potentials in the vertex. This confirmed our concept
about the role of additional local activation of the limbic system
structures in observed changes of potential. In animal experi-
ments, it was shown that amizil inhibits cholinergic mechanisms

in the limbic system for defensive reaction (7,8).

It is known that the activating (and inhibiting) influences of
the limbic system on the.neocortex are accomplished by the ac-
tivating (and inhibiting) systems of the mesencephalonic and
thalanic reticular formations, although it is not exclusively
a direct influence (17,26).

In multiple studies, it has been established that the activa-

ting influence of the nonspecific reticular structures in the
cerebral cortex has a dual nature--local and diffuse. The diffuse
influence is accomplished by the mesencephalonic activating sys-
tem, and the local, by the nonspecific structures of the thalamus.
Recently, a great deal of attention has been directed at explai-
ning the neurologic mechanisms for local activation of the neo-
cortex and their physiologic role in the organization and per-
formance of a behavioral reaction.

Long ago, clinical neurologists noted that consciousness is re-
tained following resection or disease of any more or less re-
stricted part of the cerebral cortex, but it inevitably dis-
appears if, as a result of pathologic influences, the dience-
phalon is cut (28). Understanding the direct role of the reticu-
lar formation, in particular the nonspecific part of the tha-
lamus, in the activation of the cerebral cortex allows researchers

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to integrate these clinical facts by a physioloric approach.

The direct dependency of consciousness on activation of the non-
specific system of the diencephalon--a structure which is connec-
ted with all parts of the cerebral cortex--led w. Penfield (28)
to construct the theory of the central cncephalonic system. This
theory has been repeatedly subject to criticism because it dents
the role of the diencephalonic structures in higher integrating
mechanisms involved in the accomplishment of conscious activity.
he consider the theory of the central oncephalonic system to be
untenable in relationship to the definite regulating role of the
cerebral cortex in the organization of conscious experience. In
additioa, we can not ignore the rich clinical and physiologic
Eactua1.material, accumulated during neurosurgical Operations.
without doubt, these data attest to the key role of dioncepha-
lonic activating nonspecific structures in consciousness.

In higher vertebrate animals, especially in primates, electro-
graphic expression of local activation can be seen in the de-
layed evoked currents of cortical potential. Skinner (31) re-
corded the delayed negative potential in the anterior regions

of the cortex of cats by stimulation of the vcutrolateral nu-
cleus of the thalamus; a structure associated with the behav-
ioral reaction of selective attention. Robert (29) observed in
monkeys the deve10pment of do? 2d negative potential in the pre-
motor cortex, in the middle p.-. of the thalamus, and in the
caudate nucleus, during the pause between warnin and triggering
signals, that is,in conditions when the monkey 5 cold focus his
attention on a forthcoming triggering stimulus. Fuster and
Alexander (21) recorded in monkeys an evoked neuronal reaction
in the granulous prefrontal cortex and in the dorsomedial nu-
cleus of the thalamus during a delayed, instrumentally condi-
tioned, feeding reaction. These authors concluded that the
neuronal activity which they described was the basis for the
development of tie delayed negative potential and was connected
with actively focused attention on information which must be re-
tained in the memory for future utilization. The well known
works of C. Uolter 06) and others describe conditioned delayed
negative waves. In man, this wave develops in the neocortex in
response to conditions which require active attention. Accor-
ding to the data of C. Uolter (15), one of the characteristics
of this delayed potential, which is registered directly on the
cerebral cortex in man, is its strictly expressed local charac-
ter. The local character of a delayed negative potential was
noted both in our work and in the studies of E. G. Briling. The
evoked cortical electric activity involved in the process of
speech activity was examined in these studies.

when a word is pronounced, a delayed negative wave develops in

any part of the cortex of the left hemisphere. This wave can

be compared to the potential for preparedness which is developed
22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the motivating zone of the cortex during performance of an
arbitrary motion.

Obvious and subtle indices of local activation can be seen in
changes in amplitudinal and temporal parameters for the late
positive wave, the component ”300, of an evoked potential. This
late potential develops in response to the effect of significant
stimuli which illicit a tentative reaction or focus the attention
of the individual. Given percaption of significant visual stimu-
li when the test snbfect is not performing another arbitrary ac-
tivity, changes in tie P300 wave are noted mainly in the occipi-
tal cortical region (22 23,24). This was detected in our pre-
viously mentioned experiments using perceived emotional semantic
stimuli.

We are faced with an extremely difficult but interesting ques.
tion: given perception of an emotional semantic stimulus, in

what manner and by which neur010gic mechanism is the thalamic
nonspecific system involved in local activation and likewise,
given unconscious perception of these stimuli, how is the diffuse
activated system of the mesencephalonic ret‘cular system involved?
we are not in a position to provide a sufficiently complete an-
swer to this question, but we can present a physiologically based
hypothesis to explain the corticofugal mechanism of the nonspeci-
fic systems involved in the process of unconscious and conscious
perception.

According to our hypothesis, activation of temporary connections
between the receiving elements of the cerebral cortex and the
motor speech region, involved in erception of any external sig-
nal, has crucial significance. Tris concept has been confirmed
by the multiple studies of R. Sperry and his colleagues (32, 33).
Their data indicate that it is impossible for test subjects to
Verbalize and perceive stimuli if the visual information is re-
ceived only by the right hemisphere without involvement of the
motor speech region. Analysis and synthesis of semantic signals
occurs in the gnostic Speech zone of both hemispheres (mainly

in the right hemisphere). These signals are not perceived if
the nervous impulses from this zone are not transmitted to the
motor speech regiOn; that is, if activation of temporary connec-
tions between these cortical zones does not occur.

The difference,noted in our experiments, in the evoked activity
for perceived and unperceived semantic stimuli clearly attests
to the involvement of the corticofugai mechanisms in the non-
specific impulsation of cortical reaction. Only after prelimi-
nary analysis of the impact on the cortex of the semantic pro-
perties of the visual stimuli used in our experiments were we
able to discern the non specific influence of emotionally

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

innnleduliuluﬂl an the cerebral cortex and judge the "percepti-
hllily" of a word stimulnu. Undoubtedly, the nature of the non-
specific influence on the thalamic and brain stem structures is
determined by curticofugal impulses. The difference between
these influences is a result of the semantic content of the stlv
mull. in the cerebral cortex, there are structural-functional
elements which, in all probability, are the source of similar
corticofugal influences.

A series of experimental results, obtained in animal studies,
points to the presence,in the cerebral cortex of structural
mechanisns involved in performance of a directed reflex (S, 14).
The activating mechanisms for a directed reaction are located in
the secondary cortical zones, ad acent to associatioual fields.
with electrical stimulation of t ese points on the cortex, inte-
grated directed reactions occur which are similar to those seen
in natural stimulation of receptors. This electrical stimula-
tion reinforces the activating influences of the reticular sys-
tem in the cortex. Previously learned cortical activating mecha-
nisms are triggered during the formation of a temporary connec-
tion when the cerebral cortex is stimulated by irradiation. In
cases when stimuli are perceived, that is, when the structures

of the motor speech center are temporarily connected, triggering
of the cortical activating mechanisms for focused attention occurs,
as well as activation of these mechanisms located in other re-
gions of the brain. hvoked corticofugal impulses stimulate tha-
lamic mechanisms for focused attention, which in turn leads to
the development of local "nonspecific" activating influences.
These influences selectively raise, for a given moment, the level
of "creative" excitability of parts of the cerebral cortex. We
think that with the aid of this cortico-thalamo-cortical mecha-
nism for a counter connection, involved in the structure of a
temporary connection, the cerebral cortex creates the optimal
conditions for both conscious recognition of a significant sig-
nal stimulus and performance of an adequate arbitrary reaction.

Our data on evoked potentials indicate the the above mentioned
mechanism for local activation is not involved in the formation
of a temporary connection for an unperceived external stimuli.

In all probability, the temporary connection between motor speech
cortical structures is not activated or formed. fvidently, these
mechanisms, located in the secondary cortical zones of analyzing
structures, for activation of a directed reflex are involved in
the system for temporary connections. As shown in animal experi-
ments, evoked corticofugal impulses stimulate the nonspecific
structures of the mesencephalonic system, as a result of which
the diffuse "nonSpecific" influences of the mesenccphalon on

the cerebral cortex are strengthened. we observed this effect

in the form of diffuse changes in amplitude of the late cortical

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
)‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

evoked potential in res ease to unpcrceived emotionally signi-
ficant word stimuli. Tlis scheme, baSed on modern neurophysio-
logic concepts, allows scientists to visualize the neurologic
mechanisms involved in the cortical dynamics of "nonspecific"
activation of the cerebral cortex. In some cases, activation

is local and in others, diffuse, depending on the perceptibility
of the signaning stimulus.

The concept that local activation of the cerebral cortex is de-
termined vy the signaling significance of the perceived stimulus
which dominates psychic activity at a iven moment was confirmed
by studies on cortically evoked electr c activity in healthy na-
ture individuals during periurmence of a chosen voluntary motor
reaction (ll). Recording of average evoked potentials was con-
ducted during tests using physically similar visual stimuli with
differing signaling sign f cance: in one variant, the stimulus
was only a warning. but the choice of reaction was determined

by the character of the activating signal; in another variant,
the warning stimulus determined tie choice of reaction.

Analysis of the late positive wave P300 indicated that a warning
stimulus, which determines the choice of a reaction, evokes an
electrical response which, in the anterior regions of the cere-
bral cortex, has a larger potential responsiveness to stimuli

of analogous physical force. However, this cortical region does
participate in the process of choosing a reaction. A similar
difference in size of evoked response was not observed in the
occipital region.

Evidently, the size of the cemponent P300 in anterior regions of
the cere ral cortex determines local activation of the cerebral
cortex. This local activation of the cortex at a given instance
is probably the essential component in the neurologic mechanism
needed to prepare and organize ”the commands” si nailed by the
environucnt, for performance of a motor act. Th 5 explains the
changes in an evoked response observed in the anterior regioas
of the cerebral cortex in which, according to data from neuro-
psychologic studies on patients with organic disorders of the
frontal lobe, a goal oriented motor activity is organized (12).

Results of the two previously mentioned experiments.using per-
ceived stimuli, clearly show that the cortical topographic phe-
nomenon for activation or inhibition of late evoked resoonses is
determined by the signal significance of stimuli which dominate
cortical activity at a given moment. When it is necessary to
select a reaction, in reponse to visual stimuli, activation of
the cortex occurs in the anterior regions. if a perceiving
function dominates, then local activation is observed mainly

in the related perceiving cortical zone, to which the given
stimulus is addressed. Thus, during performance of conscious

25
708 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

activity, the resulting local activation of the cerebral cortex
has a dynamic character, determined by the signal significance
of the stimuli and by the predominant arbitrary activity.

by no nbhns do we consider the described cortico-thalamo-corticnl
mechanism for focused attention to be the substructure of consci-

ousness, as is assumed in the central encephaionic theory of w.
Penfiold. Rather, we view it as the element in the complex brain
system which guarantees conscious experience in nan.

it appears to us that the quoted experimental results indicate
that modern psychophysiologic and electroph siolo ic methods of
research provide a physiolo ic approach w t whicl to study the
most complex processes of h gber neurologic activity in man. How-
ever, we acknowledge that our understanding of all the intricacies
of the physiologic mechanisms for conscious and unconscious exper-
ience in the human mind remains incomplete. However, these ex-
perimental findings indicate that l.P. Pavlov's ideas on the
physiology of consciousness were indeed prOphetic. Clearly
understanding that consciousness is a function of the entire
cerebral cortex. l.P. Pavlov stressed the dynamic character of
local changes in brain response. He wrote: "If it would be possi-
ble to see through the skull and if the sites in the cerebral
cortex of Optimal excitability were illuminated during stimula-
tion, we would catch sight of the thinking conscious individual
and would observe the constantly changing contours of the light

spot, surrounded by the shadowed expanse of the rest of the core-
bral cortex" (l3).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Arzumanov, Yu. L. Journal of higher neurologic activity, 1974
volume 24, No 5, page 917.

2. Asratyan, E.A. Journal of higher neurologic activity, 1969,
volume 19, No 2, page 195.

3. ballavndzbyan, 0.6. Autonomic regulation of electrical acti-
vity in the brain. Leningrad, "Science", 1967.

4. Heritashvili; l.S. in the book: Marks of the institute of
Physiology imeni 1.5. beritashvili. Tbilisi, Publication of
the Georgian SSR Academy of Sciences, 1956, volume iO,page 3.

S. beritashvili l.S. in the book: Gagrskiye [word unknown] dis
cussions. Tbilisi, ”Netsniyerebn" [expansion unknown], 1963,
volume 4, page 111.

26
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.
21.
22.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6ershuni, 6.V. Physiology journal. USSR, 1946, volume 32,
No. 1, page 43.

ll'yuchenok, R. Yu and Chaply inn, 8. R. Journal of higher
neurologic activity, 1970, vo ume 20, No 1, page 176.

11°yuchenoh, R. Yu. and Yelisoyeva, A.6. Journal of higher
neurolonic activity, 1967, volune 17, No 2, page 330.

Kostandov, E.A. and Arzumanov, Yu. L. Journal of higher
neurologic activity, 1974, volume 24, No 3, page 465.

Kostandov, h.A. and Briling, 5.6. Journal of higher neuro-
logic activity, 1973, volume 23, No 5, page 938.

Kostandov E.A. and Vazhnova, T.N. Journal of higher neuro-
logic activity, 1976, volume 26, No 6, page 1123.

Luriya, A.R. Higher cortical function in man. Moscow, Publi-
cation of MGU [Moscow State University], 1962.

Pavlov, i.P. Completed collected works, 1931, volume 3, book
1, page 121.

Sokolov, E.N. in the book: Gagrskiye [word unknown] discussions.
Tbilisi3 "Netsniyereba" [expansion unknown], 1963, volume 4,
page 8 .

Uolter, 6.". In the book: Problems of the dynamic localiza-
tion of the brain. Moscow, 1968, page 194.

Uolter, 6.6. The living brain. Moscow, "World", 1966.

Beck, E.C., Dustman, R.E. and Beier, 6.6. ERG a. Clin. Neuro-
physiol., 1966, v. 20, No. 4, p. 397.

Celesia, 6.6. a. Puletti, G. EEG. a. Clin. Neurophysiol.,
1971, v. 31, No. 6, p. 603.

Chi, C.C. a. Flynn, J.P. EEG a. Clin. Neurophysiol., 1968,
v. 24, No. 4, p. 343.

Domino, ﬁ.F. Anesthesiology, 1967, v. 28, p. 184.
Fuster, J.M. a. Alexander, 6.6. Science, 1971, v. 173, p. 652.

Garcia-Austi, 6., Bogacz, J. a. Vanzulli, A. EEG 3. Clin.
Neurophysiol., 1964, v. 17, No. 2, p. 136.

27
FOR OFFICIAL 11$! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

23. Goff, w.R. 1n: Attention in ﬁeurOphysiolony. Ed. C.R. Evans
and T.u. Muiholland, London, 1969, p. 169.

24. Hollidoy, A.M. a. Mason, A.A. EEG 0. Clin. Neurophysiol.,
1964, v. 16, No. 3, p. 314.

25. Levy, R. a. Behran, J. EEG n. Clin. Neurophysiol., 1970, v.
29, No. 4, p. 400.

26. Llamas, A., Avendnno, C. o. Roinoso-Sunres, F. Science, 1977,
v. 195, No. 4280, p. 794.

27. Lorens, S.A. a. Brown, Th. 8. Exptl Neurol., 1967, v. 17, No. 1, _
p. 36.

28. Penrieid, W. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jer-
sey, 1975, p. 123.

29. Rebert, Ch. 5. EEG. n. Clin. Neurophysiol., 1972, v. 33, No.
4, p. 399.

30. Sierra, 6. a. Fuster, J. M. EEG a. Clin. xeurophysiol., 1968,
v. 25, No. 3, p. 274.

31. Skigngr, J.E. EEG a. Clin. Neurophysiol., 1971, v. 31, No. 3,
p. 9 .

32. Sperry, n.w. in: Brain and conscious experience. Berlin--
Heidelbergo-Ncw York, 1966, p. 298.

33. Sperry. n.w. a. anzoniga M. In : stain Hechanisms underlying
speech and 1nngua c. Ed. C.H. Millikan a. F.L. Darley, New
York and London, 967, p. 108.

34. Spong, P., Hnider, M. n. Lindslcy, v.3. Science, 1965, v. 148,
No. 3068, p. 395.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "ﬂanks", "2hurna1 vysshcy nervnoy deyn-
tcl'nosti", 1978

9139
680: 1870

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NBUROSCI WCES

1118 STATE OF PROSPECTS FOR III! mm} mm SCIENTIFIC PROJECT 'BRAIN' TO
STUDY THE WISH!) 0? "I61!“ NBUROLOCIC ACTIVITY

Hoscov ZHURNAL WSSIlﬂ NBIWNOY DBYATBL'NOSTI in Russian No 6, 1978 pp 1143-1150

[Report on the 23rd Session of the Scientific Council, 17 April 1978,
Leningrad by E. A. Asretyen and P. V. Sisonov, Institute of higher Neurologic
Activity and Neurophysiology, USSR Academy of Sciences, materials presented
by H. c. Ayrepetyents, U. G. Casanov. N. 0. Lopatina, V. V. Ponomarenko,

N. P. Suvorov, K. V. Sudekov, and H. H. lthenenashvili are used in the
report]

[Text] The long term scientific project "Rrain", undertaken to
study the mechanisms of higher neurologic activity, re resents
one of the creative developments stemming from the wor of I.P.
Pavlov. The latest achievements in general neurophysiology and
modern experimental techniques applied to this study are based
on his fundamental work. The indepth elaboration of fundamental
scientific questions in the field of higher neurologic activity
is relevant for education, psychoneurologic clinics, rational

organization of labor, the practice of animal husbandry, and a
whole series of other fields, which have major applied signifi-
cance for our country.

In this report, we do not intend to give an exhaustive summary
of all the most significant results, obtained by soviet resear-
chers in this scientific field. Rather, we will focus on the
results which illustrate the basic directions of the scientific
project "Brain" and which reveal the current state of research
and its future prospects.

Mechanisms for learning, activating, and inhibiting conditioned
reflexes. In studies on mechanisms for conditioned reflexes, re-
searchers have concentrated on analysis of systematic neuronal

activity and on the identification of synapses which can modify

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and [auctionally unite different neurons (IVNU [Institute of

Hi her Neurologic Activity and Neurophysiology. USSR Academy of

Sc encos; Brain institute. USSR Academy of Medical Sciences; 1F
[institute of vhilesOphy], Ykrainian SSR Academy of Sciences:
Institute of rsycholo§y, USSR Academy of Sciences: IBM [Institute
of Epidemiology and M crohiology , USSR Academy of Medical Sci-
ences; HGU [Moscow State Univers ty]; and LGU [Leningrad State
University]). Investigators established the specific forms of
organization of neuronal microsystems in the cortical projection
zones of the brain during performance of conditioned reflex re-
actions by functionally ifferentiated cells, initiation of asso-
ciative changes in the population of cortical cells, and functional
union of neurologic elements from different areas of the cortex.
Data were obtained on the selective pliahility of synaptic path-
ways of cortical neurons using mathematical analysis of synaptic
activity in overall responses. Studies on individual neuronal
projection zones of the cortex demonstrated the specificity of
sequential conditioned reflex response. This specificity controls

the reorganization of neuronal activity in response to various
stimuli.

The operation of bilateral (direct and reverse) conditional sig-
nals in the activation of a conditioned reflex was demonstrated
by recording neuronal activity in cortical responses to signal
and reinforcement stimuli. The further elaboration of the "polar-
ization” and "neuroglial" hypotheses for how temporary nervous
signals are completed is of interest. New experimental evidence
has been obtained which indicates the usefulness of these hypo-
theses. originally proposed by soviet scholars.

A series of studies on neuronal mechanisms for conditioned re-
flexes was used to analyze neuromediatoral activity (lVND and
NF, USSR Academy of Sciences; Brain institute, USSR Academy of
Medical Sciences; and MGU). Reorganization of cortical neuron
activity for a conditioned reflex occuned when remote signals
were combined with local application of norepinephrine and ace-
telcholine, causing the condiﬁnud reaction of the neurons to
oppose the usual response to ap lied pharmacolonic "reinforce-
ment". It was shown that the cioline sensitivity of cortical
neurons depends on the signaling (positive or inhibiting) sig-
nificance of the conditional stimulus. Associative changes in
neuronal activity can also occur when the action of two mediators
are combined with diametrically opposed effects. By studying
the neurochemical bases for training. scientists discovered in-
formational exchan es of membraneous roteins, the appearance
of new antigenic cuaracteristics in tiem, and changes in the
activity of the protein networks in the synaptoplasm. Additional
data were obtained on the involvement of catecholaminergic mech-
anisms of the brain in the performance of a conditioned reflex

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the role of serotonergic mechanisms in rribforcinn the re-
sponse. The protein content of the neurons of the motivating
cortex and the hippecampus is altered by these processes.

Recently, scientists studyinf the macrostructnrnl bases for
conditioned reflex activity \ave focused a great deal of atten-
tion on training the limbic system (IVND and NF, USSR Academy

of Sciences; hruin Institute, USSR Academy of Medical Sciences).
Study of the spatial organization of the neurologic processes
involved in the performance of a conditioned reflex revealed the
regulating influence of the limbic structures on the functional
relationship of different parts of the cerebral cortex. It was
demonstrated that the select functional connections of the hippo-
campus and caudate nucleus with the projection and associative
regions of the neocortex are determined by the stage of condi-
tioned reflex reinforcement. With reinforcement, the frequency
of the theta rhythm is altered, as evidenced by a high degree of
coherence in Ebb recordings.

Study of the generalization of conditioned reflexes, illicited

by direct electrical stimulation of limhic structures was very
fruitful for analysis of the functional interrelationship between
these structures. Studies showed that combining direct electrical
stimulation with feeding or defensive reinforcement for limbic
training completely alters this reaction, which was caused pre-
viously by stimulation of certain limbic structures.

Simultaneous stimulation of rhythmic and permanent currents at
two hippocampal sites, from which the phenomenon of self stimu-
lation can be illicited, allowed scientists to differentiate
between the "motivational" and "reinforcing" components of an
experimentally induced self stimulation reflex.

One can hope that further studies of the mechanisms for activa-
tion of conditioned reflexes, on the macro- and micro-structural
levels, and the utilization of cellular analogs for temporary
signals and conditioned reflexes in invertebrates will lead to
understanding those membraneous-synaptic and intracellular ex-
changes which are the bases for training.

NeurophysioIOgic bases for integrated behavior. The study of the
neurophysiologic bases for goal-oriented behavior is one of the
most important creative developmentsstemming from the work of

l.P. Pavlov, for whom the terms "higher neurologic activity" and
"behavior" were synonymous. Pavlov repeatedly asserted that
higher neurologic activity is a result of interaction of the most
complex uncenduhned reflexes (instincts), conditioned reflexes,
and their diverse systematized forms (for example, dynamic stereo-
types). in man, this process is seen in the complex functional

3]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

training for mechanisms of speech and thought processes.

Building on these fundamental theoretical assumptions of I.P.
Pavlov, scientists at the IVNn and NF, USSR Academy of Sciences
obtained new experimental data which reinforced concepts of how
the physiologic mechanisms for motivated behavior are a result
of a complex interaction between vital unconditioned reflexes
and various kinds of conditioned stimuli (direct and counter-
conditi nal signals). investigators paid particular attention
to coun er-coniitional signals, that s the influence of the un-
conditioned reflex on the functional state of the brain structures
which receive the conditional signals, related to the given uncon-
ditioned reaction: the signals for food, water, and avoidance of
painful stimulation. They also studied the motor apparatus in-
volved in behavioral acts. It was shown that these counter-con-
ditioned signals can have a tonic character, guaranteeing strict
selective responses by the animal to multiple external stimuli.
As a result, the behavior of the animal becomes active and goal-
oriented. The whole pattern of behavior illicited in response
to a given set of factors, allows scientists to measure the non-
regulated opposition to motivated behavior caused by the reflex
principle of brain activity. This line of research builds on
the works of I.M. Sechenov and I.P. Pavlov.

Experimental data were compiled at the iVND and NF, USSR Academy
of Sciences on the fundamental role of four brain structures
(frontal section of the neocortex. hippocampus amygdala, and
hypothalmus) in the genesis of emotional reactions and in the
organization of behavior. These four structures form two sub-
systems, one of which (hy othalmus and amygdala) selects the pre-
dominant needs by cvalunt mg the subdominant competetive motiva-
tions. and the second (the frontal cortex and hippocampus) eval-
uates the probability of satisfying these needs for a given si-
tuation at a given moment. It was shown that the frontal cortex
orients behav or to signals with a high probability for rein-
forcement. The hippocampus is responsible for reaction to the
signals for improbable events. Experimental need informational
schemes for integrated brain activity allows scientists to syste-
matize in theoretical terms an enormous amount of factual mater-
ial, rotted to the function of the limbic system and to propose

conceptual schemes for the organization of behavior, naturally
super mposed on the anatomical structures of the brain.

Using models for feeding and defensive behavior of nestlings and
homin behavior of cats, evidence was obtained regardin the most
signi icant natural stimuli which determine the innate germs of
behavior and their subsequent dynamics related to training pro-

cesses. informational and energetic parameters of the apparent
stimuli and their connection with the visually specific sensi-

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tivity of animals were determined. The role of impulse activity
of neurons in the somatosensory cortex and the reticular forma-
tion of the brain stem in the process of kitten development was
studied. 0n the basis of the data, the characteristics of acous-
tical activity of these cells were defined, typical forms of their
electrical discharge were classified, and the evolution of poten-
tial for action was traced. An original method was devised to
evaluate the geometry of a developing neuron.

The ontogcnic approach to the study of brain function in children
allowed researchers to explain the gradation and heterochronism

of involvement of various parts of the brain in the processes of
perception and attention and the role of the cortical lobes, which
mature later in the organization of adequate reaction to external
action (institute of Child and Adolescent Physiology, APN USSR
[USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences].

Studies on the neurophysiologic bases for goal-oriented behavior
being conducted by a number of scientific groups are based on P.
K. Anokhin's theory of the functional system. Some of these studies
are being conducted at the following institutions: Institute of
Normal Physiology, USSR Academy of Nedical Sciences; individual
laboratories at the Institute of Pediatrics, USSR Academy of Medi-
cal Sciences; First LMI [Leningrad Pedical Institute]. The se-
quence for storing and remembering results of actions which pre-
ceed stimuli to reinforce feeding behavior was demonstrated ex-
perimentally. An hgpothosis was formulated on the structure of
the "receiver" whic interprets the consequences of an action.

At the basis of this theory is an assumption that the traces of
the reinforcement stimulation remain fixed in these neurons which
are selectively involved in motivational stimulation.

By examining human activity durin working conditions, scientists
found ways to coordinate the physﬁological rhythms of man with
work rhythms. They also derived a series of indices to charac-
terize the degree of resistance of the functional state to the
process of instilling working habits. Study of EEG rhythms in
conditions of social isolation during simulation of prolonged
space flight and in polar workers in the AntarCtic, allowed scien-
tists to trace the dynamics of the functional state in a cycle of
adartntion and readaptation. For a study of the system of man-
macuine, groups of people were selected according to their pre-
dominant mechanisms for coping with disturbances and distractions.
By this selection process, Operators were classified according

to type of coping mechanisms.

Experimental pathology and therapy for higher neurologic activity.
Until recently, this scientific field, based on the work of l.P.
Pavlov and his colleagues, was clearly under-developed,

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

although the advances in modern neurophysiology were extremely
advantageous for its further development. The theoretical and
practical significance of this scientific field can be seen in
the reject "Brain". At the present time, data are available
whicu conclusively point to the fact that given differences in
the quality and degree of complexity of the factors which lead
to pathology in higher neurologic activity of man and animals,
the resulting pathophysiologic stresses in man and animal are
very similar. For example, contents of norepinephrine and sore-
tonin can be altered in brain tissues given a depressive state
in humans and monkeys subject to social isolation. It also has
been shown that man and higher animals, given a similar patho-

logic state, respond similarly to the therapeutic influences of
the same drug.

Recently, it has become especially ap arent that the success

and practical value of studying exper mental pathology of higher
neurologic activity, to a large extent, depends on selecting
models in which to adequately examine the etiology and pathogen-
esis of neurologic disturbances in man. Analysis of clinical data
points to two critical factors in the genesis of neurosis in man:
motivational conflicts arising within the sphere of interpersonal
relationships, and the chronic need to make decisions without
sufficient time to digest all the information required to take

a course of action. his stuation is sometimes referred to as
"informational overload". In fact, such an "overload" indicates

a lack of available means required to solve the given problem, that
is to satisfy the need.

Intensive studies are being conducted at IF, Georgian SSR Academy
of Sciences; IVND and NF, USSR Academy of Sciences; IEH, USSR
Academy of Medical Sciences; Institute of Normal Physiology, USSR
Academy of Medical Sciences; and IE? and T [Institute of Experi-
mental Pathology and Therapy], USSR Academy of Hedical Sciences
(Sukhumi) to find an animal model in which to study experimental
pathology of higher neurologic activity, the principle causes for
which are seen in neurotic diseases in man.

It has been found that dogs, raised without litter mates during
early stages of their ontogenesis, are characterized by a signi-
ficant degree of aberration both in mechanisms for regulation of
emotion and in function of short term memory. In these animals,
it is easy to produce prolonged experimental neurosis. It is also
difficult to reinforce training in these animals. Increasingly,
other methods are being used to disrupt the normal social rela-
tionships. These include creating group stress by a threat of
painful stimulation, providing signals for aggressive and de-
fensivelstimulation in other animals of the same species and

so ortn.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Overstress of the functional abilities of the nervous system

is achieved by such experimental methods as gradually increasing
the burdens on the function of short term memory, testing delayed
reactions, employing probability reinforcement, evaluatin ability
to work out complicated dynamic stereotypes, using condit oned re-
Flex reinforcement on dissimilar reflexes, and so forth.

A multifaceted analysis of different functions and systems in an
organism is a very productive way to study experimental neurosis:
disturbances in sleep structures, brain vasculature, the relation-
ship between neuromediators in brain tissues and peripheral blood
supply, and the micromorphological diaplacements in various sec-
tions of the cerebrum. Simultaneous analysis of changes in many
functions during the process of development of ex erimental neur-
osis has important practical significance for sin oration of
methods for early diagnosis and for monitoring the effectiveness
of therapeutic measures.

Having clinically established the role of debilitating influences
which enable the development of neurotic diseases, scientists are
now studying the effects of exposure to ionizing radiation, chro-
nic noise and prolonged hypokinesis on behavior. Experimental
data have been obtained on the role of genetic factors which de-
termine predisposition and resistance to emotional stresses.

Study of the dynamics of cardiovascular function in different
genetic strains of rats exposed to experimental stress, enabled
scientists to establish precise prognostic criteria for distur-
bances in cardiovascular function. It has been shown that Niaster
rats, resistant to cardiovascular disturbances, have a predispo-
sition to disturbances in the adrenalizing ennervation of the
stomach. Stimulation of the medial anterior brain bundle (the
system for "rewards") in rats substantially weakens the reactions
of fear and agression, increases experimentally induced activity,
and in situations of conflict, facilitates the choice of the
correct reaction. One mechanism for inhibiting emotional reac-
tion to pain involves strengthening the resistant influence of
.the central gray matter of the brain.

In clinical conditions, it is apparent that there is a relation-
ship hetween the state of psychogenic childhood and the psycho-
genic and actual course of hypertonic and ulcer diseases. It
has been shown that increasing the arterial pressure in patients
with hypertonic diseases correlates with characteristic changes
in the structure of evening sleep and interhemispheric interac-
tiou.

With the development of research in the field of experimental
pathology and therapy for higher neurologic activity, it has

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

become possible to conduct a series of scientifically organized
meetings such as the {oint meetings of the Bureau of the Depart-
ment of Physiology, USSR Academy of Sciences and the Medical
Biologic Division, USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, and a meeting
to cr'tically analyze neo-freudianism.

In light~of the evident revitalization of interest in the problems
of experimental pathology in higher neurologic activity which,
tbanks_to the multifaceted collaborative project "Interbrain",

has been‘observed among neurophysiologists and clinicians in
socialist countries, we consider the general level of work in

this field to be still inadequate. The level of development

does not correspond to the practical importance of the problem.

We hope that the mutual interest in this problem by two academies--
USSR Academy of Sciences and Academy of Medical Sciences-- will
enable further progress in the development of this field, inclu-
ding more widespread use of monkeys as the most effective model

in which to simulate human pathology.

The genetics of higher neurologic activity and innate forms of
behavior. Studies on the genetics of behavior have been conducted
at six scientific research institutions in our country: Institute
of Physiology inwni I.P. Pavlov, USSR Academy of Sciences; Insti-
tute of Cytology and Genetics SO [Siberian division], USSR Aca-
demy of Sciences; Department of Biology, MGU; the Department of
Biology, LGU; Institute of Breeding and Genetics of Agricultural
Animals; Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology, USSR
APN [Academy of Pedagogical Sciences].

The characteristic feature of soviet research on the genetics of
behavior is the elaboration of uestions on the mechanisms which
influence genes for behavior an their relation to activity of the
nervous system and the endocrine glands. Research is also focused
on the role of the nervous system and neurohormonal factors in

the realization of the mutation process and in nicroevolutionary
transformations.

Studies on the genetics of the human nervous system by utilizing
"twin" methods ndicated the dependency of certain EEG components
of different sections of the brain on genotypes. A dependency

on genotypes was established for particular extrapolated reflexes
in mice and rats.

Data on the genetic dependency of reactivity to stress in the pro-
cess of domestication of wild animals enlarged upon research in
this area. Specially bred populations of mice and rats, obtained
by double crossbreeding according to reactivity to stress,were
studied. Examination of the influence of genetic polymorphism on
stress sensitivity during pregnancy for differential breeding of

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

females indicated that reaction to stress can lead to elimination
or certain genotypes which are more susceptible to stress. This
reaction to stress serves as a factor which influences the genetic
structure of the following generation and participates in the pro-
cess of microevolution.

Selection studies on the threshold of neuronuscular excitability
in rats have been completed. Differences between strains with
high and low excitability appeared in the second generation and
were retained to the same degree in the sixth generation. it was
shown that this divergence between strains is not accompanied by
a divergence in a number of aorphologic indices éfor example,
weight of the animal) related to nutritional con itions during
ontogenesis which could have an effect on the general tonicity

of the nervous s stem. bevelo ment of a strain of rats,charac-
terized by thresnold of excita ility of its effector section,

is required for further genetic and neurophysiologic and beha-
viorai analysis. Such a strain could he used to simulate differ-
ent pathologic states of the nervous system and can serve as test
objects for the study of the effects of pharmacolo ic prepara-
tions. The study of characteristic behavior and p ysiologic in-
dices in interspecies crossbreeding of sturgeon showed that the
character of motor activity and adaptation to salinit of the
water was inherited through the maternal strain. hla oration of
this concept, in addition to its theoretical significance-~ex-
planation of the role of the nucleus and cytoplasm of the oocyte--
also has practical significance. These data are needed to cre-
ate scientifically based conditions for industrial and reservoir
breeding of sturgeon.

Current experimental work on the project "Brain" must be combined
with continual upgrading of the t eoretical and methodologic
level of research in progress. Recently, a series of reports
appeared which without grounds, criticized the science of higher
neurologic activity by contradicting the achievements made in
psych010gy. Current advances in understanding the physiology of
higher neurologic activity are often seen by authors of such ar-
ticles as being too simple and fascile. For example, E. ll'enkov,
in reviewing tie current "widely disseminated concept" of higher
neurologic activity in man wrote the following: " This concept
can be applied to anything, such as to training which is used on
circus animals: working with innate (“unconditioned") reflexes,
building on them to produce new kinds of "conditioned" reflexes.
Trainers begin with the "first" set of reflexes (innate) and

then build a "second signal system" upon them by using spoken
commands. in the end, a man is obtained" (Communist, 1977, No 2,
page 72). Unfortunately, h. il'enkov not once provides a refer-
ence for.such statements as "widely disseminated concepts",
"mythical hunt oriented reflexes", "scientifically haSed preju-

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl’ICMl. USE ONLY

dices, decorated by terminology of the genetics and physiology

of higher nervous activity"(we quote the vocabulary of the authors,
E.A., P.8.). For the non-specialist reader in this field, ier-
usal of such artlclos gives an entirely unfavorable impress on of
the theoretical level of research on higher neurologic activity.

This scientific topic is subject to question. in the opinion of
V.P. Zinchenko and M.K. Mamardashvili "mental events, in fact,
occur not in the head as neurophysiolo ic events, but grow and
unfold in extracerebral and transindivi ual realit and in quasi-
scientific fathoming of existence" (Questions of Piilosophy, 1977,
No 7, page 118). According to V.P. Zinchenko and H.K. Mamardash-
vili, a neurologic representation of the nature of mental activity

reality, is located in the scope of the brain as it was previously
thought to he in the scope of the heart, liver, etc. Well then,
it is easier to ascribe the property of objectivity in everyday
consciousness to the neuronal mechanisms of the brain, to find

in them the informational containing relationships, and to assert
the objective nature of brain activity, than to admit the reality
or the subjective, psychologic character of mental activity and
moreover, to recOgnize the dependency of mental activity on space
and time" (Questions of Philosophy, 1977, No 7, page 110). Again,
with the exception of a single reference to the controversial
article by H.M. Kol'tsova, we can not locate in the cited litera-
ture concrete statements by those authors with whom V.P. Zinchenko
and M.K. Mamardashvili are in dispute.

It is clear that unsupported references to “disseminated concepts",
"everday consciousness", "mechanical thought" by these anonymous
opponents deprive our discussions of the productivity which is
possible only when clear and precise formulations of the theo-

retical positions of both the supporting and opposing viewpoints
are given.

We are approaching the 150 year anniversary of the birth of 1.".
Sechenov who, in the opinion of l.P. Pavlov, was the first sci-
entist to Suggest a new approach to this field. "is work pro-
vidcd a place for this important field of physiologic research
in the study of the living organism. Scientific study of a
higher neurologic activity is one of the most promising develop-
ments to come out of the scientific-technical revolution both

in its philosophical and applied implications. By understanding
these answerable but extremely difficult problems, we will be
able to continue our research.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Zhurnal vysshey nervnoy
deyatel'nosti", 1978

9139
C80: 1870

38
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PNYSIOLOOY

A MORPHOLOGIC STUDY OF ADRENAL CLANDS 0F RATS AFTLR FLIGHT 0N
Tﬂh "IUSATELLITES 'COSHOS-OOS' AND 'COSMOS-782'

Leningrad ARKHIV ANATOMII, GISTOLOGII I EMRRIOLOGII No 9, 1978
PP 30-30

[Article by Ye. A. Snvina, institute of biomedical Froblems,
USSR ministry of health]

[Text] Study of the adrenal glands of rats, placed on hiosate-
llites, is interesting because these glands are sensitive indi-
cators of the effect of the stress factors of flight and the
adaptive capacities of an organism. The first morphologic
study of adrenal glands of mammals (mice and porpoises) after
short term exposure to weightlessness was conduected by v.6.
Petruhhin (1962). In animals sacrificed 2-3 days after flight
on a satellite, scientists observed acute plethora of the adre-
nal glands, depletion of the cortical lipids, mild hemorrhaging
in the nedullary matter. Thirty days after landing, the adre-
nals had a normal structure. No structural changes were ob-
served in the adrenal glands of nice placed on board the space
ship "Apollo-l7"(0rdy, J.H.. hrizzee, K.R., and Samorajski, T.
1d 5).

data are presented in this report to correlate norphologic mani-
restations of the adrenal gland reaction observed in animals
during the first 9-11 hours and those observed two days after
prolonged residence in conditions of weightlessness.

Materials and methods of investigation. The basic experimental
conditions on the biosatellite are outlined in the article by
Ye. A. ll'ina and co-autbors (1976).

Studies were conducted on adrenal glands from animals sacrificed
9-11 hours, 48 hours (20 rats), and 25-27 days (17 rats) after

completion of space flights of 19.5 days duration ("Cosmos-782")
and 22.5 days duration ("Cosmos-605"). Controls for each of the

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

above mentioned groups were provided by sacrificing an equal
number of animals from related land experiments which simulated
the conditions of flight, and by using rats retained in Vivarium.
histar line rats were used for the experiments on the biesatellite

"Cosmos-605" and SPF histar line rats were used for the biosatel-
lite "Cosmos-782".

Adrenal glands were dissected from fat cells, weighed, and fixed
in Beuins solution and calcium formel. Lipids were stained by
Berg's method, fat red 0 and sudan black n stains. Cholestroi
was examined by Shul’ts' method and viewed in polarized light.
Adrenal lands of animals from the "Cosmos-605" satellite were
studied n more details. Catechelaminos and the nedullary matter
of the adrenals were examined by Khillarp-Khekfel't reaction. The
islet cells which secrete noradrenaline were studied by Erenko's
method. The activity of the Krebs cycle enzymes (dehydrogenases:
succinate, malate, isocitrate) and t e pentose shunt (dehydro-
nenases: giucosc-b-phoSphate and 6-phosphog1uconate) were mea-
sured in cryostated sections of unfixed tissue. Activity of

the 3(p)-sterol-dehydrogenases was determined by Hattenberg's
method which was modified by Allen (1960). Karyometrv was con-
ducted on cells from the fasicular and glomerular zones and from
the medullary matter. Using the tracing apparatus RA-o, outlines
of the cell nuclei were traced (100 cell nuclei from each zone
were enlarged 2,000 times), their long and short diameters were

measured,and nuclear sizes were calculated according to standard
methods (Khecin, Ya. Ye., 1967).

Experimental results and discussion. A definite increase in
adrenal wei ht was observed in rats sacrificed 0-11 hours after
flight on t e'Cosmos-782" in comparison with animals from the
land experiments and controls retained in Vivarium. The adrenal
gland weight was not altered in animals from land experiments.

Accorfing to general bistelogic structures of the cortex and in-
dividual related zones, the adrenal glands of rats from the flight
group did not differ substantially from the glands of rats re-
tained in Vivarium. The glomcrular zone was well defined for

its whole perimeter and was composed of cells from vacuolized,
almost colorless, cytoplasn. The subglomerular layer, composed
of cells from the eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, was examined

in all animals. Sections from the fasicular zone had a radial
alignment and the cortex had a generally uniform structure. The
external zones were composed of cells from vacuolized cytoplasm,
whereas the middle and internal parts of the section were com-
posed of cells principally from eosinophilic cytoplasm and even
individual vacuoles. The reticular zone was narrow and plethoric;
its cells contained individual vacuoles. In the capillary lumens
of the cortex, segmented nuclear leukocytes were often observed.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB 0"“

 

T 0 an n u a l
1. Alma “immune- up»: In mum at emu-ax «coconut-roe
J.
2 «nun-m. 23:1

   
     

 

um um
(M 3 In)

 
  

 

 

a.§—|I u now: noseu I: l6.4:0.6" I--§ qr ocean loam ls 18330.5“

P <O.Wl
9.. P:<0.ml is. $1323:
.37.: n1: '°§?....°S§.'; l-2 cyr nocae ononu- 5
mm tram-ore cum . .
onut. ...... I2 b.2303 gun-29ml: «amid :5 33:8:

auupnul Iompoas l2 I3.l:0.5 c
Ha eyr Iocae noun II ".6305 am ”13’5".” |2 12,630.;
1225 cyr new new 26-27 on We once-

um museum unu-
Nnm ----- II “1.420.: enam ”193”” I2 I2.l:0.6

”Magma mums ll 12.6:0J Bunyan coupon-519 12 I? 6-03

29‘. n p u u e u a u u e: " -- sorrow-nu wan-In P.- lotto-tonne“ pun-«a
My noamum- r nnuu In em nun on : -
ueauy autumn npzncunuuu ancuﬁumurznutwu' p. “weep-out paununi

——

° 8 Y‘all" ﬂp'uﬂli Hm. NIJIOIOQIIIOI I" llmﬂll‘ Illdlﬂlﬂlllltﬂ

'enepnuuu.
Table 1
Key:
1. Weight of adrenal glands of rats from (light and land tests
2. ”Cosmos-782"
3. Number of rats
4. height of adrenals (mg/100g body weight)(Men)
S. "Cosmos~605"
6. Number of rats
7. height of adrenals (mg/100g body weight)(th)
8. 5-11 hours after flight
9. 5-11 hours after cempletion of land test
10. Controls retained in Vivarium
ll. 25 days after flight
12. 25 days after completion of land experiment
13. Controls retained in Vivarium
14. 1-2 days after flight
15. 1-2 days after cenpletion of land test
16. Controls retained in Vivarium
17. 26-27 days after flight
18. 26-27 days after completion of land test
19. Controls retained in Vivarium
20. Note: "significant differences. P --significancc of differ-
ence between flight groups and con rols retained in Vivarium;
P o-significance of ifferences between flight and land tests
21. ‘ The weight of adrenals from all animals,suhject to the ex-

periment, are presented.

Karyouetry of cells from the glonerular and fasicular zones
showed a significant increase in the size of nuclei from the

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

external faslcular layers in rats from the flight group in com-
parison with control animals from land experiments and these re-
tained in Vivarium (Table 2).

Key

1.

10.
ll.
12.
l3.
14.
15.
lb.
l7.
I3.
19.
20.

Tadanaa 2

1. 0030. am mun unease. ma non nan-«cannon In: as amt-u:
a nauuaux aunmumnoe '

6.
Mn»
nun

  
   

 

 

   

8.9—" "locum". 5 I30.5:4 I" 213’: mac ems - - 0 “loan?"
ppcmﬁl pp<mw
P. < 0.Wl 15, 15(1).“

9.9—" a noes: onen-
MMII ”WWO
0mm ...... 5

} guns-nu! tempo» 5

Y _ cyt noon: noana s

1219‘” nous enou-

2 eyr not-ac ouoauun

lanai-ore 0mm -- 6 |2l.0:4.7l

92.!33.” Baupnuaxonrgonlo. l0 I28.028.C

61.532.“ ﬂeyr Iota: noma .. 6 ”9,137.0
l00.0:3.67 21 an aocae enou-
unnl “macro

wanna amnion onum . .13.. . . . 6 113.5z4.‘l8
mam ...... 5 “.322.“ Bnupnuh xonrpou . . l0 "9.922.:
139..»qu nonrpoas 5 l0l.'l:2.c2 19.

2°°npnueunne. “ —aocvoupnue pauuna: P —aotroeepuotrs alumna
neuy noaernuw rpyanaun n anew-nun nonvpoaeu; I’,-amoupnoers pan-nah
nanny nomruuuu .- nun-man newline-mun.

TE“"

‘ Ghent: use IMO! nyﬂouoaoi mu n uoaroaoro mm he announce
a can t avg-mm zone-rpm: owl-an. may “one” unsusnunn rpynaaun
n unupnuu nounoaou.
Table 2

éize of cell nuclei froa the fasicular zone of the adrenal

cortex in rats from flight and land experiments
"Cosmos-782"

Number of rats 3

Size of the nucleus in u (Hem)

"Cosmos-605"

Number of rats 3

Size of the nucleus in p (Man)

9-11 hours after flight

9-11 hours after completion of land test

Controls retained in Vivarium

25 days after flight

25 days after completion of land flight

Controls retained in Vivarium

2 days after flight

2 days after completion of land test

Controls retained in Vivarium

27 days after flight

27 days after completion of land test

Controls retained in Vivarium

Note:“significant differences; P1--significance of differences
between flight groups and controls retained in Vivarium; P,--

significance of differences between flight and land experiments.

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

21. Sizes of cell nuclei from the glomerular zone and the medu-
llary matter were not calculated on the basis of absence of

significant differences between experimental groups and con-
trols retained in viviarium.

Examination of lipids revealed marked differences between the
adrenal glands of rats from the flight ,roup and those from
animals retained in Vivarium. In the f rst 9-11 hours after
flight, a significant decrease in lipid content was noted, par-
ticularly in the internal layers of the cortex. The glomerular
zone was separated from the rest of the cortex by a large number
of brightly luminescent large droplets. The subglonerular layer
was devoid of lipids. In all animals. delipoidization of the

fasicular zone (middle and particularly the internal layers) and
the reticular zone was observed (Figure l).

 

Figure l. Lipid content in the cells of the fasicular zone of
the adrenal glands of rats in normal conditions and after flight
on the biosatellite. a. Control. Cells of the gloncrular and

fasicular zones in the adrenal cortex contain a large amount of
large, brightly luminescent lipid droplets. b. Experiment. 9 hours

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

(Figure 1 continued) after flight. A marhed decrease in lipid
content of the fasicular zone of the adrenal cortex. Berg's
method. Mh-Z. oh. 20.

The extent and range of delipoidization varied in different ani-
mals. in some rats, a moderate amount of finely dispersed lipid
droplets was located only in the external layers of the fasicu-
lar zone, whereas in the rest of the fasicular and reticular zones
the lipid inclusion was almost absent. In other rats, the exter-
nal layers of the fasicular zone were more replete with lipids.
Helipoidization was present mainly in the internal and particu-
larly the middle layers of this section.

In animals, sacrificed 9-ll hours after completion of a synchro-
nized experiment, the general structural design, the relation-
ship of individual cortical layers of the adrenal glands, and
the size of cell nuclei in the glomerular and fasicular zones
did not differ from the controls retained in Vivarium (see Table
i). Delipoidization was localized and was significantly less
marked than in the flight group.

In rats, examined on the second day after flight on the "Cosmos-
605" satellite, the weight of the adrenal glands remained sig-
nificantly increased (see Table 1), whereas the histologic struc-
ture of t e cortex, in comparison with animals from the "Cosmos-
782" satellite. underwent definite changes. The interzonal hor-
ders had a rag ed appearance, and the fasicular zone was widened
causing narrow§ng of the glomerular and reticular zones. The
subglomerular layer was not examined. increase in the size of
the cell nuclei from the fasicular zone was retained, however
differences,in comparison with controls retained in Vivarium,
were less significant (see Table 2). nelipoidization, noted

in the first hours after landing, alternated with an accumula-
tion of a large quantity of finely dispersed lipid draplets
throughout the entire t ickness of the cortex. The sudanphobic
zone was not evaluated (Figure 2).

Correlation of enzyme activity (Krebs cycle, pentose shunt, 3(p)-
sterol-dehydrogenase) did not show any differences in the adrenal
glands of experimental animals in comparison with the controls.

Two days after flight the size of the cell nuclei from the medu-
llary matter, the luminescent intensity of islet cells which

socrete noradrenalin, and total content of catecholamines (eval-
uated by the Khillarp-Khekfel't reaction) were not different
from the controls retained in Vivarium.

Two days after completion of the land experiment changes in the
histologic structures, the histochemical properties, and the

66
P08 OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Suhglomerular layer of the rat adrenal cortex after
flight of different durations on board the biosatcllite. 3.
Experiment. 9 hours after flight. The subglomerular cortical
layer, deprived of lipids, has distinct contours; delipoidiza-
tion of the fasicular zone. b. Experiment. 2 days after flight.
Absence of subglomerular layer of the cortex; accumulation of
finely dispersed lipid droplets throughout the entire thickness
of the adrenal cortex. Berg's method. HL-Z. ob. 10.

weight of the adrenals were not observed.

Morphological displacements, noted in rat adrenals in the first
two days after landing, were transitory and after 25-27 days
were normalized in animals from all the experimental groups
("Cosmos-605" and "Cosmos-782").

Morphologic signs of hypertrophy and hyper-function of the adre-
nal cortex were detected in rats during the first 9-11 hours
after hiosatellite landing: increase weight of the adrenals,
significant increase in the size of the cell nuclei from the
fasicular zone, and delipoidization of internal cortical layers.
Results of biochemical studies, conducted during this experiment,
showed an increase in the content of corticosteroids in adrenal
gland tissue and in blood plasm (Kvetnyanski, R. ct al., 1976;
Tlgranyan, R.A., et al., 1976). In other words, during the

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

first hours after landing morphologic and biochemical displace-
ments, characteristic of a stress reaction, were observed in

the adrenal glands. Two days after flight, the intensity of
morphelogic indications of increased functional activity was
lowered si-nificantly. Thus, if in the first hours after flight,
the size 0 the cell nuclei from the fasicular zone was increased
by 54 percent, than two days latter, it exceeded the control only
by ll percent. The content of corticosteroids in blood plasm

of these animals was lower than in the control animals ( igranyan,
R.A. et al., 1975).

According to these data it is possible to determine whether the
observed displacements in the animals are caused by exposure to
weightlessness or if they develop acutely upon return to earth.

In order to evaluate the acute stress reaction caused by the
effects of a complex of factors present at the time of descent

and after landing of the biosatellito, we correlated the possible
relationship of increased size of cell nuclei from the fasicular
zone with delipeidizatien of the adrenal cortex. These changes
could develop ll hours after satellite landing, based on the
increase in the size of cell nuclei from the fasicular zone ob-
served two hours after a single dose intake of ACTH. After eight
hours, the increase reached ts naximun--$9 percent more than the
control (Kracht, T., 1954). in analogous conditions (intake of
ACTH) the maximum lowering of lipid content in the adrenal cortex
also developed in the first 6.12 hours (Shelton, F.R., 1961).

The development of an acute stress reaction was evidenced by the
absence of signs of structural rebuilding in the cortex. Such re-
building was not detected in the first 9-11 hours, but was clearly
apparent two days after flight.

The marked changes seen in rats from the flight group, as compared
with those observed in animals from synchronized experiments, may
be caused both by changes in the reactivity of the animals after
prolonged residence in weightlessncss and sy the more complex
group of factors which effect flight animals (in particular, re-
turn to earth's gravity). Apparently, the dynamic factors of
simulated re-entry and landing to which animals from the syn~
chronized experiment were subjected had a lesser inpact.

uvaluation of the morphologic manifestations of an acute stress
reaction was complicated, to a significant degree, by the retro-
spective analeis of the state of adrenal glands in conditions

of space flig t. Thus, for example, an unresolved question
remained: does the increase in adrenal weight occur in the pro-
cess of flight or after landing? The relatively moderate in-
crease in adrenal gland weight could have developed in the course
of the first 11 hours of the animals' residence on earth. how-

66
FOR OWICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR ONICIM. USE ONLY

ever, the absence of disruption in blood circulation and histo-
logic signs of acute structural reorganization of the cortex
sug'ested that changes in adrenal gland weight did not occur in
a snort period. The possibility of hypertroph and increase in
the functional activity of the cortex during tie time of flight
ﬁat least during individual stages of flight) was evidenced by
ata from studies on the lympho d organs, in which not all the
observed_changes fit into a picture of acute stress (1). Re-
duction;in the body weight of rats from the flight group, in
comparison with animals from the land experiments and controls
retained in vivarium (given practically identical food consump-
tion) was another indication that a stress reaction occurred

during the time of fli ht (Durnova, 6.N., Kaplanskiy, A.S., and
Portugalov, V.V., 1977§

Despite the stated difficulties, study of animals in the first
hours after flight allowed scientists to establish that the
phenomena of acute stress reaction developed despite normal
cortical architecture. The emergence of the suhglomerular layer--
distinctness of its borders and those of the corresponding indi-
vidual zonoso-attested to the significant degree of normaliza-
tion of cortical structures at t e and of the flight. According
to data presented in the literature, the condition of the sub-
glomerular zone is one of the morphologic criteria by which

the functional activity of the whole adrenal cortex can be judged
(Creep R.0. and Jones, 1., 1950). Disappearance of the subglo-
merular layer is observed in conditions of stress influences

and corresponds to increased cortical function. Reduction of
the la er's dimensions is a good index of adrenal gland "re-
covery' after stress reactions because it is often related to
normalization of the cortical structures and its histechemical
properties (Glasser, S.R. and Leathem, J."., 1956). Reduction
of the subglomerular zone in animals, subjected to a recurrent
influence, is an indication of adaptation by the organism to a
given factor. whereby increased adrenal function is no longer
exhibited (Mitre, A. and Hikulaj, L.. 1965).

Based on this criterion, it is likely that prior to re-entry to

earth, the function of the adrenal cortex was not increased and
that the animals had fully adapted to flight conditions.

The effect of the complex of factors, present during re-entry
and landing of the biosatellite, ermits, to a certain degree,
evaluation of the "stability marg n" of the adaptationai systems

of an organism. Absence of indices for "exhaustion" of adrenal
cortical function, based on morphologic and biochemical data

(Tigrnnyan, R.A. et al., 1976), attests to the preservation of
the adaptatienal capacity of an animal organism after prolonged
residence in weightlessness.

‘7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "3! ONLY

Thus, morphologic manifestations of functional displacements in
the adrenal glands were detected in rats after flight on the
blosatellites "Cosmos-60$" and "Cosmos-782". These displacements
reflect the adaptational reaction of the organism to conditions

of weightlessness and to the effects of return to earth's gravity.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Durnova, 6.N., KaplanshiK, v.s.. and Portugalov, V.V. The influence
of 22 days of space flig t on the lymphoid organs of rats. Space
hiology and Aerospace Medicine, 1977, No 2, p.53-S7.

ll'in, Ye., A., Serova, L.V., and Noskin, A.D. Experiments with
mice exposed to 22 days of flight on the biosatellite "Cosmos-

005" (Problems and methods of study). Space Biology and Medicine,
1976, No 3, p.9-13.

Kvetnyanshi, R., Tigranyan, R.A. et al. The influence of pro-
longed residence in space on the activity of the sympathetic-
adrenal system of rats. Proceedings of the lx Symposium on
Space Biology and Medicine, nudapest, 1976, p.100-107.

Petrukhin, v.6. Pathomorphologic changes in internal organs of
animalssubject to flight on space satellites. in: Problems of
Space Biology, 1962. Volume 2, p.128-139.

Sereva, L.V. The question of organism resistance during weight-
lessness. Aerospace Medicine. Proceedings of the V All-Union
Conference, Kaluga, 1975. Volume 1, p.36-38.

Tigranyan, R.A., Gayevskaya, M.S., et al. The nature of meta-
bolism in rats subject to weightlessness. Vlll Symposium on
Space Biology and Medicine. Reports. Varna, 1975, p.10d-lOS.

Tigranyan, R.A. Popova, I.A. et al. Changes in biological indices
of blood from rats after flight on "Cosmos-782" hiosatellite.
Proceedings of the 1x Symposium on Space Biology and ﬂedicine,
nudapest, 1976, n 83.

Khesin, Ya. Ye. Dimensions of the nuclei and the functional
state of cells. Moscow, ﬁtedicine", 1967, p-421.

Allen, J.M. A histochemical study of 3 (h)-sterol-dehydrogenase

in the adrenal cortex of the devoloping mouse. Anatomical Record,
1900, v. l37, N 1, p. 57-62.

classer, S.R. and Leathem, J.". The influence of diet on the
recovery of the rat adrenal from stilbestrol induced stress.
Endocrinology, 1956, v. $6, a 0, p. 420-425.

‘8
'08 OFFICKAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Creep ﬁlO. and Jones, I. Ch. Steroid control of the pituitary
Eggcgsgn. Recent Progress in Hormone Research, 1950, v. S, p.

Kracht. T. Zur Dauer der Nebennierenrindonactivicrung nach ACTH
und ACTH-depot. Arch. exporim. Pathologie und Phnrmakologie, 1954,
8d. 223, p. 355-361.

Mitre. A. and Mikulaj L. Uber die Verteilung Fetton in Nebcnniere
von Rotten in Laufe wiederholter Stresseinwirkung. Endokrinolegic,
196$, 36. 49, N 1-2, 8. 18-21.

Dray. J.M., Brizzce. K.R., and Sanora ski, T. Condition of
flight animals on recovery; food into e; observation on the
hypothalamus, pituitary and adrenal cortex. Aviation, Space and
Environmental Medicine, 1975, v. 46, N 4, p. 627-633.

Shelton, F.R. Response of the adrenal cortex in disease. In:
The Adrenal Cortex. ed. Moon, ".0. New York, 1961, p. 176-200.

COPYRIGHT: "ARKHIV ANATOMII, GISTOLOGII I BMBRIOLOGII", 1978

9139
C80: 1870

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PNYSIOLOGY

ANOTHRR DISCUSSION ON THE MECHANISMS FOR HISTOLOGICAL AND CYTO-
CHENICAL CHANGES IN NAMMALS (RATS) DURING ORBITAL FLIGHTS

Lcnéggggd ARKUIV ANATOMII, GISTOLOGII I BMBRIOLOGII No 9, 1978
PP '

[Article by V.V. Portugalov, Institute of Biomedical Problems,
USSR Ministry of Health]

[Text] Flights of the biosatellites of the "Cosmos" series have
enriched the field of space biology with a multitude of new data
which reveal how weightlessness effects various mammalian organ-
isms including man. Data collected during the biosatellite

series "Cosmos-605", "690", "782", and "936" indicate that factors
of space flight influence, to varying degrees, the structure and

chemical organization of various functional systems in living
organisms (Portugalov, V.V., 1976, 1977).

V.S. Yagodovskiy et a1. (1976, 1977) in studying a series of
satellites beginning with "Cosmos-605", and somewhat latter,
the American investigators C.W. Asling, D.J. Baylink, and E.M.
Holton, also using data from Soviet biosatellites, noted that
osteoporosis of the spongy segments of long tubular skeletal
bones developed in rats during prolonged orbital flight. Re-
duction of the Spongious of metaphyses and epiphyses was asso-
ciated with a decrease in mass of the arimary spon ious near
the epiphyseal cartilaginous layer. Tlinning of t1e cortical
layer occurred in the metaphyseal region. The dimensions of
the osteocytic lacunae in the diaphysis increased to a statis-
tically significant degree. This increase indicates the develop-
uent of periosteocytic osteolysis during flight.

Similar phenomena were observed in rats, subject for a prolonged
period to hypokinetic conditions and to experimental land tests
in which all the conditions of flight were simulated except
weightlessness. However, in the later tests, these changes,
according to the data of Yagodovskiy, were less obvious than

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

those seen in flight animals.

Thus,-we have accumulated facts which indicate that removal

of the static burden from the skeleton leads to changes in
mineral metabolism, manifested by the development of osteopor-
osis of the spongy segments of long tubular skeletal bones and
periosteecytic osteolysis of them.

Studies of skeletal muscles (il'ina-Kakuyeva, E.l. et al., 1976,
1977 a,b) indicated that different muscles have dissimilar
functional responses to the effects of space flight. Thus, in
muscles of the posterior extremities, the maximum loss in mass
was noted in the soleus amnion; to a lesser extent this was seen
in th0 gastrocnemius mumle: and in the quadricep muscles of

the femur only a tendency towards decreased mass was detected.
The muscle mass in the anterior extremities, for example the
biceps of the shoulder, was not altered. in all muscles of

the posterior extremities, signs of the development of muscle
fiber atrophy were observed microscopically. In functionally
different muscles, these signs were manifested in different
degrees. in contrast to the composite muscles, in the red soleus
muscle edema associated with proliferation of connective tissue
cells occurred in addition to atrophic processes. In the edema-
tous zone, segments of the muscle fiber underwent death and
breakdown. Correlation of the results from studies on the soleus
muscles in rats after flight, with data on these same muscles
subjected to hypekinesis, suggested to us that changes in the
muscle occur at the end of flight.

We consider the prevalence of atrophic changes in the skeletal
muscles to be related to reduction or even complete removal of
the static burden from the muscle, experienced during weight-
lessness. Data from multiple ex eriments on the effects of
restricted mobility during hypok nesis indicated the correct-
ness of this conclusion (Portugalov, V.V. et al., 1968, 1971,
1975), as well as those drawn from the previously mentioned
experimental land tests.

Other associated mechanisms take part in the genesis and develop-
ment of changes in the orientation-motor apparatus of an organ-
ism. At the present time, it is difficult to establish a direct
connection between the level of afferent information transmitted
to muscles from the central nervous system and the nature of
muscle metabolism. A deficiency in proprio- and interoceptive
impulses creates a "stimulation deficit" in the nerve centers
and alters both the nerves and tissues innervated by them during
trophic processes (Chernigovskiy, V.N., 1960; Ho endovich, M.R.,
1970, and others). It appears that the deprivat on (cemplete or
partial) of motor function, which occurs during space flight and

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

during certain earth conditions, leads to a deficit in the
function of related brain structures and to subsequent distur-
bances in the nutrition of the skeletal musculature and bones.
Reference should also be made to the fact that along with re-
duction in proprioceptive impulsation (quantitative and quali-
tative), distortion of angioreception with possible redistri-
bution of blood in the organism of the rat occurs during flight.
In fact, most recently it has been demonstrated in studies of
the pastrocnemius muscle that during flight a significant de-
crease in the number of functioning capillaries occurs (Kap-
lanskiy, A.S., 1978). We disagree with Kaplanskiy's under-
standin' of the genesis of these displacements. He relates these
observe changes to a decrease in the kinetic burden on the muscles
rhile we attach cardinal significance to removal of the static
)urden.

Observations conducted during the early period after completion
of space flight (4-11 hours) revealed a definite decrease in the
protein content of the cytoplasm of motor neurons in the spinal
cord at the level of the lumbar region, a decrease in the Kro-
tein content and RNA in the major sensory nerve cells in t e
spinal cord ganglia located at this level, and a decrease in

the content of water-soluble proteins in the structures of the
gray and white matter of the spinal cord and intervertebral
ganglia. These changes can be interpreted as cytochemical mani-
festations of a deficit in intero~ and proprioceptive impulsation
during the time of flight (Gorhunova, A.V. et a1., 1976, 1977,
1978). Thus, the changes detected in the early period after
flight (4-11 hours) in protein and RNA metabolism in nerve
structures involved in the signal reflex arc must be viewed as
the response to removal of the static burden from the orienta-
tion-motor apparatug which enables the organism to adapt to con-
ditions of weightlessness. Similar disalacements in the gray
matter of the cortex in the sensory motor zones ofthe cerebral
cortex were not detected concurrently. The later indicates

that adaptation to weightlessness occurs mainly at the level of
the signal reflex arc.

he mentioned previously that residence in weightlessness inevi-
tably leads to development of atrophic and particularly dystro-
rhic changes in skeletal nuscles. It is clear that with distur-
rance of the structural organization of muscle tissues, normal
muscle metabolism becomes impossible. indeed, in the early
period after flight (4-48 hours), the spectra of the isocnzyme
IJnIin the soleus muscle migrate from "cardiac type" to "inter-
mediate“ (Petrova, H.V. et al., 1976, 1977). The nature of
these changes in spectra of the isoenzyme LDH indicates that an
increase in the glycolytic processes of the soleus muscle occurs
during space flight. Until recently, it was difficult to prove

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that the function and structural organization of tissues is under
the strict control of the nervous system. In multiple experiments
on the trephic influence of the nervous system on muscle, described
in studies published by V.S. Il'in (Il'in, V.S., 1964; Il'in, V.S.
et al., 1967, 1972, 1975), it was demonstrated that any type of
damage to nerve ganggiu leads to disturbances in muscle nutrition.
he observed changes in the nature of muscle metabolism in rats
subject to flight conditions. During weightlessness, in addition
to changes in the structure of signal reflex arcs, alteration of
the trophic inter-relationship between the nerve and muscle occurs
producing modification of the metabolism in the later.

The results of experiments,conducted on the biosatellite "Cosmos-
936" by V.M. Shvetz to study ectopic osteogenesis,reinforced
these concepts of the nature of neurotrophic chan es which de-
velop in skeletal bones during weightlessness. Tiese studies
showed that residence in weightlessness did not significantly
influence the processes of remodelling and new formation of ec-
topic bone. Based on these data, we consider that changes which
occur during weightlessness in the morphologic parameters of
skeletal bones, such as their mineral metabolism, are determined
mainly by disturbances caused by the deficit in motor function.

what other in ortant changes occur in an organism during flight?
Observations nave been accumulated in the literature which state
that a decrease in hematopoiesis occurs in conditions of weight-
lessness. J.T. Lllis and coauthors (1975L working with mice
sent on the spaceship "Apolloﬁ relate this decrease to hypoxia.
Results of our investigations obtained from biosatellites from
the "Cosmos" series where atmospheric conditions were identical
to the earth's, allowed us to establish a causal relationship
between the observed changes--depression of erythropoiesis--

and decrease in the size of the functional load on the orienta-
tion-motor apparatus (V.N. Shvetz and Portugalov, V.V., 1976, 1977).

In animals during the early period after orbital flight, a com-
plex of structural changes appeared in the hypothalamus-pituitary-
adrenal cortex system which determines development of the pro-
tective, adaptive, and compensatory reactions (Savina, Ye.A.,
1977; Savina, Ye. A. and coauthors, 1977). Neurosecretory cells
in the supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus became increasingly
active, their nuclei increased in dimensions, and the perinuc-
lear zone of the majority of the cells was expanded. The con-
tent of neurosecretory granules in the cells was lowered in
comparison with control animals. In the pituitary gland, the
number of Herring bodies and the density of neurosecretory
granules were diminished. Based on these data, we consider

that all the enumerated changes are caused by factors which are

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

activated at the time of satellite landing and return to earth's
gravity. The adrenal glands increased in weight in comparison
with the controls. There was a high content of lipids in the
glomerular zones of the adrenal cortex and significantly less in
the internal layers of the cortex-~indications of localized de-
lipoidization in the sheaf and reticular zones. The degree of
manifestation and distribution of this recess varied in differ-
ent animals. The absence of a sudanpho ic zone and the presence
of hypertrophic cells in the fasicular and reticular zones was
also noted. in other words, in flight rats, two types of changes
were noted in the adrenal glands: acute changes which possibly
develop during re-entry to earth, and changes resulting from
prolonged residence in flight conditions (Savina. Ye.A., 1977).

hxamination of the lymphoid organs of rats 2-24 hours after
flight revealed a decrease in the weight of thespleen and the
thymus glad and a tendency toward decrease weight of the in-
guinal lymphatic nodes. Microscopic analysis of the spleen
showed diffuse neutrophilic infiltration, hyperplasia of the
white and red pulps, a decrease in the number and dimensions

of the lymphoid follicles and their light centers, and a de-
crease in the number of erythroid henogenesis sites. In the
early period after landing massive breakdown of lymphocytes and
accumulation of nuclear debris occurred in the cortical material
of the thymus gland. Twenty-four hours after flight, the corti-
cal substance of the thymus, for all practical purposes, contained
no lymphoid elements. The distinction between the cortical and
medullary matter in the gland tissue was preserved. The lympha-
tic nodes, as well as the spleen and thymus, underwent involu-
tion (Durnova, G.N. and co-authors, 1976, 1977). Both Soviet
and American scientists (L. Kraft) comment on the acute deple-
tion of lymphocytic elenents in the inguinal lymphatic nodes.

Thus, in the lymphoid organs,as well as in the hypothalamus-
pituitary-adrenal system, displacements of two types were

noted: tne first type has an "acute character",such as the break-
down of lymphocytes in the cortical matter of the thymus and
neutrophilic infiltration of the spleen; the second type is
characterized by atrophy of lymphoid follicles and their light
centers in the spleen and lymphatic nodes, reduction of the
cortical matter in the thymus and inguinal lymphatic nodes, etc.
The first type of change represents morphologic manifestations

of acute stress and fro uently develops in a period of 6-24

hours after cessation of the factors which cause it. In studying
the effects of space flight, scientists should consider the
complex of reactions which accompany biosatellite landing and
passage from weightlessness to earth's gravity. Hypoplasia of
lymphoid tissue, which causes decreased weight of lymphoid organs,
develops early and is evidence of the influence in the early

5‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

h .

stageh‘bf space flight of those factors which cause stress
(Hurnova, G.N. and co-authors, 1976, 1977).

Signs'of stress reactions in other functional 5 stems of an
organism have been observed. In the stomach, tiese signs appear
in the form of decreased content of neutral mucopolysaccharides
in the noblet cells in the neck of the fundic gland, and reduced
pepulation of lymphocytic elements in the Peyer's patches of the
small intestines (Shuhich, M.G. and co-authors, 1977). In the
liver, fatty infiltrates, caused by mobilization of lipids, occurs.
(Yakovleva, V.l., 1977). In the myocardium, increased activity
of phosphorylase A and B occurs as a result of an increase in
adrenaline content (Kaplanskiy, A.S. and co-authors, 1977).
Accumulation of neutrophilic leucocytes are seen in lung capil-
laries (V. I. Yakovleva).

Ya. A. Vinnikov and co-authors (1978) noted changes in the inner
ear structures responsible for balance. The authors relate these
changes on the one hand to disturbances,produced hy weightless-
nms, in calcium metabolism within the system of the otolith-oto-
lithic membrane, and on the other hand to local disturbances in
circulation and drainage of endo- and perilym h. The otolithic
membrane, which had a granular structure in tie control rats,
acquired a gelatinous character after flight and adjoined the
surface of the receptor epithelium of the utriculus. Immobili-
zation of the otolithic membrane resulted from the effect of

the G-force during landing. Otoconia, often characterized by
the presence of multi-sided crystals with alternating light and
dark granular substances, had an oval-sphericalshape. A compo-
nent of this otoconia was vacuolization. Stasis of the capillar-
ies and edema of the connective tissue deve10ped. In the mem-
braneous labyrinth, the most obvious changes were seen in the
receptor cells arranged within acutely vacuolized cup-shape
nerve endin 5. Thus, chan es in the vestibular apparatus in
animals is determined by t e effect of flight factors such as
weightlessness and G-forces.

Studies on the retina of the eye, conducted by the American
investigators D.h. Philpott, R.Corhett, and others, indicated
that a contribution to the total effect of space flight on an
organism is made by the flow of the more heavily charaged par-
ticles of the solid propellant 2 equally 6-28. In the early
period after flight, necrohiotic and necrotic changes of the
nuclei occurred in the external and internal nuclear layers of
the retina. In the area where external segments of the rods
contact with cells of the pigmented epithelium, channels of
up to 26-29p in length were observed.

Additional research data indicate that the fundamental histo-

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

logic and cytochemical changes, which occur during orbital flights
of 18.5-22.5 days duration are determined on the one hand by

deprivation of motor function, and on the other hand by the de-
velopment of non-specific reactions to stresses which intensify
during individual parts of the tra ectories of space flight
(during lift-off and re-entry). Tue results of the biosatellite
flight of "Cosmos-936" attest to the correctness of our inter-
pretations of the available data. For this flight, animals were
placed in a centrifuge which created a constant operating speed
of about 1 g.

Preliminary data fromstudies on long tubular bones, conducted
by L.M. Uolton, suggest on the basis of indirect indices, the
preservation of normal or close to normal mineral metabolism
in rats placed in a centrifuge.

The results of cytochemical, biometric, and histologic studies
on muscles of the anterior andposterior extremities in rats
placed in a centrifuge, suggest that the use of artifical
gravity during conditions of weightlessness impedes the develop-
ment of the atrophic processes and metabolic disturbances ob-
served in animals exposed to weightlessness during orbital
flight (Ye.l. ll'ina-Kakuyeva). Use of artifical gravity im--
pedes, but does not completely prevent these disturbances.
Possibly during experiments on 'Cosmos-Dsoﬂ such conditions were
not created and the influence of precess and coriolis force
accelerations did not permit complete dilution of the undesir-
able effects of weightlessness. Using cytochemical methods,
scientists established that residence of animals in conditions
of "artifical weight" significantly stabilized nuscle metabo-
lism. Thus, the spectra of the isoenzyme Ln” in the soleus
muscle of rats placed in a centrifuge retained the character-
istics of "cardiac type", disregarding a change of activity of
two fractions (N.V. Petrova). In other words, fundamental
shifts in the trophic relationships of nerve to muscle do not
occur in conditions of artifical gravity.

In the gastrocnemius muscle of rats placed in a centrifuge, the
number of functioning capillaries decreased to the same extent

as rats exposed to conditions of weightlessness (Haplanskiy, A.
5., 1978).

Shifts in the content of water-soluble proteins in the gray
matter of the spinal cord, the structures of the intervertebral
ganglia, and the gray matter of the cerebral cortex were not
observed in rats placed in a centrifuge. Subsequent observa-
tions have provided us with additional data to Support the exis-
tence of a direct relationship between decreased content of
water-soluble proteins and the effects of weightlessness on an

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organism. he have discussed the genesis of these displacements
previously. We attribute the decreased quantity of water-
soluhle proteins in the white matter of the spinal cord of rats
placed on a centrifuge during the flight of t e hiosatellite
'Cosmos-936" to possible slowing of metabolic transport in

the orientation systems of these animals (A.V. Gorhunova and co-
authors. 1978).

Histologic study of the adrenal glands (Ye. A. Savina) and
lymphoid or ans (G.N. Durnova) in rats exposed to conditions

of artificaI gravity, did not show changes characteristic of
acute stress. These observations again emphasize, as previously
stated, that the leading factor in the development of acute

stress after flight is transition from weightlessness to the
earth's gravity.

These data reinforce our opinion that in mammals (rats), the

most significant changes resulting from exposure to weightless-
ness, can be related to the development of motor function dc-
privation. These data allow us to look at the complex of changes,
which occurs in a mammalian organism during space flight, as a
nuerotrophic phenoaenon. The si nificant displacements observed
in these animals are caused by the stress effects of space flight.
These stresses, in turn, can be displayed, to varying degrees,
during different parts of the flight trajectory.

in this report, we did not discuss the role of disturbances in
blood supply and intra-organ circulation in the genesis of cer-
tain changes produced by weightlessness. We attach considerable
ﬁgnificance to this question, however, at this time, there are
no related experimental data available.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Vinnikov, Ya.A., Gazeuko, 0.6., Titova, L.K. et al. Structural
and functional organization of the vestibular apparatus in rats
placed in conditions of woightlessness for 19.5 days on the
satellite "Cosmos-782". Archives of Anatomy, 1978, v. 74, N l,
p. 22-28.

Gorbunova, A.V. and Portugalov, V.V. Cytochemical investigation
on protein and RNA in spinal motor neurons and neurons of the
spinal ganglia of the rat after space flight. Aviation, Space
and havxroamental lbdicine, 1976, v. 47, N 7, p. 708-710.

Gorhnnova, A.V. and Portugalov, V.V. The influence of space
flight on the composition of water-soluble proteins in the
Spinal cord and intervertebral ganglia. Bulletin of hxperimental
Biology and indicinc, 1977, V. 84, N 8, p. 168-171.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hurhunova A.V. and Purtnpnlov, V.V. The influence of artifi-
cial gravity in space flight on the content of water-soluble
proteins in the structures of nerve tissue. Bulletin of Exper-
imental Biology and Medicine, 1978, v. as, N 8.

Burnova, G.N., Kn lanskiy, A.S. and Portugalov, V.V. Effect of
22 day space flignt on lymphoid organs of rats. Aviation, Space
and Environmental Medicine, 1976, v. 47, N 6, p. 588-591.

Burnova, G.N., Kaplanskiy, A.S. and Portugalov, V.V. Changes in
lymphoid organs of rats during space flight. Archives of Anatomy,
1977, v. 72, N S, p. 14-20.

ll'in, v.3. Central regulation and adaptation of cell metabolism
in hi her organisms. In: Molecular Biology. Problems and Per-
spect ves. Moscow, 1964, p. 323-332.

ll'in, v.5. Pleskov, V.M. and Razunovskaya, 3.1. Hexokinase in

soluble fractions and in mitochondria of embryonic skeletal
muscles,and intact and denorvated muscles in an adult rabbit.
Biochemistry, 1907, v. 32, N 4, p. 807-811.

ll‘iu, v.5. Yemel’yantsev, A.H., Pleskov, V.V. et al. The bio-
chemical bases of nerve trophic processes. Pathologic Physiology
and Experimental Therapy, 1972, N.3, p. 3-12.

Il'in, V.S., Bazumovskaya, N.I., and Usatenko, :.S. Influencc
of nerve impulse on the enzyme sysnthesis in skeletal muscles.
Advances in Enzyme Regulation, 1975, v. 13, p. 219-234.

ll'iua-Kakuyeva, Ye.i., Portu alov, V.V. and Krivenkova, R.P.
Space flight effects on the s elotal muscles of rats. Aviation,
Space and Environmental Pmdicine, 1970, v. 47, a 7, p. 700-703.

ll'ina-Kakuyeva, Ye. 1., Portugalov, V.V. and Krivenkova, N.P.
influence of space flight factors on skeletal musculature.
Space Biology and Aerospace lbdicine, 1977 a, S 1, p. 20-25.

ll'ina-Kakuyeva, Ye.l. and Portugalov, V.V. Combined effect of
Space flight and radiation on skeletal muscles of rats. Avia-
tion, Space and anironmental "edicine, 1977 h, v. 40, ﬂ 2,

p. 115-119.

Kaplanskiy, A.S.,Durnova, G.N. and Portugalov, V.V. Horphologic
studies of the heart in rats placed on board biosatellites.
Bulletin of ﬁxperimental Biology and ibdicine, 1977, v.83, N 4,
p. 485-486.

Mogcndovich, M.R. Reflex trophic process and proprioreception.
In: Nerve Trophis in Physiology and Pathology. Hoscou, 1970, p.
48-54.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Petrova, N.V. and Pertugnlov, V.V. lsoenzyme Ln" in skeletal
muscles After space flight and hypokinesis. Space Niolegy and
Aerospace Medicine, 1977, N S, p. 66-72.

Petrova, N.V. and Portugalov, V.V. Effect of penetratin radia-
tion on skeletal muscles of rats in weightlessness. Av atien,
fpgge and Environmental Medicine, 1976, v. 47, N 10, p. 1080-

0 .

Portugalov, V.V. Preliminary results of morphologic and cyto-
chemical studies on animals exposed to 22 de 3 of space flight
on board 182 gearthhound artif cal satellite "Cosmos-60$".
Publication 0 the USSR Academy of Sciences. Biological series,
1976, N 3, p. 418-429.

Portugalev, V.V. Morphologic and cytochcmical studies on the
hiesatellite "Cosmos-782". Archives of Anatomy, 1977, v. 72,
N 7, p. 5-20.

Portu alov, V.V., Gazenko 0.6., ll'ina-Kakuyeva, Ye. I. et a1.
Cytoplysicnl and cytochemical aspects of hypekinesis. Proceedings
of the XVIII Congress MAP [International Astronautical Federa-
tion]. Belgrade, 1967, Varshava, 1968, p. 133-144.

Portugalov, V.V., il'ina-Kakuyeva, Ye.I., Starostin, V.i. ct a1.
Structural and cytochemical changes in muscles of rats given
rcsggigiion of mobility. Archives of Anatomy, 1971, v. 61, N 11,
[’0 ° 0

Portugalov, V.V., Rekhlenko, K.D., and Savik, Z.F. Changes in
the red soleus muscles with reduced function. Archives of
Anatomy, 1975, v. 68, ﬂ 2, p. 11-18.

Savina, Ye.A. Comparative evaluation of changes in the hypothalamus-
pituitary-adrenal system in rats from the biosatellites "Cosmos-
605" and "Cosmos-782". X Symposium on Space Biology and Hedicine.
Sukhnmi, 1977, p. 58-59.

Savinn, Ye. A., Pankova, A.S., and Alehseyev, Ye.1. “orpholepic
manifestations of functional displacements in the hypothalamus-

pituitary-neurosecrctory system and kidneys of rats exposed
to the effects of space fli ht. Space Biology and Aerospace
Medicine, 1977, N S, p. 72- 6.

Chernigovskiy, v.1. interoreceptors. Moscow, 1960.
Shvctz, V.N. and Portugalov, V.V. Space flight effects in hema-

topoietic function of hone marrow of rats. Aviation, Space and
Environmental Hcdkune,1976, v. 57, ﬂ 7, p. 746-749.

59
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shvctz, V.N. and Portugalov, V.V. Influence of space flight
factors on crythropoiesis. Bulletin of Experimental RielOgy
and Medicine, 1977, v. 83, N 2, p. 238-240.

Shuhich, M.G., Goryacheva, L.L.. nudetskiy. et al. Histochenical
study of digestive organs in rats after flight on "Cosmos-605".
Space uiology and Aerospace Medicine, 1977, N 3, p. 40-44.

Ya'odovski, V.S., Triftanidi, L.A.. and Gorochova, G.P. Space
fl ght effects on skeletal bones of rats (light and electron
microscopic examinations). Aviation. Space and Environmental
Medicine, 1976. v. 47, N 7. p. 73a-738.

Yagodovski. V.S., Triftanidi, L.A., and Gerochova, C.P. The
influence of space flight on skeletal bones in rats. Space
uiology and AerOSpace Medicine, 1977, N l, p. 14-20.

Yakovleva, V.I. The dynamics of lipid content in the liver of
rats placed on the biosatellites "Cosmos-60$" and "Cosmos-782".
Archives of Anatony, 1977, v. 73, N 10, p. 39-43.

Ellis. J.T., Kraft, L.H., Lushbaugh, C.C., Hunansen. G.L. et al.
Evaluation of viscera and other tissues. Appendix III. Aviation,
Space and Environmental Medicine, 1975, v. 46. p. 641-642.

COPYRIGHT: "ARKHIV ANATOHII, GISTOLOGII I EMBRIOLOGII", 1973

9139
C80: 1870

60
FOR OHICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

' DOC: 628.1".22
BIOLOGICAL DAMAGE 10 MATERIALS AND PRBVBITION TIIBREOP

Koscov BlOPOVRBZﬂDENIYA MTBRIALOV I wIICIlITA 01‘ N110! (Biological Denege
to lieteriels and Prevention mereof) in Russisn 1978 signed to press

28 Her 78. pp 2. 306, 218-220

lAnwtetion, foreword byYe. H. Lebedev. scientific secretary of the
scientific council for biological injuries. USSR iced-y of Sciences. end

teblc of contents froe book edited by Prof T. V. Sterostin. doctor of
biological sciences, published by the Scientific Council for Biological

Injuries of the USSR Acede-y of Science. 560 copies, 232 nsges]
[Text] Annotation

This is n collection of pepers deeling with species conposition, ecology end

norphology of nicroorgsnieu, fungi, nerine invertebretes. insects end rodents
uhich are the sources of biological injuries end interference. and which

ceuse significent detrinent to the netionel econoey of our country. Much
attention is given to clsssifying biologicel densge. netth of detecting
it quickly. lethods of evelueting resistence to hiologicel orgenises.

scene of protecting rev esteriel. fabrics, engineering devices fro-
hiologicsl deeege.

The euthors of this collection include scientists fro. Acedeny end
sectorisl institutes who ere working ectively in the eree of biologicel
injuries. as well es prectitionere with extensive industrisl experience in
the control of biologicel desege.

This collection is intended for e vide renge of scientific workers. engineers
and techniciens deeling vith problees of biologicel injuries.

Foreword

At the present time, problens of intensificetion of practicel use of the
results of scientific reseerch have acquired exceptionel isportence. One

of the nein objectives of the 10th five-feet Plen ie to improve the quelity.
reliebility end durehility of the netionel product. Anong these proble-s.
e proninent plece is held by problees of increesing the resistence of

61
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eaterials. goods and installations from biological organises and being
overgrown by then. problane of protection against functional interference.
fouling. daugs. obstruction and corrosion resulting fro- the presence
and vital functions of organises.

in the 3 billion years of evolution of life on earth. organises have acquired
the capacity to affect nost natural substances. directly or indirectly.

People have encountered the results of such effects. deleterious to industrious
activity. since antiquity. Even in the days of natural farsing. aose neans

of protection were found in processing raw material. storing and using
products. Develop-ant of trade end navigation [seafaring] aided in selection
of the nost reliable seaaures. Sons of the ancient discoveries. for axe-pie.

the use of copper cospounds as protection against fungi. narine borers and
fouling organises. have not lost their value to this day. Sons fall by

the wayside in the Hiddls Ages. when shop specialisation of industry
occurred. but even in our tines. the distance between the producer and

consueer does not always per-it the former to evaluate the true durability
and resistance to organises of his products. Not infrequently. the visual

evaluation of bioreaistance of nateriala on the basis of growth on their
surface of a sixture of solds. which is practiced abroad. does not
guarantee fitness of the product under real natural and operating conditions.

Many organises (nicroorgsnisss. fungi. algae. nsrine invertebrates, insects.
rodents and birds) can dasage raw asterisl. products and installations; they
can cause corrosion or create functional interference. The probles of

protection against biological huge and fouling becase sore acute with
the intensive develop-ant of rivers. soil. uninhabited territories and

exploration of space. ninerals of land and sea. People often cause the
spread and sanifeststion of detrisentsl effects unintentionally. Pollution
of the environ-ant by excessive heat. organic substances and fertilizers is
also a contributing factor. Host ”synthetic" and fuel-lubrication asterials
do not have sufficient biostability. hany conplex nodern instrunents and
installations have elenents that are vulnerable to organises.

Probless of biostability, isperviousness to fouling and reliable protection
against biointerference are particularly important to co-unication equipsent.

transport. industrial. power plants and housing. household and stored objects
and to the preservation of priceless cultural sonunents.

According to foreign estimates. the loss referable to direct biological
damage alone exceeded 31 of industrial production in the early 1970‘s. These

estinates did not include the following: biological daugc erroneously
attributed to wear. aging and corrosion: 2) functional interference due to

fouling of functional parts of equip-ants and ships. obstruction and fouling
of pipes. etc.; 3) losses due to collisions between aircraft. rockets and

birds; e) daaage to so ed goods. household products. as wall as cultural
sonunenta. for this reason. the true losses are even greater.

62
mt OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Allost all organisms. those that are destructive and fouling organisms,
are present in nature on o sass sclae. They play a useful part in producti-

vity of the biosphere and self-purification of water. air and soil, which E.
is needed by mankind.

For this reason. to protect the anvironsent one should only inplesent
selective. local seasures. Development thereof . use in operating and over-

hauling equipment require the mandatory involvement of biologists specializ-
ing in ecology of biological desege and fouling organisms.

A nuaber of publications of the Scientific Council for Biological Damage.
published in 1972-1976, as well as books dealing with biology of fouling
organiﬁms and biostsbility of cellulose and polymer seterisls disseninate

such intonation: books, documents, textile. wood-pulp and nuseun netsrial.
published by academic and sectorial institutions.

The papers in this collection were written on the basis of scientific
reports delivered by the authors at sessions of the Council in 1973-1977.

Contents Page

Porevord 3
Evaluation of "star Quality by Toxicological Methods

(N. S. Strogenov and 0. P. Pilsnko) 5
Unionid Capacity to Regulate Ion Composition of Hater

(V. c. Khobot'yev [deceasedD ll

Main Fresh water Fouling and Destructive Organisms in waters of
European RSPSR
(c. D. Lebedev) 12
Damage to ﬂood Pulp and Macrophytea-ccmronoaidse biofilters
(Diptera, Chirononidse)

(N. s. Kslugins) 25
Fouling of Buoy Stations in the Indian Ocean
(1. N. Il'in and G. G. Nikolayeva) 32 .

Lepedidae Fouling of the Buoy Platform in the Arabian See
(I. N. Il'in. N. A. Rudyekova [deceased], I. V. Steroetin

and L. A. Pononsrsvs) 39
Composition of Pauling Organisms of the Northern Part of Kola

Pen insu is

(I. A. Kuznetsova and c. B. 2evina) «'07
Attachment and lietamorphosis of Planule of the Dynemene pusila (1..)
Nydroid
(Yu. 3. Buryltin and N. N. liarfenin) 56

Settling of Fouling Organism Larvae on Hydraulic Installations in
the Bay of 'i'agsnrog of the Sea of Asov

(Ye. P. Turpsyeve and R. G. Siakine) 67
Ecological Variability of Hercierella Tubes
(Ye. N. Lebedev) 78
63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some Ecological Causes of Changes in Form of Lepralis Colonies
(Ye. H. Lebedev)

Possible Ecological Causes of Diversity of Forms of Henbraniporid

Psarlvort Colonies
(Ye. N. lashedev)

Distribution and Population Dynamics of Balanus Larvae in Sukhoy
River Valley and Adjacent Region of the Black Sea (1968-1972)
(1.. G. Rovel'. T. F. Kotsegoy, G. H. Trofanchuk et al.)

The Role of Fouling Organisms in Denthos and Fouling of Submarine
Installations on the Heat Coast of the Southern Caspian See

(R. N. lagirov and C. N. Pystakova)
Species Composition of Fouling Organisms of Organic Glass in the
Region of Zhdanov
(Ye. H. Partsly)

Hheel Animalcules in Fouling in the Region of Zhdanov
(L. A. Kutikova and Ye. M. Partaly)

0n the Question of Formation of Primary Fouling Cenosis
(V. D. Drayko and Z. S. Kucherova)

Link between Dimensional and Height Parameters of Balanus
(I. A. Kuznetsovs)

Marine Hood Borers and Hydraulic Installations in Northern Seas

of the USSR '
(I. N. Il'in and I. V. Stsrostin)

Intensity of Food Intake by the Teredo Navelis (1...) "Ship Norm"
(Ye. A. Tsikhon-Lukanina)

Reterotrophic Fouling Nicroflora and Its Effect on Corrosion of

Metal Objects in the Black Sea
(H. N. Lebedeva and A. I. Shtevnevn)

Conperative Characteristics of Test Fungi Used At Low Taperstures
(I. S. Vostrov. L. V. Kalakutsltiy, V. Ye. Anikanov, A. A.
Cerasimenko and Ye. A. Savitakiy)

Antagonistic Properties of Fungi That Destroy Combined Materials

and Nature of Destruction Thereof
(2. A. Turkova)
Investigation of Resistance to Fungus of Plasticized Polyvinyl
Chloride
(G. G. Dochkareva, Yu. V. Ovchinnikov, L. N. Kurganova and
V. A. Deyrekhovs)
Adaptability of Microorganisms to New, Modified Synthetic Fibers
and Degree of Destruction Thereof
(1. A. Yermilove)

Hood-Destroying Fungi of USSR Forests and Destruction of Timber
(S. F. Negrutskiy)

Effect of Carbon Dioxide on Exchange of Cases in Hood-Pulp

Stricken by Hood-Destroying Fungi
(V. A. Solov-‘yev and G. N. Nekraaova)

Acetylation and Enhancement of Fungus Resistance of Hood Pulp
(K. P. Shvnl'be. I. 0. Ozolina, D. B. Truskne and
Ya. Ya. Vitolin'sh)

6!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

81

82

86

98

102
106
115
119

126
128

135

160

145

151

154
157

162

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Resistance to Molds and Mechanical Properties of Hood Pulp Modified
Hith diisocyantate and Added Pentschlorophenol
(A. E. Enbreksh, K. P. Shvalbe and Ya. Ya. Vitolin'sh)
Investigation of Aspen Wood Pulp Stricken by Pellinus Fungus by
the Method of Fluorescence Microscopy
(N. I. Dol'ahova and V. Ye. Meskaleva)
Investigation of Diostability of Hood-Fiber Dara Protected Hith
Anionis Pluosilicate and Salicyl Anilide
‘Fﬂl P. Hill“)
investigation of Toxicity of Copper Sulfate Mixed with Sodius
Chrosste to Tunicate Household Fungus
0. A. Delenkev and V. M. Sozonova)

Modification of Objective Method for Evaluating Fungus Resistance
of Arbolite

(8. V. Mikhaylova)

Lepidoptera That Destroy Synthetic and Anilsl Materials
(A. K. Zagulyayev)

Bird Nests as the Habitat of Insects That Destroy Materials
(A. K. Zagulyayev)

Status and Objectives of Research on Protection of Materials
Against Rodents

(N. P. Naumov, P. A. Psnteleyev, I. A. Yeuel'yanova and
L. L. Danilkins)

Field Tests of Rodent Damage to Some Materials
(1. A. Yenel'yanova)

intensity of Damage by Rodents to Foss Plastics as a Function of
Sane Properties of Materials

(M. A. Deryagina and I. A. Yesel'yanova)

COPYRIGHT: Nauchnyy sovet AN SSSR po biopovrezhdeniyss, 1978

10,657
cso: 1870

65
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY