APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: ClA-RDP02-00880R000100030001-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8430

1 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL Scxsuces
(FOUO 13/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTI’.‘

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied ssappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LMIS AND REGUUTIONS GOVERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPIB L1
1 May I

TRMSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE MD TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEﬂAVIORAL Setauces

(P000 13/79)
CONTENTS
NEUROSC IENCBS

urain Research in Georgian SSR Described
(‘1‘. Oniani; ZARYA vosm, 15 Feb 79)

PSYCIIOLOGY

Tasks of Psychological Science, 'VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII'
in Current Year

(Editorial; VOPROSY PSIIOIOLOGII, No I, 1979) .........

Increasing Effectiveness of National Bconouy's Management,
Psychological Science

(H. I. (Nardeytssv; VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII. No I, 1979)..
SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

Order of Labor's Red Banner Institute of Microbiology
and Virology Insni D. K. Zabolotnyy of the Acadeny
of Sc iencas Ukrainian SSR
(V. V. Suirnov; MIKROBIOLOGIYA. No I, 1979) . ....... ..

In the Executive Comittee of the International Union
of Psychological Sciences

(3. F. honov. E. A. Perponova; VOPROSY PSIIGIOLOGII,
No l. 1979)

sosasosnsos

In the USSR Society of Psychologists
(E. A. Faraponova; VOPROSY PSIKIIOLOGII, No l, 1979) ..

All-Union Synposiua 'Psychology and Medicine'

(1‘. I. Arten'yeva. et al.; VOPRNY PSDOIOLOGII.
No I. 1979)

ceases...
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Comma)

MHCNI‘IMS

Key to the mm; mm or the USSR
(V. I. m'yaniohcbevx OW' mm

mm 88$, 1978) OOCCCOOOOCOQIIOIOIIJCOOOOOIOOOO‘

. b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEUROSCIBICB

BRAIN RESEARCH IN GEORGIA! 58R DESCRIBED
Tbilisi ZARYA mm in Russian 15 Feb 79 p 2

[Article by Professor '1‘. Oniani. Corresponding Member of the Georgian
Acndesw of Sciences. Director of the Georgian SSR Acadew of Sciences
Institute of Physiology: "‘l'ovard Understanding the Brain"]

[Text] In his report at the 25th CPSU Congress, Comrade L. I. Breshnev
emphasized the importance of nmdamental research in scientific problems
to resolve priority tasks of the national econoaw. The role of science in
the life of society has risen more than ever these days. In particular,
practical medicine under conditions of the scientific-technical revolution
cannot get along without the findings of fundamental research in the field
of biology. But these findings are valuable in practical health care only
if the research is conducted on a high methodological and technical level.

An excellent example of neurophysiological research meeting the needs of
practical medicine is a cycle of studies by Academy of Sciences
Academician V. Okudshava on the neurophysiological mechanisms of epilepsy;
this work has been nominated for the 1979 Georgian SSR State Prise.

First of all. it should be noted that the Institute of Clinical and
Bxpcrimental Heuroloy of the Georgian 83!? Ministry of Health, where V.
Okudzhavn directs the experimental division, has long since become a
scientific center of international significance in epileptology. This
institute was the first in the USSR to make use of such refined
methodological techniques of investigating the properties of normal and
pathological brain neurons as the recording of intracellular potentials.
the measureaent of the physical parameters of the neuron membrane, the
use of a mathenatical apparatus to study the distribution of electrical
fields in the brain during the development of epileptic shifts, and so
on. These lethodi. have made it possible to determine significant facts,
the analysis of which has made it possible to describe both the

development of epileptic changes in the neuron and the mechanisms of
cessation of pathological activity.

V. 0kudzhava has convincingly demonstrated that in the epileptic changes
of the ncuron a decisive role is played by shifts in the synaptic
apparatus: (that is. intercellular contacts) arising in the presence of
1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strum: synehrunlu ::I.lmulai.lnn ui‘ a urn-u» nl' nerve MI |::. "l' has shown that
the name mechanisms underlie an epileptic change in the neurons in various
foci of pathological activity. These findings have also made it possible
to shed new light on the factors causing the spread 01‘ epileptic activity.

The research has also determined the mechanisms which condition the
transmission of convulsive activity from one hemisphere of the brain to

the other. Ii knowledge or this can have great practical importance for
surgical. intervention in the treatment of epilepsy.

Also of great theoretical importance is the scientist's research into
mechanism of cessation of epileptic activity. He found. in particular.
that certain sections of the brain stem are the source of inhibitive effect

on the cortical neurons. These findings are also very promising for the
treatment of epilepties.

V. Okudzhava'a research is of great interest not only in epileptology but
also In explaining other fundamental problems of general brain physiology.

The Georgian researcher's work in the neurophysiological mechanisms of the
development and ceasastion of epileptic activity of the brain is
internationally recognized. His work has been widely published in foreign
Journals and is quoted in fundamental monographs. Also indicative of the
broad recoyiition of this research was the International Epilepsy
Symposium held in Tbilisi in 1978. Outstanding neurophysiologists taking
part in the symposim unanimously acknowledged the big role played by the
Georgian researcher in resolving urgent tasks or epileptoloy and shaping
today's understanding of its neurophysiological mechanisms.

685’:
C30 2 1870

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

PSYCROLOGY

TASKS 0P PSYCROWICAI. SCIHCE, 'VOPRW PSIKHOINII' Ill 01mm YEAR
Hoscow VOPRDSY PSlKﬂOlDGn in Russian No l, 1979 pp 3-9

. [Editorial]

[Text] Implementing the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress, the Soviet
people honorably cowleted the tasks of the Tenth rive-Year Plan's 3d year.
The econonic and defensive power of our motherland increased even more.

Its international authority has risen even higher, brotherly friendship
with SOCialist countries has become even closer and more cohesive, and the
inseparable unity of the peoples of our multinational country has grown
even stronger. The national economic plans have been completed successfully,
and surpassed in many cases. Many labor collectives and individuals satis-
fied additional work pledges in the socialist competition ahead of schedule.
Construction of the Baikal-Mu: Rail Trunkline proceeded at full steam.

“any new huge production facilities outfitted with the most progressive
equipment have been created. A broad program of housing, school. and hospital
construction was completed. Hany millions of agricultural laborers devoted
all of their energy to attaining high yields, and they achieved treaendous
successes. exceeding all former indices. The cultural and educational level
of tho Soviet people climbed even higher, as did the level of our society's
social development. The successes of Soviet science and technology are
resarkablo. Flights by our cosmonauts, including joint flights with the
first cosmonauts from fraternal socialist countries, were unprecedented in
duration and a number of other indices. significant successes were also
enjoyed in all other areas of scientific knowledge and technical creativity.

Publication of L. I. Breshnev's noteworthy works 'Halaya zemlya' (The Little
Land), "Vosroshdeniye" (Resurrection), and "Tselina' (The Virgin Land) was

of exceptional significance. Written by a beninist cousunist who had traveled
a glorious road of persistent struggle for socialist development in our
country and for peace throughout the world. and created by an outstanding

official of the international cos-unist and workers movement and the head
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the Soviet government, these

books are the powerful ideological weapon of the party and all Soviet people.

3
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They cabody the best, the truly heroic qualities of the Soviet citizen,

his burning love for the motherland and his readiness to sacrifice his

own life in its behalf, and they demnstrate the diversity of character
seen in Soviet people. The remarkable examles of leadership and control
of people, the combination of high exactingness with great benevolence.

with a truly humanitarian attitude toward every person deserving of such
respect, unbendi'..g adherence to principles in evaluation of people, their
personal qualities, their acts, and the results of their activities, trust
in man, and effective assistance to people experiencing difficult situations,
presented in these works, are highly significant. All three of L. I. Brash-
nev's works contain rich factual saterial that is also of great value to
psychology.

A deep analysis is given of progress in isplenenting the decisions of the
25th (:98!) Congress, and the eajor problems of the country's socioeconomic
develop-ant and ilproveaent of national economic control are posed to the
party and people in the substantial and thoroughly grounded speeches by

. . Brezhnev at the July and Novednr plenuu of the cc CPSU, during the

18th Kenseeol Congress, and during his trip to Siberia, the Far East, Minsk,
and Baku.

The CC CPSU and USSR Council of Ministers decree on schools, published in
Deccsber 1977, and the All-Union Congress of 'nsachers held last year had

extremely ilportant significance to the country's life and to development
of national education.

All of these events, which have been reflected in our journal as well,
predetermined the work of Soviet scientists, including psychologists, and
they were placed at the basis of the plans for all sduequent research
directed at providing inediate assistance to our subsequent development
and at providing all-out assistance to national education, child rearing,
and the training of the growing generations.

A significant number of works by Soviet psychologists (monographs, collec-
tions on particular topics, individual articles) on the pressing psychological
problems of the work of public schools, preschool children's institutions,
special schools for children suffering specific handicaps, and adult schools,
which have such important significance to attainment of universal secondary
education for the working youth of our country, were published in 1978.
Problems directly associated with directives contained in the decree on
schools assumed an especially prominent place. These problem are, first of
all, those of ilproving ideological indoctrination of children and the young,
shaping high noral qualities within them, developing independent thinking
and the ability to learn, providing vocational training and indoctrination,
and providing occupational orientation. Soviet psychologists devoted sig-
nificant attention to characterizing different ferns of activity engaged in
by children and young people--at play and in their studies, particularly in
regard to the motivations for studying. develop-ant of conscious learning

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

activity, the problems of cosnunication of children among themselves and
with adults, development of collectiviss, and participation of senior

students in socially useful activity and in the development of children's
and young mople's collectives.

Work in other areas of psychological science was initiated in 1978. Doubt-
lese achievaents have been attained in social psychology, both in relation
to particular problsns and. what is especially imrtant, in relation to
the basic theoretical problem; also of isportance is cosparisen of the
theoretical positions of Soviet psychologists with the viewpoints of social
psychologists in capitalist countries, as well as criticism of their con-
ceptions. Many works have been published on the problems of labor and
engineering psycholoqyp which are revealing the features of new foras of
labor arising in the course of the scientific—technical revolution, new
ferns of occupations and the means of preparing people for them and shaping
the psychological qualities requiredby these new occupations. a nusber of
works have been finished in a new area of psychological science--the psychol-
ogy of the management and control of labor collectives. The psychological
problems behind the effectiveness of agitation and propaganda were studied.
Research on the psychology of aviation and cosmonautics occupied a special
place. Problems of sports psychology, pathepsychoiogy, and neuropsycholoqy
were studied. work done in psychophysiology, particularly in relation to
the problems of differential and genetic psychology. represents valuable
research. He should note publication of the next veins of the 'Osnovy
psikhologii' (Pundaneutals of Psychology)--"1he Biological Fundamentals

of Psychology,” which contains rich information on the results of research
on the material substrate of the aind. and modern data on the work of the
brain and nervous system.

Along the problem of general psychology that were studied in the past year,
we should point out those of the psychology of activity--its basic concepts.
the structure of activity, conscious forecasting of actions. and the role
of the unconscious in the activity of people. A number of research projects
were completed on the laws governing varicas mental processor-perception,
memory. thinking, imagination-and on emotions and enotionality. Work on
the problems of set and some problems of personality qualities was success-
ful.

Nor should we fail to mention, finally, the problems of the history of
psychological science (mainly in this country) . which are also illuminated,
though on a limited scale (mainly in connection with anniversary celebra-
tions), in the works of Soviet psychologists. and correspondingly in some
articles published in our journal.

In addition to the broad front of research done by Soviet psychologists in
the past year. we should not fail to note the valuable work done to popu-
larize psychological knowledge, particularly to prepare a nulber of
panphlets published by lsdatel'stvo "Znaniye." we lust do everything to
encourage such publications acquainting the popular reader with the

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

achievements of modern psychological science, a knowledge of which is necessary
to all forms of human activity, to development of a materialistic philosophy

in every Soviet citizen. and especially to education of the growing genera-
tions.

Reciprocal comunication among Soviet psychologists at a umber of conferences
and symposium on various problems of psychological science, particularly
on those of the psychology of activity, social psychology, the psychology
of learning in the school. and the unconscious, had an important place in
the scientific life of Soviet psychologists in 1978. Friendly meetings with
psychologists of foreign, primarily socialist countries, both at jointly
sponsored sylposiuns and at scientific forums organised by psychologists of
particular countries and attended by their foreign colleagues on invitation,
were highly useful. There were quite a few meetings with foreign scientists
during the numerous trips abroad by individual Soviet psychologists and
during visits by foreign ucientists to our country.

The work of our journal was discussed three times in 1978 at different
meetings of Soviet psychological scientists. Students of the Institute of
Advanced Training of W: Instructors in Pedagogics and Psychology under the
USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences acquainted themselves with its work,
and it was discussed at an expanded session of the journal's editorial
council and at an expanded session of the office of the USSR Academy of
Pedagogical Sciences' psychology department.

The overall assessment given to the journal was positive, but at the same
time a number of critical remarks and wishes for the future were exprest
as well.

Considering these resarks and wishes as well as its own intentions, in the
new year-~1979--the journal plans to first of all organise discussion of
the pressing probless of psychology at the present level of its development.
The nest convenient form- for such discussion is the “round table,‘ and on
suggestion of some of the journal's readers the problem of a psychological
service as a direct link between psychological science and practice is to
be one of the first subjects discussed.

The broad range of work being done in particular areas of psychology is
creating favorable conditions for the work of practical psychologists,
inasmuch as the research is revealing a significant mﬂnr of laws imortant
to the solution of practical problems. Nevertheless there are certain
difficulties in introducing these laws into practice. inasmuch as they are
relatively abstract in most cases, and this adds a great deal of complexity
to their utilization in the concrete living situations with which the
practical psychologist must deal. and which require quite definite recon-en-
dations from him. Thus it is extremely important to discuss the content

of the practical psychologist's work, the methods of his work. the nature
of his training for a concrete practical function and, what is especially

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

important, the problems of providing systematic guidance to his work through
a locally organized system of applied (scientific-practical) psychological
laboratories, offices, and teaching centers. We must not forget that inade-
quate preparedness of the practical psychologist for solving practical
problems in the concrete working conditions of particular enterprises,
training institutions. and medical institutions can easily undermine the
very idea of practical psychological services and do harm to the development
of psychological science; by assisting in the solution of practical problems,
in addition to promoting its own development the latter is considerably
benefited by the rich factual material it acquires from practical solution

of those problems, generalizing it and revealing new laws highly significant
to itself.

Other topics that could be proposed as pressing psychological problems for
discussion at the "round table“ include interaction of psychologists and
pedagogues. the mutual relationships between psychology and physiology.
the place of mathematics in psychological research, and the avenues of its
utilization. Naturally all these problem must be discussed by psycholo-
gists jointly with representatives of these other sciences.

A special place must be given to the system approach problem in psychology.
This approach has already been discussed in anusber of works, but we still
have not achieved sufficient unity in the very definition of this approach
and. most imrtsntly. in its specific application to experimental studies
and theoretical. generalizations. This problem demands meticulous and
thorough discussion.

As far as the range of experimental studies is concerned, what we need here
first of all is deeper and more-comprehensive study of the problems toward
which psychology has been oriented by the December (1977) CC CPSU and USSR
Council of ninisters decree on the schools. Hhat had been done last year

by psychologists in this direction is still not at all enough, and what we
need is deeper and more systematic study of these problems by psychology,
such that the latter's contribution to implementing the decrees of the party
and government would be sufficiently substantial. The problems referred to
here were noted above; it is about them that the research of psychologists
must be centered. of course with the focus placed on those problems within

the cospetency of developmental and pedagogical psychology.

Naturally specialists in these areas are concentrated mostly at the psychol-
ogy departments of the numerous pedagogical “12's and at universities
training teachers. But the umber of works submitted to the journal from
these training institutions is entirely inadequate to the number of
colleagues in these departments. To an equal degree, even the scientific
level of those relatively few works which do reach the journal from psy-
chologists working at these training institutions is far from always
satisfactory. This situation must be decisively changed. Unification of
the departments of several vuz's in relation to some single problem, joint
work on a concrete subject pertaining to a particular problem, and a

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

significant increase in the demands placed on the studies being conducted
through their thorough discussion, without fear or highly business-like
and thorough criticism aimed at rendering collective assistance to each
researcher. could and should play a significant role in this direction.

It is very important for the journal to carry, in addition to research
papers intended for the eyes of psychological specialists, works which would
be addressed directly to teachers and other practical workers in national
education. Such a department does exist in the journal. but there are
clearly not enough articles in it, and the articles that are published are
not always timely. Meanwhile there is a definite need for acquainting
practical workers with the results of studies on problems of imrtme

to them. Publication of such articles should not only help practical workers
in their activities but also raise the general level of their training and
upgrade their qualifications. The journal's editorial board appeals to our
most highly qualified and erudite psychologists to devote all of their
attention to the need for their active participation in this department of
the journal.

it is extremely important to keep research on problems forewarded by the
Decanter (1977) decree on the school from being limited to just the urban
schools, as is true today in the overwhelming majority of the cases. The
research must also deal with students in rural schools. This also follows
directly from the CC CPS!) July (1978) Plenum decrees on further development
of agriculture and on .social development of sovkhozes and kolkhozes.

similar requirements must be imposed on social psychology as well. In
relation to their psychological make-up--needs and interests. level of
education and culture, interpersonal mutual relationships-~the modern
kolkhoz peasantry and today's sovkhoz workers differ fundamentally from
their predecessors of 20-25 years ago. The task of psychologists is to
study these new traits jointly with sociologists and reveal them in today's
rural and sovkhoz laborors.

Naturally we cannot limit the introduction of psychological science into
practice just to the area of national educataon. Research must be signifi-
cantly expanded on the problems of labor psychology and engineering
psychology, management psychology, aerospace psychology, public health.
sports and physical culture, criminal psychology. and forensic (legal)
psychology. 'ihere are many concrete. applied problems in all of these areas
(as is true for the area of pedagogical psychology as well). and it is on
the basis of these problems that we must organize the psychological service
mentioned above. At the same time it is extremely iaportant that all of
these studies would provide, to the extent possible. useful information to
general psychology itself, and equally so that these areas of psychology
would rely upon this material as well.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this connection we cannot ignore the present situation of general psychol-
ogy. intensive development of various special areas in psychological science
has brought us to a situation in which the enphasia on the study of general
pnychology's problems in our country is now less than what would be required
by the significance of research in general psychology and by the central,
fundamental significance of general psychology. Indicative in this regard

is the fact that even in our journal the number of articles in this area
decreased considerably in the past year. while in fact this area must be the
basis. the backbone of all special areas of psychological science. Heanwhile
even the relatively small number of works on general psychology that have
been published are dispersed among a large nuber of the divisions and
problems of general psychology and far free always consider important topics

significant to other sectors of psychology and to solution of the problems
of psychological theory.

The need for research in the history of psychological science should be
pointed out as well. The new year-ol979--is one of a number of jubilees:

it will be the 150th birthday of I. h. Sechenov, the founder of our domestic
scientific. materialistic psychology: it will be the 100th anniversary of
Hundt‘s establishment of the world's first psychological laboratory in
Leipzig: it will be the 100th birthday of K. h. Kornilov. the first (together
with P. P. Blonskiy) to argue for creation of a Marxist psychology and for
fundamental reconstruction of psychological science on the basis of Marxism-
beninism: it will be the 90th birthday of s. l.. Rubinshteyn, whose work
played a prominent role in development of Soviet psychology. All of these
dates must be conemorated by works revealing the role of each of these
scientists in the development of our science. We must also publish other
works on the history of psychology having great importance to resolution of
the psychological problems of today.

Re have been discussing the content of that which must- be done by Soviet
psychologists in the present year, and that which must find its reflection
in this journal. But in addition to this we must point out another extremely
important task concerning not the content but the style of works published
in vopmsv PSIKHOIDGII. In a number of cases they are encudaered by ninet-
ous details having no serious. fundamental significance. They contain many
special terms, often deliberately coined or not yet in coal-on scientific
usage. sometimes known only to a narrow circle of specialists working on
some narrow problem they contain an abundance of formulas expressing some-
thing that has already been said with sufficient clarity in words and not
providing any new information. All of this goes a long way to decrease the
size of the audience that can understand the articles submitted to the
editorial board, deprives the. of informative value, and elicits valid
reproaches from many readers who are interested in the subject of an article
but find the content incomprehensible. Consider this in the light of the
fact that the journal's purpose is to upgrade the qualifications of its
readers, broaden their knowledge, and help then in their scientific growth.

9 0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thin journal new has a subscription of 19,000. ’lhis means that the journal
in being read not only by specialists in psychology but also scientists in
other areas of science--philosophy, physiology, and pedagogics, as well as
by many practical workers requiring, by the nature of their activity, the
latest data of psychological science, and by a sufficiently broad range of
persons that sisply have an interest in psychology. This, of course, causes

certain difficulties in preparing articles for the journal. which must be
surmounted.

Nor can we fail to mention. finally, the substantial proportion of the articles
submitted to the editorial board which sisply go on and on without saying

:h; their excessive wordineaa alsomakea it difficult to get a clear
understanding of the content. This problem encouraged the editorial board

to desand a brief and clear presentation and shorter articles from authors
from now on.

We would like to express out confidence that the journal's readers will heed
all of the wishes stated above. The journal's editorial board will be
grateful to them for whatever proposals they may possibly have. and especially
for their concrete satisfaction of the suggestions stated here in the
articles they submit to the editorial board.

COPYRIGNT: 'Voprosy psikhologii", “Pedagogika', l9‘l9

11004
C80: [”70

IO
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYGIOIDGY

INCREASIM WINES OF NATIONAL ECONM'S MANAGEMENT, PS'XCBOWICAL scram
Hoscow VOPlIJSY P81301010“! in Russian No 1,1979 pp 9-16

(Article by u. l. Gvardeytsev]

[Text] Our society's progressdepends in many ways on the extent to which
we can increase the effectiveness with which the national economy is
managed. In his report to the 25th Congress of the mist Party of the
Soviet Union, cc CPSU General secretary Comrade L. l. Brezhnev enphasised
that at the present stage of columnist development, "organisationuthat is,

further improvement of the economy's management in the broad sense of the
worduis becoming the decisive link."

Today, most executives and experts feel that the effectiveness of manageeent
can he raised by introducing automation resources into this process.

Creation of effective autosated control systems is an extremely complex.

multifaceted problem. 'lhe principal issue within it is that of defining

what would be a harmonic coﬁination of technical resources. mathematical
resources, and man in the control process.

The following question arises in this connection: what do management agencies
and executives need, and what are the objectives of outfitting them? 1he
objectives are sufficiently clear. We uust create conditions permitting the
executive to verify each of his decisions in term of its correspondence to
the objective laws of social development. The best decision in each concrete
case would be the one that corresponds maximally to objective laws. Basing
ourselves on this objective, we can determine the resources with which we
need to outfit management agencies.

1.. l. Brezhnev noted that “upgrading the quality of all work has become the
key problee in development of all of our national economy. This pertains

 

“Materialy XXV s7y-ezda 085" (Proceedings of the 25th CPSU Congress).
Moscow, 1976, p 58.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the quality of our plans-~that is, the grounds upon which they are written
and their balance. This pertains also to the quality of managerial activ-
ity--i'ro¢s the lowest levels of production adninistration to the central
economic agencies.“

In practical management or the econo-y. we encounter a tremendous quantity
of intonation describing the current conditions in which the activities or
each enterprise proceed; the current status of the enterprise itself; the
goals that oust be reached. In order that a grounded decision could be
oadenthat is, one corresponding to objective laws, all of this intonation
must be analyzed, evaluated, and comprehended. This work must be carried
out currently-~that is, in pace with the course of real nanagenent processes.
clearly resources supporting rapid intonation processing must come to the
aid of the manager in this case. Here we to ask the question “And what are
these reeourcss7", the scat likely answer would be “Electronic meters.”

But it is funds-entally inpossible to imrove aanagesent quality by just
introduction of coeputers alone. They cannot tell us what rules to follow
when processing intonation to be used as quantitative grounds for decisions;
they only possess a universal capability for performing computations on the
basis of prescribed algorithms.

Thus we arrive at the conclusion that there is a need for a aschanisu which
would give substance to the objective laws of social developlsent in the fora
of the rules of formalized information processing: this lechanisa can be
stated as Iatheeatical definition or the categories of scientific Ianageoent
of the society. In sy nonograph published in 1978 by lzdatel'stvo 'Sovet-
skoye radio” I called this mechanism a systes of special sanagenent software.
it must ensure arrival at quantitatively grounded decisions supporting
achievement or the goal posed to the enterprise, and impienentation of a
succession of treasures and actions to cosplete a plan, in pace with the
actual temo of aanagesent and depending on the evolved conditions and the
situation.

we cannot achieve the goals formulated above without building a system. The
correctness of this assertion is isplied by the following considerations.

First, the objective laws of social development exist as a sutually associated
set. Theretore their influence on oanagenent practices could be reflected
only on the condition that we build a systen of sutually associated rules

for intonation processing and decision sexing.

Second. the process of gaining an understanding or objective laws is contin-
uous. Theretore the special wanagenent software must undergo inrove-ent as

 

 

“Brezhnev, t. 1., "Voprosy upravleniya ekonomikoy rarvitogo sotsialisti-
cheskogo obshchestva. Rechi, doklady. vystupleniya" (Problem in hanagesent
of the zoom-y of Developed Socialist Society. Speeches, Imports, Addresses),
Ibscow, 1976, p 493.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

well. This isprovoment is possible only on the condition that we accumulate
the attained results within the framework of a system.

Third. whether or not we raise the effectiveness of management depends eig-
nificently on the extent to which actions are coordinated at all levels and
in all unite of the management system. He cannot achieve such unity without
uniting ell formalised information processing rules in a system.

Hence follows the conclusion that accmulation. development, and utilization
of formal rules that era a reflection of the objective laws of social devel-

opment would be possible only within the framework of a system. defined as
a system of special management software.

Thus in addition to the fact that the executive must have the necessary
education. he must be outfitted with resources with the help of which he
could utilize the achievements of science eta pace that keeps up with the
real course of managerial processes.

The problem of automating management is a very important one of the relation-
ship between the executive's talent and management science. The notions of
some cyberneticists, especially foreign ones. who sometimes fail to see man
behind automated control processes. belittling his role in these processes,
have recently become fashionable.

The issue concerning the relationship between the creative and formal
approaches to management is among the most important. There is an inseparable
link between individual responsibility and creativity. since the former
cannot exist without the latter. Tbnreforo if the formal methods of our
system of special management software constrains the creative capabilities

of the executive. these methods are unviable.

Management will always remain deeply creative in complex man-machine systems.
Collectives of people are a constant part of such systems. and therefore an
attempt to completely formalise management in such systems would be fruitless.
The creative element will always be at the basis of the work of control
agencies in such systems.

Special management software, which is a set of algorithm, is the formal
foundation of information processing. of course this formal system reflects
the objective laws of social development. It is based on generalizations
of the creative experiences of people and the scientific theories they have
developed. But formalized models are incapable of reflecting the entire
diversity of the living process of control. The need arises in this connec-
tion for uniting the formalized mechanism of management software with the
creative capabilities of executives. This union is harmonically achieved
with the help of the sets of algorithms provided by the system of special
management software, and it is the principal feature which makes these algo-
rithms different from those of mathematical models that can support only the
modeling of processes being controlled.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After we define the goal of our actions we create the plan for achieving

this goal. The process of creating the plan can be formalized sufficiently
well. The creative element in its development manifests itself as the search
for ideas which would help us to achieve this goal with greater effectiveness
than we might enjoy by using just formalised methods alone. The variant of
the plan developed with the assistance of formalized methods is called the
master plan. New variants. which arise under the influence of new ideas. make
this master plan more concrete. The person controlling the process evaluates
all of the resulting variants and selects, as his decision. that which in
his opinion is the best for achieving the assigned goal. The last word in
reaching a decision remains with man. Here lies the expression of the crea-
tive role of the executive in management utilising automated resources.

Let us dwell in greater detail on the issue concerning the relationship
between technical automatic control resources, including cosputers, and the
special management software system. According to today's interpretation
special management software is an attribute of technical automation resources.
and not a means of management support. (bvieusly this viewpoint was correct
and even unavoidable at the first steps of introduttion of automated resources
with the purpose of raising management effectiveness. Today, however. such
an idea harbors a nunber of negative consequences. were we to believe special
management software to be only an inseparable part of computers, we would
logically have to assists that it is an auxiliary. secondary element. The
conclusion that there is an inseparable relationship between technical
automation resources and software leads us unwittingly to incorrect organiza—
tion of the work of creating the special management software. Moreover it
makes it difficult for us to resolve the problem of preserving the special
software when the technical base undergoes change.

The special management software is inseparably associated with the very
process of control, being its principal inherent part. when we take this
approach, special software assmes the interpretation of one of the principal
resources intended to upgrade the effectiveness of management.

This viewpoint on special management software permits us to correctly deter-
mine its place within the overall automated system. Because special
management software plays the main. role in the overall system of automatic
control resources, the conclusion that special attention should be turned to
this general system becomes unavoidable.

The general success in raising the effectiveness of management with the help
of automation depends on the success with which we solve the problem of
creating the special software.

Heathematics is quite obviously a tool which can help us raise production
effectiveness. Traditional mathematics was employed mainly at the product
design stage. It played the role of an ilplement of production. Its use
was limited as a rule to the stages of product planning. After manufacture
of the product began, mathematics was not present and was not utilized in
obvious form in the process of the product's use.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DIWICIM. USE ONLY

This can be explained mainly by the fact that utilisation of mathematical
methods in concrete production processes requires great outlays of time
for computations. The computation rate is such lower than the rate at
which real processes proceed. The situation changed fundamentally with the
appearance of electronic computers. They created the conditions for per-

forming computations at a rate which not only coincided with the speed of
many real processes, but also exceeded it.

But in order that these potentials could be utilized in management, we would
have to create methods of forual intonation processing. Only mathematical
methods for forecasting the course of real processes. for quantitative
evaluation of the variants for achieving an assigned goal, and for sanction
of sensible controlling influences would permit us to make inrovemsnts in
management techniques using automation as the basis.

All of these methods must be materialized within the system of special manage-
ment software. 'i‘hus special management software becomes an object of
conetnption, and consequently it must be a product of production. Its
creation must go according to a plan. on an industrial basis, utilising
scientific methoa. as is drne today in the production of all other forms of
industrial products.

V. I. Lenin wrote: "In any socialist revolution, after the proletariat
completes the task of gaining power...the fundamental task of creating a
social structure higher than that of capitalism. namely increasing labor
productivity. assures priority..." mder today's conditions the growth
rate of labor productivity in the economy's management has fallen signifi-
cantly behind the rate of its growth in industrial production. Elimination
of this inconsistency will depend to a significant extent on the success we
enjoy in creating the system of special management software.

In this article I would like to dwell rather briefly on a number of issues
which make participation of psychologists in creation of this special
management software necessary.

If we are to develop the scientific grounds for generalizing the collective
experience of executives in relation to uaking effective manageaent decisions,
we would first have to classify the tasks executives It!“ CONN“.

Studies examining the structure of strategic or tactical tasks have shown
that any task is formally a vector representing three components. Its com-
ponents are:

The initial state of the environment (1),

 

'benin. V. 1., "Poln. sobr. soch." (Complete Collected works). Vol 36.
p 187.

[5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the final state of the environment (2) .

we process responsible for transformation of the initial state into the
final state-"the method of task completion (3).

hence it follows that if we are to classify the taskswewould have to create
the means for revealing their similarities and differences. which in the

end boil down to determining the similarities and differences of each of
the components listed above.

The third component is specifically husannthat is, it is an object of
psychological research. Psychologists can participate in the formulation

of the objective means for revealing and commenting those methods used by
executives to complete their tasks. And after such methods are formulated.

we can use objectively documented task comietion methods as the basis for
building a scientific classification of management tasks, and then for
generalizing the experience of management in the form of formalised procedures
of purposeful information processing. In other words we would obtain that
“product" which we need as a component for development of the theory of
special management software.

The management process will always remain deeply creative in complex man-
machine systems: The element of creativity will always be the basis of

the work of control agencies in such systems. As was noted above, the
special software must reflect the objective laws of social development, and
it must account for the creative experience of many generations of people.
The need arises in this connection for uniting the formalised mechanism of
special management software with the creative potentials of executives--in
such a way that the creative potentials of the executive would not be
constrained. If this requirement is not satisfied, than people would aban-
don the automated resources in the control system as soon as they encounter
a situation in which their creative potentials come into conflict with the
formal constraints imposed by the automated resources.

How can we ensure such interaction in the saw [special management software)?
“hen we talk about an executive‘s creativity we are primarily implying that
in most cases the executive is not given a ready-made task to complete: lie
is more likely given a problematic situation which he must resolve. And to
do so the executive must transform the problematic situation into a task,

the latter being a model of the problematic situation documented in one of
the formal languages. Construction of this model--that is, formulation of
the task--requires specification and formalization of the goal, that final
state in which the system must be placed. In this stage the executive
exercises his creativity in formulating the goal precisely.

He lay special emphasis here on the fact that what the executive does is,
precisely, formulate the goal, and not sort through ready-made goals and
choose some one of them. And while certain resources are available in
applied mathematics which allow us to formalize the sorting algorithm. we
have no mathematical resources with which to formalize at least some of

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the processes occurring in goal formulation (in goal setting). This situa-
tion is in many ways the product of the fact that not enough work has been
done yet on the psychological problems of goal setting. nu. research must
be stimulated in every way possible, since only with its assistance can we
reveal the objective laws of this process which would help experts in applied
mathematics and programing to develop the necessary ”blocks" of the SW,
ones which. in interaction with the executive, would significantly help him
to complete the creative tasks associated with defining the goals.

The language of comaunication plays a tremetrlous role in the interaction of
man with automation resources. Neturallymanwould prefer the natural language to
which he is accustomed in his dialogue with automation resources. But modern
technical automation resources are still unable to employ natural language.
Moreover this situation will not change until psychologists include themselves
actively in the research on "artificial intelligence” associated in the most
intimate fashion with the problems of modeling the environment and represent-

ing the relationships between the different couponents of such models in
natural language.

But oven in the event thatwe intensify such research, the language of co-unica-
tion between man and technical automation resources will continue to be formal
in the foreseeable future. This is why it would be desirable for psycholo-
gists to also concentrate their efforts on improving formalized languages
with the goal of making it easier for man to receive information pertaining
to all concrete problems with which he must deal. From the standpoint of the
most general considerations we can say that man finds it convenient to use
information in alpham-erical form, organized in special tables. to handle
some problems, while analytical graphs or pictographic representation of
information may be found to be more convenient in relation to other problems.
We have an urgent need to begin, on the basis of a scientific classification
of management tasks, systematic research aimed at determining the typical

relationships between the essence of the tasks and the most adequate methods
of intonation display.

Nor should we fail to dwell on yet another very important aspect of support-
ing the possibility for man's creative participation in snou. This aspect
is associated with creation of the conditions permitting the executive to
correctly interpret the results of solving problems with special software.
Creation of such conditions would depend in many ways on the individual's
capabilities for comrehending not only the results themselves but also the
solution process: It is very often extremely inortant to man to understand
why a technical device, together with the algorithms and programs built into
it, suggests a particular solution. The possibility for comprehending, at
least in the most general terms. the set of causes and the sequence of delib-
erations which led to a particular solution would significantly increase the

individual's trust in the obtained result and make him feel more comfortable
with the SW.

[7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This issue of Increasing the executive's psychological confidence in the
correctness of the intonation he receives and in the grounds of the result-
ing recosmendations is extremely important in relation to those management
systems in which a delay in decision making harbors irreplaceable losses.
This is why, relying on a scientific classification of management tasks,
psychologists must initiate research to clarify what stages of decision
making are most interesting to the individual in relation to different types
of tasks, what is the meet sensible and comprehensible form for presenting
these stages to the executive, whether or not this form depends on the type
of management task, and so on. Basing themselves on such research, experts
in applied mathematics and programing would be able to develop the necessary
resources and include them within the structure of the SMOU.

SMOU is an entirely new system in management organization and management it-
self. Today's typical executive has desks and numerous telephones in his
office, and perhaps that is all. When we add the SIDU system we add a console
with which the executive can assign work to the automation resources, and a
screen on which the answers wouldbedieplayed to him. But these are simply

the external changes that would occur, rather effective but not at all the
most important. What is most important is that the equipment in the office
would make it possible for the executive to quantitatively substantiate the
variants of decisions he would have to make. The executive will get the
possibility for analyzing--effectively and, concurrently, profoundly logically
and quantitatively--the course and conditions of processt occurring in ob-
jects being controlled. Such analysis entails a tremendous quantity of
information which today's executive cannot in fact employ, since he does not
have a real possibility for analyzing it. with the new system the executive
will achieve a possibility for effectively recreating a picture of the

recent past, or even of the most remote events. He will receive the possibi-
lity for establishing presence of situations similar to current ones in the
past, and to acquaint himself with the details of the decisions made by his
predecessors in similar situations: he will be able to model the course the
processes would take in response to different decisions.

In order that he could capitalise upon all of the possibilities, the execu-
tive must be appropriately trained. In particular he will have to recall
(or learn for the first time) many concepts which he had not utilized prior
to this--effectiveness criteria, optimum decision, probability. confidence
interval, risk, and many others. ﬁts best way to surmount the negative
psychological factors associated with practical assimilation of these con-
cepts is to retrain executives in special courses. Man is not born with
ready-made methods of problem solution: They are shaped within him through
training. And if it is our task to facilitate and simplify the saw intro-
duction stage to the maxim, we would have to turn attention (the most
serious attention) to purposefully teaching the methods of working in the
new conditions to the people.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He already have various ways for training and retraining manage-ant special-
ists and executives of the lost diverse levels--institutes for advanced
training, cycles of lectures given at peoples universities of econoaic
knowledge, special courses attended with or without leave from production.
and so on. These existing methods and organisational for-as of training have
been very beneficial. and today they play an inortant role in increasing
the effectiveness with which cosputers and the methods of sathenatical
economies are used in management. But the real ”payoff“ from all of these
methods is still low. The effectiveness of training and retraining must be
increased significantly. and specialists in educational psychology must
provide real assistance in this regard. what should be the mini-um necessary
volune of knowledge, abilities, and skills possessed by executives of
different profiles and different levels? what is the lost sensible sequence
for their development? What is the effectiveness of different methods
(passive and active) and organisational forms of training? no they depend

on the content of the knowledge being assimilated and on the ages of the
students?

Providing a coqlete answer to these and any other questions directly asso-
ciated with training cannot be the prerogative of just experts in management
science. applied mathematics, economics, and computer technology alone. Any
training is an active cognitive process in which changes occur in the mental
activities of the students. And this aspect is within the coqetency of
specialists in educatich psychology.

The positive results that have been obtained in solution of many of the
problesas listed above by psychologists in application to preschool children.
young schoolchildren. and senior students are universally known. I an referring
the work of P. Ya. Gsl'perin. V. V. Davydov. A. V. Zaporoshets. N. P.
Talysina. D. s. Bl'konin, N. N. Podd'yakov. and other specialists. It has
now become necessary to broaden the sphere of such research, and conduct it
in application to other age groups. And if such research were to be started.
we would be able to count on obtaining results which would have a favorable
effect on the effectiveness of the executive training and retraining system
in the very near future.

The shortness of this article does not permit me to dwell in greater detail
on all of the problems. requiring the mandatory participation of psycholo-
gists. in all stages of the creation of a special nanagenent software
(developnent of the theory. processes. and standards, and introduction,
operation. and modification). nut in sy opinion just the seapling of problems
discussed here is enough to show that the psycholgist cannot and should not
be an “occasional" consultant in this work: The creation and introduction
of the 5500 (as well as develop-ent of SHOU theory) are posing questions to
psychologists which could be answered only on the basis of serious theore-
tical and experimntal research in different areas of psychological science.
And the sooner such research enjoys the development it requires. the clearer
its organization and coordination. and the closer psychologists work with

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mnngcmnt specialists ln organizing and conducting such research. the sooner

ulll we arrive at practlcal rucmndaclona no urgently needed to: luprovoaont
of the national. econony'a management.

COPYRIGR'I‘: "Voproay pslkhologu", "Pedagoglka', 1979

11004
C803 1870

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIBM'IEI'B AND scmlrmc W038

ORDER OF LABOR'S RB": BANNER INSTITUTE OF HICROBIOIDGY AND VIROIDGY mm
D. K. um OF THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES UKRAINIAN SSR

Moscow HIIROBIOLOGIYA in Russian No 1. 1979 pp 163-173

ﬁrticle by V. V. Sairnoﬂ

Eng May 31. 1978 was the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the
Institute of Microbiology and Virology ineni D. K. Zabolotnyy of the Acadeny
of Sciences Ukrssn. one of the largest microbiological scientific institut-
ions of the Soviet Union.

Organization of this institute was an important landnark in the develop-ant
of nicrobiology in our country. Prior to the Great October Socialist Revo-
lution the Ukraine had sanitary-bacteriological institutes and stations
which dealt with sanitary-epid-iological problems. and the production of
therapeutic and prophylactic bacterial preparations (vaccines, sera).

After the Great October Socialist Revolution favorable conditions arose
for conprehensive development of all branches of Iicrobiology, a situation
which was associated with the vigorous developnent of industry, agriculture.
and the accelerating requirements of national public health.

In 1929 due to the initiative of the president of the Academy of Sciences
UkrSSR. Academician D. r. Zabolotnyy, an Institute of Microbiology and Epi-
daiology was established in the systen of the AS UkrSSR, an institute which
was to becone a scientific center developing and uniting theoretical and
practical research in areas of general. soil. medical Iicrobiology and
epidemiology.

Acadeaician D. K. Zabolotnyy because the first director of the institute
(1929-1929). In 1930 the institute was conferred the name of D. K. Zabol-
otnyy. In 1966 it was retitled the Institute of Hicrobiology i-eni D. K.
Zabolotnyy of the AS UkrSSR, and - in 19621th Institute of Microbiology
and Virology ineni D. K. Zabolotnyy. A8 UkrSSR.

In the first years of its existence the institute had two divisions—nadi-
cal and microbiology-with a staff lumbering less than twenty. Soon, how-
ever. in connection with the accelerating needs facing Iicrobiological

science, the institute organized new divisions and laboratories of nitro-
biological and virological orientation. In the pre-war years, 115 people
were already working in the institute (including 48 scientists). working

81
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at various tines in the institute were such great scientists es Acadeeitian
B. L. Isschenko. Acadenicians of the AS UkrSSR V. G. Drobot‘ko and N. c.
Kholodnyy. Corresponding Members of the AS UkrSSR I. Ye. Ruchko, L. I.
Rubenchik. s. N. Hoskovets and R. H. Pidoplichko. Professor K. I. Bel'tyu-
have. and others.

Staff personnel of the institute carried out broad research in various sec-
tors of nicrobiology end virology. In the pro-war and first post-war years,
coeprehensive efforts were devoted to problees of bacteriophages. the biol—
ogy of nicroorgsniees and their mutability (Corresponding Meeber, A8 UkrSSR,
1. Ya. Ruchko. Acad.. AS UkrSSR, V. G. Droh-‘t'ko. G. H. Prenkel. B. I.
Kleyn. R. B. Sergiyenko. P. Ye. Vizir', H. 1.. Ilepoenyashchaya, 1.. Yu. Hed-
vinskaya. and others). The institute has isolated and studied about 1.0
bacteriophages of pathogenic and ssprophytic bacteria. none of the for the
first tine (pertussis, brucel lar). Sons of the isolated bacteriophages
have been used in nedicine (dysenterial, staphylococcal). Study was de-
voted to phages of lactic acid bacteria and lethods were worked out to
control phegolysin in the dairy industry.

One of the important achievuente of the institute in the pre-wsr period
was the deter-ination in 1931-1938. of the etiology of an unknown disease
(01)) of horses which caused ease deaths of the horses. It was shown that
the etiological agent is the sicroscopic fungus Stachybotrys alternsns
(its toxin). This asde it possible to work out neasures for control of
the disease. titled stachibotriotoxicosis and for its rapid liquidation.
Staff nenbers of the institute who had studied this disease and developed
control neasures, were honored with USSR Orders (V. c. Drobot’ko. P. Ye.
Hsrusenko, 3. Ye. Ayzenaan. I). G. Kudlay. N. Yu. Kolesnik, P. D. Yatel'.
N. H. Pidoplichko and B. 0. ngan).

The institute deternined the etiological role of a toxin of another eicro-
scopic fungus Dendrodochiu toxicu- (Pidopl. et Bilal) in another unknown
disease of horses (Zaporozhe "82"). called dendrodochiotoxicosis (R. H.
Pidoplichko. V. I. Bilsy). During the war years, in association with staff
personnel of other institutes. these research workers participated in de-
ciphering the etiology of an equine disease. the so-called septic angina
and in working out methods for its control.

The war intgr-upted the peaceful creative labor of the institute collective.
Soee of the leading personnel who went off to the front died defending the
notherland (Director P. Ye. Hsrusenko, Secretary of the Party Organisation
N. V. Stsdnichenko. B. 0. Kagsn. P. D. Yatel', V. s. Rozhdestvenskiy).

The institute was evacuated to Ufa city, than relocated to Moscow where it
carried on work in the therapy and prophylaxis of diseases caused by patho-
genic bacteria and fungi. In this period the institute entered the struc-
ture of the united Institute of Zoobiology. as UkrSSR.

A great role in the develoment of scientific research of the institute
after the war was played by Honored Scientist. Academician as UkrSSR.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. o. Drobot'ko who headed the institute over an 18 year period (l9b4-1962).

The basic direction in the scientific activity of the institute became in-
vestigations on the topic problem "Physiology and Biochemistry of Micro-
organisms". Broad studies were developed on antibiotics and other bio-
logically-active substances. microbiological synthesis of proteins. etc.
Successfully completed were studies on the creation. and introduction into
medical practise. of the therapeutic preparation mikrotsid (Corr.-Hemb..

AS ukrSSR. N. H. Pidoplichko and Corr.-Hemb.. AS UkrSSR. V. l. Biley. 1952).
on working out the theoretical bases of microbiological synthesis on petro-
leum hydrocarbons (Corr.-Hemb.. as ukrsss. Ye. I. Kresnikov. 1971). These
works were awarded State Prizes of the USSR. For successful fulfillment of
a number of other investigations. many staff members of the institute were
honored with governmental awards. they were conferred medals and diplomas
of the Exhibition of Achievements of the National Economy. USSR. and of

the VPONKh. UkrSSR. and name prizes of the Presidium. as UkrSSR. and so on.

At the present time the institute is coordinating work on problems of
physiology and microbiology of microorganisms in the Ukrenian SSR. it is
successfully carrying on research on mycology. destruction of materials by
microorganisms. on general. soil and industrial microbiology. phytocides.
phytopathogenic bacteria. virology of plants and on molecular biology of
viruses. In 16 divisions and three non-structured laboratories. 670
people are working. of whom 165 are scientific workers. including 2 corres-
ponding members of the AS UkrSSR. 12 doctors and 132 candidates of science.

Research of the institute is being conducted in three problem areas-physi-
ology and biochemistry of microorganisms. molecular biology and microbio-
logical synthesis of protein and other products from hydrocarbons.

A large unit of the institute. which is working on the topic problem
”Physiology and Biochemistry of Microorganisms" is the Division of General
and Soil Microbiology. which was created in 1929. Its directors have been
A. I. Rakitskaya. H. D. Bogopol'skiy. Corr.-Hemb.. AS UkrSSR. L. I. Ruben-
chik. and. since 1968. the division has been led by Ye. I. Andreyuk.

Workers in the division have included such renouned scientists as Academic-
isn B. L. Tsachenko. Academician. AS USSR. N. G. Kholodnyy. V. T. Smsliy.
Rh. 6. Zinovyeva and 0. l. Bershovs.

The first investigations of the division were devoted to the ecology of
soil microorganisms (N. c. Kholodnyy) and the physiological features of
individual groups of bacteria: nitrifying (V. T. Smelly). ezobscter (Kh.
c. Zinov'yeva). bacteria decomposed by urea (L. I. Rubenchik).

In the course of two decades the division carried out research on study

of the interactions of soil microorganisms and higher plants. The role
was established of soil microflore in supply of plants with phosphorus.

trace elements and vitamins of the B group (L. l. Rubenchik. V. T. Smaliy.
0. t. Bershova).

23
FOR orncuu. use osu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considerable attention of the division has been devoted to investigations

on the biological fixation of nitrogen by different groups of microorganisms.
to the influence of azobacter on plants. to study of the mechanism of inter-
action of nodular bacteria with leguminous plants (L. 1. RL enchik. Kb. 6.
Zinov'ycva. 0. l. Bernhova). The prepared. active strains of azobactcr and
nodular bacteria have been used for production of azobacterin and nitracin.

A significant place in the research of the division has been occupied by
questions of ecology. physiology and taxonomy of soil actinomycetes (Ye. I.
Andrcyuk. Ye. V. Vladimirova. S. V. Kogan).

Patterns have been found in the distribution of this group of microorganisms
in the soils of the Ukraine. Moldavia. the Crimes and the Caucasus. indi-
cator groups of actinomycates have been discovered for certain types of

soils of the south; study has been made of the capacity of actinomycetes
to synthesise active compounds.

Detailed study has been made of oligonitrophil bacteria; diagnostic cri-

teria have been proposed for determination of oligonitrophils; their role
in nitrogen balance of the soil has been established (Ye. I. Andreyok. N.

l. Hal'tsev).

In the course of recent years. study has been underway of the ecology.
physiology and role in nature of lithotrophic-thionic and sulfate reducing
bacteria (Ya. I. Andreyuk. I. A. Kozlovs). It was established that thionic
bacteria are the cause of appearance of an aggressive medium in the construct-
ion of the Kiev metro. The completed studies supported development of
biological criteria of potential aggressiveness of the ground earth and of
measures to assure permanence of underground construction.

The Division of Antibiotics. in creation of the institute. was titled the
Division of Medical Microbiology (chief. academician D. K. Zabolotnyy).
After 1930. this division was hesded--following its transformation into the
Division of Pathogenic Hicroorganisma--by academician, AS UkrSSR. v. G.
Drobot'ko, for 32 years. After 1963, the division has been named the Divi-
sion of Antibiotics (director. 3. Ye. Ayzenmnn).

At first. division research was directed to study of the biological proper-
ties of pathogenic bacteria. their metabolism and mutability. and, subse-
quently. to search for bacteriophages. chemotherapeutic agents and anti-
biotics and study of the mechanism of their action.

At the present time. the basic direction of research is the search for ncv
antibiotlcs produced by bacteria and higher plants. Patterns of antibiotic
formation are being investigated in association with the systematics of
these organisms. Study has been made of various groups of bacteria. es-
pecially wide study has been made of saprophytic species of the genus
Pseudomonaa. New species of the genus Pseudomonas have been discovered;

a series of new antibiotic substances has been isolated. It was shown

2%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OWICIM. USE ONLY

that synthesis of a number of antibiotics can serve as a species indicator
of certain bacteria. Much of valus has been done in the division in the

f ieid of investigation of antibiotics from bacteria of the genus Pseudo-
monas and in search of antibiotics from higher plants. It has been shown
that higher plants are an extensive source of production of new useful
antibiotics. A series of antibiotic preparations has been obtained. The
chemical structure has been established of structures which determine their
particular antibiotic activity: polysynthetic antibiotics are being
created which possess more effective properties than the original pre-
parations. A stimulating influence has been found. in a series of plant
antibiotics. on protective mechanins of the macroorganimn. Some of them
have been produced in the institute from higher plants and are being used
in practise. Thus. imanin has been used over a 20 year period. novoimanin
is widely employed. salvin and armarin are being introduced and are be-
coming known to industry. The effectiveness of acne antibiotics in horti-
culture has been established.

At the institute broad devalopaent has occurred in research on a very im-
portant sector of mycology. This had already started in 1933 when a Laborator-
ry of Mycology was organised (director. Corn-Hersh. AS UhrSSli. N. H. Pido-
plichko). and transformed in 1936 into a Division. In 1958. in the facili-
ties of this division. Divisions of Experimental Mycology (director.
Corn-Heath. AS UkrSSli. N. H. Pidoplichko) and of the Physiology of fungi
(director. Corn-Hub. AS UkrSSli. V. I. Bilsy) were created.

Objects of research were. for the most part. fungi of the class Deutero-
mycetes. and. also. some lower and ascomycetous fungi. studied in pure
cultures.

The basic directions were ecologo-taaonomic and physiologo-tasonaic. with
study of new objects with important national economic significance: micro-
flora of grain. crude fodders. various types of soils and risoapherea of
agricultural plants of the UkrSSli and natural plant associations. insect
pests. new kinds of materials. construction and raw materials and other
localized fungi. A number of fundmaental monographs were issued on this

area and a number are being prepared for publication. An important place

is occupied by questions of the experimental systematics of deuteromycetee.
intraspecies heterogenicity. amplitude of mutability of diagnostic indicators.
features of metabolism and fine structure.

Description has been nade of a number of new taxona; dominating species
have been revealed in soils of different climatic zones. The effect has
been established of fungi inhabiting soils. on the germination of seeds
and growth of agricultural plants. The mechanism of resistance of dark
colored fungi to radiation has been discovered; the protective role of
melanin pigment has been established.

Study has been made of thermophilic and thermotolerant fungi of the soils
of the UkrSSR. among which have been found active producers of proteolytic.

amylolytic enzymes. peroxidasas. The biochemical bases of thermophilie of
fungi and of their thermostable enzymes has been revealed.

25
ma orncm. use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic direction in the area of study of the physiology and biocheaistry
of fungi has been the working out of the physiological bases of regulation
of growth. aorphogenesia. activity of biosynthesis of physiologically-
active metabolites-toxins. easy-es. antibiotics. etc. It has been shown
that a physiological change is achieved in the phases of growth. in the
level of biosynthetic activity of the nyceliua. its growth. change occurs
in content of protein. nucleic acids. aaino acids. change occurs in the
sequentiality of (creation of individual metabolites and their coaponents.
One of the characteristic exaaples in this plan night he production of a
new species of fungus of Penicilliun vitslo. working out aethods for its
directed cultivation intending to produce the therapeutic preparation
sikrotsid. to produce a high and stable content of extra-cellular easy-es.
glucosooxidsse and catalsse. which lie at the basis of the technology of
their industrial production for the needs of nedicine and the food industry.

The institute is one of the leaders in the USSR on tsxonosy and physiology
of toxin-forning species of fungi. causing aliaentary sycotoxicosis of son
and agricultural aniaals. and on systesatics and physiology of sicroaycetes.

In 1932. the instltvte organized a Division of Technical Microbiology
(director. M. L. Meponnyashchsya). which included two structural labora-
tories: yeast (director. M. V. Stsdnichenko) and anerobic (director. 0.

M. Prenkel'). In 19‘s the division was reorganized into the Division of
Microbiology of Persentstion Processes (directors. M. L. Meponnysshchaya
and c. M. Frenkel'). Research was carried out on study of the causative
agent of bread and sugar syrup spoilage and on working out recoanendations
for prevention. Processes of scetone-butyl feraentation were investigated.
Mork on the study of onerobioais was carried out.

In 1960. research in industrial nicrobioloby sharply expanded. In the
facilities of the division of the Microbiology of Feraentation Processes

a Division of Physiology of Industrial Microorganisas (director. Corr.-
Menb.. AS UkrSSR. Ye. I. Kvasnikov) was organized. A cycle of fundaaental
investigations was conducted on the sy:;..-.2... yh,siology. biochelistry
and ecology of a number of groups of aicroorgsnisna. which are potentially
useful in the national econoly.

To be especially noted is the work on study of aicroorganisus which use
petroleum hydrocarbons. alcohols and other torus of inedible raw materials.
In the course of this work. selection and conprehensive study was carried
out of active producers of protein substances. a number of group B vita-
nins and carotenoids. proteolytic enzyses and several other substances.
Using aethods of aatheasticsl planning of an experiaent and the computer.

search was aade for optiaal regimes for growing selected cultures in a
continuous process.

Research was carried out on changes in the ultrafine structure of cells and
in biosynthetic processes of theraotolerant yeasts and bacteria during their
continuous growth. It was shown that their capacity for synthesis of protein
substances. vitasins and. especially, lipids. varies regularly as a function
of the carbon food source and growth rate.

26
Iron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fundamental work was done on study of lactic acid bacteria. New methods
were sought to study them and a new interpretation of their ecology given.
Reconmendations were worked out for regulation of the vital activity of
lactic acid bacteria in biological preservation of fodder. vegetables.
fruits and in the meat industry and. also. in control of them as the caus-
ative agents of infection in the fermentation industry. Results of work
of the division have been introduced into practise with high economic
effect. Isportant work was coapleted on study of the taxonomy of myco-.
arthro-. brevi- and corynebacteria and nocardia.

Since 1934 the institute has had a functioning Division of Phytopathogenic
Bacteria (director. for 33 years. K. I. Del'tyuhova. and. since 1970. R.
l. Gvoedyah). The division studies causative agents of bacterial diseases
of plants and phages of phytopathogenic bacteria.

Study has been done on bacterial diseases of rubber plants. legumes. cereals.
vegetables. cucurbitsceous plants. sugar beets. fodder grasses. fruits and
several forest species. Isolation and identification were made of the caus-
ative agents of diseases (including new species). control measures for
several of them worked out. Antimicrobial preparations were sought and the
mechanism of their action on the bacterial cell was studied.

An important place in work of the division was occupied by study of the
interrelationships of phytopathogenic bacteria with plants and insects.

The Division of Biochemistry of Microorganisms was created several years

before the war (director. B. 0. Regan; after the war. Ye. M. Koldayev).
Since 1951 directors were Ye. Ya. Rsshb. followed by 1. Ya. Zakhsrova.

Research uss begun in the sixties. and is now going on. in the chemical
bases of O-antiganic specificity. which is determined by the content and
structural specificity of the polysaccharides of the cellular membranes of
bacteria. The structure of a specific polysaccharide of one of the aero-
types of D. coli was determined; a lipophilic sugar. previously not de-
scribed. was isolated in enterobacteria and its chemical nature established.
Lipopolyseccherides of bacteria. their endotoxins. have a broad spectrum

of biological activity and potential for use as stimulators of natural
ismunity.

hethoda were worked out in the division for purification and study of the

nature of isoenzyme systems and multicomponent complexes of proteo-.
cytolytic and other enzymes.

The institute has carried out important research in the field of genetics
and radiation mutagenesis of microorganisms. The research-on bacterial
mutebility--which has been traditionally going on since the organization
of the institute. has been continued in the Division of Hutability of
Microorganisms. set up in 1955 (director. P. Ye. Vizir'). This was sub-
sequently reorganized into the Division of Genetics of Microorganisms

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(director. 8. P. Matselyuk). The division has been conducting systelatic
research on the most isportant problems of genetics of actinosycetes. a
cyclic chart of the genome of Streptoayccs olivaceus has been constructed.

a bisdircctional replication of a chrosoaose has been shown for the first
tine in actinonycetes and s plasaid DNA has been isolated which deter-lacs
synthesis of an antibiotic. formation of protuberances on the surface of
spores and is an effective reproductive factor, mobilizing unidirectional

transfer of a chrososone during conjugation free a point fired on the
genetic chart.

The Division of Radiation Microbiology (director, a. H. Pasechnik) was
organized in 1961. Basic direction of research of the division is study
of the sutagenic action of ionizing radiation upon bacteria. In cultures
of Bacillus and Clostridius genera, coeparative study was carried out of
the nutsganic action of UV-rays. gas-a radiation and fast neutrons of an
experinental nuclear reactor and the high efficacy was deucnstrated of the
latter in the induction of variants with changed enzy-e activity. As a
result of the action of doses of low intensity and graduated selection.
strains of cloatridium perfringens. type A and b were produced. for the
first Line. by way of experimental selection. which had increased biosyn-
thetic activity with potential for use in production of therapeutic prep-
arations. and. also. strains defective in synthesis of individual easy-es,
suitable for study of the paths of their biosynthesis. a strain was ob-
tained of the producer of proteinase of Bacillus nesentericus 316". and

introduced into production of light-sensitive laterials for regeneration
of files.

In cannection with the developeent in the institute of research in biosyn-
thesis of protein from petroleum hydrocarbons. Divisions of the Technology
of biosynthesis. Che-istry of Raw Material and Processes of Biosynthesis
were organized.

The basic direction of the Division of Technology of Diosynthesis (director.
V. P. Sescnov) is the study of kinetics of growth, physiology and biocheuis-
try of industrially important for-s of nicroorganises. and. devising Iicro-
biological technology to produce protein and other biologically active
substances from inedible raw saterials. Work has been carried out on

study of the kinetics of growth. physiology and biochesistry of yeasts which
oxidize various carbon-containing substrates. Study is underway of the
physiology of growth of producers of enzyles and other biologically active
substances of bacterial origin with the intent to direct the process of
biosynthesis of enzymes and to devise technological regiuens which assure
haul-us yield of product. Exquisite solutions have been perfected; en-
gineering-technological calculations and modelling of the apparatus for
provision of technological processes of biosynthesis have been carried out.

Research in sicrobial synthesis of fodder protein has been undertaken in
the Division of Che-lorry of Raw Material and of Processes of biosynthesis

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(director. V. Ya. Menu-yen). The division has studied the chemical com-
position of microorganisms cultured on n-elkanes.

In 1968 the institute created a Division of Biology of Gas-oxidising Micro-
organisms (director. Yu. R. Haleshanko). Research in the division has es-
tablished the presence. in natural sresls. of thersotolersnt and thermo-
philic (62-65°) methane-using bacteria. Descriptions have been made of

new species and methods devised for their isolation and culture. Principles
have been worked out for intrsgroup classification. Diagnoses have been

set up for genera and species and keys for their essay. Absence of an
absolute substrate specificity in a Iethana-oxidising enzyme has been es-
tablished. It has been found that sethane-oxidizing bacteria actively
participate in the carbon cycle of the biosphere.

A new kind of raw aaterial-msthanol--hss been suggested for biosynthesis
of proteii-vitanin concentrates; active cultures of yeasts have been
selected.

In 1970-1977 the institute had a functioning Division of Natural Anti-
TUmor Substances (Corr.-Hamb. AS UkrSSR. D. c. Zstula). This division
studied the nicrobiological aspects of oncology. A bac. megatarium ﬂ
strain was found which has an antigenic relationship to the cancer cell;
study was made of the anti-tumor properties of culture liquids of micro-
organisms and antibiotics of plant origin. The composition of microflora
of the gastrointestinal tract of patients with malignant tumors has been
examined.

Beginning in 1970 the institute has carried on comprehensive study of the
microplesma of plants (director. I. c. shripal'). A medium was proposed
recently to cultivate these microplssms. and a suggestion made for improve-
ment of their systematics which has been supported by the Intersational
Subcommittee on Systematics of Hicroplesas.

DNA-dependent RNA-polymerase has been studied for the first time in micro-
plssna and it was shown that in pathogenic species of them. and also in
Agrobacterium tunefsciens bacteria. the RNA-polymerase system. like the
euzaryot. is of a multiple type.

Presence in sicroplasma and Agr. tumefeciens of alpha-smanitive sensitive
DNA-dependent RNA-polymerase has direct association with their pathogenic
potential and capacity to evoke-~in higher organisms-diseases of a malig-
nant character. with due regard for these data. suggestion was made of a
model of the mechanism of pathogenicity of mycoplasma (without integration

of genetic material) and of Agr. tumefeciens (with integration of genetic
material).

Broad research has been conducted in the institute on viruses of plants.
annuals. yeasts. fungi and bacteria. This began in 1960 when the institute

organized a Division of Viruses of Plants (director. Corr.-Hembr.. AS UkrSSR.
S. N. Hoskovets.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Detailed study has been devoted to distribution of viral diseases of agri-
cultural plants in the Ukraine. Methods have been devised for diagnosis
of the majority of viral diseases. identification of their infectious

agents. and study nsde of the ways they are transmitted and circulated in
nature. Recon-endations have been developed for control of viral diseases

of potato. tobacco. tomatoes. sugar beets. hops. legunes and other cultures.

The Division of Phytopsthogenic Viruses (director. A. D. Bobyr') has worked
out the general principles for seeking out and selection of virus inhibitors,
and paths and nethods drawn for their wide use to cosbat viral diseases of
agricultural plants. A considerable number of various substances have been
discovered which can inhibit a number of phytopathogenic viruses. including
products of netabolisn of yeast genera Candida and Saccharanyces-substances
of a polyaaccharide nature; their physical chesical properties and biologi-
cal activity have been studied. Research on the nature of genetically-
deternined virus-resistant plants has been carried on.

Hethoda have been devised for cultivation. isolation and purification of
viruses which daaage fungi of the penicilliua genus; their biological.
physical. chenical and antigenic properties have been studied.

Basic direction of the work of the Division of Reproduction of Viruses of
Plants (director. V. c. Krayev), organized in 1976 is study of the physical
chanical properties of plant viruses and their structural cospongats and
the features of interaction of viruses with the cell in the process of
viral infection.

The division has inquired into the ultrastructure of the cell of a plant
danaged by viruses during an individual or nixed infection; it has estab-
lished the features of localization and distribution of virions in the cell,
the content and structure of intracellular viral inclusions during infest-
ation of plants by x- and y- viruses of the potato and some viruses of
leguninous plants.

At the present tine the division has been examining the intracellular local-
ization of processes of synthesis of virus nucleic acid and proteins, the
physical chenical properties and functional features of coaponents of
viruses of plants with a fragmented genome.

The basic direction of work of the non-structured Laboratory of Viruses of
Algae (director. V. A. Goryushin) is the study of molecular biology of
algal viruses. It has discovered and exaained viruses of blue-green algae
(cyanophages) which lyse a nunber of single-cell and filar blue-green
algae. It has seen the phenoaenon of lysogeny in single-cell algae and has
found cyanophsgea which elicit it. A virus has been discovered which dan-
ages green alga Chlorella purenoidosa.

In 1963. the institute organized a Division of Physical Methods of Study of
Viruses which was later renased the Division of Biophysics of Viruses

30
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(director. Ya. c. Kishko). In 1977 the division was reorganized into the
Division of Molecular Biology of Viruses (director, N. s. Dyachenko).

The division has studied the ultrastructure of a number of viruses of
plants end bacteriophages and individual elements of their capsid and iso-
lated nucleic acids. It found polylysogeny of Pseudomonas vignae. caused
by doubly discriminating moderated phages (director. Ya. 6. Kishko).

In a structural-functional study of the components of DNA-genome viruses
and the eechaniams of their reproduction. it was found that the complexity
of the antigenic structure of an extension of the virus correlated with
the size of the molecule in our composition. Previously unknown antigens
have been identified. The devision found a different orientation of a

type- and group- specific determinant of hexone in the virion. intranuclear
inclusions end cepaomers.

The division shoued the virus-specific nature of intranuclear inclusions
and their different functional role in virus reproduction. New data were
obtained on characteristically different action of DNA-genome viruses
(adenovirus. several phages) and their components upon an immune system.
wherein whole virions and proteins inhibit. vhile DNA stimulates. the
activity of antibody forming cells and of T-lymphocytes (N. S. Dyschenko).

In the 1963-1968 period the institute had functioning Divisions of the
Viruses of Animals (director, Academician. As unrssn. S. H. Gerahenaon).
Chemistry of Viral Proteins (director. 3. B. Serebryanyy). Chemistry of
Nuclear Acids and Viral Carbohydrates (director. V. P. Chernetakiy). the
latter becoming the nucleus for creation of a Sector of Nolecular Biology
and Genetics of the Institute of Nicrobiology and Virology imeni D. K.

Zabolotnyy, converted then into the Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics. AS UkrSSR.

In all the years of its existence the institute has constantly striven to
concentrate scientific cadres and material resources on studies of current

problems of modern microbiology and virology and to translate into practise
the results obtained in its theoretical work.

The institute has carried out diversified scientific activity in combination
with a number of scientific research institutes of the Ukraine and other
union republics. it has supported and constantly expanded association with
practical work. The institute is carrying on its activity in individual
problems at the present time in combination with 68 scientific institutions
and enterprises end.also. on the basis of socialist competition with several
of them. The institute has been executing five themes in combination with
scientific institutions of the CBHA countries (GDR and CSSR).

The institute is conducting great work in the area of preparation of scien-
tific cadres for scientific research institutes. medical. agricultural and
industrial institutions; it is also preparing cadres of microbiologists

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

or virologists for a number of other countries. In the postwar years alone.
the institute her. trained 28 doctors and over 250 candidates of sciences
who are working in various institutions of the Soviet Union. countries of
socialist cooperation and developing countries.

The institute systesatically conducts republic and general federal school-

aeninars. aylaposia. scientific seetings. conferences of young specialists
on current questions of contesporsry sicrobiology and virology.

The institute publishes HIKROBIOLOGICNESKIY ZIWM. (founded in 193’s).
Ionographs. thematic collections. sethods developsent for various probless.
sicrobiology and virology. In the lost 5 years alone. it published 29
sonographs. 13 collections of works. and produced 30 author docusents.

On 31 Hay 1973. the institute was awarded the Order of Labor's Red Banner
for services in the developsent of biological science and training of
highly-qualified scientific cadres. The high esteem of the Iotherland
infuses the personnel collective of the institute with ever greater energy

to work in the field of biological science and to seek new reserves to
incresse its effectiveness.

In serking the 50th anniversary of the founding of the institute. the
personnel collective is directing its entire activity to fulfill-est of
the decisions of the XXV Congress of the CPS” and m Congress of the

C? of the Ukraine. for realization of raw tasks of columnist construction.

oomrcm': Izdatel‘atvo ”nauka“. "nikrobiologiya" 1978.

8586
650: 1870

32
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

IN THE EXECUTIVE WINES 0? 11!}: Inseam-10m “110“ 01’ PSYGiOIDGICM. SCIENCES
Moscow VOPROSY 9911010an in Russian No l, 1979 pp 143-144

[Article by e. r. lamv. new Vice Preeident. and E. A. reroponove, Senior
Scientific Secretary. USSR Society «Psychologists!

[Text] A regular meeting of the International Union of Psychological Sciences
(IBM!) was held from 26 to 29 July in Vekheyenburg (coal. The participants
of this ﬂeeting included A. Smerfil‘d (lBPN president. England). a. P.
lanov (vice president. USSR), 11. buyer-Guaterro (vice president. nexico).

'i'. Tomashevsxiy (Polend). r. Kliks (60R), Kh. Gevera (Wabash. Nyutten
(Belgiu), M. Durodzhayte (Nigeria). h. nozentsveyg (USA). P. Press (France),
2h. do honnolenn (scientific secretary o! the INTIMTIONAL doom or
psvcuowcv, France). v. Gol'tsaen (mm general secretary, USA). It. Pavlin
(«spa assistant secretary). and D. Belenzher (ESPN treasurer. Canada).

The following issues were discussed during the work of the executive conceit-
too:

i. The new president's report on the executive couittee's work during the
year since the last conference.

2. The treasurer'e report on the financial status of the min.

3. The IGPN general secretary's report on the organizational activities of
the 06?".

4. Intonation on the activities of the emittee for Conunication and
Publication Problem: (chair-en. N. Rosentsveyg). namely: e) Publication
of an international handbook of psychology. b) the international journal
of psychology. c) a review of publications on psychology in French-speaking
countries. d) translations or the psychology handbook, published in three
languages (English, french. Gerun), into other languages.

33
ron ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Information on activities of the comittee for exchange of apprentices
and students (co-ittee chairmen, Prof Sanmerfil'd).

6. Information on the users participation in the International Year of the
child in 1979. the program of which includes an international colloquium

on the problem of child development (speaker, Prof Press) . and in wssco
publications on the problems of educational television.

7. information on the status of research in special projects: Socialization
of children in Africa (Prof Durodzhayte): the role and status of women
(Prof Honmolenn): the environment and adaptive behavior (Prof Sanerfil'd):

professional ethics (Prof Gol’tsman). UNESCO-financed research is being
conducted in all of these projects.

8. The mutual relationships of the IBPN with the International Society of
the Social Sciences.

9. Mutual relationships of the ESPN with other international associations.

ID. The status of affiliated menbers of the ltSPN.

ll. The program of the regular 22d International Congress of Psychology,
which is to be held in Leipzig. COR, 6-lZ July I980 (speaker-Prof P. xliks).

12. The provisional plan for the 23d International Congress of Psychology
in Mexico in 1984 (speaker. Prof R. Dayaz-Guarerro).

l3. The place and time of the next meeting of the iBPN's executive cosmittee.
I4. Acceptance of new members in the ESPN.

The members of the executive coamittee visit J the Karl Marx University in
beipzig and inspected the facilities in which the congress was to be held.

The executive comittee approved the provisional program for the 22d Inter-
national Congress of Psychology written on the basis of suggestions from
national societies within the 8PM mewership (Program Omittee chairman,
Prof Syudov. can).

The congress will be held 13-12 July I980 in Leipzig. The working lan-
guages of the congress will be English. French, and German. The scientific
program consists of long sywosiuns, meetings on particular topics, and
individual reports. The Program Couitteo has cospiled the list of problems
for the symsiums on the basis of suggestions from national psychological
sciences in the International Union of Psychological Sciences. The problems
for the symposium, graciously sent to the USSR Society of Psychologists in
mission, are presented below: i. Methodological fundamentals of psycho-
logical theories. 2. Classical and field experimentation in fundamental
and applied research. 3. Effect of developmental theory on psychology.

3’:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Variable measurement nethods. 6. mltidinensional scaling and inter-
personal differences. 6. The concept of infornation in psychology. 7.
Cognitive processes and eye novenents. 8. Psychophysiological evaluation
scales and perceptual classification. 9. mltiple coding and the stages
of intonation processing. 10. the concept of language~—syntactic struc-
tures and se-antic content. 11. Hesory and cognition-~0rganization of
knowledge in the hussn senory. 12. Individual differences in cognitive
processes. 13. consciousness and communication. 14. cognitive psychology
and organisation of learning. 15. The psychology of creativity. l6.
Artificial intelligence and cognitive psychology. 17. Intercultural
cosparieons-etheory and methods. 18. Development of speech and conunica-
tion before speech. 19. Interference in childhood. 20. Developmental
aspects of the relationships between cognition. enotion, and motivation.

21. Diagnosis and treatment of retarded mental development in children.

22. Starvation and developnent. 23. Psychophysiological analysis of
personality changes. 24. Analysis of biological rhythms at the psycho-
logical level. 25. The limbic system: Activation and alertness-«valuation
and doctrine. 26. Asynetry of the functions of the frontal lobes. 27.
Psychophysiological analysis of mental operations. 28- Inborn behavior and
hereditynethological and genetic approaches. 29. Psychophysiological and
biochemical bases of memory and learning. 30. Analysis of brain functions
in animals. 31. Nonvocal cmunication. 32. nodels of personality develv
opnent. 33. Social regulation of human behavior. 34. Structural and
diagnostic aspects of personality research. 35. Early development and
socialization. 36. Cognitive and motivational developnent in the process
of training and education. 37. Differential aspects of ageing. 38. For-
nation and nodification of attitudes. 39. Social interaction and the
personality. 4o. Attribution processes in social perception. 41. Decision
asking in groups. 42. Interpersonal perception and conception. 43.
Behavior nodification. 44. Biological feedback. 45. neuropsychological
therapy. 46. Pharmacological, biochemical. and psychological approaches
to the study of schizophrenia. 47. Psychopharnacology and the personality.
48. Cognitive and motivational aspects of activity regulation. 49. Neuro-
physio1ogical mechanisms of purposeful activity. 50. Planning nan-sachine
systems. 51. Mental loads in activity. 52. stress and control of stress--
psychodynanic and psychobiological approaches. 53. Psychosocial aspects of
large families. 54. Symposiun in honor of H. Rundt. 55. Theory and setth
in the history of psychology. 56. Psychology and its history in different
countries.

The Rational Preparatory cmittee (chairman, President of the USSR Society

of Psychologists 9. P. honey) was created with the objective of promoting
participation of Soviet psychologists in the 22d congress and encouraging
participation of the largest possible nMer of psychologists working in
different institutions and cities of our country. Applications for partici-
pation in the congress in all subdivisions of the USSR Society of Psychologists
should be sent prior to 1 May 1979 to the National Preparatory Oouittee:
129366. Moscow. Yaroslavskaya Street. .13. 0851! Society of Psychologists.

35
was orncm. use ONLY
F0)! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The organizers of the congress report that only reports on original. pre-
viously unpublished projects will be accepted for the program.

Applications lust contain the following information: 1) The topic and the
nusber of the problem to which the report applies: 2) the title of the

report: 3) the complete names and titles of the authors: 4) the complete
mailing address) 5) the preferred language for the report, and other languages
possible out of those selected for the congress; 6) the content of the

report in 300-400 words (a brief resume). Applications must be typed in
Russian and in one of the languages of the congress, in three copies.

The program of the congress foresees presentation of scientific films.
Applications for the showing of scientific films must contain the same infor-

mation as required for reports and, in addition, information concerning the
length and technical parameters of the fill.

Exhibitions cf scientific research apparatus, tests. books, and journals
will be organized. Applications indicating the exhibits and the space they
require will be accepted by the congress secretariat until 1 May 1979.
There are also plans for a snail historical exhibition of psychological
apparatus. The organizers are interested in proposals and recomendations
concerning possible exhibits or good photographs of such apparatus.

The organizers of the congress report that Circular No 2, together with the
forms and further information on preparations for the congress, will reach
the USSR Society of Psychologists in mid-1979, and copies of it may be
requested there.

(DPYRlGi‘r: 'Voprosy psikhologii', ”Pedagogika", 1979

11004
C80: 1870

36
FOR OFFICIAL ”SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS MD SCIENI‘II’IC MIMTIONS

IN THE USSR SOCIETY OF PSYCHOLOGIS‘I‘S
Moscow VOPROSY PBIKROIDGII in Mssian No 1, 1979 p 148

(Article by S. A. Paraponova]

[Text] A regular scientific organizational session of the Central Oomcil

of the USSR Society of Psychologists was held 25-26 Septesber in Yaroslavl'.
The Iain issue discussed in detail at the session was that of developing

the fundamental principles of creating a psychological service in our coun-
try. A report was given on this topic by Yu. M. Zabrodin. and the participants
of the discussion included v. I. Voytko, A. A. Krylov, K. H. Gurevlch. V. D.
shadrikov, N. P. Talysina, A. R. Aatinov. s. A. Dushkov, Yu. P. Polyakov.

h. C. Zarakovskly. Yu. T. Gus'kov, and others.

A series of reports on the problem of psychodiagnosis. engineering psycho-
1°97. and psychophysiology as well as reports generalizing the experience
of teaching psychology in VUZ's were given at a special meeting to which
students and instructors of the Yaroslavl' State University and the f-tate
Pedagogical Institute ineni K. D. Ushinskiy were invited.

The Central Council's resolution on organizing a psychological service in the
country was approved in the final meeting. In its resolution. the Central
Council approved the work of the Presidium of the Central Council of the
USSR Saciety of Psychologists. the society's regional branches, the USSR
Academy of Sciences Institute of Psychology. and other organizations parti-

cipating in work on the plan for the psychological service in our country.
The fundamental organizational principles and the forms and directions of

the work of the psychological service, as presented in the report by Yu. H.
Zebrodin, were approved.

Il‘he Central Council noted that the general methodological foundations and
the scientific base now exist for further development of the scientific-
oethodologicsl and organisational probleus of creating a psychological
aervlce--frotl its lowest levels to the executive agencies.

37
you orncm. use om:
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same tine the Central Council's resolution sakes note of the need
for writing a master plan for stage-by-stage organization of the psycho-
logical service with a consideration for dostestic and foreign experience
and the typical tasks to be carried out by practical psychologists. as well
as the typical ferns of organising psychological services in different
areas of public practice (the national econoey. education. public health,
culture. social control. and so on).

Special emphasis was placed on the need for posing the issue of developing
the methodological base, and standardizing and unifying the lethods of
practical work, consultation. and expert psychological certification. in
order that different ferns of psychological service could be developed in
the country, it would be desirable to attract an increasingly greater nusber
of associated-organisations, conduct integrated projects. publicise psycho-
logical knowledge, and upgrade the psychological cemetency of executives

in public practice at different levels. ‘i'he Central Council felt it suitable
to begin work on training plans and prograls for psychological specialists.
for which purpose a special mission on the probleas of the psychological
service is to be created under the presidiu of the Central Council.

Mention was ends of the need for providing the scientific psychological
grounds for the resources and setth of publicizing the socialist way of
life, and for intensifying the ideological function of psychological science
in the conditions of the present ideological struggle, which has becole
lure acute.

‘lhe regional branches of the Society of Psychologists were asked to prepare
their proposals concerning the directions and forms of work of the country's
psychological service. and to shit then to the presidiun of the Central
Council. They were also asked to prepare and conduct a conference on the
problems of training personnel for the psychological service in the first
quarter of 1979.

comment; “Voprosy psikhologii", "Pedagogike". 1979

11004
C50: 1870

30
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCIENI'ISI‘B AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

ALL-UNION SYMPOSIUM 'PSYCHOIDGY AND MEDICINE?
Moscow VOPROSY 981101010611 in Russian No 1, 1979 pp 152-154
[Article by T. 1. Arten'yeva. 1. A. Dshidar'yan. and I. I. Chesnokoval

[Text] An all-union sylposiun devoted to psychology and medicine was held
10-12 ray 1978 in Moscow.‘

Three basic probless were examined at the synposim: The methodological
issues -:oncerning the relationship between medicine and psychology, the
probleu of Iedical psychology, and the issue concerning interaction of
social and radical psychology.

The smosiun was opened by 088R Academy of Sciences Corresponding Huber

B. r. msov. director of the Institute of Psychology. He noted broad use

of the nethods of the systees approach as an important trend in development
of the knowledge of man; he esphasized that the system approach suggests

a new concept of deterniniss in psychology, which in distinction free: the
mechanistic, linear definition permits us to consider the variation in levels
of mental pheonoeensntheir multilevel nature. their Iultiplicity of quali-
ties, and their nultidinensionality.

The first day of the synosim was devoted to the nethodological problems
of psychology and medicine. The principal topic of debate was the issue
of the mutual relationships of the sciences--psychology and nedicine, and
psychology and psychiatry.

The sciences are being integrated in research on the complex problem of

lean on the fins foundation of harxist-Leninist philosophy (Ye. V. Shorokhova,
Hoscow). But this does not seen rejection of the specific approach to the
studied phone-ens. In their research on nan, psychology and nedicine are
elements of a couples united by season philosophical conceptions and cosmon-
ness of goals. It was in this connection that the issue of the importance of

'Ses the collection specially prepared for the sy-posius: ”Psikhologiya i
neditsina. haterialy k sispoziunu' (Psychology and Medicine. Materials for
a symposium). hoscow. 1978. 436 pages.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the scientist's ideological position was touched upon (A. h. Megrabyan.
Yerevan). The situation in American psychology and psychiatry and the
trends of their development attest to the exploitation of these sciences
for reactionary sociopolitical goals (8. K. noshchin. Moscow).

The following were isolated as general medical and general psychological
problems: The relationship between that which is biological and that which
is social) the association between the mind and brain activity) the psycho-
somatic problem, and the problem of normal versus pathology.

In addition to issues such as organising a psychological service in medicine
and the demands psychologists place on medical practice (A. h. Portnov.
Moscow) . participation of the latter in treatment of somatic patients and
analysis of medical practice with a consideration for changes occurring in
the social conditions of life. changes requiring active participation of
psychologists in the treatment of patients is. P. Semenov. Moscow) and their
rehabilitation following illness ('1‘. Ya. Khvilivitskiy, Leningrad). reports
were given on the need for creating a unified psychological conception of
the personality (1. G. aeaml‘ko, Leningrad). on delineation of pathopsy-
chology and psychopathology, and psychology and anthropology. on development
of their conceptual apparatus (Yu. M. Savenko. Moscow) and on achieving
closer mutual ties between medicine and psychology, which have a cannon
taskuproviding the conditions for normal mental and physiological activity
of the personality (6. Kh. shingarov, )bscew; M. M. Kabanov, Leningrad).

Medical psychologists are now facing a number of tasks concerning research
on the features of childhood and adolescence. 'ﬂuse include the problems
of occupational orientation of sick children or children with a weakened
nervous system. and research on the forms of labor coepensation and job
placement (3. Ya. Rubinshteyn, Moscw).

Swarising the results of the first day of the syQosium, A. A. Megrabyan
esphasized the increasingly greater interest in the problem of man and
personality. Me noted the high theoretical level of the discussion on the
problems posed.

The second meeting of the symposium was devoted to a discussion of the prob-
lens of medical psychology. The need for making the tasks of medical
psychology more specific (its sphere of competency includes all that has a
bearing on the psychology of the sick person) and bringing medical doctors
and psychologists closer together in their understanding of the object of
research were noted (M. M. kabanov, uningrad: re. 0. Ithomskaya, Moscow:

1:. it. Platonov, Moscow). and the association medical psychology has with
concrete practical tasks was esphasised (s. o. Karvasarskiy, Leningrad).

P. V. Bassin (Moscow) turned his attention to the complexity of medical
psychology's subject and the difficulties it is experiencing in its growth.
Me distinguished two groups of causes which. in his opinion. are hindering
successful development of the science. They include differences in the

to
WI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

languages spoken by medical doctors and psychologists, and the inadequate
attention being given to men's internal, spiritual life. as the most important
component of man's mental activity.

issues discussed at the sysposium included the methodological procedures of
diagnosis as one of the main directions in the work of medical psychology.
standardization of the methods of classification, of placing patients in
particular groups, test validation (I. M. Tonkonogiy. Leningrad) I. M.
Gll'yasheva, Moscow. and others), the tasks of psychological research in
somatic medicine (V. V. Mikolayeva. Leningrad). and the place and methods
of neuropsychology (Ye. D. Khomskaya. Moscow: 1.. I. Vasserman. Leningrad).

Reports given by B. V. zeygarnik (Moscow), Ye. M. Kameneva (Moscow). 1“. I.
Sluchayevskiy (Leningrad), and others touched upon a number of controversial
issues associated with our understanding of the sibject of pathopsychology
and its relationship to psychiatry and psychopathology. V. I. Belorertseva
(Ul'yenovsk) dwelt on analysis of the historical aspect of the relationship
between pathopsychology and psychology. The role of psychology in research
on patient rehabilitation was emphasised by M. M. Kabanov and V. Ye. Kagan
(Leningrad). M. M. Kabanov examined the basic points of the rehabilitation
conception: discussing its development, he emphasized the obviousness of
the need for fundamentally reviewing the existing system for training both
physicians and medical psychologists. lunch room was devoted in the dis-
cussion to issues concerning the urgency of developing the psychological
fundamentals of psychotherapy (B. D. Karvasarskiy, Leningrad) V. Ye. noshnov,
Moscow), organization of a psychotherapeutic service within a broad network
of polyclinical. sanstorium, and health resort therapy (I. z. Vel'vovskiy.
Khar'kov) . the need for creating psychotherapeutic offices in children's
polyclinics with the goal of preventing children's neuroses (A. I. Zakharov,
beningrad). organisation of an extensive system for monitoring the psycho-
logical health of children within the framework of other psychological
services in the country (A. Yu. Panasyuk, beningrad). and investigation of
unconscious phenomena from Marxist positions (V. Ye. nozhnov). Urgent
issues brought up in the reports included those of inproving and expanding
the training of medical psychologists, and intensifying the psychological

training of medical doctors (K. It. Platonov, M. M. Kabanov, A. Kh. Lifshits,
Moscow. and others).

Concluding the second day of the symposium. Yu. P. Polyakov (Moscow) noted
the fact that practical public health has come to deeply recognise the

need for psychology’s participation in the solution of medicine's pressing
problems. The symposium also provided the framework for discovering some
weak points in the development of medical psychology today, particularly

the leg of scientific fundamental research from the needs of practice. and
the evolving disproportion in the structure itself of this science. The
methods problem continues to be acute and controversial. Among the most
important organisational and practical problems, we can isolate the need for
intensifying the planning and coordination of research in medical psychology,
for creating a psychological service in medicine, and for solving the problem
of training and utilizing personnel.

1&1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OII‘FICiM. USE ONLY

The third day of the synponiun was devoted to the relationship between social
psychology and medicine. The specific features of conunication between the
patient and the physician and between the patient and individuals inediately
surrounding his were discussed. Usually medical workers focus their atten-
tion on the patient's somatic manifestations, while the psychological factors.
among which contact of the patient with his physician and medical personnel
is significant, are ignored as a rule (Ye. P. Bashin. Moscow: 1.. l.. aokhlin.
Moscow, and others). In this connection A. P. Graysman (Moscow) substantiated
the validity of the existence of conunicology as a science of the art of
cosmunication (in individual form or in the form of group psychotherapy).

It was noted that considering the patient's way of life is important to diag-
nosis of sental illnesses. inasmuch as the disease pattern includes not only
organic disturbances but also disturbances in the personality's internalized
social relationships (A. V. shmakov. Moscow). Social psychologists and
medical doctors nust also apply joint effort in preventiVe psychology, which
oust take the form of organising consultative assistance to young people in
resolving complex vital issues. in settling various sorts of conflicts. and
in resolving the problems of family and marriage (V. x. Hyager. Leningrad).
The difficulties presently facing preventive psychology were noted: Absence
of a personality classification and of suitable research methods. and lack

of a classification of conflicts.

The study of emotion-arousing influences in extreme conditions deserves per-
sistent attention. The importance of joint efforts by psychologists. social
psychologists. and physician-hygienists in solving a large number of probless
concerning the organization of the life and personal needs of people in
unusual conditions was demonstrated with the psychological state of a ship's
crew on a long cruise as the example (A. R. Steyaatskiy, Moscow). 1'. Ya.
Khvilivitskiy (Leningrad) examined cases observed in Leningrad during the
tins of the blockade. In the extremely difficult conditions of that tise.
there was growth in neither mental nor somatic diseases. historical facts
of this sort must be analyzed from the standpoint of the relationship between
that which is mental and that which is somatic. and between that which is
biological and that which is social.

A number of the reports concerned the relationship between social psychology
and forensic psychiatry (V. n. shumahov. Moscow: 5. ii. Lifshits. Kiev: 1.. L.
lbkhlin, Moscow) . The problem of socially dangerous behavior was examined
in this connection. Other problems discussed were the need for differentiat-
ing pathological deviations from normal psychological deviations in research
on the difficult adolescent (I. r. hyaghov. Voronezh), the integrated nature
of experimental psychological examination of the patient carried out with
the goal of revealing the degree to which the personality is preserved and
the possibility for exposing individuals simulating psychological difficul-
ties (I. l. Korhukhovskaya, hoscow Oblast). the urgency of critical analysis
of materials acmlated by foreign social psychologists from the positions
of Marxist psychology (P. N. Shihhirev, hoscow), and development of a theory
of psychotherapy with a consideration for its psychosocial aspects (V. L.
mykov. Moscow)-

he
FOR OFFICIAL "SE 0!“?
VON OFFICIAL USE ONL?

Describing the work of the sywosiun in the section ”Social Psychology and
Medicine.“ K. K. Platonov (Moscow) eaphasised that the range of problems
being discussed. which began with the debate by philosophers, psychologists.
and psychiatrists on the consciousness probles H966). has broadened and
risen to the level of interaction of psychology and medicine as 0 whole.

The smsim damnstrated that ssdicine has gone beyond the trasework of
individusl psychology. having discovered intimate ties with social psychology.

In their concluding renarhs, Ye. V. shorokhovs and V. M. Banshchikov (Moscow)
noted the truittulness of interdisciplinary discussion of joint problems

end expressed confidence in further close contact between medical doctors and
psychologists.

mPYRIGu'n 'Voprosy peikhologii". 'Pedagogika". 1979

l 1004
C50: 1870

"3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PIELICA‘I‘IONS

KEY 10 NB BIS? M61 0? NB USSR

boningrod OPIGDBLIRV WWIINNYIOI 681309 5588 (Key to the Rust Nngi of
the USSR) in Russian Part No 1978 signed to press 22 Feb 78 pp 2-4, 383

anotation. Table of Contents. foreword. and Bibliography from the book by
v. I. Ul'yanishchev. lsdatel'stvo Nauks, 38h meg

(Text: Rust fungi parasitise sany agricultural and ornamental plants. and
they attack tisbar stands and vindareaks, causing a significant decline in
plant productivity. This key is intended (or exact determination of species,
which will facilitate subsequent conduct of scientific research and inle-
sentation of ssasures to control rust fungi. This book presents keys for
(our genera (Puccinie. Mphyllwn, Aectdim. and Undo) and describes 104
species of rust fungi parasitising 2.300 plants. Three hundred eight-five
figures. 2l bibliographic references.

mm
Page

Foreword...”.......................................................... 3
Orderuredineles....................................................... 5
11. Pan. Pucciniaccee................................................. S
20. Genus Pucctnia S
21. Genus Mphyllwn 322
22. Genus “Minn................................................... 324
23. Genus Undo 3G8
Supple-ant............................................................. 351
index of Russian Names for the Rust Mgi.............................. 353
Index of Latin Halos for the Rust Fungi 359

index of Latin Nance for Host Plants of the Rest mngi................. 366

hi;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I": "who: ml

Mung the nmrous fungal agents of plant diseases, the rust fungi are
extremely widespread. and undo;- conditions favoring their develop-ant they

often elicit severe danags to any grasses. shrubs, and trees, leading to

a significant decline in the productivity or the latter as well as to loss
of ornamntal qualities.

 

e
5 E g 3 ~55
c N 5 u
v. o 8
g a: i 5 g a: mg
3 a a 3 a 5
Pan. mu.” rsteelslaeese
eacese
fret-mus . . . 0 0 -‘
2W0 . . : : g: . : gonadal. . . . . a I) ...
mm.- " 3 , 3 ‘n "" I 3: ' 'E :
rmmwu... I . 13 no) I pmmmm ' ' ' ' f ‘ b :
gumm- - - - “'3 F) ‘ 1:.de I I I z 1 -
ma . . . - ‘-
Me superman . . ‘ ‘ "'3 :2:fo1 : I 3: m) 1
PW.... ' " Unp'lls.....' ') -
lenus.... I ~ ' can-Imus... I - -
Casement . . . . 6 (0) ' Plums. . . . . 3 0 "
aw.“ . . . . 13 (IS) ' rummage l l '
'IMMW‘Q...‘ l) "' ”m....' ‘ 3
W“ e o e . : P : ”My". . , i I) .-
MU‘ . e s . ) “I'm” M (II) 8
CW“... 33 ) ‘ madam....— ' ‘
0.1mm a 0) -~ Umms....-"O (m) 0
Moll-W - . ~ “ (35’ 3 Schumann . . . I - -
guesses“ . . . . : P J Purdue . . . . . GI. «59) 0‘
”m...” ) Endsph'uan... 2 (3) 3
Subtotal. . . . m (an) M
deemsn'. . . . . 30 (Q) 10
Unis . . . . . . 3 m 3

 

Subtotal . . . . 88 (05) 12
Total" .. ."28 (MO) 013

 

 

Unfortunately it was not until this tine that Soviet uycologists, scientists,
agricultural specialists, and instructors and students in institutions of
higher education have had a “Key to the Rust Fungi of the USSR' available,
one necessary for correct determination of the species of these fmgi vith
the goal of ispleoenting particular control measures.

"5
ran orncm use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11n- ”Key to Llu- Hunt Fungi of the USSR“ consists of two parts describing
,x'nl summons or fungi mllected from note than 5000 species of plants
(the noses of the host plants are given in the ”Flora SSSR" (Flora of the
0553)). Part One was published by tsdatel'stvo “Nauka i tekhnika" (Minsk)
in l'J75. Part M, the second publication. contains the basic knowledge
of 704 species of rust fungi in four generaul’wcinia. Mphyllun.

Accidiwn. and Undo.

it should be noted that while Transhel' (1939) cites 840 species of rust
fungi found in the USSR. parts One and No of the "Key to the Rust Nngi
of the USSR“ provide information on 1,126 species discowred in the USSR.

The table above presents the newer of species of rust fungi representing
43 genera known in the USSR as of January 1974. and the nusber of species
which may be found within our country’s borders (the nmber of species known

in the USSR prior to 1939. as cited by Transhel' (1939). is indicated in
parentheses).

Hycological research is presently being conducted in any repwucs, krays,
and oblasts of the USSR, and we would hope that our intonation about this
interesting and “patent group of fungi will be significantly expanded in
the future and the nuaber of tsmns known for the DSSR will grow.

This key was cospiled on the basis of literature dealing with the rust
fungi. to include works by Soviet and foreign uredospore experts as well

as herbal natarials stored in the herbarims of the USSR Academy of Sciences
Botanical Institute issni V. 1.. Xonsrov, the All-mien Institute of Plant
Protection, the Azerbaydzhan SSR header-y of Sciences Botanical Institute.
the Georgian SSR Acadeuy of Sciences Botanical Institute, and other insti-
tutions.

Use was also ads of uterials sent by Soviet sycoiogists to the author by
personal requestuz. H. Azbukina. H. s. Melia, D. N. Babayan, and others.

The author extends his gratefulness to all of the individuals indicated
above.

Bibliography
1. 'Viznachnik gribiv Ukrainy" (Key to the Ukrainian Fungi). Vol 4, Kiev. 1971.

2. Gutsevich, S. h.. "Obsor rshavchinnykh gribov Kry-a' (Review of Crimean
Rust Fungi). Leningrad. 1952.

J. Korbonskaya, Ya. 1.. “wredelitel' rzhavchinnykh gribov Sredney Asii i
Yuzhnogo Kazakhstana" (Key to the Rest hingi of Central Asia and Southern
Kazakhstan), Dushanbe. 1969.

I6
roe orncm. use ONLY
‘0

s.

6.

7O

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
N.
15.

16.

17.

IO.

19.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kuprcvlch. v. r., and Tranahel'. u. 6.. “luhavchlnnyya quby. Vyp. 1.
80a. mla-paorowyc" (The Run: qu1. tuna 1. ran. Malawaoracaao).
ummgrad. 1957. Hlnak. 1972.

Nevodovakly, 0. 9.. “Flora aporovykh raatanly Karakhatana. 1‘. l.
Iuhavchlnnyya grlby" (Spora-Baarlng flora of Kazakhstan. Vol. 1. The
Boat. M91). Alla-nu. 1956.

Tatcrovnlkova-Bahayan. D. 11., "Rahavchlnnyyo parazlty kul'cumykh 1

dlkoraacnahchlkh raaunly" (Rule Paraaltea of Agricultural and ulld
Planer), Yaravan. 1952.

Tranahal', v. 6.. "Obxor rzhavchlnnykh 9r1bov 898R” (nevlav of the
Run M91 of the USSR). unlngrad. 1939.

Ul‘yanlahchav, V. 1., 'Mkotlora Aurbaydzhana' (Mycof'lora of Axarbay-
dzhan), Vol 2. 1959: Vol 3. Part 1. 1960: Vol 3, Part. 2, 1962, Baku.

Arthur. 1. ch. . “annual or the Nata 1n tha muted stator and Canada.“
Lafayatta. lndlana. 1934.

rlrchar. Ed" 'Dle Uradlnaan dor Schulz.“ 1n “Beltraq Kryptogauntlora
Schulz." earn. 1904.

Fraqoao. R. 6.. “Flora 1bar1ca. l--9anara Maia. 11--9anara Umcu.
etc. ." Hadrld. 1929-1925.

Gamma. c. 11.. '01. mtplu Hatt1aauropaa.” 1n "Baltrag Kryptoganon-
flora Schvalz.' Barn. 1959.

Grove, u. 8., "The Brltlah we M91. Uradlnalu.‘ Canbr1dga, 1913.
Guyot, A. 1... "Oradlnalu. Moon.“ 1. 11. 111. Parla. 1938-1953.
Harlot, 9., “be: Uredlnalca." Parla. 1908.

chbahn. 11., “madman." 1n 'Kryptogamnflora dar Hark Brandenburg.“
Lelpzlg. 1914.

Llro. 1., 'Uredlnaon fonnlcae.‘ Melalnqmrs, 1900.

quula, 11., 'Kryptoqa-en-Plora von Dautachland. Dautach-Oatarrelch and
dc! Selma," Mlpzlq, 1910.

Sawloacu. Tn. "Honoqragla uradlnalalor dln Rambllca Populara ma.“
loll. Bucharest. 1953.

W
you omcm use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

30. Sydov. P.. or. at” ”Monograph“ Urodlnoarun.‘ Vol I--"genun Puccinia."
Vol II--”gcnus ”mangoes.” Vol III-~Pucc1nlacoae,“ Vol IV--Urud£naaa¢
£npvrdhct£.' Lelpzlg. 1904-1924.

21. Trotter. A” ‘Utedtnalu.’ 1n “Flora lunca Cryptogm." Pavia. I908-
1914.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl‘stvo 'Nauka". 1978

1100‘
C50: 1870 END

h8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY