APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100010055-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8248

29 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(FOUO 5/79)

LL15.JCDNNO'FNJBLJCJNJ1CJFIS RESEJ\R(]1 SElO/NCE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriste in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no Hay represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGiT MRS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HERE!" REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3E RESTRICTED MOFEICIAL USE ONLY.
I. Rrpm No.

nosuocuemc oau
was w 8248

a-- - n
rmsmxons on ussu scram: AND rscuuowcv
monsmcu AND BEHAVIORAL scmcas . (F000 5/79)

      
          
    
  
   
  

J. lemme-It's Acres-ma Nu.

    

  
 

epon In:

29 Jenna 1979

.- Seducing Oguiuiion New.
0.
I0. Noieu/Tut/I'od UIiI No.

II. Comma/Gnu No.

l). Ty cl Report 0 Period
c.5224

   
 
  

7. Autos“)

  

 
  
 

   
    
 

0. Peder-in. One-Mice None nod Address

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glcbc Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

  
    

I; Spoouﬁu Olga-Entic- Name and “dun

     
 
   
 
   
      
    
       

As above
I!» Supple-comp Nous

I6. Abumcu

The report contains information on aerospace medicine, agrotechnoiogy, bionics
and bioacoustics, biochemistry, biophysics, environmental and ecological
problems. food technology, microbiology, epidemiology and immunology,

marine biology. military medicine, physiology. public health. toxicology.
radiobiology. veterinary medicine. behavioral science. human engineering.

psychology, psychiatry and related fields. and scientists and scientific
organizations in biomedical fields.
I-‘Im Ul"l"l(.'ll\l. IIS‘II-z ONLY

,. JPRS 13/8248

29 January 19 7

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(9000 5/79)
CoureuTs PAGE

ECONOMICS

Processing Visual Infomtion in s Situation of
Ultimate Responsibility
(V. K. Kslin; rmnucnnsnn 38mm. No 11. 1978).. 1

salaries

Long-Range Directions of Gene Engineering
(V. A. Kordyun; HOLKKULYABRAYA BIOLOGIYA, No 19. 1978) ll

PUBLICATIGIS

Studies in Child Brain Development

(‘1'. P. Khrizllnn; WI?! “MSW HOZGA
mm. 1978)....................................... 20

An Electrophysicsl Investigstion of the Dolphin Brain

(A. Ya. Supin. et. 31.; EMOPIZIOIDGICHESKOYB
ISSLZDOVANIYB mm DEL'PINOV, 1978)................. 67

Elm Voluntsly Hovesents Subjected to Electrophysio-
logical Research
(H. P. Ivsnovs; monzmmclcaxsxon
ISSLEDOVARIYE PROIZVOL'm DWI? 0
mm, 1978)0-OIOOOO0.0.0...0.0.0....OCOOOOOOOIOOI 53

Injury Caused by Conbined Action of Radiation and toxins
(L. A. ‘l'iunov. et. s1.; RADIA‘I‘SIYA I YADY, 1977)..... 57

Civil Defense ‘rrsI-stology Handbook
(RUKOVODSTVO P0 mmmwcn DLYA I-rrsmsxor
81.0an WSW 030m. l978).................. 60

- s - [III - USSR - 22 SGT POUO]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EWICS

PROCESSING VISUAL INFORMATION IN A SITUATIW OP ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY
Moscow TEKHNIOlBSKM'A ssmrn in Russian No ll, 1978 pp 13-16

[Article by Cand Psych Sci V. K. xalin, Sinferopol' State University ineni
H. V. Frunzel

[Text] The unique features of visual information processing in a situation
of ultimate responsibility have to do with the individual's operational
reliability-~that is, his capability for stably maintaining optimum working
parameters (efficiency, “alertness," "resistance to interference,“ and so
on) for prescribed intervals of time and in the face of possible complica-
tions in the situation. Nervous system properties make up one of the most
important "human factors” of reliability. (17)-

Change in an individual's behavior in extreue conditions, considered in
light of his individual features, is quite interesting.

Research has shown (l,4.9.lO.l3,lS,16,2l) that extreme conditions can have
both a positive and a negative influence on hush activity, the differences
in goal attainment beco-ing significant only at a high degree of stress.
M0119 individual characteristics responsible for the resistance subjects
exhibit to the action of emotional factors, the strength of the nervous
system, as deter-ined by the arousal index, is noted uost frequently.

At the sane tine sooe investigations (2,8,18-20) have shown that a weak
nervous syste- is important to success in a number of jobs.

It I‘ diffi ult to'po'spare the data of many researchers because they have
been obtain in research on different types of activity and in different
conditions. ' e results of activity depend not only on presence or absence
of tension in the subject or differences in the degree to which it is
expressed, but also on many other factors (for sample the possibility for
choice of behavior strategy or correction of actions in the course of their

fulfilluent, presence of conditions permitting preliminary preparation for
the possible development of events, and so on).

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

So far the research has centered on nacroaralysis of activity using para-
meters of integrated action as the informative indices--temporal. spatial.
and strength parameters (3). But nacroanalysis does not allow us to
evaluate the work of individual psychophysiological nechanisss.

Study of human activity in a situation of emotional tension from the positions.
of microanalysis appears promising (3.5-7).

In nicrostructural analysis of mental activity we isolate the swiftly pro-
ceeding components of integrated acts and examine their interaction.
aperinents performed on the basis of these methods have revealed a number
of functional blocks or levels of information processing. allowing us to
subdivide the integrated act of control into its cognitive and controlling
conponents and reveal the ties between the effectiveness with which these
functional blocks work and the most general energy characteristics of the
brain, and the dependence of these ties on the level of responsibility for
the results of the work.

The asplitude dispersion of the background :86 is one of the most general
energy characteristics of the brain (it also contaivs considerable informa-
tion on individual features). A number of studies have provided intonation
allowing us to interpret this characteristic as an index of the strength

of the nervous system (12).

The task of the present investigation boiled down to studying changes, in
individual. functional blocks participating in visual information processing,
which occur in people exhibiting different dispersions of the background are
in connection with bearing ultimate responsibility for work results.

a technique developed by the department of engineering psychology of Moscow
State University was employed. The subjects performed six types of assign—
ments: Reactions to nimbers (time spent was recorded) (Kr): signal search
within a set sequence of nusbers (88); identification of a nuber stated
following presentation of a sequence of numbers (10): determination of the
absent mﬁer (All): total recall of a presented series of mﬂaers (TR):
solution of an interfering problem followed by recall of a presented series
of nuﬁers (1P). testing corresponding functional blocks (search for nubers
en a console; filtration and recoding block; block consisting of initial
memory without participation of the recall mechanism; block of elementary
logical transformations; response block and initial mes-cry block: repetition
block) (7.14).

A special stand was manufactured in conjunction with this technique (ll).

The research was conducted on two groups of adult male subjectswexperimental
(53 persons) and control (30 persons). the subjects were students of the
university's physical education department who had frequented the laboratory
many time and were well adapted to the experimental situation. may
subject underwent three series of assignments.

2
NR OHICIAL 088 MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the first series the subjects in the experimental group were given the
following instructions: Work at top speed throughout the entire series,
trying to make no mistakes. This series was a unique sort of background
for the next two series.

In the second series the subject was instructed to complete the assignment
better than in the first series, and he was warned that as soon as he exceeded
the total time or total mdaer of errors in the first series recorded after
each assignment, he would be subjected to electrocutaneous stimulation.

Thus we created a situation of a constant threat or a negative evaluation
(allowing every assignment: however, the electric shock was not applied to
any of the subjects in this series.

The best time in relation to each assignment in the first and second series
was selected by computer (the computer complex simulated a number of counters
in the experiment).

In the third series the subjects were told to work better than in the
first and second. The subjects were warned that if their times in performing
the assigment are worse than their times for the first two series, they
would be subjected to electrocutaneous stimulation: the same sort of stimu-
lation would also be applied for every error made.

Thus the subjects were placed in a situation of ultimate responsibility for
cospletion of every assignment.

In reality, however, the subjects were subjected to electrocutaneous stimu-
lation only when they made errors. The warning that they would be punished
for too much time helped to achieve a maximum reaction time.

Work with the control group proceeded in the same sequence and in the same
values as in the experimental group. But before each of the three series

the subjects of this group were given identical instructions: "Try for the
best speed and accuracy." Before the work started, an electroencephalogram
was recorded from each subject in a soundproof and shielded chamber, in

the dark and following initial dark adaptation at a constant amplification
ractor, using "IO/20" system bipolar co- 0; points or contact and a tour-
channel encephalograph produced by the L‘vov Blectronic Medical Apparatus
Plant. Electrode resistance was 10-15 kohms. The encephalograph signal
was fed to an til-7H analog computer, which calculated the EEG dispersion and
fed a signal to one or the galvanometers or the eiectroencephalograph. Thus
concurrently with the background encephalogram we recorded the dispersion of.
its aspli‘.ude. Then segments having no artifacts were selected in randcm
order from the 886 to represent a total of 60 seconds of brain biopotencials.

The 63 was recorded from the subjects by (Ch. Pere's) method during the
entire time of work. The electrodes were secured to the palm and back of
the left hand. The recordings were made with an 899-09 potentiometer, the
scale of which was graduated to permit determination of electric resistance
of the skin.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIA

Several mathematical data treatment methods were employed to analyze the
results of the experiments: Pearson's correlation coefficient r, the
correlation ratio n of the indices of the effectiveness with which test
assignments were performed as determined from the dispersion of the back-
ground EEG amplitude. and the t-test of significant differences in the
results of testing the functional blocks of visual information processing
in groups of subjects exhibiting significant differences in EEG amplitude
dispersions were computed.

The minimum average current 326 dispersion, represented in millimeters of
deflection of the galvanometer stylus. was 0.70, and the maxim was 22.98.

Three groups of subjects We)” created to permit computation of differences
using the t-test: bow BEG aaplitude dispersion (nine persons), average (11).
and high (ll persons). Differences in the EEG index amng these groups were
significant at p<0.00l.

Examination of Pearson's coefficients of correlation between‘ EEG amplitude
dispersions and visual information processing speed and accuracy showed
that in the first series of assignments. there is one significant but rather
weak positive correlation with the nuaber of errors in the TR assignment
(r-o.26, p<o.05).

Application of Student's t-test confirmed the results of correlation analysis:
Differences between groups with low and high 336 dispersions turned out to

be simificant only in relation to the nunber of errors made in the TR
assignment; subjects with the highest dispersion made the largest number of
errors (t-2.27, p<0.05).

The same differences in quantity of errors were also revealed between groups
of subjects with low and average :86 amplitude dispersions (tn-2.25, p<0.05).
Moreover there are significant differences between these groups in relation
to the total reaction time in the RT assignment (t-2.lld, p<0.05), but
subjects with the average EEG amplitude had the best time. The latter
correlation was confirmed by an examination of correlation ratios between
indices of psychometric tests and the EEG amplitude dispersions.

Computation of the correlation ratio measuring the degree of curvilinear
and linear correlations revealed a significantly large water of statisti-
cally significant correlations between 886 dispersion and the test trial
indices in the first series. Il‘his imlies that most correlations are
curvilinear. The results of test assignments involving the work of the
most mien blocks participating in visual information processing were
found to be dependent on £36 aqlitude dispersion. The most stable corre-
lations were revealed between 236 dispersion and the temporal indices of
the ‘ra assignment (the response block and the initial memory block are
tested) and the 1P assignment (the repetition block is tested). In differ-
ent variants of the quantitative relationships among classes of indices

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

examined. the probability of error for the significance of correlation
ratios varies from 0.05 to 0.001.

Examination of correlation matrices of curvilinear correlations showed
that the scatter of the temporal indices of tests in the neutral situation
(from the motivational aspect) was greatest for the group of subjects
exhibiting a low 336 dispersion, and it was least for the groups with the
average and high dispersions. however, some subjects with a low EEG dis-
persion do produce good results.

In the second series of test trials involving the threat of electrocutancous
stimulation, it was established on the basis of the coefficients of corre-
lation analysis and the t-test of significant differences that subjects

with a low 336 amplitude dispersion had better qualitative indices (at
p<0.05) in the 88 assignment (testing the filtration and recoding block)

and the ID assignment (testing the initial mmory block less the recall
mechanism). The worst qualitative results were typical of subjects with

an average 38G amplitude dispersion in relation to the SS assignment, and
stbjects with the high dispersion in relation to the In assignment. Statis-
tically significant correlations were not revealed between the other indices.

examination of changes in the 65!! during the work showed that saw of the
subjects developed tension inediately after receiving the instructions.

though as a rule it passed quickly (the 653 value returned to its initial
level).

Thus tension did not persist throughout the entire second series. Never-
theless significant correlations between 836 a-plitude dispersions and
indices describing performance in the most complex assignments (TR and IP)
disappeared. and correlations arose with qualitative indices of the easier
assignments-oss (performed at the level of sensory traces and being inde-
pendent of the sensory mesory block) and ID. which requires engagement of
the initial memory block less the recall mechanism.

In the third series of test assignments, in which the subjects worked in
conditions imposing real responsibility for the results of each trial,

the direction of correlations between the indices of the psychometric tests
and the £86 amplitude dispersions changed for the opposite in nest cases

in comparison with the first two series. becoming linear.

Out of the Pearson correlation coefficients computed on the basis of the
work results of the entire group of subjects, only two were found to be
statistically significant; these were negative correlations between EEG
dispersion and ss latent timeun- -0.275 (p<0.05) , and between the electro-
encephalographic index and the nuwer of errors in the ID test--ru-0.305
(p<0.025). These data indicate that when these assignments are performed
in the critical situation, subjects with a low EEG amplitude dispersion
begin to work much more poorly than subjects with a high EEG dispersion.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

65!! recordings made during the third series show that the tension exhibited
by subjects varied in the situation of real punishment for errors. Four
groups of subjects could be distinguished: sum persons. whose tension
remained high frost the_beginning to the end: B--18 persons whose tension
was significant at the beginning of the series and noticeably declined
toward the end (in a number of cases the (BR value returned to its initial
level); C--l0 persons exhibiting almost no changes in the GSA,- D--7 persons
with an average (SR.

Analyzing the research materials, we computed both the absolute indices
of work effectiveness in the different test assigments, and percent changes
occurring in these indices from series to series.

Among coefficients illustrating the level of correlation between BEG disper-
sion and the absolute indices of test trials in the third series, only one
was found to be significant--the correlation with errors in assignment I?
(rm-0.418. p<0.05). This correlation was discovered in group A.

Analysis of the correlations of 336 dispersion with changes in the indices
of the psychometric tests revealed many sore significant correlations. - The
results of the analysis, which was perfon in relation to-three groups of
subjects--the first consisting of subjects fro- all groups, the second
consisting of subjects from groups A and s, and the third consisting of
subjects from group A--are shown in the table below.

We can see from the table that all correlation coefficients are positive.
This toys that subjects with a higher background 386 anplitude dispersion
exhibit large changes in the direction of inproving speed and accuracy in
a umber of test assignments, both in a threat situation and in the sit-
uation of real punishment for every error; in a significant mater of the
cases subjects with a low 336 dispersion. seanwhile, exhibit a worsening
of their indices in the examined situations.

We should also turn our attention to the fact that most of the correlations
revealed have to do with the most couple: assignments—4m and IP. In
relation to the I? test, 336 amlitude dispersion was found to be correlated
not only with temporal parameters but also with the qualitative index
(nusber of errors). In this case the strongest correlation is revealed in
groups exhibiting pronounced tension during the third series.

In relation to the rest of the assignments, correlations were revealed only
with the te-poral indices of the test trials. Subjects with a low 886
asplitude dispersion could achieve their previous qualitative indices only
by worsening their temporal indices, while subjects with a high 836 dis-
persion managed tc. .eaintain qualitative indices and significantly increase
their speed in the assignment in the critical situation.

Correlations were not revealed in relation to the as and AN assign-ants.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Coefficients of Correlation Between BEG
Amplitude Dispersion and Changes Occurring in Psychometric
Test Indices from Series to Series

Coefficients for Coefficients for Coefficients for

    

262‘ 259'
302“ 246'

249‘ --

302“ -- 485"
255' -- --
268' -- sages.

Notes 2

1. Only correlation coefficients significant at p<0.05(‘).
p<0.0l("), and p<0.001(“") are shown.

2. Colunn synbois: 2/l--\ ratio of second series to
first; 3/1-4 ratio of third series to first; 3/2--\
ratio of third series to second.

3. Indices: a--latent tine, b--total reaction time,
c--number of errors.

The RT assignment is sufficiently simie; errors made during it steel not from
erroneous perception of nunbers but rather from accidental pressing of
neighboring keys.

At the sane tine absence of significant changes in the speed of the simple
reaction to a presented number (Kr) inpliee that on the whole the tone of
the central nervous systen does not experience significant changes in this
experimental situation, and the influence of the letter on the state of
certain functional blocks is to a certain extent selective.

Absence of significant correlation between EEG amplitude dispersion and
changes in the indices for the AN assignment in the situation of ultimate
responsibility for work results implies that operation of the block res-
ponsible for elementary logical transformations and playing an important
role in the m test is not associated with the examined characteristic of
the background 236.

In the threat situation and the situation of ultimate responsibility, the
most significant changes occur in the response, initial muory, and repeti-
tion blocks (assignments TR and 1?). Our research revealed a clearly

pronounced tendency toward better work of these blocks in subjects with a
high 886 amplitude dispersion, and toward worse work in subjects with a low
BEG dispersion.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Examination of the correlation matrices would show that the scatter of
indices describing changes in the results oi the test trials from one series
to another (and the absolute values) are greatest for the group of subjects
with a low 386 dispersion. Certain subjects of this group managed to
demonstrate significant improvement in the results of their work in the

third series (no less than the improvement shown by subjects with the high
BEG dispersion) .

Comarison of the results of test assignments performed by subjects working
in situations of ultimate responsibility with indices of the control group
using Student's t-test showed that the nest significant improvesent occurred
in group c in relation to assignments SS (p<0.01), ID (p<0.0l), and AN
(p<0.05). In comparison with the control group. the greatest deterioration
of results in the third series occurred in groups exhibiting a pronounced
emotional reaction (groups A and B)-in the latent time of RT (p<0.05) and
the quantity of errors in the I? test (p<o.05). Subjects with a low 336
dispersion were mainly responsible for this deterioration.

Not very many statistically significant differences were found between the
experimental groups and the control group. The reason for this lies in the
fact that individual features significantly mask group differences. Thus

in the situation of ultimate responsibility seoe subjects exhibited improve-
ment of indices in the psycho-atria tests (some experienced improveuent in an.
16 indices of the test assignments in this situation). while others exhibited
a worsening of indices (some subjects did worse in relation to 10-11 indices
out of 16) .

Thus the research showed that the individual features of the subjects per-
taining to the speed and accuracy of visual information processing in the
situation of ultimate responsibility are significantly correlated with the
dispersion of the amplitudes of their background electroencephalogram
(the nervous system strength parameter), but at the same time it because
obvious that nervous system strength (as determined froa BEG dispersion
indices) is not the sole determinant of successful work. The influence of
other determinants must be clarified.

BIBLIOGRAPRY

l. Vyatkin, B. A., "Cognitive Stress and Individual Psychological
Features of Sportsnen." in ”Temperament i sport“ ('reeperanent and
Sports), Pern', Ind-v0 Permskogo pedinstituta, 1912.

2. Gordeyeva, A. IL, and Klyagin, V. 8., “Some Manifestations of Nervous
System Strength in the Activity of Bus Drivers.“ vopnosr PSIKHOIDGII.
No l, 1977.

3. Gordeyeva, u. 0., Devishvili. V. 21., and zinchenko, v. 9., "mimos-
trukturnyy analiz ispolintel'noy deyatel'nosti" (Hicrostructural
Analysis of Controlling Activity). noscw. Izd-vo mum, 1975.

8
1’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
S.

6.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

mm nH’HIIAI. ":4 UNIX

tiurevich. K. 14., "l’rofe-y-nonul'naya m-iquunost' l ounuvnyye uvoyutva
nervnoy uiutemy" (Occupational Suitability and the Ii-‘mic Propertieu
of the Nervoun Syntem), Hisscw, lzd-vo Naukn, 1970.

Zinchenko. V. P.. "Productive Perception,“ VOPROSY PSIKHODOGII, No 0.
MN.

Zinchenko, V. P.. ”The Microstructural Method for Investigating Cognitive
Activity,” in "Trudy VNIITE. Ergononiko“ (Works of the All-Union
Scientific Msearch Institute of Technical Esthetics. Ergonomics) .

Issue 3, Moscow. 1972.

zinchenko. V. P., ieonova, A. V., and Strclkov, Yu. K., “Uuing Computers
to Acquire Quick information on Operator Functional States,” in
”Ergononika. Printsipy i rehonendatuii" (Ergonomics. Principles and
Rucocmendations). Issue 5. Moscow, lad-v0 VNll‘l‘E, 1974.

ll‘in. Ye. P.. "Differential Psychophysiology. Its "lace and Role in
Study of the Personalities of Sportsmen." in "Sportivnaya i vozrau-
tnaya psikhofiziologiya" (Sports and Developmental Psychophysiology) ,
Izd-vo Leningradskogo pedinstituta. 1974.

Kalin. V. x., “Volitional Effort as an Object of Experimental Research,"
in "Voprosy psikhologii i peoagogiki voli" (Problems of the Psychology
and Pe-‘lagogics of Volition) . lad-v0 Krasnodarskogo pedinstituta, 1969.

Kalin, V. X" “Effect of Emotional Tension on the Effectiveness of the
Voiitional Efforts of Sportsmen." VOPIDSY PSIKHOIDGH. No 3, 1975.

Kalin, V. K., et .11., "A Stand for Diagnosing Operator Functional States.“
TEKIINICIIBSKAYA ESTETIXA, No 4. 1977.

Klyagin, V. S.. "Mathenatical Analysis of instantaneous Values of
Individual Electroencephalograms," in "Problemy differentsial'noy
psikhofiziologii” (Problem: of Differential Psychophysiology), Vol 7,
Moscow, lzd-vo Pedagogika, l972.

Kopytova. L. A” 'Hanifestation of typological Properties of the Nervous
System in the Labor of Repairnen Working on inoperable Machine Tools.‘I
VOPNSY PSIKHOIDGII, No 4, 1963.

Monova. A. V., ”Auto-atic Assessment of functional. States," mucus-
SKAVA ESTBTIKA. No 10, 1974.

Hatveyev, V. 9.. “Psychological Hanifestations of the Basic Properties
of the Nervous System in Electric Power Network Operators Pacing
Conditional mergencies," in "Tipologicheskiye osobennosti vysshey
nervnoy deyatel'nosti cheloveka" (Typological Features of “man Higher
Nervous Activity) Vol 4, Hoscow, lzd-vo Prosveshcheniye, l!“ S.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE cum
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

FOR OFFICIAL USI“. HN'

Harlin, V. 5.. ”Ochterk tcorii tnmpctamnto" (Bunny on the Theory of
Tonpormnt). Moscow. lad-v0 Prosvnshcnuniyo, 1965.

Ncbyiitsyn, V. 0., “Oanovnyyc svoystVa nervnoy slateny chelovcka"
(Buic Properties of the Human nervous System), Moscow. Izd-vo
Proavuhchcniye, 1966.

Rozhdestvenskaya, V. L, at «1.. ”Functional States in Connection with
upoiogicni. Properties 0! the Norman: System,” in "Tipoiogichoakiye
ouobonnooti vyuhcy norvnoy doyatel'nosu cholovokc,” Moscow. lad-v0
Prosveahcheniyc, 1967.

Rozhdestvenskaya. V. 1.. Calubcva, E. A” and Yemlayova-Tmina, 1.. v.,
“The Role of Nervous Symon Strength in the Dynamics of Efficiency in

Different Types of Activity,“ in “Problem diftetontaial‘noy psikho-
fizioioqii.“ Vol 6, Moscow, Izd-vo Prosvcshchoniyc, i969.

Maude-Wench”. V. IL, and umhkina. I. A., "Nnctionai Staten
Accoapanying Ponotonous work, and the Strength of the Nervous system"
in 'Probleay differentoici'noy paikhoﬂzioiogii,‘ Vol 7. Moscow,
lad-v0 Pedaqoqika. 1972.

Sixotin, 0. A” "The Pnychophynioloqical nature of the notional Stabil-
ity of Sports-on.” WPROS‘! PSIMIDGII, No i. 1373.

COPYMGﬂ‘r: Vaesoyuznyy nauchno-iulodovatel'skiy inotitut tokhnicheskoy

coutiki, 1977

11004

C501

1870

10
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENETICS

UDC: 577.1
LONG-RANGE DIRECTIONS 0F GENE ENGINEERING
Kiev HOLEKULYARNAYA BIOLOCIYA in Russian No 19,1978 pp 3-10

[Article by V. A. Kordyum. Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics.
Ukrainian Academy of Sciences. submitted 13 Jan 77]

[Text] Numerous popular publications about gene engineering have generated
the most diverse conceptions of this direction of biology. At the present
time. we see a striking contraction between what is expected of gene
engineering and the fact that not a single practical problem has been re-
solved in this field. Such a situation requires comprehensive analysis.
With reference to long-range aspects. let us first define what this should
mean. He shall use the term "long-range directions" to determine what
could actually be achieved for the practical activities of society. We
shall limit the time of expected results to the next five years in this
analysis.

historically. the "birth" of gene engineering can be dated to 1928, when
Griffith discovered the transformation phenomenon. However. this direction
actually became a reality only in 1972. when Berg joined the genome of A
phage and SV-60 virus. after which it was demonstrated that controlled
fragmentation of DNA and formation of recombinant molecules is possible with
the use of a second class of restrictases that form sticky ends and DNA
ligases. From that time on. the technique became feasible in any laboratory
with a certain modicum of instruments and reagents. Only 5 years have gone
by, and already the most diverse organisms. at all steps of the evolutionary
ladder. have become the objects of gene engineering research: microorganisms.
plants, animals and man.

Host of the methodological studies have been made among the prokaryotes.
At the present time. one can obtain virtually any group of genes. at any
rate in the class of bacteria of viruses. introduce it into phages. plasmids.
etc. There is intensive deployment of gene engineering work with eukaryotes.
One could expect that a wide enough range of genetic material will lead.

if not to a revolution in the national economy. at least to rapid development
of producers for the microbiological industry. However. nothing of this sort

has happened as yet. This is attributable to the fact that if there is a
source for a given gene or group of genes (for exaamge. responsible for the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

formation of some fragment or other). this source (i.e., the actual producer)
by itself can provide for bionynthesis of the required product, provided

the appropriate technology is available. There is no practical purpose

in transferring sane genes from one producer to another, while it has not

yet been possible to obtain complete expression of genetic information moved
from s eukaryote to prokaryote systems. In only one unconfirmed work. that
of Davis from Stanford University (United States). is it reported that

there was expression of the histidine operon of yeast in s bacterial cell.
Other research in this direction indicates that there are substantial
disturbances in this process. It was found more expedient to assemble
several characters together, forming an organism with a fuller set of the
required properties. he already have examples of such work. However,

the attitude toward this direction, which is part of applied ecology, is
quite reserved. In the flfot place. it is not yet clear how the new gene
engineering product will behave under real, rather than laboratory, condi-
tions; in the second place, the development and release into the environment
of an org-slam [individual] with complex properties that did not exist
before constitute an overt infraction of theexisting international agreement.

Thus there are no conceptions in genetic engineering that would permit using
the developed methods and obtained results for inmediste solutions of spe-
cific practical problems. For this reason. our first task was to create
such a conception. It was developed, related to various groups of objects--
bacteria. plants. animals, man-and consists of the following.

As related to bacteria. there are two possible approaches. depending on the
product one wants to obtain. Hith some arbitrauness, one can divide all
products of metabolism into two groups, primary and secondary. Primary ones
are directly linked with genetic information. These are the products of
template synthesis (replication, transcription and translation). i.e.. DNA,
RNA and proteins. Secondary metabolites are the products of enzynatic acti-
vity of the cell. From the standpoint of modern gene engineering, the

focal problem is to transfer information and express it as a functionally
active protein. i.a.. production of primary metabolites. For this reason
all primary metabolites are equivalent in the first approximation. The
situation is quite different with production of secondary metabolites. _

A single enzyme is involved in forming some products and an entire set of
enzymes in forming others: the function of the latter is strictly coordi-
nated. both in space and in time. In turn. some enzymes play a key role
and others. a dependent one in such cycles, which are often quite complex.
Although anabolic and catabolic processes in the cell consist of more or
less complex cycles (which are interrelated also). from the practical point
of view, catsbolic enzymes are usually of independent significance, for
example. some proteases, cellulase, B-galactosidaaea, etc. Anabolic
enzymes are more often required in the form of a complete set to run the
entire cycle. since the end products (amino acids, vitamins. etc.) are
needed. This must be taken into consideration when planning gene engineering
studies.

12
FOR OFFXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He propose the use of the supersynthesin phenomenon. controlled by temperate
phages. for commercial production of primary products and. first of all.
enzymes. it should be noted that the procedure. which Punld he made uni-
versal. directs the process in such a way that the yield of product with
which we are concerned under technologically suitable conditions becomes
commensurate with all the other cell metabolites together.

He could expect that, by virtue of the supersynthesis phenomenon. even in

the next few years. it will be possible to augment appreciably the yield of
many products that are being produced and prepared for production by
industrial microbiology. The efforts at supersynthesis, undertaken before
ours. using information transferred to small plasmids turned out to be
nontechnologicsl and. as a result, unsuitable for practical purposes. while
expression of genes introduced by phages was no greater than in mutant forms
of the corresponding bacteria. In assessing the potential of supersynthesis.
it must be borne in mind that transfer of a character determined by expression
of one gene by means of temperate phages is the simolest task, as well as
the one that can be fulfilled the fastest. It will be somewhat more diffi-
cult to transfer a character implemented by the function of one enzyme.

but consisting of different subunits. Some complications may arise as s
result of the fact that all cistrons coding the subunits of a given protein
should be assembled in one operoa (for example, the protein of RNA polymerase
consists of four subunits coded by four structural genes situated in three
segments of the chromosome), or else be a natural part thereof. The larger
the DNA fragment, the more difficult it is to obtlin it under controlled
conditions. Finally, the polypeptides formed in the recipient cell must

be correctly assembled. Nevertheless. all this appears to be quite feasible.
The main difficultywillbe that. in spite of the quite extensive studies
pursued in different institutions, among the numerous fragments obtained and
described there are virtually none that would carry information for syn-
thesis of industrially important enzymes. An intensive search is now in
progress in this field. For the time being, the potential of supersynthesis
of added information to anabolic processes is unclear. For this reason.

a different route is proposed for them. in which the multiplicity of genomes
is not introduced exogenously. but is created and constantly present in the
cell.

Hith reference to the consequences of transferring information to an inde-
pendent and complete anabolic cycle, for example synthesis of sugar or amino
acid. a special situation arises. In this case. there must be simultaneous
formation of several (and. usually, many) enzymes. Each of them must be
properly assembled. and all of them together should implement a strictly
coordinated successive process. This involves a new stage of organization.
which is related to appropriate arrangement of newly formed proteins on

cell structures, among the many macromolecules already present. it can

be expected, a priori. that with increase in number of genes such a system
will function well only in a homologous or similar recipient. It is unlikely
that such complex systems wi;l function with any significant efficiency under
markedly heterologous conditions, this would require some other transforma-
tions that are not quite clear as yet. for this reason. it is best to

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

augment the number of copies existing in gene cells. In the bacterial cell.
structural genes are represented by one specimen, and all the scheming of

genetics of industrial microorganisms are directed toward more productive
expression thereof. Some rather impressive results have been obtained in
this area. however. systems with several identical genes can be created
with the existing techniques. For example. using a set of phages of the
lambdoid type with different integration sites but the same transducing
marker. one can obtain a cell with several genes in addition to the existing
one. which are inserted in different parts of the bacterial chromosome
(the opposite of the Shimada method). of course, one can increase the
number of copies of a single industrially valuable gene in the very same
manner. Such an operation would apprently improve substantially the
national economic indices of the producer. Technically. it is already
feasible today.

The question may arise as to whether increasing the number of copies of in-
formation in the bacterial chromosome would lead to growth of overall pro-
ductivity of a specific metabolite. For we know that. in the case of poly-
ploidy of higher organisms. there is not an adequate amount of gene copies
and products of their expression. However, in the case of polyploidy, we
are dealing with alleles and, starting with the diploid set of chromosomes,
there are evolutionarily developed mechanisms of homologous discrimination.
But in those cases when the number of copies is increased in a haploid set
of chromosomes (tuna. rRNA and histone genes), their expression under condi-
tions of total derepresaion is consistent with the volume of information in
eukaryotes as well. In such a case, the increased amount of copies in
bacteria would also be present in the haploid chromosome. For this reason,
we can expect that there would be an adequate increase in productivity,
provided a proper choice is made of technological management of the process.

Thus, in view of the fact that the microbiological industry is the most
obvious and immediate area of application of gene engineering. it can be
considered that studies dealing with transfer of information for synthesis
will be the most promising. in each specific case for one enzyme important
to the national economy, or a complete anabolic cycle, in order to develop
producers with several copies of the information of interest to us, or
production of recombinant temperate phages to implement subsequent super-
synthesis.

On the basis of the work that has been done on supersynthesis of B-galacto-
eidase. the use of gene engineering techniques will make it possible to
augment by many times (at least a factor of 10) the productivity per unit
of reactor working volume in the microbiological industry. This will lead
to wide use of enzymes in industry, agriculture and medicine, the results
of which would be difficult to evaluate at the present time.

In addition to the microbiological industry. gene engineering manipulations
with bacterial may also be promising in other fields. Applied ecology is
an interesting direction. in which the first practical success has been
achieved. But. at the same time. this is the most debatable area of

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

application of the technology for selective transfer of information, since
forms known to be capable of existing outside the laboratory and carrying
new sets of characters can be created. This situation appears to be
rather risky. however, in applied ecology there is a direction involving
no risk. but with unquestionable advantages. We refer to nitrogen fixing.
There are some special reports dealing with it in this collection.

Higher plants constitute the next group of objects for gene engineering.
However, although it would seem that information transformation thereof

is desirable, the very first analysis shows that things are not so simple.
indeed, plants do not require additional catabolic processes, at any

rate those that are accessible to transfer. As for anabolic cycles. they
are complex, shifting of information for implementation thereof (for
example, to increase the number of gene copies) from plant to plant is
still methodologically unfeasible, whereas it would hardly be productive
with regard to bacteria (or phages) for the reasons discussed above
(heterologous state of systems). For this reason, research that is un-
questionably interesting on the scientific level would he impossible on
the level of practical applications in the next few years. The situation
may be different with respect to other transfers. For example, it
appears to be realistic to transfer to plants information for the synthesis
of the enzyme nitrogensse (which implements nitrogen fixing). He can
expect success with anabolic cycles, with regard to the transfer of a gene
(or genes) that codes only one key enzyme, rather than all enzymes in the
process, according to which regulation occurs. He could expect that

the bacterial gene will be found insensitive in the plant cell to regula-
tion of the repression type, while by using appropriate mutants as donors
we could avoid regulation by retroinhibition and thus induce stimulation
of the entire process by overcoming the "weak point." but methodologically
the routes for such transformation have not yet been developed.

Use of information for "detracting” proteins of the neutral type appears to
be quite promising. If a template is inserted in the cell to code polymeri-
ration of one amino acid, a given homopolymer will be formed. Thus, it

was demonstrated that if a polysequence is inserted in tobacco mosaic
virus, polylysine will appear in the stricken plant. however. not all such
homopolymers are harmless to the cell. Thus, polylysine. which is a poly-
mer of the base amino acid, forms a polypeptide with strong base proper-
ties, superior to those of histones. insertion of excessive histones in

the cell induces severe impairment of intracellular processes, which lead
to retarded growth or even death of the cell. We can expect different

results with the formation of neutral polypeptides. Their appearance will
not lead to metabolic disturbances, but will detract a specific amino acid.

As a result, there should be more intensive synthesis of this deficient
amino acid, with accumulation of the excess in the form of the corresponding
polymer. There is no information in nature for such synthesis. But it

can be obtained artificially. Such a task is quite feasible at the

present time. Impsrting the capacity to inhibit a given metabolic cycle
may be an interesting direction of plant gene engineering. For this, it
would be enough to transfer information for synthesis of the corresponding

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inhbiun'protein. As a result, it will be difficult for a specific key
reaction to occur. and there will be accumulation of the precursor product.
For example. prevention of polymerization of sugar into starch would provide
for prolonged preservation of sweet corn in an industrially valuable condi-
tion without sdditioral technical devices. Inadequate development of the
relevant branches of plant biochemistry and molecular biology is the ob-
stacle to such work. it is also interesting to consider the possibility

of imparting some adaptive processes of s :onstitutive nature. For this
purpose. a specific gene or group of genes could be supplied with an auto-
nomous promoter. As a result of such an operation. the genetic information
would cease to be governed by regulatorv commands and would be expressed

at a rather constant rate. In practice. development of an individual promoter
and joining it with any DNA fragments, either at the sticky ends or end-to-
end. has already been done. and the main deterrent to such work is the

lack of information about organization of the plant genome and its controlled
fragmentation, separation and functional identification of fragments. In-
cidentally, after answering these questions, it will be possible to under-
take the task of increasing the number of copies of specified genes that
function in an adaptive or constructive mode (when united with their own
promoter). ferhaps the greatest difficulty in this case is to find the

basic route of functional identification of DNA fragments of higher plants.
Two methods are being developed to solve this problem. The first consists
of transformation of plants. He have demonstrated. together with the
department of experimental mutagenesis. that this is feasible in theory.

The exceptionally wide set of diverse corn mutants provides good opportu-
nities for subsequent demonstration of many markers in DNA fragments.

The second method is based on creating a special vector for higher plants

on the basis of the large Tl plasmid of Agrobacterium tumefsciens, which
induces crown galls. Bacterial plasmids are excellent vectors. and they

are used extensively in genetic engineering to insert information in the
bacterial system. for this reason, there is every reason to expect that

the Tl plasmid. which has teratogenie properties, will turn out to be an
exceptionally good object in plant gene engineering, although there are still
some problems to be resolved. which are related to its high molecular weight.
Such studies are developing intensively. The main advantage of a teratogenie
vector is that even a single set of recombination in the genome of a somatic
cell leads to formation of proliferation that is readily demonstrable and
analysed. Such a vector could be used to solve many problems of plant

gene engineering.

He can expect that the bulk of the preparatory work related to creating
vectors for plants. identification of genes in DNA fragments and obtaining

recombinant vector-functional molecules carrying specified information
will be done in the current 5-year period. Most likely. deployment of
work dealing with direct information-related transformation of cultivars
will begin in the next 5-year period.

Probably the most difficult and least developed problem is that of gene
engineering work with animals. Actually. there have been more than enough

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proposals and desires in this field. However, such proposals and wishes
are still without s real scientific and methodological foundation. The

tution. This is a well-known procedure of medical microbiology which
acquires utterly new implications, in our opinion, in connection with the
capabilities of gene engineering. In essence, microbial substitution
refers to the following: The existing methods of bacterial therapy, which
originate with I. I. Hechnikov, imply for the substitution (usually.
partial and temporary) or normal (or pathological) microflora of man and
animals with bacteria having certain useful properties. It is usually

the intestinal microflora that is replaced. In this regard, an interesting
example is the transfer into the animal intestine of representatives of
normal microfloru with the nif operon, which has minimal sensitivity to
repression by bound nitrogen. If such a nif operon (and the bacteria with
it, but which normally do not contain it, have already been obtained) is
transferred to bacterial strains that prevail in farm animals (with con-
sideration not only of species, but breed, as well as geographic region),
we could expect that after inserting it the animal will be able to provide,
to some extent, bound nitrogen for its-f1. As an example, let us indicate
that the intestinal microflora of a cow weighs 6 kg. Active nitrogen-
fixing of 251 of it would be more than sufficient for the animal. The prin-
ciple of bacterial substitution may turn out to be a rather promising one,
capable of solving problems that are insoluble at present. For example, it
is not possible as yet to obtain nitrogen-fixing cows. At the same time,

menta by means of nitrogen-fixing intestinal microflora is a very real
problem. we must discuss here the uuestion of safety, for after all we
are dealing with development of an organism that is not only capable, but
intended for existence outside the laboratory. However, the property
imparted to it is widespread in nature, and one could hardly conceive,
even theoretically. of any undesirable consequences of such a procedure.

At the present time, transfer to animals of information for the enzyme
cellulase, which is capable of digesting cellular tissue, is another direc-
tion in which work could already begin. In the ease of a successful
solution, an animal will appear with a sharply broadened feed base and
better assimilation of feed. But some substantial difficulties will arise,
which are related to the fact that, in addition to actual transfer of
information for this enzyme, it will be necessary to have it appear
exclusively (or at least mainly) in glandular cells of the intestine with
mandatory excretion in the intestinal cavity. This is a rather complex
matter and the methodology has not yet been found. Everything indicates
that things would be considerably simpler for bacterial substitution.
Transfer to an additional class of intestinal bacteria of animals of the
capacity to synthesize cellulase and migration thereof from cells would

lead to such a result, and feasibility is not only a reality, but
referable to the next 5-7 years.

‘ l7
ros orrzcm. use 0ch
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally, there rennin problena of gene engineering as they relate to nan.
Hith the very formulation of this aspect. so many moral and ethical problena.
as well as all sorts of apprehensions arise. that the subject is more than
conplex. But. since nothing gets solved by itself. here too rational
analysis is required. Perhaps the consequences of experinents denllng
with nicrobial substitution can be estinnted the best. Such procedures

in nan are officially allowed in strict nedical regulations (for exanple,
in the presence of dysbacteriosis). Here is one of the exanples of

a possible gneu engineering procedure involving substitution: It is known
that a considerable nunber of people does not assinilate dairy products
due to presence of lactose. Breakdown thereof into nonosaccharide is
induced by the enzyne B-galactosidasc. At the sane tine, there is a real

possibility of using special strains to replace the E. coli nicroflora that
produces significant quantities of B-galactosidase excreted in the environ-

nant. Such a substitution would have only a tenporary effect but, we
believe, considerably longer than that of a pure enzyne preparation. The
probability of potential hazard of this procedure is nil, since experi-
nenters have encountered strains suitable for such work for nany years,
long before work in gene engineering began, without adhering to any special
rules (other than the usual laboratory ones). It can be stated with car-
tainty that, for at least the last 20 years, people and their surroundings
have been in extensive contact with such ferns, and nevertheless there

has never been even a suggestion of any adverse consequences. Along with
knowledge of the corresponding genetic infornation inplenenting synthesis
of B-galactosidase, it can be stated that such a substitution would be
conpletely safe. while aninal experinents can already be begun, since the
required strains and techniques are available. Of course, this principle
coula also be applied to therapy of a number of other hereditary diseases.

Gene insertions constitute a sore conplex fern of intervention in nan. this
topic was discussed rather extensively in the literature with reference to
trestnent of nonogeaic hereditary diseases. However, utterly different
directions are possible. for exanple. there would be a real possibility

of gene engineering therapy of drug addiction. Insertion of genes res-
ponsible for fornation of an ensyne that deco-poses a given drug free a
nicroorganisns would result in loss of susceptibility ofthe nacroorganisn to
it. Such an insertion could be nade of the adaptive or constitutive type.
which would lead to constant presence in the body of the appropriate

”guard" ensyle. It would be best in the case of an enryne that breaks

down only the drug, for enanple. heroin. and does not affect nornal cell
netsbolites. In the case of coapleaon action (for exasple. alcohol dehydro-
gensse). the adaptive for- of gene expression of inserted infornation nay
be best. Then. rapid regulation of the prokaryote type would provide for
inclusion of a structural gene (or genes) and lead to virtually inediate
appearance of the necessary enayne after intake of the drug. Such work
could already begin now. with regard to nethodological readiness.

Another nonstandard field could be gene engineering gerontology. Accunula~
tion of waste. the ”dead and” netabolic products that cannot be or are

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

difficult to eliminate, is one of the causes of deterioration of human cell
and tissue functions with age. Cholesteroland lipofuscin are well-known
examples. Transfer into the human cell (at birth or starting at a certain

age) of genetic information from microorganisms with the proper enzymes of
degradation of these metabolites would lead to their constant elimination

from the body as they are formed, and this could have a beneficial effect
on metabolism. -Such work should start with isolation of specified genes.
and they could be started at any time.

Hith reference to long-term plans. we inevitably are faced with the
attempt to evaluate actual target dates of practical fulfillment. This
consists of basic feasibility and difficulty thereof. For this reason,

even when all processes leading to the desired result have already been
described. obtaining the actual result would require a certain time. the

extent of which would depend on many elements. Still. it can be expected
that. already in the current 5-year period, i.e.. before the end of 1980,

many specific problems will be resolved. In the area of industrial micro-

biology. there will apparently be a drastic increase in enzyme production
for industry. agriculture and medicine, as well as, perhaps, production

of secondary metabolites (for example. amino acids). This will happen on
the basis of development of special extrachromosomal determinants of super-
synthesis. as well as producers with an enlarged set of specific genes.
There will be continued development of applied ecology on the basis of

gene engineering manipulations with microorganisms. Basic solutions will
be found for controlled addition of specified information in plant objects.

As for the practical results, it is unlikely that some will be obtained
for plants under the current 5-year plan.

with respect to man and animals, we can expect that derivatives of normal
microflora (mainly E. coli) will be obtained and tested for bacterial sub-
stitution. Direct intervention is unlikely to go beyond the framework of
obtaining specific genes and group of genes, development of methods of
controlled insertion and ironing out the moral and ethical principles and
safety rules, which is a mandatory element of such applied studies.

Thus, under the current 5-year plan, the practical use of the first gene
engineering systems and basic research on fundamental aspects of the next

stage. direct information-related transformation of eukaryotes. will begin.
Actual direct transformation of higher organisms on a wide scale will

being under the next 5-year plan.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauhova dunks", 1978

10.657
cso: 1870

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIOIIS

UDC 612.822.3.087 "TIZJI"
STUDIES IN CHILD BRAIN DEVEIDPMBNT

Leningrad RAZVITIYB I-‘UIIKTSIY WZOA REBEIIKA (Development of the Functions
of the Child's Brain) in Russian 1978 signed to press 11: Jun 78 pp 2. 3-6.
118-126, 127.

[innotatiom introduction. bibliography and taple of contents from book by
T. P. Khrizman, Nauks, 2.150 copies, 12'! may

[feat] Annotation

This monograph is devoted to the study of the spatial organization of elec-
tric brain processes and its functional importance at various stages of de-
velopment. A close connection among the rise in the level of processes of
spatial synchronisation of the biopotentials of projection and association
brain sections, change in the frequency spectrum of crosscorrelograms. in-
crease in the power of periodic components and change in the phase rela-
tions of biopotentials in children during the perception of simple and com-
plex sensory signals and during the perception and identification of a word
and various verbal cos-ands was disclosed. 21:8 bibliographic entries; 39
illustrations; 8 tables.

Introduction

Neurophysiolou has now entered an important stage in its development, when
man. his brain and the most complex forms of psychic activity--speech.
thinking. memory. various types of voluntary movements and so forth--have
become the subject of careml electrophysiological investigations.

Such an opportunity has appeared only owing to the penetration of computer
technology and mathematical methods into neurophysiological experiments and
medical diagnosis. The study of the continuous wave activity of the human
brain (EEG), of the dynamics of slow electric processes. of the nature of
neuronal impulse activity. of the characteristics of regional blood flow and
of the changes in evoked activity to various sensory effects made it possi-

ble to embark on a very fine analysis of the neurophysiological mechanisms
of the structural-functional and neurophysiological basis of man's psychic

activity (Bekhtereva. 1971. 197%; Bekhtereva, Bundzen. 1971a. 1977). All
this fundamental research is conducted mainly under clinical conditions in
stereotactic operations and deep brain structures are large]: subjected to

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNI."

a detailed analysis. With regard to the ventral neurophysiological mech-
anisms of organization of the most complex psychic functions at the level
of the whole brain and the role of association sections of the ncocortex
in the regulation of these system processes in the healthy person and. es-
pecially. in children. these problems in brain physiology on yet have been
studied very insufficiently.

According to the modern theory of localization of psychic processes. the
whole brain is involved in the performance of psychic functions in man. but
each brain section makes its differentiated contribution to its general
work (Luriya. 1963. 1970. 1973). Association sections of the neocortex--
frontal and subparietal zones, which are closely connected with the regula-
tion of nsn's integral behavior through the speech system--hold a special
place among the various brain structures related to complex psychic proc--
esses. The involvement of these complex brain fornstions in the performance
of many higher cortical functions. that is, in the organisation of purpose-
ful novenents and actions, complex intellectual operations and higher gnos-
tic processes. in the programing of constructive activity and the organi-
zation of a speech utterance scheme and in the organization of visual spa-
tial and symbolic (quasispatial) syntheses and speech memory processes. can
be considered proven by nunerous clinical observations and neuropsycholog-
ical investigations (see the following surveys: Luriya. 1970. 1973; Khan-
ahaya. 1972; Batwev. 1973; Traugott et al.. 1913).

It becomes obvious that. without taking into consideration the regulating
role ﬂf association sections of the brain in the organisation of complex
forns of child behavior, in general, it is difficult to understand how the
child's complex psychic processes, such as speech. thinking, memory and vol-
untary actions, develop and are regulated.

Investigations of the regulating role of association zones in children's be-
havior are of special current interest if the fundamentally important prin-
ciples developed by Soviet psychologists to the effect that all psychic
functions are formed in the child only in the process of practical activity
are taken into consideration. The child, in his constant comimication with
adults reorganizing his behavior on the basis of object activity and speech
and sssinilating specific knowledge, acquires not only new foras of attitude
toward the external world. but also develops new types of regulation of his
behavior and forms new functional systens enabling him to naster new forms

of perception and nemory. nev types of thinking and new methods of organiser
tion of voluntary movements (Vygotskiy, 1960; Zaporoshets. 1960; Lyublinshaya,
1955; Venger. 1969; Leont'yev. 1972'. Leushina, 1972; Pod’yakov. 1971). In
fact, L. 8. Vygotshiy (1960) pointed out the great importance of association
brain sections of ”higher" centers in the development of the child's psychic
functions. Studying the relationship between elementary and complex psychic
processes in children at various stages of developent. he expressed the as—
suption that higher psychic functions formed on the basis of elementary
psychic processes begin to affect their basis. reorganizing the child‘s ele-
mentary activity. L. 8. Vygotskiy further noted that the functional rela-
tionship anong individual cortical cones changes in the process of developent.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Whereas at the first stages of ontogenesis the formation of "higher" cen-
ters depends on the maturity of "lower" centers, in the child's formed be-
havior "higher" centers organise the work of "lower" centers and subordi-
nate them to their effect. These important assumptions on the change in
intercentral relations in the child at successive stages of ontogenesis
open up nev prospects for understanding the functional importance of inter-
central interactions of cortical proJection and association sections and
the special role of association areas as ”higher” centers in the regula-
tion of these interactions at the later stages of ontogenesis.

It can be assumed from the above stated that the investigation of associa-
tion sections of the neocortcx and their role in the development and refine-
ment of the child's higher psychic functions is one of the important trends
in the physiology of the human brain. What are the general theoretical pre-
mises confirming the urgency and theoretical importance of this problem?

It is well known that the fundamentally important stage in the complication
of cortical integrative mechanisms is connected with the appearance and de-
velopment in the course of progressive evolution of the mammals of associa-
tion areas, in which. in the absence of a dominant representation of am! one
sensory systaa. a wide convergence of signals of a varying modality takes
place. An increase in the size of the neocortex at the highe.- levels of
philogenesis occurs as a result of the expansion or the territory of asso-
ciation areas. The most intensive grovth of association areas is observed
in the primates. In man they comprise approximately 50% of the whole neo-
cortex (Polyahov, 191:9, 1962) and. according to recent data, 8161 of the area
of the whole cortex (Campbell, 1965).

Fundamental research by physiologists and clinicians (Bekhterev, 1907; Pav-
lov, 19109; Shustin, 1959; Shumilina, 1966; Anokhin, 1968; Batwev, 1968.
1971, 1973; Lsgutina, 1972; Pribram. 1975) and morphologists (Kononova, 19339,
1972; Polyakov, 19309, 1965; Stankevich, 1961, 1965; Adrianov et al., 1973;
Adrianov, 1976), as vell as numerous electrophysiological studies (see the
following surveys: Batwev et a1., 1973; Polyakova, 1977). shoved that as-
sociation systems have a complex constitution and numerous connections with
various subcortical structures, including nonspecific and association nuc-
1ei of the thalamus, and are involved in the regulation of diverse functions,
that is, from the integration of situational and triggering afferentation,
creation of afferent syntheses, organisation of a program of action and so
forth to the evaluation of the result of action and regulatioa of emotional
states and memory processes. With regard to ontogenetic investigations of
the development of concrete physiological mechanisms enabling association
regions to perform these numerous functions, they are almost absent.

There is also a considerable lack of correspondence between specific morpho-
logical data on the structural characteristics of association areas in child-
ren in ontogenesis and on the functional evolution of these sections of the
neocortex and the formation of their functional multivaluedness. By this

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE Jh.

time norphologists and histologists have azuuied in sufficient detail the
etructurnl deVelopnent of proJccticn and aunociaticn arena in men in onto-
genesis and have shown their nonunifonn formation (Kononova. l9ﬁ9. 1962.
Polyakov. l9h9. 1962; Btankevich. 1961. 1965; Blinkov, Glezer. l96h. Kuhu-
yev. 1968). For example. according to the data by 3. M. EtinLov and I. I.
Glezer (196h). the surface of the cortex of the uewent regioue--frcntal and
subparieta1--increnscs ninefold. whereas the surface of occipital. precan-
tral and postceutral regions increases Gal] fivefold. and that of linbic and
insular regions. only twofold or threciold.

Such a nonuniform development in undnu‘. tedly connected with the functional
nonequivalence of these cortical zones and with the different rates of their
deVelopment. One thing is "Mar: Association areas directly related to the
organisation of higher cortical functions (speech. gnosis. praxis) increase
in the process of ontogenesis to a much greater extent than the nuclear zonen
of analysers. Fundamental questions arise: m do the association forma-
tions of the neocortex sharply differ in the rate of development and degree
of increase in the surface of the cortex from projection zones? What is the
functional meaning of this for the development and refinement of higher cor-
tical functions? At what stages of ontogenesis do association zones begin
to function. that is. makeueven if elenentary--intersensory analysis and
synthesis constituting the basis for the formation of numerous associations?
These questions have hardly been studied. but'they are extrenely isportant
for understanding the integrative activity of the child's brain.

Since cortical association fields. or zones overlapping analyzers. are close-
ly connected with the activity of various sensory systems. their develop-eat
can be considered only in interaction with other sections of the child's
brain.

In this respect the study of the electric processes of proJection and asso-
ciation structures of the brain and clarification of the statistical con-
nections of fluctuations in biopotentials at various stages of ontogenesis
are also very promising. If we proceed fro- the modern concepts of the prin-
ciples of organisation of intercentral interactions at the level of neuronal
ensembles developed by proninent electrophvsiologists and morphologists (Li-
vanov. 1912; Kogan. 1963. 1970; Burns 1969; Behhtereva. 1971. 1911‘; Solo-
gub. 1973; Adrianov. 1916; John. l9" . it can be assured that the rhytuls
of the child's brain and their space-tine organisation reflect the dynamics
of intercentral interactions of various cortical regions concerned with the
child's concrete activity. This work is devoted to the study of this prchlen.

Having used the nethod of crosscorrelation analysis of no. as long ago as

1963 vs first disclosed the characteristics of space-tine organisation of

brain biopotentials in children aged 1 to 1’: during the performance of vol-
untary movements. This naterial was correlatgd in the monograph "Dvizheniye
Rebenka i Blehtricheskava tivnoat' Nozga" [The Child's novuent and Elec-
tric Activity of the Brain . Subsequently. the front of our research on the
functional development of association sections of the neocortex was expanded

considerably.
23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-TICIM. USE ONLY

This vork set the folloving tasks:

1) To study the characteristics of space-time organization of the blow-
tentials of projection and association brain sections in children free the
first nonths of life until the age of 'l in a state of caln vahefulness.

2) To shov by the method of crosscorrelation analysis of m the topical
characteristics of statistical connections of the biopotentials of frontal
and subparietsl association areas and their phase relations and to uncover
the frequencies in vhose band intercentral relations betveen association and
proJection tones in children in ontogenesis are fanned mostly.

3) To study the functional iuportance of space-time organization of the
biopotentials of projection and association zones in children during the
perception of verbal signals at various stages of ontogenesis and to dis-
close the role of association areas in semantic word evaluation.

5) To show the Mctional inportance of the process of spatial synchroni-
zation of brain biopotentials in the organisation of intercentral interac-
tions at a higher cortical level in children during the perception of con-
nands directed at the activation of concrete sensory or motor systems through
a vord ("look." "listen.” "say,” "add").

I would like to express my deep gratitude to M. ii. Livanov, academicisn of
the USSR Acadm of sciences. A. 0. Khripkova. director of the Scientific
Research Institute of Child and Adolescent Physiology. and Prof D. A. Parber
for their support in the developlsent of the electroencephalographic investi-
gations performed on children and assistance in the publication of this vork.
I am very grateful to Candidate of Biological Sciences 1.. M. zmseva and
scientific vorker V. D. Yermeyeva for their help in conducting these inves-
tigations.

Bibliography

Adrianov‘ 0. 8.. "0 Printsipath Organizatsii Integrativnoy Deyatel'nost;
Mozga” [Principles of Organization of Integrative Activity of the Braiy.
Moscov. 1976.

Adrianov. 0. 8.. Babnindra. V. P.. Tolchenova. G. A.. and Kukwev. L. A..
”Structural Characteristics of Thalanoparietal_lnterrelations." in the book
”Evolyutsiya Punktsi Tsmennykh Doley Mosga" [Evolution of the Functions of
Parietal Brain Lobes . Leningrad. 1973. p 7.

Azhitshiy. K. Yu.. "Osobennosti tlektricheskoy Aktivnosti Kory Bol'shihh
Polushariy u Chelovek; pri Atsiklicheskay Wshechney Deyatel'nosti (na Pri-
mere Pekhtovaniya)" [Characteristics of the Electric Activity of the Cere-
bral Cartel: in Man in Acyclic liuscular Activity (Using Fencing as an n-
“my. author's abstract of his candidate dissertation. Leningrad. 1973.

2‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.‘

Aleksendryen. B. A.. "Seneornoye Rezvitiyo w nennikh Etapekh Ontogenese

i Rol' Dviaetel'nogo Anelizetore v Eton Proteeanc” LScndory Developent at
Early Steees of Ontogeneeie end the Role of the Motor Anelyzer in This
Procesy. Yerevan. 1912.

Alekssndryen. E. A.. end Khrinnen. 1‘. P.. "Cherecterieticc of the Functionel
Btete of the Child". Drein Under the Effect of Physicel Sounds end the iiulen
Voice.” in the hook "no e Issledoveniye po Vozrentnoy Pitiolosii" Llev Re-
seerch in Ase Physiol . No l. Noecw. 191’. pp 3-7.

Ali'erove. V. V.. "Cherecterietice of the Reception end Processing of e Vie-
uel Signel in the Cerebral Cortex in Children of mfferent Ages." ”Trudy IX
ileuchn. Konf. po Vosreetnoy Merrol. i Biohhin." [Proceedi s of the Ninth
Scientific Conference on Ase Morpholog end Biochuist . Pert l. Moecov.
1972. p 90.

Alterovu. v. V.. "Electrophysioloeicel Analysis of the Cherecteristics of
Functioning of the Cerebrel Cortex in 6- end 7-Yeer Old Children." in the

hook "lIovyye Iseledoveniye po Vozrestnoy Pitioloaii." lo 3. Moscow. 1915.
pp 3-50

Anohhin. P. K.. "Biologiys i leyrotiziologiye Uslovnoso Reflekee" [Biology
end neurophysiology or the Conditioned RefleJ. Moscow. 1968.

Artonenko. D. 9.. end Henonets. ‘1'. 11.. ”Reections of leurone oi‘ the Postc-
rior Supresylvien Gym of the Get to Verious Stimuli.” WOPIZIOIDOIYA.
1972. Vol h. llo 1-. p 375:

Betwev. A. 8.. ”lssledoveniye Punktsiy Dvigete 'noao Anelizetore" [Inven-
tigetion of the Functions of the Motor Anelyzer . euthor's shstrect of his
doctorel dissertetion. Leninsred. 1968.

Betwev. A. 8.. ”AneLysis of the Origin of llectric Responses of Associe»
tion Fields of the Cong." in the hook ”Iiehheniny Vyzvenmhh Potentsielov
Mom; net-Ly 8m." Luechenisns or Evoked Brsin Potentiels. Bmoeiu
Detej. boning-ed. 1911. pp 28-39. -

Betwev._A. 8.. "holyutsiye bohwhh Doley i Integretivneve Deyetel'nost'
nous" [Evolution of Prontel lobes end Intepetive Activity of the Breiﬂ.
Leningrad. 1913. p 127.

Betwev. A. 8.. "Developent of I'helnocorticel Associetion Systas of the
Kennels." in the hook ”Punktsionel'no-Struktumye Osnovy Bistelnay beyo-
tel'noeti a netheninv Plutichnosti Mom” ﬁance: -8truoturel Primiples
of ant. Activity end Iiechenises of stein Plestieit . Issue 8. Moecov.
1915. Pp 326-329.

Betwev. A. 8.. Vesil'yevs. L. A._. end 'i'eirov. o. P.. "Motions oi’ the
’i'helusoperietel Associetion Systen of the lie-elien Brein." in the hook
'holyuteiye mu ‘i'uennyhh Dolley mm" ﬁvozution oi’ the Function: of
Perietel lrsin lobe , bounced. 1973. p in.

25

F0! OHICML US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Batwev. A. 8.. and Karanwan. A. 1.. "Projection of Afferent System in the
Neocortex of the hedgehog." DOKLADY AKADEMII NAUK 858". 1973. Vol 211. No 6.
pp 11:75-11:78.

Bel'tyukov. V. IL. "The Problem of Mechanisms of Functional Disturbances in
Sound Pronunciation." in the book "Speteial'naya Shkola" [Special School].
No 1. Moscow. 1969.

Beritov. I. 5.. "Struktura i Fungal: Kory Bol'shogo Mozga" ['sjtructurc and
Functions of the Cerebral Cortey. Moscow. 1969.

Burns. 8.. "Neopredelennost' v Nervnoy Sistcne" [The Uncertain Nervous Sys-
teg/. Moscow. 1969.

Beteleva. '1'. 0.. Dubrovinehaya. N. V. a. and Farber. D. A.. "Senaornyye Me-
khaniyiy Razvivawshchegosya Mozga" [Sensory Mechanisms of the Developing
Brain]. Moscow. 1917.

Bekhterev. V. H.. "Osnovy_Ucheniya o Funktsiyakh Mozga" [Frinciples of the
Theory of Brain Functions]. Vol 6-8. St. Petersburp. 1907.

Bekhterev. V. 14.. "The So-Called Spaetic Center and the Center of Body Move-
ment at the Level of the Pons Varolii." in the book "Izbr. Proizv." [Selected
Nor-kg]. Moscov. 195k.

Bekhterevn. ll. P.._"O Neyroi‘iziologicheskikh Aspektakh Psikhicheakoy Dgate1'-
nosti Cheloveka" [Neurophysiological Aspects of Man's Psychic Activity].
Leningrad. 1971.

Bekhteren. ll. 9.. "lieurophysiological Theory 21’ Han's Psychic Activity."
in the book “Klinichesqua Neyroi'iziologiya” [Clinical neurophysioloql.
Leningrad. 1912.

Bekhtereva. II. P.. and Bundzen, P. V.. "Nearophysiological Organization of
Man's Psychic Activity." in the boo): ”f‘:;::'::'i:i:2aalchcohiyc Methanim Psi-
khicheskoy Deyatgl'nosti Cheloveka" [ieurophysiological Mechanism of Man's
Psychic Activity]. Leningrad. 1911:. p 1-2.

Bekhtereva. ll. 7.. and Bundzen. P. 11., "Ilearophysiological Coding and De-
codim or Verbal-Thinking Processes.“ in the book "Funktsional'noyc Zna-
cheniye Elektrichesxikh Protsessov colovnogo Mozga" [Functional Significance
of Electric Processes in the Brain7. Moscow. 1977. pp 110-119.

Blinkov. S. 11.. and Brazovskaya. P. A.. "Long Association Systens of Con-
nections Between the Frontal and Teaporsl Lobe."_in the book "Probl. Sovr.

leygoxhirurgii" [Problems of Modern Neurosurgery] . Vol 1. Moscow. 1957. pp
“1- 1.

Blinkov. 8. 11.. and Glezer. I. I.._"Mo:g Cheloveka v 'i‘sifrakh i Tablitsakh”
[Man's Brain in Figures and Tables]. Moscov. 196k.

26
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 05!: ON“

Robkou. V. V., "Osohennogti Blektrichenka, Mtivnonti Mosga pri Nevroti-
cheskikh Bostoyanixakh" LCharactcriotivo of Electric Activity of the Brain
in Neurotic Statey. author's abstract of his doctoral disncrtntion. Lenin-
grad. 1971.

Boyko. Y . 1.. "Mukhsnim Unstvennoy Deyntel'nooti" Liechmiiune of Mental
Activit . Moscow. 1975.

Boldyreva. C. 1.. ”Use of Correlation Analysis for an Evaluation of Topo-
graphical Characteristics of the Reaction oi‘ Assinilation oi‘ the Flickering
Rhythn in Man's 30v." in the book "Mateuticheskiy Anali: Elektricheskikh
Vavleniy iovnogo Nozga" [Mathematical Analysis of Electric Phenanena in
the Brain . Moscow. 1965.

Poskis. R. Mu "Characteristics of Speech Develomcnt in Children During
Disturbance in the Auditory Analyzer,” XZV. APR RM. 1953. Issue 108.

Brendsted. A. II.. "Characteristics of mo in 6- or 7-Year 01d Children Dur-
ing the Pomtion of a Coupler Motor-Visual Skill." ZRURIIAL wsam may
DBYAM'IIOBTI. 1976. Vol 26. Issue 3, p 575.

Bundsen. P. V.. ”Decoding of leurophysiological Mechanism oi‘ Perception and
Reproduction of Verbal Signals.” ”XXIV Vses. 80VeshCh. po Probl. Vyssh.
Rervn. Dgat.. Posvyasch. l25-Letiyu so We Rozhdeniya I. P. Pavlova. Mat-1y
Sinp.” Lzhth All-Union Conference on Problems of Righer nervous Activity
Devot-d to the 125th Anniversary of I. P. Pavlov's Birth. Syuposius Datg.
Moscm. 197%. p 203.

Vinogradova, 0. 8.. "Cippokanp i Pawst'" [ﬁe Hippocanpus and Henry]. Ros-
cm. 1915.

Volkova. V. D. , "Base Characteristics of Pomtion of Conditioned Reflexes
to Speech Stimuli in Children," PIZIOL. 2m. 8883. 1953. V01 39. “one 5.
p 530.

Voikova, re. 0.. ”Pornation of Statistical Connections bong Various Regions
of the Cerebral Cortex in the Process of Recognition of the Afferent Btilulus
in Children of Preschool and Young school Age," in the book ”lime Issledo-
vaniya po Vosrastney Piziologii.” lo 3. Hoseav. 1911.. pp 6-8.

Vygotshiy. L. 8.. "Rasvitiye Vysshikh Psikhicheskihh Punktsiy" [Bevelopent
of Higher Psychic Functiony. Moscow. 1960.

Osvrilova. l. A., "Prostranstvennaya Organizatsiya giopotentsialov Kory Oo-
lovnogo liozga pri Reactor-yin: Pornakh Shinorrenii" Lepatial Organisation of
Biopotentials or the Cerebral Cortex in sane Pom or Schizophrenij. au-
thor's abstract of his doctoral dissertation, Roscov. 1913.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

avozdev. A. ﬂ.. "Vopgpsy Izucheniya Dctskoy Rechi" [ﬁroblema in the Study
of Children's Speech]. Moscow. 1961.

Genhin. A. A.. and_Medvedev, V. 1.. "Prognozirovaniye Poihhofiziologiches-
kihh Sostoyaniy“ [forecasting Psychophysiological Statcg/. Leningrad. 1973.

Olezer. I. 1.. "QuantitatiVe Characteristic of Some Stages in the uevclop-
ment of the Cortex of the Frontal Brain Lobe in Man's Postnatal Ontggeneoia."
"Trudy III Nauch. Konr. po Vozrastnoy Morfol.. Fiziol. i Biokhim" [Proceed-

ings of the Third Scientific Conference on Age Morphology. Physiology and
Biochemistry]. Moscow. 1959.

Oodovikova. D. 8.. "Characteristics of Babies' Reactions to 'Physical' and
'Social' Sound Stimuli." vars. 93mm... 1969. No 6. p 79.

Grindel'. 0. M.. "Significance of Correlation Analysis for the Evaluation
of Man's SEC." in the book "Matematicheskiy Analiz Elcktrichcskikh Yavleniy
Colovnogo Moses." Moscow. 1965, p 15.

Grindel'. 0. M.. "Automatic Mathematical Analysis of Man's EEC in Focal
Brain Lesions.” in the book_leiaicheakaya Elektroentsefalografiya" [Clin-
ical Electroencephalography/. Moscow. 1973. p 286.

Gubler, Ye. V.. and Cenkin, A. A.. "Primeneniye Kriteriyev Neparametriches-
key Statistiki dlya Otsenki Raslichiy Dvukh Orupp Nablyudeniy v Mediko-Bi0m
losicheakikh Issledovaniyakh" [Application of Criteria of Nonparametric Sta-
tistics for an Evaluation of the Differences in Two Groups of Observations
in Medicobioloaical Researcg, Leningrad. 1969, p 9.

Danilov, 1. V.. and Cherepgnov, 1. M., "Patofiziologiya Logonevrozov" [fatho-
phyaiolosy of Logoneuroae;/. Leningrad. 1970.

Demina. L. 0.. and Khomskaya, Ye. D.. "The Problem of Functional Organiza-
tion of Attention.” in the book "Informatsionnoye Znacheniye Dioclektriches-
kikh Potentsialov Colovnogo Mozaa. Mater. Simp." [Jnfogmation Significance
of Bioelectric Potentials of the Brain. Symposium Data]. Leningrad. 197“.

p 570

John. Ye. R.. "Anatomical Distribution and Neutron Mechanisms of Memory Read-
ing Processes." in the hook "Punktsional'aoye Znacheniye Elektricheskikh
Protsessov Oolovnogo Moses." Moscow, 1977. pp 138-150.

Dzugayeva. 8. 3.. "Pro ashchiye Puti Oolovnogo Hosea Cheloveka" [gonduc-
tion Paths of Man's Brain . Moscow. 1975.

Durinyan, R. A.. ”Corticofusal Modulation of Nonspecific (Reticular) Brain
Systems in Mechanisms Elaborating Conditioned Reflexes." in the book 2M2-
khanizmy Deyatel'nosti Golovnoso Mossa” [Mechanisms of Brain Activitx/, Tbi-
lisi. 1975. Pp 152-165.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNI?

Durinyan. R. A.. and Robin. A. 0.. "Projenion Systems of the Drnin and
the Problem of Selective Mechanisms Hegulnting the Ascending Afferent Flow."

in the book "Korkovsyn Regulyatsiya Deyatel'nosti Podkorkovykh Obrazovsniy
Oolovnogo gorge" Eortical Regulation of the Activity of Subcortical Brain
Pomtiony. Tbilisi. 1968. pp aha-261.

Yerelseyeva. V. 0.. "Characteristics of Intercentral Relations in the Cere-
bral Cortex in Children During the Identification of Objects." "Tea. Kent._

po Problene Panysti" Abstracts of the Conference on the Problen of Memory].
Pushchino-na-Oke. 197 . P 257.

Yereneera. V. D.. "Electrophyaiological Investigation of the Relationship
Along Various Sensory Systu... in Children in the Process of Formation of
the Generalizing Function of a Mord." in the book "Novyye Issledovnniya no
Vozrastnoy Piziologii.” No 2. Moscov. 1975. p 13.

Zhadin. M. 11.. "Issledovaniye Mgkhaniusa 5mm Sinkhronisatsii Biopoten-
tsialov Kory Oolovnogo Mozga" [Investigation of the Mechanism of Effect of
Synchronization of Biopotentials of the Cerebral Cortey. author's abstract
oi‘ his candidate dissertation. Moscow. 1969.

Zhinkin. ll. 1.. "The Problem of Development of Speech in Children." 80V.
mascara. 195b, so 6. pp 19-9».

Zhirnunshaya. Ye. A.. and 8m. E. 8.. "ﬂeyrodinaaiha Mosga pri Optiho-Ono-
sticE-zskoy Deyatel'nosti” Lleurodynaaics oi‘ the Brain in Optic-Gnostic Ac-
tmzj. Moscow. 197k.

Zager. 0.. "Mcshutochsyy Mosg” fr'he Mid-Drug. Bucharest. 1962.

lager. 0.. "Study of the Punctions of the Cerebral Cortex Regulating Sub-
cortical Centers." in the book "Korhovaya Regulyatsiys Deyatel'nosti Pod-
horkovyhh Obrazovaniy Golovnogo Mosga." Tbilisi. 1968.

zaytseva. L. M.. ”Issledovaniye Elektricheskihh Protsessoinozga u Detey
Vtorogo Coda Zhisni pri Vospriyatii Slovesnyhh Signalov" Llnvestigation of
Electric Processes of the Brain in Children in the Second Year of Life Dur-
ing the Perception of Verbal Signals]. author's abstract of his candidate
dissertation. Moscow. 197%.

zaytseva. L. M.. "leurophysiological Mechanism of Formation of the Signal
Meaning of Words in Young Children." mm V2881!!! may DSYAm'IIOS'l‘I.

Zaytssva. L. M.. ”Spatial Relations of Electric Activity During the Repro-
duction of Verbal Signal. in Children." 2mm. MEMO! nzum‘som.
1916. Vol 2'0. Issue 5. pp 1032-10h0.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zaytsevn. L. M.. ”Spatial Synchronization of the Potentials oi‘ Frontal
Brain Zones During the Performance of s Nominative Speech Function in

Children." ZHURNAI. VY8SIIEY mvuor DEYATEL'ROSTI, 1977. V01 27. Issue 6.
pp llhl-llh9.

Zaklyakova. V. IL. "Characteristics of Intercentral Relations of Brain
niopotentials During tho Presentation of Verbal Stimuli Designating Action
With ObJects.” in the book "llovyye Issledovaniya po Vozrastnoy Piziologii."
No 5. Moscow. 1975. p 16.

Zaporozheta. A. V.. "DeVelopment oi‘ Logical Thinking in Preschool Age child-
ren." in the book ”Vopr. Psikhol. Rebenka Doghkol'nogo Vozrasta" [Problems
in the Psychology of the Preschool Age Chily. Moscow. Leningrad. l9h9. p 81.

Zaporozhots. A. V.. "Razvitiye Proisvol'nykh Dvizheniy" [Bevelopnent 0! Vol-
untary Movementj. Moscow. 1960.

Zvonareva. H. 1.. "Organization of Intercentral Interactions of Fiopoten-
tials of the leocortex in Children in Voluntary Activity." in the hook "Von-
rastnyyo Osobennosti Piziologicheskihh 8istcg Detey i Podrostkov. 'l‘ez.

I Koni‘. 'Piziologiya Razvitiya Cheloveka'" LAgo Characteristics of Physio-
logical 8ystens in Children and Adolescengs. Abstracts of the First Con-
ference 'Physiology of Human Developmenty. Vol 2. Moscow. 1917. pp 38-39.

Zeyeman. 5.. ”Rasstroystva Rechi v Detskom Vosrastc” [Epoech Disorders in
Childhood]. Moscow, 1962.

Zislina. ll. IL. and lovikova. L. A.. ”Age Characteristics of the Electric
Activity of Children's Brain.” ”Trudy III lauch. Koni’. po Vozrastnoy Mor-
phol.. Piziol. i Biohhin.." Moscov. 1959. PP 17-32.

Ivanitshiy. R. Yu., ”Cortical Synthesis and Two Information Brain Systems."
MEAL "88113! m0! DEYATEL'IOBTI. 1973. V01 23. lane 2, pp 375-333.

Iyukhins. V. D., "Medlennyye Elektricheski e Protsessy Mozga u Cheloveka"
LSlov Electric Processes in the human Brain . Leningrad. 1977.

Kazakov. V. II.. and Inet'yev, V. A.. "Reactions of the Neurons of the Pa-
rietal Association Area to Stimulation of Primary Sensory Zones." muo-
FIZIOIDCIYA. 1912. Vol ’5. lo 5. PP Sgt-SN.

Kasatkin. I. 1.. "Ogherk Rasvitiya Vysshey lervnoy Deyatel'nosti u Rebenka
ﬂannego Vosrasta" LOutline of the Developent of Higher Nervous Activity
in the Young cmy. Moscow. 1951.

Knipst. I. I.. Korinevskiy. A. V.. and Kurova. ll. 8.. "Dinsmika Pro tran-
stvennykh Sootnosheniy Biopotentsialov Kory Bol'shikh Polushariy: Dynamics
of Spatial Relations of the Biopotentials of the Cerebral Cortex , hoscov.
1976.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
I’OR OFVICIM. USE 0Nl\

Koaan. A. 8.. ”Statistical Probability Principle of Neuronal Organization
of functional Brain System." 00va MADE“! NAUK 888R. 1961:. h'o ‘3.

Kosan. A. 3.. “Principles of Organization of Brnin System From Neuronal
ﬁle-eats." in the book ”Kiberneticheskiye hapegty v Izuchcni‘. Rnhoty Hozgn"
[Cybernetic Aspects in the Btuw of Brain Rory. Moscow. 1970. pp 33400.

Kosan. A. 3.. "Principles of Neuronal Organization oi‘ working Nechanionu
Controlling the Functional System." in the hook ”Printnipy Sintcnnc Orga-
nisatsii runhtsiy" [Principles of Systcn Organization of Functions . Mos-
CW. 1973. pp 125-1”.

Koshsvnikov. V. A.. and Mgshcherskiy, R. IL, "8ovrenenmo Hetody Analina
Sickgroentsefaloaram” Luodern Methods of Analyzing an Electroencephalo-
gr‘E/o Moscow, 1963.

Kolarovn-Biryukou. z. 1.. ”Dignika nervnykh Protsessov i Mekhaniw Vre-
nennylm 8vyaaey u Cheloveka" antics of nervous Processes and Mechanism
of honorary Connections in Han . Leningrad. 1969.

Kgl'tsova. H. 31.. "O Pornirovanii Vysshcy llervn Deyatel'nosti Robenka”
LPN-nation of the Child's Higher Nervous Bystsn . Leningrad. 1958.

Kol'tnova. u. 14.. "Obohshcheniye m Funktsiya Hows" Lionel-nineties an
a Brain Function]. Leningrad. 1961.

Kol'tsovg. H. N.. "Dvigatel'naya Aktivnost' i Rasvitiye hanktsiy Hosea Ile-
henha: motor Activity and the Pevelopnent of the Functions of the Child's
Brain]. Moscow. 1973.

Kononova. 1's. 1’. . “The frontal Region."in the hook ”Tsitoarkhitektonika Ko
Bol'shogo Mona Chelovska" LCyto-Architecture oi‘ the llunan Cerebral Cox-tog.
Moscow. 1989. P 305.

Kon ova. is. P.. ”bohnaya Oblant' Bol'shoao Nona" E’ne Frontal Brain Re-
;io . Leningrad. 1962.

Korol'hova. T. A.. 'l‘rush. V. 0.. 'l‘ishaninova. L. V.. and Belyankiy. Ye. IL.
"Synchronisn netveen the Potentials of Various Brain Pox-nations Vith a bit-
ferent Correlation of the Potentials or the Ieocortex." in the book "tun-
htsional'noye Znacheniye nutrichaskihh Protsessov Colovnogo Mona." Mos-
cov. 1971. p 3b.

Kostandov. 3. A.. "Vospriyatiys i botsii" Eerception and botionj. nos-
CWs 19170

Kravchenko. V. A.. "Prinsneniye Upravlyayushchey am one Issledovnniya
Mtsional'noco_2nacheniya Sinhhronnosti Biopotentsialov Kory Colonogo
Nous Krolika" [Use of a Control Electronic Cmuter for Investigation of

31
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Functional Significance oi‘ Synchronisn or the Biopotentials oi‘ the
Rabbit's Cerebral Corteﬂ, author's abstract of hie candidate disserta-
tion. Moscow. 1910.

Kukuyev. L. A. J. ”Btruktura Dvitagel'nogo Annlizatora" Latructure oi‘ the
Motor Analyser]. Leningrad. 1968.

Lagutina, N. 1., "Basic Mechanisms of the Activity of the Frontal Sections
oi‘ the Cortcx_and Prospects for Their Study," in the hook "Fisiologiya boh-
nykh Daley" [Physiology 01‘ Frontal Loheg7. 3mm, 1972, p s.

Lehedeva. 1.. L. "Bioelektricheskaya Aktivnost' Colovnoso Hosea v Protsesse
Ahta Rodov" [Bioelectric Activity of the Brain in the Process of the Child-
hizth Acg. author's abstract or his doctoral dissertation. Sverdlovsk.

19 80

Leont'yev. A._ll.. "Prohleny Rasvitiya Psikhiki" [iroblens of DeVelopnent
or the Psyche]. Koscov, 1912.

Leushina. A. IL. "Tasks of the Kindergarten in the Light of the Demand 01‘
the Modern Elementary 8chool.‘ DOSliKOL'IIOYE VOSPI‘I'ANIYE. 1972, No '0.

Livangv, H. I. . "Prostranstveanaya Organizatsiya Protsessov Oolovnogo Mos-
gn" LSpatial Organization of Brain Processes]. Moscov. 1972.

Lindenhaun. A. I... "Electroencephalographic Studies of Children Rith Ala-
lias and Organic Dyslalia." in the hook "Hat-l: V Vacs. S'yezda Nevropato-
logov i Psikhiatrov" (pat; of the Fifth All-Union Congress of lleuropatho-
loaists and Psychiatristy. Vol 2. Moscow. 1969. PP MAS-M17.

Lisina. Ii. 1.. "Vosniknoveniye i Rasvitiye Bluentamykh For: Ohsheheniya
so Vsroslyni u Detey Pervogo Poluaodiya Zhisni” Lmergence and Developent
oi‘ Blcnent Forms of Association With Adults in Children During the first
an: of “:3. Moscov. l96h.

boskutova. '1'. 0.. "Effect of the Functional State or the Central nervous
System on the Pornation of a Single Motor Reaction (According to the Data
of a Correlation Analysis of 2m ." PIZIOL. CW. 1975, Vol 1. lo 1.

p 98.

Luriys. A. 8.. "Nos; Chelovgha i Psihhicheskiye Protsessy. lleyropsihholo-
sicheskiye Issledovaniya” [_ s liunan Brain and Psychic Processes. neuro-
psychological Investigation . Vol 1. Moscov. 1963.

Luriya. A. 11.. in the hook "leyrci‘isiologicheshiye Methanim larusheniy
Rechi" Lleurophysiological Mechanism of Speech Disorders]. Leningrad. 1961.
p 109.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USII 0N! \'

Luriye. A. 11.. "Vysshiye Korkovyye Funkts‘l" [Higher Corticnl Functiong.
second edition. ﬂoscow. 1969.

Luriye. A. 11.. "Osnovy Neyropeikhologii" [Principles of Neuropeyoholoﬂ.
Moscow. 1973. '

Luchhowe. '1'. 11.. ”Prostrenstvennege Sinkhronizetsiye Potenteielov Kory
Colomoso Moses pri Vyrsbotke Uslovnogo Cooronitel'nogo Retleken" Lepetiel
Synchroniution of the Potentiels of the_Cerebrel Cortex During the Ele-
horetion of s Conditioned Defense Refley. euthor's ehstrect or his cendi-
dete dissertstion. Moscow. 1973.

Wuhlinskeve. A. A.. ”Ocherki Peikhicheskoeo Rezvitiye Rehenke" Lautline of
the Child's Psychic Dewelopeng. Moscow. 1965.

Maine. 0. 8.. "Resvitiye Rechi u tey v Rennen Vosreste" Lgpeech Devel-
opment in Children et en zerly e . Moscow. 1963:.

Lyspidevskiy. 8. 8.. Shenhel'. A. 0.. end 8s1ivsrstov. V. 1.. "Disorders in

the Bets. Rhyth- end luency of Speech." in the book ”Rustroystvs Rechi u
Detey i Podrosthov" Speech Disorders in Children end Adolescents]. noscow.

19699 P 2&3-

lqekh. 0. 8.. "Bremitel'neys Rol' Blnkhovogo i Kineeteticheskgo Meliss-
torov v Vospriyetii Zvuhov Rechi Det’ni Per-mo Code Zhizni" LCuperstive
Role of Auditory end Kineethetic Anslysers in the Perception of Speech
Sounds by Children During the First Yeer of mtg. euthor's shetrect of his
cendidste dissertetion. Leningrad, 1968.

Mirsoyents. ll. 8.. "Investiaetion of the Bioflows of Children's Brein in

Zerly Orthogenesis.” in the hook "Ctr-utters i Mtsiys Anelisstorov Che-
loveke Ontogenese" Structure end Function of linen Anelysers in Onto-

;enesis . Moscow. 1 1. p 18h.

Menitshiy. D. I.. end much“. V. V.. "Ini’ornetsiye i Problem Vysshey
llervnoy Deystel'nosti" LIni’onetion end Problems of Higher nervous Activ-

n17 . using-u. 197k.

Honekhov. K. K.. ”Developent of Besic nethods of mectrophysiologicel
Study of Diseeses or the llueen Brein.” in the hook "Perehlinichgskiye He-
tody Issledoveniye v lemlosichsskoy Klinihs. net-l: 813p." [Perez inicsl
Methods of Investiaetion in the Neurologicel Clinic. Bmosiun Dets . Is-

sue 1. Moscow. 1969. p 21.

lleriheshvili. 8. P.. ”Direct end Indirect ”feet of the Cershrsl Cortex on
Thole-1c Nuclei." in the hook "gonusnme Problem Rlektrofisiologii
‘rssntrsl'noy Isl-vow 8 stew" modern Problem of Electrophysioloy oi' the
Centre]. nervous Cyst . loscow. 1961. pp 181-181.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Narikashvili. s. P.. "Effect of the Cerebral Cortex on Thnlanic ﬂuclei and
the Reticular Formation of the Brain Stu," in the book "Korkovaya Regulya-

tsiya Dezatel'nosti Podkorkovykh Obrazovaniy Oolovnogo Mosga." Tbilisi. 1968.
pp 211-2 2.

Norman. L. V.. and Pravdina. 0. V., "Hearing Disorder and its Effect on
Speech Fomtion." in the book "RasstroystVa Rechi u Dctey i Podrostkov"
[Speech Disorders in Children and Adolescentﬂ', Moscov, 1969. p 60.

Novikova. L. A.. "Age Characteristics of the Electric Activity of the Brain
of Children and Adolescents." ZHUFNAL VYSSHEY WWO! DBYATEL'IIOB‘I‘I. 1961.
Vol 2. Issue 1. Pp 60-70-

ltovikova. L. A. , "Vliyaniye garusheniy Zreniya i Slukha na Funktsional'noye
Bostoyaniye Mosga Rebenka" [Effect of Vision and Hearing Disorders on the
Functional State of the Child's 3mg. Moscow, 1966.

Novihova, L. A.. and Parber. D. A.. "Functional Maturation of the Cortex and
Subcortical Brain Structures During Various Age Periods According to the
Data of Electrophysiologicaljeaearch." in the book ”Vozrastnaya Piziologiya.
Ruhovodstvo po Piziologii" Age Physiology. Handbook of Physioloﬂ. chap-
ter 12, Leningrad. 1975. DP 91-517.

Pavlov. I. P.. "Physiological Mechanisms of So-Called Voluntary Movements.”
"Truw Piziol. Lab. Akad. I. P. Pavlova" [Proceedings of the Physiological
Laboratory of Academician I. P. Parlor], 1959, Vol 6. Issue 1.

Pemer, I. A.. ”Evoked Potential of the “man Brain as an Index of Some In-
formation handling Processes." in the book "lnfornatsionnoye Znacheniye Bio-
elektricheskikh Potentaialov Colovnogo Mozga." Leningrad. 1971:, pp 65-66.

Plohhinskiy. I. A.. "Dionetriya" [finch-17, Moscov. 1910.

Podd'yakov. s. 1.. Mahleniye Doshkol'nika" [ﬁe Preschooler'a Thinking-7.
Moscov. 1977.

Polikanina. R. 1.. "Razvitiye Vygahey ﬂervnoy Deyatel'nosti u Nedonoahenwkh
Detey v Rannen Periode Zhizni" Developent of higher legrous Activity in
Premature); Born Children During an Early Period of my. Leningrad, 1966.

Polyakov, 0. 1.. "structural Organisation of the Cerebral Cortex According
to the Data of Its Developaent in Ontogenesia,” in the boo): "‘l'sitoarkhitek-
toaika Kory Dol'shogo Hozga Cheloveha." Moscow. 19’19. p 33.

Polyoov. o. l. . "Present Data on the Structural Organisation of the Cere-
bral Cortex; in the book by Luriya. A. 3., ”Vysshiye Korkovyye Mktsii
Cheloveka" [Man's Higher Cortical Mctionj. Moscow, 1962. p 35.

36
FOR OFFIClAL USE OSLY
FOR Oll’l-‘ICIAL USE ONLY

Polynkov. o. 1., "0 Printsipakh Noyro noy 0"3nnizntsii Mugs" Erinciplen
oi‘ Neuronsl Organization of the Brain . Moscow. 1965.

Polyaxova, A. 0.; "Punktsional'neys Organizntsyys Assotsistivnoy Kory 00-
lo ogo Mozga" [Functional Organization or the Associetive Cerebral Cor-
tex , Moscow. 197?.

Ran. P. L. "Chuchgniye Oluhhonewkh Proitnooheniyu" [Fenching Pronuncia-
tion to Deer-Mutspj. Moscow. 1960.

Rgungart-Pupko. 0. I... "Pornirovsnye Rechi u Detey Rennego Vosrestn"
/_Speech Fomtion in Young Children/. Moscow. 1963.

Roytbak. A. 1.. and Butkhusi, s. 1.. "Mecbnnisa oi' the Waking Resct_i_on Under
the Effect 2! Peripheral Stimuli." in the book "Gegrshiye Besedy" LGegrs
Discussions], Vol II. Tbilisi. 1963. pp 2&9-256.

Rusinov, V. 8., Grindel'. 0. 14., and Boldyrevs. C. 11., "Investigations of
the Dynamics of Intercentrsl Relations in the Cerebral Cortex of Man by the
Method of Spectral Analysis of m." in the hook "Mekhanim Deyetel'nosti
Ooiovnogo Morge." Tbilisi, 1976. p 36.

Rutnan. E. 14.. ”Vonoghnosti Priaeneniye Usrednennykh Vyzvanmkh Potentsia-
lov v Psikhoi'isihe" [Possibilities of Using Avereged Evoked Potentials in
Psychophysice]. Noscov. 1.97". p 65.

Sukisov, 8. A.. ”Ilekotgryye Osobennosti Stroyeniya lleyronel'nykh vassey
Kory Bol'shogo Horse" Lame Charscteris tics of the Structure of leuronal
Connections of the Cerebral Cortej. Moscov, 193:8.

Sarkisov. 8. A.. and Polarakov, 0. 1., "Neurons and Interneuronal Connections
of the Cerebral Cortex," in the book 'Tsitoarkhitektonike Kory Bol'shogo
Marge Cheloveks.” Moscow, 19h9. p 102.

Selenovsksye. Ye. 1.. Verkhntins. A. 1., and noshdestvenskwe. V. 14.. "Re-
activity of Occipital Regions of the Cerebral Cortex in Children According
to 330 Data.” 121]. mam mucoczcmm HAD! RBI-SR. Issue 57, Moscow.
1953. pp 228-2bo.

Sechenov. I. u.. "Brain Reflexes," "rm. Prom." [Enacted «orig, Vol 1.
Moscow. 1952.

Snirnov. V. IL, and Shandurins. A. 1.. ”Thalanoparietal Association Syste-
and Its Participation in the Central Hechanisns of the Scheme." in the book
"Bvolyutsiys Funktsiy Te-ennykh Daley Hoses." Leningrad. 1973, p 126.

Sologub. Ye. 8.. ”neutrichesgwa Aktivnost‘ Mosge Cheloveks v Protsesse
Motel'noy Deyatel'nosti" [Blectric Activity oi‘ the mien Brain in the
Process of Rotor Activity]. Leningrad, 1973.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sologub, Ye. 8.. "Information Content of EEO Data in the Evaluation of Man's
Work Fitness," in the book "Informatsionnoye Znacheniye Bioelektricheskikh
Potentsialov Colovnogo Mozga," Moscow, 1971:, pp 1:849.

Stankevich, M. A., "Development of Man's Lover Parietal Region and Its Place
in the System of Cortical Bnds of Man's Analyzers in Ontogenesis." in the

book "Struhtura i Punktsiya Analizatorov Cheloveka v Ontogeneses,“ Moscow,
1961, pp ans-256.

Stankevich‘ H. A., ”The Lower Parietal Region," in the book "Razvitiye Mozga
Rebenka" [Development of the Child's may, Leningrad, 1965. p 128.

Tishaninova. L. V., "Issledovaniye Znacheniya Korkovykh i Podkorkovykh Vli-
yaniy Dlya Forairovaniya Proatranstvennoy Sinkhronizatsii Potentsialov Kory
Golovnogo Mozga Krolika" [Investigation of the Significance of Cortical and
Subcortical Effects for the For-nation of Spatial Synchronization of the Po-
tentials of the Rabbit's Cerebral Cox-tag, author's abstract of his candidate
dissertation, Moscow. 1975.

Tanks. 1., "Izuchenye Razvitiya Uslomkh Svyazey na ZWRi Rechi u Detey
Rannego Vozrasta" LStudy of the_Developnent of Conditioned Connections to

Speech Sounds in Young Children , author's abstract of his candidate dis-
sertation, Moscow. 1957.

Tonkova-Yanpol'skwa, R. V., ”Stanovleniyg Fiziologicheskikh Hekhanimov
Rechi u Detey Pervykh Trekh Let Zhisni" [Formation of Pmrsiological Mecha-
nisms of Speech in Children During the First 3 Years of 1.1257, author's
abstract of his doctoral dissertation, Leningrad, 1968.

Traugott, ll. IL, ”0 narushenii Vzainodeystgiya Signal'whh Sistel" [iistur-
bance in the Interaction of Signal Bystany, Moscov-Iasningrad. 1957.

Traugott, I. ll., Kaydanova, S. I., and Meyerson, Ya. A., "Syndromes of Af-
fection of Parietal Brain babes," in the book "Evomtsiya Funktsiy Temennykh
Doley Mosga," Leningrad, 1973, p 118.

Trash, V. D.. "Mtsional'noye Znacheniye Spektral'no-Korrelyatsionnykh Po-
kasateley Biopotentsialov Golovnogo Mozga" [Functional Significance of Spec-
tral Correlation Indices of Brain Biopotentialy, author's abstract of hia
candidate dissertation, Hoscov. 1915.

Uryvaycv, Yu. V.. and Kalistratov. C. F., "Significance of the Frontal Cor-
tex in the Functioning of Sanatosensory and Auditory ProJection Zones," in
the book " Piziologiya Lobrwkh Dolley,” Sukhuni, 1972, p 32.

Usov, V. V., "Bone Statistical Methods of Analysis of Brain Electrogramg,"
- in the book "Klinicheskaya leyrofiziologiya. _Rukovodstvo po Piziol." Lelia-

ical Neurophysiology. Handbook of Physiolow, Leningrad, 1972, p 560.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Uhhtoeekiy. A. A.. "Outline of the Phyniolwgy of the Nervous System." "80hr.
Boch." LCollected Horny. Vol 1., Leningrad. 19h5.

Ukhtenehiy. A. A.. "Univereity School of Phyeiologietn in Leningrad During
20 Yeere of Soviet Lite." "80hr. Boch.." Vol 5. Leningrad. 195h. pp 172-221.

Perher. D. A.. "Punxteionel'noyc Bonreveniyg Mozge v Rnnnen Ontogeneze.
(Blektrofiziologicheekoye Ieeledoveniye)" [functionel Metur tion of the Brain
in Eerly Ontogeneeie. (llectrophveiologicel Inventigetionﬁ, Moecov. 1969.

Porter. D. A.. "Specificity of So-Celled Nonspecific Viauel Evoked Poten-
tLele." in the hook "Oenovnyye Problem Elgktrofiziologii Colovnogo Morse”
[peeic Problem of Brein tloctrophyeiolow. unecov. l9’ﬂa. p 222.

Perher._p. A.. end Alferove. V. V., "Blehtroentnetelogrgnn Dctey i Podron-
tkov" [Electroencephelogren of Children end Adoleeccntgj. Moscow. 1972.

Predkine. P; 1.. "Speech Pomtion in the Child " "Met-1y Soveehch. po Pei-
hhologii" LDete or the Conference on Peychol , Moecov, 1957, pp 3964101.

Prid, K. #1.. ”Effect of the Orientetion Reflex to Vieuel invoked Potentinle
in the BBC 0! School Age Children.” MIA]. W881!!! mnor nnhm'noeu.
1910, Vol 20. p 1116.

namkeye. Ye. D., "noes i Ahtiveteiye” Lirein end Activating. Hoecov. 1912.

Knriuen. 'l'. P.. ”Correletione of the Bioelectric Activity of Sale Section

or the Cerehrel Cortex in 8- to llo-Yeer Old Children During the Pertornence

or Phyeicel Bxercieee.” in the hgok "Piziologicheehiye Mekheniw Dvigetel'-
with i Vegetetivyhh Punkteiy” [Phyeiologicel Recheniene of Motor end Vege-

tative Functiony, )loeeov, 1965. P 20.

Khriuen. 'l‘. P.. ”Punctionel Developent of Prontel Brein Lobee in Children
According to the Dete o! tlectroencephelogrephy." ”'rez. Veee. leuchn. Kant.
po Aktuel'm Prohl. Ohehche tvennogo Doehkol'nogo Voepiteniye i Voproeen
Podgotovki Detey h Bhkole" hetrecte or the All-Union Conference on Urgent
Problem 0 Public Preechool Bducetion end Problem of Prepering Children
for Schoo . Vol 1. Moscow. 1969. p m.

Khrimn. ‘i'. P.. “Developent of Punctionel Connectione in the Cerehrel Cor-
tex of Children According to the Dete of Correletion Anelyeie of llectroen-
cgphelogreu,” ”Met-la XI 8'yezde Veee. Piziol. O-ve in. I. P. Pevlove"
[pete of the llth Congreee o! the All-Union Physiologicel society ineni l.
P. Pevloy. Leningred. 1910. p 378.

lozriaen. ‘1'. P.. ”Developent of Auocietion 8tructnree--Leeding Btege in
the Developent of the Child'e Brein.” in the hook "Home Ineledoveniye
Piziologii i Peikhologii" [in Reneerch in Physiology end Peycholoq7. noe-
cov. 1911.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR UFFICIAL USE HHLY

Khriznan. T. P.. "Investigation of Intercentral Interconnections of Frontal
Sections of the Brain in Children in the Freeman of DchJoment." in the
book "Fiziologiya Lobnykh Daley." Sukhumi. 1912a. p 1:9.

Khriunan. 1‘. P. . "Characteristics of Functional Relations Between Projection
and Aneocintion Structures of the Cerebral Cortex in Children During the
First 3 Years of Life According to £86 Data." ”Trudy IX Nauch. Konf. po Voz-
rantnoy Mortol.. Pisiol. i Biokhin..” Moscow. 1972b. p 82.

l0_1riman. T. P.. "Dvizheniya Bebenka i Elektricheskayn Mtivnont' Moses"
[The Child's Movements and Electric Activity of the Braiy. Moscow. 1973n.

Khrinan. T. P., "Characteriotics of Spatial Synchronization of Brain Bio-
potentialo in Children of Different Ages Under the Effect of Verbal Signals."
in the book "Problem Prostranstvennoy Sinkhronizatsii Biopotentsialov Go;

lovnogo Moses" [Problems of Spatial Synchronization of Brain Biopotentialy.
Pushchino-na-Oke. 1913b. p 131.

Khrinaan. '1'. P.. "Characteristics of Intercentral Connections of Electric

Brain Processes in 2- or 3-Year Old Children During Voluntary Movements."
vom. 93110101... 1973b. llo 6. p 108.

Khriznan. T. P.. "Relationship of Subparietal Association Brain Sections to
Speech Perception in Children." ZHURNAL VYSSHEY NEWNOY DEYATEL'NOSTI. 1918a.
Vol 23. Issue 3:, p 758.

Khriznan, T. P.. "Reflection of the Semantic Basis of Verbal Signals in the
Organization of Space-Tine Relations of Brain Biorhythns in Children." in
the book "Intomtsionnoye Znacheniye Bioelektricheskikh Potentsialov Coley-
nogo Mozga. Hat-1y Sinp.." Leningrad. 1978b, p 50.

latriznan, T. P.. "Organization of space-Tine Relations of Electric Brain
Processes in Children Upon the Presentation of Verbal Comands," ZHURIIAL
VYSSHEY NERVIOY DEYA‘I'EL'NOSTI, l975a. Vol 25. Issue ‘0, p 690.

Khriuan. T. P., "Formation of Intercentral Connections of Subparietal Re-
gions in Children in Ontoecnesis." in the book "Funktsional'no-Strukturwye
Osnovy Sistgnnoy Deyatel'nosti i Mekhanimy Plastichnosti Hosea." "Trudy In-
ta Mazes” [Proceedings of the Brain Institutg. Moscov. 1975b.

Khriunan. T. P., and Oolovina. Ye. 8.. "Pathogenesis of Central Mechanisms
of Disturbance in Speech Functions in Children With Alalia." ZHURN. IBVROPATOL.
I psmmm.. 1976. Vol 76. Issue 10. p 1558.

Khriunan. T. P.. and Zulyakova. V. 3.. "Characteristics of Intercentral Rela-
tions Betveen Projection and Association Structures in Children with the Re-
tention of Traces of Varying Activity." in the book "Pawat' i Sledovyye
Protseesy" [Memory and Trace Processeg, Pushchino-na-Oke, 1973:, p 188.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONL'I'

Khriznnn. ‘1'. P.. Zeklynkove. V. IL. and an'taeve, L. IL. "Characteristics
of the Proceeees of Spetinl Synchronization of Cortical Biopotcntieln in
Children During the Second Yeer of Life Upon the Preeentntion or Vernal
Cons-ends." “me1. W88}!!! umvnor DEYATEL'IIOSTI. 1972. Vol 22, Innuc In,
p 92.

'revetkove. L. 8.. "Ngusheniye i Vosstenovleniye Schetn pri Lohnl'nyhh Po-
rezhenilehh house” [pisturhnnce end Restoration of Counting in hocsl Brain
Leeiony. Moscow. 1972.

Chietovich. L. A.. "Preeent Problem end Methods of Studying Speech Percep-
tion end Speech Pornotion." USPEKBI fIZIOL. mm. 1970. Vol 1, p 83:.

Chietovich. L. A.. Venteov. A. V.. end Ornnetren. M. P., ”Physiology of
“in“! Speech." ”Voepriyctiye Rec i. Rukovodstvo po Pisiologii" [Speech Per-
ception. handbook of Meiol . Leninsred, 1916.

Choruen. 0. 0.. "Kihernetihe let-mun Kletok" Eyhernetics of Nerve CellJ.
Roetov. 1975.

Chuprihovn. I. l.._"Slovo Kek Pektor Uprevleniye v Vysehey lervnoy Deyetcl'-
noeti Chelovehe" ord on 3 Factor of Control in Ken'e Richer Nervous Activ-
ity]. Moecov. l9 7.

Shehnn. V. IL. ”Section of leurons of the Anterior Section or Supresylvlen
Cyrus to Periphersl Stinuli of Verioun liodnlities." monzxonoom. 1912,
Vol 1-. lo M. p 368.

Shvechkin. l. 101.. "Developent of Phonenotic Speech Perception in hr]:
Childhood," 12V. mom: W10“. IAUK REFER. 1958. lune 13. p 189.

Shepovel' ihov. A. l.. 'Aktivnost' Spyuhcheso lions” chtivity of the Sleep-
in; Srnin . beningred. 1971.

Shichko._o. A.. ”Vtoreye Signel'neys Sieteno i Yeye Fizioloeicheskiye nethe-
niw" [1329 Second Signaling Syctel and Its Plusiologicel Mechenisng. Len-
ingrad. l .

Shunilinn. A. 1.. "Punctionel Significance of Pronto. Regions of the Cere-
hrnl Cortex in the Dog's Condition Reflex utility.” in the hook ”nohme
Doll 1 Regulnteiyn Peihhicneshihh Protseesov" ntnl bohes end the Resu-
lntion of Psychic Processey. Koecov. 1966. p l.

Shutin. n. A.. "Piziolosiye town: Doley Colmo Moses” [Em-moo of
Pronto). Brain lobej. Leningrad. 1959.

thhuhine. I. V., ”0 Ruritii Korkovoy Proyekteii Zritel'nogo Annliutore u
Detey Pervogo Code 2hizni" Lnevelopent of the Corticel Projection of the
Visunl Anelner in Children During the First leer of bits]. nuthor's ehetrect
of hie cendidnte diseertetion, Moscow, 1912.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1-:l'konin. D. 8.. "Razvitiye Rechi v Doshkol'non Vozraote" [Speech Develop-
ment in Prenchool A5137. Moscow. 1958.

Adey. V. R.. “Use of Conputern for Analysis or Neurophysiological gate."
in the book "Vychislitel'nyye Ugtroystva v Biologii i Meditnine" [Computer
Devicco in Biology and Medicine], Moocov. 1967. p 153.

Akert. K.. Oruesen. R. A.. Vooloey. C. N.. and Meyer. D. R. Kluver. "Busy
Syndrome in Monkeys Vith Neoeortical Ablation of Temporal Lobe." BRAIN.
1961. Vol 8b, p heo.

Amassian. V. 5.. "Observation on a Smeathetic Association Area.” EEG A.
GUN. NMOPEWBIOLH 1952. Vol ‘0. p 113.

Anaesian. V. 15.. "Evoked Single Cortical Unit Activity in the Genetic Sen-
sory Areas.” EEO A. 01.1". NEUROPRYSIOI... 1953. Vol 5. p ”15.

Alsassian. V. 3.. "Studies on Organization of a Sonenthctic Association
Areaé Including a Single Unit Analysis." J. REUROPllYSIOi... 1951-. Vol 17. pp
39-5 .

Bakes. F. P.. ”Effect of Response to Auditory Stimulation on the Latent Tine
of Blogking oi‘ the Berger Rhythm." J. EXP. P8!CﬂOL.. 1939. Vol 2h, It Is, pp
h06-hl .

Bauchot. R.. "Le Development! Phylogenetiquc du Thalanus Che: Les Insecti-
vores." in "Evolution of the Forebrain. (Phylogenesis and 0ntogenesis)."
Stuttgart. 1966. pp 3’56-355.

Dental. 8.. and Bihari, 8.. "Evoked Activity of Single Neurons in Sensory
Association Cortex of the Cat." J. moment... 1963. Vol 26. p 207.

Bettinger. L. A.. Davis. J. I... Meikle, M. 3., Birch. IL, Kopp. R.. Smith.
R. 8.. and Thupson. R. V.. "'Rovelty' Cells in Association Cortex or Cat."
Psrcnot. scr.. 1967. Vol 9. p hzi.

signal. K. 8.. "Comparison of Optic Afferents to Primary Visual and Poly-
nensory Areas of Cat Reocortex." EXP. mot... 1967, Vol 17. p 327.

Bloch. V.. "be Controle Central de l'Activite Bleetrodemle." Paris, 1965.

Borenstein. P., and Buser. P.. "Observations sur les ProJections du Cortex
Dans la Formation Reticules Hescncephalique Chez le Chat," C. R. SOC. 3x01...
1960. ll 5'0. p 38.

Brenner. P.. and Terzuolo. C.. "Contribution a l'Etuie des Mecanisnes Phy-
siologiques du Maintien de l'Activite Visile du Cerveau. Interaction de la
Pomtion Reticulee et de l'Ecorce Cerebrale Dans le Processus du Reveil."
anon. INT. PHYSIOL.. 195», r. 62, n 2. pp 157-118.

’00
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bueer. R.. ”Activitee de ProJection et d'Asoocietion du Neocortex Cerebrel
dee He-iferee. Deuxiele Pertie. Activitee d'Aeeocietion et d'Bleboretion:
Projection non Specifiquee." J. P1118101... (Pu-is). 1957. T. 1-9. pp 589-659.

Bueer. 9.. end Bisnell. K. 8.. "Ronprinu-y Sensory ProJectionn on the Cat
Reocortex.” m. REM. 8101... 1967. Vol 10. p 111.

Rueer. R.. end Intent. 14.. ”Beneory ProJectione to the Motor Cortex in Cote."
in Roeenblueth (ed). "Beneory Cununicntion.” con-bridge. 1961. pp 601-626.

cgezpbell. II. J.. ”Correletive Meio1ozy of the lemue Byeten.” London-Rd"
1 5.

Chop-en. R. R.. "Evoked Reeponeee to Relevent end Irrelevent Vieuel Stieuli
While Prone. Bolvina." in "Proc. 73rd. Ann. Conv. An. Peychol. Aeeoc. ."
1965. pp 177-178.

Chev. K. I... ”A Retnogrede Cell Degeneretion Study of the Corticel Projection

giothe Pulviner in the Monkey.” J. CM. MOI... 1950. Vol 93. ll 3. pp 31'.-

Devie. R.. ”Inhencenent of holed Corticel Potentiele in Ruene Releted to
e Teek Requiring e Decieion." semen. 1963:. Vol 185. I 3628. pp 182-183.

Donchin. 3.. end Lindel . D. R.. "Averese Evoked Potentiele end Reection
Then to View Stinuli. no A. 01.1]. MOMIOI... 1966. Vol 20. I 3.

pp 2‘7‘223e

Dov. 3. IL. end Dubner. R.. ”Single Unit Reeponeee to Moving Vieuel Stimli
inhuiddle Supreeylvien Orrue or the Cet." J. momzor... 1911. Vol 35,
p 1.

Dunner. R.. end Brown. R.. ”Reeponee of Celle to Reetricted Vieuel Stimuli
in en Aeeocietion Aree of Get CerebreJ. Cortex." m. MOI... 1968. Vol 20.
p 10.

Dubner. R.. end Rutledge. 1.. R.. “Recording end AneJyeie of Conver in; In-
put Upon Neurone in Get Aeeocietion Cortex." J. momma... l9 . Vol 27.
n h. pp 620-6335.

but”. 3.. "Activetion end Behevior.” Riley. 1962.

Reteble. 0., "Coneideretione on the lietolosicel Reeee of leuroplqeiolog.”
in "Ruin Itecheniene end tau-nine.” Oxford. 1961.

Pleeheis. R.. ”Duet-Men Uber die lorephere dee Renechlichen Genie-no."
IMO!” WI... 1908. .13. 21. I 2. 8. 50.

‘1
708 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

French. J. 0.. Hernandez-Peon. R.. and Livingston. R. 8.. "Projections
Fron Cortex to Cephalic Brain Stem Reticular Formation in the Monkey.” J .
NEUROPHYSIOLH 1955. V01 18. N 1. PP 7’1-95.

French. J. D.. and Mngoun, H. H.. "Errcctn of Chronic Leeiono in Central
Cephalic Brain Stem of Nonkeys." AMA ARCH. mon. PSYCHIAT.. 1952. Vol 68.
N 5. PP 591-60lt.

French. 0. M.. "The Frontal Lobee and Association." in "The Frontal Granular
Cortex and Behavior.“ ILL. 196%. pp 56-71:.

Oellhorn. 12.. ”Autonomic Inbalance and the hypothalenun." Minneapolis. 1957.
Cottschich. J .. "Die Leietungen den Nerveneyetene." Jena. 1955.

hernandez-Peon. R.. 1969. "Neurophysiological Mechanisms in Attention." in
"handbook of Clinical Neuroloy." Vol 3. Amsterdam. 1969. PP 155-186.

Rodeo. 1L. "Evolutionary Interpretation of neural and Behavioral Studies of
Living Vertebrates.” ”The Neurosciences." N.Y.. 1969. II 1.

horst. L. van der. ”Fem and Function of the Frontal Brain.” PSYCIIIA‘m”
unmet. A. momma. 1963. Vol 66. u M. I» 326-331..

huhel. D. L.. and Hiesel. '1‘. 3.. ”Visual Area of the Lateral Buprasylvian
Cyrus (Clare-Bishop Area) of the Cat." J. PﬂYSIOL.. (London). 1969. Vol 202.
H 1. pp 251-2“0

Jae r. it. 11.. "Functional Properties of the 'l'halamic Reticular System.”
in Brain Mechanisms and Consciousness.” Oxford. 195%. pp 37lo-801.

Jasper. R. 11.. "Recent Advancen in our Understanding of Ascending Activities
of the Reticular System." in "Reticular Formation of the Brain.” Boston-To-
ronto. 1957. PP 319-331.

Larsson. L. 2.. "The Effect of the Psychological Significance of Stimuli on
Evoked Potentials in the linen am and the Startle Reaction." no A. CLIII.

moment... 1959. suppl. 11. p 335.

Lindsley. D. 3.. Dovden. J. E. and Hsgoun. ll. 11.. "Effect Upon the of
Acute Injury to the Brain Stem Activating System.” no A. CLIN. Immsmn. .
l9h9. Vol 1. ll 5, pp 1575-1186.

Lindsley. D. 8.. "Attention Consciousness Sleep and wakefulness .” in ”Band-
hook of Physiology." Vol 3. Hashington. 1960. pp 1553-1955.

Lorente de lo. 3.. "Cerebral Cortex: Architecture. Intracortical Connec-

tions. Motor Projections." in "Physiolog of the Nervous System." ILL-0x-
i‘ord. 19’53.

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

McCulloch. H. 8., “Sons Connections oi‘ the Frontal Lobe Established by
Physiological lsuronoeraphy." in "The Frontal Lobes. Res. Pub. Assoc.
lerv. Mont. Dis..'I 19%. ll 21. pp 95-105.

Mercer. D. Ii. A.. ”Analytical Methods for the Study of Periodic Phenomena
Obscursd by Randoa Fluctuations.” "Com Spring Harbor synp. on Quantitative
Bio)...” 1960.Vol 25. 13-85.

Mitra. II. 1... "Quantitative Analysis of Cell Mes in ﬂan-alien leocortsx.”
J. “Wk. 1955. Vol 89. [I h, pp h67-h83.

Monakov. Cu "Die Lokalisation in Crosshirn und der Abbau der Funktion Durch
Kortikalo Horde.” Hiessbaden. 19110.

Moruaai. 0.. and ﬂeaoun. ll. w.. "Brain Stu Reticular Fox-nation and Activa-
tion or the am." no A. cm. moment... 19'09, suppl. 1. l '0, p '65-
I073.

Rants. 9. J.. "Fibre Degeneration Following Lesions of the Anyhloid Cc.-
plcx in the Monkey.” J. AnA'i‘. (London). 1961. I 95. pp 515-531.

lIauta. H. J .. "8m Ettorent Connections or the Prerrontal Cortex in the
Mom; in "The Frontal Granular Cortex and Behavior." McCrav-liill. 196%.
pp 391- 10.

lIauta. H. J .. "The Problem of the Frontal Lobe. A Reinterpretation. (Hanu-
OCl'iM). Canbridse. 1971.

lauta. H. J.. "ileural Associations of the Frontal Cortex." am WBIOL.
Ell, 1972. Vol 32. p 125.

Osvald. 1.. "Sleeping and ﬂaking.“ Ansterdan. 1962.

Oxbyry, J.. Darlington. C.. and 8tonin. C.. ”Effects of Frontal Cortex he-
sions on Learning Set." INNER. (W). 1969. Vol 221. I 5187. PP 1271-
1272.

Pribran. K. 3.. ”The Intrinsic System of the Forebrain." in "nandbook of
thiolog." Vol 2. Washington. 1960. pp 1323-13“.

Pribrn, K. 3.. "A leuroplvsiological Approach to the Analysis of the lam-
behavioral Deficit ‘i'hat Follovs Frontal Lesions." "Hat-11 XVIII mammar-

Psikbol. Kong. Bilp. 5. Lobme Deli 1 Bogulyatsiya Povedeniya" [Data of
the 10th International Psy logical Congress. Buposiul S. Frontal Lobes
and Regulation of Behavior . unscov, 1963:. pp 9-25.

Pribran. K.. ”Languages of the Brain. Experinental Paradoxes and Principles
of leuropsycboloy." mlwood Hills. 1911.

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prihran. IL. "Yaqki Mona“ Languages of the Braiﬂ. Moscow. 1975.

Prihm. K. IL, and McLean. J.. "Reuronographic Analysis or Medial and
Basal Cerebral. 11. Monkey." J. momrmox... 1953. u 16. pp 565-575.

Prihran. It. ll., spinelli. D. R.. and 8. L. Rcitz. "The Effects of Radical
Disconnection of Occipital and Temporal Cortex on Visual Behavior of Mon-
keye." BRAIR. 1969. Vol 92. p 301.

Rose. J. 3.. and Hoolsey. C. ll.. ”Organination or the Mammalian 'l'halanua
and Ite Relationship to the Cerebral Cortex," am A. CLIN. 5313091118101...
1939, Vol 1. l h. p 391.

Rgaei. a. 1.. and Zanchetti. A.. ”Reti ulyarnaya Pornatoiya Stvola Morse"
[Reticular Pornation or the Brein Stu , Moscow. 1960.

Russel. J. R., and De Wer 9.. ”The Quantitative Cortical Origin of Pyra-
Iidll Axons of Maceca Rhesus." WIDGY. 1961, V01 11. N 2.

'Ihonpson. R. 7.. "Thelanocortical Organization of Association Responses to
Auditory. Tactile and Visual stimuli in Cat." “XIII Intern. Com. Physiol.
Sci. Abstracts.” Leiden. 1962.

Thoupson. R.. and Sindhers. R. 11.. "Auditory Response Fields in Association
and Motor Cortex of Cat.” J. RwROPMIBIOI... 1960. Vol 23. PP 87-105.

Thunpson. Rh. 6.. Bettinser. I.. A.. Birch. IL. and Groves. P. M.. "Caper-
ison of holed Crosa and Unit Responses in Association Cortex or "shine
Cat.” no A. CLIR. momma, 1969. Vol 21. 1) 11:6.

Halter. 6.. "Role of Frontal lobes of the ﬂunan Brain in the Regulation of
Activity." in the hook ”Iohme Deli i Resulyatsiya Psikhicheskihh Protses-
sov." Moscow. 1966. p 156.

Minkler. C.. in "Bandbuch der leurologie." 8d. 5. Bet Corpus Striatu an
Met Diencephalon." Raarlen. 1933.

Table of Contents Page
Introduction 3
Chapter I. Asaociation System and Their Ro1e in the Integrative Ac-
tivity of the Brain 7
Morphorunctional Organization of Association Areas of the Reocortex 7
Research Methods 10

Ace Characteristice of Spatial Distribution of Statistical Connec-
tions of Biopotentiala of Projection and Asaociation Regions of
the leocortex in Children 11

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Significence of Associetion Sections of the Neocortex in the Resuletion
of the Stete of Vehemlness in Children

Chepter II. Developent oi‘ Intercentrel Relstions oi‘ Suhperietel Re-
sions of the Ieocortex in Children

Horphomnctionel Characteristic. of the Perietel Region or the Mann
Cerebral Cortex

Age Cherecterintics of Iornetion oi‘ Intercentrel Correletions of
Diopotentiels oi' Suhperietel Zones With Other Corticel Sections

Crosscorreletion Reletions of Diopotentiele of Suhperietel Zones with
Motor end Occipitel Centers in Children Fran the First Months 01‘
Life Until T Yeers

Significence of Suhperietel Regions in the Reguletion of the Stete of
Hehsmlness in Children

Conclusions

Chepter III. Developent of Intercentrel Rsletions or irontel Regions
of the leocortex in Children

Functionel Multiveluedness of Prontel Lohes end Their Role in Integra-
tive Resetions of Men end Aninels

Chereeterietics oi" Porestion or Rhythmic Processes in Prontel Zones
end the letnre of Spetiel Distribution of lntercentrel Correletions
of These Zones Hith Other Centers

Chensss of Crosscorreletion Mctions of Diopotentiels of Prontel
Regions in Ontogenesis

Conclusions

Chepter IV. Significence of Associetion Sections of the lleocortex
in the Developent of Speech Motions in Children

Sensory ﬁsts-s end heir hole in the Developent of the Child's
Speech Motions

Spece-‘l'ine Orsenisetion of Brein Diopotentiels in the Perception of
Verhel Signels in Children et Different Steees or Developent

Connection of auntie Cord Anelysis with Specs-Tine Omenisetion of
Drein Rhyths in Children

Conclusions

Chepter V. Herd Saentics end Spetiel Orsenisetion of Brein Rhythm
in Children

Significence of Verhel Signels in the Resuletion of Sensory Functions
in "en

Spece-‘i‘ine Rsletions of Biopotentiels of Projection end Associetion
Zones During the Perception of the Verhel Cunends "Listen." "look”
in lo- to 5-Yeer Old Children

leture of Spetiel Distribution of Intercentrel Correletions of Drein

Siopotentiels During the Perception of the Cuends "Add." ”Sq."
”Attention”

‘5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

18

22
22
23

91

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reflection of the Semantic Quin or Verbal Commas in Space-Tine Oran-

niution of Ruin Rhythm in Children 109
Conclusion. ' 112
Conclusion 11h
Biblioguphy 118

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'otvo "huh". 1978

ll . I039
(:80: 1810

‘6
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

AN BLECTROI'HRICAL INVESTIGATION OF THE DOLPHIN BRAIN

Hoscov SLRTROPIZIOLOGICMSKOYE ISSLEDOVANIYE HOZGA DBL'FINOV in Russian
1978 signed to press 27 Jun 78 pp 2-6, 211-213

(Annotation, introduction end table of contents from book by A. Ya. Supin,
1.. h. Hukhaletov, ct AL. Isdstel'stvo "Nsuka". 1200 copies, 215]

Annotat ion

[Text] This book brings together experilentai data in the previously un-
researched area of the physiology of the brain of Cetacesns. mulch are of
interest in both cooperative _ph_ysiology of the nervous __s_ystel and in __genera_1_
neurophysiology. These data include intonation on the unusual location of the
sensory trees of the cerebral cortex in dolphins. the unusual way in which
electrical reactions (evoked potentials) of the cortex are generated:

the unique regulation of waking end sleeping states (the alternating
development of sleep in the two cerebral hemispheres): features of the
auditory system which are revealed through electrical reactions of the
cerebral cortex. Methods used in the eletrophysiologicel investigation

of the dolphin brain are exalined.

The book is intended for biologists special izing in neuronorphology
and neurophysiology. for zeologists and ecologists.

it has 102 illustrstiens and a bibliography of 160 titles.

‘7
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Introduction

The interest which dolphins have aroused in researchers working in the "lost
Varied areas or science is caused by many factors and is. to a significant
degree. to be expected. Hardly any other animal which has become available
for research. has posed immediately such a number of diverse problems to
specialists in Various fields. The characteristics of these animals'
behavior. which is organized in an extremely complex manner; their striking
ability to learn quickly and to enter in contact with man: their developed
system of communication by sound: their highly-developed hearing, including
the ability to perceive ultra-sound signals; their capacity for active

echo location; their brain, which is enormous (for animals): their ability
to move about in water at high speeds with a relatively small energy

loss and their capacity for prolonged diving--coaprise a far-from—complete
enumeration of the anatomical and physiological characteristics of dolphins,
which deserve the most careful study.

he dolphins (or Cetaceans in general). in fact. constitute a group of
animals which are exceptional in their morphophysiological characteristics
and which deserve very special attention on the part of researchers? Hardly.
Instead. dolphins provide an instructiVe example of how expanding the circle
of animals which are th!objects of detailed morphophysiological study

can be unexpectedly important and useful.

Unfortunately. a significant gap exists between the enormous number of
animal species which are within the sphere of attention provided by multi-
skilled biologists and the number of species which have become model objects
for detailed study of their morphological or physiological organization.
This limitation on the number of objects for study is. ulfact, essential.
The continuous intensification of the research requires a thorough
knowledge of the object. which is hardly possible with a large number of
objects. 0n the other hand. for purposes of comparing studies, it is
advisable for them to be carried out on the same standard objects. Con-
sequently. the selection of a relatively small number of animal species

as standard laboratory objects is dictated by the logic of biological studies.

However. this situation also has a reverse side: one cannot always be
confident that the data discOVered during the course of investigations
reflect universal phenomena. and do not just describe the features of
the species under study or of the group to which the species belongs.
for this reason detailed morphophyiological study of new species may
sometimes lead to unexpected results.

And this is precisely what happened when dolphins in captivity became
available for detailed study as a result of the opening of oceanaria-
dolphinaria in a number of countries. Further, the morphologists and
physiologists did not receive simply one more object for study: they
received instead an animal which differs radically from the well-known
laboratory mammals. During their evolutionary course the Cetaceans

‘8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY

separated from the main trunk or the evolutionary tree of the mammals and
covered an extended developmental path independent of the terrestrial
mallals. For this reason it is completely natural that many of the
problems of environmental adaptation were solved in a unique way in this
branch in the evolution of marmals and that many features of the Cetaceans'
morphophysiological organisation proved to be unusual for researchers
working with terrestrial laboratory animals.

An mderstanding of the fact that the interest in dolphins is due to

their difference from the well-studied laboratory animals rather than

to any uniqueness of their position in the animal world reveals the fullest
sig lificance of the investigations being carried out on dolphins. They

are important primarily because they can save us from a one-sided under-
standing of a amber of aspects of maualian organization. Re need to
emphasize especially that the all-around study of an unusual order such

as the Catacesns is definitely of exceptional interest for understanding
many questions of mammalian evolution. including the evolution of the brain.

One of the most important and interesting questions in the study of
Cetsceans concerns the organisation of their nervous systems. The
Cetacean brain is one of the largest in the animal world. Although it

is difficult to compare the dimensions of the brain in animals with
differing body size (neither absolute nor relative brain weight, nor the
product of absolute weight multiplied by the relative weight is considered
to be a universal criterion for such a comparison). the enormous and complex
brain of the dolphins. nonetheless, could not fail to attract to itself

the most careful attention from neuromorphologists and neurophysiologists.

however, the study of the brain can be effective only if there is a
harmonious combination of morphological and physiological investigations.
But the study of the morphology of the Cetacean brain (which is more
accessible) has a relatively short history, while until recently there
were practically no neurophysiological studies at all.

There are quite definite reasons for the inadequate development of
neurophysiological, and primarily electrophysiological. investigations

of the Cetacean brain. Despite the fact that dolphins have been held

in captivity successfully for many years. they remained until recently were
expensive and unavailable animals. the experimmtal use of which has been
extremely limited. further, many difficulties related directly to
experimental methods are encountered h the performance of neurophysiological
investigations on dolphins. The characteristics of the the dolphins'
structure and physiology make it difficult or impossible to use with them many
well-developed methods which are used in working with the usual laboratory
animals. hereover. the aethods for working with dolphins amt be developed
to a significant degree .anev. and in so doing there are serious difficulties

to be overcome. The difficulties are due to the problem of access to
the brain of these animals. the need to take special measures to preserve

their lives during operations and experiments, etc. Further, the

69
FOR OFPICIAX. USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

problems of methods are intensified by humanitarian requirements: in
working with highly-organized animals, a category which definitely
includes dolphins, it is essential to exercise strict control and

to limit the traumatic effect of the research methods which are used,
while avoiding gross vivisoction.

However, the interest in the neurophysiology of the dolphin brain has
forced us to look for ways to overcome these difficulties. Attempts-

have been made repeatedly to carry out physiological investigations

of dolphin brains (Langworthy, 19323 Yanagisawa et al'., 1966: Lende,
Adikman, 1968 and others), although the majority of these attempts

have yielded few results or been unsuccessful due to the above-mentioned
difficulties with methods. Until recently the literature contined only
isolated reports of successful work on the electrophysiological study

of the dolphin brain. Among the pioneers of such investigations

Bullock and his coauthors (Bullock et al., 1968) should be mentioned first.

The Laboratory of the Mlution of the Sensory Systems of the Institute

of the Mlutionary Morphology and Ecology of Animals of the {858 Academy
of Sciences, which is represented by the author's collective of this

book, is one of the few laboratories which conducts electrophysiological
investigations of the dolphin brain. Various aspects of the morphological
and physiological organization of dolphin brains have been studied by

this laboratory for a number of years. Further, studies of a comprehensive
and systematic nature are considered to be one of the main goals of this
laboratory.

It goes without saying that certain limitations on the volume of work
were nonetheless inevitable. The cerebral cortex, the highest analyzing
center, was chosen for more detailed study, although other brain centers
were studied along with it. A number of issues requiring first-priority
investigation were outlined. They included first of all the problem of
the main features of the general morphophysiological organization of the
dolphin brain, and mainly of the cerebral cortex. The dolphins' analyzer
activity was thought to be the second important problem, with the dolphins'
superior auditory analyzer attracting priority attention. And finally,
it developed that the regulation of sleeping and waking stator-in
connection with features of the dolphins' biology and behavior-was

deserving of special attention.

In practice, during the process of the investigations all these problems
proved to be interrelated to a significant degree and were worked on as
a single unit. However, the division of all the results obtained into
the indicated areas proved to be convenient for purposes of their
systematization, and it formed the basis for the contents of this book.

The major part of the investigations, the results of which form the
basis of this collective monograph, were carried out during expeditions to
the Black Sea, in the area of Anapa and Novorossiyek, rather than at

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stationary bases or in oceanaria. The authors note with gratitude that
it would have been impossible to carry out the research program of the
expeditions without the help of a large number of assistants who
participated in the labor-consuming auxiliary work. To everyone who
assisted with the investigations the authorn would like to express

sincere gratitude. The authors will also be grateful to their colleasuct:
(or any critical cements.

Table of Contents

Introduction a,ssassseseeeeseeees-eesseeeseeeessesesseesssesseeee 3
Chapter 1

A Brief Horphological Description of the Cetacean Brain.......... 7
1s Cephalization ‘l'id General Properties 0‘ the ”ECtheseseeeseese 7

2. Sulci and Convolutions of the Cortex of the Dolphin brain...” 13
3. hicroscopic Structure of the Cortex of the Dolphin lrain...... 22

suerasseeeesseseeeseeeseeseeeeseeseeesseeesseeeseeeeseeeeseess 27

Chapter 2
Neorophysiological Features of the Cortex of the Dolphin Drain... 29
1. Conditions for Experilent Ind stm1.t1°nsesseeeeseeesseseeees 30
2. Localization Properties of Evoked Potentials in the Cortex. . .. 31
3. Localization of the Auditory Projection Area of the Cortex

in the DOlPhtn To truncatus.......ou"on”...”Human... 32
10. Response types and Functional Subdivisions of the Auditory

Area Of the cortCXoesqeeeeeseeessessseeeesseeeeesesoeeseaseeee 35
S. Localization of the Visual Projection Area of the Cortex in the

Dotphin To l"NIT“EOCIJOeseassesseseeeeeeeeeessesesseeseseessseses ‘0
6. Response Mes and Functional Subdivisions of the Visual Area

Of the Cbl’tueeeeesseesssessseseeeeessseeseeessssseeeseeeeeeee I“
. 7. localization of the Senate sensory projection Area or the

Cortex in the ”019.11“ ‘1‘. MCUtUCeseeesseeseeeseeeeeeseseeees ‘9
8. Map of the Sensory Projection Areas of the Cortex in the

Dolphin To MCICUOsesssseeeseeeeeeseeseseeessseeeeesesessese 51
9. Projection Sensory Areas in the Cerebral Cortex of the Dolphin

"I. mmen‘eeessssessseeesseeeeeeesseeeeessseesssesesseeeesee $2
10. Concerning the Existence of Polysensory Zones in the Cerebral

cortuilO0..OOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOO0.0.00.0000000IOOOOIOCOOOOOOOO. 60
ll. features of the Generation of Evoked Potentials in the Cerebral

corcaOOO00.000COOOOOOOODOOOOOOO000000.000...0000.00.00.00... 63

12. Locational Features of the Projection Sensory Zones of the
Cortex of the Dolphin Drain and Some Issues in the Evolution

Of Ch. Cerebral Cortex Of MlIeeeeeeeseeeeseeeeeesseeeeee 69
surYOeeeeessessoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoseeeeeeeseeeeeeseseeeeseeeesee 0‘
Chapter 3
Determination of the features of Dolphin lleariu Based an
Electrical ROICCIOIII 0‘ Ch. CCIOM‘I Cortex.........uuounu ’6
l. Micro-electrode Investigation of the Impulse Activity of

IM‘V1d0.1 "W 0‘ th. ‘Mitory cortneeeeeoeoeseseeseoee s9
2. Conditions for the Investigation of nicked Potentials of the

Auditory Systea........uouuun...........u...u.uo.... 96
51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFICIM. "SE ONLY

3. EVoked Potentialn at the Start and Stop of Sound. Strength

Curves and Absolute Thresholds of Arousal for Evoked Potentials . 96

4. Reactions of the Cortex to Changes in Sound Intensity. Differen-
t101 Threnholds for 111110118114.noosesoooaosoasoooosooooosassess-c
5. T1I'IIL' Sumation..o................................................
6. Depression of the Evoked Potentials with the Increase in the
Duration 0f C110 Stlmlloooooossoosoocooososaosoooosooooosoooosooo
7. Dependence of the EVoked Potentials of the Auditory Cortex on the
Drop in the Front Of the Auditory sclm‘uﬂoooooooooosooassesoooo
8. Reactions of the Dolphin Cortex to Change in Sound Frequency.
Thresho‘lisof Frequency Discrimination”.........................
9. The Reaction Capacitytf theAuditory Cortex to the Reproduction
"1th Paired and Rhythmic SCI-mllooseassessoooooooooosooaoooooooo
10. Reactions of the Auditory Cortex to Sound Stimuli Supplied
Against C Background 0f Interference.......................o...
ll. Functional Differentiation of the Various Sections of the
Auditory Cortex and of the Various Components of Evoked
POtcntillﬂoooosooooooossoOOooooootoossossooooosoooococooooooco
12. Concerning the Presence of Specialized (Detector) Elements in
the Auditory Systemnnuuu...........................no...
13. Electrical Reactions of the Lower Corpora Biaeuina and the
Internal Geniculate Body to Sound Stimuli......................

SWIYooooooooooooooooooooosoosooo-cso.aoooosooooossooosoooosoosso
Chapter 4
Electroencephalographic Investigation of the Functional States
Of the Dolphin Brain....................o.........................
1. Experimental Conditions for EEC Investigation of Sleep.........
2. Electroencephalographic Characteristics of ﬂaking and Sleeping
states.........0.0.00......0.0QOCOOCCOOQOCOOOCCCIC.‘CCCOOOOCICC
3o “JUICQI'NIDCO Of Respiration in Natural SIQOPoooosooooooasoossooo
a. Change in the Electrocorticogram Under the Influence of
Narcotics"u...o..............................................
5. lnterhenispheric Asymmetry of Functional States of the Brain...
6. The Daily Rhythm of "311108 and Sleep in DOlphansosooaoosooooos
SWITY.osooooooooosoooososssooosooooosoooooooooooooosoossosoooooo
Conclusion............................o.......................o...
nibltOSlehYeoso...osoooooosooooooooooooosssoooososoosooooooooosoo
Ind“.............OOCCOOOCOCO00.......0....I...‘..I.O.I......OI.0.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo “Nauka”, 1978

8563
£80! 1870

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

100
103

107
110
116
120
125

126
136

150
158

161
163

166
169

171
116
191
196
198
201
209
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

HUMAN VOLMW mm SUBJECTS!) N umcrnomvsrowaxcaz. meant}:

lbsoow SMMPXZIOIDGIGIESKUXE ISSLBWVMIYB PNIZVOL'NYIQI MW“ 0
mm (Blectrophysiological Research on Voluntary hovesonts in Man)
in Russian 1978 signed to press 12 May 78 pp 2-4. 167-168

anotation, Table or Contents, and Introduction tro- book by h. P. Ivanova,
Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka“. 1550 copies, 168 pages]

[Post] This eonograph is devoted to electroencephalographic research on

the actor activity of a healthy adult. The author's any years or exper-
inental research and modern domestic and foreign ditsamgenoralizod. hemo-
graph discusses cortical organization of voluntary novenents. The examination
or this problea lays ewhasis on the nolandic alpha-rhythm and the actor
potential. Part of the sonograph is devoted to research on change in the
functional state of the cerebral cortex in response to suscle work.

The book is intended tor neurophysiologists, psychophysiologists, medical
doctors. labor and sports physiologists. and specialists in aerospace bio~
logy and nadicine.

Thirty-two figures. 5 tables. 30 bibliographic references.

Contents Page

Introduction 3

Part 1
Change in the human :86 in Connection with
Fluctuations in the mnctional State of the Higher Divisions of
the Central Nervous Systse elicited by a mule lead

Chapter 1. (hangs in the Hunan m Acoospanying Physical Exercise
and Sports
ll. Orange in the no in Pesponse to a One-Tins Physical lead

52. Change in the are following Bxhausting Physical work
53. Specific Pastures o! the m in helation to Different

Breathing Conditions ll
5‘. Gauge in the 226 in Connection with Stimulation of the

Vestibular Analyzer 19

Out”

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

55. Functional Tests as a Method for Studying fluctuations
in the State of the Cerebral Cortex Slicited by Muscle

Mark 22
I6. Coqarison of Changee in the EEG and in Other Body

System in Reaponse to Physical work 24
51. Change in the Electric Rhythms of the Brain's Subcortical

Structures in Response to Phyeical Exercise 25
58. Specific Features of the BBC Ste-suing from the Perennial

Activities of an Athlete 27
Conclusion 32

Part 1!

Change in the lumen no in Connection
with Organization of Voluntary Movenente

Chapter 2. mlative Electric Activity of the Cerebral Cortex and

Its Change in Response to Physical Exercise 34
51. Change in the :86 During a Motor Act 34
92. The Rolandic (Arch-Shaped) Alpha-Rhyth- 38

53. Coeparison of Changes in the Occipital and Rolandic
Alpha-Rhythms During Perforlence of Voluntary Movements

Differing in Structure in Different Meurodynanic Conditions 51
Conclusion 58
Chapter 3. 'me Role of Ideas in Movsaent Organization 63
Si. Pedagogical Research on the Ible of Ideas in Movement
Organization 63
9. Physiological Research on Chang“ Occurring in the Km
Body in Response to Ideas About Movement 65
53. (Bungee in the are in Response to Mental Reproduction of
Moveslents 68
Conclusion 72
Chapter 4. Cortical. Organization of Voluntary Moveeents 74
Si. Predispositionu'me First Stage in Organizing Voluntary
Moveasnts 75
$2. The Preparatory Period-~One of the Main Stages in Organization
of Voluntary Movements 91
53. lbverse Afferentation 115
Conclusion 111
Oaapter 5. Organization of Voluntary Movements Differing in Degree
of Precision 121
$1. Sons Intonation on Modeled Repreaentation of the
Organization of Voluntary Movementa 121
52. Investigation of Motor Acta Differing in Their Degree
of Coordination 123
Conclusion 130
54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI’ICIM. USE ONLY

General Conclusion 134
Bibliography 137
Introduction

Brain biocurrenta have been studied extensively in the last decade in
connection with the motor activity of can and aniuele. The range of issues
examined by researchers of this problem ie unusually broad. But two
directions can be clearly delineated in the numerous studies. Authors of
works falling in the first direction approach actor activity as the object

of research. and they analyse the 386 to reveal the mechanisms behind
movement structure. Authors of works in the second direction interpret motor
activity as a factor influencing the functional state of the central nervous
system. and especially its higher divisions. 'lhe approaches to studying
these two aspects differ. Research on the physiological mechanisms behind
the structure and organisation of different types of move-tents involves re-
cording m'a during the tins of their performance. The effect of motor
activity on the functional level of cortical cells is revealed by recording
836's before and after physical exercise. Research on the mechaniass behind
movement organisation: is revealing new rhythms associated with these nove-
ments both in the total superficial are (for exslple Rolandic alpha-waves and
beta-waves) and in the activity of subcortical formations (the hypothal-ic
theta-myths); pot-Itials specific to movements-motor and souatosensoryu

are described; the activity of neurone in the motor cortex is studied. ‘fhus
in this case researchers concentrate their attention mainly on the motor
region of the cerebral cortex and on the electric activity it generates. In
cases where the researcher is studying the effect of physical exercise on the
functional level of tho cerebral cortex. as a rule he evaluates fluctuations
in the anlitude-freguency characteristics of biopotentiale recorded fron -
all brain areas, and especially from the occipital regions. in which the main
resting rhythm-alpha-oscillations--is the most highly pronounced. In this
case various functional tests are used extensively to reveal the more pro-
found changes arising (opening and closing the eyes. a. I. Livanov's
reactivity curves. the rhythm alteration effect in response to flickering
light. and so on) .

Because the mechanis- of voluntary mvemsnts are so tremendously cowlen
and great technical difficulties are encountered in recording the as
during performance of such movements. this problen is solved as a rule using
involuntary motor reactions and elenentsry voluntary sovements as the model.
As far as revealing the effect of muscle activity on the functional state
of cortical cells is concerned, in this case researchers study changes
occurring in the 3:6 in response to the most diverse athletic activities.

As we know, physical exercise can have a teqorary, swiftly passing effect
on the state of the body. and it can also elicit long-term consequences
expressed as growth or decline in the individual‘s efficiency and fitness.

55
m OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR Ol’l-‘ICIM. USE ONLY

Specialisation in one form of sotor activity or another can also have an
effect on higher divisions of the central nervous system and develop some
sort of specific features and properties. One of the objectives of electro-
physiologists studying motor activity is to reveal the electrographic signs
of all of these effects. In this connection these specialists devote
attention to research on the way brain bioeurrents change in response to
fluctuations in the functional state of the central nervous system's
higher divisions in the presence of different physical loads. Special
research on animals has the objective of revealing how the pulsating activity
of neurons in the motor cortex and biopotentials in the brain's subcortical
structures change in response to physical exercise.

In addition to published data. this book presents the results of the author's
experimental research conducted in the laboratory of sports physiology of
the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Physical culture with the
active participation of engineers o. I. Ulanev. v. P. sundarov, and v. v.
Kozax and instructor-professors I. P. Ratov, V. G. Lunichkin. V. V.
chernashkin. and A. P. Strizhak. A nusber of the experiments were performed
by graduate students A. A. shaburyan (Naumova) and Yu. G. Chernykh. The
author received considerable and constant consultive assistance during her
work from Prof A. B. Kogan, director of the Rostov Institute of Neuro-
cybernetics. and USSR Academy of Sciences Corresponding "saber, Prof A. I.
Roytbak. To all of these comrades the author extends her deepest and

most heartfelt gratefulness.

The author is especially grateful for the constant attention devoted to the
work by a dear teacher, USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences Academician.
Pref A. R. Luriya (deceased).

COPYRIGNT: lzdatel'stvo 'Nauka“. 1978

11004
C802 1870

56
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

INJURY CAUSED BY COMINBD ACTION Ol’ RADKATION AND NXIRS

Moscow MDIATSIYA l YADY mediation and Toxins) in Russian 1977 signed to
press 27 Sep 77 pp 2-4, 144

[Annotatiom Table of Contents. and Introduction from book by 1.. A. Tiunov,
Ye. A. Zherbin, end B. N. Zherdin, Atonisdat, 2000 copies, 144 pages)

[Text] This book generalizes work done by the authors over a period or
several years on the co-bined action of radiation and toxic conpounds. and
experience in mathematical sodeling of contained injuries. The problen is
exaained iron both the theoretical and the practical aspects.

The possibilities for predicting the effects or conbined injuries on the
basis of today's ideas about the nechaniaas behind the toxic influences of
various toxins and of the biological action of ionizing radiation are
examined. Detailed intonation is presented on application of mathematical
modeling to this end.

The book is intended for a broad range of radiobiologists and toxicologiats
as well as workers in associated specialities interested in this problem.

Thirteen figures, 32 tables, 718 bibliographic references.

Contents Page

introduction 3

i. Conbined Action of Ionizing nadietion and hypoxic Toxins S

i. Toxins Causing lie-a1 hypoxia 5

Carbon Monoxide 5

Methenoglobin Toners l4

2. Toxins Causing Tissue hypoxia 24

Cyanidcs 20

Nitriles 28

J. Toxins Causing Moxie Hypoxia 31

Nitrogen Dioxide .- 31

Bibliography ' ' 35
$7

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR Ol-‘I’WCIAL USE ONLY

II. Combined Action of Ionizing Radiation and Nonelectrolytic

Toxins 49
Preons 49
Acetone 55
Aromatic Hydrocarbons (Dcnzol. Toluol. Xylol) 61
Bibliography 69

III. Contained Action of Ionizing Radiation and Some Radiosensitizing

Toxins 75
Organic Peroxides 77
Ozone 90
Formaldehyde 94
Bibliography 99

IV. Contained Action of Animal inns and Ionizing Radiation 109
Bibliography 117
v. Mathematical Modeling of the Ooebined Action of Radiation and
'Doxins (Freon, Carbon Monoxide, Nitrogen Oxides. and Aniline) 119
1. General Principles of the Probability Approach to Evaluating
the Combined Action of Radiation and Toxins 119
2. Mathematical Models of the Combined Action of Radiation
and Ruins of Different li'ypes 123
Bibliography 129
Conclusion 130
Bibliography 139
Introduction

The problen of the combined action of ionizing radiation and cheuical con-
pounds attracted the attention of researchers from the ascent radiobiology
came into being. In subsequent years it was examined predominantly fro-
the point of view of finding effective resources of radiation protection.

Much less attention was devoted to studying the simultaneous action of
radiation and chemical co-pounds in toxic doses or concentrations. At the
sane tine development of stoeic industry, the increasingly greater use of
nuclear energy. swift chesicalization of the national econosy. and intro-
duction of chemical cot-pounds into practically all spheres of human activity
are making the problesl of the costined action of radiation and toxins on the
body extresely urgent.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The authors attempted to generalize and systemtize their own and published

data on this problem. Results obtained in the search for radiation protection
resources tare umd to some extent. Some lmntheses on the enchanism behind sodi fication of

radiosensitivity by chemical compounds were found to be useful to analysis
of the codeined action of radiation and toxins as well. asseerch on the
modifying influence of toxins having different sechanises of action on the
effects of radiation is producing information on the nature of radiosensi-
tivity.

Considering that practically all chemical coepounds can be toxins depending
on their dose. concentration. means of entry into the body. and exposure
tine. we linited the span of our work beforehand. Because of the relatively
snall volme of the sonogrsph. we exasined material only on the coabined
action of radiation and the principal industrial toxins. Interesting
chapters of radiobiology devoted to the coebined action of ionizing radiation
with anissl and plant toxins and with bacterial toxins were left out. This
issue is only touched upon in part in the section on the oosbined action of
radiation and snake toxins.

The and goal of the work was to answer. on the basis of today's ideas about
the mechanism behind the injurious action of radiation and various toxins,
the question as to whether or not it is possible to predict the effects of
combined injuries to organisms.

The last chapter. which is devoted to sathenatical nodeling, era-ines the
general principles of the probability approach to evaluating the injurious
action of ionising radiation and chenical cospounds.

bet the reader be the judge of how close we have cone to achieving our goal.
The authors will gratefully accept all requests and renarks concerning the

work.

Chapters 1. n, and m are written by b. A. riunov, Chapter IV was written
by Ye. A. Zherbin, and Chapter V was written by s. N. Zherdin.

common: Imlmt, 1977

11004
C30: 1870

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

CIVIL DEFENSE TRAUMA‘I‘OLOGY IIANWOOK

Moscow RUKOVODS’I'VO P0 TRAVM'IOIDGII DINA DEDITSINSKOY SLUZHBY GRAZRDANSKOY
osoaom (Traunatology handbook for the civil Defense Medical Service) in
Russian l978 signed to press 1 Dec 77 pp 2-4, 309-311

lAnnotation, table of contents and foremrd from book edited by Prof A. l.
Kaz'nin, lrdatel'stvo "Meditsina", 5800 copies. 311 pages]

[Text] ‘Ihis handbook presents the fundamental principles of nodern trauma-
tology in application to the tasks and working conditions of civil defense
medical service institutions. Part One devotes its main attention to
organizing traumatological care to casualties in major disasters and to their
medical sorting at the civil defense medical service's evacuation stages--
first aid detuclment: and specialized hospitals. The problem of. preventing
and treating tramtic shock and the specific features of its diagnosis in
the presence of compound injuries and along elderly and senile persons are
discussed in light of modern concepts.

chapters devoted to wounds and wound infection reflect the preaises of pre-
-9ention and treatment of wound infection in the stage-by-stage treatmnt
system. Special attention is turned in the presentation of the principles
of treating thermal injuries to the unique features of care rendered to
persons injured by light radiation and burning mixtures. A special chapter
deals with the principles of treating and preventing conplications arising
in the presence of radiation burns.

Part No of the handbook is devoted to the problems of particular trau-a-
tology. The basic preeises on the clinical pattern of injuries. the unique
features of rendering first aid, on sorting, on prenedical and medical care,
and on the basic principles of specialised treatment applicable to injuries
of the head and neck. the abdomen, the pelvis and pelvic organs. the spine
and spinal cord, and the liabs (including major vessels and nerves) are
successively presented. Part Three examines the basic concepts on coubined
injuries-~eechanical injuries and burns combined with acute radiation sick-
ness, and injuries and burns contaminated by products of a nuclear burst. A
separate chapter deals with the course and principles of treatuent applicable
to the costination of nechanical trams and thermal injuries.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The book ie intended for surgeons. tramtoloqieta. etoeutologiete. neuro-
enrgeone, otolaryngologiete, and public health organizers.

Contents Page
Foreword 3

Part One. General Problem of Military hematology

Chapter 1. Organization of Hematological Cure for Caeualtiee in
Hedical Evacuation stages, by H. V. Volkov. l. l. Deryabin,

N. N. baxhnutekiy. and V. N. Zhizhin 5
General Principlee of Rendering Aid 5
Organization of Hret Medical Aid and Special hematological Aid ll
Medical Sorting 19
chapter 2. Prevention and Treat-ant of Traumatic shock.
by G. D. shuehkov 31
Clinical Pattern of Tramtic shock 32
First Hedical Aid 33
Treatment of Tramtic Shock 3‘
Specific Peaturee of the Diagnoeie and Treatment of Shock in the
Preeence of Denound Injuriea 40
Specific Peaturee of the coerce and Treatment of Shock hang
Elderly and Senile Persons 42
Specific Featuree of the Couree and ‘l'reatnent of Shock Among
Children 43

Grapter 3. 1'he Prolonged Coepreeeion Syndrom. by It. Ya. Gerehtenkern 44

Chapter or. We. Infection Couplicatiene of Rounde. and heir

Treatnent, by V. n. Hel’nikova and O. N. Herkova 52
General infatuation on Hounde and the wound Proceee 52
Initial Surgical Treatlent‘ of Hounds 54
Agents of Early Infection 59
Seneitivity of The Agenta of Early Infection to Antibiotice and
Other Chen-otherapeutic Preparatione 60
Prevention of Hound Infection 63
Treauent of Purulent Hound infection 65
Anaerobic Infection 16
tetanus Bl

Chapter 5. Thereal Burns. by H. I. shrayber, V. K. Soloqub. a. M.
Koetyuchenok. V. N. zhirhin. s. K. ZaV'yalov, andv, G.

Borieov 86

Clinical Pattern of Burn Dieeaee 89

Injury by Light Padiation and Burning Hixturee 92

Treatment of wherual burns 99

Chapter 6. Radiation Borne. by G. 1‘. Chernenko 100
61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Part M. Particular Problems of Military Traunetology

Chapter 1. Injuries of the Head and Neck, by B. A. Sawtokin. G. N.
Ivashchenko, and N. A. Preobrazhenskiy

Neurosurgical Aid to Casualties with Cerebrocranial Trauma
Specific Features oi Rendering First Aid
Specific Features of Sorting at a First Medical Md Detachment
Neurosurgical Intervention Based on mergency indications
Specialized Aid

Injuries to the Face and Jaws
First Medical Aid
First Physician's Aid
Specialized Aid

Injuries to the Bar, Throat. and Nose

chapter 2. Chest Injuries, by D. N. Arapov and N. V. Khoroshko
Exposed Injuries
Internal Injuries
Treatment of Chest Injuries
Heart Injuries

chapter 3. Abdominal Injuries. by D. A. Arapov and N. V. Khoroshko
Exposed Injuries
Internal Injuries
Penetrating Hounds
Specific Features of Surgical Intervention

Chapter 4. Injuries of the Pelvis and Pelvic Organs. by L. G.
shkol'nikov and V. P. Selivanov
Injuries to Pelvic soft Tissues
Pelvic Bone Fractures
clinical Pattern of Injuries to Pelvic Organs
Therapy

Chapter 5. Spinal and Spinal Cord Injuries, by I. V. Virosub
classification of Spinal and Spinal Cord Injuries
clinical Pattern of Spinal and Spinal Cord Injuries
Principles of Therapy

chapter 6. Upper and newer Limb Bone Fractures. by A. V. Kaplan

Upper Lisb Bone Fractures
Bone Fractures of the Shoulder Girdle
Fractures of the Nunerus and Adjacent Joints
Fractures of Forearl Bones
Fractures of Nrist and Finger Bones

lower Limb Bone Fractures
Fractures of the Four
Fractures in the Vicinity of the Knee Joint
Fractures of Shank Bones
Fractures 0! Foot Bones

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 7. Injuries to Major Blood Vessels and Peripheral Nerves.

by N. I. Krakovekly and K. A. Grigorovich 248

Danage to Vessels 248
Diagnosis and Treatment of Pulsating Henstomas, Arteriovenous

fistulas. and Aneurisns 253

Nerve Injuries 257

Part Three. Ooabined Injuries

Chapter I. Costined Radiation Injuries, by P. N. burenin 266
Giapte: 2. Injuries Cowined Nith Radiation Sickness, by P. N.

Durenin 277
Gupta: 3. Burns Contained with Acute Radiation sickness. by

V. N. Zhizhin 283‘
Chapter 4. Wounds and Burns Contaminated by Radioactive Products of

a Nuclear Durst, by v. N. Zhizhin and G. 1‘. Chernenko 291
Chapter 5. Injuries Cosbimd With Burns. by v. v. Vlasov 297

foreword, by Distinguished Scientist Prof A. I. Kaz'ain

Norld Na: II ended 50 sillion huaan lives. The concluding stage of the
war wzs aarked by appearance of nuclear weapons. htoaic bodes dropped by
the Mricane in 1945 onthe James cities of Niroshina and Nagasaki trans
fora-ed than into heaps of ruins; the losses suffered by the public totaled
hundreds of thousands dead and wounded. since that ties, nuclear weapons
have been undergoing continual immanent, their power has risen. and
aodern aissiles carrying nuclear warheads can deliver them to any target on
the globe within a short time.

Availability of nuclear weapons to aggressive iaperialist states and the
possibility for their use in the event of initiation of Norld War III sake
preparations for our country'sproucuon .priority task of national
ilportance.

The Soviet Union is persistently fighting to liait arm, to prohibit nuclear
weapons. and to maintain peaceful coexistence. At the sane tine the

Oo-unist Party and the 0888 govern-ant view protecting the socialist father?
land and strengthening the defense capabilities of the IBSR and the power

of the Soviet Arned forces as a sacred duty of the party and all Soviet people,
as the lost inortant function of the socialist state.

Use of nuclear weapons having treasndous destructive power will mean con-
siderable losses in the population. In this connection Soviet public health
and the 088R Civil Defense Medical Service, which is intended to render

aid in areas of ease destmction, face a great. cleex problaenispleaenting

63
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a complex of preventive, therapeutic, and evacuations]. measures with the
goal of providing modern medical care to the stricken public, providing
specialized therapy to casualties, and reducing mortality and disability
caused by wounds and diseases.

A nuclear strike will be acoospanied by concurrent arisal of tremendous
numbers of wounded individuals, burn victims, and individuals with combined
injuries. At the same time the manpower and facilities of the medical
service will be extremely limited, and the working conditions will be
extremely unfavorable. In this connection much attention must be devoted to
the problem of wartime injuries and their treatment, and to organizing
traumatological aid to casualties.

Wartime trematology is not a narrow concept limited to the treatment of
injuries to the locomotor-bearing apparatus; instead, it is a broad cosplex
of scientifically grounded theoretical, practical, and organizational pre-
mises embracing the problems of pathology, clinical pattern. and treatment
of casualties at times of instantaneous arisal of massive traumatic injuries.

The goal of this traumatology handbook is to help the civil defense medical
service to achieve a certain degree coupliance with all of the requirements
and features of treating casualties at the evacuation stages of the civil
defense medical service. This handbook examines the organization of surgical
aid on analogy with corresponding manuals of military field surgery. The
difference lies in the fact that treatment is examined only in two evacuation
stages: In the first stage, at first medical aid detachments and surviving
therapeutic institutions, casualties are rendered first physician'said; in
the second stage casualties receive specialized medical aid in specialized
hospitals of a hospital base until a stable outcome of therapy is achieved.

This handbook of military traumatology for the civil defense medical service
is being published for the first time on the basis of an analysis of extensive
materials, the experience of Soviet medicine in the Great Patriotic War, and
the personal experiences of the authors.

The author collective believes that the present work will help inrove
preparation of medical personnel for work in the civil defense medical service.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "heditsina'. 1978

11004
C50: 1870

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY