FOR 0mClAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10527

18 May 1982

USSR Report

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and laterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
LIFE SCIENCES
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(£000 3/82)

CONTENTS

810N103
BiucoutIIC. of Insectﬂouuonn...uou..............u.unn

Method for Teluetric Recording of Blood Pressure and
Respiration of freely Sui-in; Dolphins.......................

'BIOTBCHNOLOGY
Routa Indue. U.“ To Identify Sn Pmmgogsssssosasosssss

Seisnosensory System and Classification of Cottidas Pish
(Myoxocephalime, Artedienime)ssseesoss'sesoseoooosoooosssoo

MROWT

Detersination and Quantitative Evaluation of Hutagsnic Factors
of Anthropogenically Varying Habitat Using Bacterisl ‘rest

swtmssso...so00000.000000000000000000000000'0sisvoooooooeos

90$: and 1370s Accumulation by Sue Lover Plants in Vicinity
of Beloyarskays Atonic Power Plant in the Urals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Collaboration of 11.8. and Soviet Scientists in Legal
PrOtCCtion of the mromntoossvososoooossosooosoosooooossoo

MEDICINE

Loy-’requemy Acoustic vib'atiou in taut". s s s s s o s s s s o s s s s o s o

- a - [III - USSR - 213

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12

17

23

31
63

67

56

SST I
HUMAN FACTORS

Analysis and Optimization of Control Systems for Manned

Aircrafts'soluse.00's.sIsCoos...0.0000000000000000000.000.0000

PSYCHIATRY

Joint Sylposiul on Biological Psychiatry of USSR Acsdeuy of
Medical Sciences and Swedish Auday of Sciences. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Conference of Neuropathologists and Psychiatrists in Pern' ..... .

‘b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

60

66
69
310N108

UDC: 59l.582.591.185.5:595.7 .
BIOACOUSTICS 0P INSECTS

Moscow BIOAKUSTIKA NASEKOHYKB in Russian 1981 (signed to press 1b May 81) pp 2-8,
217-226, 256

[Introduction, article, conclusion and table of contents from book "Bioacoustics
of Insects" by Rustem Devletovich Zhantiyev, Department of Entomology, Moscow
State University. IzdateI'stvo Hoskovskogo universiteta, 1800 copies, 256 pages]

[Text] This monograph submits the results of studying acoustic communication
systems of insects. It describes the structure and functions of-acoustical organs,
physical characteristics and adaptive properties of acoustical signals. The
latest data are submitted on the structure and functions of hearing organs and
mechanisms of processing acoustical information in the central nervous system of
insects. Much attention is given to the problem of identifying acoustical signals
and localizing the source of sound. There is discussion of the possibility of
using sounds to control insect behavior. It is intended for workers, graduate

and undergraduate students specializing in entomology, physiology, biophysics and
bionics. References 445; figures 88. tables 12. appendix 6 tables.

Introduction

Bioacoustics is one of the new directions of research developing on the boundary
of biological and physical sciences. It is usually defined as the science of
acoustical signaling and orientation of animals. Both of these phenomena play
an extremely important and diverse role in vital functions of most animals; for
this reason, a wide spectrum of acoustical, mathematical and biological methods
is used to study them. The results of bioacoustical studies are of first and
foremost importance to the solution of many problems confronting such biological
disciplines as systematics, ecology, ethology, neurophysiology and genetics.
Some of the advances in bioacoustics are used for bionic studies and solving
applied problems related primarily to the control of behavior of animals that
are of economic importance.

The conditions for inception of bioacoustics existed long ago, since studies in
this direction were pursued for many decades; however, the First Bioscoustics
Congress, which convened in the United States in 1956, is generally considered
the official beginning of its existence.

Of course, one can view insect bioacoustics as a part or section of general bio-
acoustics. The goals and tasks of this direction are largely determined by the

l

 

l‘ﬂltﬂﬂﬂCIAl.lEﬂi(ﬂﬁLY— ———‘
specifics of the insect class. In assessing it as the object of bioacoustic
studies, one must take into consideration three circumstances. In the first
place, insects do not use sound for active ranging (echoranging), while hetero-
specific communication did not obtain significant development in them, so that
researchers can concentrate mainly on the study of intraspecific communication
systems. In the second place, these systems appear numerous times in insects
and independently in different taxons; they are notable for remarkable diver-
sity and, in spite of the conceptions that prevailed until recently, they are
extremely widespread. In the third place, insects are the only group of
terrestrial invertebrates in whom sonic signaling underwent rather significant
development, and since its inception is apparently referable to the Permian
period (Sharov, 1968), it can be assumed that acoustical communication systems
reached considerable refinement in the course of prolonged evolution.

0n the whole, this form of communication plays a very large part in vital func-
tions of many insects; it is instrumental in encounters between specimens of
the opposite sex, maintaining reproductive isolation of close species, regula-
tion of intrapopulation and intrafamily relations. In addition, some insects
use sounds as protection against enemies and for detection of prey.

All of this circumstances determine the importance of bioacoustic studies and
their intensive development in the last few decades. In order to gain an
idea about the theoretical and practical implications of such work, it is
enough to list the entomological and general biological problems, in work on
which bioacoustical data play a considerable and, sometimes, deciding role.

In this regard, it must be noted, first of all, that in the course of acoustical
communication and orientation insects solve problems that are as difficult as
those of vertebrate animals, but they do this on a different morphofunctional
basis. For this reason, the results of studying their acoustical systems con-
stitute necessary and interesting material for comparative studies in the

fields of morphology, physiology, ethology and ecology of animals.

The importance and place of bioacoustics in entomology are attributable chiefly
to the fact that acoustic signaling is directly related to insect reproduction
and intrspopulation relations. This explains the heightened interest of ecolo-
gists and ethologista in acoustic studies. At the present time, it is growing
increasingly obvious that the most important patterns of distribution of
insects in biotopes, regulation of population density, dynamics of population
size, migration, etc., could not be studied without consideration of acoustical
communication systems. Knowledge of the "language," by means of which many
insects communicate during contact or at considerable distances from one
another, makes it possible to adopt a different approach to the study of their
behavior during reproduction, competitive relations, establishment of rank
(ranking), protection against predators, spatial orientation and other etholo-
gical problems.

Animal bioacoustics is equally important to the study of mechanisms of species
formation, particularly in those for whom sonic signals serve as the main
isolating factor. Species-specificity and stability of sonic signals makes it
possible to use them as reliable taxonomic characters, which are needed to solve
such complex problems as differentiation between twin-species, determination of

2

FORIOPFRJAI.USE(MVLY
species status, degree of similarity of close taxons, etc. For this reason,
some characteristics of sounds have found a firm foothold in systematics
concerned with the study of insects with well-developed communication systems
(Orthoptera, Cicadidae and others).

The vast area of insect bioacoustics related to the study of processes of
receiving and processing acoustical information is, in essence, a part of phy-
siology of sensory systems. For this reason, the study of auditory analyzers of
insects helps disclose mechanisms that permit identification of _conspecific
signals and orientation in relation to the sound source, and it contributes

many new elements to conceptions of rhythmic processes in the central nervous
system, integrative functions of some parts of the brain, interactions of
different analyzers, etc.

 

 

Investigation of acoustical communication systems of insects is of both theo-
retical and practical importance. Knowledge of the principles of organization

of these systems enables us, on the one hand, to use the discovered patterns

for development and refinement of technical systems (primarily acoustical, direction
finding, radio measuring) and, on the other hand, to gain information about

vital functions of harmful insects or actively influence their behavior. As a
result of these studies, devices and equipment could be developed for the de-
tection, estimation of number, diagnosis and monitoring the physiological state

of pests, as well as acoustic repellents and attractants.

There are very many articles and several surveys dealing with descriptions of
various aspects of organization and function of different elements of acoustical
communication systems of insects (Busnel, 1955,-ed.; Haskell, 1961; Busnel,
1963, ed.; Alexander, 1967; Bennet-clark, 1975a; Eisner, Huber, 1973; Hichelsen,
1976; Hichelsen, Nocke, 1976; Elsner, Popov, 1978, and others). No comprehensive
description of these data could be offered in this book, nor was it included in
our objective. At the same time, analysis of literature sources shows that most
works dealing with bioacoustics converge on two main problems-orecognition and
localization. The reason for the increased interest of many researchers in

these problems is that insects solve essentially two main problems in the

course of acoustical cosmunication and orientation: they recognize conspecific
communication signals and determine the spatial position of the sound source.

For this reason, we have tried to discuss in this book primarily material that
enablesustm come as close as possible to understanding the mechanisms involved
in recognition and localization of sonic signals. The second and third sec~
tions are concerned with these problems. Section 1 describes the main components
of acoustical communication systems. Data on some of them are submitted in a
generalized form, but many aspects of their organisation are discussed in greater
detail* in subsequent chapters.

This book was based on the results of 15 years of studies pursued by this author
in the department of entomology, 3101087 FOCUItY of Moscow State University.

*He virtually fail to touch upon audio signaling of social insects in this book,

since a summary of the literature on this subject is given in the monograph of
Ye. K. Yes'kov (1979).

FINIINHHCIAI.I§HE(HVLY
This author expresses his profound gratitude for valuable advice and assistance
to Prof G. A. Hazokhianorshnyakov, Prof N. P. Naumov, Prof S. N. thevkin, N. N.
Dubrovin, I. N. Kalinkina, 0. S. Korsunovskaya, A. G. Chernyy and V. S. Chukanov,
and expresses his appreciation to A. V. Popov, Prof F. Huber, Prof K. Kalmring,
Dr. J. Rheinlaender, Dr. H.-G. Rehbein and Dr M. J. Samways who kindly furnished
drawings from their works.

Applied Problems of Insect Bioacoustics

At the present time, it is difficult to determine when the idea of using acoustic
vibrations to control harmful insects appeared. The first attempts to use
acoustical methods to solve applied entomological problems yielded encouraging
results. Thus, as far back as 1935, an instrument was designed in Germany to
determine latent infestation of wood by the house longhorn beetle (Schwarz et al.,
1935); in Canada, a device was developed and successfully tested for chasing

the beet webworm away from crops (Belton, Kempster, 1962); acoustic mosquito

traps were tested in Cuba (Kahm, Offenhsuaer, 1949), the "apidictor," an instru-
ment for controlling bee swarming, was developed in England (Woods, 1959), etc.
However, in the years that followed there was no further development of acoustical
methods and there were virtually no practical applications thereof.

As we analyze the causes of diminished attention to such studies, we must men-
tion three circumstances: in the first place, this period was characterized by
excessive enthusiasm for chemical methods of control; in the second place, acous-
tical methods seemed to be unprofitable at that time, since they required the

use of cumbersome and expensive electronic equipment and, in the third place,
applied bioacoustics did not yet have the proper theoretical bass.

By the end of the 1960's, the situation in this area of research began to change
rapidly. The search for new methods of controlling pests that would not pollute
the environment and appearance of relatively cheap and compact instruments

again raised the question of developing acoustical methods and introducing them
into agricultural practice. At the same time, the results of unceasing experi-
mental studies revealed that insecrs have more complicated and refined acoustical
communication systems that was previously assumed. For this reason, it became
apparent to most researchers that applied problems can only be solved on the
basis of comprehensive analysis of the principles of organisation of these sys-
tems. A new approach to solving this problem has yielded the first practical
results in the last few years, but apparently there is still a large amount of
work to be done before acoustical methods will take a worthy place in the
arsenal of modern means of regulating the number of economically important
insect species.

Hhat are the most promising directions in this area of research? Experience in
studying acoustical communication systems shows, first of all, that acoustic
signals are used by insects to solve many vital problems. For this reason,
having learned to record and analyze these sounds, we can gain some very import-
ant information about the epecies of interest to us. At the very least, it is
possible even now to develop devices for detection of pests, determination of
their species cwmpositiom, number, level of activity and distribution in agro-
cenoses or reservoirs. It is desirable to gather all of this information by

FOR‘OFF“JA1.USE(MVLY
remote control, using diverse sensors, to process it on a computer and use it
to forecast or control pests.

Knowledge of the principles of organization of acoustic communication systems
of insects arms us with yet another effective tool, the possibility of interven-
ing in the process of transmission of acoustic signals and thereby exert the
desired influence on insects or, in other words, controlling their behavior.
Devices can be created for this purpose that disrupt in some way or other the
normal communication and orientation of insects: those that attract them to
traps, scare them away from protested objects, create interference in the
communication channel, etc. Nor should one overlook the fact that sound and
high-power ultrasound have a depressing effect on insects or lead to their
death. Thus, the acoustical resources that we have at the present time enable
us to perform three main types of tasks: 1) to obtain and analyze information
about pests; 2) to control their behavior; 3) to exert a direct physical
effect on them.

Let us consider these questions in somewhat greater detail.
Obtaining Acoustical Information

Acoustical instruments could become irreplaceable tools for determining the
latent infestation by insects of all sorts of materials, stock and even plants.
Devices that are usually recommended for.this purpose include microphones or
vibration detectors, amplifiers and recording elements, as well as filters that
permit isolation of the useful signal from noise. with such instruments one
can pick up both the communicating signals of insects and noise associated with
various manifestations of their vital functions.

A device of this type was first developed in Germany to determine infestation of
wood by the Xylotrupes bajulus longhorn beetle (Schwara et a1., 1935). Sub-
sequently similar instruments were developed in England, the United States and
USSR. In 1953, an acoustical device was proposed for determining latent in-
festation of grain (Adams et a1., 1953). This method was found to be quite
effective and gained practical use in several countries (Zakladnoy et al., 1970;
Zakladnoy, Snyurina, 1977).

Acoustical methods of detecting soil pests appear to be less promising. however,
the results of studies in this direction warrant the belief that such methods
could be used, at least in experimental research (mainly under laboratory
conditions).

If the sounds emitted by insectsareloud enough, one can determine from their
intensity not only the location of pests. but their number. True, to obtain
satisfactory results, one must adhere to certain conditions, in particular,

one should place the pickups at a specific distance from the object, take into
consideration the noise level, etc., but theoretically they do not impose
appreciable limitations on use of the method. The use of acoustical methods

is desirable, not only to keep a record of number of invisible insects, but

in cases where other recording methods are ineffective for some reason or other.

Since the sounds of most insects can be well-distinguished by their time and/or
frequency parameters, it is theoretically possible to develop methods of

5

IN)! CWWWCIAI.I£SE¢(HVLY
I‘Uﬁ VI llkll‘h Du.- v.1...

identifying the species of pests. One can use for this purpose both communica-
tion signals and sounds that are made when insects move or feed. In the former
case, tables or atlases and acoustic instruments can be developed even now that
permit identification of Orthoptera and Cicadidae in the field. It is harder to
develop equipment to record the sounds of small and concealed species. The
efforts made in this direction do not always yield positive results. For example,
Uojcik (1968, 1969), who used very complicated equipment, was unable to record
the communication signals of several pests of stored products, including
Cryptolestes pusillus, which has stridulation organs, and two species of Pyra-
loidea, Bphestia kuehniella and Cadra cautella. However, this does not mean

that these insects do not emit sounds, since precopulation signals have been
recorded in another borer species, Corcyra cephalonica (F. coro, verbal
communication). Experience in such studies indicates that, in addition to a
meticulous choice of acoustical equipment, one must have comprehensive knowledge
about the biology of the species under study.

All of these difficulties grow significantly in the study of noncommunicative
sounds, which have less marked species-specific features, but progress in the
field of analysis of diverse industrial noises may facilitate substantially
the solution of this problem.

As noted previously, special acoustical equipment permits not only detection
and identification of insects, but obtaining information about various aspects
of their vital functions and, first of all, the nature of their activity. The
most elementary devices of this type, which include a microphone, amplifier and
automatic recorders, are used with success to study the circadian rhythms of
insects (see, for example, Hedioni, 1966). Analogous devices can be used in
the field to gain information about changes in level of pest activity in the
course of a day or season. At the present time, there is an opportunity to
introduce acoustical methods to monitor insect cultures and, in particular, for
automatic regulation of their upkeep conditions. The interest of beekeepers

in such control methods is not waning either. Hany types of bee activity are
associated with certain sounds; for this reason, analysis of the acoustical
background in the hive yields important information about the condition of

the bee family or changes occurring in it. The data accumulated to date make
it possible to design and refine devices similar to the "apidictor" we mentioned
before (Woods, 1959; Schauff, 1975; Yes'kov, 1979).

Control of Insect Behavior

Studies in this branch of insect bioacoustics are being pursued in three main
directions: development of acoustic attractants, repellents and interference in
communication systems (a. Frings, H. Frings, 1965).

Attractants: To attract insects to sound sources, it is expedient to use
calling, assembling signals or flight sounds, i.e., signals that have an
attractive effect on insects in their natural habitat. By reproducing such
sounds or models thereof one can virtually always attract or detect a certain
number of specimens of the desired insect species that are situated in the
vicinity. For example, Spooner (1968b) proposed the use of simulated response
signals of females to trap male Phaneropterinae crickets, and in the above-
mentioned experiments with mosquitoes, it was possible to attract some males

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to female sounds (Kahn, Offenhauser, 1949). however, these methods must have
immeasurablc greater efficacy for them to gain practical use. Efforts made at
insect attraction on a mass scale to sound have usually failed. In our opinion,
the causes of these failures are attributable to the following factors.

In the first place, it is not always possible to use adequate stimuli to attract
insects. For example, the sound of female mosquitoes in flight recorded on tape
do not attract males if two conditions are not met: the intensity of the sound
exceeds 60-70 dB and its source (usually a loudspeaker) is too large (preventing
formation of spherical waves). In the second place, many insects have a settled
life style and do not migrate beyond a certain range. In the third place, insects
are distracted from acoustic traps by natural sound sources, i.e., sounds

emitted by specimens of the same species.

To eliminate the first of these obstacles, it is necessary to make a comprehen-
sive study of signals and acoustical environment. And, as we have seen, it is
sometimes not enough to know the frequency and time parameters of sounds, and

one has to take into consideration their intensity, emitter radiation pattern

and other parameters. At the same time, having information about the informative
elements of the signal, we should not necessarily strive to reproduce it exactly.
As noted previously, time and, occasionally, frequency parameters of signals

are markedly dependent on temperature. For this reason, use of tape recordings
to attract insects does not appear to be too promising. In our opinion, one

must use for this purpose special generators of model signals, which automatically
adjust their characteristics with change in temperature. The complexity of such
generators (and their cost) depend, of course, on the complexity of the simulated
signal. For this reason, in developing the scheme of an instrument, we should
provide for reproduction of only the signal elements that determine its attrac-
tion to insects.

As for the second of the above-mentioned difficulties, to eliminate it acoustical
attractants must be used during periods (which are sometimes quite lengthy)

when insects migrate. Hole crickets and many grasshopper species are a good
example in this respect. One can increase the number.of traps per unit area and
the power of emitters to attenuate the distracting influence of natural sound
sources. However, it is not always desirable to amplify the sound, since such
signals have a repellent effect on some insects. All of these statements can

be illustrated on the example of the acoustic traps we developed for mole
crickets.

As noted previously, the first experiments on attracting mole crickets of the
genus Scapteriscus to sounds were conducted in the United States (Ulagaraj,
Walker, 1973, 1975). In these experiments, tapes of model signals were used.

0n the basis of the data we obtained from studies of the acoustical communica-
tion systems of mole crickets (Zhantiyev, Korsunovskaya, 1973), we developed

and constructed. together with V. S. Chukanov and D. A. Yusipov, an acoustical
system to attract and collect two mole cricket species. Gryllotalpa unispina and
G. gryllotalpa. The main element in this system is an electronic unit that
generates pulses corresponding to the calling signals of the male mole cricket
in time and frequency parameters. After amplification, these pulses are fed to
lo-H dynamicloudspeakersinstalled in cone-shaped plastic traps (l m in diameter).

FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE(NVLY
A container with fixing liquid is attached to the tapered end of the trap. The
trap is buried in the ground to its top edge. As mentioned previously, the

pulse repetition frequency in insect sounds is usually a linear function of
ambient temperature. For this reason, a thermistor is connected in the generator
circuit that automatically regulates pulse repetition‘frequency in accordance
with the results of prior acoustic readings.

The acoustic traps were tested for two seasons in Turkmenia (Baba-Durmaz station).
Hole crickets (G. unispina) start to fly with onset of darkness and stop at 0200
hours. The insects flew to the trap mainly from the leeward side and fell into
the funnel or descendedatsome distance from the trap, traveling the remaining
distance on the ground. Even under adverse weather conditions (relatively low
temperature, wind), up to 50 mole crickets were caught in the trap in l h, and
952 were females.

The results of these tests revealed that raising sonic pressure beyond the
levels inherent in the natural calling signal had no repellent effect; on the
contrary, it increased the attraction of the signal for mole crickets. For

this reason, by increasing the power of the emitter one can broaden appreciably
the area covered and improve the efficacy of the traps. Analogous data were
obtained previously from experiments with two Scapteriscus species (Ulsgara),
Walker, 1973, 1975). Moreover, we established in preliminary experiments that
the shape of the pulse envelope does not affect insect reactions. This enabled
us to subsequently use square-wave acoustic signals and simplify appreciably

the circuitry of the generator.

Repellents: Development of acoustic repellents is one of the most promising
but little-elaborated directions of research. Theoretically, such repellents
could be used against all insects that have receptors forsonic vibrations or
oscillations. In order to elicit negative phototaxis, one can apparently use

two types of sounds: biologically important signals (or an imitation thereof),
which have a repelling effect under natural conditions, and oscillations at
frequencies that elicit discomfort.

The most vivid manifestation of negative phonotaxis is observed in nocturnal
Lepidoptera subject to attacks by bats. For this reason, it is not surprising
that in the first tests related to development of acoustic repellents ultra-
sounds simulating the echoranging signals of these animals were used (Belton,
Kempster, 1962). The results of field trials revealed that exposure of corn
fields to ultrasound (50 ms duration, 50 kHz frequency) lowered by 501 infesta-
tion thereof by the beet webworm. Analogous results were later obtained on
cabbage and lettuce fields. Use of 20 kHz ultrasounds lowered plant infesta-
tion by Trichoplusia ni moths by 661 (Payne, Shorey, 1968). However, trials

of this method to control the Heliothis zea moth on corn and cotton did not
yield positive results (Agee, Webb, 1969a; Shorey et a1., 1972). The authors
consider the cause to be that insects perhaps become accustomed to continuously
pulsating ultrasound, while large plants prevent propagation thereof. These
explanations do not appear quite convincing, since they are in contradiction
with the results of the aboveqmentioned tests.

In general,’experience with ultrasound to scare off moths and Pyraloidea has
shown that acoustic repellents could become an effective means of control of

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
many posts of the order Lepidoptera. But to develop such methods, it is neces—
sary to conduct special studies of the life style and behavior of each species.
There are grounds to believe that it is expedient to use analogous methods for
protection of both crops and stored products.

In time, acoustic repellents may find applications not only in agriculture, but
in the control of blood-sucking Diptera. This question has been repeatedly dis-
cussed in the scientific literature. Some foreign firms produce devices for
personal protection against mosquitoes, of the "mosquito repeller" type, which
consist of portable sound generators. However, tests conducted in our country
(Rasnitsyn et al., l97é) and abroad (Kutz, 1974) showed them to be entirely in-
effective. A search for sonic oscillations that elicit negative phonotaxis in
mosquitoes is being pursued in many laboratories. And, although the desired
results have not yet been obtained, this does not mean that there are some

basic difficulties that prevent development of such repellents.

Eradication of Insects

Eradication of insects with sound is more a technical than a biological problem,
so that we shall not deal with it here. Let us merely mention that, according
to data obtained to date, ultrasound and sound of sufficiently high power have
a depressing effect on insects. For example, there are reports that sounds at
frequencies of 0.2-2 kHz inhibit development of Plodia interpunctella moths
(Kirkpatrick, Harein, 1965), while powerful ultrasound (0.2—4 H/cmz) has a
devastating effect on Drosophila pupae (Pay at al., 1978).

Apparently sources of sonic and ultrasonic oscillations will be used to destroy
insects in stocked or stored materials; however, it is unlikely that they will
be used in the field (H. Frings, M. Frings, 1965).

Conclusion

In assessing our knowledge on sonic communication and orientation of insects, it
must be noted that the results of intensive experimental research conducted for
the last two decades had a deciding influence on forming current conceptions of
the principles of organization of their acoustical communication systems.

The greatest progress was made in the study of mechanisms of sound emission,

the auditory system and some forms of acoustic behavior. For this reason. we now
have a rather complete idea about the neuromuscular system of acoustic organs,
acoustical properties of sound-emitting and sound-receiving structures, ultra-
structure of auditory receptors, morphofunctional organization of auditory organs
and physical characteristics of acoustic signals. Use of combined methods of
research made it possible to obtain important data on the functional distinctions
of the auditory system in the course of identification and localization of
communicative acoustic signals. However, in spite of the efforts of many re-
searchers, we have rather limited information as yet concerning processing of
acoustic information in the central parts of the auditory analyzers, and we know
virtually nothing about the connections between auditory interneurons and other
parts of the central nervous system. As for the neurophysiological mechanisms
involved in recognition of conspecific signals, the data available to us enable
us to develop only preliminary hypotheses or conceptual models.

9

F03¢Hﬂﬂ€1Al.USE(NVLY
IV“ V. I I‘r.l|~ snug. 0"...

In view of these circumstances, we can be sure that most researchers will con-
centrate in the near future. as they did before, on the problem of recognition

and certain other problems of basic importance. But we can also expect further
widening of the circle of objects studied and increase in number of comparative
bioacoustic studies that will help demonstrate the adaptive distinctions of
ac0ustical communication systems and the patterns of their inception and evolution.

The following main tasks will have to be done in the course of future neuro-
physiological studies: study of morphofunctional organization of acoustic centers,
l.e., neuronal nets implementing the function of diverse acoustic organs of in-
sects; completion of investigation of peripheral and central parts of the audi-
tory analyzers; trace the functional connections between auditory interneurons
and associative centers and effector systems. The main results of these studies,
which will have been obtained in acute experiments, should then be checked in
chronic experiments on mobile insects. Perhaps only such combined studies will
enable us to form a definitive idea about the mechanisms of recognition of
communicative signals and localization of sound sources.

In the near future, we should expect further development of ethological studies,
including not only laboratory experiments to test functional hypotheses and
models, but observations in the field, which permit analysis of complex forms
of acoustic behavior of insects.

There is still quite a lot to be done with regard to investigation of acoustic
signals of insects, particularly their variability. transformation in the course
of species formation and adaptive distinctions.

Genetic studies aimed at determination of patterns of inheritance of species-
specific distinctions of various elements of acoustical communication systems
should yield much interesting and important information.

The results of all these investigations will not only help form a general con-
ception about the principles of organization of insects' acoustical communication
systems, but will serve as the basis for developing new and effective methods

of controlling the behavior of economically important species.

CONTENTS Page
Introduction 5
Part 1. Acoustic Communication Systems in Insects
Chapter 1. Sound-Producing Mechanisms 9
Chapter 2. Physical Characteristics of Acoustic Signals 19
Chapter 3. Auditory Organs 30
Structure of the auditory organs 31
Fine structure and functional characteristics of the auditory
receptors (chordotonal sensilla) 36
Functional organization of the auditory organs 41
Tympanal organs 41
Johnston's organs 61
10

FOR OFF-10M. USE ONLY
Chapter 4. Central Parts of the Auditory System
Auditory interneurons
Connections between the auditory system and effector systems
Descending neurons in the cervical connectives of crickets
Descending neurons in the abdominal nerve cord of orthopteran
insects
Chapter 5. Acoustic Behavior
Types of acoustic signals
Reactions of insects to acoustic signals

Part II. Recognition of Acoustic Signals
Chapter 6. Comparative Analysis of Acoustic Signals of Sympatric
Species
Chapter 7. Reactions of Insects to Acoustic Signals and Their Models
Informative parameters of acoustic signals
Noiseproof factor of acoustic communication systems
Chapter 8. Features of Functions of the Auditory System during
Recognition of Acoustic Signals
Recognition of the intraspecific signals
Functions of the auditory organs
Functions of the central auditory neurons
Recognition of the conspecific calling songs
Functions of the auditory organs
Functions of the central auditory neurons
Chapter 9. Mechanisms of Recognition of Acoustic Signals in Insects

Part III. Sound Source Localization
Chapter 10. Adaptive Features of Acoustic Signals and Conditions
for Acoustic Orientation
Comparative analysis of acoustic signals
Experimental data
Chapter 11. Acoustic orientation
Acoustic orientation during flight
Reactions of flying insects to terrestrial sound source
Acoustic orientation in terrestrial environments
Chapter 12. Directional Hearing
Functions of the auditory organs
Functions of the central auditory neurons

Applied Aspects of Insect Bioacoustics
References

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Hoskovskogo universiteta. 1981

10,657
CSO: 1840/121

11

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USB(M9LY

63
63
87

92
94
96
99

106
121
122
135

138
139
139
142
148
149
151
156

166
167
168
176
176
178
180
186
186
202

217
227
eves va.a~a..~ ~~— veto-a.

UDC: 612.14.08

METHOD FOR TELEHETRIC RECORDING OF BLOOD PRESSURE AND RESPIRATION OP PRBELY
SHIHHING DOLPHINS

Leningrad FIZIOLDGICHESKIY ZHURNAL SSS! IMENI I. M. SECHENOVA in Russian Vol 67,
No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received 4 Dec 78) pp l7bb-l768

[Article by V. G. Dargol'ts, Ye.V% Romanenko,Ye. A. Yumatov and V. G. Yanov,
Laboratory of Morphology and Ecology of Higher Vertebrates (headed by V. Ye.
Sokolov); Laboratory of Bioacoustics (headed by Ye. V. Romanenko), Institute
of Evolutionary Morphology and Ecology of Animals imeni A. N. Severtsov, USSR
Academy of Sciences; Department of Normal Physiology (headed by K. V. Sudakov),
First Moscow Medical Institute imeni I. M. Sechenov, Moscow]

[Text] At the present time, various techniques have been developed to study
cardiovascular and respiratory functions of terrestrial animals, which permit
recording arterial pressure, the electrocardiogram, volumetric and linear blood
flow, pneumogras, etc., in different states of an organism, including un-
restrained animsls [1, 2].

At the same time, there is also a need for such studies on aquatic animals,
for example, dolphins, when their behavior is unrestricted. In particular,

it is interesting to make a comparative analysis of cardiovascular and respi-
ratory functions during emotional reactions of animals situated in different
environments. A need also arose to examine regulation of arterial pressure
and respiration in delphinids in connection with problems of hydrodynamics and
bioacoustics.

However, there are a number of technical difficulties involved in recording
these functions on freely swimming animals. It is necessary to deveIOp a
sealed telemetry device for this purpose, with its own power pack that would
pick up useful information and transmit it from the aquatic environment to
receiving equipment. He describe here an instrument that meets these require-
menu‘s

The functional flowchart of a radiotelemetry instrument, which we designed

and constructed to measure blood pressure, as well as air pressure in the res-
piratory system of the bottlenosed dolphin, swimming freely in a restricted
body of water (tank, marine pen), is illustrated in Figure 1.

An Eleme-Schonander (EMT-34) type ensor 1 served as the device that picked
up pressure directly, and its wor ing chamber was connected to a blood vessel

12

IIHIGDFI1CIAI.UEI:(HVLY
or tested part of the dolphin's respiratory system by means of a catheter 1.5-2 mm
in diameter. To measure blood pressure, the working chamber of the sensor and
catheter were first filled with saline, which transmitted blood pressure to the
sensitive element of the sensor. Output voltage which changes slowly is the
information signal, whose amplitude is proportional to excess pressure, in
relation to atmospheric, from the symmetrical output of the sensor, and it was
fed to converter 2. In the converter, the clock pulses coming from the clock
pulse generator with a repetition frequency P - 2 kHz 3, are submitted to pulse-
amplitude modulation by the information signa . The same pulses divided into
four frequencies, 4, 5, served as the calibration signal. We determined the
necessary correlation between level of calibration signal and pulse-amplitude
modulated information signal by means of two dividers, Rl-Ra and Rz-Ra.

The overall signal then passed from adder 7 to the generator with frequency modu-
lator 8, where it modulated the carrier frequency which had a frequency of
31 kHz in the "silent" mode. After the amplifier 9, the signal was emitted into

salt water. He used narrow-band frequency modulation with a modulation index of
m ' 0.4.

Transmission of information about pressure coded in this manner was effected
via an underwater radio channel.

The generated power of the transmitter constituted 50 m" on a resistance of 7 9,
which provided for a range of certain reception of up to 8-10 m. This range
makes it possible to receive a signal distinctly over the entire volume of the

pen or closed tank. The construction of the transmitting and receiving antennas
is described in [3].

And now a few words about the choice of coding method. In view of the fact that
a signal with slowly changing frequency has a rather small amplitude with actual
values of blood pressure and air pressure in the dolphin's respiratory system.
it was found expedient to use a subcarrier frequency (in the form of clock
pulses), amplitude modulated by the useful signal, and subsequently work with
this subcarrier frequency signal. The concurrent presence of a clock signal
makes it possible to form a calibration signal required for absolute readings
that is a multiple thereof in frequency.

Reception of radiotransmitter signals is effected by means of a specially developed
receiver of frequencquodulated signals, which consisted of two functional units
[block units]: the unit of selective amplifiers 10 (with central tuning

frequency f - 31 kHz and band of 2 bf I 8 kHz) and demodulation unit 11. The
carrier frequency was demodulated and overall signal, which consisted of the
pulse-amplitude modulated information signal at a frequency of 2 kHz containing
information about pressure and calibration signal of 500 Hz was isolated in the
receiver. This overall signal after the necessary division 12 was recorded on

one of the channels of an Elektronika-loo type tape recorder 13, while the
explanatory text was recorded on another channel from microphone 14.

In the course of processing the recorded results, the overall signal was repro-
duced on the same tape recorder and fed to two filters: band filter with central
frequency of 2 kHz and band of 2Af- 650 Hz 15 and a filter for lower frequencies
with cut-off frequency of 1020 Hz 16. The band filter served to isolate the
intermediate frequency of 2 kHz with pulse-amplitude modulated information sig-
nal, while the lower frequency filter served to isolate the calibration signal.

13
l!”l(lﬂﬂ€1Al.USE10NLN
_———‘-————--—_——————— ———--————

O u anormatiou signal(l$) U o - - .
i C: , c H"_\ «cs-cm
l ‘ 4 .

U

   
      
   
   

ﬁght; - ’ - ,

8 en

,- _________________ ﬂ . ”' n m A" Is
I Receiver schaignaqu-I l /

s
I. 1:}

\

     

7

“Record" '"Reproduce" / ‘
Em: A
f

sachzawnwhz
Figure 1. Functional flowchart_
a-Schonander (sum-34) 7) adder 14) nicroph
sure sensor 8) generator with frequency modulator 15) hand f1
arter 9) power amplifier 16) lower f
k pulse generator 10) selective amplifier unit 17) Bruel a
uency dividers ll) demodulation unit record:
rnation and calibra- 12) divider l8) Gz-lOZA

signal dividers 13) Blektronika-lOO tape recorder general
The coefficients of transmission of the band filter at a frequency of 2 kHz and
lower frequency filter at a frequency of 500 Hz equaled 1. Then, the information
and calibration signals divided by frequency were recorded alternately on

paper of a Bruel and Kjxder 2305A recorder. The scales of recorder levels were
calibrated at the beginning and end of each tracing with the signal from an
external type 62-102 generator 18.

w a
gm
5
on
|———l
”'3
.b
:3
i 1
3
3 .
—A=L_
‘ I.__J
1.0:

Figure 2. Samples of pressure tracings

a) blood pressure in vessels of tail fin

b) air pressure in main nasal passage during emission of echoranging series
1) pressure curve

2) echoranging tine

If one knows the pressure to which corresponded the constant amplitude of the
calibration signal and graduation characteristics of the pressure sensor, one
could estimate absolute pressure in blood vessels or airway system of the
dolphin at each point in time.

The transmitting equipment 1 together with pressure sensor 2 were attached to
the dorsal fin of the dolphin. A flexible catheter, 1.5-2 am in diameter,
filled with saline and heparin (to prevent blood clotting) was introduced into
one of the arteries of the dorsal or tail fin and connected to the pressure
sensor. Before taking each reading the catheter was flushed with the same
solution. Access to the artery was provided by cutting off a 2-3 cm and of
the fin. To measure air pressure in the respiratory tract of the dolphin, the
air-filled catheter was introduced into the choanae or'blowhole above them and
attached with a suction cup near the entrance into the blowhole.

15

FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
Figure Za is a sample of a tracing of blood pressure in vessels of the tail.
Blood pressure in vessels of the tail fin of a free-swimming dolphin is of

the order of 60-80 mm Hg. It should be noted that the dolphin did not submerge
to any depth during this time. Blood pressure in vessels of the dorsal fin is
1.5-2 times higher, and this is apparently related to the closeness of dorsal
fin vessels to great arteries, their larger diameters, as compared to vessels
of the tail. In addition, it was possible to introduce the catheter deeper
into vessels of the dorsal fin than into the smaller vessels of the tail.

Air pressure was recorded in the region of the main nasal meatus (blowhole),
between the external sphincter and muscle plug shutting entry into the choanaecPig-
ureZb). Pressure curve 1 iicorrelatedtoeChoranging time 2. Typically,

the echoranging process is always associated by approximately 30-50 mm Hg in-
increase in pressure in the blowhole, whereas pressure in the choana does not
change.

It should be noted that we set the pressure sensor to zero at the start of

each experiment. For this purpose, we equalized pressure in the working chamber
of the sensor with atmospheric pressure. The sensor was then adjusted for a
minimal output signal in the absence of excess pressure in the catheter. The
remaining dysbalance signal at the output of the sensor was recorded on tape,
and its value served as the zero reference point.

This technique permits satisfactory reading of both blood pressure in blood
vessels and air pressure in the dolphin's respiratory tract when the animal
swims on the surface without subaerging. Artefacts were found in the course
of recording blood pressure, which were related to submersion of the animals,
and with measurement of pressure in the caudal artery with movement of the
flukes while swimming.

with submersion, the distance between the sensor and reading site has an
effect. This occurs because of the flexibility of the walls of the long cathe-
ter (1.0-1.5 m), which transmit water pressure and distort the true pressure
of both blood and air in the respiratory tract. To rule out such artefacts,

we placed the sensor as close as possible to the measurement site on the dorsal
fin, thus also reducing the length of the catheter to a minimum.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

i. Tkachenko, B. 1. (ed.), "Hethods for Testing Circulation," Isd. "Nauka",
Leningrad, 1976, pp 1-278.

2. Skotselyas, Yu. 6., Ivanova, L. I. and Yumatov, Ye. A., "Dynamic Recording
of Rat Arterial Pressure in Chronic Experiments and Hith Unrestrsined
Behavior," PIZIOL. 2H. SSSR, 63, 1, 1977, pp 154-155.

3. Yanov, V. G. and Romanenko, Ye. V., "Radiotelemetry System for Measuring
Hydrodynamic Parameters of Dolphins in a Confined Hater Area," Izd.
"Bionika", Kiev, 6, 1972, pp 92-99.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka" Piziologicheskiy zhurnal im. 1. M. Sechenova,
1981

10,657

C30: 1860/117

16

IIIICHHHC1A1.USE(NVLY
BIOTECHNOLOGY

UDC: 543.544:547.996.02
KOVATS INDEXES USED TO IDENTIFY SEX PHEROHONES

Tashkent KHIHIYA PRIRODNYKB SOYBDINBBIY in Russian No b, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 19 Jan 81) pp 501-505

[Article by S. F. Nedopekina, B. G. Kovalev and A. N. Kostf, All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Biological Methods of Plant Protection, Kishinev; Moscow
"Order of Lenin}'"0rder of the October Revolution" and ”Order of Red Banner of
Labor" State University imeni M. V. Lomonosov]

[Text] In View of the development of new methods of protecting plants, which
are safe to the environment, there is special interest in substances of natural
origin-sex pheromones of insects-use of which is considered quite promising [1].

Isolation and identification of the structure of natural pheromones involve a
number of difficulties, due chiefly to the small amounts of this substance con-
tained in insect glands (nanogram range). Hence the need to use highly sensitive
physical and physicochemical methods, as well as combinations thereof with chemical
identification.

The pheromones of Lepidoptera identified to date consist mainly of unsaturated
aliphatic alcohols, their acetates. aldehydes, esters and apoxides containing 10-18
atoms of carbon [2].

Identification of a natural pheromone involves determination of the length of
the molecule's carbon chain, quantity, position and configuration of dual bonds,
as well as the nature of other functional groups'it contains.

Relative gees-chromatographic retention level is often used to describe functional
groups of analyzed compounds [3]. Kovats [4] proposed the use of the difference
between indexes of compound retention in two phases of different polarity A112 as
a characteristic parameter:

Mn = I.—l,. ' _ (1)

where I; and I; are the retention index on stationary liquid phases 1 and 2, res-
pectively. A112 is the characteristic of the functional group; it depends on the
nature of the stationary phase and depends little on column temperature. Experi-
mental determination of the value of 61;; makes it possible to relate the ana-
lyzed compound to a specific class, provided the values of All; have been tabulated
for a large number of known substances.

17

FOI1OFFKJA1.USI(NNLY
The retention index of a compound is the sum of the retention index of the carbon
shell and increments corresponding to functional groups. This makes it possible
to determine the retention index of the carbon shell, if the contribution of the
functional grOup and length of the carbon chain are known, bearing in mind that
the contribution of the methylene group is 100 units.

Our objective here was to construct tables of retention indexes for unsaturated
aliphatic alcohols, their acetates and some epoxides. The practical usefulness
of the tabulated data is demonscrated on the example of identification of natural
pheromones of female cabbage (Mamestra brassicae) and tomato (Hamestra oleracia)
moths.

He used n-alkanes (Cnﬂzn+o, where n - 12-17, 19, 20, 23, 24) as standards for
determination of I. We calculated I using the following equation [5]:

_ l 1,—1 1
I. —IOO.Ill # 100(43—115) 1%. (2)

where n, and n; are the number of atoms of carbon in the corresponding rralkanes,
lnl, Zn, and z: are distances on the chromatogram from introduction of sample to
height of corresponding peak (in millimeters), and

1,. > z,> I...

The increments of functional groups for each type of phase were calculated as
follows:

51.: 1“"L —l00-n.

AI, = I""°—100-n.

where I‘”H /""’is the retention index of the compound at the (3)
corresponding phase;
a is the legnth of the carbon chain.

The difference between retention indexes of the compound on polar and nonpdlar
phases was determined using the formula:

at. = I"-‘°—Im. ' ' (a)

All of the obtained values are listed in Tables 1-4.

The tables show that use of the difference between retention indexes on polar

and nonpolar phases (Alia) makes it possible to identify rather accurately
ethylene alcohols (A112 - 371-429 units), their acetates (A11; - 286-345 units)

and saturated epoxides (A112 - 264-276 units). However, we see that there is

some overlapping of values of 6112 (Table 4) for ethylene acetates (286-345 units)
and saturated alcohols (337-364 units), as well as saturated acetates (260-299
units) and epoxides (264-276 units). In this case, for exact identification one

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
should use the increments of functional groups for each type of phase (Ah. Ala,
Table 11), which differ substantially.

Table l. Retention indexes for ethylene acetates with the general fornula

cis
R-CH- “(cum-011: and sole saturated acetates

 

 

 

 

 

 

c 11..c11=c11—c11 01: 1336 333 1621 621 2116
c111 .,c11=c11(c11.1.011 1330 310 1616 616 233
1: 11..c-.=c11(c119.0: s; 1311 311 1626 1126 312
C91 1:11-c11 C11 11: - 1331 331 1611 611 301
c.11;c11=c11 C11, 1316 316 11131 1151 3011
CIBHnOAC 1359 359 '6” 626 267
c, 11 ..r:11-c11(c119. 1.11: 1520 320 11131 631 311
d11.".c11-c11 c119 01: o 15_21 3m 1311 611 311
c..=111:11-c11( 9.6.1: 1; 1633 333 1610 611 , 3111
c§.11 C11-c11(c11.1..11: 1510 310 | 1366 I606 326
(5.- -.0111 1562 362 1m 122 I 261
I

c.11..=c11-c11éc11,3o1:' 1119 319 2011 616 I 321
c'11.1.11=c11 1:81 1131 331 2013 613 332
c.11'.'-'11=c11(C11.1.01: ._ 1131 331 2011 611 331
c.11.c11- c11 (1.119.011: ' 1113 313 2063 m 315
c..11.o.1: 1151 351 20112 652 295
c.11..c11-c11(c119.r11: 192-1 325 2261 661 | 312
c.11..c11-c11(c119.01: o 1929 329 2212 6:2 313
c.11.c11-c11 (01.1.1111: a 1936 3211 22111 678 312
c.11c11- c11(c11;1..o.\: 1931 331 2261 669 335

c..1I..01: l 1260 360 225' | 651'.) 299

Table 2. Retention indexes of ethylene alcohols with general formula
c s
R-CH - c11(c11.),, 0!! and some saturated alcohols

Compound

Inc [in l .11. 1:11-10 | 11.

       
     
     
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
   

 

 

c 11..c111.c 1—c11.o11 1221 221 - '606
c-. 1..c11-c11(c.19,011 ._ 1213 213 1611
c.1111..o11 1213 233 1.190
c.11..c11.c11(c119.o11 1119 219 I 1621
c111. c11-c11(c11.1.o11 o 1119 219 13211
11.611=cr1(c11,11111 : 1150 2110 11161
c..'11,, 111 1153 213 1301
1: .11. .c11.- c11(c11,10 1 1626
1"11c11- -c 1 11:11 9.0" 1629
cI1'c11= -c11(c11_ 1.1011 3 11151
cuﬂnou [M
c.11c11=c;1(c11 .011
c.‘.1?.,o11"' I I

19

FOROFFICIALISEONLY
I'UI \Il f.\-lﬂ~ was; \Il‘bl

Table 3. Retention indexes of °PQE§QF§."1th the general formula

 

n.-cn—cu-—R=
\w/
0
Compound | ’55" I-Vn‘ 13;" l “2 l "n

 

Eﬁﬁcmcng. cu—cn—mh:

 

/
\0
cu .. .
Chi>cmcu=x {l—/CH—C.H.. me 98 2212 312 214
0
cu ..
00‘3"“: ,),c{1_}:nu-c...u.. was 96 2160 360 264
o
53: Cli(CH:).Cl'l—CH—C...H,. mo so 2266 366 216
‘\ 2’
o

 

Table 6. Increments of retention indexes for functional groups

“"9““ | u. u. 61..

 

R-CH-CH (CH3, CH 213-37 “—086 37I—429
R—CH-CH (CPL-)n OAc 3M4$6 616-688 286—345

c, amp" _ 253—262 690—626 —364
c, ammo.“ 357-362 622—659 299
mum—c1441= 90—93 36‘JL—372 —276
\ / -
0

Within a specific class of compounds, the value of the retention index (I) at
a given phase permits determination of the length of the carbon chain provided
we know the contribution of the functional group at this phase (AI..AI;):

n Ayah—-TL-M . (5)

For all of the tested alcohols and acetates, the value of I is an overall one,
including the contribution of the alcohol or acetate group and unsaturated bond.
If the retention indexes of saturated compounds are known. one can assess the
contribution of the multiple bond.

The value of A112 is determined primarily by dipole-dipole interaction between the
dissolved substance and stationary phase. With increase in polarity of the mole-

cule, there is increase in value of AI):, and this is evident on the example of
the compounds studied:

20

lili‘OFIlCJAI.lEﬂE(NNLY
A1,, (CRH,,+,0H)-;~ A1,,(c,H,,+,0At-\> All, (R.-'cH—/<:H-R,). as well as
o

3],, (R—CH = CH (cu-1,), OH) > 51,,(canm, om m
Alum—CH = CH (GHQ. om > AI" (c,H,,,+,0Ac).

The existing scatter of values of I and AI for each class of compounds is attri-
butable to the influence of the length of the molecular chain and position of
multiple bond, a change in which alters the mutual influence of functional groups,
which affects general polarity of the molecule.

The obtained retention indexes were used to identify the sex pheromones of female
cabbage and tomato moths.

We determined the retention index of the chromatographic peaks on two columns
of different polarity. corresponding to the length of the chain and functionality
of pheromones to determine these parameters.

Female extract consists of a mixture of substances. In order to refer a specific
peak on the chromatogram to a pheromone, preparative selection of 1-minute extract
fractions was made, followed by electroantennographic testing, as described in
[6]. He then identified peaks contained in fractions, on which male antennae
showed maximum responses. It should be noted that, in View of the small amount of
active substance contained in insect glands, the pheromone peak is not traced on
the chromatogram, whereas the antennae respond to the corresponding fraction. In
this case, it is quite helpful to use Kovats indexes that can be calculated

from the time of appearance of the fraction that yields the maximum response of
male antennae.

The pheromone of female cabbage moths consists of one main component II with
retention indexes I} - 1936. I; - 2278 and AI}2 - 342. The pheromone of the
tomato moth has two components (III, 1111), and the retention indexes are
I}! - 1833, 1;! - 2253, AI}; - 620. 1§II - 1936, 1§II - 227a, AI{§I - 342.

If we compare the values of AI]; of natural pheromones to the tabulated data
(Tables 1, 2, 4) it is easy to see that the II, IIn (AI‘z - 342 units) peaks
fall into the range of ethylene acetates, while the 111 peak is in the range

of ethylene alcohols (All; - #20 units). The coincidence of retention indexes
on nonpolar and polar phases of natural pheromones with hexadecenol and hexa-
duaﬂauuuemﬂhluuusthcmduMnmutMlughdtucuMn
chain of the compounds to be identified is 16. In the general case. one should
use formula (5) to determine chain length.

Experimental Section

The retention indexes were determined on a Khrom—bZ chromatograph with flame-
ionization detector. The glass columns are 2.SX3 mm in size. The carrier gas is
extra pure nitrogen. He used N-AH-HHDS 60/80—mesh chromaton as the solid carrier.

Apiezon L (8!) served as the nonpolar phase and XE-60 nitrile silicone rubber (15%)
as the polar phase.

21

FOI10FFHJA1.USE(MNLY
av“ Va al\ u..- w-oa. \la‘I-I

Conclusions

Determination was made of retention indexes of a series of unsaturated alcohols,
acetates and saturated epoxides on two columns of different polarity. The

obtained tabulated data were used to determine chain length and functionality of
pheromones of two moth species. '

l.

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Jacobson, 11., ”Sex Pheromones of Insects," Hoscow, 1976.

Hinyaylo, V. A. and Kovalev, B. 6., "Advances in Science and Technology," Ento-
mology Series, Moscow, 2, 1973.

Reynolds, H. 0., "Gas chromatographic Retention Data," Evanston, 1966.
Kovats, 8., HELV. CHIN. ACTA, 101, 1915, 1958.
Idem, ADVANCES CHROMATOGR., 1, 229, 1966.

Kovalev, B. 0., Nedopekina, S. P., Lebedeva, K. V. and Kost, A. N., HOORGAN.
IGIIMIYA, 5, 912, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "FAN" 112883, 1981

10,657
080: 1840/103

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC: S97:585:59l:488.9:47l.3+59l.9(26l,265,266)

SEISHOSENSORY SYSTEM AND CLASSIFICATION OF COTTIDAE FISH (HYOXOCBPHALINAB,
ARTEDIBLLINAB)

Leningrad SEYSHOSENSORNAYA SISTEHA I KLASSIPIKATSIYA KERCHAKOVYKH RYB (COTTIDAE:
MYOXOCEPHALINAE, ARTEDIELLINAE) in Russian 1979 (signed to press 28 Aug 79)
pp 2-7, 207-208

(Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Seisnosensory System

and Classification of Cottidae Fish (Hyoxocephalinae, Artediellinae)" by Aleksey
Vadimovich Neyelov, approved by the Zoological Institute of the USSR Academy of

Sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1100 copies, 208 pages]

[Text] This monograph deals with a comparative morphology of the seismosensory
system of 54 species and subspecies of Cottidae. Original studies are preceded

by analysis of the worldwide literature on morphology of the seismosensory system
of Anamnia vertebrates, different aspects of function, nature of variability

and use in systematics and phylogenesis. A classification of both subfamilies
studied is validated on the basis of the structure of various systems of organs.
Characteristics and identification of various taxons through subspecies levels
are submitted. There is discussion of the nature and patterns of evolutionary
transformations of different elements of the seismosensory system and phylogenetic
relations and evolution of Cottidae. References 642, illustrations 85.

Introduction

The Cottidae family is the largest group of fish, with regard to number of species,
in the ichthyofauna of the USSR and adjacent waters. Bxpreasly the Cottidae con-
stitute the most substantial element of the fauna of our northern and far eastern
seas. Thus, Andriyashev (1939b) reports 297 fish species in the Bering Sea,

65 of which are Cottidae, i.e., over one-fifth (21.92) of its entire ichthyofauna.

Cotfidae are represented by 10 speciesin the Kara and Chukotsk seas of the 56 and
&4 species of fish, respectively, known in these seas (Andriyashev, 1954). Schmidt
(1950) cites about 50 species of Cottidae for the Sea of Okhotsk, or almost one-
fifth of the entire fish fauna. Hilimovsky (1964) stresses in particular that

45 out of the 140 species of fish incoasta1.regions of the Aleutian Archipelago,
or almost one-third, consist of bullheads of the Cottidae family, and no other

families can compete with them in this regard. Cottidae play an exceptionally
large part in the fauna of Lake Baykal; all 26 hullhead species are endemic
to this lake (Taliyev, 1955).

As yet, very little has been done with regard to working out the morphological
bases of the system of the Cottidae family and particularly with respect to

23
FOR OFFICLA1.lEﬂ!(”‘LY
I VI\ VA I l‘vla'lh was. Vanna

cVolutionary relations between the taxons it includes. In this respect, the
uaykal bullheads were the "luckiest," since comprehensive studies thereof resulted
in the excellent monograph by Taliyev (1955). In this work, the author devoted
several pages to evolution of bullheads of the Cottidae family in connection with
the origin and formation of endemic bullhead fauna of Lake Bayksl. Current con-
ceptions of the scope and relations within Cottidse and families close to it

are based on the rather concise, but morphologically validated work of Tarsnets
(1941), "Classification and Origin of Bullheads of the Cottidae Family."

A large group of father-lasher bullheads. which Taranets (1961) placed in the
Hyoxocephalinae subfamily numbering 16 genera with 48 species, according to Taranets,
occupies the central position in this family. Schmidt (1950), Taliyev (1955) and
Bolin (1967b) stressed the leading role of Hyoxocephalinae among the Cottidae.

Not only are the species of this subfamily numerous, but they are extremely

diverse. Father-lasher bullheads are among the most common elements of the

benthic ichthyofauna of all our northern and far eastern seas. Moreover, they

are quite numerous within the range of their habitat, inhabiting seas from the
littoral zone to depths of about 2000 m, .e., they are also among the deepest

water fish in the Cottidae family. Some species form concentrations of commercial
magnitude. Thus, in 1970, 2653tons of bullheadswerecaught in the Northeast Atlantic
(Statistical Information on USSR Fishing in the Northeast Atlantic ...,l97lb),

and 1283 tons were caught in the Baltic Sea (Statistical Information ...,_ 1971a).

The Cottidae species studied are very important to work on zoogeography and origin
of ichthyofauna of different bodies of water.

The foregoing explains, to some extent, the reason for the increased interest of
ichthyologists all over the world in bullheads of this group and Cottidae in
general. Hence it is understandable that this book, which has some prior history,
was the logical development of the interest of Russian ichthyologists in this
group of fish.

Originally, the work was planned as a study on the "Fauna of the USSR," where
attention would have been focused on osteological and external morphological
distinctions of structure, which are generally used extensively and constantly in
studies of fish. However, in the course of this work, I consistently encountered
instances where the status of the species was quite vague and the range diffuse,
i.e., it was impossible to offer a clearcut description of the species and, quite
often, of the genus as well. It was necessary to find some morphological criteria,
which had not been discovered before (if they existed at all) that would permit
demonstration of rather distinct species—specific differences in the group under
study.

As a result of comprehensive studies of the morphology of different systems, in-
cluding osteology and external morphology of many species of the Hyoxocephalinae
s. l. subspecies, it was found that the species and entire groups of species

are quite distinguishable, primarily according to quantity, structure and,

first of all, topography of integumental canals and pores of the seismosensory
system of the head and body. Bxpressly the structural distinctions of the seismo-
sensory system or, as it is usually inaccurately, but commonly called the"lateral
line organs.“ enabled us to comprehend, to a certain degree of course, the sys-
tematic correlations in the Hyoxocephalinaes.L subfamily. Having some degree

of species specificity, the general structural plan of the seismosensory system

26
F‘MRCNWNCIAI.IEHECNVL¥
turned out to be profoundly different in the two tribes with the most species-
Hyoxocephalini and Artediellini, subfamily Hyoxocephalinae(in the scope adopted

by Taranets, 1941). Structural differences in the seismosensory system of
hooked-horn bullheads (Artediellini of Taranets) and all other representatives of
this subfamily made it possible to validate the independence of the hook-horns

in a separate subfamily (Artediellinae), along with the use of other morphological
structural distinctions. Its species-specificity made it possible to clearly
distinguish within these two subfamilies lower taxons through species. This,

in turn, made it possible to make broader use of the distinctions of external mor-

phology, which it had been sometimes impossible to detect before exact differ-
entiation between species.

in the course of our work, we ecountered a number of methodological difficulties.
The main one was the absence of developed terminology to designate the numerous
canals and pores of the seismosensory system of the fish head. Usually, no atten-
tion was paid to such structural distinctions of the peripheral branches of the
seismosensory system when it was studied. since it was essentially the route and
nature of the canals that were studied. Apparently, this is why insufficient de-
tails were provided about the peripheral branches of the seismosensory system and
it is the reason for absence of conventional terminology for them (Hakushok, 1958,
i961c; Jskubowski, 1965; Cowan, 1970, 1971). It was necessary to not only find a
convenient method to study the system proper and stock material, but primarily

to systematize the large quantity of pores and cutaneous canals which appeared,

at first glance, to be quite disorderly in arrangement. After this, it was
necessary to develop a system of designations, with which it would be convenient,
to some extent, of course, to work in describing the structural distinctions of
the fish sense organs under study. Since this is, to some extent, the first
attempt at a comprehensive description of the morphology of the peripheral
branches of the seismosensory system, this author realizes that it is far from
perfect, and would be very appreciative of all critical comments and additions
that would improve it.

Comprehensive studies of the topography of the seismosensory system as applied
to systematics was largely instrumental in developing the conceptions submitted
in this book concerning the validity of different taxons and their systematic

rank, which led to development of conceptions concerning the evolutionary relations
of the fish species studied.

The large number of species and their considerable morphological variety made it
possible to trace on vast (in the sense of species) and moreover related material
the following: in the first place, the diversity of structure, primarily the
topography of peripheral branches (canals and pores) of the seismosensory system
of closely related forms with the same general structural plan thereof; in the
second place, the significant differences in structure of central parts of the
seismosensory system (morphology of canals) and communication with the environment
and, in the third place, which is the main point, this diversity enabled us to
demonstrate and trace the direction and sequence of evolutionary changes in struc-
ture of the seismosensory system of species of the same genus, different genera
and similar genera. As a result, we fOund instances of morphological parallelism,
where species formed homologous series in the meaning of Vavilov (1967) and
ecological parallels in the meaning of Berg (1935). As a result, all this made

it possible to propose. of course with the use of the entire set of studied
morphological structural distinctions. a system of subfamilies, their position

25

IND! OFFIC1A1.USE(NVLY
among Cottidae and to submit a scheme of probable phylogenetic relations between
taxons in this group. It is expressly on the basis of comprehensive morphologi-
cal analysis of structural distinctions of the seismosensory system of all repre-
sentatives of the Hyoxocephalinae and Artediellinae subfamilies that 1 demonstrated
(Neyelov, 1967a, 1967b, 1971a. 1971b, 1973a, 1976, 1977) that simplification of
structure of peripheral branches-oligomerization according to DogeIL-should be
considered one of the main directions of evolutionary transformations of this
system of sense organs in bullheads and sculpins.

In working out the system of subfamilies, we also used some of the osteological
distinctions of structure of the skull and axial skeleton (mainly for substantia-
tion and characterization of subfamilies). For characteristics of various taxons,
extensive use was made of external morphological structural features, which are
generally used in systematizing and identifying Cottidae (along with new or pre-
viously insufficiently used morphological structures). This enables us to make
use oftheabundant factual material already accumulated from all previous studies
and to include in the identifications and determination tables external morpholo-
gical structures that can be reaoily seen with the most cursory examination of
fish and could always be compared to already existing descriptions.

Such synthesis of morphological structures which were used for the first time and
external morphological distinctions used previously was instrumental in more
accurate utilization of these features and made it possible to_describe more

fully a given taxon within tHe form of a brief diagnosis. It is expressly because
of these considerations that I resisted the temptation of constructing identi-
fication tables and offering taxon diagnoses solely on the basis of the dis-
tinctions of the seismosensory system, although this could have been done (as,

for example, was done by Illick, 1956 and Nelson. 1972).

in View of the foregoing, it was necessary to alter the initial direction of
research, devoting more attention to morphology than fauna proper.

This book consists of an introduction and five chapters. The first chapter deals
with the history of research on the seismosensory system, general conception of
its structure, function and use of its morphological distinctions in systematics
and phylogenesis.’ The second chapter is concerned with morphology of the seismo-
sensory system of cottoid bullheads and sculpins and contains the following:
information about the volume of material studied, terminology for peripheral
branches (canals and pores) of the seismosensory system which was developed and

is proposed for Cottidse, general morphological description of this system in

both subfamilies, description of genera and species with reference to seismo-
sensory system, and it is illustrated with original drawings. The third chapter
contains a morphological validation of the independence of Hyoxocephalinae and
Artediellinae subfamilies and lower ranking taxons. Chapter 4 has information
about the scope of the subfamilies under study and changes in the system of these
fish, as compared to the classification of Taranets. This chapter includes identi-
fication tables for all taxons through the subspecies, characteristics of sub-
families, tribes and genera, and diagnoses for all lower taxons. The diagnoses
are listed in the identification tables in the form of an expanded thesis or
antithesis. There too is brief information about the distribution and habitat
depth. After the description of each genus, its scope is indicated--list of
species and the main synonyms. The synonyms are provided in full for taxons

FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY
from the genus level up. Since the complete validated name, with its author, is
given for all of the species studied, the author's name is omitted in the rest of
the book where only their Latin names are given. The Latin name of all other
mentioned species is given along with its author.

adopted a decision to consider 1814 the year of publication of "Zoographis
Rosso-Asiatica" by Pallas (Vol 3, Fishes) (Svetovidov. 1976), unlike the previously
used year of 1811. this change is taken into consideration in indicating the year
of description of the relevant Pallasisn species.

The book concludes with Chapter 5, in which there is discussion of direction of
specialization of the seismosensory system, its evolution as a system of sense
organs that implement direct contact between the organism and habitat, questions
of evolution of the systematic groups studied and offers a scheme of phylogenetic
relations within the Hyoxocephalinae and Artediellinae subfamilies.

This work constitutes an attempt at systematiastion of morphological details of
strucrure of the seismosensory system and to use this system of sense organs for

the purpose of classification and identification of taxons on the subspecies-
subfamily rank.

This work was done in the laboratory of ichthyology of the Zoological Institute,
USSR Academy of Sciences. I wish to express my profound appreciation to the
management of this institute and laboratory for granting me the opportunity to work
in that laboratory and make use of its rich fish collection. I wish to express my
sincere appreciation and profound gratitude to A. P. Andriyashev, corresponding
member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, for his considerate and attentive attitude
throughout my work on the monograph and for taking on the Job of editing the
manuscript. The advice and constant aid of Anatoliy Petrovich were largely
instrumental in following the adopted direction of research. I am also profoundly
grateful to the never to be forgotten c. U. Lindberg for his constant interest

in my work, valuable advice and availability for consultation whenever necessary,
as well as the opportunity to use the abundant bullhead catches of the Kuril-
Sakhalin expedition. I am sincerely grateful to V. M. Hakushok, who unintentionally
was the inspiration for the chosen direction of investigation for his advice in
making the morphological drawings. To all of the laboratory staff, my friends

and coworkers and particularly senior laboratory technicians A. A. Korovkina,

H. S. Morozova and V. R Prirodina I am profoundly grateful, and I thank all of
them for their constant assistance in everyday work and support, without which

the book would hardly have been completed. I offer my sincere gratitude to

the staff of the Zoological Institute library, and particularly to the bright me-
mory of Ivan Georgiyevich Husatov, for their constant aid in bibliographic work.
without this library and its sharp staff our work would have been simply incon-
ceivable. Hy sincere gratitude goes to all conrades and friends who were in-
volved in some way or other in this work. I an profoandly grateful to artists

H. H. Zharenkov and N. D. Ogloblina for rendering in India ink the author's
original morphological drawings and diagrams sketched in pencil. I take this
opportunity to express my appreciation to V. V. Fedorov,a L. S. Kodolov, V. P.
Shuntov on the staff of TINRO [Pacific Ocean Scientific Research Institute of
Fisheries and Oceanography], 0. G. Kusakin, V. H. Hatyushin and V. I. Pinchuk on
the staff of the Soil Biology Institute of DVNTs [Far East Research Center?] of the
Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences, as well as all other comrades

27
INNRCHWWCJAI.USE(NVLV
for placing at my disposal the Cottidae caught in the basin of the Pacific Ocean.
1 am deeply grateful to doctors D. M. Cohen (U. S. N. H.) and J. Nielsen (Univ.
2001. Museum, Copenhagen) for granting the opportunity of examining bullhead
specimens lacking in our collections, which they were kind enough to send me.
Finally, I wish to thank with all my heart my Polish colleague, Doctor H. I.
Jakubowski, who was kind enough, during his visit to the Zoological Institute,
to help me learn to use the original techniques he developed for examining
organs of the seismosensory system.

FOOTNOTES

1. The Russian name for fish of the Cottidae family—-"ksrchakovyye" or
"rogatkovyye" [father-lashers or horned fish] (Bass, Lindberg, 1971) does
not always apply well to all species, so that in addition to these names,
this author has also used the name, "bullheads," which is old and has been
in wide use for a long time, and currently used to refer only to the Gobiidae
family; the name, "sculpins," is used for freshdwater species of this family.

2. Tohisprofound regret, the author was unable to make use here of the excellent

monograph by Disler, published in 1977, dealing with morphology and develop-
ment of seismosensory system organs of Euselachiae, or for reasons beyond his
control to make use of the interesting works of Cowan (1970, 1971, 1972a,
1972b, 1973) and Kartavtsev (1975) dealing with species of the genus Myoxo-
cephalus in the discussion of his own findings (chapter 5).

3. Presently a scientist in the laboratory of ichthyology of the Zoological
Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences.

CONTENTS Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Seismosensory System of Fish and Methods of Studying It 8
1. Historical survey 8
a. Morphology 8
b. Function 15
2. Use of distinctions of seismosensory system in systematics and
phylogenesis 21
a. History of the question and its present status 21
b. Use of distinctions of seismosensory system in systematics and
phylogenesis of Cottoidei 27
c. Some aspects of variability of morphology of seismosensory
system organs 30
d. Free neuromasts 32
Chapter 2. Morphology of Seismosensory System of Bullheads
(Hyoxocephalinae) and horned fish (Artediellinae) 36
1. Material and methods 34
2. Terminology and designations of elements of seismosensory system 35
a. General theses 35
b. Designations for canals and pores 37
3. Description of Myoxocephalinae and Artediellinae subfamilies with
reference to seismosensory system 42
General information #2
28

F0l1MﬂﬂCUULlEEZONLY
Subfamily Hyoxocephalinae
Hyoxocephslini tribe
Genus Hyoxocephalus
Genus Megalocottus
Genus Triglopsis
Microcottini tribe
Genus Hicrocottus
Genus Porocottus
Genus Argyrocottus
Taurocottini tribe
Genus Taurocottus
Genus Tricbocottus
Enophryini tribe
Genus EnOphrys
Genus Aspicottus
Genus Taurulus
Genus Micrenophrys
Subfanily Artediellinae
Genus Artediellus
Genus Artedielloides
Genus Artediellichthys
Genus Artediellina
Genus Zesticelua
Genus Cottiusculus
Chapter 3. Morphological Validation of Subfamilies Hyoxocephalinae and
Artediellinae, and Their Place in the System
1. History of the question and classification of A. Ya. Taranets
2. Seisnosensory system
3. Skull
a. Sensory canals of cranial bones and structure of frontal bones
b. Myodone
c. Some other distinctions of cranial morphology
4. Thoracic cingulum and axial skeleton
5. External morphology .
a. Structure of some visceral bones of the head
b. Fins
c. Nasal and preopercular spines
d. Granulation of membrane bones
e. Osseous investment of the bead and trunk, and appendages of

the skin
6. Coloration
7. Biology

Chapter 6. System of Hyoxocephalinae and Artediellinae
Main changes made in the system
Table for identifying subfamilies
I. Subfalily Hyoxocephalinae
Table for identifying tribes
l. Hyoxocephaliui tribe
Table for identifying genera
l. Genus Hyoxocephslus
Table for identifying species
2. Genus Hegalocottus
3. Genus Triglopais

29

FOI1DFFNJA1.USE(HVLY
2. Hicrocottini tribe

Table for identifying genera

1. Genus Hicrocottus
2. Genus Porocottus

Table for identifying subgenera, species and subspecies

3. Genus Argyrocottus
3. Tsurocottini tribe

Table for identifying genera

l. Genus Taurocottus
2. Genus Trichocottus
6. Bnophryini tribe

Table for identifying genera

1. Genus Enophrys
2. Genus Aspicottus

Table for identifying species

1. Genus Tsurulus
2. Genus Hicrenophrys
11. Subfamily Artediellinse

Table for identifying genera

l. Genus Artediellus

Table for identifying subgenera, species and subspecies

2. Genus Artedielloides

3. Genus Artediellichthys

6. Genus Artediellins
‘ 5. Genus Zesticelus

Table for identifying species

1. Genus Cottiusculus

Table for identifying species

Chapter 5. Main Directions of Evolution of Seisnosensory Systes and
Phylogenetic Relations in Subfanilies Hyoxocephalinae and Artediellinae

Bibliography
Index of Latin Names

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Nauka". 1979

10,657
cso: 1860/101

30

FOI1HHHCJAJ.USE(INLY

133
133
136
135
137
161
162
162
162
163
163
166
165
167
168
169
169
150
152
153
155
159
159
160
160
161

'161

162

166

181
201
ENVIRONMENT

uoc S75+S77 . 4

Sverdlovsk EKOLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Nov-Dec 81 (manuscript received 21 Apr 81)
pp 72-81

[Article by R. A. Pshenichnov and Yu. V. Pashin. Institute of Ecology of Plants

and Animals, Ural Scientific Center, USSR Acadeuv of Sciences; and Institute of
General Genetics, USSR Acadsnv of Sciences]

next] Basing themselves on a review of the literature and
observation results, the authors describe the optima variants
of bacterial test systems and validate their suitability.
ecumy and promise as a scans for screening environmental
mutagens. wservation results are presented. and the future
directions of research and possible li-itations of. the nethod

are noted.

The spectrum of chemicals in the environnent having genetic effects changed signi-
ficantly in recent years as a result of swift developaent of the scientific-technical
revolution. throughout its long evolution the hunan population has been exposed to
natural nutagens: in recent decades, however. the effects of artificially synthesised
conpounds-wnes which the hunt: body as well as animals, plants and microorganisms
had not encountered formerly-have assured dominance. merefore evaluation of the
effect of mutagenic factors in the environment is acquiring imortant significance.
and the need has arisen for developing and introducing test systaus that would per-
unit us to reveal. among many new compounds, those which are genetically active. for

determining their nutagenic potential and for predicting their effects (2).

M009 dozens 0f test Objecu used to register mutagenicity, microorganisms—bacteria
primarily-are the most sensitive and sufficiently representative. m reasons for
this are:

l) Microorganism are a constant comment of all ecosystems, and their diversity,
abundance and contribution to the cycling of matter and energy in nature are ex-
trenely great. Oorrespondingly a study of their gene pool and heterogenicity, as
formed by the habitat, must become an object of constant attention and supervision.

2) Microorganism have a minimum reproductive period (measured in minutes and
hours) , and change in genotypes may be registered within a short time.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UI‘I'ILIAL hél‘s URL.

3) Bacteria have a haploid set of chromosones, and disturbance of the genotype is
followed ianediately by its phenotypic expression. The methods of determining

change in phenotype are rather diverse. As a rule they are sisple and practicable.

4) Many years of experience in testing hundreds of diverse chemical mutagens have
revealed a high degree of correlation in their action upon ma preparations and

upon genetic structures in cultured cells, plants, animals, man and microorganisms
(7,8,17) .

It should be noted that the principal achievements of modern solecular genetics have
involved microorganisms . and primarily bacteria: therefore all data on genetic events
occurring in bacteria contain a large amount of information.

Moreover bacterial tests are relatively inexpensive to run, they can be carried out
in large mmbers, and therefore they may be used extensively in various screening
programs. 'mey can be used to detect gene mutations, owing to which rare events
can be revealed in large populations within a short testing time. Point or gene
mutations that significantly influence the sire of the so-called "genetic load“
affect only a small part of a gene (about one or two pairs of a total of about
1,000 pairs of bases raking up a gene). Substitution, addition or deletion of bases
is what usually occurs. Point mutations are usually registered in bacteria as re-
verse mutations, in which case a specific mutant allele say be reverted by substi-
tuting one pair of bases by another, while a mutation associated with shifting of the
“reading framemrk" may be reverted by shifting the “reading framework.“ M types
of similar cells are used in mutagenicity tests: 1) cells with a normal nus repair
mechanism and 2) cells in which one or several steps of the damaged DNA restoration
pathway are absent.

The simplest classical test is performed in Petri dishes seeded with test cultures
of Escherichia coli (44) or Salmonella typhimurlum (12, 14). no substance to be
tested is applied to the center of each of these dishes, thus creating a gradient

in its concentration from the center to the rim. If the substance turns out to be
nutagenic a ring of induced mutants forms about it. In this case predominant death
of strains with a defective repair mechanism would indicate that a reaction had
occurred with cellular sun, and consequently that the given substance is genetically
active. An important prerequisite of these tests is that the substance to be tested
must be able to diffuse in agar. If it does not diffuse, the indicator straixp say
be processed with different concentrations of suspensions of the substance. For
practical purposes no difficulties arise with water-soluble eoapounde.

since Ames' first works were published. test strains have undergone continual im-
provement through the introduction of additional mutations (for maple ones which
can reveal defects in the polysaccharide mesbrane of a cell that increase its per-
meability, and defects in the repair system) and through introduction of episomes.
use of lysogenic cultures and so on, making them more sensitive than wild strains.
my over 40 strains of S. typhimuriun. 40 of E. coli and about 10 of Bacillus
subtilis are used for genetic screening: however, only the 20 or so strains shown
in the table below have practical significance.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
General Characteristics of Bacterial Strains Used Most often in Genetic
Screening (Brusick et al., 1976; 7, 8, 52, etc_.2'

  
 
     

 
 

 

 

 

“amuse (2) 11:32,“. Beams-HI m:
upraulna more
u ocuoauol "Mill ”canteens
nynuuu (We)
Salmonella TA- ISM (llys om) uvr B R — FS
lyphimun'um TA- I530 R — BPS
(hys' — hys') IA~I535 (by: Go.) Ila. uvr B R— BPS
muses R — FS
114538 (by: 0w) rl’a. an 8 R— FS
TA-l960 (bye O.) my 8 R — BPS
TA-Iw R - BPS
11-98 R -- FS
Escherichia pol A-
rala' WP. R - BPS
llr)" —arg ’) WP; on A' R — BPS
("E-‘3'Z'l KI: ’80, us FM
CM“. R — BPS
CM“: R - BPS
wane/Pam ER
Bacillus Hl7 Rec' l Hnmdepoeauae
sublilis . $45 Rec (5) pocn

 

 

‘Synbols: hys—histidine: try-ntryptophan;
arguarginine; rfawnutation increasing cell
wall permeability due to defects in the poly-
saccharide layer: uvr—Iutations causing dis-
turbance of excisional repair; R-reverse
mutation; BPS-«base pair substitution; P8-
"reading framework” shift: lib-forward nuta-
tions; BR—excisional repair; mc’ureocnbina-
tion insufficiency.

Key:
1. Organism and principal mutation 4. Revealed type of Iutational change
2. Strain (effect)
3. Additional mutation 5. Growth inhibition

Because of the high specificity of the test strains. cases may occur in vhich mutagens
are incapable of inducing detectable types of reversions, and therefore the need for

constantly seeking and expanding the set of strains with different mtation mechanism:
is obvious.

In contrast to nutagenic factors such as ionizing radiation and ultraviolet eniesions.

chenical coapounds undergo complex metabolic biodegradation on entering the organism.
In this case nutagens nay transforn into inactive cowounds, while on the other hand

genetically inactive Substances (indirect nutagens) may acquire nutagenic properties.
'me metabolic pathways of xenobiotic substances may vary in some ways, but the Iain

role in their biological transformation is played by cytochrome P450, an element of

33

FOROFFICIALUSBONLY
I'UK Ul’l'l‘ IAI. USE. URL!

the mono-oxygenase system associated with intracellular membranes. This system can

be found in a number of microbial species, insects, amphibians, fish, reptiles, higher
plants, birds and manuals.

Grin and Goldberger (l) erphasized the biochemical universality of the operation of
this system, which is responsible for oxidation of lipid-soluble xenobiotic substances
and for their conversion into readily excreted hydrophilic compounds. It is an im-

portant component of more-general systems responsible for inmmnochemical homeostasis
(3). Therefore metabolic activation of the tested substance, which may be done

in viva or in vitm, is a mandatory stage of genetic testing. In the former case the

would be the recipient media method), after which it acts upon test microorganisms
injected into the abdominal cavity, circulatory system or testicles of the recipient.
Indicator cells processed in this fashion are removed and analyzed by a particular
method. Indicator microorganisms have alsobeen found useful for revealing the ways
of penetration, dissemination and elimination of mutagens with biological fluids—
the urine and blood of animals processed by premutagens. However, the latter

The "recipient medium" method is not'broadly accepted owing to the need for admini-

stering large doses of the tested substances, its expensiveness and other reasons
such as nonuniform distribution of the active substance in the body and tissue-specific
activation or deactivation of the mutagen. An infectious process may arise in manuals
given a significant number of test strain bacteria when the recipient is sick, and
so on. But even if the recipient remains outwardly healthy. in this case the bacterial

test strains would be subjected to the strong influence of the host's protective
mechanisms.

The method of metabolic activation by microsomal enzymes in vim has enjoyed the

broadest acceptance. Considering the biological universality of the mono-oxygenase
system in relation to metabolism of xenobiotic substances, the appropriate enzymatic

preparation may be obtained from the tissues of mice, rabbits, rats, Chinese hamsters,
dogs, guinea pigs, rhesus monkeys, baboons and man (32,36). Although mono-oxygenase
activity is typical of most organs rich in epithelial cells (stomach, intestine,
kidneys, lungs, skin) , the comenly accepted and proven source of enzyme preparation
is liver tissue, which is responsible for more than 90 percent of xenobiotic meta-
bolism. Liver tissue from sexually mature Histar line male rats is used most often
for this purpose.

Although microsomal enzymatic activity is inherent to all healthy organisms, it may
be subjected to additional induction and activation by chemical substances present
in food and the environment or introduced into the organism by artificial means. It
increases when a large nuber of drugs, food additives, salts of heavy metals, poly-
cyclic hydrocarbons, pesticides and other compounds enter the body. For practical
purposes microsomal oxygenases may be induced successfully with sodium phenobarbital,
arokhlor, luminal, diazepam and other substances, which are administered intraperi-
toneally or per 08 for 3-5 days prior to dissection of the animals (18, 31, etc.).

Sampled liver tissue is homogenized at a temperature close to 0', and the obtained
preparation is used within the first 2 hours.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Substances to be tested may be metabolically activated by imobilizing the microsomal
preparation and the necessary cofactors in agar, or by processing the test strains
with a suspension of the substance to be tested (13,33). There may also be cases

in which a mutagen cannot be detected (for exasple a chemical substance may be
metabolized not by liver enzymes but by intestinal microflora: the active metabolite
may be too unstable to achieve an effective concentration: there may be strongly

study most representatives of all classes of chemical cospounds. They have been
found to be convenient and effective in revealing the genetic activity of hydro-
carbons, their derivatives, drugs, nitro derivatives, nitrogenous bases, nucleotides.
nucleosides, salts of heavy metals, inorganic substances, steroids, low molecular
weight organic substances, pesticides, herbicides, defoliants, complex mutagens,
natural physical factors and so on. may include widespread and rarely encountered
compounds, and comnonly accepted and 'exotic" substances-~foodstuffs, food additives,
cosmetic dyes, meat curing fluids, fungal toxins, meadow grass extracts, alcohols,

waste water, tobacco smoke components, narcotics, and even the combustion products
of labdanum and church incense.

We may assert from an analysis of 1,015 works that authors have used the following
models with increasing frequency for genetic control: Cytogenic tests in man, tests
run on blood cells, experiments with plants, primary and transplanted animal cell
cultures, DNA preparations and microorganisms, correspondingly in 5.9, 6.4, 7.5,
15.2, 16.4, 17.2 and 31.3 percent of the works.‘

The authors selected microbial test systems from practically a third of all of these
works in order to evaluate their genetic effect, and owing to their simplicity,
practicability and quickness they were able to evaluate 34, 101, 465 and 855 different
compounds in comparable observations within a short period of time (30,50,43,3S).

A tremendous amount of facts were accumulated, facts which can and must become the
basis for making the corresponding conclusions and recon-endations on the most
suitable use of bacterial tests and for imposing limitations on the use of these
methods. These issues were discussed specially in 1978 in Arlington (USA) and
Dortmund (PRC), in May 1979 in Banbury (USA), in November 1980 in Ottawa (Canada)
and elsewhere. The resulting recommendations have already found their way into some
national programs (19,24,49,SS). -

The International Commission on Protection from Environmental Mutagens and Carcinogens
(ICPEMC) and the Environmental mtagen Information Center (ERIC), created in 1977,

are making a major contribution to the creation and standardization of quick screening
test systems. In all recomendations and adopted programs, evaluation of the muta-

municity of chemical compounds using bacterial test systems is the first and mandatory
stage of analysis. The following are also reccumended:

 

"these percentages are the result of an analysis of the principal Soviet and
foreign publications of 1979-1980, including those in the abstract card index

'Mutagenic Effects of Chemical Factors“ published by the Biology Division of
the All-Union Institute of Scientific and 'Dechnical Information.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK UDI'llJAL bar. UNLI

i) using a single set of test strains--TA-1535, TIA-1537, Tit-1538, TA-98, Tit-100 and
Sulntmella typhimriun. and periodically verifying their genotype;

2) working with bacterial cultures undergoing logarithmic growth at a density of
1-2-10" cells/ml;

3) using the 5-9 microsomal fraction from the liver of activated rats, preparing
fresh preparation each time or developing reliable methods of stabilizing prepara-
tions;

4) testing the spontaneous Instability of test strains and performing control tests
with known direct and potential mutagensz

S) considering the toxicity of the substance to be tested;
0) determining the dose-effect curve;

7) in the concluding stage it would also be desirable to document the results in a
computer program, which would be the formal recording unit and the basis for the

program of further tests (21).

It should be noted that most of these recomendations were taken into account in the
methodological directives "A Test System for Evaluating the Hutagenic Activity of
Environmental Contaminants Using Salmonella" (8). Timely publication of these
directives played a major role in standardization and development of work in the
Soviet Union. The following may be regarded as unsolved problems hindering intro-
duction of bacterial test systems:

the need for creating a single collection of lyophilized test strain cultures:
development and industrial production of dry microsomal fraction preparations;

production of a single standardized outfit containing everything needed for control
of substances using bacterial test systems.

The first of these tasks is being worked on by the Institute of Ecology of Plants
and Animals of the USSR Academy of Sciences Ural Scientific Center, which has
developed the processes and created a collection of lyophilized Salmonella typhi-
muriun cultures suited to long-term storage, transportation and use anywhere. It
has been demonstrated that lyophilization promotes long—term (more than a year)
preservation of the properties of indicator strains.

Researchers have traveled different paths in their search for a stable microsomal
fraction. The possibility for long-term storage of this fraction at supeer temper-
atures on the order of —l93’C has been demonstrated (16). However, such long storage
and transportation of the preparation were associated with certain difficulties,

and thus this approach has not enjoyed widespread acceptance. me Institute of
Ecology of Plants and Animals of the USSR Academy of Sciences Ural Scientific Center
has developed a semi-industrial method of making lyophilized capsulated microsomal
fraction preparation not imposing special requirements on storage and transportation
and maintaining its enzymatic activity for more than a year (the time of observation).
Industrial production of the preparation is planned to begin in 1982.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hence we arrive at a possibility for creating a single cosplex which would include,
besides lyophilized indicator cultures of test bacteria and dry microsomal prepara-
tion, a complete set of reagents and standard mutagens necessary for positive con-
trol. Creation of such a preparation outfit and broad introduction of bacterial
test systems are among the priority tasks of the genetic control service.

There are other problems requiring immediate solution as well. As of today more
than 3.5 million different chemical compounds are known, and each year up to 80,000
more are synthesized, Of which 30.000 are produced on an industrial scale. A
selective study has shown that about 20 percent of them exhibit some level of

genetic activity (2,54). Naturally we could hardly expect testing of all of them
in the foreseeable future.

We also know that in natural conditions these substances act upon the bodies of man
and animals, plants and microorganisms not in isolation but as various combinations,
with the ingredients present in different concentrations. This means that oo-muta-
genic action (activation of potential mutagens by nonmtagenic substances) and the
effects of summation, amplification or attenuation are possible (15,25,27,37,4S,56).
A large number of observations have shown that temperature fluctuations, the action
of electric and magnetic fields, light-induced activation, and the composition of
the medium in which mixtures act have a certain influence on the end effect of
mutagens (20,22,26,34,4l).

Hence arises a new and great ilportant problem-development of ways for determining
the cumulative action of mutagens in the three principal environments (air, soil,
water). This would allow us to adopt a new, more sensible approach to organizing
the genetic control service--primary mapping by means of smational tests, revela-
tion of zones of high genetic danger and subsequent determination of the concrete
causes behind this danger. For the moment we can cite only a limited number of
studies based on this approach. They include an evaluation of the total mutagenic
activity of soil water in the Surgut petroletm-gas region and of the waters of the
Mississippi. and mapping of mutagens in the atmosphere above Norway (4,11). A
similar approach would also be sensible for analyzing the possible mutagenic danger
of multiple-ingredient local mixtures-~industrial wastes, gas exhausts and so on.

In the opinion of specialists, as reflected in recomndations of a symposium of the
Canadian Society of Geneticists, determination and quantitative evaluation of the
action of individual mutagens or their combinations is not yet enough to allow pre-
diction of the end results of change in the gene pool of ham, animal, plant and
microorganism populations within the limits of a closed ecosystem, and all the more
so an open ecosystem. We would have to agree with the opinion that the influence
of mutagens upon a population should be evaluated on the basis of the size of the
genetic load and the frequency of arisal of hereditary pathology (38). This is why
increasingly greater significance has been attached in recent years to developing
a system of genetic monitoring or surveillance of the dynamics of the genetic load
in human, animal and plant populations inspace and in time (9,10,28,29,39,48,51).

In the Soviet Union. the Interdepartmental Scientific-Technical Council on Complex
Problems of Environmental Protection and Sensible Use of Natural Resources has fore-

seen development of genetic monitoring of human populations (the Institute of General
Genetics) and a similar system for natural bacterial populations (the Institute of

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ecology of Plants and Animals of the USSR Academy of Sciences Ural Scientific Center).
The object of the observations is the ubiquitous indicator species E. 0011: came.
Research is embracing all of the basic units of the species' natural circulation
(healthy people, drinking water, domestic wastes, open—air water basins) and groups
of clones isolated from industrial wastes containing a high concentration of chemical

mutagens, from the cooling ponds of atomic electric power plants and from patients
subjected to intensive antibiotic and chemotherapy.

The system used to describe the gene pool of natural populations includes the
following genetically determined and ecologically significant characteristics:

a) prototrophism, or auxotrophy, with the type of trophic dependence being stated;
b) reproduction dynamics on solid and liquid media, with Kr, td, Mm, Xm, tm and

Y3 recorded; c) the possibility of utilizing basic carbohydrates and alcohols for
development: 6) antagonism in relation to accompanying bacterial flora: e) sensi-
tivity to bacteriocins produced by satellite microbes; f) resistance to the principal
antibiotics, activated chlorine, ultraviolet light and so on. The obtained results
are subjected to biometric treatment. systems analysis and computer comparison. In
this case E. coli conmme is the indicator microbial species, and periodic analysis
of the gene pool of its natural populations would obviously allow us to evaluate the

. resulting action of anthropogenically changing natural factors and of regulatory
mechanisms within populations (6).

Summing up the published data and the results of our own observations, we should note
at the same time that bacterial test systems, as with any other method, have their

limitations. Some researchers (40,42,47) feel it ilpossible to use this approach to
reveal all genetic damage, to test all antimicrobial agents and to reveal carcinogens
activated by other means, apart from liver microsomes. Pull quantitative correlation
is not always revealed in experiments using bacterial and other more-complex systems.

But this does not in any way reduce the value of bacterial test systems, which are

a mandatory stage of screening and the simplest, most convenient and fastest model,
and when combined with selective tests run on animal cell cultures (5,23), they allow
us to reveal and quantitatively evaluate the genetic effect of all substances, their
mixtures and other environmental factors. This system has already received inter—
national recognition, and it will enjoy even broader acceptance in the future.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Grin, D. and Goldberger, R., "Holekulyarnyye aspekty zhizni" ['me Molecular
Aspects of Life], Moscow, 1968.

.3. Dubinin, N. P. and Pashin, Yu. V., ”Mutagenez i okruzhayushchaya sreda"
[Mutagenesis and the Environment], Moscow, Nauka, 1978, 128 pp.

3. Kovalev, 1. ‘le. and Malenkov, A. G., "the Flow of Foreign Substances: The
Effect on Mankind,“ PRIRODA, No 9 (781), 1980, pp 90-101.

4. Kolotov, V. 14., Nikolayev, A. G. and Pshenichnov, R. A., "Geomikrobiologiya
poiska i razrabotka neftyanykh mestorozhdeniy" ['me Geomicrobiology of Exploring
and Developing Oil Deposits], Sverdlovsk, UN'l‘s AN SSSR, 1979, pp 138-140.

38

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
6.

7.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Pashin, Yu. V. . 'Practicability of Modern Test Systems for Evaluating the
Mutagcnhity of Environmental Factors," in ”Geneticheskiye posledstviya :agrya-

zneniya okruzhayushchey sredy" (Genetic Consequences of Environmental Pollution],
Moscow, 2d Edition, 1977, pp 85-88.

Pshenichnov, R. A. and Maslov, Yu. 8., “Study of the Heterogenicity of Natural
E. colt Populations as the First stage of Biological Monitoring,“ in ”Voproay
genetiki i selektsii na Urale i v Zaural'ye (inform. naterialy)" [Problems of

Genetics and Selection in the Urals and Transurals (Information Materials”,
Sverdlovsk, Me AN SSSR, 1979, pp 22-23.

Ponshteyn, L. 14., Revazova, Yu. A., and Vinkler, G. 1]., '0 nekotorykh podkhodakh
k otscnke mtaqennoy aktivncsti lekarstvennykh preparatov' [Some Approaches to

Evaluating the Mutagenic Activity of medicinal Preparations], Moscow, Nauka,
1977, pp 42-47.

Ponshteyn, 1.. PL, Kalinina, L. H., Polukhina, G. N., Abilev, S. x. and Shapiro,
A. A. , “Test-sistena otsenki mutagennoy aktivnosti zagryazniteley sredy na sal-
monellakh' [A Test System for Evaluating the Hutagenic Activity of Environmental
Contaminants Using Salmonella], Moscow, VINITI, 1977, 52 pp.

Khil'chevskaya, R. 1., “Possibilities of Using Morbidity Data and a Number of
Demographic Population characteristics for the Purposes of. Genetic Monitoring,”
in "Materialy zasedaniya Sektsii geneticheskikh aspektov v problems 'Chelovek i
biosfera" [Proceedings of a Meeting of the Section for Genetic Aspects of the
'Man and Biosphere“ Problem], Yerevan, 1979, pp 54-57.

shirinyan, G. 5., Batikyan, G. G. and Arutyunyan, R. #1., "Principles of Popula-
tion Monitoring for the Intensity of daemical Mutagenesis in the Armenian ssa,‘
in ”Voprosy mlekulyarnoy kletochnoy biologii. Heterialy nauch. kont." [Pro-
blems of Molecular Cell Biology. Scientific Conference Proceedings], Yerevan,
1979, pp 81-82.

Alfheim, I. and Holler, UL, "Mtagenicity of wig-Range Transported Atnospheric
Aerosols,” SCI. TOTAL mach, Vol 1 , No 3, 1979, pp 275-278.

Mes, B. N., "The Detection of Chemical Hutaqens With Bnteric Bacteria" in
ltollaendor, A. (Editor), "anemicel Mutagens, Principles and Methods for Their
Detection,” N.Y., Plenun Press, Vol 1, 1971, pp 267-282.

tunes, 3. N., Durston, w. 3., Yamsaki, B. and Lee, E. D., 'Carcinogens are
Mutagens. A simple Test Combining Liver Homogenates for Activation and Bacteria
for Detection,” PROC. NAT. ACAD. SCI. USA, Vol 70, 1973, pp 2,281-2,285.

Amos, 8. N., meann, Y. and Yanasaki, 3., ”Methods for Detecting Carcinogens
and Mutagens with the Salmonella/mamlian-Hicroaone Hutaqenicity Test,“
MUTATION RES., Vol 31, 1975, pp 347-364.

Arisawa, Nikio, Fujiu, Moria, Suhara, Yasuji and Matuyama, Hircmi 3., “Differen-

tial Hutagenicity of Reaction Products of Various Pyrazolones With Nitrite,“
MUTATION 835., Vol 57, No 3, 1978, pp 287-296.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

26.

27.

28.

Ashwood-Smith, M. J., ”Stability of Frozen Microsone Preparations for Use in the
Anes Salmonella Mutagenicity Assay," muons 1285., V01 69, N0 1, 1980, pp 199-200.

Bartelness, A., "chenical Hutagenesis in Manuals and Han," Heidelberg, Springer
Verlag, 1970, pp 69-78.

Beije, 8., Jenssen, D., Arrhenius, E. and Zetterqvist, M. A., “Isolated Liver

Perfusion-a 'Dool Hutagenicity 'Desting for theEvaluation of Carcinogens," CHEM.
BIOL. INTERACT" V01 27, No 1, 1979, pp 41-57.

Braun, R. and Schoneich, J., "The nitagenicity Testing System Used in the
German Democratic Republic,” in "Eval. Embryotoxicity, Mutagen and Carcinogen

Risks in New Drugs. Proc. 3d Syrp. 'noxicol. Test. Safety New Drugs (Prague,
1976)," Prague, 1979, pp 253-256.

Chrisman, C. L. and Baumgartner, A. P., “Micronuclei in Bone-Harrow Cells of
Mice Subjected to Hyperthernia," MUTATION £25., Vol 77, No 1, 1980, pp 95-97.

Claxton, Larry and Baxter, Richard, “The Cmputer Assisted Bacterial Test for
Nutagenesis,“ KEATION 835., V01 53, No 3, 1978, pp 345-350.

Comoner, Barry, Vithayathil, Antony J., Dolara, Piero, et al., “formation of
Huragens in Beef and Beef Extract During Cooking," SCIBNG, Vol 201, No 4359,
1978, pp 913-916.

Hollstein, lbnica, McCann, Joyce, Angelosanto, Frank A. and Nichols, Warren N.,
“Short-mm 'Dests for Carcinogens and Hutagens," MUTATION £38., Vol 65, No 13,
1979, pp 133-226.

Ilsie, Abraham IL, O'Neill, J. Patrick and McElheny, victor K., ”Quantitative
Hamlian Cell Hutagenesis and Hutagen Screening. A Report on Banbury
Conference 11.," MUTATION 1135., Vol 64, No 6, 1979, pp 437-440.

Ishizawa, it, Utsunomiya, T., Kinoshita, N. and ando, 1%., “Formation of Methyl-
nitrosocyananide Prom Methquuanidine and Sodium Nitrite in simlated Gastric
Juice and in Stonachs of Rats: Quantitative Estimation by a antagonicity Assay,"
J. NAT. CW]! INST., V01 62, No 1, 1979, pp 71-77.

Kada, Tsuneo, Morita, Kaziyoshil and Inoue, 'radashi, “Anti-mtagenic Action
of Vegetable Factor (8) on the nitagenic Principle of Tryptophan Pyrolysate,“
MWATION 1135., Vol 53, No 3, 1978, pp 351-353.

Kada, 'l‘suneo and Kanematsu, Nobutake, ”Reduction of N-Hethyl-N'-Nitro-N—Nitro-
soquanidine Induced Mutations by Cobalt chloride in Escherichia coli. ," ch.
JAP. ACAD., V01 854, No S, 1978, pp 234-237.

Kale, P. Y. and Baum, J. w., ”Sensitivity of Dmsophila melanogaater to Low
Concentrations of Gaseous Hutagens," MUTATION 1238., V01 68, No l, 1979, pp 59-68.

Klekowski, E. J. Jr., “Screening Aquatic Ecosystems for mtagens with Fern
Bioassays," ENVIRON. HEALTH PBRSPBCT., Vol 28, 1978, pp 99-102.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

d2.

43.

Lijinsky, w. and Andrews, A. H., ”The Mutagenicity of Nitrosanides in Salumtella
typhimamlun." MUTATION 1135., Vol 68, No 1, 1979, pp 1-8.

Magnusson, J., Hallstron, I. and Basel, C., 'Metabolic Activation of vinyl
Chloride in Drosophila melmogaater After Pretreatment with Inducers of Micro-
sonal Detoxication anynes,‘ MON 165., Vol 64, No 2, 1979, pp 138-139.

Haier, P., Philphot, R. it, Mohn, G. R. and Malling, H. V., ”Influence of Sub—
cellular Fractions of Illa-alien Rates on the mtagenic Activity of Nitrofurans

mward Escherichia coli. Presence of a Co-mtagen-Like Pactor,‘ mnou 1135.,
V01 63, No 2, 1979, pp 223-243.

Malling. H. V., “Comparison Between in vim and in viva Activation,‘I in “In
vitm Metabl. Act. Hutagenesis 'nest. Proc. Sylp.," 1978, pp 143-156.

McCoy, E. C., Hyman, J. and nosenkranz, H. 5., “Conversion of Environ-ental
Pollutant to Mutagens by Visible Light," BIOCHBH. MD BIOPHYS. RES. mm”
V01 89, No 2, 1979, pp 729-734.

McMahon, Robert 8., Cline, John C. and Moon, Christine, 2., 'Assay of
855 Test Chemical in Ten ’nester Strains Using a New Modification of the Apes
Test for Bacterial Hutagens,“ CANCER 123., Vol 39, No 3, 1979, pp 682-693.

Muller, D., Nelles, J., Deparade, B. and Arni, 9., “Studies or the Activity of
S9-Liver Fractions Prom Various Species in the Muse mast," MTIOOI 335., Vol 64,
No 2, 1979, pp 104-105.

Nagao, Minako, Yahagi, Takie and Sugimira, Takashi, “Differences in Effects
of Narharlan with Various Classes of Chemical mtagens and Amounts of 5-9,"
BIOCHEM. AND BIOPHYS. RES. comm” V01 83, No 2, 1978, pp 373-378.

Newcome, Howard 8., I'Problems of Assessing the Genetic Impact of nutagens on
Man," CAN. J. 6883?. AND C2101... Vol 20, No 4, 1978, pp 459-470.

Nilan, R. A., ”Potential of Plant Genetic System for Monitoring and Screening
Hutsgens,“ BNVIIDN. mm! PERS'ECT” Vol 27, 1979, pp 181-196.

Pini, L. A., Fabio, U. and Della, Cass 6., 'Considerzioni critiche e valuta-
zione di un test nicrobiologico quale netodo di screening per sostanze poten-
zialmente cancerogeno,” SECURITAS, Vol 63, No 5, 1978, pp 257—272.

Pool, B. L., 'Nachweis der mutagegen wirkung von S-Methoxypsoralen (Bergapten),“
ARZTL. KOSHB‘NL” Vol 9, No 6, 1979, pp 349-350, 352, 355.

Rinkus, s. and Legator, M. , "Deficiencies in the Microbial Activation System for
Mutagenic-Carcinogenic Screening,“ manor: 335., Vol 53, No 2, 1978, p 254.

Rinkus, St. L. and Legator, M. 5., ”Chemical Characterization of 465 Known or
Suspected Carcinogens and Their Correlation With Mutagenic Activity in the
Salmonella typhimm‘un System,“ CANCER 135., Vol 39. No 9, 1979, pp 3,289—3,318.

101

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

Rosonkranz, H. S., “Bacteriological Detection of Carcinogens," UHSCEIAU, Vol 74,
1974, pp 745-747.

Rosin, M. P. and Stich, H. r., “Inhibitory Effect of Reducing Agents on
N—Acetoxy- and N-Hydroxy-Z-Acetylaninotluorens-Induced Hutagenesis,‘ (NIGER 385.,
Vol 38, No 5. 1978, pp 1,307-1,310.

Sadaie, v. and Kada. 'r., “Mapping of nee-Genes in Bacillus aubtilia,“ mu. m.
NATL. ms'r. GENE?” Vol 23, 1972, pp 74-75.

Serres, Frederik, J. de., “Strength and Weaknesses of. Microbial ‘l‘est insults for
Predicting Human ksponse," J. mvmou. PATROL. AND IOXICOL., V01 1, No 2, 1977,
pp 43-48.

Serres, Frederik, J. de., “Introduction to Utilization of Higher Plant Systems
as Monitors of Environmental Hutagens," mm. HEAL!!! PBRSPECT., Vol 27, 1978,
pp 3-6.

Serrcs, Frederik, J. de. and Shelby, Michael, 0., 'mcouendations on Data
production and Analysis Using the Salmonella/Micron“: Hutagenicity Assay,"
MUTATION RES., Vol 64, No 3, 1979, pp 159-165.

sin-on, V. E. , "In Vitro Mutagenicity Assays of. Chemical Carcinogens and Related

Cospounds With Salmonella typhimim," 3. NM. cancsn INST” Vol 62, No 4,
1979, pp 893-899.

Stan, R. J. and Kulesov, N. P., 'Monitorovani genetic1ych ucinku factori zivotuiho
prostzedi v lidske populaci,” BIOL. LISTY, Vol 44, No 2, 1979, pp 81-103.

Tazina, ‘l., Kada, '1'. and Murakami, A., "magenicity of Nitrofuran Derivatives
Including Purylfuranide, a Pood Preservative,‘ mines 1235., Vol 32, 1975,
pp 55-80.

"The Foundation of the International Comission for Protection Against Environ-
mental Mutagens and Carcinogens,‘ 8101.. ZBL., Vol 96, No 6, 1977, pp 735-736.

Verschaeve, L., "Problenen van nutagenese,‘ TIJDSCHR. Gama” Vol 35, No 20,
1979. PP 1,289-1,295.

Wiekranasinghe, R. H., ”Short-mean antagonicity 'nest Systems for Detecting
Carcinogens. Report of an International Synposiun in Dortmund," IND. ARCH.
OCCUP. AND ENVIRON. HEALTH, Vol 44, No l, 1979, pp 61-64.

Yoshida, D., Hatsumoto, 'J'. and okanoto, 8., "Interaction Between Anino-l-Carholine
and, Amino-y-Carboline on mtagenicity in Salmonella typhimiun," mum.
835., Vol 68, No 2, 1979, pp 175-178.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Nauka”, 'Bkologiya", 1981

11004

CSO:

1840/90

42

FOR Ol-‘ﬁCIAL USE ONLY
00C 581. 5+577. 391

[Article by n. G. Nitantova and N. v. rulikov, Institute of Ecology of Plants
and Animals, Ural Scientific Center, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Considering the future of atomic power, the laws governing migration and
accmulation of artificial radionuclides in oouponsnts of natural ecosystems at the

locations of industrial atomic electric power plants (ass) are an namely important
object of study. Such components say include the lover plants, representatives of

which (the lichens for crawls) are capable of greater accumlation of radioactive
and stable nuclides (3,4,8).

his paper presents data on the concentration of 9 °Sr and 137Ce in the thalluses of
the leafy epiphytic lichen Hypogynnia physodes (1..) uyl. and in a nuke: of widespread
species of edible fungi growing in forested areas of the health protection zone of
the Beloyarskaya m in the Central Urals: agaric-dihssula cymtha (Schm) Pr.,

birch mushroom-ism soabmn (PL) 5. 9. Gray, pepper mam-Lecterns residue
Pr., and the valuy [transliterationlnﬁuseula fastens (ha) Fr.

1979. Then the material was dried and reduced to ash at ASO-SO'C. 9 08: was deter-
mined' radiocheniteny by the presence of daughter 9 "v, and 137C: was determined
with an AI-lZB-Z scintillation gam-spectroneter with an BOXBO Ill Kall'l‘l) crystal
and a 24X40 In socket. The statistical error of the analyses did not exceed 10-15
percent.

*1‘he authors express t eir deep gratefulness to S. Kh. Pakhrutdinova and S. I.
Rossolcnko for their assistance in radiometric processing of the preparations.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘M UI'I'II 0AA. Uw’l’. \ll‘I-I

their concentration in the substrates. The latter indirectly confirms that the

principal source of. 9°81: and 127(is taken up by epiphytic lichens is not the substrate
upon which they grow but atmospheric precipitation and water draining trom tree
crowns. enriched by radionuclide: to a certain degree.

       

316/
§
s2
m.- a“)?
14/
I
062212.

   

     

Izsoso

Figure 1. Concentration of 90$: (aapty Colt-Ins) and 137Cs (Cross-Hatched

Columns) in Thalluses of Hypogynnia physodee and Substrates:
1-3--lichens (1--from birch, Z—Irom pine, 3--£rom brushwood):

4-6--substrates (4--birch, 5--pine, Gubrushwood)

Key:
1. Concentration, nanocuriee/kg dry weight

The concentration of radionuclides in edible mushrooms was about an order of magnitude
lower than in lichens (Figure 2), which is explained mainly by the life span of the
objects studied. Bpiphytic lichens usually live several decades, and consequently
they accumulate radionuclides in their thalluses for many years. The life span of the
fruiting bodies of mushrooms is limited to several days (5). Moreover, as was noted
above, lichens accumulate radionuclides from atmospheric precipitation and from water
draining off of tree crowns: the principal source of radioactive products in the
fungal mycelim is the substrate itself--that is, soil andlitter, in which" 0s: and
Wes exist predominantly in a bound form with low mobility (2). Figure 2 also
shows that these radionuclide: are not readily available to the fruiting bodies of
mushrooms. He can see that the concentration of radionuclides in fungi is signifi-
cantly lower than in the substrate. In this case the acouulation coefficients

are only 0.07-0.09 for 9 0Sr and 0.18-0.22 for ‘37Cs. Consequently, given uptake

oE both nuclides by the fruiting bodies of mushrooms, they are noticeably enriched
by radioactive cesium in comparison with 9°Sr. The concentration of 9 051' and

H7Cs in the caps of the fruiting bodies of some mushroom species is somewhat

higher than in the stems (Figure 3). But on the whole the concentration of these
isotopes in edible mushrooms living in the health protection zone or the Be-loyarskaya
mas does not exceed amounts explainable by worldwide radioactive fallout, inasmuch
as the same concentrations of radionuclides were noted for mushrooms in the Lithu-
anian SSR (l), the m (6) and a number of other countries (7).

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\\\W:

 

g
5
z
z
z
I
z
I
I
I
I
I
I
z
z
a
z
z
I
z
I
I
I
z
I
I
I
z
I
I
g
2

\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\‘€
.\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\
\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\‘:
\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\

I 2 3 ll .7

Figure 2. Concentration of 9 081' (mpty Columns) and 137Cs (Cross-Hatched
Columns) in Fruiting Bodies of Ageric Mushrooms and in Sub-

strate: 1--Russula cymtha; 2-Lccc£man scabrun; 3—Lactarius
mailman 4--I?ussula foam; 5—soi1

         

Key:
1. Concentration, nsnocuries/kg dry weight
0
#2.
s
$15
(1 z
’312 E g
a I §
an: s e a
a I 9 5
g I I I
ah I I I
z x g
g a 5 ,
a . 4 4 4.
I 2 3 I 2 J
Figure 3. Concentration of 9 Os: and 137Cs in the Caps (Empty Columns) and
Stems (Cross-notched Colums) of Mushroom Fruiting Bodies:
J--Ruseula fastens; anRuaaula cymtha: 3--Lactartus new
Key:

1. Concentration, lNHW’C‘“?:LW/kg dry weight

«'05

Iron omcm. use ONLY
I'U. UI'I'ILII‘I. DJI- Vi‘hl

Thus the data presented here permit the assumption that the concentration of 908:

and

l”Cs in epiphytic lichens and edible agaric lushrocus in the vicinity of the

Beloyarskaya ABS does not exceed the background concentration of these radionuclide:
typical of similar plants from other habitats outside the possible influence of the

ABS.

7.

8.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

mshauskene-Duzh, R. F. and Urbonas, V. A., "Migration of 2109b and 9°51: in
Terrestrial Ecosystems,” BKOIDGIYA, No 5, 1978, pp 97-100.

Kulikov, N. V. and Molchanova, I. V., "Kontinental'naya radioekelogiya"
[Continental Radioecoloqyl. Moscow. Nauka, 1975. 184 pp.

Moiseyev, A. A. ”Id Ramsayev, 9. V., “Teeny-137 v biosfere' [Cesium-137 in the
Biosphere], lbsco'd, Amadet, 1975, pp 152-166.

Nifontova, H. G. and Kulikov, N. V., "Accmulation of Strontiun-90 and
Cesium-137 by Lichens in Nature,“ BKOIDGIYA, No 3, 1977, pp 93-96.

Serzhanina. G. I. and Znitrovich, I. 1., 'Makronitsety" [lacronycetes], Minsk,
Vysheyshaya shkola, 1978, 190 pp.

Grueter, 8., "Product 13"'Cs in Mushrooms in w. Germany airing 1963-70,’ HEALTH
PHYS.. Vol 20, No 6, 1971, pp 655-656.

Haselwandter, K., ”Accumulation of the Radioactive Nuclide 137C: in Fruiting
Bodies of Basidiouycetes," EBALTB PHYS», Vol 34, No 6, 1978, pp 713-715.

Hattsson, 5., 'Radionuclides in Lichen, Reindeer and Han," Lund., 1972, 48 pp.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka". "Bkologiya', 1981

11004

CSO :

1840/ 90

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COLLABORATION OF 0.8. AND SOVIET SCIENTISTS IN LEGAL PROTECTIOQ
OF THE ENVIRONHENT

Moscow VESTNIK AKADEMII NAUK SSSR in Russian 80 8, Aug 81 (signed to press 4 Aug
81) pp 102-109

[Article by O. S. Kolbasov and H. I. Koayr', doctors of law]

[Text] In the second half of the 20th century,environmental protection has
become one of the most serious global problems, the solution of which requires
coordinated effort on the part of all countries of the sorld.

Enormous and valuable knowhow has been accumulated in the Soviet Union in the
area of environmental protection; relevant laws have been elaborated and
successfully implemented. The communist party and Soviet government attribute
much importance to further intensification of measures for protection of the
environment and devote their constant attention to this matter.

Article 18 of the USSR Constitution states: "In the interests of the present
and future generations, the necessary steps are being taken in the USSR to
protect and make wise use, with scientific validation, of the land and its
mineral resources, water resources, the plant and animal kingdom, to preserve
the purity of air and water, implement reproduction of natural resources and
improve man's environment." There is a special section in "The Main Directions
of Economic and Social Development of the USSR in 1981-1985 and for the Period
up to 1990," which were approved at the 26th CPSU Congress, concerning environ-
mental protection, and in the section listing the main objectives of economic
and social development of our nation for the future period it is stated: "There
must be intensification of protection of nature, the land and its mineral re-
sources, atmospheric air, water reservoirs, animal and plant kingdom. Hise

use and reproduction of natural resources must be implemented."

The Soviet Union is actively in favor of continued development and deepening
of international collaboration in the area of environmental protection. Con-

structive proposals on this subject are constantly offered at party congresses,
sessions of the USSR Supreme Soviet, in speeches of Soviet representatives in

various international forums.

Much work on environmental protection is being pursued in the United States of
America; considerable knowhow has been accumulated there, particularly with re-
gard to refinement of laws and management in this area.

67
FOR'OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
In view of the enormous Importance and acuity of the problem, as well as the
need to combine forces for.environmental protection, the governments of the
USSR and United States signed an agreement on collaboration in the area of
environmental protection on 23 Hay 1972, in Moscow.

Soviet-American collaboration is directed at solving the main aspects of the
problem of the environment and developing bases for regulating the effects of
human endeavor on nature with, of course, consideration of the differences in
socioeconomic and political systems of these two countries. The main aspects
of this collaboration are: prevention of air and water (including the marine
environment) pollution; protection of the environment against the adverse
effects of agriculture and other industries, improvement of the ecological en-
vironment of cities, organization of reservations, forecasting earthquakes,
study of biological and genetic consequences of environmental pollution,
regulation of the effects of human endeavor on climate, investigation of the
distinctions of arctic and subarctic ecological systems, analysis of various
legal and administrative measures to preserve the quality of the environment.

One or several joint projects and collaborating organizations were assigned
for each of the above problems. The forms of work were defined: exchange of
scientists, specialists and trainees, as well as scientific and technical
information, documentation and results of research, holding joint symposiums,
conferences and meetings of experts, joint development of specific scientific
programs, etc. The plans for such work are approved at annual meetings of
the Soviet-American commission, which isjointly headed by the chairman of

the USSR State Committee for Hydrometeorology and Control of the Environment
and director of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of the United
States.

In view of the fact that work on legal and administrative measures for environ-
mental protection touches upon many common problems of government and law, the
institute of Government and Law, USSR Academy of Sciences, was named as the
chief organization for the Soviet side (since 1972, there has been a sector

at this institute working on legal problems of environmental protection).

The Council on Environmental Quality under the U. S. president is the chief
organization on the American side.

Since this collaboration started, there have been five 2-week conferences of
experts (in 1973, 1976 and 1980 in the United States; in 1976 and 1978 in the
USSR); two American specialists spent 5 months in the Soviet Union in training,
there was regular exchange of literature and information on legislation and
practical use thereof, consultations were offered on different questions of
law and management in the area of environmental protection, assistance was
given in establishing direct contact between public environment protection
organizations of the USSR and the United States. Of course, personal meetings
of specialists and expert conferences were also very important.

At the meetings of specialists, there was discussion of such important topics
as the correlation between international and national law in environmental
protection, correlation between law and management on different levels (all-
Union--fedcral, republic--state, etc., down to the level of individual enter-
prises); legal forms of participation of the USSR and United States community
in environmental protection.

68

IN)! (INHCJAI.INSEZ(NHLV
Exchange of opinions, knowhow and information on these pressing problems,
joint work on theoretical conceptions in the area of law and administration
are instrumental in mutual enrichment of theory and practice on both sides,
dissemination over the entire world of knowhow in environmental protection of
the two large industrial countries, strengthening the spirit of mutual under-
standing of the Soviet and American peoples.

While visiting the country in which a meeting of experts is convened, the
scientists of the other side have the opportunity to learn about environmental
protection in the host country, the nature of activities of environment pro-
tection organizations, the work of reservations and national parks.

Thus, American specialists, who came to the Soviet Union in 1974 and 1978
learned about the work of state agencies and public organizations concerned
with environmental protection in Hoscow and Moscow Oblsst, Kazakh SSR, Kiev,
Baku, Tashkent, Vladimirskaya and Rostovskaya Oblssts. In particular, they
visited the Botanical Garden of the Institute of Botany imeni V. L. Komarov,
Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences, the Kanevskiy Preserve and marine oil wells in
Baku. They talked with the staff of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet,
chairman of the Commission for Environmental Protection of the RSPSR Supreme
Soviet and members of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of Azerbaijan SSR,
representatives of the USSR Supreme Court, USSR Ministry of Justice, RSPSR
Ministry of Agriculture, Vladmirskaya and Rostovskaya oblispolkoms, agencies
for protection of fish reserves and supervision of hunting, administrators of
the All-Russian and Kazakh environmental protection societies, as well as
Rostovskaya Oblast organization of the All-Russian Society for Environmental
Protection, etc. In 1978, an agreement was made for establishment of direct
contact between the Ali-Russian Society for Environmental Protection and the
American Sierra Club, and in accordance with this agreement, American public
figures concerned with environmental protection made their first visit to the
USSR in 1979.

American specialists and public figures who visited the USSR praised the work
conducted in our country in the area of environmental protection. Such a
rating was reflected in the speech of (J. A- Basterud), a member of the
Council on Environmental Quality, at the Internal Expo-76 exhibition

in Spokane. Prof T.(Shoenbaum), who studied for several months the organiza-
tional and legal measures for the protection of reserves in our country,
published an article entitled "Protected Preserve Regions in the Soviet Union
and United States. Comparative Aspect,“ in the AMERICAN JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE
LA", in 1976, where he shed light on our achievements in this area and re-
commended that some elements of Soviet knowhow in legal regulation of protec-
tion of reserves be used in the United States. Representatives of American
public organizations who visited the USSR in 1979 gave a high rating to the
statutes in the USSR Constitution pertaining to environmental protection.

In turn, Soviet specialists had the opportunity of learning about organization
and content of the work of the Council on Environmental Quality, EPA

and some of its peripheral departments, the work of the U. S. congress perman-
cni commissions, the Departments of Justice, The Interior, Agriculture, the
Atomic Energy Commission, the U. S. Supreme Court and certain other regional and
state courts, environmental protection organizations in Washington, New York,

49

Fill(ﬂﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
Boston, San Francisco and Los Angeles. They visited Grand Ieton, Yellowstone
and Grand Canyon National Parks, learned about the work on redeveloping land
in the coal mines of the (Deker) Mine Company (Montana), protection of water
and atmospheric air at the Kennecott Copper copper and molybdenum enterprise
(Utah), and participated in seminars in Denver (Colorado) and Salt Lake City
(Utah).

The fifth conference of Soviet and American specialists on legal and adminis-
trative aspects of environmental protection was held in December 1980, in the
United States (Washington, Miami, Atlanta and New York). The American delega-
tion was headed by F. Knight, who performed the duties of the chief jurist of the
host organization, the Council on Quality Environmental. The delegation coa-
sisted of prominent specialists: N. Yost, director of the president's working
team for preparation of a global ecological forecast up to the year 2000, J.
Hoorman, head of the Land and Natural Resources Division, U. S. Department of
Justice, 0. (Widman), deputy director of the juridical service of the Dept.

of the Interior, E. Greenberg, head of the juridical service of the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin. of the Dept. of Comerce, (V. Smith), chief
economist of the EPA. N. Robinson. member of the board of directors of the
Sierra Club, 0. Hook, vice-president of the National Wildlife Federation,

(V. Futrell), president of the Institute of Environmental Law. members of

different departments and agencies, K. (Hall), 3. (Bramble). G. (Osherenko)
and D. (Shay) .

The Soviet delegation included 0. S. Kolbasov (head), H. I. Kozyr', Yu. S.
Shemshuchenko, A. M. Kaverin and Yu. A. Starikov.

in his opening remarks at the conference, E. Knight stressed the fact that
collaboration of the United States and the USSR on a very difficult problem
affecting the interests of all countries of the world-~environmental protection--
was quite fruitful.

0. S. Kolbasov noted the importance of Soviet-American collaboration in the
area of environmental protection, indicating its place and role in the system
of measures to preserve peace, improve the general political climate, as well
as living conditions. He informed the audience of measures implemented in
recent years in the USSR to protect the environment and stressed that a very
important place is given to environmental protection in the draft of the "Main
Directions of Economic and Social Development of the USSR in 1981-1985 and

for the Period up to 1990."

During the meeting, Soviet and American specialists discussed issues related to
the need and mandatory nature of considering ecological aspects and questions
pertaining to the environment in elaborating construction plans, with analysis
of the role in this process of the U. 3. EPA and analogOus state organizations.
In particular, determination was made of the extent to which this agency takes
into consideration economic factors in making decisions related to environmental
protection. We sensed a concern on the part of the agency with the fact that
the supposedly strict laws, as well as EPA rules for environmental protection,
which supposedly held back development of the economy were submitted to ex-
cessive criticism during the period of the pre-election campaign in the United

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Status in l980, and the opinion was voiced that it was necessary to strictly

“straighten out" the EPA officials and reduce expenses for environmental
proteCtlon.

During the meeting there was also comprehensive discussion of global environmental
prorection, international mechanisms of assessing the environment and problems
of environmental protection in the entire world.

American specialists acquainted the Soviet scientists with an abstract published

in July 1980 of a report to the president of the United States, which contained
an ecological forecast for the year 2000.

In the opinion of the authors of the report, in the year 2000 earth's
population will be 6.35 billion, and 901 of the population growth will
occur in developing countries. By that time, foodstuff production
will almost double; however, the increase per capita will be less

than isz. There will be an even greater discrepancy between the
economic welfare of the people of developed and developing countries:
industrially developed countries (one-quarter of the world's popula-
tion) will, as before, consume three-quarters of the worldwide

mineral resources. A water shortage will increase in some parts of
the world. There will be a 50% decrease (per capita) in stock of
growing timber of commercial size; in developing countries, about 40%
of the remaining forests will be removed. In view of the serious
changes in living conditions, perhaps up to 201 of the existing species
of animals and plants will disappear forever. It is expected that the
atmospheric concentration of nitrogen dioxide and other chemicals that
destroy ozone will increase at such a rate that they will alter appre-
ciably earth's climate by the year 2050. In spite of the fact that
an increasing effort is being applied at the present time to protect
the environment, in the opinion of the authors of this report this

is obviously insufficient and cannot alter the negative ecological
trends. At the same time, the authors did not take into considera-
tion the real economic and political difficulties that prevent people
from forming their relations with nature more wisely, and this in-
creases even more the seriousness of the looming problems.

No concrete plan of actions was advanced in this report to correct the ecologi-
cal situation (work ls not yet finished on the third volume thereof, which
contains recommendations on models of behavior of U. 8. management in implementa-
tion of ecological policies). It merely offers general recommendations: to
display more initiative in solving ecological problems, elaborate global
complex and long-term programstafenvironmental protection that should "inaugurate
an era of unprecedented collaboration andselflesaness" of all peoples of the
world. The authors of this report maintain that, at the present time, all

of the opportunities are available, as well as weighty grounds for the United
States to become a world leader in the movement for environmental protection.

Soviet specialists found the report quite interesting and considered that its
material merited careful investigation. At the same time, they stressed the
fact that so long as there is a real threat of thermonuclear war because of

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
thusr who oppose detente, and there is intensification of the arms race, it is
difficult and unrealistic to speakabout"unprecedented international collabora-
tion" in the area of environmental protection. As for leadership of the
United States in the international environmental protection movement, it could
be accepted by the international community only if it is implemented with no
detriment to and not at the expense ofother nations, if it becomes a leader-
ship through good examples and assistance to needy nations.

The scientific papers delivered by members of the Soviet delegation offered in-
depth and comprehensive analysis of different aspects of existing Soviet
legislation for environmental protection, including preventive measures, and

it was noted that questions of environmental protection are taken into compre-
hensive consideration in our country in preparing construction plans, and that
a thorough ecological expert evaluation is made of such plans. The speakers
gave detailed information on the content of new Soviet laws on protection of at-
mospheric air, protection and use of the animal kingdom; they told about the
procedures for planning wise use of natural resources and environmental protec—
tion in the area of agriculture, the juridical guarantees for land protec-
tion and improvement of soil fertility.

The American participants displayed much interest in the information about deve-
lopment and use of laws for environmental protection in the USSR, and voiced
their interest in strengthening Soviet-American collaboration in the area of
environmental protection.

During their stay in the United States, the Soviet specialists had comprehensive
talks with American specialists dealing with legal and administrative problems

of environmental protection in the USSR and United States, the EPA, U.S. Depart-
ments of The Interior, Commerce and Justice, as well as at the Kennan Institute
and Institute of Environmental Law in Washington. They discussed with M. (Hilkie),
a member of the Federal Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia, the question
of the role of U. S. courts in the area of environmental law. They had talks

with government officials of several states and some local agencies on the
effectiveness of using federal and state laws, rules and procedures for environ-
mental protection, with representatives of U. 5. public organizations concerned
with environmental protection, in particular, with activists of the Sierra Club
and National Wildlife Federation, as well as prominent practicing

juriSts concerned with legal problems of environmental protection and professors
on the faculty of law at Pace University.

The members of the Soviet delegation visited the national Everglades preserve,
a farm near Miami (Florida), a heat and electric power plant and regional
department of the EPA in Atlanta, the department for environmental protection
of the state of New York, a gas plant near Calvert Cliffs (Maryland) and were
received the Mayor of Greenburg, New York.

During these meetings, American figures in the area of environmental protection
displayed much interest in Soviet knowhow and praised it highly. Thus, J. H.
Moorman, assistant attorney general; Land and Natural Resources Division, Dept.

of Justice, voiced his admiration to Soviet specialists for setting up well the job
of protecting the environment in the USSR; in several of his speeches Prof

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
N.A. Robinson rated highly the collaboration between the Soviet Union and the United

States. with reference to legal and administrative problems of environmental
protection, repeatedly citing articles 18 and S8 of the USSR Constitution as a
model of responsible attitude toward environmental protection, calling for
further expansion of collaboration in this area. The major American special-
ists, N. Yost and 0. Hook, made similar statements.

How can one assess the current status of American law and government, and their
role in environmental protection?

in the opinion of Soviet specialists, some progress in legal protection of
atmospheric air and coastal zones of adjacent seas has been made in the United
States in the last decade (in previous years, there were mainly measures to
protect waters and regulate land use on the basis of territorial zoning).

Worthy of especially careful study is. in our opinion. the effective use in the
United States of a new legal institution. "Declarations on Effects on the
Environment," referable to construction of various industrial projects and
facilities (gas and pipe lines. dams. hydroelectric power stations. irriga-
tion canals, etc.). which is a rather powerful means of preventive control
[inspection] that American specialists believe helped increase significantly
the ecological validation of management decisions avoid mistakes and improve
effectiveness of environmental protection. The American specialists recomend
the use of this form by other countries, as wall as in international relations.

This system of preliminary ecological control is implemented in industry in
accordance with the Law on National Policy in the Area of Environmental
Protection (January 1970) and analogous laws in certain states. The

laws stipulate that, at specific times prior to construction and remodeling of
enterprises and other economic facilities, the entrepreneurs and state agencies
must make a public "declaration on effects on the environment" of these instal-
lations. The contenaaof the declaration are analyzed for a specific time by
state inspection [control] agencies, public organizations and the local public,
who can voice objections for ecological reasons against a particular project

as a whole, propose alternative variants or corrections to the plan. Entre-
preneurs and state agencies must examine the corrections and, within a specific
time, annoance whether they are accepted or rejected. If the authors of the
comments and proposals are not satisfied with the results of this examination.
they can file suit to force implementation of their suggestions. To date,
several tens of thousands of declarations on effects on the environment have
been examined on different levels of the American governmental structure; up to
52 of them have been disputed in the courts.

However, by far not all of the important aspects of legal environmental protec-
tion in the United States could be studied during the years of collaboration.
There is still a need for deeper investigation of the system, functions and
interaction in environmental protection of American state agencies, which
include, in particular, the U. S. Department of Justice, Council on Environmental
Quality under the U. S. president and the Environmental Protection

Agency.

The system of preventive environmental protective measures in U. S. agriculture,
as well as the adverse effect of industrialization and particularly use of

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
chemistry in agriculture on the environment have not been adequately studied
either.

it is of great interest to Soviet jurists-~scientists and practitionera-to
study the practice of examining environmental protection cases in the American
courts and to analyze measures of liability [as to property] for the detriment
to the environment (for example, fines of $25,000 for each day of violation).

international environmental protection measures of the United States, their

place in the general policy of this state, as it applies to different parts of
the world as a whole, but particularly as it relates to food aid for develop-
ing countries, also merits investigation. Finally, we must also study the as-

pects of American theory and practice that are related to development of inter-
national environmental laws.

As for assessment of the current status of Soviet-American collaboration in
law and administrative problems of environmental protection, it was formulated
as follows in the summary minutes of the meeting: "Both sides observed that
the fifth meeting was successful and that there was satisfactory exchange of
information and knowhow. The specialists conceded that there is a need to
continue with the exchange of opinions, information and documents, and observed
that collaboration on environmental issues on a worldwide scale is very
important and merits increasing attention."

The minutes also formulated the main directions of collaboration in 1981-1982.
As before, there will be continued exchange of information and opinions concern-
ing elaboration and use of legislation on environmental protection in the USSR
and United States. There will be continued exchange of information about
research and evaluation of effects on the environment, both within each nation
and on earth as a whole, abOut comparison of economic factors to environmental
factors, implementation of laws pertaining to the environment. Exchange of
scientists and students concerned with legal and administrative aspects of
environmental protection will be continued.

It was also decided to examine the question of the means of future collaboration
of the USSR and United States in the area of long-term problems of environmental
protection and wise use of natural resources on an international scale.

It is planned to discuss all these problems at the sixth meeting of Soviet and
American specialists, which is to be held in the USSR in 1982.

The participants at the meeting agreed to explore the possibility of joint
preparation and publication in both countries of a collection of articles
dealing with evaluation of environmental protection on the national and inter-
national levels, use of legislation, as well as analysis of administrative
measures in the area of environmental protection that are being implemented

in the USSR and United States.

With reference to the results of 9-year Soviet-American collaboration on legal
and administrative problems of environmental protection, it should be noted
that the main achievement was deeper knowledge of theory and practice of legal
regulation in the area of environmental protection, in both countries and in
the system of international law.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Aside from its direct professional usefulness. collaboration was instrumental
in maintaining a spirit of trust and mutual understanding betueen the Soviet
and American people.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Veatnik Akadenii nsuk SSSR”, 1981

10,657
CSO: 1840/120

55

FOI‘OFINCJAI.USE(NVLY
MEDICINE

UDC: 613.644
LOU-FREQUENCY ACOUSTIC VIBRATIONS IN INDUSTRY

Hoscow HIZKDCHASTOTHYYE AKUSTICHESKIYE KOLEBAHIYA HA PROIZVODSTVE in Russian
1981 (signed to press 22 Aug 80) pp 2-5, 190-191

[Annotation,, introduction and table of contents from book "Low—Frequency
Acoustic Vibrations in Industry“ by Nadezhda Ivanovna Karpova and Eduard
Hikolayevich Halyshev, Izdatel'stvo "Heditsina", 1266 copies, 192 pages]

[Text] This monograph is concerned with hygienic evaluation of infrasonic

waves in industry, their biological effects on man and animals, and prevention

of their deleterious effects. For the first time, information is systematised
concerning the physical nature and distinctions of infrasonic waves. Techniques
are described for measurement and estimation of infrasound in industry. Hethoda
are discussed for conducting tests on man and experiments on animals to study
reactions to low-frequency vibrations. The authors' own data, as well as

those of the staff of the Department of Industrial Hygiene, Leningrad Hedical
Institute of Sanitation and Hygiene, obtained using modern investigative

methods, which describe the influence of industrial parameters of subsonic
vibration on the subjective state of man and functional changes occurring in

the central nervous, cardiovascular and respiratory systems, as well as analyzers
and viscera are presented. Special attention is given to the approach to setting
standards of subsonic vibrations in industry. In conclusion, measures are listed
for the prevention of the deleterious effects of industrial infrasonic waves of
specific parameters and medical preventive measures. This aonograph fills a gap in
the literature, since there are no such works either in our country or abroad. It
is intended for industrial hygienists, occupational pathologists, industrial
health inspectors [physicians], engineering and technical workers, as well as
other specialists concerned with the study of industrial noise, control of noise
and infrasonic waves.

Introduction

The decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress provide for further improvement of work-
ing conditions that would be instrumental in lowering morbidity and increasing
labor productivity in all sectors of industry.

Intensive scientific and technological progress is leading to development of
high-power equipment and sachines. However, operation of such equipment is
not infrequently associated with considerable noise. Infrasound, which did
not attract the attention of scientists for a long time, is a constant companion

of noise.

S6

F‘ll(ﬂﬂﬁC1Al.lEﬂi(MVLY
Infrasound varying in intensity and frequency is always present in our environ-
ment, particularly in large cities with well-developed industry and intensive

transportation. Han may be exposed to low-frequency sonic vibrations at work
and at rest.

There are natural sources of infrasound. Many natural phenomena, such as earth-
quakes. eruptions of volcanoes, thunder, landslides, hurricanes, storms at see,
large waterfalls, aurora borealis, generate infrasonic waves. In addition to
natural sources, more and more often man is exposed to increasing levels of

infrasound occurring in industry and transportation as a concomitant factor of
technological processes.

lnfrasonic waves are formed during operation of compressors, turbines, diesel
engines, electric locomotives, air-conditioning systems, commercial fans and
other large machines and equipment.

with the development of technology. machines are appearing that are large in
size, operating at high speed and high power, whose function is associated with
excitation of intensive lowarequency sonic waves. Modern technology is

increasing the noise background in industry, which has a broad spectrum and
increasing intensity.

Various forms of transportation are also artificial sources of infrasound:
seafaring. railroad, aviation, including jet aircraft and the high-power
engines used in space flights (R. H. Stephens, 1969, 1974; H. Tempest, 1971).
Men's exploration of space generates noise during launchings that has maximum
energy in the low-frequency part of the spectrum, in the range_of l to 100 Hz.
lnfrasonic vibrations are not only a component, but in many cases the pre-
vaillng part of spectra of industrial noises. At the present time, the effects

of industrial noise in the acoustic range of frequencies on man have been studied
rather well.

There is extremely little information in the Soviet and foreign literature about
the biological effects of low-frequency vibrations. The data in the literature
are disparate and often contradictory. There are few sources with systematized
data on the biological effects of infrasound.

Studies have revealed that man is sensitive to low-frequency vibrations and
compel us to admit that the problem of studying the effect of infrasound on
man merits the very closest attention.

Infrusound may be one of the deleterious factors of the industrial environment.
Curtain levelsofinfrasound may be deleterious to human health. It affects
the entire human body, man's health and work capacity.

Most workers in modern industry and transportation are exposed to such a little-
studied factor as infrasound. This puts to industrial hygienists the task of
comprehensive investigation of the distinctions of its biological action in order
to determine the degree of harm of low-frequency sonic vibrations, set hygienic
standards and elaborate measures to eliminate the deleterious effects of some
parameters of low-frequency vibrations on workers.

57

Ftﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1Al.U881MNLY
Because of the distinctions of propagation of infrasonic waves and their dif-
ference from audible vibrations, the study of biological effects of infrasound
requires new methodological approaches to set the scientifically substantiated
rungc of permissible levels of infrasonic pressure and develop optimum amelio-
rativc measures. It is very important to determine the threshold intensity of
infrasound with acute and chronic exposure to it, as well as to demonstrate the
physiological mechanisms of the body's reactions to infrasound.

The objective of this book is to acquaint the reader with infrasound as a dele-
terious factor of the industrial environment; as well as experimental data
from studies of biological effects of infrasound of industrial parameters on
animals and man.

This work summarizes the knowhow of Soviet and foreign authors in the area of
studying the biological effects of low—frequency vibrations, as well as the
results of studies conducted by the authors and staff members of the Department of
Industrial Hygiene of the Leningrad Medical Institute of Sanitation and Hygiene
and Department of Industrial Safety of the Leningrad Institute of Railroad
Engineers.

It is imperative to widen the front of scientific research in this interesting
branch of science.

CONTENTS Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Physical Characteristics and Distinctions of Low-Frequency
Acoustic Vibrations 6
Concept of infrasound 6
Mechanism of formation of infrasonic vibrations 8
Physical characteristics of infrasound 10
Distinctions of propagation of infrasonic vibrations 12
Rate of propagation of infrasOund 15
Chapter 2. Methods for Measuring and Evaluating Low-Frequency
Acoustic Vibrations in Industry 17
Analysis of existing methods of measuring noise and possible use
thereof to record noise in the infrasonic range of frequencies 17
Equipment and methods of measuring noise in the infrasonic range 19
Chapter 3. Hygienic characteristics of Industrial Sources of
lnfrasonic Haves 27
Investigation of infrasonic waves in industry 27
Evaluation of infrasonic vibration of compressors 33
Evaluation of infrasound of vibrating surfaces 38
lnfrasonic vibration of transportation vehicles 42
Chapter 4. Biological Effects of Low-Frequency Vibrations in the
lnfrasonic Range 68
Chapter 5. Generation of lnfrasonic Waves Under Experimental
Conditions 63
Chapter 6. Methodological Bases of Conducting Research for the
Study of Effects of Industrial Infrasonic Vibrations 72
Experimental complex for biological studies and simulation of
infrasonic field occurring in industrial premises 72
Methods of studying the biological effects of infrasound 75
58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 7. Investigation of Effects of Infrasonic Vibrations on
Experimental Animals
Behavioral reactions of animals
Investigation of functional state of cells of the central nervous
system and viscera by the method of intravital tissue stain
Investigation of functional state of the rabbit's central nervous
and cardiovascular systems
Investigation of microcirculation in the pie mater of white rats
Amounts and distribution of nucleic acids in receptor cells of

Corti's organ
Investigation of enzymatic and metabolic changes in experimental

animals
Chapter 8. Histological and Electron Microscopic changes in Various
Organs and Systems Under the Influence of Infrasound
Morphological changes in viscera
Reactive changes in brain cells
Investigation of effects of infrasonic vibrations on biological
objects
Chapter 9. Investigation of Effects of Infrasonic Vibrations on
Human Physiological Functions
Subjective perception of infrasonic vibrations
Effect of infrasonic vibrations on functional state of the
central nervous system
Effect of intrasonic vibrations on the cardiovascular system
Effect of infrasonic vibrations on the respiratory system
Condition of some analyzer systems
Changes in the auditory analyzer

Changes in the vestibular analyzer
Changes in skin's sensitivity to vibration and temperature

Physiological study of the effects of infrasound in industry
Investigation of effects of infrasonic vibrations on man

Maximum permissible levels of infrasound
Chapter 10. Means of Prevention of Deleterious Effects of Low-

Frequency Acoustic Vibrations on the Organism

Medical preventive measures
Technical methods of controlling low-frequency sonic vibrations

Absorption of infrasound
Ultrasonic insultation
Low—frequency dampers for attenuation of infraaonic waves

generated by aerodynamic processes in industrial installations
Design proposals for reduction of noise from vibrating surfaces

Bib] iography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Meditsina", Hoskva, 1981

10,657
cso: 1840/119

59

FIIICHHNCJA1.UEI2(HULY
HUMAN FACTORS

"DC: 629.7.05
ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF CONTROL SYSTEMS FOR HANNED AIRCRAFT

Moscow ANALIZ I OPTIMIZATSIYA SISTER UPRAVLERIYA PILOTIRUYEHYKH LETATBL'NYKH
APPARAIOV in Russian 1981 (signed to press 2 Jun 81) pp 2-8, 200

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Analysis and
Optimization of Control Systems for ﬂanned Aircraft", by Grigoriy Illarionovich
Ryl'skiy, Isdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye", 1260 copies, 200 pages, illus-
trated]

[Text] This book analyzes the performance of Operators in control systems (CS)
of manned aircraft, as well as the possibility of describing it mathematically.
A classification is proposed and analysis made of modern mathematical models
that describe certain forms of human work in aircraft control systems. The
advantages are shown of models that make use of queueing theory, and new
engineering methods were developed on the basis of these models for demon-
strating the characteristics of human operators. This book is intended for
engineers involved with the design and operation of a broad class of man-
machine control systems.

Introduction

The cybernetic problem of refining control of various systems (engineering,
biological, economic, management [organization], man-machine, etc.) is a
rather pressing one. The most important element of this problem is to find
optimum variants of organization of structure and processes of control in

such systems. The concept of system emerged as a result of development of en-
gineering disciplines, since it is expressly the increasing complexity of
various technical systems that made it necessary to elaborate methodology that
would help integrate all parts of such systems. At the present time, there
are quite a few definitions of system. However, there is still no conven-
tional [generally used] definition. Each researcher gives this concept his
own special content and singles out essentially the element of the system that
he submits to investigation (see, for example, the works of foreign [2, 58,
79, 92, 101, 107, 117, 121, 129, 135, 136] and Soviet [7, 43, 77, 78, 109, 113,
119, 125, 130, 166, 107] authors).

In this book, system is used to refer to the aggregate of elements that are
interlinked into a specific structure. Hith such an approach, industrial,
educational and research organizations, man-machine systems, equipment, etc.,
can be considered to be a system.

60

FOR‘OFFHJA1.USE(NQLY
Systems with infinite diversity can be classified according to a number of
features: purpose, complexity, level of automation and others.

Control systems (cs) are an extremely important class of systems. which are used
to control other systems (aircraft, plant, etc.). Consequently, such systems
must have the purpose of functioning and, BOVOOVGY. IMO: hlVB the capacity

to alter the parameters (characteristics) and structures of elements and of the
entire system in accordance to this functioning purpose. Control systems, in
which man is an element, are called automated, ergatic, anthrOpotechnical, or-
ganizational systems or man—equipment (man-machine) systems. It must be noted
that all of these definitions refer chiefly to man-machine control systems
(HHCS), i.e., in which man (or a group) interacts with technical systems and
devices in the control process. He are not dealing here with control of social

and economic processes, in which man does not necessarily interact with tech-
nical systems.

In modern CS of manned flight vehicles [aircraft] (HFV). whose complexity and cost
are constantly rising, man's role is increasing more and more and his duties
are growing more and more complex. However, because of the limited psycho-
physiological and intellectual capabilities of man, he is often unable to per-
form all of the necessary functions for the control of complex systems and
thereby lowers drastically the efficiency of these systems. Thus, according to
the data of American specialists, of the total number of malfunctions occurring
in the control of complex systus, 60: in the rocket industry, 63.61 in the
navy and up to 702 in aviation occur because of errors made by a human operator
(H0) while controlling these systems [90]. For this reason, when developing and
operating modern man-machine control systems, there is a pressing need to con-
sider human factors. In this respect, aircraft and particularly MPV cs are the
first and foremost objects of scientific work on ergonomic problems of design,
development and operation of MHCS.

Thus, analysis of Soviet and foreign-experience in the time that has elapsed
since the start of space exploration [55, 59, 1101 enables us to derive the
following conclusions from the standpoint of ergonomics: man can not only live
in space for a long time, but perform efficiently a large volume of diversified
work; the crew of manned spacecraft must participate actively in implementing
the space flight program, assuring structural redundancy Pf onboard systems,
and play the role of the adapting element in the general circuit of onboard 08;
it is desirable to use man in cases where his presence aboard the spacecraft
provides more effective solution of the target (multitarget) problem, as com—
pared to machines, aids in maintaining spacecraft function on a high level of
reliability and successful performance of the program as a whole, lowers the
cost of running these programs, as compared to entirely automatic spacecraft
(with equal effectiveness of problem solving); the designs of spacecraft and
their onboard systems are such as to aid in making utmost use of man's capa-
bilities, using the rich knowhow accumulated by aviation; the scope and import-
ance of tasks put to man are increasing constantly, and special ergonomic
studies must be pursued for them to be performed well.

There are rather detailed but often far from complete data on many traits and
characteristics of the H0, which can be considered in developing various
elements and equipment of MMCS. Rather extensive recommendations have been

61

FORIOFIIClAl.lEﬂE(HVLY
elaborated for designing information display systems (IDS), indicators and
signals; development of control levers, consoles and stations; development of
life support systems and systems to maintain high levels of work capacity.

Use of already existing results of research in the fields of physiology, medi-
cine, psychology, cybernetics, engineering psychology and ergonomics makes it
possible to drastically improve the efficiency of HHCS and objects of control,
often without any special industrial and economic expenditures. For example,
according to 0. K. Antonov [8], use of the ergonomic approach to designing
aircraft cockpits, as compared to previously developed ones, resulted in 20-
40: reduction of work load for the crew with regard to equipment and improved
distribution thereof among crew members; it increased by 30-60: the relative
tine available to the crew for piloting the aircraft and scanning the surround-
ings [outside the aircraft], with concurrent improvement of conditions (visi-
bility, force applied to stick, etc.); it reduced the probability of mistakes
and increased reliability of work done by the crew to correct accident
[emergency] situations (AS) in flight; it increased by 15-20% the operation-
ality, readiness of the aircraft for flight by reducing the time required for
the crew to make preparations and taxi to the take-off position.

In our opinion, all HMCS can be arbitrarily divided into three types (unlike
the four types of operator work proposed in [54]), according to nature and
degree of man's involvement in the control process. The first type refers to
systems, in which man performs his functions directly, observing the object
(process) of control and affecting it by his motor organs or using the most
elementary equipment. In such systems (which are often called monoergatic-
with one person), man's functions can be called technological and the operator
could be called the technologist (according to V. P. Zinchenko [54]) or
executor (according to Yu. G. Fokin [133]). The second type refers to HHCS,
in which the work done by a man (or group) to control an object (process) '
is performed by means of controls and other means on the basis of using
information models. In such systems (often called polyergatic-with several
operators) the man's (group's) work is called operator work and the man is
called an operator (according to B. F. Lomov [83]). We can list as this

type of human work the functions of an operator-observer and operator-
researcher according to the classification proposed in [54]. The third type
refers to systems, in which a team of people participates in the control pro-
cess, some of whom, called administrators [supervisors], do not directly
interact with equipment, but are concerned with organizing operator work. Such
systems are usually called organizational. In this book, we shall deal with
problems referable to uses of only these three types.

The complexity of modern systems and, first of all, systems of purposeful con-
trol made it necessary to use the so-called systems approach and general
theory of systems (018) to develop them.

According to current conceptions (see, for example, [78]), GTS refers to the
scientific direction related to elaboration of the aggregate of philosophical,

methodological, concretely scientific and applied problems of analysis and
synthesis of complex systems of an arbitrary nature. GTS inherently strives

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
toward being interdisciplinary on the basis of creating a single scientific
platform. This unity can be achieved by means of analogy (isomorphism) of pro-
cesses taking place in various (engineering, biological and other) systems.
Strictly demonstrative isomorphism of systems differing in nature permits
“transfer" of knowledge from one discipline to another. Moreover, GTS as an
area of scientific knowledge implies that it is possible to study the behavior,
including purposeful behavior, of systems whatever their complexity and
purpose.

The formal organization of 618 is diverse, just as the object of its study,
systems. For example, the following have been developed and used in a number of
Soviet works for mathematical descriptions of real complex systems: machine-
algebraic methods (V. H. Glushkov [37]), test theory (8. V. Yablonskiy [147]),
operator algorithms (A. P. Yershov [55]), causal networks (A. A. Markov [86]),
growing machines (Ye. M. Barsdin' [9]), theory of aggregate systems and
computer modeling methods (N. P. Buslenko, I. N. Kovalenko [21]), algorithmic,
information and network [critical-path?) methods (G. s. Pospelov, V. A.

Irikov [109]).

A. I. Kukhtenko [77, 78], who analyzed works dealing with mathematics and GT3,
proposed the following classification of levels of abstract description of
different systems: symbolic or linguistic (semiotics); theoretical-set ["multiple"];
abstract-algebraic; topological; logical-mathematical; theoretical-informa-
tional; dynamic; heuristic. Each of these levels has its own definition of
system. Thus, according to H. Hesarovich [92], on the symbolic or linguistic
level of abstract description, system refers to a set of correct statements,
whereas on the theoretical-set level system is the reflection Szx-sY of abstract
set x in abstract set Y, where x and Y are set of inputs and set of outputs,
respectively. According to N. Burbaki [18], on the theoretical-set level,
system refers to the set made up of elements that have certain properties and
certain relations with one another and with elements of other sets.

V. V. Chavchanidze, who pointed to the ineffectiveness of the proposed software
and absence of really common elements in the approaches of different authors,
proposed a new approach [137] to the choice of a language that would describe
the most fully systems and structures of arbitrary complexity. Analyzing the
concepts developed in theory of artificial intelligence (AI) and using the
principle of potential isomorphism of the world and cognitive intelligence, he
proposed that a description be chosen in the form of concept-models directed

at man and completely simulating the process of formation of concepts by a
natural intelligence. Studies of the mechanism of information storage in the
brain, which are presently being conducted under the guidance of V. V.
Chavchanidze, revealed [138] that there are special forms of information
storage by means of elements of neuron ensembles ("memorons"). This form makes
it possible to issue information in the form of pictures, including some that
were not presented in the learning process. Several of the works of V. V.
Chavchanidze deal with validation of the need and desirability of the conceptual
approach to development of GT8 [139-161].

At the present time, there is a considerable number of mathematical methods for
analysis and optimization (according to different criteria) of control systems

63

IIII(MHWC1AI.USE(NVLY
m use v..as..... ~._ you...

and processes, and a rather comprehensive analysis of their current status was
made in, for example, (36, 72, 89, 95, 96]. In these methods, the first and
foremost objective of the researcher was to completely formalize the problem.
and then only to choose a criterion and develop methods of optimizing the con-
trol system or processes.

Analysis of man's performance in cs shows that the current level of development
of GTS and various special mathematical methods, as well as the inadequate know-
ledge of psychophysiological and intellectual characteristics, and behavioral
motivations of man during such activity, do not permit proposing a universal
method of formalization at the present time, that would adequately describe all
of these processes in the work of HO. However, the need to consider human fac-
tors led to the use for formalization of different forms of no activity in CS,
at first known methods (for example, automatic control, information theories),
and then new and modified mathematical methods (theories of queueing-QT,
reliability, etc.). with these methods, which make use of certain anthropometric
data and psychophysiological characteristics of man, a number of ergonomic prob-
lems were solved with regard to developing controls, information display systems
and even some problems of optimum distribution of functions between man and
equipment. In particular, determination has been made of optimum form and
arrangement of controls and consoles, illumination characteristics, form,hloca-
tion. means of presenting and coding information on information display systems
for individual and-group uSe, etc.

It is known that the objective of optimizing any piece of equipment is to find
its parameters (analysis) and structure (synthesis) that will,provide the given
quality (or efficiency). As it applies to MMCS, one of the main purposes of
optimization is wise (or best possible) distribution of functions between 80 '
and equipment assuring maximum (or close to it) efficiency of the entire cs. A
unified formalized apparatus is needed, which could be used to describe the
main properties of an HHCS for quantitative analysis and optimization of this

system.

In this book, analysis is made, on the basis of consideration of some types of
no activity in modern HHCS, of the possibility of formalizing this activity

by means of mathematical and cybernetic methods. In view of the relative
simplicity of obtaining base information and running algorithms of mathematical
description of H0 function using QT methods, an engineering method has been
proposed and developed for defining the characteristics of an HO in the case of
his performance with and without mistakes.

Since all HMCS parameters (including no characteristics) can, in most cases, be
divided into additive, multiplicative and logical, we have proposed here the
choice of a "global" criterion of optimization in both a determined and stochas-
tic formulation. Quantitative methods and algorithms for comparative analysis
and optimization of a wide class of HHCS are offered, which are based on the
use of mathematical (dynamic, linear and nonlinear) programming methods.

The main purpose of this book was to offer engineering methods and equipment for
optimizing uses, which could increase their efficiency and improve (accelerate
and lower the cost) processes of designing, developing and operating them.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The author expresses his sincere gratitude to 8. Ya. Kuritskiy, I. Yu. Yusupov,
A. N. Maksimenko and V. S. Cherkes, whose assistance was largely instrumental
in writing this book, as well as to V. F. Vende for examining the manuscript
and offering valuable comments.

CONTENTS Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Activity and Its Formalization 9
1.1. Some definitions and concepts 9
1.2. Possibility of formalizing activity . 12
1.3. Methods of theory of automatic control and purposeful mechanics 18
1.4. Methods of information and probability theories 32
1.5. Queueing theory methods 47
1.6. Algorithmic methods 59
1.7. Methods of graph, net and vector optimization theories 73
1.3. Heuristic programming and simulation of MMCS 79
1.9. Methods of image recognition theory, artificial intelligence
and mathematical programming 91
Chapter 2. Formalizstion of Operator Activity by Queueing Theory Methods 105
2.1. H0 characteristics when working without mistakes 105
2.2. H0 characteristics with consideration of mistakes in the
control process 115
2.3. Engineering method of analysis of H5 performance in MMCS 126
2.4. Example of quantitative evaluation of operatory performance '
in a special control system 137
Chapter 3. Optimization of Man-Machine Control Systems [MMCS] 156
3.1. General comments and choice of special function 156
3.2. Analysis 159
3.3. Synthesis 164
Chapter 4. Optimization of MMCS in Critical Situations 170
4.1. Distinctions of H0 behavior in critical and irregular
situations 170
4.2. Simulation of H0 performance in critical situations 176
4.3. Means of eliminating critical situations and criteria for
evaluation thereof . 182
4.4. Choice of structure of HMCS with occurrence of critical
situation 189
Bibliography 194

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye", 1981

10,657
CSO: 1840/106

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PSYCHIATRY

UDC: 616.89:06l.3](47+57)+(685)"l981"

JOINT SYMPOSIUM ON BIOLOGICAL PSYCHIATRY 0F USSR ACADEMY OF MEDICAL SCIENCES
AND SWEDISH ACADEMY OF SCIENCES

Moscow ZHURNAL NEVROPATOLOCII I PSIKHIATRII IMBNI S. S. KORSAKOVA in Russian
Vol 81, No 11, Nov 81 pp 1749-1750

[Article by A. V. Vetoshkin, Moscow]

[Text] The symposium of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences and Swedish Royal
Academy of Sciences dealing with biological psychiatry convened in Moscow from 5
to 7 May 1981. Prominent specialists in different branches of science-psychia-
trists, psychopharlacologists, biochemists, biophysicistsamd physiologists-
were among its participants.

In the 3 days that the symposium was at work, a total of 15 papers were delivered
and discussed, in which Soviet and Swedish scientists submitted the results of
basic research in the area of physiology and pathology of the brain, and introduc-
tion thereof into clinical psychiatry.

The opening remarks were delivered by S. S. Debov, vice-president of the USSR
Academy of Medical Sciences. L. Wetterberg (head of the department of psychiatry,
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm), head of the Swedish delegation, relayed the
regards of the Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences to the participants and guests
at the symposium.

The program of the symposium listed discussion of the following problems: biolo-
gically active substances of nerve tissue, in particular, neuropeptides, and
function of receptors and membranes (lst day of the symposium); neurophysiological
and genetic aspects of psychiatry (2d day); role of biological research in clinical
psychiatry (3d day); in addition, questions of experimental and clinical psycho-
pharmacology were discussed at each session.

The first session began with the overview paper by Sedwall (Sweden), which des-
cribed new methodological approaches and methods for examining spinal fluid in
cases of diverse mental diseases. A significant part of this paper dealt with
metabolism of neuropeptides in the presence of mental disorders. Various aspects
of the problem of biologically active substances of nerve tissue were discussed

in the papers of Academician Ye. I. Chazov (USSR), "Some Aspects of Neuropeptide
Action," Terenius (Sweden), "Bndorphins in the Presence of Mental and Neurological
Disorders," and A. V. Val'dmsn (USSR), "Neurotrophic Effects of Taftcin." The
paper of Ye. I. Chazov summed up data obtained by several research teams in our
country pertaining to the effects of neuropeptides on a number of vital functions,

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
including the functional state of the cardiovascular system. L. Terenius, who
proceeded from the results of his own experimental research, offered an analysis
of the literature pertaining to changes in endorphins in the presence of pathology
of the nervous system and shed light on approaches (including methods) to deter-
mination of their role in function of the central nervous system and mechanisms

of action. A. V. Val'dman submitted experimental data on the effects of taftcin,

a tetrapentide that is the product of immunoglobulin proteolysis. He reported

the results of studies having a bearing on the question of correlation between

the nervous and immune systems, routes of reciprocal regulation thereof, a problem
that is quite important, not only to psychiatry, but many other branches of theore-
tlcal and clinical medicine.

Questions of physiology and pathology of receptors and membranes were reflected
in two papers: "Function of Central Nervous System Receptors," by S. Ross (Sweden)
and "Peroxidation of Lipids--0ne of the Factors in Damage to Biological Membranes
in Schizophrenics," by L. L. Prilipko, R. R. Lideman and A. A. Zozulya (USSR).

Neurophysiological aspects of brain function were discussed in the following
papers: "Cerebral Organization of Human Emotions," by N. P. Bekhtereva, V. P.
Smirnov and D. K. Kambarova (USSR); “Clinical and Neurophysiological Study of
Depressive Patients," by Perris (Sweden) and K. K. Honakhov (USSR); "Experimental
Models of Pathology of Caudate Nuclei. Neurophysiological and Neurochemical
Mechanisms," by G. N. Kryzhanovskiy (USSR).

There was broad and comprehensive discussion at the symposium of questions of
genetics of psychoses. Hetterberg (Sweden), in a paper entitled "Genetic and
Biochemical Aspects of Schizophrenia," Submitted the results of his many-year
observations of a number of families burdened with schizophrenia, which were
examined thoroughly, not only psychiatrically but for a number of biological
parameters. I. V. Shakhmatova, V. H. Gindilis and V. D. Hoakalenko submitted the
results of mathematical processing of numerous clinical and laboratory data ob-
tained from examining patients and their relatives, in a paper entitled "Genetic
Variance Analysis of Familial and Twin Data in the Presence of Schizophrenia."
Relevant comparisons were made of different clinical classifications of schizo-
phrenia. Eberhard (Sweden) described in detail the state of the problem of
psychosis in twins and his own observations.

SeVeral papers delivered by Swedish researchers dealt with important questions

of use, interaction and metabolism of a number of psychotropic pharmacological
agents, their possible role in regulating behavioral reactions and therapy of
psychiatric and neurological disorders: “Pharmacology of Behavior and Psychotropic
Agents" (Ungersredt), "Experimental Therapy of Zymelidinoma” (3. Ross) and
"Treatment of Schizophrenia" (Bjerkenstedt).

0n the last day of the symposium, there was a round table discussion chaired by
Sedwall (Sweden) and M. Ye. Vartanyan (USSR) of two questions: the coatribution of
biological studies to clinical psychiatry; biological factors and heterogeneity of
mental diseases. In addition, there was broad discussion of all topics of the
symposium, its achievements and value of basic biological research to clinical
psychiatry.

The active participation of scientists representing the USSR Academy of Medical
Sciences--Ye. I. Chazov, A. P. Avtsyn, N. P. Bekhtereva, S. S. Debov, H. D.

67

IKMICHHNCJAL.USE(NNLY
Hashkovskiy, A. V. Snezhnevskiy and A. V. Val'dman-uss largely instrumental in
the success of this symposium.

In their closing remarks, H. Ye. Vartanyan and Hetterberg.head of the Swedish
delegation, commented on the high scientific and methodological level of the
papers, the good organization of the symposium and all its measures, and they
expressed the hope that this meeting would aid in further development of colla-
boration between scientists of both countries.

COPYRIchT: "Zhurnsl nevropatologii i psikhiatrii imeni S. S. Korsakova", 1981

10,657
C80: 18401102

68

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
UDC: 616.8+616.89]:061.3(67+57)"198l"
CONFERENCE 0F NEUROPATHOLOGISTS AND PSYCHIATRISTS IN PERM'

Moscow ZHURNAL NEVROPATOLOGII I PSIKMIATRII IMENI S. S. KORSAKOVA in Russian
Vol 81, No 11, Nov 81 pp 1750-1751

[Article by A. A. Shutov, Perm']

[Text] An interoblast scientific and practical conference dealing with symptoma-
tolosY. diagnosis and therapy of neurogenic somatic diseases was held in Perm'

on 30 April to 1 July [sic] 1981. A total of 128 scientists and practicing phy-
sicians from 35 cities of the Russian Federation, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan,
and Kirghizia participated in the work of the conference. More than 1.00 practicing
physicians of Permskaya Oblast were also assembled there. The participants in-
cluded neurosurgeons, cardiologists, internists, endocrinologists, otolaryngolo-
gists and other specialists, due to the "synthetic” program of the conference.

A large place was occupied by papers disclosing the pathogenesis, essence and
nature of somatic disturbances in patients with neuroses and individuals with
borderline states. Key issues concerning neurosomatic, psychosomatic relations and
mechanisms of formation of psychovegetative syndromes were raised for discussion

in the papers of A. M. Veyn (Moscow), Ye. M. Panchenko et al. (Voroshilovgrad),

V. A. Karlov et al. (Moscow), T. D. Bol'shakova et al. (Moscow) and others. There
was broad discussion of the problem of vegetovascular dystonia. The papers of

Ye. M. Burtsev et a1. (Irkutsk), 0. A. Kolosova (Moscow), D. D. Sosontova (Perm'),
L. A. Nifontova (Moscow), L. V. Pustokhanova (Perm') and others submitted data on
the neurosomatic basis of the symptom complex of vegetovascular dystonia. neuro-
humoral and neuroendocrine changes in patients with autonomic paroxysms, syncopic
states and arterial hypotension.

A special meeting was devoted to neurogenic and other mechanisms of formation of
arterial hypertension and ischemic heart disease. The papers of Z. A. Skudarnova
et al. (Smolensk), A. V. Thyev et a1. (Perm'), V. F. Vinogradov (Kalinin), V. S.
Movsesov et al. (Sverdlovsk), Ye. V. Vladimirskiy (Perm'), V. V. Solozhenkin
(Frunze) and others disclosed concrete pathogenetic factors in formation of cardio-
vascular pathology. Distinctions of psychovegetative organisation of patients

who had suffered myocardial infarction and the role of the psychological factor in
the process of rehabilitation following ischemic heart disease were the topics of
A. R. Rakhlmdzhanov et al. (Tashkent), A. A. Glaurov (Si-feropol'). M. B. Lantsberg
et al. (Perm'). The papers of A. D. Solov'yeva (Moscow), N. S. Tsimnerman et al.
(Pern'), L. Ye. Snirnova (Kalinin), B. I. Kamenetskaya et al. (Moscow) and others
dealt with cerebral (psychogenic) factors and mechanisms of breakdown of mediator
systems in development of essential hypertension and peptic ulcer.

69

FOR(MHW(JAI.USE(NVLY
New data were reported at the conference on the pathogenesis of somatic distur-
bances associated with organic brain disease. On the basis of the results of
stereotactic operations and pathohistological (morphometric in particular)
studies, cerebral mechanisms of integration of autonomic functions, autonomic and
somatic effects of therapeutic destruction of different brain structures. changes
in the neurosecretory system of the hypothalamus and role of the limbic-reticular
complex in expression of somatic pathology were demonstrated in a series of

papers delivered by the staff ofthe Kuybyshev Clinic of Neurological Diseases and
Neurosurgery (L. N. Nesterov et al.; N. N. Solovykh et al.; V. V. Skupchenko et
al.; Yu. I. Kravtsov), as sell as A. Yu. Hakarov et a1. (Leningrad). The nature
of somatic disturbances was described comprehensively in the presence of brain
tumors (0. V. Grinkevich et al., Sverdlovsk), epilepsy (V. I. Okladnikov, Irkutsk;
V. A. Gusev, Ryazan',and others), cerebrocranial trauma and ischemic attack

(B. V. Zapadnyuk, Kiev; P. V. Voloshin et al., Kharikov,and others), hereditary
ataxia (V. N. Klyuchikov et al., Yaroslavl'), syringomyelia (Ye. N. Leksin et al.,
Saransk) and tick—borne encephalitis (A. P. Iyerusalimskiy, Novosibirsk).

immunological, allergological problems of epilepsy, parkinsonism and a number of
other pathological states were the topics of I. G. Shabalina (Omsk), N. F. Garishina
ct al. (Perm') and s. K. Yevtuahenko (Donetsk). Neuroendocrine aspects of cerebra-
cranial trauma,epileps» cerebral accidents and muscular diseases were discussed

in the papers of A. A. Shutov et al. (Perm') and A. A. Skoromets (Leningrad). The
paper of A. Yu. Ratner et al. (Kazan') called attention to the incidence and role

of natal injury to the nervous system in development of somatic diseases in

children and adults. There was also discussion of neurogenic mechanisms and clinical
manifestations of gastrointestinal disorders (L. G. Yerokhina et al., Moscow; A. I.
Loktionova, Aatrakhan'), bronchopulmonary pathology (Yu. A. Kulakov, Tomak), sclero-
dermia (G. Ya. Vysotskiy, Semipalatinsk), sporadic goiter (H. N. Krasil’nikova,
Ufa), some rare neuropathological syndromes (V. Ye. Grechko et al., Moscow; 1. V.
Borzenkov et al., Perm'; T. S. Osintseva, Izhevsk) and other diseases.

This conference demonstrated the increasing interest of physicians in all specialties
in the problem of neurosomatic and psychosomatic pathology. It reflected a certain
stage of investigation of neurosomatic correlations. The adopted resolution outlined
future plans for investigation of the role of the nervous system in the genesis of
somatic diseases. It was stressed that a complex approach must be used to study
neurogenic somatic pathology, paying attention to cerebral (neurogenic, psychogenic),
vegetoviscerai, neurohumoral and neuroendocrine, as well as other mechanisms of

its formation. Attention was called to the desirability of expanding, deepening

and coordinating research on neurogenic somatic pathology, particularly in the

area of developing new methods of treating neurosomatic disturbances. It was pro-
posed that a unifiedmethodologicalapproach be elaborated, which could be used to
conduct research on the problem in question, as well as to standardize the termino-
logy, which is quite confused at the present time.

A collection of summaries of delivered papers was published, which reflected all
of the material presented at the conference.

COPYRIGHT: ”Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii imeni S. S. Korsakova", 1981

10,657
C50: 1860/102 .. m -

70

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY