APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030004-3

- - :
(FOUO 8/79)
1 HRROH 1979 EFFECTS OF NONIONIZINO ELECTROHBONETIC RHDIBTION 1 OF 2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/830l

1 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(FOU0 8/79)

EFFECTS OF Nomomzme

ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or lExcerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items~are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNERSKIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED NEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
Of THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
“'”°°"'"'°°"‘ " "'°" ’
JPRS L/8301

91¢"
‘spou ale

. at O A - I! l
TRANSMTIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 1 March 1979

BloﬂEDiCAL AND BBNAVIORAL SCIENCES, (FOU 8‘73!
Effects of Nonionizing Blectromagnet c a ntion

No.
0. Palm-50g chaalmioa Nous cod Adda” l. Plain: Task/'od. van No.

Joint Publications Research Service

i000 North Globe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

    
    
     
     

 

II. Contact/Gun: Na.

 
 

u. Spoosoniag Olgaaiauias Nana sad Addie-s l1- Typc oi Repeat a Peciod
Coveted

As above
la

‘6. Absmeu

The report contains information on aerospace medicine. agrotechnology. bionics
and bioacouatics. biochemistry, biophysics. environmental and ecological
problems. food technology. microbiology. epidemiology and immunology.

marine biology. nilitary medicine, physiology, public health. toxicology.
radiobiology. veterinary medicine. behavioral science, human ecciuecring.
psychology. psychiatry and related fields. and scientists and scientific

organizations in biomedical fields.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/83(
1 March 1!-

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE MD TECHNOLOGY

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(P000 8/79)

EFFECTS OF NONIONIZING
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION

CONTENTS

Advances in Magnetobiology
(Yu. A. Kholodov; RMSII BIOINICIKIKB 8mm NA

mmm ”LIA, 19%) 000000000000...COC0.0.000000000000000l00

Vegnetohydrodynenic end Bleetrokwdrodynsnic Effects in the
Mechanisms of Action of hgnetic Fields on Biological ObJects

(Ye. z. Gels, et 61.; msn nomamumm 519m NA
momma mm, 1978) 00....IOOOO'OOO‘ODDIOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOIOO

Some Distinctions 01' Effects of Pulsed Magnetic Fields on Conductive
Fluids and Biological System
(Yu. V. Berlin, et el. ° REAKPSII BIOIIOGICBleGJCB 8mm 1%
”mm ”L“, 19783 ..................l....................
Destnbilizntion or Bonequilibrsted Processes es the Basis of the
General Mechanism of Biological Effects of mgnetic Fields
(6. V. Plekhsnov; amen BIOWICBKIKB SIS‘l'm NA
momma ”It“, 1978) ooeoessoooooooosooooooooosoooeusoooooob

Bioenergctics and Regulatory Systems or the Organism During
Exposure to Magnetic Fields
(N. A. sumac, et al.° mu smwnxcmmcs sxsrm NA
Metic Fields, Adaptation Reactions and Resistance of the Organism
(1.. 1m. Oarksvi, et 61.} mu smworcussmm SISI'DI NA
momma POLYA, 1978)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Continued)

.Psychophysiological Analysis or Nervous System Reactions to
mgnetic Fields

(Yu. A. Kholodov; WSII BIOLMICHESKIKB SIS'I'EM NA
mm mLYA, 1978) 00....IIOOCOOOCOOIDOOOOOII000......

Effects of Variable Industrial Requency mgnetic Field on
ﬁmctional State of the Thyroid and Thyroxine Uptake by
Rat Organs '
(N. A. Udintsev, et al.; BMW' IIPERIMEITAL'NOY
BIOWII I mmm' N0 11' 1978) assesses-000000000000...

Peculiarities of Disruptions in the Selection Reaction in Rats
Exposed to a Modulated and hmnent mectromsgnetic Field

(G. D. Antimoniy a. K. Vasina; UPRAVLBNIYE mm

mm, 1978’ IIOIOOIOOOOOIOOOIIOCCOOOOOOIOOOOOOII.000.

Reaction of m‘osophils to Electrical Field

(V. M. Medina, V. B. Chernyahev; umvmcm
mumm’ 1978) .0.0CCCCOOOUOCCOCOCCOIUO0....

Special Characteristics of the Interaction of Electromgnetic
Fields With Biological Entities

(B. M. Savin, G. A. Stemskiy; OSOBHINOS'I'I WMSTVIXA
WRITE!“ POLE! 8 BIOOB'YEICI‘AMI, 1978) ............

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

108

112

111;

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ADVANCES IN HAGNETOBIOLOGY

Moscow REAKTSII BIOLOGICUBSKIKB SISTEM NA MAGNITNYYE POLYA in Russian 1978
signed to press 26 Feb 78 pp 3-5

[Article by Yu. A. Kholodov, Institute of Higher Nervous Activity and Neuro-
physiology, USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow, from book edited by Yu. A.

Kholodov, lzdatel'stvo Nauka, 2250 copies.213 pages]

[Text] Only 6 years have passed since the first collection of works dealing
with nagnetobiology [l] was published by the scientific council for the
cosplex problem of "Cybernetics," USSR Acadeey of Sciences; but in this

tine sany publications have appeared on this topic (especially in the USSR).
There have been All-Union symposiuas on different aspects of aagnetobiology
in Moscow (1971, 1972. 1976), baku (1972), Belgorod (1973), Prunze (1976),
Leningrad (1975), Kaliningard (1975) and Yalta (1975) [1-4, 7, 8. 13, 15].
Monographs [5, 6, 16, 16-18] and survey articles [9. 10] have been published.
Tens of dissertations have been deftnded on different problens of biological
effects of magnetic fields (MP), and this is indicative of the development
of this branch of biophysics in our country.

As of today, there are at least 2000 literature sources dealing with the
biological effects of MP. Mars-robiology is also discussed in textbooks

[12, 20] and encyclopedias [11. 19].

At the present time, there are few who question the biological effects of

MT. but there is still no satisfactory answer to the question of how these
effects are expressed. For this reason, attention is focused on the mechanism
of effects of MP on biological systels in the articles of this collection.

In essence, each author devotes sole of his attention to this basic problem

of nagnetobiolczy, but the works dealing solely with it are assembled in the
first part of the collection. Here, authors with physicochenical specializa-

tion set the style. Each of then stresses the facet he considers the most
isportant in the multifaceted process of interaction between MP and a

biological object, outlines the different approaches to solving this important
problem and lays the foundation of general theory of primary mechanisms
(obviously, he is not alone) of biological effects of MP.

The second part of the collection was written by medical specialists and
biologists who concentrate prisarily on the properties of biological systens

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(be they mitochondria or a population of organisms). There, HF often
emerges as a convenient tool for the study of biological systems, although
the ecological role of this physical factor has already been reflected in
some works. The complaint can be made that the effects of attenuated
magnetic fields (AM?) on biological objects are still not being studied
enough, while the role of biomagnetic fields in the function of biosystems
and in magnetobiological reactions is still unclear.

It has been shown that an organism also presents a reflex reaction to HP,
as it does to other stimuli, as well as a direct reaction, since HF have
penetrating action and can directly influence the CNS [central nervous
system]. The second route of influence was demonstrated in experiments
with isolated mam-alien CNS preparations and surviving nervous system of
invertebrates. Interestingly enough, the isolated CNS reacted better to
M? then the intact cus [18].

We should also mention a third route of effects of MP on an organism, which

is a sediated one. He refer to the fact that aqueous solutions of many
substances, including drinking water and solutions of pharmacological agents,

present a change in their biological properties after exposure to H? [6].

Thus, by altering the target, the researcher can vary the degreee of effects
of the same MP on a biological object for control purposes. The magnitude
of exposure also makes a contribution to the nature of reaction to HP, which
is notable for a long latency period and considerable aftereffect. In the
case of intermittent exposure, summation of effects is observed, and this is

used in physiotherapy [12]; with increase in exposure one observes adapta-
tion. However, the ultimate biological effect is determined not only by

localization and duration of exposure, but the distinctions of the biological
object.

0n the level of the organism, the reaction to HP is determined by species-
specific and genetic charscteristice, age (young organisms, especially
enbryos, are sensitive to HP), sex (males are more sensitive than females),
individual distinctions and functional state.

This information is indicative of the most vulnerable elements of a biological
system to magnetism, but it does not define the degree of biotropisa of
different parameters of this factor.

The third part of the book deals with the characteristics of biological
effectiveness of some parameters of HP. It was written by engineering

specialists. It is to be hoped that consideration of information given
in this section will raise the methodological standards of magnetobiological

experiments, in which only the MI intensity had previously been indicated
in most cases.

It is also necessary to indicate the gradient and vector of H! and for

VHF [variable MP], the pulse frequency and shape. The duration of exposure
to as and its localisation also determine the magnitude of the biological
effect.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He discussed above the biological effects in the case of fixed MP parameters.
It was demonstrated that the effectiveness increases when one or several
parameters are altered during exposure [19]. Thus, intermittent exposure is

stronger than continuous. exposure to a changing frequency is stronger than
a fixed frequency. etc.

It should be concluded that by artificially altering the MF parameters.
researchers can control the behavior of an organism to some extent.

affecting its regulatory systems by a contact-free method.

The ultimate goal of magnetobiological research-the possibility of con-
trolling the function of biosystems-can be reached with the inclusion of

feedback in the circuit of an automated controlled experiment. The means
of reaching this goal are outlined in this collection. It is to be hoped

that the friendly efforts of different specialists will help solve complex
theoretical and practical problems of magnetobiology.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. "Bffecte of Artificial Magnetic Fields on Living Organisms," "Mater.
Vsesoyuz. simp." [Proceedings of All-Union Symposium], Baku, 1972.

2. "Effects of Natural and Heat Artificial Magnetic Fields on Biological
Objects," "Mater. Vsesoyuz. simp.." Belgorod, 1973.

3. "Effects of Magnetic Fields on Biological Obiects," "Mater. III Vsesoyuz.
simp. [Proceedings of 3d All-Union Symposium , Kaliningrad, 1975.

a. "Hygienic Evaluation of Magnetic Fields," "Mater. simp." [Symposium
Proceedings], Moscow, 1972.

S. Dubrov, A. P. "Geomagnetic Field and Life," Leningrad, Gidrometeoirdat,
197‘.

6. Klasscn, V. I. "Hater and Magnetism," Moscow, Rauka, 1973.

7. "Space and Evolution of Organisms," "Mater. soveshch. [Proceedings of
Conference]. Moscow, 1976.

8. "Magnetic Fields in Medicine," "Trudy Kirg. med. in-ta (Frunze)" [works
of Kirgiz Medical Institute (Frunze)], 100, 197‘.

9. Msykelson, S. M. "Radio-Frequency Radiation. Magnetic and Electrical

Fields," in "Osnovy kosmicheskoy hiologii i meditsiny" [Fundamentals
of Space Biology and Medicine], Moscow, Nauka, Vol 2, Bk 2, 1975, p 9.

10. Rakhil'nitskaya, Z. N. "Biological Effects of Magnetic Fields,”
KOSM. BIOL. I AFIAKOSM. MED. [Space Biology and Aerospace Medicine],
No 6, 1974, p 3.

3
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Novitskiy. Yu. I. "Magnetobiology. children's Encyclopedia," Moscow,
Pedagogika, 1973, p 62.

Pasynkov, Ya. I. "Physiotherapy," Moscow, Meditainn, 1975.

"Reactions of Biological Systems to Heak Magnetic Fields," Mater.
ail-p. ," Moscow, 1971.

Travkin. M. 1’. "Life and Magnetic Fields," Belgorod, 1971.

"Physicoaatheutical and Biological Problems of Effects of Electro-
nagnetic Fields and Air Ionization," "Mater. Vaeaoyuz. nanch.-teklm.

siap." [Proceedings of All-Union Scientific and Technical Sympoaiun],
Moscow, Monks, 197-3.

Kholodov, Yu. A. "Msgnetiss in Biology," Moscow, Manta, 1970.

Idea, "Man in the Magnetic Heb," Moacow, Znsniye, 1972.

Idea, "Reactions of the Nervous Syatea to Electromagnetic Fields,"
Moscow, Manka, 1975.

Idem, "Magnetobiology," 333 [Great Soviet Encyclopedia], Vol 15. 1971.,
p 167.

Beier, H. "Biophyaic,” V33 Gorg Thiene, Leipzig, 1975.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mann", 1978

10,657
cso: 8161.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAGNETOHYDRODYNAHIC AND ELECTROHYDRODYNAHIC EFFECTS IN THE MECHAHISHS OF
ACTION OF MAGNETIC FIELDS 0N BIOLOGICAL OBJECTS

Hoscow REAKTSII BIOLOGICHBSKIKH SISTEH NA MAGNITNYYB POLYA in Russian 1978
signed to press 26 Feb 78 pp 26-38

[Article by Ye. Z. Cak, G. P. Komarov and H. 2. Oak, Agrophysical Scientific

Research Institute of the All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences imeni
Lenin, Leningrad]

[Text] In spite of the great strides made by magnetobiology in the last

few years, the hasic possibility of biomagnetic effects (ant) under the influ-
ence of SH? [stationary magnetic fields] and VH3 [variable magnetic

fields] is still being denied [1-4]. The skeptical attitude toward magneto-
biology is larpcly attributable to current thermodynamic conceptions, accord-
ing to which L e effects of HP [magnetic fields] on biological systems are

smaller by a factor of 10‘-10’ than the phenomena induced by the thermal
energy of these systems.

however. an increasing number of experimental studies confira the direct
effects of MP on biological objects, and this prompted an extensive search
for the primary physical mechanisms of action of HP, ranging from the quantum
mechanical level to the level of the integral organism [5-18].

To date, a large cycle of theoretical and experimental studies on model
systems, containing aqueous solutions of electrolytes. has been completed

at the Agrophysicsl Scientific Research Institute, since all living organisms
are referable expressly to such open systems, which cannot be described

from the positions of modern thermodynamics of irreversible processes [19-21].

These investigations warrant the belief that the most diverse macroscopic
phenomena can occur in such systems under the influence of HF, and they
overlap by several orders of magnitude any effects of a thermal nature.

In particular, it was possible to demonstrate that a change in kinetics and

rate of heterogeneous reactions are a typical property of such systems. when
they interaction of SN? or VHF, in spite of the fact that there is virtually

no change in total energy of such systems in the above-mentioned HP.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This article deals with the nature of occurrence of such phenoaens in living
systems.

It can be deaonstrsted that electric currents with density .1 1i 0 and space
charges with density 9“ 9‘ 0 appear in an aqueous nediua usually containing
different ions and characterized by electric conductivity 0, specific nagnetic
susceptibility X, constituting an open nonequilibreted ayaten, a property of
which is retention of a stationary or quasiststionary concentration gradient
VG i 0 [22]. Thus, in particular, there are always endogenous electric
currents with density J.“ i 0, space charges with density p“. end 9‘ 0, while
the presence of henoglobin and other pure-agnetic ions and nolecules, includ-
ing free radicals, enables us to describe the unit of live tissue volune

and negnetic susceptibility as Xend.

In general, one can describe the intensity of a nagnetic field acting on
a living systel as follows:

I-O
H; - “all! .. [l + k../.(:)|. (i)

and the intensity of an electrical field as:
I
z; - 2. E... (2)
ﬁ-l

where H.nis the intensity of 94?, ”he: is the amplitude of VHF, fa“) is

a tine unction, n n 1 corresponds to m [electroaagnetic field] of natural
origin, n - 2 are background IMP due to human activity and n - 3 are

experiaental HP. The values of 3,. and I!" can vary over a very wide range.
Thus, an electrical field of natural origin 8 can vary from 1-2 to 10 War,

for exaaple during magnetic storm or thunder [23, 210]; k,1 - ”ﬁn/55w

The presence of B; 1‘ 0 causes generation of currents of an exogenous
nature in biological tissue, with density of:

[“300 2 5'"

He should like to note that the considerable space devoted in this article
to the effects of electrical fields on living systems is due to the fact that
one cannot realistically consider the effects on living systaas of endogenous

electric and magnetic fields separately without taking special shielding
eeasures.

Consequently, the overall current density per unit volume or biological
tissue under actual conditions is:

It - ’end+ do 2 En- - (3)

6
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Magnetohydrodynamic (Han) and electrohydrodynamic (BHD) forces are generated
in biological tissue under the influence of H and Si, and this can be

described in the most general for: per unit t ssue volume as:
Fn-llglrnXHmlMewgm'i'h'rngtuﬂm (4)

uhere Us is magnetic permeability of vacuun, psc,end isdensity of endogenous
space charges and grad H describes the intensity gradient of HF. Taking
(l), (3) end (4) into consideration, we can write down for F2:

,3 ﬂ
’3 ' volumﬂdc I En)x( {In-’nu‘rknanDIWscﬁnd X En+X5328r‘dux- (5)
n-I n-

In the case of a single biological cell with consideration of the region
of diffuse layer with volume AV:

0

we see iron (5) and (6) that the magnitude of fences is determined not only
by the physical parameters of h? and electric fields, such as amplitude,
time, gradients, but to an equal extent by the electric, astabolic and mor-
phological parameters of the living organism. Evidently, the chief diffi-
culties involved in this problem are related more to underestimation by
physicists of the specifics of function of living matter than to the in-
adequacy of a purely physical approach to it. Thus, it is only in a very
few works that it has been noted that it is imperative to take into

consideration, when discussing the nature of BM! [biomagnetic effects],
one of its most typical properties, electric ones.

In our model experiments with aqueous solutions of electrolytes, with
current densities close to biological levels Liend). i.e., of the order of
1-10 mA/cmz, we obtained flux rates of the order of cmls with SH! of about
0.1-5 k0e [25-26], and when using alternating current and VHW they consti-
tuted l-lO 0e [27].

Convective flows varying in geometry appear when Mr heterogeneity V” i 0 or
nonuniform current density in space Vj f 0 is present in the electrolyte.

Thus, with the use of magnetophorea as sources of polygradient static
magnetic fields, which are presently used in medicine [28-29], we observed

a large class of flows varying in geometry in thin layers of electrolyte
situated directly above the magnetophore. As an example, Figure la
illsutratea a photograph of convective flows of aqueous solution 1 and CuSOK
(magnetophore No 5), which were visualized with particles of lycopodium

7
son OFFICIAL use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

powder. Figure 1b illustrates the distribution of HF intensity on the
surface, visualised by means of a corresponding ferromagnetic suspension.

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII I
I’IIMIIMM:

 

Figure 1. Shape of hydrodynamic flows in thin layer of electrolyte
situated above nagnetophore 5 surface (a). structure of

HP visualized by means of ferromagnetic suspension (b).

with the use of nonstationsry electric current and SH? under specific

boundary conditions, we observed effects of generation of stationary and
traveling waves in thin layers of aqueous media [30-31].

All these effects enabled us to experiaentally observe a change in kinetics
of various heterogeneous reactions in aqueous aedia of 10 or more tines,

and to discuss the reality, from the physical point of view. of any magneto-
hydrodynsuic and electrohydrodynanic phenoaena in aqueous uedia.

However, living systems consist, to a significant extent, of gel-like struc-
tures with special rheological characteristics. For this reason, it should
be noted that the case levels of forces, i.e., according to (5), can arise

not only in aqueous media, in nacrospacea, but in gels. This distinction of
MED and EH6 effects is attributable to the fact that the motility of low

8
FOR orncm. vs: 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

molecular ions in gels is of the same order as in macroscopic spaces. in
spite of the significant change in rheological characteristics.

In a study of the microscopic mechanism of HF effects on the kinetics of
heterogeneous reactions in open systems. we discovered an interesting feature
thereof which. in our opinion. is of special interest for living systems.

in view of the fact that this phenomenon hes not been sufficiently investi»
gated. we shall discuss it in greater detail.

it was found that when the heterogeneous reactions occurs in the area of
mixed or diffusion kinetics there is formation. beyond the area of double
layers. of macroscopic diffuse electric space charges of relatively low
density, as compared to diffuse charges of double electric layers. but tens
and hundres of times longer. These charges are attributable to the presence
of thermal movement in fluid and a difference in diffusion coefficients of
anions and cations. The maximum length of such charges is attributable

to the thickness of the diffusion layer. which reaches 10" cm in free
spaces in the presence of natural convection.

Such space charges appear when a dispersion system in aqueous media is ex-
posed to low-frequency electric fields [32-33]. This phenomenon explains the
anomalously high dielectric permeability of such systems. including a number
of biological suspensions (suspensions of cells. viruses. etc.). However,
these charges are resorbed when the electric field is removed.

in the case of heterogeneousreactions in a concentration of 0‘0.l N in
aqueous media. for open systems. such a space charge is an inseparable

property of such systems. which is due expressly to the reaction and its
selectivity. Let us mention that such concentrations of electrolyte are

typical for living biological systems. Such a space charge plays the role
of an electric ”barrier." inhibiting the reaction to some extent or other.
There may be "resorption" of the charge under the influence of various
physicochemical factors. However. after removal thereof the space charge
is completely relaxed. We have discussed some of these properties elsewhere
[34-36]. He then conducted additional experimental studies. in which the
space charge was formed near a small electrode immersed in 0.1 N or less
electrolyte. Figure 2 illustrates one of the techniques used to study its
properties. In the absence of forced convection. when there is only
spontaneous convection between electrode A and B (SAGL53. where 53 and 5;
refer to electrode area). potential difference as appears due to the
difference in areas of electrodes that are made of the same material. As
we hows already noted [36. 35). probing methods are unsuitable for the
study of properties of such charges in aqueous media. In this case. we
used the fact that the space density of a macroscopic space charge (NSC)
”NSC and length ansc are exceptionally sensitive to exogenous hydrodynaaic
factors. for example turbulisation of flow. Convection arising near one of
the electrodes can "tear off" this layer entirely, which causes generation
of an electric pulse between the electrodes. which is recorded by means of
an amplifier and oscillograph.

9
FOR orrxcnu. use 031.?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
 

   

wmv

m

. ’ Figure 2.
Diagram of device for studying pro-
perties of space charge

1) polyvinyl chloride pipe
2) CuSOe solution

3) small electrode A

6) large electrode B

5) dielectric sphere

6) turbulited flow

7) direct current aaplifier
8) oscillograph

9) solenoid

10) low-frequency amplifier
ll) sound generator

I
l

 
  

 

,

5R

:3

.\\\\\\~A\\~me

G;
I 1
{F-

\‘_~\~w . nuns—m a...“

   

The paraneters of such a pulse are determined by the following conditions:
amplitude 09. by the density of the space charge page; duration of leading
edge [anterior front] T..f by flow rates near the snail electrode and
duration of trailing edge [posterior front] 19", by the time of relaxation
of the HSC generation system. Under specific conditions determined by the
geometry of the system, concentration of electrolyte and cation and anion
diffusion coefficients. a sylmctricsl pulse arises. i.e., tp f~ﬂuf For
stability of results. flow turbulitation wss created by pass ng a
dielectric sphere with diameter 0‘ close to pipe diameter D: through the
pipe. at any set velocity in the range of l to 50 cmla. The disasters of
pipe [tube] 0; were varied from 0.1 to 2 cm in different experiments. In

these cxperinents, aqueous solutions of Cu80~ varying in concentration,
copper and graphite electrodes were used.

Figure 3 illustrates a typical oscillogram of the observed pulses. Figure be
illustrates pulse amplitude as a function of temperature a. I f(t’c) and
Figure 4b, pulse amplitude as a function of effects of sinusoidal VI? of
different frequencies and intensities. According to Figure 6a. the HSC
resorption effect appears at temperatures in excess of 60-50'6 and it
decreases somewhat in the low temperature range. Figure db shows that, with
increase in frequency and amplitude there is resorption of HSC. In our
opinion, such a model is also of independent interest for the study of

electricphenomena that occur uhen an erythrocyte passes through a blood
capillary.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 3.
Shape of electric pulse arising with
resorption of space charge near
snail electrode

  

U.) l.‘ M 0.0 no” lo 10 M H I?

Figure 4. Aaplitude (y-axia) of electric pulse es s function of
frequency and intensity of VHF (a) and electrolyte tea-
perature (b)

The appearing space charge causes diffusion potential 041;, the sagnitude of
which is determined by the equation:

RT
”e"'1"

t-l

DeI’Dec C” -
. . . _|n . ‘)
IJ’LI+ sJ ml ans. (

where R is the constant of Hendeleyev-Clepeyron. T is absolute tesperature,
F is the Phreday number. 0 . and Dk i are the diffusion coefficients for
cations and anions, 20 i an ’ k,£ are’their charges. i is the kind of ion,
Ci,1 and C£,2 ere the ion concentrations on the phase interfaces and in
the space.

The conceptions expounded above concerning the nsture of foraation and role
of space charges also enriched our conceptions about the role of endogenous

electric properties of a living systes in the aechsnisn of sction of NF. The
presence of diffusion transport of setter to the cell surface free the
eabient nedius. their efflux vis a diffusion route and selective transfer

of ions through aaabranes-ell this enables us to sgree that in such systess
not only are there diffusion layers outside the cell and near its actively
functioning organelles. for example, aitochondria (Figure 5). but also

use vith their inherent properties in these layers. The presence in such

11
POR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

systems of both low molecular and high molecular ions. for example, of a
protein nature. warrants the belief that this charge serves not only as an
electric barrier. but has special structurisation in this region. which we
also observed in our physicochemical studies [34, 35]; in addition to

this. with resorption of part due. for example, to the presence of low
molecular 61'. OH‘. etc.. anions, and a slowly resorbing part due to protein
ions.

Figure 5.

Diagram of formation of macroscopic
space charge near membranes of isolated
intact cell

1) nucleus

2) intracellular medium

3) mitochondria

A) surface membrane of cell

5) region of diffusion layer

6) extracellular mediua

 

No doubt. resorption of such a charge, partial or complete. does not require
considerable energy since, according'to our theoretical and experimental

estisates for use and estimates for use in disperse systems [32. 33]. it
is of the following order:

U
ﬁsckzgtzlm-lo’ V/cn, (8)

whereas in the regions near membranes. where there is a concentration of
space charges of enormous density. the electric fields are of the order of

105 "Ice.

This conclusion warrants the belief that the superposition of electric fields
of the order of hundreds of "Ion can have a direct influence on metabolism

of living cells.

In our oodel experiments, resorption of such a space charge by different

techniques enabled us to alter substantially the rates of various hetero-
geneous reactions in aqueous aedia with electrolyte concentrations of C<0.l N.

we also believe that there may he effects leading to resorption of "SC, as

illustrated in Figure 6b, in any living organisms exposed to VHF of relatively
high frequency and intensity. Blood capillaries, where hydrodynamic condi-
tions on both sides of endothelial cells are basically different. can serve

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as a typical example of areas of localization of such space charges. Under
such conditions, we could expect that VHF would have a direct effect on trans-

endothelisl transfer and, consequently. on capillary permeability.

The END and Inn phenomena occurring in living systems are attributable prime-
rily to the energy of the living systems themselves. Under the influence of
SN? and VHF. there is a change in electric energy accumulated by the living
system and energy of both types of space charges into mechanical energy.
which is capable of performing work, altering barrier thickness and rate of
delivery of reagents to membranes and reaction zones.

Hith reference to the possibility of direct MD“ and BED affects on metabolism
of living cells leading to microvibrations, microconvection and ”barrier

resorption" effects. it should be noted that the following applies when
there is additional appearance in living tissue of pressure Pt' induced by
HDH and END forces:

I
P: I- %> to. (9)

where 95 is the cross section of the cell or diffusion layer and r. is

maximum intensity of change in protoplasm, which may become diluted or even

split. especially in the case of brief exposure to electromagnetic fields

?f in impact nature, as comprehensively discussed by Yu. V. Berlin et al.
37 .

 

Figure 6. Diagram of experiment dealing with blocking of AP by
heterogeneous HF (a) and set-up for stimulation of AP (b)

1) muscle preparation 5) circular magnetic space
2) nerve segment 6) magnetic system with
3) salt crystal circular space

6) nonmagnetic layer (film)
Uith preparation in position (I) there is no block. whereas in position (11)

it does occur.

13
roe orncm cs: oxu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cher:

lasose etic fields Background biosphsrr
fields csused by hunn
ivities

Geoslectric
| | Erternel electro-
ns etic fields

  
 
     
    
     
     
    

Artificisl ststionsry
snd nonetetionsry

II! etic fields

 

 
     
  
 
    
    
   
  
      
      
  

  

Endogenous electric
current due to note-
bolic processes and

slectrokinstic effects
[sigh densit

  

Diffuse specs chsrgee

in lsyers nesr nesbrenns
(double electric end

diffusion lsysr) with
density 0.“;

    
    
   

  
 
 

Living orgenise- .__
etetionsry, open.
nonequilibreted

e-stes

 
     
 

     

Exogenous (induced)
electric currents

under the influence
of exogenous IMP.

jOX

 
 
 
     
    

*- Perensgnetic fields, free
redicels end psrsssgnetic
perticlss (erythrocytes,
nitochondrie. bscterie)
uith se;nstic noesnt

  

HMD effects under
the influence of

forces:

F3011)" "O'Iex m 3
PIMP Dolhypey]:

i -'ﬁ gred II
HID

BID effects under
the influence of

forces:
’m'hmﬁ

‘ aydrodynenic processes , Chenge in rete of
in livi-' or.eniss sstebolic recesses
¢——’

 
   
 

Chenge in spsce
density end length
of spece chsrgee in
regions neer nea-
brsnes (chsnge in

selective perseebi-
litv of the cell

  

 
 

 
    
 
    
   
   

 
 

Chenge in rete of
delivery of reegente
to functionsl nes-
brsne surfecee end
neesenger necro-
solecules

 
 
    
 

+ Horphologicel chengss
::::::ti:..::.:::§: o... Chfﬁsf in Ph¥|1°1°81c in structure of
(chenge in nsnbrene "“‘ °f “:11 tore 1st.
I. ' Chenge in conditions 0
:enetic s sten function

1%
roe orrrcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Numerous data in the literature and, apparently, our own experimental findings
with regard to the effects of SH? and VHF on living systems can serve as
experimental confirmation of the above conceptions.[ll, 13-18, 38-60].

For example, as shown by calculations, one can induce a direct 8MP effect
on living systems, even with the use of shields, by means of using Hr gradi-
ents of the order of 10’-1o’ OeIcm and intensities of the order of kilo-
oersteds. He generated such fields under laboratory conditions, and in these

experiments we observed changes in c‘ncentration and vital functions of iron-
depoaiting bacteria [15], as well as ital blocking of action potential (AP)
conduction in neuromuscular fibers. The techniques for this experiment were
described by A. V. Ribyakov et a1. [39, 40], while Figure 6 illustrates the
experiaentsl set-up.

Let us indicate that experimental results analogous to those reported by
A. V. Kibyakov [39, 60] were subsequently obtained by P. G. logach et a1.
[bl]. however, since the authors used lower ngad H, they succeeded in

inducing a partial block of AP conduction, characterized by a decrease in
amplitude and rate of conduction. All of the foregoing enabled us to
formulate the primary mechanism of interaction between H? and living systeas
(see Chart) as follows: exogenous SH? and VHF, us well as spontaneous and
artificial comomitant electric fields, which interact with electric
currents and space charges of an endogenous nature that are determined by
metabolic processes in the course of function of a living organism, induce
generation of “ED and END pressures capable of altering the rate of sets-
bolic processes, cell permeability, rate of delivery of reagents to func-
tioning membrane surfaces and messenger macromolecules.

Equation (5) reflects only the general nature of HP effects on living syetess.
A comparative quantitative analysis of the effects on living systems of
different types of HP would be of special interest to practice. In most
cases. such estimates are feasible. Thus, we consider the case where VB!

is involved against the background of SH! of considerable intensity, which

occurs, for example, by insufficient rectification of current in the electro-
magnetic which. in turn, causes a radical increase in all SH? effects.

The analysis revealed that analogOus effects can be obtained by exposing liv-
ing system to VHF with an intensity of II, 2 > ”1.0 but provided that «when.
which we also observed [16-18]. '

The mechanisa we have discussed reflects only the primary effects of MP on
living systeas. The reaction of an integral organism is a more complex

phenomenon that requires further special investigation with due consideration
of the role of the central nervous system.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Akkerman, Yu. "biofizika" [Biophysics], Moscow, 196‘, p 556.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
5.

6O

7.

8.

9.

11.

12.

13.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Abashin, V. M., and Yevtushsnko, G. I. ”Effects of Stationery Magnetic
Fielde on Biological System." BIOPIZIRA [Biophysics], 20, 2, 1975,
pp 281-282.

Idea, "Stationery Magnetic Fields and Impulse Conduction in Nerves."
1m. 20. 2. 1975. pp 276-281.

Idea, "Co-ents on Article Entitled 'Effecte of Magnetic Fields on
Blood Plow' by V. A. Vardsnysn.” Ibid, 18, 3, 1973, p 491; 19. 6,
1973, pp 1117-118.

Dorfasn. Ye. 8. "Physical Phenomena in Living Objects Under the
Influence of Stationary Msgnetic Pielde," in ’Vliyaniye ugnitnykh poley
ns biologicheskiys ob”yekty" [Effects of Msgnetic Fields on Biological
Objects], Moscow. Neuke. 1971. pp 17-31.

Shiehlo. M. A. ”Effects of Magnetic Fields on Enzyme. Tissuler Respite-
tion and Sons Aspects of Metebolisn in the Intact Organise,” Ibid.

pp 32-58.

Presnsn. A. S. "Electroesgnetic Fields end Living Mature." Moscow,
Neeke, 1968.

Trevkin. M. P. "Poesibls Mechenisns of Biological Effects of Magnetic
Fields." in "Meter. much-meted. konf. Belgorod" (Proceedings of
Scientific end Methodological Conference in Belgorod). 1969, pp 23-26.

Piruzyen. L. M; Gleeer. V. M.; Delent'yev. V. A.; et el. "Mechenisn

of Biologicel Action of Stationary Magnetic Fields," IZV. AN 888R.

588. 3101.. [News of the USSR Acede-y of Sciencea. Biology Seriee), No 6.
1970. pp 535-539.

Arieterkhov. V. M.: Pimzyen, V. P.; and Tsy’t-yehev. V. P. "Physico-
chemical Bases of Prinry Mschsnisls of Biological Bffecte of Magnetic
Fields" (in this collection. p 6). 1977.

Kourov, c. P.. and Celt. Ye. 2. "Priury Mechenisn of Phyeicoche-icel
Action of Stationery end Low-Frequency Msgnetic Fields on Biological

Objects," in "Meter. III Veesoyue. siep. Kslningred" [Proceedinge of
3d All-Union Symposium in Keliningrsdl, 1975. pp 31-32.

Arber. s. I... end Peytel'berg-Blank. V. R. "Mechenisn of Biological

Effects of mectroeegnetic Fields on the Cell.” in ”Elektronneye
obrsbotks uterielov” [Electronic Processing of Msterisls]. Vyp 6,
1976, pp 67-70.

Gsk. Ye. 2. "Sane Questions of Biologicel Effects of Stationery
Msgnetic fields.” in "Morfologicheekiye i khieicheskiye ineneniye v
proteesee razvitiya kletki" [Morphologicel end Chenicel Chsngee
During Cell Developoent], Rigs, Zinetne. 1967, pp 125-132.

16
won ort-‘xcm. use ONLY
lb.

15'

16.

17.

18.

19.

n
L e

21.

22.

23.

2b.

25.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gak, Ye. 1. "0n the Question of Prinary Mechanisns of Physicochenical
Processes With Exposure of Biological Objects to Stationary Magnetic
Field," in ”Tszisy l sovsshch. po izucheniyu vliynniya aagnitnykh polcy
na hiol. oh"yekty" [Summaries of Papers Delivered at the First
Conference Dealing with the Study of the Effects of Magnetic Fields on

Biological Objects], Moscow, Nauka, 1969, pp 18-20.

Ides, “0n the Question of Effects of External and Local Magnetic pielda

on Biological Objects," TRUDY LBNIMGR. OB-VA YBSTBSTVOISPYTATBLEY (LCD)
[Marks of the Leningrad Society of Naturalists (Leningrad State Univer-

sity)], Vol 76, Vyp l, 1971, pp 57-59.

Gek, Ye. 2.; Koaarov, c. 9.; and Zhgenti, T. C. "The Mechanism of
Biological Action of Low-Frequency Magnetic Fields,” in "Blektronnayn

obrebotka natarialov,” Vyp l, 1971, pp 63-66.

Zhgenti, T. 6.; Oak, Ye. 2.; Kosarov, G. P.; and Nishnianidzc, K. A.
“Biological Activity of Sonic Range of Magnetic Fields," Ibid, pp 82-8‘.

Oak, Ye. 1., and Konarov. G. F. "Some Distinctions of Effects of Lou-
Frequency Magnetic Fields on Biological Objects,” Ibid, pp 71-73.

Ronanovskiy, Yu. M.; Stepanova, N. V.; and Chernavskiy, D. s. "Mathe-
naticel Modeling in Biophysics," Moscow, Mauka, 1975, pp 320-321.

Bauer, 8. 8. "Theoretical Biology," Leningrad-Moscou, lad-v0 VIEM
[All-Union Institute of Experimental Medicine], 1935.

Tokin, B. F. "Theoretical Biology and the Creativity of B. s. Bauer,"
2d edition, lsd-vo LCU [Leningrad State University], 1968.

Enanuel', N. M., and Knorre, D. 6. "Course of chenical Kinetics," 36
edition, Moscow, Vysshaye shkola, 197k.

Pudovkin, P. P. "Distribution of Electric Fields in the Ionosphere,"

in "Sunburi i voznushcheniye v aagnitosfere" [Substorna [7] and Pet-
turhancea in the Magnetosphere], Moscow, Nauka, 1978, pp 38-66.

Voychishin, K. 8.; Brachan, Ya. F.; Kuksenko, V. 1.; and Mihaylovskiy,
V. N. "Infornative Correlations Between Bio-Helio-Geophysical
Phenonena, and Blenents of Forecasting Them." Kiev, Naukova dunks, 1976.

Oak, Ye. 1., and Rik, O. R. "Effects of Stationary Magnetic Field
on Kinetic Movement of Ions in Aqueous Solutions of Potent Electrolytes,"

DAN SSSR [Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences], 175. No 6, 1967,
pp 856-858.

ask, Ye. 2.; Rokhinson. B. Kh.; and Bondarenko, M. F. “Distinctions
of Changes in Kinetics of Electrode Processes in Electrolytes in
Stationary Magnetic Fields," ELBKTROKMIMIYA [Electrochenistry], ll, 4,

1975. 528-535.
9" 17

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

36.

35.

36.

37.

38.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oak. Va. 2.. and Koaarov, G. P. ”Stationary Pious in Electrolytes in
Low-Frequency Magnetic Fields." ZMTP [Journal of Technical Physics].

41. 9. 1971, pp 1996-1998.

Pefer, A. S. "A Means of Exposing Biological Objects to Magnetic
Fields (Author Certificate #45 638),” BYUL. IZOBRET.. OTKRYTIY I

PROM. ZNAKDV [Bulletin of Inventions. Discoveries and Tredesarks].
No 37. 1976. p 15.

Idea. "Magnetophores and Msgnatophore Devices," (in this collection.
p 209). 1978.

Gak. Ye. 2.; Gak, M. 2.; and Koasrov. G. P. "A Method of Direct

Generation of Mechanical Oscillations in Electrolyte Space (Author
Certificate 410 821)." BYUL. IZOBRET.. OTKRYTIY 1 P30“. ZMAKOV, 2. 1976,

p 22.

Bondarenko, N. P.. and Oak, M. z. "Investigation of Nonlinear Properties
of Capillary Gravitation Haves in Electrolytes." INFORM. BYUL. AF!
[Information Bulletin of the Institute of Agricultural Physics]. No 17-18,

1973. pp 102-108.

Dukhin, s. 8., and Shilov, V. N. ”Electrical Phenomena and Double
Layer in Disperae Systens and Polyelectrolytes," Kiev. Naukova dunks.
1975.

Dukhin. s. 8. ”Electric Conduction of Disperse Systems." Kiev, Naukova
Dunks. 1975.

Gak, Ye. 2.; Rokhinaon, 8. Kb.; and Bondarenko. M. P. ”Possibility
of Electrodynanic Bifects in Electrolytes,“ ZMTP, 44, S, 1976. pp 1066-

1069.

Idea, "The Role of Space Charges in Kinetics of Electrode Processes."
in "Elektronnayn obrabotha naterialov," Vyp 6, 1973, pp 23-28.

lden, "Influence of Magnetohydrodynaaic Effects on Volraapere Charac-
teristics of Plow-Type Blsctrochenical Cells,: BLBKTROKBIMIYA. 11.

No 4. 1975. pp 535-539.

Berlin, Yu. V.; Buvin, c. M.; Bel'kevich. V. 1.; and Oak, Ye. z.
"Distinctions of Effects of Pulsed Magnetic Fields on Biological

Systems.” (this collection, p 39), 1978.

ll'in, V. 8.; Yenel'yantsev. A. M.; Koesrov, G. P.; et a1. "Biochemical
Bases of Neural Trophies and Ispairnentthereofin Skeletal Muscles,"
ZHURN. EVOLYUTS. BIOKBIM. I PIZIOL. [Journs1 of Evolutionary Biochemis-

try and Physiology], 8, 3, 1972. pp 2&0-251.

18
FOR OFFICIAL use osu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

39. Kibyakov. A. v.; Konarov. c. P.; and Oak. Ya. z. "The Role of Hydro-
dynaaic Pactora in Synaptic Trananieaion," FIZIOL. ZHURN. 8883
[Physiological Journal of the USSR]. 57, Lo 11, 1911. pp 16‘1-1666.

40. Konarov, c. P.. and Oak, Ye. 2. "Action Potential Blocking by Hagnetic
Pialda." in "Hater. III Vaeaoyux. ailp. Kalininsrad." 1975. pp 16-17.

61. Bogach. P. 6.; Hirutenko. V. 1.; and Kondrat'yeva, I. D. "Effects of

Stationary Magnetic Pielda and Ultrahigh-Frequency Electromagnetic
Fields on Heabrane Potential of Nerve and Huacle Cello,” in "Hater. IV
Hezhdunar. biotiz. konnr." [Proceedings of 4th International Biophysica

Congress]. 1973, p 245.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Na ". 1978

10,657
C80: 8166

19
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOME DISTINCTIG‘S 0? EFFECTS OF PULSBD MAGNETIC FIELDS ON CONDUCTIVE FLUIDS
AND BIOLOGICAL $781848 -

Moscow mu BIOLOGICHBSKIIOI SIS‘l'DI NA M6811!!!“ POLYA in Russian 1978
signed to press 26 Feb 78, pp 39-68

[Article by Yu. V. Berlin, 6. H. Buvin. V. I. Bel’ksvich and Ye. Z. Gak,
All-union Scientific Research Institute of Medical Instrunent Making,

Moscow; Agrophysical Scientific Research Institute of the All-Union Academy of
Agricultural Sciences insni Lenin, Leningrad)

[Test] Of all the diversity of HP [magnetic fields] of spontaneous and
artificial nature that influence biological systems [6], PH? [pulsed
magnetic fields] are biologically the most active and the least studied.
Yet PM? are encountered under the most diverse industrial conditions

(when servicing radio-relay conunication lines, radar stations, in a
number of technological industries, etc.).

mus, artificial PM! have becons one of the environmental factors that
affects nan constantly. And if we consider that significant PM! are formed
in the living organism with generation of action current [1, 5, 10, ill, the
importance of studying the effects of M on nodels of biological processes
becomes understandable.

There has been discussion of PH? that are active in a limited space, for
example, when an aniaal is placed completely or partially in a solenoid

[7-9]. Yet instances of traveling H! (or sliding in space) are encountered,
when different parts of the body of a living object are successfully exposed

to then.

An analogous phenomenon can be observed in living systems. Evidently, the
HP accompanying propagation of action potential along an axon can be con-
ceived of as a sliding PM? [1, 10, ll].

Consideration of such a problen is of interest, not only to define the ne-

chanism of action of a moving PM? on biological system, but as related to
a number of technological tasks involving continuous exposure of flowing

liquid to HP. There have been virtually no studies of the mechaniss of
action of m on various processes in aqueous media, and still unclear is

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the role of such important factors as transconductsnce ("steepness") of

edges, on-off time ratio and duration of HF pulses. All this prompted us
to conduct this investigation.

The inadequate knowledge of primary physicochenicsl mechanisms of action of
HP on man, animals and plants retarded development of research, both on

the use of MP for treatment purposes and effects of this factor on the bio-
sphere. physiological snd regulatory mechanisms in man. It nust be noted

that such research is only making its first cautious steps in several
branches of technology. This applies, in particular, to comprehension of

the mechanism of effects of PHP on transfer processes in aqueous media.

He shall dwell on the distinctions of effects of PH? with a shape that is
close to the ideally square-wave, since other pulse shapes are much closer
to the known types of effects of nonstetionary fields. For the sake of
convenience in our further discussion of phenomena occurring in aqueous
Iedia, we shall successively consider the effect of a single pulse, train of
pulses and PM? moving in space.

As we know, any pulsed signal lasting for a short period of time it. relation
to an interval considered can be described in the form of a Fourier series
and written as follows:

‘9 (l) .. § A. sin(2n!..t + m. (I)

where An is the amplitude of pulse conponents, f" is the pulse frequency and
y" is the phase.

In our further study of physicochemical mechanism of phenonena that then

arise, we shall confine ourselves to the simplified form of function h(t)
for a single pulse.

Figure la illustrates a typical single MP pulse h - f(t), where r“ is the
duration of the leading edge [anterior front], Tpf is the duration of the
trailing edge [posterior front] of the pulse and 1", is the duration of the

central part of the pulse with amplitude ll. Let us designate 1 {’1' f ,
and mus. to: value h(t) with ocm f, i.e., to describe the feeding
edge of the pulse, let us assume the following condition:

ma"- Kay. (2)
where with (-1 —. -L’._
af Kaf ‘af
At the same time with taf<l<1p+ 1'th fcrhm- we should
OI ‘—
assume Mme!“ ._ II. (3)
and with 1.g+tp<t<rp l-rpg-l-rgtghu) we can write down
haul? "Man—15,5 where "
to . Kpf-rpf, (6)
21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

so that

am - m a“ + n 11;», m - mug-:33". (a)

 

figure 1. Diagram of magnetic field pulse (a) and induced electric
pulse in conductive medium 0:)

As it has been noted [6]. one can obtain considersble HP effects on aqueous
sedia and, first of all, changes in kinetics of heterogeneous reactions.

nalnly when such systems have electric currents due to nonequillhrium pro-
cesses, i.e. . when condition jam 9‘ 0 is met end when there are various
space charges in the systees, i.e.. p “a” f 0. In addition. there may
also be different ions in aqueous media. particles with ll 9‘ 0, where f. is
the magnetic moment. The presence of some conductivity of aqueous media
due to presence of low molecular ions determines. in turn. generation of
induced electric currents in the aqueous media under the influence of

induced 3? [electric field] in space Jind f 0. so that total current
density in the medium can be written down as:

less 9‘ lie-o) 'l' I’M o (6)

'.ct us determine function 8(a) with consideration of Mt) (Figure 1).
Since 8:341 {(r). where f(r) is determined by f as a function of coordinates,

by making a graphic differentiation of Mt) with consideration of (2)46).
we can describe 8(a) as in Figure lb, which shows that with tﬂctﬁtpf + T9

Eu) - 0. with 00““: .
H
’ 5(0-m- const. (7)
and with 3+ '.g< ‘ <1pg+ 1., + 1‘,
EU - —i- “It". 8
) i“ n
22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. at ment t.f(c(t.f+‘rp. the HF effect on transfer processes in aqueous
eedie is determined only by force:

Im‘o- p. ”I“ K ,II 4' z”.nﬂlls (9)

where grad fl characterises the degree of HF heterogeneity, x is magnetic
susceptibility and mm is esgnetohydrodynanic.

As noted in (6), under the influence of these forces phenomena of convection
and diverse hydrodynasic phenoeene may arise in the aqueous medium. but the
specifics of W action is not manifested here. especially under condition
that Tel!“ > 1. In aodern equipment, such a correlation constitutes up

10

to 10‘ or more. Figure lb shows that the asplitude of generated 8?
pulses is inversely proportional to their duration.

In this case. the most interesting effects should be expected expressly
at time 00“.; end Tﬁ+1.f‘“1g+t.f+1’pf. In this interval, in the space

of the electrolyte wit conduct vity 0 electric currents arise with density:
H
[M'afzoﬁ*('syvo)l (‘0)
~ H
Imrpg~-°';p-£\N'.y.9)o (N)

Then. in the volume of the aqueous medium, with “in“, forces are gene-
rated that are defined by the following values:

II

hat“) a ['0 “tan + h (0] + 08C 'af

ﬁr. v. 8) + zh (and Mi).
('2)

Analysis of the above equations enables us to demonstrate several distinc-
tions of PM? effects in the case of 1.5104410", to - 0.01 l s or more.
which can be briefly formulated as follows:

i. Under the influence of PH? with high trensconductance lO"+lO" s and
duration of the order of 10'”). s. high density pulsed electric currents
arise. j .1“. the amplitude of which is deter-lined by the conductivity of
the f luis. pulse amplitude and duration are comparable in order of
Iagnitude to currents generated under the influence on aqueous media of

sinusoidal jain VHF [variable nagnetic fields] at a frequency of 10’4-107 a:
with the sale amplitude II.

23
roe orrtcm. use ouu
roe orncm. use out?

Since. other conditions being equal:

'sigim_ 1"“ i

with 7‘< 'ef bmm< Ip.1nd.,""°"‘7 " W- Undo-1n.

in the density of induced current under the influence of H - It. nine (at.

2. The nagnetohydrodynasic forces arising in period 00“.; end tpﬂﬁ<tt
‘tpﬂ.{«pf are equal in neon value and oppoeite in sign, i.e.. sign-
variah e pressuree appear in the nediun. but with interval 1", between then.

Herein lies the difference of occurring proesures fron those introduced by
ultrseound. vhich is usually obtained fron generators of sinusoidal oscilla-
tione. Consequently in the cane of e low value of tp. i.e.. with ‘p'Tafo

‘l’P'Tpf. when the value of H is relatively lr'v. the pressures nay he:

ppm< V..." (1‘)

where re.“ is minus: shear screen of the liquid.

The rheological properties of the liquid nadiun do not neceessrily change;

macroscopic effects can occur only in the tine interval t.g<t‘tp~|*rpf. as
we have noted above.

3. Hith significant values of 1p - 10"” e or lore, hydrodynanic effects
ere manifested due to the fluidity effect of the liquid, i.e.. there could
be generation of hydrodynenic oscillations in aqueous nedis or convection
due to heterogeneous distribution of forces in the value. Thus. in our

opinion, long pulses with liquid 1’ ) 13.1 tine end with traneconductance
[steepness] of edges end tine of t e order of 10" s or lens.

6. In the case of e periodic sequence of unipolar pulses with period 2'

(Figure 3). of psrticulsr importance are the pnuees between pulnes. heceuae
if 1P.u...<1’"1 the relaxetion effect diseppears and we can refer to a

continuous spectrum of effects.

5. In the one of treeting an aqueous nediun with e single MP pulse that
moves in space et a relatively elov rate. one nhould elso expect generation
of "running" legnetohydrodynalic and electrohydrodynanic forces in the

liquid. at the use rate. Generation of such epatially heterogeneous
forcee should he sesocieted with an increase in ell types of convection

effects.

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Generator of sliding pulsed magnetic field

6. All of the foregoing, with consideration of [6]. causes intensification
of all heterogeneous reactions in the nonequilibrated aqueous system.

The effects of PM! on squeous media can be demonstrated by physicochemical

experiments. As an example. we made an experimental study of the effect of
turning the electrolyte in a circular electrochemical cell by the method
described in [3].

A device was designed for experimental purposes to generate a moving PH? [6]
(CPHF), which provided for the successful formation of magnetic pulses.

Let us mention that, as demonstrated by our experiments, the generated
pulses fully set the above stipulation, i.e.. Taf=10‘ﬁ T (=10“ and

T - 0.01 l s. Moreover, with spatial separation of coi a we could

o tain the effect of an M3 sliding in space [1].

The GPHF device consists of a pulse generator, distributor, oscillator
[ahaper] keys, electrodes and switch. The pulse generator is assembled
as a multivibrator, yielding approximately square-wave voltage with varying

pulse recurrence frequencies. The distributor is a circular rhdigit counter
with presetting of the initial state. The oscillator key is executed as an

inverter, and the coils of the circular electrode are connected to it. The
device delivered sliding PH? of 0.5-25 0e. and the multivibrator made it

possible to select pulse recurrence frequencies of l to 1000 he with l to
600 ma current in the electrode coils.

25
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

The effects of PM? on a colloid 22 suspension of analogous ferromagnetic
particles flocculating in H? are of independent interest. Such a suspension

is a model of relaxing medium liquid with Tr31'0.l*0.2 s. Depending on
the intensity of MP, ranging from 1 to several dozen oersted. there is a
change in number of particles oriented in the field and a corresponding
change in optical coefficient of passage of light in such a medium. He
observed the action of PM? according to modulation of intensity of a laser

beam traversing the suspension. The beam of light from an Lc-TS laser,
reflected from a mirror. passes through the bottom of the glass with the

suspension and hits a photodetector (photodiode). dhe glass is situated in
an inductor fed by the pulse generator. As can be seen on the oscillogram

(Figure 3), if 1 >tg.1 the medium has time to alter light absorption after
HF changes. and if tpstrel we observe distortion of the leading edge of the
light pulse.

The above-described phenomena can also exist in living systems exposed to

PHF. since all of the above properties of aqueous systems are present in
biological systems. i.e.. induced and endogenous electric currents, diverse

space charges. paramagnetic ions and particles.

A special property of square-wave HF pulses is the possibility of obtaining
in biological tissues. under isothermal conditions, high pulse pressures
with relatively low expenditure of average power, which is analogous to
impact [shock] factors that impair biological structures.

At the same time. exposure of biological objects to spatially sliding MP
makes it possible to radically intensify the effect of heterogeneity of

forces appearing in space.

As an example of the direct effect of H? on biological objects. we shall
submit the results obtained with exposure of a skeletomuscular system to a
field [1. 2].

We tested the effect of a sliding wave field with intensity of 0.5 to 25 0e

on the human skeletomuscular system on the basis of changes in the main
informative parameters of electrical activity of muscles: mean frequency and

degree of coherence [synphasing] of electrical processes in two leads.

He recorded 2 electromyograms for l min before exposure, immediately after
exposure and 5 min after exposure during isometric contraction of the
brschisl biceps with a constant load. Analysis of electrical activity of

the muscle was made on a specialized HlAN-l device.

The mean frequency of the electric myosignsl was estimated as the mean number
of intersections (number of zeroes per unit time) of the electromyosignal

isoline. To assess synphaaing of two myosignals. we determined the coeffi-
cient of the intercorrelation function with a zero shift between these

signals (1 - 0).

26
rot OFFICIAL use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Oscillogram of intensity of modulated light from quantum
generator (LG-7S). A single HF pulse of 1800 0e (a) and
sliding HP p:lsss of 20 0e, 10 Hz (b)

As shown by analysis, the change in frequency of electrical oscillations and
degree of synphasing in two leads characterize the change to an alleviated
ssyncrhonous mode of stimulation of motor units, which is reflected by

an increase in frequency and decrease in synphssing. Figure 4 illustrates
the relative changes in these parameters averaged for a period of 20 s.

The indices for the first 20~s interval prior to exposure were taken as
1002. He observed virtual smoothing of the effects in the next 5 min.

No changes in electromyosignals were observed with exposure to stationary HF
of the same intensity.

In conclusion. we should like to mention some areas of practical application
of PH? with a high transconductsnce [steepness] of edges [fronts].

2?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 6.
Diagras of distribution of seen fre«

quency of electrosyosignals (a) and
degree of synchronization (b) of

electrical activity of suseles

1) before exposure

11) after exposure
Ill) 5 sin after exposure

 

l. The use of PM! with t.fﬂlO" s persits experimental investigation of
their effects on aqueous sedia. various sodels of biological tissues and.
finally, directly on anissla and nan.

2. There is continuous generation of endogenous electric currents, due to

setebolic energy. in living biological tissues. Electrical charges are
generated near the surfaces of sesbranes. and there is also continuous flow

of blood and other biological fluids at rates ranging fros ale to ss/s or
less. which detersines continuous generation of flow currents.

This makes it possible for intensive sagnetohydrodynasic and electrohydro-
dynesic phenosena to be generated in biological tissues. even under the

influence of low-saplitude PM? which. in turn, could have a substantial
influence on these processes in the organiss.

3. There are also several possible applications of PM? in solving a nusber

of technical problens in various branches of the national econosy. This
thesis is based on prior experience with HP to intensify various hetero-

geneous processes in liquids [6] and experisents described here. In our
opinion. of special interest are our experisents dealing with the effects
of PM? fros different sources. including OPHT. on the kinetics of behavior

of a suspension of analogous ferrossgnetic particles.

The great tise and spatial heterogeneity affect sakes it possible to control
the distribution of particles in a voluse of liquid. even with H? intensities
of the order of a few oereted. which could be used to develop various types
of instrusents and devices.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. berlin. Yu. V. “A Device for Exciting a Sliding Magnetic Field.”

NOVOSTI HEDITSINSKOY TlKﬂNle [News in Medical Technology]. Vyp l, 1976.
p 123.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

6.

5.

6.
7.

9.

lo.
11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Berlin. Yu. V.z Ktotov. A. V.; Bel'kevich. V. 1.; et el. "Biophyeicel

Pretequieitee for Developing e New Method of Being Moving Megnetic
Yielde. Magnetic Pielde in Medicine." TRUDY K130. MED. IN-TA (Pronto)

[Harte of Kirgiz Medical Inetitute]. 100, 1974, p 20.

Get. Ye. 2. “The Queetion of Megnetohydrodyneeic Effect in Aqueoue
Solutione of Strong Bleetrolytee." YLEKTROKNIMIYA [Electrocheeietty].
3. 1961. p 09.

Get, Ye. 2.; Keeetov, c. P.; end Get. M. 2. "Megnetohydrodynenic end
Electrohydrodynenic Effecte in the Mechenieee of Action of Megnetic
Fielde on Biologicel Objects," (thin collection. p 32). 1977.

Kibyekov. A. v.; Konerov. c. P.; end Gek, Ye. z. ”The Role of Hydro-
dynenic Yectote in Syneptic Treneeieeion." PIZIOL. ZHURN. 883R [Physio-
logicel Journel of the USSR]. 57. No ll. 1971. p l6hl.

Menoylov. V. Ye. "Electricity end Men," Leningred. Energiye. 1975.

Meryutin. V. 1.. end Dvorovenko. V. K. "affecte of Puleed Megnetic
Pielde on Sole Cherecterietice of Blood. Magnetic Fielde in Medicine."

TRUDY K316. MED. IN-TA (Prunes), 100, 1976, p 89.

Oliget. T. 1. "Bifect of Puleed Megnetic Field on Cholinergic Nervee
of the Heert. Megnetic tielde in Medicine." lbid, p 61.

Tetopteev. 1. V.. end Gergeneyev. c. P. "Co-peretive Cherecterietice
of lielogicel Effecte of Puleed Megnetic Pielde. Magnetic Pielde in

Medicine." lbid. p 6.
Kolin. A. "Magnetic Pielde in Biology," PHYSICS TODAY, 5. 1968. p 39.

Seipel. J. M.. end Morrov, R. D. "The Magnetic Field Accoupenying
Neuronel Activity," J. MASH. ACAD. 861.. $0. 1960, p l.

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'etvo "Neuke", 1978

10.657
cso: 8166

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

DBSTABILIZATION OF NONEQUILIBRATBD PROCESSES AS THE BASIS OF THE GENERAL
MECHANISM 0P BIOLOGICAL lfPECTS OP MAGNETIC FIELDS

Moscow REAxTSIl BIOLOGICHESKIKH SISTEH NA MAGNITNYYB POLYA in Russian 1978
signed to press 26 Feb 78 pp 59-80

[Article by e. V. Plekhanov, Siberian Physico-Technical Institute. Tomsk]
[Text] Introduction

There are three scientific directions which have such in cum-on. in spite

of apparent differences. He refer to electromagnetic biology (EH3). investi-
gation of solar and terrestrial relations (STE) end magnetic treatment of
water and aqueous systems (H18). If we consider them from the standpoint of
the classical atinulus-oobject-reaction systes of investigation, it is

not difficult to see that electromagnetic fields (EH!) are used as the
stimulus in all three directions. This stimulus in artificially crested for
2H! and HT". whereas in the study of 313 EN? of spontaneous origin constitute
the direct active factor. as indicated by an analysis of the literature [6. 10-
12, 39]. With the obvious difference in specific characteristics. the ob-
jects of investigation in these three directions also have at least one
property in common. since they are all referable to nonequilibrium systems.
One can alter substantially the course of processes in such systems by

means of rather weak exogenous factors. The work performed by the system
when it changes from one nonequilibrated state to another can be greater by
several orders of magnitude. due to its endogenous energy. than the work of
the acting stimulus. In view of the foregoing, the topics of these three
sections can be combined under the general title of "Effects of EH? on
Nonequilibrated Processes." But the basic similarity of the directions

in question is also demonstrable in the general nature of reactions. Here.
one observes a phenomenon that is quite familiar to researchers who have
worked in this field for a long time. but quite shocking at first to novices,
a phenomenon that we could call incenpsrability of the results of investiga-
tions. “Incompsrsbility” refers to the fact that the results of studies msy
differ even when they are conducted under the very same conditions. This

is encountered in the works of different authoro. occasionally in the works
of the same author and occasionally'inthe course of the same experiment.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dozens of authors have studied the effects of magnetic fields (MP) on 88R
[erythrocyte sedimentation rate] and more than a hundred works on this topic

have been published; however, the opinions of different authors are quite
varied as to the nature of 38R changes in HP. Some authors deny the fact

that HP have an influence on ESR, even if they are of high intensity [32, 8];
others find that there is an increase in the rate [15, 13]: others yet

find inhibition {1, 33] and,finally, there are sons who state frankly that
it proceeds in different directions [5, 26, 28-30, 36].

The reaction time in an individual exposed to HP may increase, decrease or
undergo no change [2, $1, 69, 74, 7S]. Nonspecific reactivity of animals in
a magnetic field increases. decreases or does not change [9, 56, 26). There
are also changes in different directions in enzyme activity [20, 29].
behavioral reactions [6, 65, S9, 27], growth and developmental processes
[$2, 56], etc., in a field, as compared to the control. Analogous findings
are reported in studies of 8T8. As shown by biomedical investigations, onset
of endemics [60-63, 66, 67, 71, 75], morbidity [67, 50, 60, 62], episootic
outbreaks [18, 19, 58. 66], changes in harvest [52], rate of wood growth
[31], etc., are related to changes in level of solar activity. There is

a 20-501 increase in mortality due to myocardial infarction [37, 38], an
increase in accidents involving vehicles [16, 68] and an increase in
suicides [16, 17] on the 2d day after a solar flare (with appearance of
geosagnetic perturbations). But all this is demonstrable only by submitting
large blocks of cases to statistical processing, and it may virtually fail
to be reflected in the vast majority of biological systems. Changes in
solar activity cause atmospheric perturbations [35, 36, 66], impairment of
hydrological conditions [68, 69, $3] and increase the probability of
earthquakes and eruptions of volcanoes [7], but they do not yet enable us

to unequivocally predict a change in geophysical processes in each specific

instance. i.e., in studying STR the phenomenon of ambiguity of reactions is
even more apparent. It is encountered just as often in studies dealing with

MT". Magnetic treatment can clear drinking water, diminishes scum formation
in boilers and improves flotation [26, 22, 23]. However, other instances

are also encountered, when magnetic treatment alters the process in the
opposite direction or does not affect it [25, 26]. Thus, the phenomenon of
ambiguity of reactions may be considered a general typical feature that is
encountered quite often in studies dealing with END, STR and HT". At the same
time, magnetic treatment of water is practiced widely in industry and

yields millions of rubles of savings [26, $5]. In medicine, magnetic fields
elicit a distinct therapeutic response [16, 57]. Each magnetic atorm takes

hundreds of human lives [37, 38]. This contradiction-the presence of
clearcut relationships in mass experiment. not always corroborated in

different tests-is the most typical element of research on the effects of
EH? on nonequilibrium processes. Repeated efforts have been made to deter-

mine the causes of ambiguity of results of studies involving EMF. Host
often, this phenomenon is interpreted from the standpoint of inadequately
sophisticated experimental set-up. The authors of such studies attribute
the incomparability of their results to the fact that either the fields
used were not the same or that the influence of some incidental stimulus

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

could not be ruled out. in some cases. it is assumed that the experimenter
worked with heterogeneous material, used the recording methods incorrectly
or did not process the results properly. Probably some of the contradictory
works could be attributed to methodological flaws, as is the case in any
nther branch of biological research. however, it is incomprehensible why
many individuals who previously worked in other directions without mistakes
would starting making them here. in this case, the contradictory data of
the same author, encountered moreover in the course of the same experiment,
are also incomprehensible. Evidently. we cannot attribute the incomparabi-
lity phenomenon to investigative flaws alone. A. P. Dubrov offers another
interpretation: he believes that life is based on dysaymetry due to the
presence of dextrototatory and levorotatory isomers of molecules that are
not in equal proportion in each living object.[21]. It is difficult to
reject this thesis, since it apparently is valid. however, we still do

not know the extent and distribution thereof.

Efforts have also been made to attribute incomparability of results to the
presences of exogenous artificial and spontaneous electromagnetic background.
that is usually not taken into consideration in the studies. Indeed, in a
number of investigations, a correlation between some functions of a living
system and the electromagnetic background can be tracked rather well;
occasionally the series phenomenon is clearly demonstrable and inherent
patterns are observed in the incomparability itself. But the reference to
"background" is also an inadequat- explanation, since the "background“
itself consists of the same EH! that are the stimulus considered and
studied in the expetiment. Moreover. various "malfunctions" and incompara-
bllity are also observed with different background levels and fluctuations.
Thus. this brief analysis of the literature and our considerations enable
us to formulate the topic of this investigation as follows: experimental
and theoretical determination of the causes of ambiguity of results of
studies of effects of EH? on diverse nonequilibrated processes.

Destabilizing Effects of Electromagnetic Fields on an Elementary
Nonequilibrated Reaction Chosen as a Model of a Living System

One of the fortuitous models for the study of STR is the reaction of bismuth
hydroxychloride precipitation in water, proposed by G. Piccardi [55. 72, 73).
in essence it consists of the fact that when certain amounts of hydrochloric
solution of bismuth chloride are blended with water a milk-white colloid
solution is formed, the solid particles of which settle relatively rapidly

to the bottom. After reproducing this reaction many times and in different
variants, 6. Piccardi established that the rate of sedimentation of the

solid particles in different glasses fluctuates quite markedly, both in the
case of running the reaction in several identical containers at the same time
and when conducting the experiment at different times. All of his attempts
to stabilize the reaction failed. since even substantial changes in concentra-
tion of solution, purity of water, temperature. light and amount of shaking
the containers had a rather mild influence on the rate of precipitation of
colloid particles and did not diminish fluctuation. Using various experi-
mental metheds (P. D, P tests) and comparing their general results to

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indices of solar activity, 6. Piccardi found a rather distinct correlation
between these two processes.

The comprehensive studies of this phenomenon, conducted for many years by c.
Piccardi and his proponents made it possible to demonstrate a correlation
between the nature of fluctuation of different tests and time of day. season,
place, level of solar activity, etc. In view of the overt instability of

the Piccardi reaction, its simplicity, minimal dependence on purity of
reagents and experimental conditions, as well as distinct relation to solar
activity, it was decided to use it as a model, on which one could try to
investigate the patterns of effects of spontaneous and weak artificial

EMF on nonequilibrated systems. The specific methods used in this experiment,
which were chosen after conducting a series of trials, consisted of the
following:

Several thick-walled chemical beakers were filled with 5 mm sesquinormal
hydrochloric solution of bismuth chloride and 25 ml distilled water,

passed once through MP of 3200 All at the rate of 2 cm/s, was added to each
at the ease time. Such pretreatment of the water was undertaken on the

basis of Piccardi's indications that it was desirable to "activate" the
water, as well as because a reaction run simultnaeously in several beakers
proceeds more stably with “magnetized" water, as shown by the preoiminary
trials [40). The beakers with reagents were placed in a predetermined
area and the solid particles of colloid solution began to settle, forming

a distinct interface with cleared liquid. The reaction was considered
completed at the time of total precipitation, which was determined when

he phase interface matched a mark on the beaker that had been made in
advance on the basis of the preliminary tests. The accuracy of determina-
tion of thetime of total precipitation constitutes ilOilS s, with a mean
precipitation time of 7 10 min, i.e., the measurement error factor con-
stitutes 1&21. He used a stopwatch to time total pre‘ipitation in each

beaker, and it fluctuated from 2 to 33 min in different tests.

A. H. Opalinskaya used this method to conduct experiments for 7 years, and
they consisted of 8 series of special investigations.

a. In the first series, a study was made of the relation between average

rate of precipitation of bismuth hydroxychloride in water and various
heliophysical and geophysical indices: For this purpose, the reaction rate

in 3-5 beskers was measured daily for several years, and the arithmetic

mean thereof was selected as the index of precipitation rate on a given

day. Experiments were conducted at the same time in a building of the Physico-
Tehcnical Institute. In all, 690 tests were conducted, including 2629 spe-
cific measurements. The smoothed distribution thereof is illustrated in

Figure 1. Calculation of the coefficient of correlation between 26-h
reaction times and local 3-h K index revealed a positive relationship

between these series. with r - 0.57 and significance level of P<0.01.

A link between the reaction under study and magnetic storms was also
demonstrated according to the criterion of Hilcoxson-Hann-Hhitney, with

33
FOR orncm. use osm
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

P<0.0l [40. 62]. Upon subsequent analysis of overall data. seasonal.
daily and eultiyear variations were demonstrated in the relationship between

the reaction under study and geophysical processes [42]. The presence of s
correlation between the test in question end the geomagnetic field made it
necessary to investigate this phenomenon under model conditions. by means

of using shields agnth spontaneous and artificial HF, as well as additional
use of artificially generated HP in the test.

,- Permalloy ‘

Iron shield
Background

 

 

 
  
     

 

0 5 I! I5 «‘0 [5 J0 !

Figure 1. Effect of shielding from magnetic field on rate of precipita-

tion of bismuth hydroxychloride in water.
X-sxis, time in minutes; y-sxis incidence of readings in a series.

b. Effect of shielding from W on course of Piccardi reaction: We used

three methods to shield the reaction from exogenous HP: 1) distance.
2) welded iron shield (coefficient of attenuation ~10'), 3) four-layer perm-

alloy shield“ with a coefficient of attenuation of “10‘.

1. In order to attenuate the effects of industrial HP, a special
series of experiments was conducted far from industrial installations
in the building for geomagnetic measurements. The results of this
series. which are illustrated in Figure 2, indicate that the mere
reduction of industrial sources stabilizes the reaction somewhat.
lowering the range of variation to 2-21. min. with a mean value of

a - 9.2 min. A comparison of these data to the results of back-

ground experiments conducted in the institute building revealed a
substantial difference between them, with a significance level of

P<0.001 according to the criterion of Student.

2. The many results of experiments conducted with the iron and
permalloy shields are illustrated in Figures 1 and 2. A comparison
thereof to one another and to the background distribution curve

We wish to express our sincere appreciation to V. A. Troitskays, head of
m sector of the Institute of Physics of the Earth. USSR Acadeey of
Sciences, and the staff of this sector for their assistance in making
the shield and estimating degree of shielding with it.

3’;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shows rather distinct stabilization of the course of the reaction
as a function of quality of screening. The most important and
basic fact is that the reaction in a permalloy shield is vir-
tually stable. with a range of 'variation of only 3 to 7 min. i.e..
the coefficient of stabilization. according to extreme values,
expressed as the ratio of background range of variations to

the analogous index in the ahield, constitutes 33-2/7-3 - 7.7.
There are more marked fluctuations of the reaction in the iron
shield, and here the coefficient of stabilization constitutes
only K - 3. Accordingly, when distance is used as protection,

this coefficient decreases to R3 - 1.10, i.e., there is only 1.0:
nduction of fluctuation.

 

Z 6 d d MIIMIJUMZZN IJZJJDJIMJJ

Figure 2. Mean and extreme values of time of complete precipitation
of bismuth chloride in water in each experimental series

Key:
3) background 18) iron shield
P) proving ground PS) per-alloy shield
I) institute HP) magnetic field

c. Effect of artificial infralow-frequency field on course of Piccardi

reaction: lbwever. shielding is only one of the two possible means of
deterrining the role of m in fluctuation of the reaction of precipitation

of bismuth hydroxychloride in water. For this reason, another series of
studies was conducted on the effect of artificial MP on the course of the

reaction run under different conditions.

A magnetic field was generated within a solenoid with passage through its
coils of current from an infralow-frequency generator. The amplitude in-
tensity of the field corresponded to the maximum levels of spontaneous
geomagnetic perturbations, and it ranged in different variants from 50 to
1000 Y with frequency changing from 0 to 100 Hz. The bonkers with the

reagents on special, nonmagnetic trays, were placed in the middle of the
solenoid, where heterogeneity of the field did not exceed 30:. The back-

ground reaction was run in a similar solenoid with a time shift of 30 min,
without current. As demonstrated by the study of the daily course of the

35
FOR OFFICIAL. USE om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

background reaction. such a time shift does not lead to appreciable changes

in the results. we then calculated the differences between them according
to daily paired values. In all. we conducted 26 variants of studies. with
different values of H and f, the results of which are illustrated in

Figure 3. Analysis of these data indicates that starting with I! - soyw
already observe some influence of the artificial H? on the Piccardi test.
consisting of a change in mean reaction time. For a more comprehensive
investigation of the effect of MP on the course of the reaction. we selected
the most typical of the entire amplitude and frequency set of variants

(H - 500 V, f - 0.1 Hz) and used it in all subsequent experiments. In all.
we took th readings with these field parameters. The smoothed distribution
of results is illustrated in Figure 2. A conparison of background and ex-
perinental curves shows that variation decreased to 3-22 min. with E - 8.
under the influence of Hf. which corresponds to a stabilization coefficient
of Rs - 1.63. The reliability of difference between the background and
experiment constituted P<0.00l according to the criterion of Student and
P<0.0001 according to the criterion of Hilcoxson. This warrants the state-
ment that one observes stabilization of the reaction of precipitation of
bismuth hydroxychloride in water under the influence of artificial H?

with regular parameters ﬂ - 500 Y and f - 0.1 hr.

Figure 3.
"Rate of precipitation of bismuth
chloride as a function of intensity

and frequency of VHF [variable
magnetic field].

Striped circles-reliable acceleration,
white circles-unreliable acceleration.

 

however, a comparison of experimental data on the effects of artificial
sinusoidal NF on the test under study to data pertaining to the effect on
It of spontaneous magnetic storsa shows that the mean reaction time in these

cases shifts in different directions. as compared to a nonperturbed background.
The sagnetic storm increases reaction time due to a higher incidence of

cases of slow precipitation. whereas sinusoidal HF leads to a decrease in
number of such cases.

The findings are analogous, but less marked, when the Piccardi reaction is
exposed to a low-voltage electric field (SF) (Figure 6). This series of

experiments was conducted in a condenser following the same method.

In summing up the obtained data. it can be concluded that sinusoidal infralow-
frequency EH? lead to acne stabilization of bismuth hydroxychloride precipita-

tion time in water, as compared to the background.

36
ton orrxcm. use nxw
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 6.
Rate of precipitation of bismuth
chloride in water as a function of
intensity and frequency of BF.

Triangles-slower precipitation.
Other designations are the same as
in Figure 3.

 

Two additional series of investigations of the effects of artificial HF on

the course of shielded reactions were conducted in order to determine the
causes of difference in direction of effects of EMF on the Piccerdi test

during magnetic storms (slowing) and with exposure to artificial HF
(acceleration). The results of these studies, illustrated in Figure 2,

warrant the belief that HF affecting the shielded reaction lead to its
destabilization, whereas HF stabilizes it somewhat under background condi-
tions.

Analysis of summary data (see Figure 2) enables us to voice several consider-

ations: a) maximum fluctuations of rate of precipitation of bismuth hydroxy-
chloride in water are observed when the reaction is run under background

conditions in the building of the Physics-Technical Institute. which con-
tains a considerable amount of various electrical and electronic equipment;
b) there is a consistent increase in background fluctuations during periods
of geomagnetic perturbations; c) fluctuations can be reduced by using
shields against external artificial and natural HF, and the stability of

the reaction depends on the extent of shielding; d) additional use of
artificial sinusoidal infralow-frequency MP on the Piccardi reaction leads

to a reduction of fluctuations if they were originally high (background-
institute, background-proving ground) and appreciable increase in fluctua-

tions if the level thereof had been substantially reduced by shielding.

All of the foregoing enables us to formulate the general pattern observed
in this investigation as follows: Weak, chaotic HF increase fluctuation
of the reaction of precipitation of bismuth hydroxychloride in water,

which can be reduced either by means of shielding from exogenous inter-
ference or use of additional HF with specific amplitude and frequency

parameters known to be of greater intensity.

Destabilizing Effects of Electromagnetic Fields on Biological Processes

a. Effect of H? on the course of the agglutination reaction: In the pre-
ceding section it was demonstrated that week HF can alter appreciably the
course of a process in a nonequilibrated physicocheaical system. Since

living systems are also referable to the nonequilibratcd ones, it may be

37
FOR orrtcm. use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

assumed that. in this case. weak HP should constitute a factor that causes
an increase in fluctuations of different biological processes. The immuno-
logical agglutination reaction. which involves the use of typhoid serum

and special [ON] diagnosticum. was chosen as a model reaction on the border-
line between physicochemical and biological processes. The experimental
part of this study was also performed by A. H. Opalinskaye.

Trial experiments demonstrated fluctuations in the course of the reaction
and changes in the former as a function of fluctuations of the spontaneous
geomagnetic background. It was established that when the reaction was

run many times using the standard method and with logarithmic dilution of
serum (1/1, 1/2. 1/6. 1/8. .... 1/160, 1/320), using diegnosticums from the
same batch. the result of the reaction. interpreted by the usual method

and expressed in plus signs. would be ambiguous. A change from four to
three pluses is observed with dilutions of 1/16 to 1/26: there is en analo-
gous change in boundary at which there is a change from three to two pluses.
etc. Fluctuations are observed when several standard reactions are run

at the same time. as well as when they are run at different times. The
fluctuating nature of agglutination is even more graphic when smaller
dilutions of serum are used and the logarithmic scale is replaced by a
linear one. i.e.. 1/2. 1/3. 1/4, etc. The main series of experiments was
conducted with these nonstandard dilutions. In this case. the shift in
boundary between adjacent changes in results. expressed as plus signs.

could constituted 3-5 test tubes. In view of the fact that the contribution
of each estimated change to the overall reaction should be about the same
for each series of dilutions. we calculated the averaged index of agglutina-
tion using the following formula:

7- ‘ﬂea‘hs‘LEﬂ-é-ll

“e+"s+“s+"| '

where ni is the number of test tubes in which the reaction constitute a
number of pluses corresponding to i. The series of daily values of T was
then compared to the indices of geomagnetic perturbation. and the coeffi-
cient of correlation between them was calculated. The estimates revealed
that. with n - 163. r - 0.235 with a significance level of P<0.01. i.e..
the course of fluctuations of this reaction is related to changes in the
geomagnetic field.

To study the effect of NE on the course of agglutination, we used a field
with the sang parameters as in the studies using the physicochemical test
(H - 500 Y. f - 0.1 He). exposing the series of tubes to it for 2 h. while
they were in the incubator. in view of the fluctuating nature of the
reaction itself. we selected only one serum dilution. l/26.000. for both
the background and experiment. with which estimation of a three and four
plus reaction was found to be equally probable in the preceding tests. To
increase the reliability. the test was run in 20 tubes at a time. and

half of them were put in the HP. The tests were conducted daily. and the

38
son ontcm. us: our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

difference between the experiment and control was evaluated according to
the paired criterion of Hilcoxson. The results of this series. which are

listed in Table l. warrant the belief that agglutination is more intensive
in the field. i.e.. the pattern demonstrated in the physicochemical test
is also confirmed here.

Table l. Agglutination reaction as a function of HF

Number of test tubes
Index a l i l f I s l 1 I s I s l l0

back round
Fiel
Shield

 

 
 
 
   

b. Effect of H! on fermentation process: Demonstration of the stabilizing
or destabilizing effect of MP on the course of n nonequilibrated physico-
chemical and immunological reaction enabled us to turn to an attempt to

extent this thesis to biological systems. He selected the anaerobic phase
of glycolysis es the test. and we studied it on the model of fermentati“n

of glucose by yeast. This process is at the basis of metabolism of any
organism. and the patterns of effects on it of H? could be extended. without
particular error. to other biological objects. For this purpose. 1.5 g
standard dry yeast dissolved in 30 ml distilled water was added to 10 mi
15: glucose solution, and the mixture was put in a tube set vertically in
an incubator at JO'C. The dynamics of uhe fermentation reaction was evalu-
ated according to the number of carbon d:oxide bubbles, and it was recorded

automatically using electromechanical counters throughout the experiment.
All of the test tubes were in solenoids, by means of which we could

generate magnetic fields with specified parameters. for the purpose of
pair-by-pair comparison. in each experiment we examined the same number of

daily alternating experimental and control material. The results, in the
form of hourly and overall number of carbon dioxide bubbles. for experimental
and control material were submitted to processing using the paired criterion

of Hilcoxson. Two series of studies were conducted by A. c. Kartashov
using this method of recording. In the first. a study was made of the

effect of a vertical SH? [stationary magnetic field]. the intensity of
which changed from +500 to -500 A/m in different experimental variants.

The positive direction of the field corresponded to the direction of the

vertical component of CH! [geomagnetic field]. The results of this series,
which are listed in Table 2. show that on the average the amount of carbon
dioxide discharged during fermentation changes consistently with change in

magnitude and direction of the additional SHF. At the same time. specific
readings taken in the course of each experimental variant were not always

comparable. Thus. in the experiments with an intensity of +500 A/m. the

'39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ro'n OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the mean number of bubles discharged during the experiment constituted 2193
in control tubes. Hith exposure to the field. this figure dropped by a
mean of 66 bubbles. At the sass time. paired comparison of different ex-
periments showed the figure to range from -260 to +100. however. increased
gas production was encountered only twice in this experimental variant
(+100 and +60) and decreased. in 17. Analogous findings were made in the
series with intensity of 500 him. where inhibition of the reaction was
encountered 5 times out of 28 tests. the absolute figures being rather low
(-60. -30. -10. ~10. ~10). There was more marked acceleration (+260. +230.
+180. etc.). and it was observed in 22 experiments. If we compare these
data to the results of the preceding studies. it is easy to see that. here
too. some experiments yield opposite results. in the presence of a rather
distinct mean statistical function. In the second series of studies. the
same method was used to test the effect of VH? [variable magnetic fields] on
the fermentation process. The summary data of these experiments. processed
in a similar manner. are listed in Table 3. Analysis shows that we have
here a very unequivocal dependence of the fermentation process on amplitude
and frequency characteristics of the field. and it is demonstrable upon
statistical processing. however. the distribution of specific readings

in each individual variant is quite heterogeneous. and we always encountered
sose readings with the opposite sign against the general background of
slowing or acceleration of the reaction.

Table 2. Fermentation process as a function of intensity and direction of
SH! vector

a Change
'"‘ in field] '

425 30 +6.3 Scatter 0.05
—250 5| 1-22 Acceler. 0.01
-3JO 25 +0 ' 0.0:

       

-'~ 500 20 -m nhibido 0.0!
event—cv " mm
250 5| $3.5 Cit!" 0.05
~125 M —2n nhibiti 0.06

  

Key: HA/m) intensity of artificial SM?
n) number of experisanta
AH) mean difference between number of bubbles discharged in 6 h
in experiment and control
P) level of significance according to Uilcoxson's paired criterion

c. Stabilizing effect of SH? on motor activity of white mice: The existence
of a rather distinct mean statistical dependence of the fermentation process

on intensity and direction of SN? vector enabled us to turn to analogous
experiments on mammals; they were performed by A. G. Kartashov. In view of

the static nature of the effect of the field on nonequilibrius systems. it
was decided to conduct the chronic variant of experiment. which made it

possible to operate with similar accumulated data. For this purpose, male
white mice of the same age were placed in special solenoid cages. one in

each. where they were kept for b-9 months. In all. we used four such set-ups

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the experinente. two of which alternately aerved as controls. A 2‘ Ala
field. directed from Heat to East. was generated in the experimental eole-
noid cagea by turning on direct current from a battery. when added to

the car, the total field vector increased by 171 and its horizontal compo-
nent. which ie 13.6 Ale in Teeek. doubled and deviated 65° to the Beet.
Alternation of periode of expoaure of experimental animals to the field

and with no field rang ed from 1 to b weeks. constituting a lean of 20 days.
Such a variable node wae eat in order to track the field aftereffect.

Notor activity of the nice wee recorded continuously with a eeries of photo-
diodee illuminated with a lamp. the intersection of light free which wee
recorded on an automatic recorder when the animal moved. The overall
reeulte of these etudiee are summarized in Tables 6 end 5, which clearly
ehow a decreaee in activity of mice when they are in the field. A more
colpreheneive analysis of the data revealed that there wee no field after-
effect in these teats. A coeperieon of these data to the reeulte of studies
involving phyeicochemical and elementary biological tests ehowe that the
general nature of the reaction is the eaee in all cases: Under the influence
of a regular N? there is some stabilization of the process. although some
values of the measured parameter may vary over a rather wide range. Thus.

a pair-by-pair comparison of mean daily activity of the sane anieale ehowed
it to be dietinctly diminiehed in the field. But if the comperiaon is made
for the entire eeriee as a whole. we see that eoee mice eoved more in the
field than in the control (Table 5). Thus, a weak Hr present for a long
time inhibits mouse activity. causing soee stabilization thereof.

Table 3. Pereentetion process as a function of VHF intensity and frequency

Frequency,
he.

   
 
   

.-
I"?
‘9

6.7 [0 -I -
9.5 M —¢ -
IOJ 3i 4-30 0.05
30.! M +08 0. 0|
13 15 +12 —
‘.7 so --“.3 0. (5
0.5 M —£2. 5 0 03
10.1 23 —SI A 0. 0]
2.3 12 4-2 -
L1 10 —3 -
9.5 17 —-7,0 -
I“ 5‘ +35 0.0l

Key:
HA/m) amplitude intensity of artificial VHF
n) number of experiments

AH) eean difference between experiment and control, relative unite
P) level of significance according to Hilcoxson'e peired criterion

bl
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table a. Change in hourly activity of white nice in snr

Iua er Nun er scgc- Change in
Index leg?" Median ter P field

Control 5 o gs g-»
5 6 H

1-21 0.!”

F1¢1d Decrease

 

 

 

 

 

Table ‘. Pair-by-pair coapariaon of mean daily activity of nice in SH?

  

      

Nuaber Total nean dail
”33° I of activity y
eerie ontrol Field
l 3 657 «I2
2 i no too
3 2 236 13‘ 0.05 Decreaae
‘ I ”i 76
5 I I” III

————-———_—_—__—

d. Deetabilirins effect of variable electric and eagnetic fielda on huean
reaction tiaez' In order to verify the phenonena of atabilization and deeta-

biliaation on the paychophyaiological level, L. P. Asulova conducted a ape-
cial aeriea of atudiee of the effecta of VHF and VIP [variable electric
fieldal on reaction tiae (RT). The eubject wee put in e aoundproof and
ehielded chaaber. in which one could create horizontal (back-chaet) er or
Mr. Heterogeneity of the field in the working apace did not exceed 202.

In the firat experimental variant. H? with anplitude inteneity of 320 Ala
and frequency of 0.033 a: war uaed. Expoeure tiae constituted 3 tin. The
aiaple reaction tiee to a eonic aignal was recorded for 3 min before end
after expoeure to the field. ae well ea during expoeure. At unequal
intervala. 9-ll eignele were delivered per 3~nin aegeent of tile. Some
experieenta were conducted ainilarly without the field. for the purpoae of
co-pariaon to apontaneoua dynalice of RT changea. and the reaulta of experi-
nenta with the field were calculated in relation to the background readinse.
The auInary reaulta of thia experimental variant. calculated on the baaia
of wilcoxaon'e criterion. are liated in Table 6. Analyaie thereof ehowa
that the field accelerated the reaction unreliably in 3 caaea and alowed

it down in 2. with a aignificance level of P<0.0I+0.02. i.e.. we aee here
the aaae difference in reaction direction ea in all preceding atudiea. In
the aecend variant of thia aeriee. a atudy waa aade of the effect of B?

of 100 VI- inteneity and 50 H: frequency on the ease reaction. The reaulte,
proceaaed analogoualy. are liated in Table 7. Here the deatahilixation
phenoaenon ie even aore apparent. In I out of 9 eubjecta. the RT diainiehed
in the field (P<0.001), it did not change in 3 caaee (P<0.05) and increaaed
appreciably in 5 (P<0.0l+0.001). But when we averaged all the data for the

he
roe orrxcm. us: ONLY
FOR OHICIM. USE ONLY

group of subdects. slowing of RT in the field was found at a significance
level of “0.0001. Thus. in this series of studies we could track rather
distinctly the presence of the destabilizing phenonenon in the field. when
the results were analysed elesent-by-elenent, end a unidirectional shift
on the average for the entire group.

Table 6. Effect of negnetic field of lo 0e, 0.033 a: on husan sisple reaction
ties to sonic 1000 ll: stisulus

Trend of
change in

R‘l‘ in the
field

 

1 4 1o 40 I10 :0: 0.05 No change
0 5 03 3| :0! 201 0.0! Increase
3 3 no 13 ms I01 0.05 No change
0 7 0! 1a 131 I09 0.02 Increase
0 3 10! n 103 m 0.05 No change

“‘9”—

 

Table 7. Effect of electric field of 1000 We. 50 ll: on tile of hunan sinple
Iotor reaction to 1000 II: sonic stimulus

   
 

  
   

  
 

Number of Nusber of Hedi Trend 0‘ M
No field

P 36
u: 320 387 351 0.03 Increase

I 3 t

2 3 3 3‘0 210 3“ 270 0.05 0
3 3 3 no 2:: 202 an 0.0! .
t 3 0 W 330 2“ 35‘ 0.00l '
5 3 4 102 no :u 233 0.001 0
0 3 2 2‘2 13) an :63 0.00! Decrease
1 2 i m 200 an 338 0.0! Increase
8 3 3 2‘2 2‘2 :35 3|! 0.0l 0
0 3 i 210 289 “S 473 0.05 0

 

To conclude this experisental section. He should like to stress that.
regardless of the nature of the nonequilibriun system. specific field para-
seters. experimenter's personality. etc.. in all cases one observes a

difference in reactions with similar seen statistical direction of changes
of the nonequilibrsted process proper.

Discussion

A brief analysis of the literature and our own experimtal dsta shoes that
the course of nonequilibriu processes in living eyetess and sodels thereof

03
ron orncm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

changes can be described by three tendencies. encountered concurrently in
most studies. In the first place, under the Influence of the fields there
is destabilization of nonequilibrium processes. as a result of which the

measured parameters of the living system deviate from their base state in
different directions. by virtue of asymmetry of most nonequilibrium pro-

cesses, these deviations are ambiguous and there is prevalence of a uni-
directional change in the overall reaction. This is illustrated the most

graphically by the esperiments involving precipitation of bismuth chloride
in water. where the mean reaction time increases consistently under the
influence of spontaneous or artificial fields used with a shield. The same
tendency is observed in other experiments: Unidirectional changes in
agglutination. fermentation and motor activity of mice are combined with
the mandatory presence of some tests yielding the opposite results. This
trend is also quite demonstrable in the psychophysiological test, when some
subjects presented a distinct opposite change. as compared to the mean group
result. A comparison of the obtained data to those in the literature shows
them to be totally similar. And, while there is no direct indication of
assymetrical change in different directions of the reaction under study
with exposure to weak fields in some of the sources. this is most likely
attributable to the author‘s desire to submit more graphic. averaged
results. For this reason. it eculd not be very wrong to maintain that the
phenomenon of destabilization of processes under study is always observed
in all studies of EH3. The second tendency. which ensues from the first,

consists of the fact that nonequilibrsted processes. on the average, change
consistently under the influence of the fields. in the direction of slowing

or accelerating. Although there may be other causes for this pattern. it

1. opportune to consider it here as the consequence of destabilization.

As already indicated. nonequilibrium processes are usually asymmetrical.

this is manifested by the fact that the range of fluctuation thereof

extends dissimilarly in both directions from the mean value (median). The
asymmetry is obvious for biological processes. Indeed. spontaneous variations
of any biological process are rather rigidly confined, and this limitation

is usually more rigid on one side. Thus. maximum arterial pressure of man
constitutes 120 mm Hg under normal conditions. Double this figure is
encountered in hypertensive individuals quite often. But with zero pressure
life is impossible. and the minimum cannot constitute less than 50-60 mm Hg,
i.e., if we were to consider a random group of individuals. their distribution
would be asymmetrical for this parameter. and it would be rather rigidly
limited on the side of minimum values. An analogous phenomenon is observed
in toxicology. where a homeopathic dose is lower by several orders of magni-
tude than the mean therapeutic dose. while the lethal dose is less than

one order of magnitude higher than the therapeutic. The same applies to
respiration rate and pulse, blood coagulation and sedimentation rate. renal
and endocrine gland function. After analyzing similarly most biological
processes, it can be stated that they are all asymmetrical. Incidentally,
this means that the use of statistical criteria. which work well with normal
distribution (criterion of Student), are not valid always by far when analyz-
ing nonequilibrsted processes. hat in the case of asummetrical distribtuion.
even uniform destabilization would lead to a shift of mean value in the
direction of the less rigid boundary. if we consider that destabilization

uh
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

itself and a living system in its original state may be asynmetrical for

any of the self-regulation parameters. the existence of some differences in
reaction direction under the influence of a field becomes understandable.
Also understandable is the consistent shift of reactions studied on mass
scale material, since shifting of the median as a result of averaging would
be observed mainly in the direction of the less rigid boundary. Accordingly,
in order to obtain a consistent functional change under the influence of
week fields. one must standardize the objects under study as much as possible
and conduct the study either on a large number of identical objects or

for a long tine on one object. These initial theses were used as the basis
for the experimental part of this work. Many repetitions of the reaction

of bismuth hydroxychloride precipitation under different conditions made it
possible to demonstrate distinct patterns in the course of the reaction as
related to presence and parameters of the. A multimillion colony of standard
yeast eutoeatically led to averaging of individual reactions and made it
possible to detect a clearcut relationship between fermentation reaction and
field parameters. An experiment lasting many months on white mice made it
possible to gather sufficient statistical data for one object. Although

an animal underwent certain changes in the course of several months. they
were still less significant that the differences between different animals.
and this was well corroborated by experimental data. The same phenomenon

can be tracked in the experiments involving human reaction time. Many
readings taken on the ease object demonstrated a consistent change therein

under the influence of fields, while averaging for a grOup of individuals
led to deaonstretion of a general species-specific tendency. Thus. the
destabilization of an asymmetrically distributed biological process can be
considered one of the causes of consistent change in any function of a living
system under the influence of weak IMP. The third trend. that is encountered
quite frequently in studies of EH3, can be called stabilization of a non-
equilibrated process by EM? with specific parameters. The meaning of
stabilization consists of the fact that the wide scatter of variation of

a feature under study, which is observed under background conditions.
diminishes appreciably under the influence of regular EMF. This phenomenon
is the most distinctly dsaonstreble in the model experiments with bis-nth
chloride also. where the reaction in fields of a specific frequency and
intensity is more stable than in the control and, conversely, when an in-
creenu in the industrial EH background leads to some destabilization of the
process. The fact that the random [chaotic] field destabilizes the reaction
much more than a field with regular parameters may be considered the cause
of this oppoiete effect. Stabilisation is observed to a lesser extent, but
quite apparently. in the experiments on biological objects as well. There
is decrease in fluctuation of motor activity of mice and the fermentation
process in SHP; there is some stabilization of background variations of
reaction tine of an individual in regular variable fields. Evidently. this
is related to the fact that, with significant standardization of the objects
under study, regular fields alter an unequilibrsted process more uni-
directionally, thereby causing grouping of fluctuating values within a
certain range.

"5
FOR orncm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To sum up all the foregoing, the main conclusion derived from the work that
has been done can be formulated as follows: Weak EMF induce destabiliza-
tion of nonequilibrated processes, which can be attenuated either with the
use of an additional field with regular parameters and higher intensity

or by means of even more shielding from all exogenous natural and artificial
fields. Extending this thesis to living systems, it can be stated that the
mechanism of biological effects of EMF is based on the destabilization pheno-
menon which, by virtue of asymmetry of biological processes, leads to a
consistent unidirectional change therein.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Alimovs, V. 6.; Brebenyuk. A. V.; and lakomkin, A. I. "Effects of ViF
and SMF on some Hematological lndlces." in "Mater. II Vsesoyuz. soveshch.
po izucheniyu vliyaniya magnitnogo polya na biol. ob"yekty (20-26

sentyabrya)" [Proceedings of 2d All-Union Conference on the Study of
the Effects of Magnetic Fields on Biological Objects (26-26 September)].
Moscow, 1969.

2. Anan'yev. L. M., and kyabchuk, Yu. A. “Comparative Characteristics of
Effects of NF with Different Parameters on the Central Nervous System
of Operators," in "Vliyaniye yeatestvennykh i slabykh iskusstvennykh

magnitnykh poley na biol. ob"yekty" [Effects of Spontaneous and Desk
Artificial Magnetic Fields on Biological Objects], Delgorod. 1973.

3. Achkasova. Yu. N., and Monostyrskikh, L. V. ”Effects of Extra-Lou
Frequency EMF on White Mice," TRUDY KRYM. MED. IN-TA (Khar'kov)
[works of Crimean Medical Institute]. 53, 1973.

6. Afonina, V. M., and Chernyshev. V. B. "Effect of weak Low-Frequency
Magnetic Fields on Some insects," in "Mater. II Vsesoyuz. simp. 'Reaktsii

biol. sistem nu slabyye magnitnyye polya'" [Proceedings of 2d All-Union
Symposium on "Reactions of Biological Systems to ﬂesh Magnetic Fields].

Moscow, 1971.

5. Akhutin. V. M.. and Muzalevskaya, N. I. "Effects of Heck VMF in the
infralou-Frequency Range on Sedimentation Rate in in Vivo and in Vitro

Experiments," in "Vliyaniye yestestvennykh i slabykh iskusstvennykh
magnitnykh poley na biol. ob"yckty," Delgorod. 1973.

6. Ben'kova. M. P. “Solar Activity. Perturbation of Earth's EM? and
Possible Effects Thereof on the Human Body." "Tezisy dokladov l!

nauch. konf. po voprosam klimatol. serdechno-aosudistykh xabolevaniy
(22-26 noyabrya)" [Summaries of Papers Delivered at the 2d Scientific

Conference on Problems of Climatology of Cardiovascular Diseases
(22-26 November)]. Moscou, 1962.

1.5
FOR OFFICIAL I'SE \WM'
7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

Brusevtsov, 6. V.. and Brusevtsovs. II. Ye. ”Link letveen Earthquakes

and Solar Activity." in "Solntse. elektrichestvo, thizn'" (Sun. Elec-
tricity and Life). Moscow, 1972.

Vasilenko. P. 0.. and Puchkov. V. V. "Bffecta of S“? on Some Physiolo-

gical functions in the Organise," 11le TSBNTR. N11 KURORTOWGII I
PIZIOI'BRAPII [Varies of the Control Scientific Research Institute of
Balneology and Physiotherapy], 16. 1969.

Vasil'yov. N. V.. and Soginich, L. P. "Effects of MP on Infection and
lmnity Processes," Touch. 1973.

Vladimirskiy. S. H. "Possible factors of Solar Activity Affecting
Processes in the Biosphere,” in "Vliyaniye solnechnoy aktivnoati na

atlosfern i biosfsru let-1i" [Effect of Solar Activity on Earth's Ataca-
phere and Biosphere]. Moscow, Nauka. 1971.

Vladiairskiy. 3. ".3 Achkasova, Yu. IL: and Honostyrakikh. A. V.
"Perturbation of Earth's DIP and the Problem of Heliobiological

Relations.” in "Probleoy kosnichoskoy biologii" [Probleaa of Space
Biology), Moscow, Nauka, Vol 18. 1973.

Gnevyshev. H. N. "Solar Radiation and Its Effects on the Biosphere of
Earth." in "Adoptatsiya organiua pri firicheskikh vozdeystviyakh"
[Adaptation of the Organism to Physical Factors], Vil'nyus, 1969.

Colovotskaya, 0. I... and Gobovatsltiy, A. 8. ”Clinical Prognostic
Significance of Sediaontation Rate Changes in Hagnetic Fields, in

Patients With Tuberculosis of the Lungs," in "Teriay dokladov soveshch.
vliyaniyu Isgnitnykh poley na biol. ob"yekty (20-22 sentyahrya)"

[gm-sari“ of Papers Delivered at a Conference on the Effects of

Magnetic Fields on Biological Objects (20-22 Septubern. Moscow, 1966.

Degen. I. l... and Che-shove, 1.. 6. "Treatment of Thronbophlebitis
with hagnstophores," ”listor. III Vsesoyuz. ainp." [Proceedings of 3d

All-Union Synposiun], Kslinigrad, 1975.

Dernov. A. 1.; Sonkevich. 0. 1.; and Leaesh. G. A. "Biological
Effects of HP," VOYmo-DBDITSINSKIY mm. [Military Radical Journal].
No 3. 1969. pp 43-68.

Desyatov. V. P. "Activity of the Sun and the Huaan Body," sowacmma
DATA [Solar Data]. No 2, 1962.

Desyatev, V. P.: Oeipov. A. 1.; and Suzdal'skaya. 0. V. "Solar Activity

and Mortality Statistics." in "Solntse. elektricheatve. zhizn',‘ Hoscov.
1972.

Dorofoyev. K. A. "Solar Activity and Epizootic Outbreaks," SOLNECWE
OWE. No 8. 1974.

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dorofeyev. K. A. "Long-Tern Forecasting of Bpizootic Tularania,"
SOLNECHNYYE DANNYYB. No 9, 1966.

Dubova, V. H. "Investigation of Blood Serun Fructose Diphosphste

Aldolase Activity as a Punction of SN? Effects," in "Solntse.
elektrichestvo. zhizn'." Moscow, 1972, p 68.

Dobrov, A. P. "The Geomagnetic Field and Life," Leningrad.
Gidroaeteoizdat. 1976.

Yeliseyev, N. I.; Kirbitovs. N. V.; and Klassen, V. I. ”Effect of
Magnetic Treatment of Reagent Solutions on Flotation," DAN SSSR [Reports
of the USSR Acedeny of Sciences], 209. No 2, 1973.

Zinov'yev, Yu. 2., et al. "Magnetic Treatment of Flotation railings
to Improve Thickening Thereof." UGOL' [Coal]. No 3, 1968.

Karanin, V. 1.; Konyshev, V. v.; and Plyashkevich, V. P. "Possible Role

of Sarua Proteins in Expression of Negnetiobiological Information."
"Hater. ll Vseoayuz. soveshch. po izucheniyu vliyaniya magnitnogo polya

na biol. ob"yekty (24-26 sentyabrya)." Moscow. 1969.

Klassen, V. 1.. and Zinov'yav, Yu. 2. "Effect of Magnetic Treatsent
of Hater on Aggregative Stability of Suspensions," COLLOIDNYY ZHURN.

[Colloid Journal]. 29, 5. 1967.
Klassen. V. I. "Rater and Magnetics." Moscow, Nauka, 1973.

Kogsn. A. 3.. and Tikhonova, N. A. "Effects of SN? on Hove-eat of
Paramecia." BIOPIZIKA [Biophysics]. No 2, 1965, p 292.

Kozlovs. L. N.. and Karlova, N. H. "The Question of Effects of SHE on
Sedimentation Rate in Man." "Hater. Vsesoyuz. sinp. 'Resktsii biol.
sisten na slabyye ssgnitnyye polya." Moscow, 1971.

Kozlovs. L. N.; Nazarenko, L. 0.; and Harsakova, N. V. "The Question of

Effects of SH? on Activity of Sone Enzymes." "Mater. 111 Vsesoyuz. sinp.
'Vliysniye usgnitnogo polys ns biol. ob"yekty'" [Proceedings of 3d All-

Union Sylposiuu on "Effects of Magnetic Fields on Biological 0bjects"].
Kaliningrad, 1975.

Konar, V. V. "Investigation of Reactivity to Magnetic Fields of Peri-

pheral Blood Erythrocytes of "omen in the Case of Physiological and
Pathophysiologicsl Course of Pregnancy and Perturition, and the Prog-
nostic Significance of These Studies in Cases of Uterine Bleeding

During Labor," "Mater. 11 Vsesoyuz. soveshch. po izucheniyu vliyaniya
nagnitnogo polya no biol. ob"yekty (24-26 sentyabrya)." Hoscov, 1969.

us
roe OFFICIAL use on?
31.

32.

33.

36.

35.
'16.

37.

38.

39.

‘0.

61.

62.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kostin, S. I. "Effect of 11- and loo-Year Cycles of Solar Activity on
Tree Growth," SOLNECRRYYB DANNY“, No 4, 1963.

Liyepe, H. 3.; Slutskiy, L. 1.; Kikut. R. P.; et a1. "Effects of SHF
on Sena Peripheral Blood Indicea in Clinical Practice," in "Hagnimoye

pole v neditsine" [Hagnetic Fields in Hedicine], Frunze, 197’s.

Hosendovich, H. l]... and ‘l'ishan'kin, V. F. "Mechanias of Effect of HF
on Sedinentetion Rate," BYUI... BKSFER. BIO]... I MED. [Bulletin of

Experieental Biology and Medicine], 25, 19‘8, p 26.

Muzalevskaya, N. 1., and Shushkov, ‘l‘. 0. "Effect of Heak, Homogeneous,

Infra-Low Frequency MP on Sedimentation Rate in Vitro in Patients With
Hyocardial Infarction," in "Hater. Vaeeoyuz. aiap. 'Reaktsiya biologi-

checkikh sisten na slebyye manianyye polya'," Moscow, 1971.
Mustal'. B. R. "The ’Jun and Barth's Amosphera," Moscow, 1957.

Idea, "Effects of Solar Activity on lower Layers of the Atnoaphere,"
VESTNIK All 8887. [Vestnik of the USSR Academy of Sciences], No 14, 1968,
p 60.

Novikova, K. F.; Cnevyshev, H. 11.; Tokareva; et al. "Effects of
Solar Activity on Onset of Myocardial Inf srction and Mortality From
It," KARDIOLOGIYA [Cardiology], 8, No 6, 1968.

Novikova, K. F.; Tokareva, N. V.; et a1. "Sudden Death Due to Cardio-
vascular Diseese and Solar Activity," "11 ukrainskaya respublikaneksya
konferentsiya (11-16 iyunya)" [Second Ukrainian Republic Conference
(ll-ll. June)], Kiev, 1968.

01', A. I. ”Manifestation of Solar Activity in Earth's Magnetoaphere

and Ionosphere," in "Vliyaniye solnechnoy aktivnosti ne atnosferu i
bioeferu Zeeli," Moscou, Nauka, 1971.

Opalinskaya, A. H. ”Attempted Use of Chemical Test to Forecast Solar
Activity," "Mater. 11 Vaesoycz. soveshch. po izucheniyu vliyaniya
nagnitnogo polya na biol. ob"yekty (26-26 sentyabrya)," Hoecov, 1969.

Opelinskaya, A. 11., and Plekhanov, G. I". "Change in Rate of Precipita-
tion of Bismuth Hydroxychloride in Magnetic Fields of Different Fre-

quencies," "Hater. Vseaoyuz. sinp. ’Reaktsiya biol. siste- na elabyye
nagnitnyye polya'," Moscow, 1971.

Ideal, "Change in Nature of Relationship Between Ficcardi Reaction and

Geonegnetic Fie1d as a Function of Phase of Solar Activity, Season and
Tine of Day," in "Vliyaniye yesteatvennykh i slebykh iskusstvennykh
magnitnykh poley na biol. ob"yekty," Belgorod. 1973.

1‘9
FOR OFFICIAL use can
It].

46.

65.

‘6.

‘7.

68.

69.

SOs

51.

52.

53'

$10.

$5.

Idea. “Effect of weak. Infralow-Frequency MP on Agglutination Reaction,“
“Mater. 111 Vseaoyuz. siap. 'Vliyaniye mgnitnykh poley na biol.
ob"ya|tty' ," Kaliningrad, 197$.

Pantoleyev. P. A. "Mass Reproduction of Hater Vols and Relation Thereof

to Cyclicity of Solar Activity," ZHURN. OBSIICII. 3101.. [Journal of
General Biology]. 28. 6. 1967.

Piccardi, G. "Che-ital Bases of Medical cliaatology," Moscow.
Gidroueteoizdat. 1967.

. Plekhanov. c. F.. and Kartaahov, A. 6. ”Effect of weak SHP on Rate

of Glucose Fereentation by Yeast,” TRUDY K1116. NED. lN-‘PA (Frunze)
[Works of Kirgiz Medical Institute], 100, 1976.

Plekhanov, G. F., and Opalinskays. A. M. "Effect of Shielding From

Magnetic Field and Artificial HF on Ficcardi Fluctuation Reaction."
in "Vliyaniye yestestvennykh i alahykh iskusstvennykh ugnitnykh poley

na hiol. ob"yekty." Belgorod. 1973.

Fokrovskaya. '1'. V. "Solar Activity and Climate." in "Vliyaniye
Solnechnoy aktivnoati no atnosferu i biosferu Zeoli," Moscow, 1971.

Idea. "Long-Tern Heather Forecasts. Ataospheric Circulation and Solar
Activity." author abstract of doctoral dissertation, Leningrad. 1967.

Ryvkin. B. A. "Effects of Heliogeophysical and Meteorological Factors

on the Course and Outcone of Cardiovascular Diseases in Leningrad,"
author abstract of candidstorial dissertation. Leningrad, 1966.

Ryabchuk, Yu. A. "Strength and Nature of Body Reactions as a Fumtion
0! HF Magnitude,” Frunze, 19714, p 38.

Sirotina. L. V.; Sirotin. A. A.; and Travkin. H. P. "Sons Distinctive
Features of Biological Effects of Heak HF." "Hater. II Vaesoyuz. slap.

'Resktsiya biologicheskikh sisteu na slabyye Iagnitnyye polya .
Hoscow. 1971.

Sleptsov-Shalevich, B. A. "Multiyear Fluctuations of Atnospheric Pressure

in the Northern Hemisphere Related to Changes in Solar Activity,"
SOLNECHNYYE DANNYYE, No l, 1966.

Taranov. s. V. "Sane Distinctions of Pulsed Magnetic Field Effects on
Cell Cultures," "Hater. Ill Vaesoyuz. sit-p. 'Vliyaniye nagnitnykh poley
na biol. oh"yekty'," Kaliningrad, 1975.

Tebcnkhin, Ye. P.. and Guaev. 3. c. "Treat-bent of Water with HP in
Heat and Power Engineering." Hoscou, Energiya. 1970.

50
ton omcm us: om
56.

57.

59.

60.

61.
62.

63.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

7o.

71.

Thachenko, Ye. 6.; Padalka, Ye. 8.; Nikol'akaya. .‘t. A.: et al. "Effect
of SN? on lmnobiological Reactivity of the Body." “Mater. Veeaoyuz.

ninp. 'Vliyaniye iakuoatvennykh Iagnitnykh poley na zhivyye organirny'"
[Proceedinga of All-Union Syapoaiue on "Effecta of Artificial Magnetic
Fielda on Living 0rganiana"). Baku. 1972.

Ukolova. H. A. "The Queation of Central and Peripheral Mechanic» of
Action of MP on the Organien," Prunze, 1971..

Pornozov. A. N. "Eeaay on Ecology of Tularenia-Carrier Huridae,"
Hoecow. 1947, pp 1-93.

Chernyahev. V. 3. "Solar Activity. Perturbation of Gemgnetic Field
and lnaect Behavior,” in "Solntoe, elektxicheatvo. zhirn'," Hoecov, 1972.

Chixhevakiy. A. L. ”Periodic Bffecta of the Sun on Barth'a Bioaphere."
Hoacow, 1915.

Idae, "He and the Sun." Hoacov. 1963.

Chizhevakiy. A. I... and Shiehina, Yu. 6. "In the Sun'e Rhythm," Hoacov,
Znaniye. 1969.

Chizhevakiy. A. L. "Echoea of Solar Stem,” Hoacov, 1973.
Ellison. H. A. "The Sun and Itn Bffecta on Earth." Hoecov. 1959.

Bl'darov, A. L.. and Kholodov, Yu. A. "Effect of SH? on Hotor Activity
of Birds," ZHURN. OBSllCli. 3101... 25, 3, 19610. p 226.

Yagodinekiy. V. N.. and Aleksandrov, Yu. V. "Helioepideniology of
Tick-borne Encephalitia," sometime DANNYYB. No ’0, 1965.

Yagodinakiy, V. N. "Some Aspects of Relationship Between HF and

lnfectioua Morbidity.” "Mater. 11 Veeoeyur. ailp. 'Reakteiya biol. eiaten
na alebyye nagnitnyye polya."' Moscow. 1971.

Alt-an, 6. "Effects of Physical Factors on Organum." MATH. UNI)
NATURHISS. UMBER" 22, 7, 1969. p 385.

Konig, H. L. "Effecta of Extra-Low Frequency Electric Phenouena in

the Atmoaphere on the Environment," 2. ANGER“. BAUER UND KLIH., 9, S,
1962, p 3.

Novak. 3.. and Vabn, L. "Attempt of Demonstrating Effect of Week
Hagnetic Field on Taraxacun Officinule," BIOL. PLAN‘I'RUM, 7, 1965. p 6.

Martini, R. "Effect of Solar Activity on Incidence of Accidents,"
23L. ARBEITSMBD. UND ARBBITSCHUTZ, 2, 1952. p 98.

$1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
72.

73.

710.

75.

76.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Piccardi. G. "Gaelic Phenomena and Biocliutology," HIBNBR HBO.
HOCHBNSCBRH 106. 1966. p 6.

Idea. "Correiation Between Atloapheric and Space Phenomena. and Physico-
Chemical Proceeeee." ARCH. WORM. GEOPHYS. 0ND mum-ml... 58R. B.

6. 1955. p 109.

Reiter, R. "Relationship Betueen Solar Pierce. Heather end Ila-an
Reectione ea Henifeeted by the Effect of Infra-bong Have Current on
Birth and Traffic Accident Ratea." ANGER. maonol... 1. 1953, p 289.

Idea. "Reletionehip Between [in-an Reaction Tine. Traffic Accident
Reg; and neteorologicel Bvente." WORM MED. W861!!!" 93, 1951.
p .

Free-edruff. u. R. "Biological Bffecte of Ateoepheric mediation,"
MINERVA “30.. 58. 1967, p 35.

COPYRIcﬂTz Iedetel'etvo "Neuke". 1978

10.657
cso: am.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIM. USE ONLY

BIOMRGBTICS AND REGULA‘NRY “81318 0? m: ORGAN!” DURING EXPOSURE TO
MAGNETIC FIELDS

Moscow MRI! BIOWICNBSKIKH Stem NA MAGNI‘I'NYYE POLYA in Russian 1978
signed to press 26 Feb 78 pp 81-102

[Article by H. A. 8hishlo. 8. Rh. Kubli and V. P. Nuzhnyy. Central Scientific
Research Institute of Balenology and Physiotherapy, Moscow]

[Text] Numerous and diverse evidence of the biological effects of stationary
and low~frequency variable HP [magnetic fields] over a wide range of inten-

sities (from fractions to thousands of oersted) is indicative of the high
sensitivity of biological objects to mild factors.

It is known that the energy of interaction of SH! and VME with biological
macromolecules is lower by several orders of magnitude than the mean energy
of thermal movement of molecules at ordinary temperatures. For this reason.
interpretation of magnetobiological phenomena from the standpoint of thermo-
dynamics leads to the conception of probabilistic fluctuating effects of

up, which initiates triggering processes in the organism that enhance sig-
nificantly a mild exogenous perturbation [1. 2].

In addition. in the course of investigation of biological effects of EM?
[electromagnetic fields], the conception was formed and recognized of a
resonance or informative mechanism of interaction between an exogenous
physical factor and a target. in which multiple amplification of the end
result of interaction by the system is interpreted as the consequence of

resonance. i.e., a certain consistency between physical and ties and space
characteristics of the exogenous factor and properties of the target [3, 6].

The works of A. L. Buchachenko, which which he formulated a conception of
the mechanism of action of HP unrelated to a change in energy of reactions.
but due to the effect of the field on probability of reactions occurring

in the form of states at different spin multiplicity, made a basic contribu-

tion to the study of the molecular mechanism of biological effects of HP.
The field induces intercombinatiwe transitions or alters the probability of

such transitions. Hence. the probebility of occurrence of free radical reac-
tions depends on the HP. and the greater the difference of 9 factors of

reacting particles and field intensity. the stronger these reactions. In

53
roe orncm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this respect, reactions involving iron ions, interaction of which with oxygen
or diamagnetic macromolecules may depend appreciably on SH? intensity [5],
are of special interest to biology.

The proposed mechanism ensues from studies dealing with interpretation of

noneqtilibrated density of Zeeman levels occurring in free radical reactions.
It can thus be expected that chemical polarization of nuclei and electrons.

like the effects of HF, may have the most direct bearing on formation of
nonequilibrated living biological systems.

Instability of Conformation of Polyatomic Systems and Its Role in biological
Processes. The Vibren Mechanism of Enhancement of weak Lovaymmatry

Perturbances

Basic research on instability of conformation of polyatomic systems due to
electronic oscillatory interactions was pursued by I. B. Barauker et al.

[6. 7].

The prerequisite for formation of instability in polyatomic systems is
interaction between atoms accompanied by marked (three-dimensional) delocali-
zation of electrons in chemical bonds. The latter are called coordinated

or donor-acceptor hands. They are widespsresd in biological systems and,
in essence, an inherent feature thereof.

It is known from spectroscopy that the frequency of electron movement in

molecules is about 10 times higher than the frequency of oscillation of
nuclei. This permits the use, in describing polyatomic systems, the Born-
Oppenheimer method of adiabatic approximation, in which it is assumed that
movement of nuclei and electrons is independent. However, the applicability
of adiabatic approximation is restricted by the condition of correlation

between energy of oscillatory quantum of the nucleus hubgc and difference
in energies of electron levels of the molecule:

hVosc<<€k'€j'

with decrease in ek-cj, the adiabatic approximation is less valid, and in
the presence of electron degeneration ck - cj, it is inapplicable.

The conditions for occurrence of instability of nuclear configuration of a
polystmoc system were formulated by L. D. Landau and proven in the form of
a theorem by Yen and Teller, according to whom the configuration of a non-
linear polyatomic system with electron degeneration is unstable in relation
to a shifting of nuclei that eliminate this degeneration. hence, the

electron states of a degenerated therm lose physical meaning, since they
are mixed with nuclear shifts and the states of the system become electron-

nuclear, or vibronic.

A situation that is analogous in many respects occurs in polyatomic systems
with rather close electron levels, which is called pseudodegeneration, as well

51;
ron orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in linear molecules with a strong electron oscillatory bond. It should be
noted that appearance of instability of a polyatomic system can occur with
both orbital and spin degeneration (with the exception of Kraners' degene-
ration).

Analysis of the form of adiabatic potential of Yen-Teller systems shows that.
in all cases of electron degeneration, the multidimensional surface of the
potential has several minimums that are equivalent in energy and symnetry.
which correspond to the same number of equivalent. equiponderant configura-
tions of nuclei with potential barriers between then. If there is sufficient
depth of niniauns. the configuration in each of then becones qussistetionary

and the transitions between minimuss are in the nature of tunneling. which
causes cleavage of electron-oscillatory levels in each of then (inversion
or tunnel cleavage [or segmentationl).

Let us discuss some of the consequences of tunnel segmentation of adiabatic

potential [6] that are important to comprehension of a number of biological
processes.

If there are two minimums of adiabatic potential situated close to one
another and they are not deep enough. the system is nonstationery and it
continuously undergoes tunnel transitions.

The typical property of Yen-Teller systens is their behavior in the presence
of distoring perturbations. The latter can be conceived of in the form of

differences in ligands proper or influences originating from the coordina-
tion sphere following the first one.

If the nagnitude of low-symnetry perturbation is comparable or greater than
vibron interaction. i.e., if the produced cleavage is greater than the
Yen-Teller cleavage, the exogenous perturbation depresses the Yen-Teller
effect completely. and all changes in the system are determined by the mag-

nitude of the perturbing factor. In addition. in the case of ninimal low-
sylaetry perturbetoona. the nsgnitude of distorion in the Yen-Teller systen

is virtually independent of the distorting perturbation and it is deter-
nined in essence by the Yen-Teller effect. Moreover, a ninimal distorting

perturbation is enhanced by vibron interaction, and this enhancement say
be 20-60-fold. Expression of this effect at ordinary temperatures, includ-

ing biological phenomena. is possible only if there is a cooperative Yan-
Teller effect. i.e.. correlated interaction between a large enough number
of Yen-Teller centers.

The Yen-Teller systen. being conjugated with a chemical reaction, may change
iron a sylnetrical configuration to a quasiatstionary. distorted one.

The above properties of cooperative Yen-Teller systems make it possible
to cone closer to understanding a number of typical biological phenonene.

such as high sensitivity to weak factors and "slipping away" fron then,
nonspecificity of vibron excitation with regard to the nature of

55
ran orncm cs: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

perturbation and multi-optimum correlation between vibron excitation and
magnitude and dysaymetry of perturbation.

The interaction between N? and cooperative Yen-Teller structure is deter-

mined both by its properties and characteristics of magnetic perturbations.
In the latter. induction of EM? [electromotive force] plays a substantial role;

it emerges in charge-conducting media as the main low-symmetry component
forming nonadiabatic mechanisms. On this basis, one should expect maximum
effectivanesa of periodic magnetic perturbations with marked asymmetry
thereof in time and space.

Such characteristics as energy of interaction of distortions between indi-
vidual centers and symmetry of the process of interaction of perturbations
with the anisotropic system acquire a special importance in the mechanism
of action of MP. The maximum intrinsic frequencies of tunneling. rate of
propagation and decrement of extinction of the vibron wave in an extended
continuous medium depend directly on the magnitude of energy of interaction

of correlated distortions.

with decrease in energy of interaction of correlated distortions. decrease
in characteristic frequencies of tunnel transitions and approximation of
the system to the coordinate of stationery instability. the effectiveness

of HP effects will increase and. under certain conditions. one can expect
that low-frequency M? will stimulate tunnel transitions in polyatomic systems.

Finally, in a nonstationary polyatomic system that continuously effects
tunnel transitions between two closely situated minimums of adiabatic
potential. the magnitude of magnetic segmentation may be insufficient to
depress the Yen-Teller effect and tunnel transitions.

Thus, the HP effects at the usual temperatures should be expected in
structures with low energy of interaction of distortions. low characteristic
frequencies of tunnel transitions and high decrement of vibron wave ex-
tinction in an extended medium. One could expect both depression of
tunnel transitions and an increase in their incidence, depending on the
correlation between magnitude of st-Teller and magnetic splitting.

At the same time, with increase in energy of distortion interaction and
characteristic tunneling frequencies. there will be a rise of thresholds
of vibron excitation and radical decline in HP effects. In cooperative
Yen-Teller systems, in the presence of a strong electron-oscillatory bond
and marked correlation of distortions, the mechanism of vibron amplifica-
tion should causeschsnge from local "excitation" to nondecrementsl,
spreading excitation.

Thus, the property of vibron enhancement inherent in Yen-Teller systems
makes it possible to approach the mechanisms of formation of such typical
properties of biological systems as irritability and excitability on

the same physical basis. In view of the foregoing. there is every reason
to believe that some physiological patterns (threshold, optimum, pessimum

56
FOR orncm. L'SE om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of irritation. etc.) demonstrable during interaction of electric current with
excitable structures is in essence a manifestation of characteristic proper-
ties of biological, cooperative Yen-Teller systems and nonadiabatic mechanisms
of interaction between current and living tissue; the symmetry of interaction
is expressed in the ambiguity of "anode" and ”cathode” effects.

Let us further imagine that there is a certain set of cooperative structures
with different energy of distortion interaction in living cells and various
tissues of the integral organism. Then, by selecting the parameters of
exogenous perturbation in such a way that the magnitude of introduced
segmentation (splitting. cleavage] does not exceed the magnitude of Yen-Teller
splitting, one can effect selective vibron excitation of various structures.

Such a multiphasic nature of interaction between exogenous perturbation
and the integral organism has been experimentally demonstrated under the
effect of H? (see Garkavi et al.. in this collection).

The aggregate of the above data and analysis thereof very obviously shows
that the model of cooperative Yan-Teller systems discloses the physical
mechanism of interaction of perturbations, the energy of which is below kT.
with living biological objects.

Conformation instability of macromolecules has been found in many proteins

of the actomyoain complex, which are involved in energy transformation during
muscular contraction and conjugation of redox reactions with processes of

ion transport and ATP synthesis in membranes [8-10]. Moreover, the accumu-
lated experimental data warrant the belief that actomyosin-like protein is

a mandatory component of most biological membranes [11].

The surface of the protein macromolecule, which interacts with solvent. plays
the leading role in formation of conformational instability. This is indi-
cated by the data on the effects of various nonspecific agents (alcohol.
salt. etc.) on the amplitude of conformational oscillations [8]. Protein
macromolecules are characterised by the possibility of regulating donor-
acceptor levels of their cooperative bonds by means of changing the concen-
tration of hydrogen ions in the medium. Such regulation is based on the
amphoteric properties of amino acids.

The fact that the P0. group has four minimums of adiabatic potental and KﬂzPO.
crystals present the behavioral patterns of Yan-Teller systems [7] could
serve as ponderable proof of the Yan-Teller mechanism of formation of
conformational instability of biological macromolecules. In biology, the
phenomenon of activation of macromolecules by phosphorylation thereof is

well known. In view of the foregoing. it becomes obvious that such activa-
tion can be interpreted as one of the means of vibronic excitation, in which
phosphate groups are the centers of generation of vibronic oscillations of

57
FOR orrrcm. use only
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

macromolecules,* while a solvent with thermal noise serves as the source of
low-symmetry perturbations that activate this process nonlinearly. A tem-
perature drop should lower the amplitude of vibron oscillations and radically
alter the cooperative properties of such a system.

In accordance with the conceptions that are being developed. Hn. Co. Cr

and certain other cations, with unfilled d-envelopes. should participate in
formation of Yen-Teller centers of biological systems. In this regard.

the role of the above cations in processes of energy transformation in

:itochondria. chloroplasts and the plasma membrane merits special attention
12, 13. lb .

Analysis of the mechanisms of involvement of Yen-Teller systems in biological
phenomena leads to the conclusion that they have universal significance in
processes of deliberate transfer and separation of charges, the fundamental
basis. forming active transport of ions and metabolites in biological mem-
branes. This vector process occurs in heterogeneous systems [15] in the
presence of hydrophil-hydrophobic gradients and functional conjugation of
anisotropic media with different symmetry of their crystal lattice. The role
of macromolecular complexes with Yen-Teller properties amounts to formation

of symmetry properties of the medium, accumulation of dipole and deformationsl
distortions. and use thereof in molecular transport phenomena. The effective-
ness of transfer should be determined by the magnitude of intrsmolecular dis-
tortion (magnitude of gradient) and incidence of generation of vibron in-
stability of the macromolecular complex; a correlation should be demonstrable
between effectiveness of processes of molecular transfer and characteristic
properties of the vibron generator. and there should be tightening of

the characteristic functional mode.

The Role of Vibronic Instability and Symmetry of Heterogeneous Polystomic
Systems in Effects of H? on Processes of Energy Transformation in Mitochondria

Current conceptions of the mechanism of transformation of energy in the
mitochondrial membrane are based on the principle of Mitchell, according to
which the transmembrane transfer of electrons in the respiratory chain is
associated with formation of electrochemical ion potential H [16]. The
latter Ana is the moving force of the phosphorylation system, and it con-
sists of e ectric component Aw and an osmotic component represented by the
difference between concentration of ions KT within and without the membrane:

31;";— - a» — ZApH.

where P is the Faraday number, A0 is the membrane potential in volts and
Z is the coefficient of proportionality. which equals 0.06.

*a certain chemical interaction implementing the oscillatory-electron
bond between phosphate and the macromolecule is a mandatory prerequisite
for the activation mechanism under discussion.

 

58
roe orncuu. us: on'tr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principle of chemiosaotic conjugation of respiration and phosphorylation
is usually described in the following for-t

_
.0
can»... ...~.

where z'is electron transfer and ~ is a high-energy compound of the ATP type;
Aﬂk+ is used not only for ATP synthesis but for generation of heat. electric.
osmotic, mechanical and other types of work.

According to the above-described mechanism of conjugation of the vibron with
ion transfer.* the system of conjugation of electron transfer and generation
of AUh+ can be described as follows:

9-.

3e»-X---b2v.

ttrensfl

0-.

where z'is trans-eabrane electron transfer. ”K is the vibron,') is the hydro-
philic-hydrophohic gradient, do is the electric difference in potentials that
iaplemants functional conjugation of transfer 8*, ~x and 0.

An increase in transmemhrane A pﬂ leads to increase in dipole distortions,
lowering of frequency and ultimately depression of vibron generation in the
molecular system that implements proton transfer.

At the same time, an increase in A0 to a certain critical level opens up the
possibility of intramolecular electron transfer over the do gradient in Yan-
Teller structures with electron conductivity of the Fe-S protein type,
inserted in the same anisotropic membrane layer. Such a mechanisa may he
responsible for reverse transport of electrons in mitochondria and certain
other routes of energy transformation in the membrane.

At the same time. the process of ADP phosphorylation may be described as
antisymletrical to the mechanism of do formation:

ad‘s

do-XpJI-;-e-x.

I trans; s: 1
0+-

ﬁlnvolvement of the phonon (vibron) in mechanisms of energy transformation
in mitochondria uas theorized by C. HcClare. D. Green and others (17].

59
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

Such a aupramolecular bend of A; and 0p“ with ”K becomes possible in the
presence of spatial charge asymmetry of the membrane due to the hydrophil-
hydrophobic gradients generated by interaction of proteins with lipids. and
the difference in pﬂ on either side of the membrane. Transmembrane transfer

of 3. 5 and 0* by the oitochondrial respiratory chain and presence of proton
carriers in the lipid layer, the function of which is performed by ubiquinone
is s mandatory condition for such a bond [18. 19].

There is accumulation of hp“ on the internal hydrophobic barrier upon transfer
of electron 3 in the respiratory chain to the external hydrophobic barrier

of the mitochondrial meebrane. Upon reaching a critical value of Aph H+

are tunneled into ATP synthetase. There is transfer of t to the inside in

the respiratory chain and increase of Aa'in the external macromolecular

block.

Consequently. the effectiveness of ATP accumulation. cation absorption and
heat production in mitochondria are a function of the frequency of nonlinear
oscillations in the system and integrity of hydrophobic "proton valves." The
time of Apﬂ sccumnla ion is the limiting element of the phosphorylation pro-
cess. Transport of Ca" and several other cations capable of discharging
[dropping] A0 and altering the time and space symmetry of processes in the
mitochondrial aembrane should depress the process of ADP phosphorylation.

The proposed mechanism of HT transfer through hydrophobic "valves" can
occur in the case where protein macrosolecules interacting_gith lipids are
cooperative Yen-Teller structures with dipole distortion (AP). This pro-
vides for the bond of ADE. 0; and rx, Apﬂ, ‘K and A?! in the external and
internal hydrophobic "valves," respectively.

It could then be expected that. with lowering of temperature and correspond-
ing depression of active transfer. HP would induce in a conjugate mito-
chondrial preparation a decrease in spatial-charge asymmetry of the membrane
and narrowing of the working range of the respiratory change. with decline
of maximum values of characteristic frequencies of tunnel transitions in
cooperative Yen-Teller structures of mitochondrial membranes.

Let us refer to the results of experiments dealing with the effect of MP on
isolated mitochondria stored at 0-+4’C in a medium containing 0.3 mole
saccharose and 0.02 mole trio-R01. pH - 7.5. In this study, heterogeneous
SH? were used. with intensity of 350-6500 0e, and VHP of 50 Hz, with in-
tensity of 30 and 100 Do.

After exposure to heterogeneous SH? of 3500 De for 60-50 min. a decline is
observed in the saccharose-magnesium incubation medium in rate of respiration
on succinste as the oxidative substrate (Vb), with addition of 200 umole ADP
(V3) and in the controlled state (VB). There is negligible rise of ADP/0
coefficient and increase in phosphorylstion time (Ac). However. the rate of
respiration on DNP (dinitrophenol) does not differ from the parallel control
of preparation aging time.

60
ron orrzcm. use our
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

Addition of 15 umole K01 and reduction of “gel; from 7.5 to 2.5 mnole in the
incubation medium is associated with even more marked reduction of V, as comp
pared to the control, even greater increase in phosphorylation time. negligible
decrease of ADP/0 coefficient and reliable decrease in respiratory rate on

on? in mitochondria exposed to sum. The latter is unrelated to 0AA [oxelacotic
acid] inhibition of $08 [succinate dehydrogenase]. since it ie not eliminated

by glutamate, and it depends on the presence of Kcl in the incubation medium
(Figure l).

 

Time. min

Figure 1. Rate of mitochondrial respiration in the presence of
different metabolic states. in the control (dash line) and
after 50-min exposure to SM? of 3500 0e with a gradient
of 380 0e/cm (solid line)

A. C) incubation medium in mmoles: 230 soccharose, 7.5 HgClz, 10 KﬂzP0.,
5 succinate. pH 7.40
B) incubation medium in mmolee: 200 saccharoee. 2.5 HgClz. 20 KB;P0..
15 KCl. pH 7.40
The following were added: mitochondria (MC), 3-4 mg protein. 5 mmole
succinate (s). 210 mmole ADP, 30 umole DH? and 50 umole PeSOs

An increase in duration of exposure to 3500 0e 5"? to 75-100 min leads to
elevation of V. and V» in the medium with KCl on succinate; the rate of
phosphorylation is restored to control levels, while VDNP remains low. This
phase of the mitochondrial reaction is also observed in the sftereffect
period following brief exposure to 3500 0e SHE, and it is typical of the
case of exposure for 30-60 min to VHF of 50 Hz and 180 Oe (Figure 2).

In the first and second stages of mitochondrial reactions to Hi, one observes
typical changes in their interaction with iron ions. In the first phase,
with addition of Fe ions to the incubation medium there is a decrease in
stimulation of respiration in state 11!, whereas in the controlled state
there is appearance of a second respiratory wave ending with a change to
marked energetic control. as demonstrable with subsequent addition of DNP. In

61
FOR orncm. use osu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the second phase, along with decline of V3 Fe ions raise Vs stationarily,
which is indicative of irreversible impairment of mitochondrial meebrsne
perasghility and energetic regulation of the respiratory chain (Figures 1
.nd 2 s

Q

  
 

if

Resp. rate, 'nno/s
- t

Time , min

Figure 2. Rate of mitochondrial respiration in various metabolic
states after exposure to VHF for 60 min, 50 ha, 180 Oe.
Designations are the same as in Figure l.

The decline of respiratory rate in the third state and appearance of a second
respiratory wave in the fourth state with addition of Fe to the mitochondrial
incubation medium warranted the assumption that SH? inhibits reduction of Fe'”
conjugated with function of the respiratory chain and leads to secondary

mild activation of lipid psroxidation. The direct effect of MP on free radical
processes of lipid peroxidation, which involve endogenous iron, could be the
cause of these changes.

For this reason, experiments were conducted on the effects of SF? and VIP
on high-aaplitude mitochondrial swelling in a [0103 or mum: medium induced
by Fe" (5°10"‘ aole) or Fe" + ADP (5'10“ and 5°10" mole, respectively).
The respiratory chain was blocked by antimycin A. Causing swelling at a
teepereture of 22'C directly in the HP showed that the rate of reduction of
optic density did not differ reliably from the control with all of the
intensities used.

Thus. the data indicated that HP induces primary depression of distortions
in Yen-Teller structures of mitochondrial membranes containing Fe and
involved in conjugation of electron transport along the respiratory chain
with formation of membrane potential. Activation of lipid peroxidation
induced by H? is secondary and limited in strength, due to decline of M and
charge ssynnetry of the membrane, which disrupt regeneration of reduced

iron by the respiratory chain.

62
ton OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The obtained data were consistent with the scheme. according to which ATP
synthesis and cation transport are antisymmetrical processes (Figure 3).

There is a decrease in spatial charge asymmetry of the mitochondrial membrane
under the influence of HF tunnel effects, with retention of transmeabrane ph.
As a result. we observe vibron excitation of the system of cation transport,
and in a medium with potassium chloride there is penetration and adsorption
of the chlorine ion in the region of maximum jump of electrical potential

on the membrane. which causes stationery decline of gradient 60 and lowering
of characteristic frequencies of tunnel transitions.

 
  
 

  
 

/'

slectxon transfer

Intramito-
chondriai p8

Figure 3. Diagram of conjugation of mitochondrial respiratory chain
with cation transfer and ATP synthesis.

Circles: respiratory chain electron carriers; ~x---vibron; pH-”spagen"
[7] ph on the protein-lipid interface; A¢ -e1ectric difference in
potentials; white arrow-hydrophi1-hydrophobic gradient. The diagram
corresponds to the SDH-dependent segment of the respiratory chain
(described in detail in the text)

Inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation (increase of At, decrease of ADP/0,

as well as Vnup), similar to the observed effect of HP, occurs upon slkaliniza-
tion of the mitochondrial incubation medium [20], but in this case it is the
result of equilibrated decrease in charge-spatial asymmetry due to a decline

of transmembrsne pH gradient.

Typically enough, after exposure to SHF, the mitochondria restore charge
asymmetry of the membrane during ADP phosphorylation. The dependence of

this restoration on specific functional activity of mitochondria is dis-
tinctly demonstrable with a mixture of malate and glutamate, when a de-

crease in added ADP from 200 to 100 uncle causes a 30! reduction of V3 and

80% recution of Vpr; DNP-waa-added in the fourth state after ADP phosphorula-
tion. In the control, the change in these indices was in the range of 5-102.

63
FOR OFFICIAL us: om
FOR 0F?IC[AL USE ONLY

These data are indicative of the high sensitivity of the NAB-FAD [nicotine
adenine dinucleotide--flavine adenine dinucleotida] segment of the mitochon-
drial respiratory change to the state of the spatial-charge membrane asymmetry
and demonstrate the possible role of tunnel electron transport over Pa-S
proteins in the mechanism of HF action.

One can observe the first inhibitory phase under the influence of 8H?
not only in isolated mitochondria but with exposure of the integral organism
(7 days. 30 min. 500 Oe daily).

In a saccharose-magnesium incubation medium, we observed a tendency toward
lowering of V; and ngp on succinate. reduction of all rates, particularly
(P<0.0l) on a mixture of mslate and glutamate, and dissociation of oxidation
of o-ketoglutarate-s tendency toward elevation of V. and reduction of ADP/0
(P<0.05). The latter most probably reflects activation of the nucleoside
diphosphate kinase reaction. and it can be interpreted as the compensatory
component of mitochondria with decline of Aun+ and production of ATP.

A comparison of these findings to in vitro experiments warrants expectation
of an increase in monovalent cations in hepatic mitochondria of animals
exposed to SH? many times.

The reduction of mitochondrial membrane potential and impairment of reduction
of nonhemin iron by the respiratory change could inhibit processes of lipid
peroxidation and alter resistance of the organism to the toxic effect of
oxygen and ionizing radiation. Experiments conducted with Haksimovs and
Demurov confirmed this assumption: preliminary exposure to SH? (7 days,

500 0e, 30 min daily) increases with statistical reliability rat resistance
to the toxic effect of oxygen under pressure of 7 atm(abs.).

Let us now return to the second phase of the mitochondrial reaction to HP.
when there is "slipping away" from the inhibitory response and a chan;a

to stimulation of V. and V; in a medium with KCl, and attenuation of ener-
getic regulation of respiration. According to the functional scheme of the
mitochondrial membrane. this "slipping away" is quite likely with depression
of symmetry of the bond of ATP synthetase with structural protein. i.e.,

with decrease in capacity properties of the lipid layer and hydrophobic proton
valves.

It is known that activation of lipid peroxidation leads to appearance of
proton. potassium and certain other channels of permeability of model lipid
membranes [21]. This effect is enough to weaken hydrophobic interactions
between proteins and lipids [22. 23]. depress the sntisymnetricsl bond
between ATP synthetase and structural transfer protein, and lead to a change
in function of ATP synthetase into ATP hydrolsse.

Confirmation of the hypothetical mechanism of the second phase of reaction
to HP was obtained in experiments with rat testicular mitochondria. where

6h
FOR OFFICIAL. use osu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the animals were exposed once to VHF for 6.5 h, at 50 h: and 200 0e. The
results of these expeirments, which were conducted together with s. h.
Khlynin, revealed that 68 h after exposure testicular mitochondria in a
saccharose-magnesium incubation medium with auccinats as the oxidative sub-
strate presented a 202 increase of V0, 14: decline of V3 and insignficant
increase of Va: there was also a reliable increase. to 261 versus 51 in the
control. intheinhibitory effect of dicyclohexyldiimide (DCHD) added in the
4th state (50 umole). Subsequent addition of Du? stimulates respiration.
the absolute level of which was virtually the same in the experiment and
control.

It is known that the oligomycin-like effect of DCHD is attributable to the
reduction of proton conductivity of hydrophobic areas of mitochondrial mem-
branes [26]. The obtained data indicated that the second phase of Hf

effect is manifested by activation of ATPase. appearance of excessive proton
conductivity of the membrane and impairment of energetic regulation of res-
piration.

The mechanism of mitochondrial membrane function discussed here could br
called chemivibron-electric. According to this mechanism, ATPase could re
the source of infrared radiation, whereas structural protein could raise

the "temperature" of tissue without transfer of heat in the form of infrared
radiation. Excitation of electron nuclear oxcillationa, synchronized by
means of A0. in cooperative Yen-Teller systems of cell membranes with

bond symmetry of “K and A0 inherent in structural transfer protein (see
Figure 3), is this specific biological heating mechanism. In such a system,
cyclic discharge of do by means of Ca" or other mechanism (see above) should
lead to excitation if vibron oscillations of nctomyosin-like protein and
elevation of its "structural" temperature. without touching upon many aspects
of this complex problem [14, 16] and, in particular, the possibility of
raising the “structural" temperature of other specialized cell membranes.

it should be noted that SH? and pulsed H? are capable of altering the rate

of restoration of body temperature in hypothermic animals that had not been
previously adapted to the cold. Under controlled experimental conditions,
with and without administration of amytal, HF can both increase and

decrease the rate of restoration of body temperature [25. 26].

These data indicate that there are alternative routes of thermogenesis in

tissues of warm-blooded animals. with the opposite space and time symmetry
of internal molecular mechanisms. It becomes obvious that ATPsse and vibron
mechanisms are these antisymmetrical routes of biological heating of tissues.

Thus, theoretical and experimental substantiation of molecular mechanisms of
biological effect of N? indicates that it is based on probabilistic quantum
processes. in which symmetry plays a decisive role. along with the law of
minimum energy.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Instability and symmetry, which are the basic properties of life [27. 28].
enable us to interpret many facts from new vantage points. It is assumed
and there is much evidence of the fact that development of hypoxic and a
number of other pathological processes is determined by the rate of occur-
rence of successive mutually determined states of mitochondria: impairment
of oxidative phosphorylation, passage of K into mitochondria. absorption of
Ca, etc. [29-32]. Host probably, this sequence reflects instability and
symmetry of processes in the mitochondrial membrane, and it is in essence
determined, since expression of various forms of regulation of the
mitochondrial respiratory chain-by ADP, cations. substrates-is the

form of manifestation of the law of minimum rate of increased entropy in a
stationary nonequilibrium system as permitted by symmetry.

Effects of Magnetic Fields on Adrenergic and Cholinergic Mechanisms of
Regulating Cardiac Function

when a conductive material moves in on HF, an electric difference of poten-
tials occurs under the influence of Lorentz forces. For this reason. the
heart and blood vessels can be viewed as stationary electrodes to which

is directed EMF upon movement of blood in them in an MP, and both the
vascular and cardiac walls. as well as the moving components of blood are
exposed to the influence of polarisation currents and conduction currents.

It was demonstrated above that interaction of weak electric perturbations
with biological structures must be based on nonadiabatic mechanisms expressed
in cooperative Yen-Teller systems.

Let us now discuss the results of experiments dealing with the effects of

MP on rhythmic contractile function of the heart, reactivity of its
adrenergic and cholinergic structures. as well as some concomitant netsbolic
reactions. Experiments were conducted on isolated rat hearts subjected to
flow~through perfusion and frog hearts perfused according to Shtrsub. The
methodological aspects of the experiments have been published [33. 34].
Systolic pressure in the rat aorta was recorded on an Alva: polygraph,

and the mechanogram of the frog heart, on a kymogrsph. In this study,

flame photometry was used to assay Na and K ions in the perfusate and
cardiac tissue; polsrography was used to investigate oxygen uptake; fluoro-
metric methods were used to assay cstecholamines and the method of recording
the intensity of spontaneous extrsweah fluorescence of lipids extracted

from cardiac tissues.

In different segments of the study. SHP were used with intensities of 1000
and 50 0e, and VIP at a frequency of 50 he and intensity of 180 0e. The
studies were pursued after exposure of the isolated heart to H? for 50 min.

The specific activity of the frog heart. isolated according to Shtraub

without additional aeration of the perfusate. i.e., in the case where an
oxygen deficiency occurs. is associated with lowering of perfusate pH

and impairment of ion balance in the form of passage of Na into the myocardium

66
FOR orncw. use 0ch
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and exit of K into the perfusata. Under such conditions. 50-min exposure

tn 1000 Go SHF potentiates the hypoxic effect. This is expressed by an
additional decline of perfusate pl! and increase in extra weak fluorescence
of cardiac lipids (Figure lo). which is indicative of activation of processes
of lipid peroxidation under the influence of H? with an intensity of 1000 De.

a.
'3.

33:»

”do

he MA

"7;":

neg: Figure 1..

§$§ Effect of 1000 0e 8141' on intensity of extra
~.,,8 weak fluorescence of lipid extracts and
533' pl! of perfuaate of isolated frog heart.
Egg: Exposure tine. 60 min

Sad

VIM-.01:

Left. without aeration; right. with
aeration of perfusate.

K) control

 

Perfusate 98

Examination of processes of tissular respiration in pieces of ventricular
myocardium from the frog revealed that their intensity is low and regula-
tion of respiration by releasing protonophores is poor. For this reason.
it may be assumed that the rates of aerobic oxidative processes. magnitude
of pH gradients on membranes and maximal frequency of tunnel transitions

in cooperative structures of the frog myocardiun are minimal, as compared
to most tissues of warm-blooded organism, as can be judged from the com-
parative characteristics of tissular respiration under analogous conditions

(Figure 5).

No substantial changes in respiration on auccinate, as well as with addition
of DNF, were demonstrable after exposure to SHE of 1000 0e; there was merely

a tendency toward decline of endogenous respiration. At the same tine.

50 0e SHF led to a reliable decrease of endogenous respiration of pieces of
nyocardium, in spite of the wide scatter of the obtained results; there

was no substantial difference in rate of respiration on auccinate and kinetics
of activation of respiration with DNP, as compared to the control. It seems
probable that addition of auccinate stabilizes the indices of myocardial
tissular respiration and eliminates variations thereof related to the effect

of HF (Figure 5).

The obtained data warranted the assumption that inhibition of endogenous
myocardial respiration is attributable to a decrease in spatial charge

67
ran orrrcm. us: on?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

osyuetry of membranes responsible for aerobic processes of energy production.
while activation of processes of free radical oxidation is the result of
impairment of hydrophobic interactions and depression of cooperative proper-
ties of P’s-containing macromolecular membrane complexes.

' Figure 5.
3 Effects of 50 and 1000 0e SH! on
g tisaular respiration of frog heart
2 ventricles (30-60 lg tissue)
} Incubation medium (moles):
2; 2‘0 eaccharose
E 7.5 HgClz
. 10 KHzPOs
3 10 S (succinste)
E 20 uncle UN?
3 l) 50 0e 3) control
3" 2) 1000 De lo) rat liver

 

Artificial aeration induced a decrease in changes in perfusate pH and nag-
ligible increase in extra weak fluorescence of lipid extracts in the control;
there was complete elimination of perfueate pH difference between the control
and experiment, with a marked tendency toward decreased extra weak fluores-
cance of lipids of hearts functioning in SH? (see Figure b). The results of
these experiments indicated that the mechanism of the Pasteur effect is

due to the symmetry properties of cell membranes: 1000 De SUP depresses

the spatial charge asymmetry of membranes involved in aerobic processes of
energy transformation and dissociates intramembrane redox reactions from
processes of active transport; attenuation of the Pasteur effect is observed
also. Conversely, molecular oxygen increases the say-etry of these mem-
branes. due to its role as acceptor, not only in some chains of electron
transfer but in free radical reactions leading to vibron perturbation of
macromolecular complexes involved in ion transfer and energy transformation.
Vibron perturbation of actoayosin-like protein is associated with activation
of processes of lipid peroxidation in membranes [35].

Intersection of nervous system mediators with receptors of plasma membranes

is associated with cooperative conformational changes in membranes, in their
permeability. electric potential and ion flux [36]. The cooperative confor-
mational changes in cell membranes cause changes in bioenergetic processes.

which form feedback between the end effects of mediators and their receptors
in the plasma membrane [27].

68
FOR OFFICIAL use OKLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These investigations revealed that SH? alters the correlation between bio-
energetic processes: it decreases ATP production and causes compensatory
activation of CT? [guanosine triphosphate) production; this is associated
with intensification of glycolytic processes [25]. For this reason it

was interesting to compare the reactivity of adrenergic and cholinergic
structures of the isolated frog heart. After exposure to SH? for 50-60 min.
we observed an appreciable decrease in reactivity to epinephrine over the
entire range of tested concentrations thereof (see Table 1). In addition.
interaction of the isolated heart with several concentrations of acetyl-
choline revealed increased cholinergic reactivity after exposure to 1000 0e
saw. The degree of demonstrable changes in cholinergic reactivity was
largely related to season and a number of other factors [36].

Table 1. Positive inotropic effect (2) of epinephrine on frog heart after
60-min exposure to 1000 0e SHF*

 

 

3 ins 1
Experimental 9 Phr ne. g/mi
series 140“ I bars [n4
3“? mum 12.3233" 1.3.0343"
Control 26.41:“ 31.0394; 29.3313

 

 

 

*Conditions: Rin er's solution for cold-blood or a i i
ﬂ,glbcose; perfus on according to Shtraub withoutsagrggioh.thout

The aggregate of findings referable to the effects of SN? indicated that
there is a correlation between decrease in ATT-dependent bioenergetic pro-
cesses and depression of B-adrenoreceptors. while compensatory activation of
cholinergic mechanisms corresp nds to increased GTP production. The change
in levels of cyclic can! and cGTP nucleotides probably plays an important

mediatory role in the mechanism of SF effects on reactivity of different
types of cells and tissues.

It was demonstrated that treatment of the isolated frog heart with chelate-
forming compounds (8-hydroxyquinol, EDTA and certain others) attenuates the
positive inotropic effect of catscholsmines. which can be restored by ions
of bivalent iron Fe". Ions of other metals. including Fe°". do not

elicit such restoration. This indicates that the adrenoreceptors are Fe-
containing macromolecular complexes [38). The demonstrated high sensitivity
to weak electromagnetic perturbation warrants consideration of these com-
plexes as cooperative Yen-Teller systems, in which there is conjugation of
ion fluxes with the vibron. Then the incidence of tunnel transitions initi-
ated by an agonist in receptor membrane complexes should determine the mag-
nitude of inotropic effects of catecholamines, and it should depend on the
spatial charge asymmetry of the plasma membrane, regulated under ordinary
conditions by transmembrane Aph, Anus+ and electrochemical potentials of
other ions, as well as intramembrsne redox processes. The latter are

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

linked with the main metabolic cycles of the cell through "ADI! and NADPH
Ill. 39].

In addition to the foregoing, the obtained data definitely describe the
sy-etry properties of cholinoreceptors and adrenoreceptors of the plasma
membrane, which determine the direction of their conjugate changes under
the influence of NF.

It is known that the level and correlation of different metabolic routes.
as well as molecular organization of receptors of nervous system mediators.
may differ in cold- and warm-blooded animals. In particular. it is known
that complemona do not alter the effects of catecholamines on the rat heart
[#0]. There are also substantial differences in conjugate excitation and
contraction in the myocardium [61].

In spite of these differences, the results of the experiments were indicative
of a decrease in reactivity of adrenergic structures of the isolated rat
heart after exposure to 1000 0e SHP. The effects of VHF of 180 Oe were in-
significant. The latter is apparently attributable to effective triggering
of compensatory mechanisms and the fact that plasma membranes of the heart
escape from the influence of VHF (Table 2).

Table 2. Positive inotropic effect of epinephrine (I) on isolated rat
heart with exposure to 1000 De SH? and 180 Oe VHF (exposure
time, 50 min; N 8-1.9)a

 

 

Epinephrine, __.S_“F— __VHl-‘__
SIM. Control Experim. Control ' Experiment
140" ib.0_-i:5.0 {2,012.0
140-. 113:3» Loam" 123:2; 6.63:3»
5-10“ 10.0353 5.03:2,0 “3.8-3.9 12,818.!
No" 9.03:3.0 9.02M 12.61:” 16.61:”)
1- l0" 13.6;h2ﬂ 13.0133

”‘1 - f ' .
,,ngxagsrnapgngaan37598: .szégté °- 22? “+51 0°: W!

 

Deposition of catecholsmines in the myocardium is an important factor that
characterizes the state of the sympathoedrenel system, and it is related to
energy and electrolyte metabolism of tissue. It was demonstrated that DNP,
but not fluoride or guide, effectively depresses absorption of eate-
cholamines in specific granules of sywsthetic nerve endings, as it increases

proton conductivity of membranes [42, 63].

A comparison of the results obtained (Table 3) to the molecular mechanism
of HF action warrants the belief that the influence of MP of the tested
intensities on deposition and lexels of catecholamines in the isolated
heart is based on a decline of bum on intracellular membrane structures of

the myocardium.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. Catecholsnine content of isolated rat heart with exposure to
1000 Go SH! and 180 Oe VHF (exposure tins. 50 sin; N - Bf9)‘
““—

VHF
in. Control Bxperin.

0.02:0.10 0.50:0.M“ 0.72:0»: 0.910.050
0.1mm 0.01:0.02 0.171001 custom.

*See Table 2 for experimental conditions. **P<0.05
K—

tit

  
    
  

Catecholamines.
us/s

    
 

Control Exper

 

'Norepinephrino
Epinephrine

    
 

 

 

    

The theoretical and experiaental data submitted in this report lead to con-
ceptions of the fundsnental significance of the effect of vibron enhancement
and symmntry properties of Yen-Teller systems in processes of self-regulation
of flows of energy. latter and information in biological objects. Biological
membranes play a substantial role in systesic organization of functions on
the supramolecular and cellular levels of organization. and they form the
symmetry of intramembrsne separation of charges. thereby determining the
vector nature of trans-embrane transfer and separation of substance.

It becomes obvious that the mechanis- of vibron intensification and separa-
tion of the proton and electron, expressed in Yen-Teller systems, is the
specific biological phenomenon that enables the supranolecular systea to
utilize free energy of chenicel reactions in processes of transfer and
separation of substance and. on the other hand. the opposite: it determines
utilization of endogenous energy of the system in energonic reactions.

HP. which are capable of affecting quantum physical processes when a systen
passes through an unstable state, play the role of a distinctive indicator
and regulator of dyssymmetry and vibron instability. the main moving forces

of information and energy conversions on the supranolecular level of organi-
zation of biological objects.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Hovshovich. I. H.. and Shishlo, H. A. "Effects of MP on Biological
Systems." in ”Hater. Vsesoyuz. soveshch. po izucheniyu vliysniya
nagnitnykh poley na biol. ob"yekty" [Proceedings of All-Union Conference
on the Effects of Magnetic Fields on Biological Objects], Hoscov, 1969,
pp 155-158.

2. Shishlo. H. A. "Effects of Magnetic Fields on Enzymes, Tissular Bes-
piretion and Some Aspects of Metabolite in the Intact Organism," in
"Vliyaniye magnitnykh poley na biologicheskiye ob"yekty" [Effects of
Magnetic Fields on Biological Objects], Moscow, Hanks, 1971, pp 26-60.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

6.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10a
11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dorfnan, Ya. 0. "Physical Phenomena in Living Objects Occurring Under
the Influence of Stationary Magnetic Fields," lbid, pp 15-23.

Pres-an. A. 8. "electromagnetic Pields and Living Mature." Moscow.
Nauke. 1968.

Buchschenkn. A. L. "Chemical Polarization of Electrons and Nuclei,"
Moscow. Nauka, 1976.

Bersuker. 1. 3. "Electron Structure and Properties of Coordinating
Compounds." Leningrad, Khiniys. 1976.

Bersuker. I. 3.; Vekhter, B. 6.: and Ogurtsov, 1. Ya. "Tunnel Effects

in Polyatomic Systems With Electron Degeneration and Pseudodegeneration."
USP. PIZIOL. MAUK [Advances in Physiological Sciences], No 6. 1975,

pp 605-661.

Shnol', S. E. "Synchronous Conformational Oscillations of Molecules
of Actin. Myosin and AcuOmyoain in Solutions." in ”Molekulyarnaye
biofizika" [Molecular Biophysics], Moscow, Nauks. 1969, pp 56-82.

Idem. "Conformational Oscillations of Macromolecules," in "Kolebstel'nyye
protsessy v biologicheskikh i khimicheskikh sistemakh" [Oscillatory
Processes in Biological and Chemical Systene], Moscow, Meuke, 1967,

pp 22-41.

Lehninger,a. 'quochondria." Moecov, Mir. 1966.

Neyfekh, s. A. (editor) "Mechanisms of Integration of Cellular Meta-
bolism." Leningrad. Meuka. 1967.

Shishlo. M. A.; Kotova, Ye. 8.; and Yeliseyeva, S. V. "Possible Mechanism
of Preventive Effect of Bivelent Mn. Co and Ni Ions Under the Toxic

Effect of High Concentrations of Molecular Oxygen," in "Mater. konf.
posvyeahchennoy 100-1etiyu so dnya otkrytiys D. I. Mendeleyevyn
periodicheskogo :akona khimicheskikh elementov" [Proceedings of Conference
Co-eoorating the 100th Anniversary of the Discovery by D. I. Mendeleyev
of the Periodic Law of Chemical Elements], Moscow [no year]. pp 87-89.

Khodorov, 3. I. "General Physiology of Bxcitsble Membranes." Moscow,
Nauka. 1975.

Skulschev. V. P. "Energy luil-Up in the Cell," Moscow, Nauka. 1965.

anusov, B. N.. and Kol's, O. R. (editors) "Biophysics," Moscow,
Vyeshaye ehkols, 1968.

Skulachev, V. P. ”Energy Conversion in Biomenbrsnes," Moscow. Nsuka,
1972.

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

2‘.

25.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

McClare, C. H. P. "Resonance in Bioenergetics.” ANN. N.Y. ACAD. $01..
227. 1976. pp 75-98.

Yaguahinskiy, L. 3.; Khosni, P. M.; Knlesova, c. M.; and Snirnova, Ye. c.
"Hydrophobic Areas and Electrophil Centers in the Systen of Oxidative
Phosphorylation of Mitochondria." in "Mitokhondrii. Biokhiliya i
ul'trastruktura” [Mitochondris. Biocheaistry and Ultrastructure].
Moscow. Nauka, 1973. pp 2b-60.

Libsrnan, Ye. A.; Araunanyen, A. M.: Vladiairova. M. A.; and Tsofina,
L. M. "Potential Difference on the Meabrene of Subcellular Particles.
l. Cheniosnotic and Chenielectric Mechanisa of Generation," BIOPIZIKA
[Biophysics]. 21. 1976, pp 669-476.

Shishlo, M. A., and Kondrashove. M. N. "Substantiation of Pathogenetic
Approach to Treat-ant by Means of Regulation of Bioenergetic Processes.
1. Effect of Physiotherapeutic Factors on State of Mitochondria.

Choice of Normalizing Agent According to Pathogenesis," in "Regulyatsiys
energetichsskogo obaena i ustoychivost‘ organizes" [Regulation of Bnergy
Metabolisa and Resistance of the Organism]. Pushchino. 1975, pp 216-228.

Vladinirov, Yu. A.; Olenev, V. 1.; Suslova, T. 3.; and Potapenko, A. Ye.
"Mechanisn of Peroxidation of Lipids and Its Effect on Biological
Meabranes." in ”Itogi nauki i tekhniki. Biofizike" [Advances in
Science and Technology. Biophysics], Moscow, Vol 5. 1975, pp 56-117.

Kozlov, Yu. P. "Free Radical Oxidation of Lipids in Bionenbranes Under
Nor-a1 and Pathological Conditions," in "Biosntiokisliteli" [Bio-
antioxidants]. Moscow, Nauke, 1975, pp 5-16.

Sitkovskiy, M. V. "Investigation of Lipid Peroxidation as Related to
Lipid-Protein Interactions in Biological'Menbrsnes," author abstract
of csndidatorisl dissertation, Moscow, 1973.

Gudz'. T. 1.; Yaguzhinakiy, L. 5.; and Skulachev, V. P. "Inhibitors of
the Systea of Oxidative Phosphoryletion of Mitochondria. Oligo-ycin-
Like Effect of Alkylating Compounds," in "Mitokhondrii. Regulyatsiye
protsessov okialeniya i sopryazheniya" (Mitochondria. Regulation of
Oxidation and Conjugation Processes]. Moscow, Nauka. 1976, pp 52-55.

Shishlo, M. A. "Effects of Magnetic Fields on Some Aspects of Biological
Oxidation," candidatorial dissertation. Moscow, 1966.

Shishlo, M. A., and Maslov. S. P. "Effect of Stationary Magnetic Field
on Restoration of Aninal Body Tenperature Following Acute Hypothermia,"
in "Nauchnyye trudy aapirantov i ordinatorov 1H1" [Scientific works

of Graduate Students and Residents at Moscow Medical Institute], Moscow,
Vyp l. 1966, pp 97-100.

73
FOR OFFICIAL use any
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Roennovskiy. Yu. M.: Stepanova. N. v.; and Chernnvskiy. D. 5.
"Mathematical Modeling in Biophysics," Moscow. Nauka. 1975.

Uruantsev. Yu. A. ”Symmetry of Nature and Nature of Syn-arty." Moscow.
Mysl'. 197k.

Kondraehova, M. N. "Regulation by Succinic Acid of Energy Supply and
Functional State of Tissues," author abstract of doctoral dissertation.
Pushchino. 1971.

Kondrashova, M. N. (editor) "Manual for the Study of Biological
Oxidation by the Polerographic Method," Moscou, Nauka, 1973.

Idel. "Basic Concepts of Bioenergetics Applied in Functional Studies.
stility of Metabolic Reactions of Mitochondria," in "Regulyatsiye
energeticheskogo cbeene i ustoychivoet' organisms," Pushchino, 1975,

Sorokovoy, V. 1.. and Vladimirov. Yu. A. "Injury to Mitochondria in
the Presence of Anoxia." in ”Itogi nauki i tekhniki. Biofizika."
Moscow, Vol 5, 1975. pp 11-55.

Nuthnyy. V. P.; Zhdanova, N. F.; and Shishlo. M. A. "Effect of SN?

on Functional State of Adrenergic Structures of the Isolated Heart." in
"Magnitnoye pole v ueditsine. Mater. k sinp. 'Vliyaniye

iskusstvennykh legnitnykh poley na biol. ob”yekty’" [Magnetic Fields in
Medicine. Proceedings of Sylposiun on "Effects of Artificial Magnetic
Fields on Biological Objects"), Frunze, 1976. pp 59-61.

Zhdanovs. N. F.; Shishlo, M. A.; and Kudrin, A. N. "Change in Sensiti-
vity and Reactivity of the Frog Heart to Acetyicholine After Exposure
to Stationary Magnetic Field." VOPROSY KURORTDL. FIZIOTBRAP. I LECMBBN.
FIZKUL'TURY [Problems of Belneology. Physiotherapy and Therapeutic
Physical Culture]. 6. 1975. pp 565-551.

Shishlo, M. A.; Kudrin, A. N.; and Zhdsnova, N. F. "Possible Role of
Level of Free Radical Oxidation in Seasonal Fluctuations of Reactive
Properties of the Frog Heart." in "Predbolezn'" [Preeorbid States].
Conference Proceedings,_Moscou. Pt 2. 1969. pp 366-371.

Konev. s. V.: Aksentsev. S. L.; and Chernetskiy. Ye. A. "Cooperative
Protein Changes in the Cell.” Minsk. 1970.

Putintseve. T. 6.. and Turpeyev, T. M. "Regulation of Cholinergic and
Adrenergic Mediator Processes by the Feedback Mechanisl." in
"Sinapticheskiye protsessy" [Synaptic Processes], Kiev. Naukova Dunks,
1968. pp 66-61.

7%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
38.

39.
‘0.

61.

‘2.

43.

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

Koniasarov. I. V.. and Reutskaya. G. I. "Adrenoreceptore of the Frog
Hyocardiue as Iron-Containing Couplaxea," BYUL. EKSPER. BIOL. I MED.
[Bulletin of Bxperieental Biology and Medicine], 67, 6, 1969, pp 75-78.

Archakov, A. l. “Microsonal Oxidation," Moscow, Nouka. 1975.

Abtaeeta. I. 1.; Keeiasarov, I. V.; and Reutskaya, G. 1. "Analysis of
Adrenoreceptors of the Frog and net Hyocatdiun at Different Teeperatures."
BYUL. EKSPER. BIOL. I MBD.. 70. 12, 1970. pp 48-50.

Orlov. R. 8., and Izakov, V. Ya. "Basic Questions About the Mechanism
of Conjugation of Excitation and Contraction in the Hyocardiue,” USP.
nsz. mun. 2, I0, 1911, pp 3-23.

Chang. 9.; von Euler, U. 8.; and Lishajko. P. "Effects of 2,6-Dinitro-
phenol on Release and Uptake of Noradreneline in Guinea Pig Heart."
ACTA PKYSIOL. SCAND.. 85. 4, 1972. pp 501-505.

Von Euler. U. S. "Adrenergic Nerve Particles in Relation to Uptake and
Release of Neurotransmitter," J. ERDOCRINOL.. 55, 2. 1972. pp 2-9.

COPYRIGaT: Isdatel'atvo "Nauke", 1978

10.657
080: 816‘

75
FOR OFFICIAL. us: 031.?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HAGNETIC FIELDS, ADAPTATION REACTIONS AND RESISTANCE OF THE ORGANISM

Moscow nam'su BIOLOGICHESKIKH 5151'!!! NA MAGNITNYYE POLYA in Russian 1978
signed to press 26 Feb 78 pp 131-1“

[Article by 1.. an. Garkavi, Ya. s. Kvakina and a. A. Okolova, Bostov
Scientific Research Oncological Institute, RSFSR Ministry of Health.
Bostov-na-Donu]

[Text] Among the biologically active environmental factors, under the
influence of which life evolved, recently an important role is being
attributed to our [geomagnetic field], the mediator between solar activity
and the biosphere [68, 32, 16]. Hagnetobiology has accumulated a large
amount of information about changes in vital functions of the organism
with both attenuation of (It! and geomagnetic perturbances, as well as
under the effects of all sorts of artificial HF [magnetic fields].

What then is the nature of the general reaction of an organism as a whole

to HP? The reactions to artificially enhanced HP are considered nonspecific,
i.e., they can also be induced by other biologically active factors [63-67,
32, 7, 8, 26]. Moreover, we believe that this reactions are adaptive,

since the organism adjusts to existence in a given HP with their help.

An organism adjusts to numerous stimuli by means of reactions to these stimuli.
It would be difficult to imagine that there are just as many absolutely
different reactions in the integral organism as there are stimuli. This
suggests that there are not so many standard reactions. In this regard,

of special interest is the thesis expounded by B. Selye in 1936 concerning

the general adaptation syndrome (GAS), a "stress” reaction appearing
standardly in response to the qualitatively most diverse, but potent,

stimuli. or stressors [52-56]. H. Selye makes a distinction between three
successive stages of development of stress: 1) anxiety reaction; 2) stage

of resistance; 3) stage of depletion [exhaustion]. Signs of the anxiety
reaction are quite noticeable 6 h after exposure to the stressor: inwolution
of the thymus, increased weight of adrenals, leukocytes, lymphopenia, eosino-
penis and appearance of ulcers in the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract.
There is intensification of ACT“ secretion, which leads to hypersctivation

of adrenocorticsl glucocorticoid function, impairment of correlation between
glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids in favor of the former, with depression

76
ron OFFICIAL us: om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the thymolymphetic system, connective tissue and inunogenesis. At 'the
same time, there is a decline of thyroid and reproductive gland functions.

In other words, there is depression, rather than activation, of defense
systems of the organism, of its inflammatory potential. At first glance,
this may appear undesirable. Yet a response comensurste to a potent stimulus
could be devastating as a result of an excessive inflametory reaction.

The move to the second stage is associated with reorganization of the hor-
monal background: diminished secretion of glucocorticoids, there may be
more intensive secretion of hypophyseal thyrou-o pic hormone (1m!) and
development of hyperplasia of the thyroid. Nonspecific resistance is
distinct at this stage.

If the action of the stressor is prolonged, the stage of depletion occurs:
decrease in resistance of the organism and even death. Again, there is
activation of endocrine mechanisms that characterize the anxiety reaction.

From Selye's description of the anxiety reaction, it is apparent that there
is close interweaving of defense and injury. Such a response is biologically
desirable only with exposure to an excessive and potent stimulus. The
changes associated with the anxiety reaction make it possible to rapidly
mobilize energy, even at the cost of injury, since the former is vitally
needed in extreme situations.

Severe excitation develops in the CNS [central nervous system] under the
influence of strong, eecessivs stimuli, followed by suprsliminal inhibition
which is an extreme defense measure. The biological expedience of this is
reduction of excitability and reactivity. Attenuation of the defense
reaction of the organism is effected via the endocrine system (increased
secretion of ACTH, glucocorticoids) and autonomic branch of the nervous
system.

At the present time, we observe a tendency to reduce to the stress reaction

the reactions of the body not only to excessive, but any nonspecific stimuli.
The theory of N. V. Lazarev concerning development of a state of nonspecific
heightened resistance (suns), different from stress, that occurs physiologically

in response to administration of certain pharmacological agents is an exception
[24, 25, 33, 6].

Development of the stress reaction, in which defense is interwoven with
injury, is biologically undesirable with exposure to mild and moderate
physiological factors. Nevertheless, the reaction of diverse biological
activity to HP is often equated with stress, regardless of HP parameters and
duration of exposure. The influence of Selye's theory is so strong that

if the change under the influence of HP does not fit into the concept of
stress or even contradicts it, authors still try to attribute the changes

they demonstrate to development of stress. Thus, activation of the reticulo-
endothelial system was observed in mice after long-term exposure to SH?
[stationary magnetic fields] with intensity of 10200 0e: lack of increase (even

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

some decrease) in weight of adrenals. constriction of fascicular zone (in-
stead of expansion during stress) and lack of increased corticosterone
secretion. demonstrable both in blood plasma and the adrenals [50]. The
authors called these changes "specific stress"; however. the concept of
"specific" is incompatible with the concept of "stress." which reflects
expressly nonspecific changes in the organism.

The foregoing does not seen that we consider it impossible to induce stress
with HF. Like any stimulus raised to a certain level. H? can also be a
atressor.

It was possible to obtain development of typical stress by means of HF,
with reduction of the thy-us. lymphopenis, increased secretion of gluco-
corticoids. decrease in mineralocorticoids, functional activity of the
thyroid, reproductive glands, and development of trophic ulcers.

The question of significance of strength of stimulation to the nature of
occurring changes was repeatedly raised in physiology. N. Ye. Vvedenskiy
discovered the patterns of force relations: parabiotic phases related to a
change in functional state of the reacting substrate. 1. P. Pavlov and his
disciples demonstrated that the conditioned reflex depends on the strength
of s stimulus as the universal pattern of cortical activity [30. 31. 27a].

Hith increase in dosage (strength) of a factor, one observes three stages

in the CNS reaction: preventive inhibition. excitation and secondary (supra-
liminal) inhibition [34]. The phase of initial depression is particularly
typical of weak stimuli. The CNS appears to be protected by inhibition on
two sides. Primary (preventive) inhibition protects the CNS against the
effects of weak stimuli that are not significant to the organism. Secondary
supraliminal inhibition protections the CNS from overstimulation. depletion
and death.

Since factors of different strength induce different responses in the CNS.
the reaction to them of the organism as a whole must also vary. Our studies
revealed that at least three adsptational reactions can develop. depending
on the force of the stimulus: 1) reaction to weak, threshold (for general
reactions) stimulation (low doses), 2) reaction to moderately strong (dose)
and 3) reaction to excessive. strong stimulation-«stress. The reaction to

a weak. threshold stimulus is called the "conditioning reaction" [39]. This
name stresses the fact that any sort of training or conditioning is based on
an sdaptational reaction. which develops in time with repeated exposure to
threshold stimuli and leads to greater resistance of the organism. In
response to a stimulus of moderate force (dosage). aere is development of
another reaction. which is called the activation reaction [9]. since stable
activation of physiological defense systems is observed with it.

The above reactions differ from both stress and one another. with regard to
the sets of changes in the nervous and endocrine system. netabolism, state
of defense forces and nature of resistance; like stress. these reactions

78
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

occur in stages. At the first stage of the conditioning reaction. the
"orientation stage," there is concurrent increase in secretion of glucocor-
ticoids and minersloeorticoids, some increase in thyroid and reproductive
gland function. without depression of the thysolymphstic system. The thymus
does not decrease in size. it is even somewhat enlarged during the entire
first stage of the conditioning reaction. There are none of the other
signs inherent in the first stage of stress: leukocytosia, aneoainophilia,
leukopenia, neutrophilia and ulcers of the gastrointestinal mucosa. In the
brain. there is prevalence of protective inhibition, with some decrease in
excitability. By virtue of these changes, readiness to respond to the next
stisulus is developed at the orientation stage.

Thereafter. with regular repetition of weak. threshold stimuli. there is
development of the "reorganisation stage," the essence of which consists of
gradual change in correlation between glucocorticoids and mineraiocerticoids
in favor of the latter. and a change in metabolic processes to a lover,

more economical level.

The "conditioned stage" occurs after the "reorganization stage." This stage
is characterized by some prevalence of mineralocorticoids over glucocorti-
coids, increased function of the thyroid and reproductive glands. The
thy-us is enlarged. There are minimal energy expenditures and prevalence

of anabolic type of aetabolisa.

An increase in nonspecific resistance of the organism is already noted at the
first stage of the conditioning reaction, but at the conditioned stage there
is more significant increase in resistance.

There is development of the activation reaction in response to moderate
strength (dose) of stiaulation, for which two stages are described [9, 10].
The biological sense of the activation reaction is to enhance the defense
response to the stimulus, with which the organism can cope, unlike the

case of an excessively strong stimulus, by increasing the activity of
defense systems and which, at the same time, is no longer a weak stimulus.
At the first stage. the "stage of primary activation," there is an increase
in adrenocortical activity. mainly due to secretion of mineralocorticoids.
increased function of the thyroid, sex glands, thymolymphatic system and
connective tissue system. The thy-us is considerably enlarged, not only

in comparison to the anxiety reaction. but to the orientation stage. and it
remains enlarged throughout the first stage of the activation reaction. The
number of eosinophils is in normal range, the lymphocyte count is higher
and that of neutrophils is lower than in the orientation phase. There are
no ulcers or effusions of blood in the gastrointestinal mucosa. In the
brain. there is prevalence of moderate physiological excitation. Good
equilibrium of processes of anabolism and catabolism is observed at the stage
of primary activation.

The stage of stable activation develops upon systematic repetition of
moderate stimuli. The changes in the neuroendocrine system are analogous to

79
Iron OFFICIAL. use can
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

those observed at the stage of primary activation. Activation of the thyme-
iymphatic system and connective tissue system is also retained. Relatively
stable function of these systems is maintained by phasic metabolic changes.
There is more expenditure of energy than in the conditioning reaction and
less than with stress.

with development of the activation reaction, nonspecific resistance of the
organism increases faster and more significantly than with the conditioning
reaction.

In order to determine the nature of general, nonspecific, adaptation reac-
tions that develop with exposure to If, we undertook a study of the same
indices, on the basis of which GAS, SNHR, the conditioning and activation
reactions were demonstrated, i.e., we examined the parameters of functional
activity of the pituitary, adrenal cortex, thyroid and state of the thymus-
lymphatic system.

He exposed the head of animals of sur and VHF [variable magnetic fields] with
intensities of 100-500 0e, at a frequency of 0.03 and 1 Hz, obtained by
eccentric rotation of permanent magnets and VHF at a frequency of 50 he in
intermittent and continuous modes using the Polyus apparatus of the All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Medical Instrument Making [35]. we examined
hormonal indices 6 h after 10-20 min exposure and once a week in the case

of daily exposure for several (2-3) months.

After single exposure to 8“? and VHF, there was no substantial change in
levels of l7-hydroxycorticosteroids (l7-HCC) in blood; blood serum sodium
content did not change with exposure to SH? and increased with VHF; blood
serum potassium was lower in both cases. These changes are an indirect
indication of prevalence of mineralocorticoids over glucocorticoids. Examina-
tion of cellular composition of the hypophyais revealed that there was a sub-
stantial increase in gonsdotrophs after exposure to VHF (9.510.32, versus
5.6:1.01,in the control), whereas the amount of acidophils and thyrotrophs
remained in the normal range. The thymus became enlarged, particularly under
the effect of 1 a: VHP. Leukocyte count, percentage of lymphocytes, neutro-
phile and eosinophils with exposure '0 SH? did not differ from normal (the
lymphocyte count being in the lower have of the normal range and that of
neutrophils, in the upper half). Hith exposure to var (both intermittent,
low-frequency, 50 Hz, and infrslow-frequency, 1 “2), there was also no
significant change in total number of leukocytes and relative number of
lymphocytes, but the percentage of lymphocytes increased with decrease in
number of neutrophils (Table).

Concurrently with the increase in number of lymphocytes, there was an
increase in blast transformation (63.734.21, versus 22.0:3.31 in the control),
which is indicative of activation of T lymphocytes.

Hyperplasis of the thymus indicates indirectly (in addition to the data on
elevation of blood Na/K ratio) a prevalence of secretion of adrenocortical

80
FOR OFFICIAL cs: 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

minerslocorticoids over secretion of glucocorticoids. This is also indicated
by the relative lymphocytosis. which usually accompanies hyperplssis of the

thymus.

 

Figure 1. Sections of rat adrenals in the presence of stress (A)
and activation reaction induced by VHF (B). Staining
according to Purvis and Grisbach; objective 40X, ocular 7"

Number of leukocytes, lymphocytes, neutrophils, eoainophils and
weight of rat thymus after single exposure to SM? and VHS

   

 

VHF, 300 02
Control 300 be ”30% 02.13 50 Hz (inter:-
Index "' '3’ “'3” V' '3’ nit . n-Z‘D

       
 

 

      

"gm

  

th.P Mgm.P

Leukocyte count mun-706 “9001950 uoxotsoo 111651-2360

>0.2 >0,2 >0.2

583:2,5 73:1 .5 6911.5
>o.x .AOJm: zo.ub

3&t2ﬁ 21i2 Ztti
>02 (0&1 403%

moioo LOiOJ kt0§
>0J >0j >0j

ﬁﬁiﬂj ZniﬂO iﬂttﬂ
401»: 401»: AM.M

     

 

   

Lymphocytes , Z 621:1.5

Neutrophils . Z

  
 

Jkth5

aims

  

Eosinophils . Z

Thymus weight,
mg/100 g

 

 

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After numerous exposures to HF, there was no difference in 17-ncc level over
a period of l nonth. as compared to the norm (5.16:0.62 ugZ). Sodium content
was elevated already after the first week of exposure and continued to rise
for 2 weeks, more so in the case of VHF (135.230.88 ugz, versus 123.512.9 ugz.
P<0.005). Potassium centent was somewhat elevated, more so with the use of
SHF (7.610.15 mgX, versus 6.0:0.l, P<0.0l). Thus. the Na/K ratio was

higher underthe influence of VHF then SHF; runsequently, with repeated
exposure to HF the ratio of mineralocorticoids to glucocorticoids was

higher underthe influence of VHF. Hith exposure to SHE, although the ratio
was somewhat lower, it was also indicative of prevalence of mineralocorticoids.
This was also indicated by enlargement of the glomerular zone of the adrenal
cortex and hypertrophy of cell nuclei (Figure l). The weight of the thymus
end percentage of lymphocytes were higher. Studies of these parameters for
several months (with daily exposure to HF) revealed minor phasic changes.
Protein bound iodine (FBI) content of plasma was equally increased after 1
week and 1 month of exposure to VHF (5.620.5 "31. versus 2.630.15. P<0.01).

Functional and morphological studies revealed that there was an increase in
number of thyrotrophs in the anterior lobe of the pituitary (9.630.41. versus
3.2iO.92 in the control. P<0.001), in height and size of thyroid epithelial
nuclei (12.110.1 um. versus 810.7 um, P>0.001 and 6.liO.l um. versus

5.510.l um, P<0.001, respectively; [4]. Thyroxine uptake, determined 24 h
after giving labeled thyroxine ( 1I) (in doses of l uCi and 1.5 uCi/lOO g
weight) by tissues varied after exposure to SHF and VHF for 1 month. SHF
did not alter thyroxine uptake and VHF increased it. There was a decrease
in fixing of administered thyroxine in the tissues of the thyroid proper
under the influence of both SHF and VHF. which is also indicative of in-
creased hormonal activity thereof at this time (1 month) under the influence
of both types of stimuli. Thus. as a result of exposure to the HF we used,
thyroid function increased, whereas an increase is typical of the "stress"
reaction. as we have already indica:ed.

Examination of the cellular composition of the hypophysis also revealed that
not only an increase in thyrotrophs, but in gonadotrophs, is observed after
numerous exposures to HF (Figure 2). There was no change in number of acido-
phils. It is known that a decline of gonadotropic function of the pituitary
is observed in the presence of stress. The lack of changes in number of
acidophils with exposure to HF also distinguishes the reaction induced by

HF with the parameters tested from stress, since acidopbils are considered

to be ACTH producers.

Thus, the adaptive reactions induced by HF of the parameters used differed
from stress, and they were characterized by hormonal changes, changes in
morphological composition of blood inherent in the conditioning reaction in
the case of exposure to SHF, and the activation reaction in the case of VHF

[20, 19].

A special study of the reaction of the thymicolymphatic system to HF
revealed signs of stimulation combined with hyperplastic processes [8].

82
son OFFICIAL use osu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although. in the authors' opinion. these changes resemble the resistance
stage of the GAS, to us it is important that, in essence, a different effect
was obtained with VHF of relatively low intensity (200 Oe) and low frequency
(50 Hz). with respect to the thymicolymphetic system, than in the case of
stress: after 6 h there were no changes in the thymicolymphstic system,

in particular, no involution of the thymus;sfter 12-26 h there were signs of
irritation and by the 3d day there use development of proliferative processes.

 

Figure 2. Sections of hypophysis of intact rat (A, S) and after
exposure to VMW (B, r, ID

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The changes in the CNS also differed with exposure to SH? and VHF. SHF
caused a decrease in excitability-30~6OX elevation of thresholds of direct
electrical stimulation, which is consistent with data on the predominantly
inhibitory effect of 8H? on the CNS [#3, 26]. VHF of the same intensity

led, on the contrary, to increased excitability (20-302 lowering of thresholds
of stimulation, as compared to base levels) [18, 23].

The possibility of enhancing the excitatory process by VHF is of great
interest, with regard to gaining understanding of the mechanism of action

of H?. A special study of the nature of the effects of magnetic and electric
fields on the CNS stressed the fact that with HP one could obtain only
varying degrees of enhancement of inhibitory processes, whereas only the
electric field could raise the level of excitability [51]. Thus, H! was
described as a special stimulus, with inhibitory action on the CNS.

We believe that an explanation of the difference in directions of changes

in excitability under the influence of SH? and VHF can be offered from the
vantage point of HP being a nonspecific stimulus, on the basis of the pattern
of action of nonspecific stimuli: nature (quality) of developing changes as

a function of strength (quantitative measure) of affect on the organism. As
we have already stated, development of a reaction of the CNS with three phases
is typical of the effects of such stimuli, with increase in strength of
stimulation: primary (preventive) inhibition,excitation and secondary (supre-
liminal) inhibition [3b]. The effect of SHP is similar to the first phase

of the reaction, the reaction to weak stimuli, while that of VHF resembles
the second reaction to stimuli of a "moderate" force (dosage).

Although VH3 increased excitability immediately after exposure, it dropped
to the base level or lower in the intervals between daily exposures. One
would think that intensification of the excitatory process occurred in the
presence of a rather strong inhibitory process. According to [36], this is
typical of stimuli of "moderate" force (dosage).

The obtained facts corroborate the conceptions found in the literature con-
cerning the greater biological activity of VHF, as compared to SE? [38, 15
and others].

As was demonstrated by I. P. Pavlov, excitation and inhibition are two pro-
cesses that interact constantly. For this reason, a stimulant such as
caffeine, for example, strengthens cortical inhibition and has a tonic
effect on the cortex in small doses, while bromide effects not only the
inhibitory process but, in large doses, the excitatory process [27].

There are also morphological changes corresponding to the functional change
in the brain under the influence of HF. Glioneuronsl correlations are a
fine indicator of the functional state of the CNS. Activation of neuroglia
with change in glioneuronal correlations is considered a manifestation of

a nonspecific adaptive reaction to weak stimuli [11. Thus, a similar
neuroglial reaction (especially of astrocytas) was observed in the cerebral

8%
son OFFICIAL use or.“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cortex in the presence of all nonsupraliminal inhibitory states, including
sleep inhibition [22. l, 2]. Noah atinuli-snsll doses of toxic agents,

low doses of radiation-«induced activation of neuroglia in the cerebral
cortex. whereas severe poisoning led to depression of neuroglia, associated
with dyatrophic changes and destruction of neurons. An increase in number

of astrocytea, oligodendroglial and microglial cells varying in degree.
depending on HP exposure. were observed under the influence of SN? [3]. Long-
term. continuous exposure to 8H? induced productive-dystrophic changes in

the neroglia with dyatrophic changes in neurons [66].

In our experiments with VHF, we also observed glial activation, mainly in

the hypothalamus. The reaction of microglia and oligodendroglia was more
marked. that of astrocytes was less marked. There was thickening and frag-
mentation of microglial cell processes with increase in number. The reactive
changes in the microglia were diffuse, but more marked in the hypothalamus.
The oligodendroglial changes consisted of appearance of markedly argyrophilic
granules in the cell processes. Intensificetion of glioneuronal contacts

was particularly typical. and it consisted of the fact that the nuclei of
glial satellites were closely adherent to neuronal perikaryons (Figure 3),

to the extent of accumulation of several satellites on one perikaryon [21].

 

Figure 3. Arrangement of satellite nuclei on the perikaryon surface
of large neurons from the lateral hypothalamic nucleus of
an animal with activation reaction and resorption of tumor
following exposure to VHF. Staining according to
Einsrson; objective lOOX, ocular 6.3x

! 85
.. FOR orncm. use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With reference to neurons. there was hyperchromatosis of cytoplasm (when
stained for RNA and tigroid), increased argyrophilia and hypertrophy of

some neurone. The destructive changes typical of stress were not observed
under the above experimental conditions. Thus, activation of neuroglia

may characterize not only a state of protective inhibition, induced by weak
stimuli. but a state of moderate excitation induced by moderate stimuli.
Physiologically, this is justified, since restoration of metabolic resources
:f the neurons through the glia is necessary to maintain a state of active
unction.

The nature of the changes in the organism observed with various adaptation
reactions determines their influence on the pro- and anti-inflammation
potential of the organism. The first stage of stress has a very marked
anti-inflammation effect. The use of glucocorticoids in the presence of
various inflammatory processes is related to this. However, in view of the
adverse effect of this stage of stress on the defense systems of the
organism, glucocorticoida should be used with great caution.

The first stage of the conditioning reaction has a mild anti-inflammation
effect without elements of lesion. The anti-inflammation effects of SH? and
VHS, with parameters that induce development of the conditioning reaction,
is related to the developing of this reaction.

The activation reaction increases the inflammation potential, as that it is
desirable to induce this reaction for therapeutic purposes in the presence
of pathological processes associated with a decrease thereof: neoplasms,
chronic inflammatory processes with a sluggish course.

Each of the adaptation reactions affects the level of nonspecific resistance
of the organism. However, the mechanism of enhancement of resistance varies.
1n the case of stress, the increase in resistance is obtained, as Selye
himself indicates, at a high price: aside from elements of injury. stress

is associated with great expenditure of energy and prevalence of catsbolic
processes. For this reason, the resistance stage (with exposure to a strong
stressor) is followed by the depletion stage. During the depletion stage.
the changes in the neuroendocrine system are similar to those of the anxiety
reaction. However. there is gradual decline of the reaction level due to
depletion of reserves. In our opinion, the change to the resistance stage
is related to development in the brain. after exposure to a strong stimulus,
of marked excitation at first, then supraliminal inhibition leading to de-
creased excitability. Against the background of diminished excitability,
strong stimuli induce the responses inherent to moderate or even weak
stimuli. rather than strong ones.

At the first stage of the conditioningreaction. there is some increase in
resistance due to prevalence of protective inhibition in the brain and
decreased excitability, i.e.. resistance is passive. At the conditioning
stage. which occurs only after numerous repetitions of weak stimuli. there
is more significant increase in resistance of the organism due to a genuine

86
ton OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

increase in activity of the organism's defense systems, i.e., an increase in
active resistance. At the first stage of the conditioning reaction, induced
by various means including SHW, it is possible to obtain a protective effect
against the deleterious influence on the organism of antineoplaatic chees-
therapy and radiation therapy [52, 17]. No influence on growth of experi-
mental tumors was observed at the first stage. At the conditioned stage, a
protective effect against antineoplastic chemopreparations and radiation was
also obtained. Moreover, growth of tumors transferred to animals at the
conditioned stage (after exposure to MP for 1.5-2 months) was inhibited to
total resorption, i.e., at this stage of the conditioning reaction an
increase was observed in antineoplaatic resistance of the organism.

There is rapid increase in resistance with the activation reaction, and
it is significant due to rapid stimulation of defense systems. For this
reason, when it is necessary to increase resistance rapidly, preference
should be given to this reaction. It was possible to obtain protection
against toxic antineoplestic chemotherapeutic agents and radiation by in-
ducing the activation reaction using different methods, including low-
frequency VHW. Systematic maintenance of the activation reaction by means
of numerous exposures to VHF of specific parameters led to inhibition of
growth and total resorption of experimental tumors, both transferred and
those induced by carcinogens [40, 17, 41]. In the cases where it was not
possible to systematically maintain the activation reactions and animals
often developed stress. there was even enhancement of tumor growth.

On the basis of the foregoing, we do not recommend the use of stress to
enhance resistance for therapeutic purposes. The activation reaction is

the lost suitable for this. If it is necessary to obtain and anti-inflamma-
tion effect, one should first induce developnent of the conditioning reac-
tion, and when the acuity of the inflammatory process regresses one can

turn to the activation reaction.

Attribution of the mechanism of therapeutic effects of HP to development of
systemic reactions does not rule out the role of local reactions in these
effects. However, there are extremely convincing data indicative of the
priority of systemic reactions over local ones. Thus, it was found possible
to obtain a therapeutic response in patients with various pathological pro-
cesses in the lungs from brief magnetization of the food in an SHF, which
the author relates to stimulation of imnunobiological activity of the
organism [36, 37]. An optimum response was obtained in patients, whose blood
changes were typical of the activation reaction: increased number of lympho-
cytes in peripheral blood. The author obtained analogous changes in experi-
ments on albino rats with local exposure of the tail to the same HP. Pro-
liferation of lymphoid tissue was also observed.

The results we obtained indicate that the antineoplastic effectiveness of
HP. with local exposure of the tumor, does not differ appreciably from the
antineoplastic efficacy of H? with direct exposure of the head. Thus,

with the use of H? on the tumor, the number of animals presenting inhibition

87
you OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of tumor growth constituted 73.82, and with exposure of the head to MP, the
figure was 812. The Iorphologicel changes associated with tumor resorption
consisted of lymphocytic infiltration of the tumor, lysis of tumor cells
and rsplscenent of tumor tissue with connective tissue.

During resorption of tumors, regardless of point of application of HP. in
the leukocyte formula we observed an increase in number of lymphocytes,
decrease in segmented neutrophils and normalization of number of leukocytes.
There wse significant increase in weight of the thymus. Functional acti-
vity of the thyroid increased. There was a drop in blood plasma 17-scc

and potassium, enlargement of the glomerular zone of the adrenal cortex, and
the condition of the thymicolymphatic system was indicative of prevalence
of mineralocorticoid function of the adrenal cortex, over glucocorticoid
function.

Thus. the changes occurring in the organism during tumor resorption, under
the influence of exposure‘to H? of both the head and the tumor, were indi-
cative of development of the general, nonspecific, adaptstional activation
reaction [41].

In view of the fact that aagnetothnrapy is being used more and more for

the most diverse diseases, while the nature of HF (8MP, VHF, etc.), condi-
tions and parameters thereof are often selected empirically, the possibility
of deliberately inducing specific adaptation reactions with HF acquires
special significance. Simple indices have been developed. that permit
description of the developing reaction (according to morphological coeposi-
tion of formed elements of white blood) within 6-2b h after exposure [12, 13].
This makes it possible to operationally and flexibly alter the HF parameters
or magnetization conditions for adjustment purposes, to obtain the desired
changes. Thus, in the case of development of stress, the initial Hr para-
meters-~intensity or exposure thms--should be reduced until the required
reaction is obtained, and in the case of development of the conditioning
reaction they should either be left unchanged if it is desirable to develop
tnis reaction, or else increased until the activation reaction is obtained. etc.

Thereafter, a specific adaptation reaction should be maintained in the organics
for a long time to obtain the therapeutic response. The experimental and
clinical studies have shown that. for this purpose, it is necessary to
regularly monitor the organism's response, since delivery of the same
dosage (properly selected at the start) does not elicit developnent of the
sane (as initially induced) reaction. Moreover, both experimental and cli-
nical studies revealed that numerous exposures to H? of the same intensity
and with the same exposure time (VET of 30 0e. 50 Hz. delivered by a Polyus
apparatus for 10 min daily) consistently lead to an undulant pattern of
adaptation reactions. with prevalence of the one that was originally
induced (Figure 6). Each reaction lasts for l to 3 weeks.

One cannot obtain stable maintenance of the same reaction in such cases,
and the therapeutic response is not optimal. although it may be observed

88
not orncm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by virtue of the beneficial effect of HP at the time it induces (be it
temporarily) the required adaptation reaction.

 
 
 
  

L De

Activation m

Conditioning"

3 "'7h

tress :: dose (constant)
" as _ weehs
1. 0e , 2 J s 1 5 7 0
00

Activation n

‘0

Strogg 3, dose (variable)
20
n

I r J 4 J c 7 weeks

Figure 6. Course of nonspecific reactions in rats, with constant
VHF parameters (top) and undulant changes therein (bottoa).
X-axis, time; y-axis, lymphocytes (L).

In order to maintain development of the same adaptation reaction. experiments
were conducted with H! of varying intensity (Figure 6, bottom). After

the initial selection of intensity and exposure time, we worked with those
that induced the activation reaction. The MP intensity was than gradually
decreased over a period of 1 week, then gradually increased over the next
week to the original level. Blood tests were made at this time. It was
possible to induce and maintain for a long time (3 months) the same reaction,
the activation reaction, with such undulant change in dosage. Consequently,
in order to maintain the adaptation reaction that is the most desirable in

a given case, one should periodically (undulently) alter the ”dosage" of

HF (with respect to either intensity and other field parameters, or exposure
time).

Thus, with long-term use (repeated many times) of a stimulus of the same
force (H! with the same parameters), different adaptation reactions appear

in a living system, and they are related to the force of the excitatory and
inhibitory processes in the CNS and correlation between them. A fluctuating
(undulant) process of alternation of different reactions occurs. Conversely,
in order to purposefully maintain a specific reaction, the dosage should

be systematically altered in the direction of increase or decrease, which
should also be fluctuating (undulant) in nature and adjusted in accordance
with the organisn‘s reaction.

89
FOR orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Understanding of the nature of correlation between dosage of treatment and
the organism's response makes it possible to control the resistance level
of the organism by means of H? as nonspecific stimli for preventive and
therapeutic purposes. Adaptation reactions can be used for theoretically
substantiated and purposeful sagnetotherapy.

However. the reactions of the organism to HP varying in biological activity
are not lisited to the three adaptation reactions. If only these reactions
developed with increase in intensity (or exposure time). the last one being
stress, further increase in excess of the stressor "dosage” should. according
to a. Selye. lead to death of the organics. Conversely, with any decrease
in dosage inducing the conditioning reaction. one should not observe any
changes in the organise. since the dosage would become subliminal. Bomver,
this is not the case in reality. There is extensive material in the litera-
ture dealing with aagnetobiology on the biological effects of HF over an
enormous range of intensities. from fractions of an oersted to hundreds of
thousands. and over an exposure time range of seconds to any months. More-
over. the changes in the organism are not so different with a wide range of
intensities, exposure time and other parameters of HP. and they often

fail to show an increase with increase in "dosage." Occasionally, weaker
fields have a stronger effect than powerful ones [32, 29. etc.], and the
same changes are observed with different intensities [16].

He succeeded in inducting the "activation" reaction with both low-frequency
HP (0.03 and 1 Br), loo-300 0e and daily exposure for 10-20 min, and 50 Hz

MP of 19-20. 5-7 and even less than 1 0e, with daily exposure for 2 min

(3 tines for 1.0 s at a tine, at 3-5 min intervals), and then even a
negligible increase in "deer" with regard to intensity or exposure time

led to development of stress in a number of cases. At the same time. the

use of superstrong HP (60,000 Go) failed to elicit any particular changes [5].

How then can we interpret all these facts, if we agree with Selye that an
increase in magnitude of a stressor or duration of its action leads to
development of depletion and subsequent death?

To exanine this question. we tested on white rats the effects of MP with
intensities of l to 300 Oe. delivered by the Polyus device of the All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Medical Instrument Making. with step-by-
step 1.5-fold change in intensity in each experimental series. The
current was sinusoidal. field frequency was 50 H: and the field was inter-
mittent (2 a field. 2 s pause). The developing adaptation reaction was
evaluated by the correlation between formed white blood elements. number
of leukocytes, weight of thymus and proportion of glucocorticoid and
ninerslocorticoid her-ones of the adrenal cortex. HP were used daily for
2 sin (3 times, 1.0 s at a time. 3-5 min intervals). The results revealed
that there is a periodic succession of triads of adaptation reactions
(conditioning. activation. stress) to the terted range of intensities.
with a "zone of areactivity" between these reactions. within which the HF
appears to be ineffective [ll].

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A comparison of adaptation reactions developing on different levels (of react!-
vity) revealed that the set of changes characterizing each of the reactions

is similar in many respects. This explains the production of similar

changes in the organism with different intensities of HP. At the same tine.
there are also some differences in level of hormone secretion and energy
metabolism (studies conducted with H. N. Kondrasheva. Ya. I. Hayevekiy et
al.). Further investigation of differences with the development of the same
reaction on different levels of reactivity will make it possible to
deliberately induce a specific reaction on a specific level of reactivity.

The possibility of development of stress with low intensities, of conditioning
and activation reactions with high intensities enables us to comprehend why
weak fields occasionally have a stronger effect than strong ones. The
organism reacts on each level only to an increment of HP in relation to

the "zone of areactivity," rather than the entire magnitude of HF.

Investigation of the nature of enhancement of resistance in the presence of
the very same adaptation reactions developing on different levels also
failed to demonstrate a substantial difference. Thus, A. I. Shikhlyarovn
was able to obtain increased antineoplastic resistance. to induce inhibition
and resorption of tumors in about the same percentage ofcases by means of
development of the activation reaction induced by MP of l, 7, 30 and 200 Oe
(with the same exposure time) [69]. Subsequent experiments even demonstrated
the advantage of using low intensities for development of activation.

The "principle of periodicity," formed in the course of many centuries of
evolution, with respect to development of adaptation reactions is a highly
purposeful form of preserving homeostasis in the presence of a wide range
of changes in environmental factors. Knowledge of this principle and use
therecf will broaden substantially the possibilities of controlling resistance

of the organism by means of HF.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Aleksandrovskaya, H. H. "Adaptational Mechanism in the Central Nervous
System," ARKHIV PATOLOGII [Archiver of Pathology], 30, 8, 1968, pp 26-36.

2. Idem, Morphological Correlates of Functional Changes in the Central
Nervous System, According to Results of Examining Clioneuronal
Correlations," ZHURN. VYSSli. NBRV. DEYAT. [Journal of Higher Nervous
Activity]. 19. l, p 156 [no year given].

3. Aleksandrovakaya, N. H.. and Kholodov, Yu. A. "Trace Reactions of the
Cat Brain Neuroglia to Stationary Magnetic Fields," in 'Tezisy dokladov

soveshch. po izucheniyu vliyaniya magnitnykh poley na biol. ob"yekty"
[Sumeries of Papers Delivered at Conference Dealing With Effects of

Magnetic Fields on Biological Objects], Moscow, 1966, p 3.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030004-3

- (FOUO 8/79)
1 MRO" 1979 EFFECTS OF NONIONIZINO ELECTROHRGNETIC RRDIRTXON 2 OF 2
h.

6.

7.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bordyushkov. Yu. N.; Gashnikova, L. 1.; and Kvakina, Ye. 3. "Reaction
of the Endocrine System to Low-Prequency MF and 8MP." in

“Cigiyenicheskaya otsenka magnitnykh poley" [Mygienic Assess-cut of
Magnetic Fields], Moscow, 1972, p 58.

Borodkina. A. 6.; Petrovich. I. K.; Anashkin, 0. 8.; and Nakhil'nitskaya.
Z. N. "Effects of Superhigh Intensity SMP on Morphological Composition
of Peripheral Blood." TRUDY KIRG. MED. lN-TA (Prunze) [Works of Kirgiz
Medical Institute]. 100. 1970. p 78.

Brekhman. I. I. “Ginseng." Leningrad, Medgiz. 1957.

Vasil'yev. N. V. ”Immunological Reactivity of the Organism to Immuniza-
tion With Diverse Antigens," doctoral dissertation. Tomsk, 1968.

Idem, "Essays on the Role of Memopoietic Tissue in Antibody Production,"
Tonsk, Izd-vo Toask University, 1975.

Garkavi, L. Kh. ”General Nonspecific Adaptation 'Activation Reaction'
Contributing to Organism's Fight Against Tumors. Problems of Clinical
Oncology and Neuroendocrine Disorders in the Presence of Malignant
Neoplasms," in "Trudy Rostovskogo nauch.-issled. onkologicheskogo in-ts"
[works of Roatov Scientific Research Institute of Oncology], Roatov-na-
Donu. 1968, p 3‘1.

Idea. "Adeptational 'Activation Reaction' and Its Role in the Mechanism
of Antineoplastic Effect of Mypothalamic Stimulation." doctoral
dissertation. Donetsk. 1969.

Garkavi, L. Kh.. and Kvskina. Ye. B. "The Periodicity Principle in

the Organism's Reaction to Magnetic Fields as a Nonspecific Stisulus."
Mater. 111 Vseaoyuz. simp. 'Vliyaniye aagnitnykh poley na biol. ob"yekty'"
[Proceedings of 3d All-Union Symposiua on "Effects of Magnetic Fields

on Biological Objectd'], Kaliniagrad. 1975, pp 18-19.

Garkavi, L. Kh.; Kvakina, Ye. 8.; and ukolova, M. A. "Changes in
white Blood Composition as a Criterion of Adaptation Reactions of the
Organism to Magnetic Fields and Other Nonspecific Agents," TRDDY KIRG.
MED. IN-TA (Frunze). 100. 1974, pp 23-25.

Idem. "The Role of Adaptation Reactions in Pathological Processes, and
Simple Criteria of These Reactions in Man,” in "Regulyatsiya
energeticheakogo obmena i uatoychivost' organizes" [Regulation of
Energy Metabolism and Resistance of the Organise], Pushchino, 1975.

pp 172-182.

Gornhenina. T. 1.. and Frumkis, A. E. "Morphological Characteristics
of Effects of Variable (50 M2) Magnetic Field of Low Intensity Under
Experimental Conditions,“ TRUDY KIRG. MED. IN-TA (Prunze). 100, 1976.
Pp 85-86.

92
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
15.

16.

17.

18.

1?.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dubrov, A. P. “Heliogeophysical Factors and Dynasics of Secretion
of Organic Substances by Plant Roots," in "Probleay kosnicheskoy
biologii” [Problems of Space Biolosyl. Moscow, Nsuka, Vol 18, 1973,
pp 67-96.

Druz', V. A., and Madiyevskiy, Yu. M. ”Effects of Stationary Magnetic
Field and Low-Frequency Electromagnetic Fields on Hydration Capacity
of Surviving Tissues," BIOPIZIKA [Biophysics], ll, No 6, 1966.

Kvakina, Ye. B. ”Enhancement of Nonspecific Antincoplastic Resistance
of the Organism by Means of Contact-Free Stimulation of the Hypothalanus."
author abstract of doctoral dissertation, Moscow, 1972.

Kvakina, Ye. 3.; Rotlyarevskaya. Ye. 8.; and Kvakin, S. D. "Change in
Nypothalamic Excitability Under the Influence of Magnetic Fields,”
"Mater. Vaeaoyuz. soveshch. po izucheniyu vliyaniy magnitnykh poley
na biol. ob"yekty" [Proceedings of All-Union Conference on the Effects
of Magnetic Fields on biological Objects]. Moscow, 1969. pp 103-106.

Kvakina, Ye. 3.; Nikolayeva, V. 1.; and Ukolova, M. A. "Nature of
Nonspecific Reaction of the Organism in Rtwponse to Long-Term Exposure
to Lou-Frequency VHF," in "Reaktsiya biologicheskikh sisteu na slabyye

magnitnyye polys" [Reaction of Biological Systems to Hook Magnetic
Fields]. Moscow. 1971. pp 122-l23.

Kvakina, Ye. 3.. and Ukolova, M. A. "Various Adaptation Reactions,
as Related to Force of Magnetic Field," "Mater. II Vseosyuz. soveshch.
po izucheniyu vliyaniya magnitnykh poley na blvl. ob"yekty," Moscow,
1969. p 107.

Kvakins, Ye. 3.; Shibkova. S. A.; and Isadzhanova, S. Kh. ”Morpholo-
gical Changes in the Nypothalanus Nith Resorption of Tumors Under the
Influence of a Variable Magnetic field," VOPROSY ONRDL. [Problems of

Oncology], 20, 197‘, p 89.

Klossovskiy, B. N., and Rosmarskaya. Ye. N. "Functional and Inhibited
State of the Brain," Moscow, Medgiz [no year given].

Kotlyarevskaya. Ye. S. ”Investigation of Functional State of the Hypo-
thalanic Region of the Brain as Related to Antineoplastic Effect of
Magnetic fields." author abstract of candidatorial dissertation,
nastov-oa-Donu. 1976.

Lazarevx N. V. "Comparison of Nonspecific Defense Reactions Affecting
Generalization of Infections and Metastases of Tumors," VOPRDSY 0NKOL.,
11, 1962, p 20.

Lazarev, N. V., and Rosin, M. A. "Nonspecificity of Adaptation Reactions}
in "Voprosy tsirologii i obshchey fiziologii” [Problems of Cytology and
General Physiology], Moscou-Leningrsd, 1960, p 137.

93
roe OFFICIAL use oxu
26.

27.

27a.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

36.

35.

36.

37.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Luk'yanovs, S. N. “Analysis of Central Nervous System Reaction to
Stationary Magnetic Fields," candidstorial dissertation, Moscow, 1970.

Madieyvskiy, Yu. M. "Hydration Capacity of Tissues and changes
Therein in Vitro and in Vivo,” doctoral dissertation, Moscou, 1968.

Mayorov, F. P. "History of Teaching on Conditioned Reflexes," Moscow,
led-v0 AMN SSSR [USSR Academy of Medical Sciences]. 1968.

Mar'yanovskaya, G. (a. "Mechanism of Central and Peripheral Effects of
Magnetic Fields (on the Model of the Neoplastic Process),“ author
abstract of candidatorial dissertation, Rostov-na-Donu, 197A.

Muzalevskaya, N. 1. , and Larkina, T. A. "Change in Coagulation and
Anticoagulation Systems of Albino Rats Under the Influence of ﬂesh
Variable Magnetic Fields in the Infralov Range of Frequencies Under
Experimental Conditions," TRUDY ch. MED. IN-TA (France), 100, 1976,
p 90.

Pavlov, 1. P. "The Problem of Sleep," in "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete
Collection of works], Moscow-Leningrad, lad-yo AN SSSR [USSR Academy
of Sciences], Vol 3, 1951, p 609.

Idem, "Physiology of the Cerebral hemispheres," Ibid, Vol 5. 1952,
9 ‘86s

Presmsn, A. S. "Electromagnetic Fields and Living Mature," Moscow,
Nauka, 1968.

Rosin, M. A. “Monspecifically lieightened Resistance Under the Effect
of Some Pharmacological Agents," in "Mespetsificheakaya 1ekarstvennaya
profilaktika i terapiya rake" [Nonspecific Drug Prevention and Therapy
of Cancer], Moscow, Meditsina, Ch 2, 1966, p 21.

Simonov, P. V. ”Three Phases of Reactions of the Organism to an
Increasing Stimulus,” Moscow, led-v0 AN SSSR, 1962.

Solov'yavs, G. R., and Yeremin, V. A. "Experimental Device for
Magnetotherapy," NOVOSTI FEDITSINSKOGO PRIBOROSTROYDIIYA [News in
Medical Instrument Making], No 3, 1971. p 53.

Stasyuk, G. A. "Substantiation of Clinical Use of Stationary Magnetic
Fieids,” ”Mater. Vseaoyuz. simp. 'Vliysniye iskusstvennykh magnitnykh
poley na zhivyye organiamy'" [Proceedings of All-Union Symposium on
"Effects of Artificial Magnetic Fields on Living 0rganisms"l, Baku,
1972, p 133.

Idem, "Dynamics of Some Morphological and Cytochemical Indicea of
Human Blood Leukocytes During Partial Magnetization of the Body,"
Mater. 111 Vsesoyuz. aimp.," Kaliningrad, 1975, p 166.

9"
Iron orncm L'SE 0va
38.

39.

60.

61.

62.

63.

66.

65.

‘6.

‘7.

68.
69.

50.

Toroptsev, 1. V- "Morphological Characteristics of Biological Effects
of Magnetic Eields,” ARKN. PATOL., No 3, 1968.

Ukolova, M. A.; Bordyukov, Yu. N.; and Garkavi, L. Kh. ”General Non-
specific Adeptation Conditioning Reaction which Prevents Tuner Develop-
ment in the Organism. Problems of Clinical Oncology and Endocrine
Disorders in the Presence of Malignant Neoplasms," ”Trudy Bostovskogo
nauch.-iesled. onkologicheekogo inuta," Rostov-na-Donu, 1966, p 321.

Ukolove, M. A., and Krakina, Ye. 8. "Effects (Direct and Via the
Nervous System) of Magnetic Fields on Experimental Tumors," in

"Vliysniye magnitny,h poley na hiologicheskiye oh"yekty," Moscov, Nauka,
1971. p 147.

Ukolova, M. A.; Kvekina, Ye. 8.; Mar'yanovskaya, 6. Ya.; and Garksvi,
L. Rh. ”Central and Peripheral Mechanisms of Antineoplastic Action of
MP," TRUDY KIRC. MED. lN-TA (Prunes), 100, 1976, p 16.

Ukolova, M. A.; Kvakina, Ye. 8.; and Rudoy, F. M. "Protective Effect
of MP During Administration of Antineoplastic Chemotherapeutic Agento,"
"Mater. 11 Veeeoyuz. soveshch. po izucheniyu vliyaniya magnitnykh
poley na hiol. ob"yekty," Moscow, 1969, p 260.

Kholodov, Yu. A. ”Effects of Electromagnetic and Magnetic Fields on
the Central Nervous System," Moscow, Nauka, 1966.

Idem, ”Direct Effect of Electromagnetic Fields on the Central Nervous
System," doctoral dissertation, Moocow, 1967.

Idem, "Magnetism in Biology,” Moscow, Neuke, 1970.

Idem, "Effects of Magnetic Fields on the Nervous System," in
"Vliyaniye magnitnykh poley na biol. ob"yekty," Moscow, Nauka, 1971,
p 126.

Idem, "Reaction of the human and Animal Organism to Magnetic Fields,”
in "Problemy kosmicheskoy biologii," Moscow, Manta, Vol 18, 1973,
pp 163-163.

Chizhevskiy, A. 1. "He and the Sun," Mir, Znaniye, 1963.

Shikhlyarova, A. 1. "Possible Overdoeage in Therapeutic Use of Neak
Magnetic Fields," "Mater. 111 Vsesoyuz. simp.," Kaliningrsd, 1975,
p 170.

Barnothy, M. F., and Sumegy, J. "Effects of the Magnetic Fields on

Internal Organs and Endocrine System of Mice," in "Biological Effects
of Magnetic Fields," New York, Plenum Press, 2, 1969, p 103.

95
roe OFFICIAL us: ONLY
51.

52.

53.
5‘.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Becker, R. 0. “The Neural Seniconduction Control System and Its
Interaction With Applied Electrical Current and Magnetic Fields,"
"Proc. llth Intern. Congr. Radiol.." 1965. p 1753.

Selye. h. "Thymus and Adrenals in the Response of the Organism to
Injuries and lntoxitationa." BRIT. J. BXPTL. PATHOL.. 17. 1936, p 236.

lden, "Baaays on the Annytotion Syndrome," Moscow, Hedgiz, 1960.

Ides, "0n the Level of the Integral Organism," Heston, Nauka. 1971.

COPYRIGRT: Izdntel'stvo "ﬂanks". 1978

10.657
CSO: 8166

96
roe OFFICIAL use 0an
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCHOPNYSIOLOOICAL ANALYSIS OF NERVOUS srsrm REACTIONS T0 MAGNETIC FIELDS

Moscow RZAKTSII SIOLOGICHESKIKH 8181‘!!! NA HACNITNYYB POLYA in Russian 1978
signed to press 2‘ Feb 78 pp 167-177

[Article by Yu. A. Kholodov, Institute of higher Nervous Activity and
Neurophysiology, USSR Academy of Sciences, Hoacow]

[Text] It is known from the history of msgnetobiology that the first
experiments in this branch of science were conducted on man [6]. Then
animal experiments began to prevail, but we are no again witnessing a
revival of interest in human magnetophyaiology, since the results have a
direct bearing on magnetotherapy and magnetohygiene. Theoretical hygienic

research is being pursued the must intensively [2], and it includes investi-
gation of human reaction time.

Human Reaction Time During Exposure to Magnetic Fields

It was shown in the comprehensive work of Yu. A. Ryabchuk [S] that most sub-
jects presented an increased time of reaction to photic, sonic and tactile
stimuli with exposure of the heed to SH? [stationary magnetic field] or

VHF [variable magnetic field] of 50 Hz and intensity of 100 0e, i.e., an
inhibitory process occurred in the CNS [central nervous system].

However, it is known that the hands are subjected to maximum influence of HP
in the course of performing work [2]. He failed to find information in the
literature concerning change in human reaction time in the case of local
exposure of the upper extremity to ME. and for this reason decided to test
the possibility of such an effect under experimental conditions.

The subject, who was in an isolated soundproof chamber, sat in a comfortable
armchair (Figure l). A solenoid (0;), which we previously used in experiments
on rabbits, was attached to the left arm of the chair, and a tumbler (K1)

was put ontheright arm; the subject could use the latter to switch sound

on or off (according to position of the key (K1) controlled by the experi-
menter). Other keys (K, and K.) controlled HP exposure time and localization,
since a second solenoid (0;) was put on the subject's head. A 1000 Hz sound

97
FOR OFFICIAL use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was generated by means of a sound generator (86) and dynamic loudspeaker (D),
and concurrently a counter was switched on (CT) that measured time with
accuracy of 0.001 s.

The subject was instructed to press
tumbler K as quickly'ns possible in
response to sound. He thereby

turned both the sound and counter off.
The experimenter recorded the reaction
time. The test was repeated after
30-60 s. The experimenter could

turn on one of the solenoids for 1-2 min
without being noticed by the subject,
and then determine reaction time under
the influence of the PM? [pulsed mag-
netic field] (most often at a frequency
of 9 as) on different locations. The
subject would report to the experi-
menter appearance of any sensations,

if he related them to the suspected
effect of PHI. The experiment lasted
10-20 min.

 

A total of 109 PM? stimuli were de-
livered to 15 subjects. The overall
conclusion is that, in most of the
subjects, PH? inhibited reaction time,
and the most vivid effect was observed
with the first few exposures to Phi.
For example. reaction time changed from 337:7 to 407:22 ms (P<0.0l) for

the sum of the first 2 deliveries of "(Pro subject 8., i.e., it increased by
about 202. After discontinuing exposure of thehandto Fur, reaction time
reverted to the initial level of 368218 ms. Consequently, exposure of the
hand to PM! of about 200 Oe and 9 8: could reliably and reversibly extent

the latency period of the motor reaction of the other hand.

Figure 1.
Diagram of experimental set-up for
studying the effects of H? on the
human CNS. Described in the text.

Interestingly enough, exposure of the head to PM? altered reaction time to

a lesser extent. while the subjects often guessed correctly the time of
exposure (especially with the first few deliveries) in the case of PM!

to the hand, the sensations occurred very seldom with exposure of the head.
It is opportune to mention here that concurrent determination of reaction
time to sound and possibility of sensation under the influence of PM?
increased tension in the subjects. and we decided to conduct a separate
series of experiments dealing with sensory indication of magnetic effects.
Extensive experimental material is needed to derive comprehensive conclusions
about the nature of changes in human reaction time under the influence of
PHP, and we hope to accumulate it as a result of our subsequent investigations.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sensory Indications of Magnetic Effects on Man

Experiments were conducted under the some conditions as in the preceding
series of tests. The only difference was that the subject was instructed

to press tumbler K: (Figure 1) upon appearance of a sensation in the region
of the left hand or head. This turned on the loudspeaker. and the experi-
menter recorded the time of appearance of the sensation. Since our subjects
very rarely reported a sensation with delivery of PM? to the head, we ccn-
ducted the main part of the experimonts with delivery of 9 Hz PM? to the
hand. If the subject did not react to the PM? over a period of 60 s, the
solenoid was switched off, and the experimenter recorded absence of reaction
to PHF. If the sensation occurred sooner than 30 s after turning the sole-
noid on. the duration of the effect constituted half a minute (Table 1).

Table 1. Log of experiment (subject M.. 30 October 1975); experiment
started at 1127 hours and ended at 1139 hours.

PM? ex sure time, Duration of signs Reaction
h. mg:

and a delivery, a latency

    
  
  

ll .28.&)—20.m 28.55 35

ILaoao-anap 2940 :9
$.29

n.3nay-3La: _. ..

unseen—3L3» 3‘35 55

ILssau-ahan 3639 29

H.3Loo—anI) 3135 5

      
 

In other words, the PM! functioned for no more than a minute and not less
than 30 s. These conditions enabled us to separate the test time. which
did not exceed 20 min, into 30-s intervals, and to describe each interval
(regardless of whether the solenoid was on or off) according to presence or
absence of reaction. The reliability of differences between "magnetic" and
"nonmagnetic" intervals was evaluated with the criterion of Student for
alternative variability. The calculations were made using the following
formulas:

”"7555? (I)

o = V(‘~_W—_. + .mu — In). (2)
N P -K
.-|-‘_;_*|. (3)

where N; is the number of 30-s intervals with exposure to PHP, N2 is the
number of 30-s intervals without PUP. K; is the number of signals with Phi,
K; is the number of signals without PHF, P3 is the probability of appearance

99
ron orncm use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of signal provided that the intervals with and without PM! belong to the
same set, a is the standard deviation and t is the criterion of Student.

The results of experiments conducted on 6 subjects are listed in Table 2.

Table 2. Results of sensory indication of effects of pulsed magnetic
field on left hand (6 subjects)

Ngmber 0: Number of elative
#223333 annals

  
   

          
   
  
  
 

Student

'requency°fcriterion

eiznals ,

  

The results listed in Table 2 show convincingly that the first 3 subjects
could not determine, with statistical reliability, the time of exposure to
PHP, whereas the last 3 could reliably distinguish (P<0.05, when t>2.0)
between intervals with and without PHP. Interestingly enough, the results
for subjects 3. and H. were similar.

There are radical differences that emerge between the two groups of subjects,
one of which could be called "magnetosensitive." Incidentally, expressly in
subjects E. and H. there was theunat distinct change in reaction time to
sound during exposure to PUP. The method of sensory indication of H? can be
used for occupational screening of individuals who will have to be exposed
to HP under industrial conditions.

Vague sensations, similar to pricking, cold, heat or heaviness of the hand,
occurred after a certain latency period, which constituted 21.823.3 a for
subject 8. and 23.822.7 s for H. He see that these figures do not differ
from one another.

A comparison of mean latency periods of human sensory reactions and rabbit
EEG reactions (24.6tl.6 s, taken from the work of our graduate student,

R. A. Chizhenkova [7]) indicates the similarity of central and peripheral
mechanisms of action of MP on the organism.

The similarity of these reactions is even more demonstrable in the analysis
of distribution of latency periods of reactions to H? (Figure 2). The
three peaks in distribution of latency periods of sensory reactions to MP
of subjects E. and H., and of the EEG reactions of rabbits to H? are
indicative of similar dynamics of expression of effects of MP on different

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2.
Dynamics of latency periods of sensory
reactions to H! in subject H. (1).
subject 8. (2) and 336 reaction of
rabbits (3).

x-axia. time (a); y-axis. number
of reactions (X)

 

5 f5 25 J5 45 ,5 ”a

biological systems. Determination of the causes of this similarity would
permit wiser use in the future of magnetobiological effects for practical
purposes. At any rate, the similarity of distribution of latency periods
of human sensory reactions and rabbit EEG reactions lead us to expect that
it will be possible to extrapolate to clinical practice the data obtained
on the rabbit, on whom more extensive experimental interventions are
feasible.

Changes in Rabbit Spontaneous 386 After Exposure of the Read to Pulsed
Magnetic Fields

Of the seven biotropic parameters listed in the introduction, we selected
for experimental analysis the frequency, pulse shape (sinusoidal and square
wave) and localization of H! (on the CNS and peripheral parts of the body).
In this series of experiments. only the animal's head was exposed to the
field.

He took into consideration mainly the frequency characteristics of HF, and
this determined the choice of methods of analyzing the EEG. He planned to
evaluate the frequency spectrum of each 336 lead and coherence function
between pairs of leads from different parts of the cerebral cortex.

The selected NF parameters implied in advance that the EEG could not be
recorded during exposure due to induction, but the data in the literature.
which were indicative of a prolonged magnetobiological aftereffect led us
to expect that the information from the brain immediately after exposure
would furnish an adequate amount of data about the reaction.

For these experiments, we outfitted a shielded, soundproof chamber for
electrophyaiological tests. He set up concurrent recording of biopotentials
on an ink-tracing recorder and magnetic tape. In some cases. the bio-

potentials were fed directly into a Dnepr digital computer (Figure 3).

A waking rabbit, in whom nichrome electrodes were implanted epidurally in
the cranial bones (b or 6 electrodes, depending on the objective of the

101
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exporinent). was ianobilizcd with bandages around the pew to a wooden joint.
The head was also secured sith bandages to a narrow ledge on the stand. The
stand with the aninals was put in the chaaber.

  
    

IZ- 00-digita1

coaputer
Phot -
recor er

Figure 3. Diagraa of experimental set-up for recording and processing
biopotentials of the rabbit brain. Explained in the text.

A solenoid, with inside diameter of 150 an and height of 60 In, which was
put on the rabbit's head, was used to generate MP. The solenoid was sus-
pended on a cord and did not touch the rabbit or stand.

Sinusoidal current was fed to the solenoid by means of a low-frequency sapli-
fier, which assured generation of the selected frequencies of VHF. To
generate PMF, a VS-26 rectifier was used to power the solenoid by means of
an electronic key controlled by an 880-1 electrostimlator, which formed
pulses lasting 90-100, 15 or 1.5 as. depending on the frequency of delivery
of pulses of 2. S, 9, 50 or 500 ha.

Hessurenent of MP intensity with a tesleneter showed that it constituted 50 0e
in the niddle of the solenolid and about 200 Oe at the coil. Consequently,

we were using heterogeneous PM? with force line directed along the longitu-
dinal axis of the body. he vibration was observed when the solenoid was on.

Exposure to PM? and VHF lasted 1-2 min (longer exposure caused the solenoid
to heat up), and the interval between exposures constituted 15-20 min. which
ruled out sunstion or adaptation processes in the rabbits' CNS.

In all, about 1000 deliveries of various HF and about the sane number of
background 836's were recorded on 20 rabbits.

A coaparison of results of computer processing of a lo-s segnent of the BBC
recorded before HP to the sane BEG segment recorded 30-60 s after turning
the solenoid off showed that slow rhythas in the delta range began to
dominate in the cortical regions exaained after exposure to PM? or VHF.
This trend was more narked after the use of PM? at a frequency of 2 hr.

The frequency characteristics of the EEG (Figure lo) of the visual cortex of
the left henisphere (A) and sensoritnotor cortex of the right henisphere (6)

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of rabbit No 51 illustrate the above thesis well. While the background

EEG (I) shows frequencies in both the delta and theta ranges, after use of

2 Hz PM? (II) delta rhythm began to dominate in both EEc's. Usually. such

EEG changes were observed after exposure to any of the HF used, but in this
experiment. after use of 5 Hz PM? (III), the stimulation rhythm began to
dominate on the EEG (particularly in the sensorimotor cortex). Such "atypical"
EEG changes. manifested by prevalence of theta frequencies after HF, were
observed in only six experiments.

 

Figure 4. Curves of power spectrum of EEG of visual region of left
hemisphere (A) and sensorimotor cortex of right hemisphere
(8) in the rabbit, background (I) and after exposure to
PHF of 2 Hz (11), 5 Hz (III) and 9 Hz (IV).
x-sxis, EEC frequency (Hz); y-axis, incidence of indicated
frequencies in relative units.

A very unique result (IV) was obtained, when we observed a 9 Hz rhythm
imposed by the stimulus after delivery of PM? of 9 Hz, and it appeared in

4 out of the 6 cortical regions recorded. However, this exception (the
only one!) merely confirms the rule, according to which there is most often
a nonspecific synchronization reaction. characterized by prevalence of delta

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rhythm on the EEG of the cortical regions studied, to exposure of the rabbit
heat to PM! or VHF of the indicated parameters (as well as SHE. SHE field
or moving HF generated by a GIMP generator), in all of the EEG leads.

Analysis of spatial synchronization of biopotentials of different parts of
the cerebral cortex revealed that there was a decrease in coherence between
biopotentials of the tested cortical regions in the theta range after ex-
posure to various Hf, as compared to the background 330's.

More encouraging data were obtained when we compared the coefficients of
correlation of biopotentials of the 4 regions of both cerebral hemispheres
(Table 3) in rabbits Nos 61-64.

Table 3. hean values of coefficients of correlation between bioelectric
potentials of sensorimotor (l, 3) and visual (2, 6) regions of
cerebral cortex of b rabbits and relative (2) change in these
indices after exposure of the head to pulsed magnetic fields

FreaJ Pairs of leads

 

Number

Treat-
of

ment

  
  
   
 
 
  

 

 

55 ﬁsts: — 0.086 0.7 as 0.588 0.014 0.502
:n PHF 2 4.: 4.1 —2.: —l.1 —n.7 +6.9
45 PM? 5 +4.9 +5.; +13.9 +1743 +0.8 +29.a
x mm o-m|+mu+m1+m3-+o+ns
:8 ms to +2.: 49.4 —u.u +2.2 +9.:

3 mm an +w5 +mm +mn +32 +mg

  

 

The submitted results indicate that a finer analysis of bioelectrical poten-
tials of thebrain can demonstrate a certain specificity, against the back-
ground of predominant nonspecific reactions of the brain, which occur under
the influence of any of the electromagnetic fields used.

It is important to stress that visual and computer processing of the EEG
clearly indicates the prevalence of inhibitory processes in the CNS after
exposure to Mr, since prevalence of slow waves on the EEG, decreased cohe-
rence of theta rhythm and decline of coefficient of correlation are
associated with sleep, extinction of conditioned reflex and development

of inhibitory associations. The results listed in Table 2 suggest that with
increase in frequency of PM? there is an increase in contribution of the
excitatory process in CNS function.

For a reasonable hygienic assessment of Hi, one must know the mechanism of
onset of the inhibitory process in the CNS, which can lower the productivity
of an operator‘s mental work. For this purpose, we broadened the plan of
studies on animals, including in it experiments for determination of the
effects of H! on processing of visual signals.

10%
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Investigation of Evoked Potentials in Rabbit Visual Cortex in Response to
Flash After Exposure to Various Magnetic Fields

We selected a photic stimulus for analysis, since visual stimuli deliver
most information to the mammalian CNS. Experiments were conducted on three
rabbits. The methods of recc:J1ng the EEG and delivering HF to the animal's
head were described previously (see Figure 3).

Determination of parameters of the evoked potential (EP) in response to a
0.6 ms flash of light varying in brightness was made using the Dnepr digital
computer. The retina of one eye was exposed to the flash (the flash was
delivered to the retina after attachment of s blepharostat via a light

guide, locally) 10 times before exposure to M? of the indicated parameters
and 10 times after exposure. Averaged RP indices were recorded on photo-
graphic film and compared to one another.

In all, each of the 3 rabbits was exposed for 10 5-min periods to PM? of
2, S and 9 Hz, 19 times to VHF of 50 Hz and 16 times to 5MP.

Figure 5 shows that after exposure to PHP (boldface line) there was no
change in EP latency period (distance between the nrrow and start of the
first positive wave along a horizontal line). The amplitude and duration
of components of the primary RP, positive phase (downward deflection),
negative phase (upward deflection) and the next positive phase did not pre-
sent chsngea in the same directions, although they did vary. It was found
that the slow negative wave is the most labile index of 3?. After exposure
to the PHP, this wave had a tendency toward increase in both duration and
amplitude. A similar type of 3? change was observed after use of VH? and
sum. In other words, as in the case of analysis of the spontaneous 336 of
the rabbit, the study of 3? demonstrated the nonspecific aspect of the CNS
reaction to various ME.

The second similarity in the series of studies we compared was that the
increase in the slow negative wave corresponds to onset of inhibitory post-
synaptic potentials in cortical neurons, i.e., prevalence of the inhibitory
process in the CNS.

Discussion

The results submitted raise the question of similar effects on the CNS of
reflex and central magnetic factors. True, the head was exposed to them

in experiments on rabbits, while peripheral exposure involved experimentation
with human subjects. However, 6. Ya. Har'yanovskaya [4] also mentions this
similarity in her study on rats of the model of the neoplastic process

under the central and peripheral effects of HF.

Consequently, under certain conditions, local, peripheral exposure to HF

can demonstrate a response of the organism similar to the one induced under
the direct effect thereof on the CNS. when analyzing this effect, one should
make a more comprehensive study of the local reactions of the cutaneous

105
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

analyzer. Let us recall that the sen-
sationa occurring in man with peripheral
exposure to NP are related expressly to
the cutaneous analyzer. however,

since HP has a penetrating action, it
can directly affect sensory nerve
fibers or coaposition of flowing blood
(see this collection).

Recently, an interesting report was
published [8] concerning the magnetic
properties of the frog's sciatic nerve,
which was attracted to the pole of a
, pernanent asgnet with intensity of

II 580 Oe after being suspended on a
thread. Other frog tissues failed to
denonstrate this effect. However, the
frog‘s olfactory nerve and rat's peri-
pheral nerve were also attracted to
the aagnet‘s pole.

 

Such nagnetic properties of the nerve
persisted after it was treated with
distilled water, 10: table salt solu-
tion or for-aldehyde. as well as after
air-drying the nerve. The deaonstrated
effect disappeared only after soaking
the nerve in chloroforl or Isthyl
alcohol solution.

 

Flu". Se
Averaged 3? of visual cerebral
cortex of the rabbit in the back-
ground (l) and after PH? (2)
of 2 ll: (1), 5 he (11) and 9 II:
(III). X-axis. tine. 20 II
spacing; v-axia, amplitude.
200 av spacing; arrow-flash
of light

It is seamed that phospholipids nay
be responsible for such unusual
nagnetic properties of nerves.

Another report [1] should be consid-
ered equally interesting; it deals
with the change in nature of reaction
of a fish central neuron with change
in direction of HP. This fact could
be interpreted as a specific nature
of HF perception by electric fish, as well as difference in reactions of
sensory and actor nerves to If. It then becones understandable why it? lowers
sensitivity to a peripheral stinulus [6) but increases notor activity. A
report has been published to the effect that a 4-fold increase in horizontal
component of the geonagnetic field led to an increase in notor activity of

3 out of 12 eel-on [9]. Similar exposure of birds also increased their
actor activity and disrupted their orientation [3].

106
roe orrtcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Deterninetion of the causes of such individual differences is one of the
pressing problcee of neuronegnetobiology.

l.

2.

3.

h.

5.

6.

9.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Andrianov, Yu. N. "Electrophysiologicel Study of Functional Properties
of Central Neurons of the Blectroreceptor Systen of Fish." author
abstract of cendidatoriel dissertation, Leningrad. 1975.

Vyalov. A. N. ”Clinicohygienic end Experinentel Data on the Effects
of Negnetic Fields Under Industrial Conditions," in "Vliyeniye negnitnykh

poley ne biologicheskiye ob”yekty" [affects of Magnetic Fields on Dio-
logicel Objects], Moscow. Neulta, 1971. p 165.

Lutsyuk, 0. D. "Experinental Studies of Orientation Behavior of Nocturnal
Migrants Out of Doors and in the Flene‘teriun," author abstract of
cendidetoriel dissertation, Kiev, 1975.

Nar'yenovnkeye, C. Ye. "Mechanism of Central and Peripheral Action of
Magnetic Fields (on the Nodel of the Neoplestic Process)," euthor abstract
of candidatorial dissertation, Rostov-na-Donu. 1975.

Rysbchuk, Yu. A. "Effect of Stationery and Verieble 50 a: ﬂsgnetic
Fielde on the Central Nervous Systen of Individuals Ferforning Operator
Functions," candidatoriel dissertation, ‘l‘onsk. 197$.

Kholodov, Yu. A. "Reactions of the Nervous Systee to Flectrosugnetic
Fields." Moscow, Nauka, 1975.

Chizhenkova. R. A. "Investigation of the Role of Specific end Nonspecific
Elenents in Electric Reactions of the Rabbit Brain Induced by Electro-
negnetic, Ultrehigh Frequency and Superhigh Frequency. or Stationery
Magnetic Fields." candidatoriel dissertation. Moscow, 1966.

Koiys, F. "Strong and Fernenent Interaction between Peripheral Nerve and
Constant lnhonogenous Nagnetic Field,” ACTA MSIOL. ACAD. SCIEN'I‘. NUNC"
43. No l. 1973, p 89.

Verenelli. c. c.. and ucCleave. J. D. ”booonotor Activity of Atlantic
Sal-on Under Various Light Conditions and in week Nagnetic Fields."
ANLNAL mum, 22. No l. 1976. p 78.

COPYRICN‘I': deetel'etvo "Neuke", 1978

10,657
080: 81“

10?!
FOR orncm L'SE oxu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 612.369.016.é26

EFFECTS OF VARIABLE INDUSTRIAL FREQUENCY MAGNETIC FIELD ON FUNCTIONAL
STATE OF THE INYROIO AND THYROXINE UPTAKE BY RAT ORGANS

Hoscow symmu' EKSPBRIMBNTAL‘NOY woman 1 mrrsm in Russian No n.
1973 pp 566-566

[Article by N. A. Udintsev. V. Yc. Serebrov and c. l. Tsyrov, Department

of Biochemistry (headed by Prof N. A. Udintsev). Hagnetobiologicsl Labora-
tory (headed by s. V. Tsranov) and Clinical Radioisotope Laboratory (headed
by Docent G. l. Tsyrov), Tomsk Medical Institute, submitted 25 Jan 78

(presented by N. V. Toroptsev. Academician of the USSR Academy of Medical
Sciences)]

[Text] A study use made of uptake of ”‘l by the thyroid
and of thyroxine by tissues of several organs. as well

as protein-bound iodine (PBI) content of blood plasma of
albino rats exposed to variable magnetic fields (H?) of

200 Oe intensity at the industrial frequency for different
periods of time and at different intervals. It use estab-
lished that there is an increase in FBI in response to
15-min exposure. with increase in exposure time to 6.5 h
and especially 26 h, the POI level drops and there is a
decrease in thyroxinc uptake by tissues of the testes. heart.
liver and spleen. In the case of multiple exposure to variable
HF (up to 6.5 h a day for 5 days), there is a substantial
increase in ”'l content of the thyroid. Pll level. vhereae
uptake of thyroxine by tissues diminishes significantly. It
is assumed that thyroid function and the reaction of tissues
to thyroxine change in accordance with the duration and fre-
quency of exposure to HP (BYULL. EKSPER. BlOL.. No ll, 1978.
p 566).

Key words: variable magnetic field; thyroid gland; thyroxine.

The increasing use of devices that generate magnetic fields (HP) in industry
and the national economy, and use thereof for therapeutic purposes in medi-
cine make it necessary to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the biological
effects of H? on man and animals. HP are stress factors ll, 6]. in the
adaptation to uhich the thyroid plays an important role [9]. However. its
condition uhen exposed to variable HP has not been sufficiently studied.

108
Fox orrxcm. use 0st?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our objective here was to test the reactions of this gland and uptake of
labeled thyroxine by anisal tissues after exposure to variable HF of
industrial frequency for different periods of rise.

Methods

Bxperisents were conducted on 280 snngrel albino rats weighing 150-180 g.
which were put in a variable 200 0a. 50 H: H? for 15 sin. 6.5 and 26 h,

as well as for 6.5 h per day for 5 days. he assessed the functional state
of the thyroid according to uptake of "'1 2-48 h after subcutaneous
injection of 0.5 uCi of the isotope on s USU-61 unit. He assayed Pal of
blood plasss per silliliter of heparinised please by the sethod in [5] using
s cm inatruaent (hungaryullnited States). 1hyroxine-"‘I (Institute of
Nuclear Research, Poland) content, after hypodersic injection at the rate of
l Del/100 g weight, was assayed in the adrenals, heart, thysus, spleen.
testes. hypothalasua, lysph nodes. liver and thyroid 24 h after injecting
the thyroxine [8]. The isotope was given is-ediately after exposure to HP
and there was lS-sin exposure to H? after sdsinistration of the isotope.

The obtained data were subaitted to processing with the use of the
Hilcoxson-Hann-Hhitney criterion [3].

Results

It was established (Table i) that single lS-nin exposure to variable HT
raised appreciably the plassa P81 level; however. no sarked accusulation
of iodine in the thyroid was desonstrated; nor was there any change in

uptake of thyroxine by tissues. Other researchers also observed a sisilar
reaction in the thyroid [2].

It is known that the hypothalasus is the lost sensitive to H? [7]. ln-
creased ACTH synthesis was also observed under the influence of NP [ll].
It may be sssused that stimulated secretion of hypophyseal thyrotropic
horsone is the cause of activation of thyroid function.

Table 2 shows that with increase in exposure to 6.5 h and, especially. lb h,
a negligible decrease in iodine uptake by the thyroid is associated with a
substantial decrease in fll. In the case of exposure for 6.5 h, there is
decreased thyroxine uptake by hepatic and spleen tissue. and in the case of
25-h exposure this also applies to tissues of the heart. testes and thysus.

The cause of these changes say be hypoxia [10, 12], which develops under the
influence of variable HP, in which there is inherent decrease in thyroid
function [1].

A different response was desonstrated in the case of sultiple exposure to
variable HP (6.5 h per day for 5 days). Under these conditions, there was
an increase both in iodine content of the thyroid and P31 level; however.

uptake of labeled thyroxina was reliably disiniahed in virtually all organs
exasined (see Table 2).

109
roe orncm. cs: oxu
or different periods of due on blc

____——————_

Eagon of ”sure to variable KP
“—IL———

control | exper.

   
  
 
  

control

 

uptake, 2 of given dose

SJ.“:I.N “ﬁlth” 0.43:3.” 6.23:4.
Olatl.” “mama 6.25:2.8 «.1523.

mood plum P31 (per 10 ll.)

 

2.03:0.3 l.9t0.l0’ .‘15:0.I 0.2052011
2.4!:0.ﬂ 2.Q:0.ﬂ l.ﬂ.to.23 1.57:0.5
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The results of these studies warrant the conclusion that variable HP (200 De)

of industrial frequenﬂ has a substantial effect on thyroid function. The
correlation between ' l uptake by this gland. PBI content of plasma and

degree of uptake of thyroxine by tissues changes according to duration and
frequency of exposure to variable HP.

BIBLIOGRAPIIY

l. Vssil'yev. G. A.; Hsdvedev, Yu. A.; and Khul'nitshiy. 0. K. "The
Endocrine Syste- in the Presence of hypoxia,“ Leningrad. 1974.

2. Garkavi. L. 1th.: Kvakina. Va. 3.; and Ukolova, H. A. in "Regulyataiya
energeticheskogo obnena i ustoychivost' organiua” [Regulation of

Energy Heteholisa and Resistance of the Organisn], Pushchino-na-Oke.
1975. p 172.

3. Gubler. Ye. V., and Genkin. A. A. "Use of Nonparanetric Statistical
Criteria in Bioeedical Research.” Hoscov, 1973.

6. Degen. l. L. VRACll. 0210 [Medical Record], No 3, 1971, p 124.
5. Idea, KLIN. KHIR. [Clinical Surgery], No 3. 1971. p 75.

6. Kvakina, Ye. 3.. and Gerhavi, L. Kh. in "Piziho-nateneticheskiye i
biologicheskiye probleny deystviya elektronagnitnykh poley i ionizatsii
voedukha" [Physiconathenatical and Biological Prohlens of Effects of
Blectrosagnetic Fields and Air Ionization], Moscow, 1975. p 52.

7. Kotlyarevskaya. Ye. 3. "Investigation of Functional State of llypothalenic
Region of the Brain Under the Antineoplastic Effect of Magnetic Fields,"
author abstract of candidstorial dissertation, Rostov-ns-Donu. 1975.

8. Hirkhodzhsyev. A. Kh., and lskova, V. A. non. mum. [Problens
of Endocrinology). No 2, 1966. p 86.

9. Sksbel'skaya, Yu. 3. lbid, No l, 1963. p 111.

10. Udintsev. N. A.; Kanskaya, N. V.; et al. HULL. BKSPER. 3101.. [Bulletin
of Bxperinentsl Biology], No 6. 1976, p 670.

ll. Udintsev. N. A., and Horoz. V. V. PAT. PIZIOL. [Pathological Physiology].
no 6. 1976. p 72.

12. Khlynin. S. H. in "Diokhiniya ekstrenal'nykh sostoyaniy“ [Biochenistry
of Extrue States). Chelyabinsk, 1977, p 24.

13. Yasnogorehiy. V. G. “Trudy Teentral'nogo an kurortologii i
f izioterapii" [Horus of the Central Scientific Research Institute of
Balneology and Physiotherapy], Vyp 29, 1975. p 87.

COPYRIGR‘I': ”lyulleten' eksperinentel'noy biologii i neditsiny", 1978

10,657 m '
€50: mo ran omcm. LSE om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hoecou UPRAVIENIYE POVEDEICIYEH ZRIVGI‘IWKH in Russian 1978 pp 6-7

[Article by c. D. Antimoniy and . K. Vasina. Institute of Normal Physiology.
088?. Acadesy of Medical Sciences

the nature of the restoration of the behavioral reaction in the days following
irradiation. The exporiaents uere conducted in a special autosated use.

n m shown mm. the emu of the sodulated m (80-100 v/-. 39 min) on

the day of irradiation produces errors in the selection of the reinforce-ant
side on an average up to 1% (d > 0.01). On the second day after irradiation
a reduction in the nuaber of erromous reactions on the average to 11$ (d >
0.01) occurred practically in all the animals. Further the nusber of
erroneous reactions again rose to 1% (d > 0.0i). In different aniaals the
secondary rise in the nusber or errors in selecting the reinforce-ant aide
was traced m- the third through the sixth day after single irradiation.

In the intact trained anisala there use a natural increase in the reaction
tine as the drinking activation was satisfied. Here the total nuaber of
drinking reactions during the experiaent averaged 30. Exposure to aodu- -
lated our resulted in a considerable increase in the reaction tine already
after the animal Ind run 3-5 tiaes to the drinking bowl. In addition. in
aninals during the irradiation with aodulated DIP the total nusber oi” drinki

Exposure to non-sodulated W. despite the cosplete absence of erroneous
reactions. was also accospanied by a taster increase in the reaction the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an co-mmd Lo Lho mum nniula. no well no a reduction in the total
nuaber of drinking reactions in the experiaent on the average to 13 (d >
0.01). In the restorative period in tho rate after exposure to nodulaeed
EH? the umber of drinking reactions during the experiaen‘. practically
approach that of the intact rate. however the tine oi‘ the actual reaction
increaeed iron the firet approach of the aniaala to the drinking bowl.

COPYRIGHT: Izdaul'atvo “uauka'. 197?

9035
CSOI 1870

11.3
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REACTION OF NOSOPRIIA T0 SWIG“. FIELD
Moscow UPRAVIBIIYE POVBDBIIYHi ZHIVUI'NYKH in Russian 1978 pp 13-14

[Article by V. )1. Afonina and V. B. Chernyshev. biological depart-ant of
Moscow state University]

[Text] It can be hypothesized that insects perceive the electrical field as
the force of interaction between the charge of their body and the surroudning
field (Chernyehev. 1975). A scan of the soil surface tree the fielde re-

vealed s pronounced accuaulation of eeall insects in this zone (Tehernyshev,
Erehova. Tikhonova. Shakhanovs. 1973).

Edwards (1960) showed that droeophila can react to an artificial electrical
field by stopping aoveaent. we studied this reaction of drosophila (Droso-
phila aelanogaster) and drew the following conclusions. The percentage of
individuals reacting to the field is directly woportional to its intensity.
The ainiaua potential at which a reaction was still observeduz volts per
1 ca. The natural gradient of the ataospheric potential is altered in the
interval approxintely has one to hundreds of volts per centiaeter. Con-
sequently. drosophila react to an increase in the gradient of the potential
(usually occurring before bad weather) by a reduction in activity. and seat
likely. withdrawal to shelter. The higher the air huaidity proacting the
escape of the body charge ofthe insect. the lower the level of its reaction.
however, with relative air huaidity below 30‘, which clearly goes beyond

the liaits of the nor- for droeophila. the reaction to the electrical field
is reduced to zero.

The level of reaction is aleaya higher in the variable field than in the
peraanent: it is especially high with irequency of changes in the field--
10 Hz. Apparently. the strength of the interaction of charges can be

perceived through oscillations in the sates on the body of the drosophila
or extreaities. including the wings.

Besides these relationships. we observed a variability in the level of the
reaction that is difficult to explain. With the standard experiaents for
alaost twc suaaer aonths on individml days the reaction dropped alaost to
zero. or was raised sheet to 100%. ﬁle add that in the city laboratory
the level of the reaction was. as a rule. considerably lower than in the

11';
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rural locality. In winter the flies were practically insensitive to the
field.

No correlation was observed hotveen tho reaction level and the natural changes
in ionization and electrical conductivity of the air and the level of

eloctroaagnetio oscillations of ataospheric origin. An artificial rise. as
well as decrease in the level of these factors in natural linita did not
affect the reaction of drosophila to the electrical field. The reaction
level of the droeophila also was not linked to atacsptnric pressure and the
turbulence of the geongnetic field. He succeeded in ehouing experisentally
that the artificially created weak subsonics of frequency 0.1 and 16 Hz

reduces the level of the drosophila reaction to the electrical field on the
average by W.

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'etvo "Nauka". 1977

9035
080: 1870

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UN 612.016.63/56

SPECIAL CHARACTERISTICS W m ImmTION OF ELECTRQ‘IAONBTIC FIELDS "I?“
BIOWOICAL ENII'l'IBS

Noecow OSOIBNNOS‘II VZAIMDBYSTVIYA BLEKTROHAONITW FOLEY S BIOOB'YBR‘IAH'I
(Special cherecterietice of the Interection of Electronegnetic Fields with
Biologicel Bntitiee) in Rueeien 1978. pp 5-9

[Foreword by the editore, Profeeeore 3.1!. Sevin end G. A. Stepenekiy. end
teble of contente fro- book by V. H. Shtenler end s.v.xo1eenikov}

[Text] The problem of the biologicel effecte of redio-frequency electroneg-
netic fielde hee becone perticulerly urgent in recent yeere. Ae e reeult of
the repid development of redio comnicetione, reder, end televieion,e con-
eidereble pert of the eerth'e population ie conetently expoeed to electro-
Iegnetic redietion of the redio-wave reuge. The wide uee of electroenegnetic
energy in the uetionel econo-y. ecicnce. end nedicine ie ecconpenied by fur-
ther increeee in the nueber of pereone expoeed to hygienicelly eignificent
levele of electrouegnetic redietion with verioue cherecterietice: fro- queei-
etetic redietion to redietion of the optical bend.

Devicee which ere eourcee of redio wevee ere extrenely ueeful to men, however,
when need without proper control, they creete extremely high levele of redie-
tion end cen be heeerdnue to huun heelth. Thie deter-inn the epeciel eig-
nificence of problem of hygienic nor-elizetion of redio-weve redietion in
eolving problem of eneuring eefe working conditione end environ-entel pro-
tection.

It ehould be noted thet the Soviet Union ie the firet country in the world
where the levele of redio-frequency en’ecte were reguleted by the government.

In recent yeere. internetionel ettention to the problem of the biologicel
effecte of electroeegnetic redio-frequency redietion end ite hygienic nor-el-
ieetion hee increeeed coneiderebly. The for-etion o‘ the Internetionel Co.-
uittee on Nonionieing Redietion within the freeework of HIM (Internetionel
Connieeion on Rediologicel Protection) ie eignificent in thie reepect. ‘l'he
teeke of the co-ittee include the enelyeie of the biologicel effecte of
verioue typee of nonionizing redietion, ee well ee the developeent of recon-
nendetione for the nexieul penieeible levele of redietion end nor-etive
docunente of internetionel neture. Juet eince 1973, the tine of the firet

116
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

large-scale international symposium "Biological Effects of Microwaves and
Health Masards," 15 international forums were held on various aspects of
this problem.

The problem of the biological effects of electromagnetic radiation of the
radio-wave range is one of the main divisions of the radiohiology of non-
ionising radiation, which is an independent area of scientific knowledge.

It includes a number of scientific directions connected with the establish-
ing of regularities in the responses of live systems to the effects of radio
waves at various levels of their organisation: subcellular, cellular, sys-
temic, and the organism level.

Being engendered primarily by practical needs -- the necessity of preventing
the unfavorable effects of this type of radiation on the human organism, as
well as the interests of clinical medicine (particularly, physiotherapy) --
in recent years, it has been increasingly acquiring a heuristic importance,
contributing to the discovery of the most intimate vital activity processes
of the organism.

Although the first studies on the biological effects (therapeutic) of elec-
tromagnetic radiation of the radio-frequency range were done as early as the
end of the last century, a systematic development of this problem was started
only at the end of the forties.

At the present time, the bibliography on the problems connected with the bio-
logical effects of electromagnetic radio-frequency fields has several thou-
sand titles. Nevertheless, H considerable part of them are descriptive in
nature and deal chiefly with phenomenology. Only in recent years there has
developed a definite tendency toward increasing the number of publications
treating special characteristics of the absorption and distribution of the
energy of electromagnetic fields in biological entities. and the investiga-
tion of the intimate mechanisms of their action, as well as the improvement
of research methods and experimental techniques.

This collection was prepared by the members of the laboratory of electromag-
netic radio-frequency waves of the Institute of Labor Hygiene and Occupational
Diseases of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences.

The surveys contained in it are dealing with three key aspects of the pro-
blem: its clinicohygienic aspects. effects of radicawave radiation on the

central nervous system. and biophysical aspects of the interaction of elec-
tromagnetic fields with biological entities.

The correct estimation of the hasards of radio-frequency radiation and extra-
polation of the data of experimental studies conducted on animals in appli-
cation to the human organism are possible only on the basis of the establish-
ment of a strict interrelation between the incident energy and the energy
absorbed by the biological entity, between the electromagnetic fields which
are really acting (induced in the biological entity) and the biological ef-

fects occurring at that time. These problems are discussed in the first sur-
vey of the collection.

11?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

until recently, very little was known about these problems. It is very re-
cently that considerable progress has been made in this area, which has cre-
ated the prerequisites for a more correct evaluation of the results of ex-
perimental studies. There is no doubt that the authors of this survey had

a difficult task of mnking the problems of the interaction of the electro-
magnetic field with a biological entity accessible for broad sections of
msdicobiological specialists without resorting to the comparatively complex
mathematical apparatus. The authors limited themselves to a minimal number
of formulas which, at the same time, make it possible to perform practical
computations extremely important in planning the experiments and analysing
the results of the studies.

The next survey analyses the works dealing with the effects of radio waves

on the activity of the central nervous system. It should be mentioned that
the largest number of works published in recent years are dealing with this
problem. This is quite understandable because the accumulated data indicate
that the central nervous system is one of the systems of the organism which
is the most sensitive to the effect of electromagnetic fields of the radio-
frequency range, and changes in the indexes of its functional state are con-
sidered to be of decisive importance in substantiating the thresholds of harm-
ful factors.

As has been mentioned above, the problems of hygienic normalization of radio-
wave radiation have become particularly urgent in recent years. In this con-
nection, the concluding survey, along with the discussion of the published
data on the clinical manifestations of radio-frequency effects, gives infor-
mation on the exposure standards adopted in various countries, modern ap-
proaches to the hygienic evaluation of factors, measurement methods, and
levels of radiation to which people are exposed under industrial conditions
and in everyday life. It should be mentioned that, in spite of the great
importance of these problems, the number of publications treating them is
rather limited, and most of them belong to Soviet authors.

It is notable that the number of works by foreign authors on the methodology
of hygienic standardisation is extremely limited in spite of the fact that
it is in this problsn that there are substantial differences both in the
treatment of clinical changes connected with the effects of this factor, and
in the exposure levels permitted by the standards of various countries.

This collection is irtended primarily for scientists engaged in research on
the problem of nonionieing radiation. However, it is believed that the ma-
terials contained in it will also be of interest for broader sections of
medical and radio engineering specialists.

Contents
Page
Introduction 10
Electrical and Magnetic Properties of Biological Tissues 12
118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

General Ragulsrities of the Interaction of Electromagnetic
Fields (no) with Biological Entities

Interrelation of External and Internal Fields. Absorption
and Distribution of Energy in Bodies of Various Shapes
and Dimensions
Low-Frequency Region (Quasi-Static Approximation)

Spherical Models

Spheroidal Models

Special Models Used in the Ultralov Frequency Range
Mlineer Absorption Region

Spherical Models

Spheroidal Models
High-Frequency Region

Plane-Layer Hodsls

Irradiation in the Field of en Unforned Electronsgnetic
Have

Methods and Results of Measurements of Internal Fields and
Absorbed Poster in Phantoms and Biological Entities

Methods of Measuring the Integral Absorbed Power

Heesureoent of the Internal Distribution of Fields and
Absorbed Power by the Probing Methods

Measurement of the Density of the Absorbed Power in
Biological Phantoms and Animals by the Thermographic
Method

The Problems of m Dosinetry in Experiments and Extrapolation
of the Date Obtained in Experiments on Animals to lien

Conclusion
Bibliography
COPYRIGm': VINITI, 1978

10,233
cso: aw. m

119
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY