no: OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10525

18 May 1982

East Europe Report

SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms publications contain intonation prinarily froe foreign
newapapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

landlines, editorial reports, and nterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPBS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infomtion was
processed. lIIere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ution was sunsrized or extracted.

Unhailiar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or naees preceded by a ques-
tion ark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within die body of an
ite. originate with the source. Tiles within itals are as

given by source .

‘nne contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goveruent.

COPYRIGI‘I LAWS AND REGIM‘IIONS mum: cumsnm 0?
mmms REPRODUCED HEREIN REQJIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
0? nus PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EL'RU’E REPORT
Scwmnc AFFAIRS

(2000 2/82)
CONTENTS

czacuosmvm

Satellite, Aerial Surveying of m Described
(Jiri 81-3; man A WC“ can, No 1,

1982) 0.0.0.000'000..0.00000000000000000000000000COOQO

-.- [111-33-6590-

“WISCONLY
OMAHA

Prague MIDI“! A man (8203 in Czech to 1. 1982 pp 2-6

[Article by In: Jld Sin, 03c, Institute! of module. kw Enact-print.
Prague. Contact for Denote Earth Sawing: ”Space and Aerial Saucy: of
' f

only 5-8 in. Space photographic curve” or other types of taxing have an
initial seal. of 1 2 1,000,000 or stellar. duh atrial Burma an at a
av. Vaebbm Uﬁﬁ vans

In a nunher of cases it is desirable to nininiae the ties between recordirg of
the inge data, special processing and the presentation of the required in-
tonation; this is done by using real-tine or quasi-real-tiae cysts-s. ‘ihe
inplasentation of these cqlex activities as technical processes directly
serving the needs of the national econuy ashes great densnds on capacities. in-
vestnent and expenditures.

The develop-eat of rents earth surveying in Caschoslovakia is only now begin-
ning to be neasured in years, and accordingly lost of the activities involved
still belong in the doesin of basic end applied research. lbnetheless, we can
"already point to the first successes in obtaining space and aerial survey data
for Czechoslovakia intended for specific tasks in the natioml scans-y. A
participant in the success has been the Center for tents Barth Surveying,
founded in 1978 pursuant to €383 Goveruent Decree lo 219/1977 as part of

the Czech Geodetic and Cartographic Office; this orgeniution coordinates or
directly perform work associated with civilian application of rents earth
surveying.

2. Space Surveys of Csechoslovﬂia

‘lhe nnin source of data for space surveys of Czechoslovﬁia is mltispectral
photographs provided by Soviet autonatic satellites or (note inortantly) by
piloted spacecraft and an orbital laboratory. nose were provided in accord-
ance with the Agreenent on Provision and Ilse of Data Pro- Space Surveys con-
cluded in 1978. These natarials have the following nain advantages:

--they are netric (photogr-etric) photographs with known internal orienta-
tion and nininal distortion;

--they were taken in specially chosen parts of the visible and near infrared
spectra;

—they provide a high degree of resolution of ground detail (20-40.);

-they are at a relatively large scale for space surveys (l 2 1,100,000 to
l : 2,500,000).

These naterials are being processed by the Center for Denote Earth Surveying.
which is providing a variety of derivative presentations fron than according
to orders fro. authorised users, for angle:

--photonaps of Czechoslovakia at a scale of l : 1,000,000 iron space photo-
graphs taken in the 6-0-700 I. hand (visible);

-photoasps of Czechoslovakia on a scale of l : 1,000,000 free space photo-
graphs taken in the 700-860 as hand (near infrared);

«similar photographs of the (:38, SS! and 088! at a scale of l : 500.000;

2
P03 OHICIAL 083 MY
-hlack-end-white prints and enlarge-ants of coqlete photographs or sections

at scales up to l : 200,000 fro. photographs taken in the 510-600. 600-700 and
700-840 In hands;

-—color syntheses of two to four partial hlach-and-uhite Intispectrsl (zonal)
photographs (positives and negatives) on a scale five tines greater than that
of the original photographs;

«recording of individual hlack-end-vhite photographs in digital fora on
nagnetic tape with selected inage elenent sise (fro. 25 to 600 licrons).

New for. of effective use of the space survey data continue to he found, pri-
nsrily in geolog, involving the authentication. are precise location or dis-
covery of linear and circular structures in Czechoslovakia. and also in

hydrology, involving entry and sore precise upping of newly-found water
sources on survey hydrological laps, as well a for nonitoring the environ-
ment (sources, intensity and direction of propagation of industrial enissions).

Sone tasks on a regional or global scale in geology. hydrology and environ-
aental protection can he successfully accomlished using easily accessible
inaging data free the Heteor, 11805 and IOM neteorological satellites.

3. Aerial Surveys of Czechoslovakia

In the narrow sense, aerial surveys of Czechoslovakia refer to iaaging of a
largely nomstric character. generally with special films or special
processes usim either aircraft. helicopters or niniature aircraft. In terns
of use of the data, aerial surveys ca be classified as:

—-ultipurpose surveys, i.e.. colored photography and nultispectral (nulti-
zonal) photographs;

-special-purpose, i.s., spectrosonal photography and Nate photographic
docusentation.

For technical and econonic reasons, colored aerial photographs are generally
taken with m 9/23 and 15/23 netric cansras using Czechoslovak-produced 2““-
!onachron 0-20 color reversing f1]... To obtain realistic hues, the man'-
flying altitude is 2 .000 a. these photographs are intended priaarily for
identifying boundary changes and soil use for the purpose of updating suburban
land naps and the production of forestry naps. Secondary uses are for updat-
ing hydrologic naps and planning water conservancy inroveunts, for reclus-
tion, and in regional planning. these photographs have a suitable netric

character. since the changes found nay he photogr-etrically evaluated for
use in the relevant naps.

Hultispectral (liltizonal) aerial photographs have up to now been taken pri-
narily by a systen of six are-39! centres at scales from 1 : 25.000 to l :
50.000 using Soviet-produced ”- hlack-snd-white panchro-atic and infrared
file. The narrow-hand interference filters used are identical to those of the
Him-6 aultispectral c-era (C. Zeisa, Jane). The individual hlach-andehite

3
roe onrcm. us: our
zonal photographs are used for visual interpretation either singly (particu-
larly photographs taken in the “0-6” and 790-890 1- bands) or in various
coninations for production of color syntheses which allow optimal identi-
fication of the objects and phenomena of interest. Because of the comiderb
able decrease in clarity toward the edge of the photograph (vigntting of the
objective) it is difficult to carry out photometric normalization of these
photographs and interpret the by computer. nonetheless, the materials ob-
tained with the are-m system have played a major role in mastering the ap-
plications of multispectral photogrth and meeting the initial requirements
of various sectors of the natioml economy for route territorial surveys of
Czechoslovakia.

For high-quality, photogra-etrically normaliadtle multispectral photographs,
a set of four Basselblad 500m. photographic instr'nts with special acces-
sories has been imported and adopted as a four-band aultispectral c-era
with various automated Emotions typical of mdern aerial metric c-eru.
The photographs are taken an 70-m- panchrometic and infrared film. Follow-
in extensive research and analysis of foreign publications (st-ariasd in
Table 1), four spectral zones suitable for most current and future applica-
Haas of multispectral aerial photography in Czechoslovakia were chosen:

 

Lag ulter HE
380-500 - Blue Kodak Hratten ‘73
470-620 a: Green Kodak Vratten $8
610-7b0 In Red Rodi “rotten 29
750-900 :- Infrared l’odeh Vretten 87

The color filters are made of gelatin and give homogeneous transparency. ‘lhe
4X Hasselblad 5008!. mltispectral camera is provided with f - NO -/2.8 and
f - 1.00 1-16 objectives with minin- vignetting and distortion, whose char-
acteristics are similar to those of the objectives of aerial ntric cameras.
1he format is smaller than that of the cameras nentioned above (55 a 55 a.)
and accordingly these cameras are suited for use primarily with smaller areas
and in cases where subsequent analog or digital processing of the infomtion
on the objects and phenomena in question is required.

It raisins to nention other possibilities for obtaining extremely hiya-quality
nultispectral aerial photographs in connection with the work of a flying
laboratory invited from the Soviet Union which is equipped. amng other
things, with the lily-6H sis-band camera. The individual spectral-band photo-
graphs obtained with this opera have both extremely good photometric prop-
erties and photogra-etric characteristics; so that their geometric content
may be precisely interpreted (using analog photogre-etric devices. differ-
ential rectification and the like). Special equipunt including the USP-6

1;
1'0! OFFICIAL 033 m1
mltispectral projector also speeds up and signifies the preparation of
56 x 81 - color syntheses fro. these photographs.

Czechoslovak organizations have considerable interest in the results of multi-

spectral aerial surveys, and requests currently exceed capacities, which are
lieited prlearlly by:

«available aircraft:
o-suitable weather conditions for surveys;

-the capabilities of inorted file.

Spectronzonal (colored infrared) aerial photographs are taken with the m
11.5/18 cure on Soviet-produced 190- 8“ ll naptive file or with the
Basselblad 50031. photographic instrument wing 70- Kodak Aerochrone infra-
red 2663 reversal file. ‘lhe spectral sensitivity of both naterials is so
chosen that the resulting inage distinguishes by color even call changes in
the chlorophyll content of plants or of the total chlorophyll content typi-
cal of a given type of plant. Accordingly, spectrosonsl photographs are
particularly suitable for distinguishing different types of forest cover,
deternining the degree of horn it has suffered fro. industrial enissions or
biological pests, or for identifying disease or past infestations of agri-
cultural crops.

These photographs are for special purposes and are net often taken in connee
tion vith the evaluation of the extent and results of natural cal-ities.
These activities camot he planned for in advance, and accordingly the photo-
graphs are taken fron helicopters as the need arises and to an extent depend-
ing on the mount of file available.

Quick-response photographic door-entation fro. aircraft or helicopters in-
clude other types of special-purpose aerial surveys shich nay be one-tine
activities or regularly repeated (nonitoring). The aerial photong are
taken with m 15/23 large-toast nessuring caneras and the like or a variety

of other photographic devices using 70-, 60-. and 35- black-and-vhite
panchrosstic, infrared, color reversal or color infrared file. ”set of these
activities require that the survey results be available in the shortest pos-
sible tine, even at the expense of photonetric noraalixation and geocetrlc
precision. Sosa ex-ples are given below:

One-tine activities

—docuenting failures of process equip-ant (leakage of oil, gas and chee-I
icals);

--docI-enting the extent of flooding and vindstorn d-aga;

-advance surveys of archeological finds;

5
m omcm. use our!
Monitoring

--data for nanagenent of large-scale agricultural production;
-transport surveys in cities;

«nonitoring of ice for-nation on navigable rivers.

In contrast to the unfavorable situation in past years, the Mar of author-
ized organizations cqable of carrying out fast-response photographic docu-
nentation fro: aircraft and helicopters is now increasing. A considerable
proportion of these tasks nay also be carried out in snall areas by photo-
graphy fron reacts-controlled nodal aircraft (niniature aircraft).

4. Directions of Further Developnent of Spectral Photography

Table 2, showing selected applications of renote surveys in the Czechoslovak
national em. graphically illustrates the require-eat for further expan-
sion of spectral photography. The perfornancs of certain tasks requires the
recording of electroasgnetic radiation‘of a longer wavelength than that to
which infrared photography is semitive (i.e., A - 0.9 nicrons). Analysis of
experience abroad indicates that the nicrowave bani free 2 to 5.6 aicrom could
be used effectively for recording a teqeraturs image of the soil surface,
vegetation and water (thernovision), and that use could also be ends of centi-
neter wave radiation enitted by a side-looking radar on the ﬂying laboratory
and recorded after reflection fron surface objects. Both cases result in
inage recording produced by successive exposure of the inage elenants in

lines (i.e.. in a dynanic mde) and characteristically involve a certain
radionetric and geonetric distortion vhich nust be ooqensated during further
processing of the inane data. ‘lhe relevant sensing sysoe- provide inages of
strips of territory in analog or digital fora, with the width of the strips
depending on the altitude and the viewing angle of the apparatus.

me Center for Ila-ate Earth Surveying is pursuing both of these approaches
intensively and is taking a variety of steps to test sensing system and
nake then available.

In 1981 thernovision sensing of five test areas in Czechoslovakia was carried
out using the ABA TIIP-l systen in the 2-5.6 nicron region with a viewing
angle of 80' and a resolution of about 0.2' C. ‘lherlal inages of strips of
territory 1000 to 900 a wide were nade on om 10-55 panchronatic fil- (notion
picture file) at an original scale of l : 15,000 to l x 39.000 fron altitudes
of 220 to 555 n. The sensing was carried out at speech of 80 to 200 ka/hr at
various tines of the day and night (1600, 1&0, 2200, 0000 and ozoo hours).
The surface temperatures of soils and water and the temerature and hunidity
of the air were neasured at selected ground stations at .the assent when the
helicopter flew over. These data allowed subsequent conversion of the radi-
ation tenperatures to the contact tenperatures of the surfaces of the objects
in question. In addition to a planar tewerature inge, tewerature cross
section were also taken. which in particular allows nore precise deter-in-
ation of the teqersture differences between adjoining objects.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OMS

Prelisinary evaluation of the results of the themvision experiment iddicstes
that the nathod can provide valubla surve, data vhich indicates in both inge
and quantitative for. the extent of thersal and biological pollution of stre-
and water bodies as well as subtle changes in soil misture. Amther prosising
area of thersovision research is the identification of location and causes of

heat energy loss (heat ledrage for ste- pipelinea, panel-type dwelling. and
the like). '

5. Conclusions

Space and aerial surveys of the territory of Czechoslovakia have been system-
atically conducted only for a fev years, and spat potential users of their
results are still acquainting theuelves with d). characteristics of the sur-
vey nterial and the nethods of using it for rational econouic purposes. ﬁle
rather snall extent of application of space surveys of. Czechoslovakia is es-
plained not only by linited past experience and a limited trier of variety
of space photographs. but also by the fact that the surface situation and
natural resources are already hidily explored. lbst of the required applica-
tions of the route surveys require a considerable degree of detail, and ae

cordineg nost organization are concentrating their interest on serial sur-
veys. A respectable level has been achieved in this field in a short tins.
particularly in sultispectral photography, which is now routinely perforued.
There are real possibilities for further developing the processes for quick-
respome photographic docuentation fro. aircraft, helicopters and rante-
controlled siniature aircraft. In addition. the conditions for further or
psnsion of spectral photography into the nicrovsvs and centinter save ranges
(thernovision and radargra-etry) have also been created.

7
POI onrcm US! MY
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SIM. I..- Kouucko a lamb! . . .

 

;‘.
y
;|
1|
1.

GI
I: ‘x
I \

l I\ \
90
I‘
3.
{‘-

‘
‘1
\k‘ 'l \\

40

WON. SATELLITES
11,1000 kn

SATELLITE POI INVESTIGATIOR 0P
um RESOURCES; h-600-1ooo b-

um ,sucacurr Ami ORBITAL
mamas; h - zoo-500 u

A1330”! W031” ,
h 0 5-20 kl

uncut-r; h - 500-8,000 II

“1.1me; II II 50-2.000 I

MINIATURE Am; I: II 50-1.000 n

's‘ z GROUND-BASEDW h <20.

8
P03 omcm. USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060038-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Use of ultiapectrnl photography for the mod
Q oconouy (band on analysis of tonic: data)

       
       
       
         
     
            

Vautatlon Identification in vatuloual toil
Identiﬁcation o! ntoaion ohano-ana

Diotimuhim tonilatoun (to. “cutou-
Vacation density. madam. water
D-aaa to (oust growth

2!“.

XX

Phytoplankton in water
Shallow to dapth o! 10 n

Propattiu o! snow tovat

an o! rocks (in arid atoaa)
ltoptlona. «oi-onto, ltactutu

uthoophato

 

Data: pollution
Mortification

 

 

Hoot ultabla spectral trannaiulon auxin of
color (lltcta

 

Holtisputrnl photo-
graphic systeus
usable in CSSR

min? a | AVA so

4 x llnuollilatl
500 El.

  

9
FOR ontcm. as: our

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060038-9
to; 0911.95». can wan

\ III-u w
\
\
Anne-mo \
\ i
\
Macaw" ‘
can “no"

an...” 0! plan: notation
«ﬂout taunt“
cute-lewd an “noun

  
    

“calm“.

ml «com

knotty
“taut my.
manna clmluuuoa
"gm! unmet“
ban he. 1|!“qu «tum
but Im biological yam

I» mum

mules!
up wanna
stru- and mu: body ponutlon
snow cover
what.“ an:
.’—_———"_—_—.—————-—
ecology
Hum“
clautuucm of out.“ loyal.
“and um umupum

“P “‘10.

/

Intro-n:
Amharic. polluta-
«utuuuuoo
lulu. of than! our”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Janhok. 0. ”Principles of we. Barth Sum," WHICH A
WWICKY (320! k 26, 1978, p 9.

2. Sim. J. "Denote Birth Sum“; nud Photon-urn” (200mm A
WWW 0320! R) 26.119”, p 1.

COPYRIGHT: 3m. lakhdntdotvi Tochnickc utonmry. Prague, 1982

8680
680: 2602/ 37 m

10
FOR OFFICIAL U83 Mo!