FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10205
22 December 1981

USSR Report

lIFE SCIENCES

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(FOUO 18/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliteratcd are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/102
22 Decembe‘

USSR REPORT
LIFE Soleuces

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL Scxeucss
(r000 18/81)

Coursurs

BIOCHEESTRY
Membrane Biophysics ..............................................
Levels of Organization of Biological Systems .....................
Imobilization of Enzymes and Cells of Microorganims.............
BIOIIICS
Biomechanics, Bionics and Symetry ...............................
Table of Contents From Collection mom or BIwIcs', umber 25
Table of Contents From collection 'm or BIONICS', Nunber 2h
Table of Contents horn Collection 'meDIS 0? BIMIOS', Number 23

Table of contents From Collection mm or mallos', umber 22
mnmmn'r

Dynamics of Ecological-Econmc 31/31;an ooooeoOOOIeeooeooooooooooo
MEDICINE

Mathematical Models of Diseases and Methods of Processing
Medical Information on...voocobooeoooooooooooeooeooaoeeeoooooeoo

- a -- [III - USSR - 21a .

on“. now-UN I ' V'FP All! \I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PZ-{YSIOIDCY
Computerized Electrocardiography .................................
Simple Method of Numerical Evaluation of Human BEG Potentials ....
Book on Forecasting Borderline Conditions Reviewed ...............

Rate of Hexenal Detoxification and Inductio: of This Process in
Rats Raised Under Conditions of Muscular Loads .................

All-Union Symposium on 'Self-Begulation of Functions and States'...
Ultraweak Radiation in Intercellular Interaction .................
Adaptation, Stress and Prevention ................................
Animal Adaptation to Winter Conditions ...........................
River Fleet Divers ...............................................
Anthropological Development of Man in Past, Present, Future ......
Fundamentals of Sports Hetrolog} .................................
RADIATION BIOLOGY
Hypothesis of Endogenous Radioresistance Background ..............
Rum mamas
Biomechanics of Han-Machine Systems ..............................
Problem of Information Processing in Han-Machine Systems .........
Bioengineering Systems: Theory and Design. A Textbook ..........
Scientific Organization of Labor of Maritime Fleet Personnel......
Decisions: Theory, Information and Modeling .....................
Aircraft, Pilots and Flight Safety ...............................
Problems of Time Organization of Living Systems ..................
PSYCHOLCBY

Theoretical and Applied Research in Psychopmrsiology of Sports

Activities.............-...O.."..'..0...‘.......................
Motions and Recreation of Athletes oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo

Self-Regulation and Prediction of Social Behavior of the
Indiﬁdual O.-000.00....OOOOOIOQOOOCOQIGI.OOOIOOCOODOOOOOOOOOODO
-b -
FOROFFIOALUSEONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Sociopsyohologioal Climate in a Group: Theory and
Investigative Homo-d. .0....IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0000000UOOOOOOOO

Psychomsios of Sago” sym OOOIOOCOOOIOOCCOOOOCOOIOOOOOOOCI

Sunny of Conference on Problena of Psychologists at
Industrial mm”: 0....I.00.0.0...IOOOOCOOCOIOOIDOOOOOODID

PSYCHIATIU
Paychophmacotherapy: Concise Handbook for Practicing

msicims .9.00.00...0.00....0....9.00.0000...OIOOOOOOIOIOIOUC

- c -
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIOCHEMISTR!

UDC: 577.352
MEMBRANE BIOPHYSICS '

Moscow BIOFIZIKA MEMBRAM in Russian 1981 (signed to press 16 Jan 81) pp 2, 316-319

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Membrane Biophysics", edited by
L. A. Blyumenfel'd, printed from an original prepared by the Institute of

Biological Physics, USSR Academy of Sciences (Pushchino), Izdatel'stvo "Hanks",
1900 copies, 331 pages]

[Text] Biophysics of membranes covers a significant part of modern biological
physics. Such basic processes as utilisation of energy released from tissular
respiration and photosynthesis, active transport of ions, etc., are related to the
function of membranes. This collection includes generalizing articles from several
prominent scientific research laboratories of our country concerned with. membrane
biophysics. There is approximately the same amount of material dealing with

two main problems: structure of membranes and electrical characteristics of
natural and artificial membranes. The collection will find numerous readers among
physicists, biologists and chemists working in this intensively developing branch
of science.[Russian abstracts are provided].

Contents Page
Plat, Bilayered, Dry Lipid Menbranes- (V. S. Rudnev, I. A. Bagaveyev,
Yu. G. Rovin) 3
Ornithine-Containing Lipids as Structural Components of Artificial
Membranes (L. I. Barsukov, R. Grupe, s. G. Batrakov, L. D. Bergel'son) l7

Paramegnetic Hydrophilic Probing of Phospholipid Membrancs by the

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Method (Yu. Ye. Shapiro, A. V. Viktorov,

L. I. Barsukov. L. D. Bergel'son)
' 1. Testing vesicularity of liposomes exposed to sonic waves 22‘

2. Life expectancy of probe in a bound state 32

Study of Phase Changes in Model and Biological Membranes. Temperature-

Dependent Structural Changes in Membranes of A. laidlauii Cells

(V. Ye. Mishiyev, Ye. I. Krasova, A. V. Kus'min, M. A. Tarshis,

G. I. Klebanov) 39
Study of Phase Changes in Model and Biological Membranes. Structural

Changes in Mitochondrial Membranes (G. I. Klebanov, V. I. Sorokovoy,

Ye. V. Nikushkin, Yu. A. Vladimirov) 46
Role of Phase Changes in Lipids in Regulation of Functional Activity

of Sarcoplasmic Reticulum Membranes (Ye. V. Mikushkin, G. I. Klsbsnov,

M. V. Shubin, Yu. A. Vladimirov) S3

1
FOR.0F11CLAI.US£IMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Proton Pseudopump on Bilayered Lipid Membranes During Redo: Reactions in
MAnM-Q./lipid/-0 Chain (V. S. Sokolov, Yu. A. Shchipunov.

L. S. Yaguzhinsk y, L. I. Boguslavskiy)

Photosynthetic Membranes: Study of Light-Dependent Reactions of Photosystems
and Chloroplasts by the ESR Method (B. I. Khalilov. S. V. Khangulov.
M. G. Gol'dfel'd) -

Damage to Sarcoplasmic Reticulum Membranes With Lipid Peroxidation and
Its Role in Development of Muscular Pathology (V. Ye. ngan, Yu. V.
Arkhipnnko, V. A. Pisarev, L. V. Belousov, Yu. P. Korlov)

Possibility of Corticosteroid Discrimination on the Level of Plasmatic
Membranes of Target 0rgan-Liver-Ce11s (Yu. P. Denisov, P. V. Sergeyev,
A. A. A1dashev)

Distortion of Structure and Elastic Properties of a Bilayer With Insertion
of Ion Channels and Carriers (V. I. Pasechnik, T. Gianik)

Mechanism of Temperature Dependence of Conduction of Phospholipid Membranes
With Alameticin (P. A. Grigor'yev)

Continuous Approach to Description of Single-Bow Transport Through
Marrow Pores (S. Kh. Ayt'yan. Yu. A. Chizmadrhev)

l. Generalized electrodiffusion equation
2. Exchange flow of nonelectrolytes in equiponderant state

Ion Concentration in Electrolyte at Membrane Boundary (V. M. Kim)

Effect of Near-Membrane Electrolyte Layers on Tran-membrane Ion Transport
(V. N. Akimov, V. M. Kim)

1. Distribution of potential and concentrations in unmixed layer.
Concentration on membrane boundary '

2. Membrane in electrolyte solution. Electrodiffusion model

3. 'Effect of neutral electrolyte. Maximum current ~

6. Binary symmetrical electrolyte. Two penetrating types of ions

Electron Transfer Through Liposome Membrane (G. V. Famin, M. M._Shabarchina.
Yu.Sh.Moshkovskiy)

Sodium Pump as Regulator of Cell Size and Chemosensitivity
(S. M. Ayrapet'yan, M. A. Suleymanyan, V. L. Arvanov).

Electric Breakdown of Bilayered Lipid Membranes
(L. V. Chernomordik, I. G. Abidor. M. R. Tarasevich)

1. General findings '
2. Life expectancy of membranes with different potentials

Electric Breakdown of Bilayered Lipid Membranes. 3. Change in _
Membrane Capacity Before Breakdown (L. V. Chernomordik, I. G. Abidor.

B. I. Lentsner, V. S. Kuz'min)

Theory of Electric Breakdown of Bilayered Lipid Membranes. 1. Calculation
of Membrane Life Expectancy in Approximation of Stationary Diffusion

(V. F. Pastushenko, Yu. A. Chizmadzhev, V. B. Arskelyan, L. V. Chernomordik)

Theory of Electric Breakdown of Bilayered Lipid Membranes. 2. Analysis of
Possible Mechanisms of Developing Defects (Yu. A. Chismadzhev,
V. B. Arakelyan. V. F. Pastushenko) '

Theory of Electric Breakdown of Bilayered Lipid Membranes. 3. Consideration
of Kinetic Stage in the Case_of Single-Defect Membrane
(v. P. Pastushenko, Yu. A. Chizmsdzhev, V. B. Arakelyan)

Theory of Electric Breakdown of Bilayered Lipid Membranes. 4. Consideration
of Kinetic Stage in the Case of a Membrane With Arbitrary Number of
Defects (Yu. A. Chizmadzhev, V. B. Arakelyan, V. P. Pastushenko)

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

59

67

95

-98

113

119
126
133

138
162
150
155

163
168

184
192

199

207

214

221

229
Theory of Electric Breakdown of Bilayered Lipid Membranes.

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY.

5. Stochastic

Theory of Membrane Breaks Hith Consideration of Processes of Generation

and Destruction of Defects.

Calculation of Function of Distribution of

Break Time (V. F. Pastushenko, V. G. Arakelyan, Yu. A. Chismadzhev)

Theory of Electric Breakdown of Bilayered Lipid Membranes.

6. Stochastic

Theory of Mabrane Breaks With Consideration of Processes of Generation

and Destruction of Defects.

Statistical Characteristics of the Membrane
Breaking Process (V. F. Pastusheako. Yu. A. Chiznadzhev, V. B. Arakelyan)

Potential-Dependence of Effects of Potassium Ions and Ouabain on the

Metabolically Dependent Part of the Membrane Potential of a Giant Neuron

(A. R. Akopyan, S. B. Ayrapetyan, V. N. Kazachanko) .
K+ System of Ranvier's Cross Membrane in the Rana ridibunda Frog.
Conditions for Analysis (V. S. Makovskiy)
lC+ System of Ranvier's Cross Membrane in the Rana ridibunda Frog.
Repolarization (I. Ye. Katina, A. V. Lonskiy, V. s. Mskovskiy)

1.

2

Repolarization.
Current by Inactivation (Main Type of Fibers)(I. Ye. Katina, A.L. Kachurin,

Fibers with fast K+ channel

. Fibers with fast and also K+ channels (main type)
K+ System of Rsnvier's Cross Membrane in the Rana ridibunda Frog.
3. Separation of Fast and Slov Components of K+

A. V. Lonskiy. V. s. Makovskiy, Ye. V. Polishchuk)

Kt System of Ranvier's Cross Membrane in the Rana ridibunda Fr
Depolarization.

Cole-Moore Test (Fibers Hith Fast and Slow

;§.Chnnnels)

(I. Ye. Katina, A. V. Lonskiy, V. S. Makovakiy, Ye. V. Polishchuk)

COPYRIGHT:

10,657
CSO:

18h0/999

Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

3
FOR 0FFNJA1.USE1DNLY

236

241

2‘7
256

270
282

291

303
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

soc: 576.12
mars orlonommnos or morocmu. SYSTEMS

Moscow UROVNI ORGANIZATSII BIOLOGICHBSKIKB SYSTEM in Russian 1980 (signed to press
22 Sep 80) pp 2-7. ...

[Annotation, foreword by Prof A. M. Holchanov and table of contents from book
"Levels of Organization of Biological Systems", edited by A. H. Holchanov, doctor
'of physicomsthematical sciences, Scientific Council for Problems of the Biosphere,
Scientific Research Computer Center, USSR Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo
"Nauka", 2600 copies, 106 pages]

[Text] This collection is comprised of material submitted at the fifth and sixth
lectures ["schoals"] on mathematical Iodeling of complex biological systems. There
is discussion of the principles of organizing of living systems on different levels.
Special attention is given to the study of the structure end functions of a complex.
biological system on the organismic level. The book is intended for a wide circle
of biologists. '

Por(word

Statistical processing of experimental date is familiar to both biologists and
mathematicians, and it is the traditional form of using mathematics in biology.
True, in most cases this anounts to calculation of means and dispersion. If,
however, a law of distribution (histogram) is constructed, this is, of course,
higher mathematics.

The reader will not find anything like this in the collection offered to him. The
purpose of this collection is to draw the attention of mathematicians to the dis»
tinctions of theoretical constructions inherent in biology.

The'most obvious, superficial conclusion is that biologists and mathematicians
speak in different languages. however, if this is all there was, it would hardly
be necessary to conduct a school and publish a collection of lectures delivered
in this school by biologists for mathematicians. .

It is worthwhile to take a closer look at the reasons for such a difference between
the languages of biologists and mathematicians. The most popular view of the

cause of the difference is that life is complicated and mathematics is simple,

and that is all there is to it. To counter this point of View, we have only to
try to analyze the historical causes of disagreement between biological and mathe-
matical approaches.

1‘ .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FI”!()FF1C1AL.I£SE(JNLY

The essence of the mathematical approach can be described in one word-axiomatics.

The axiomatic method has brilliantly made a name for itself in geometry, and for

2 thousand years it was the example for constructing strict theory. Remarkable
researchers, from Copernicus to Laplace, who created celestial mechanics, proudly
called themselves geometricians and in their hands the axiomatic method won, we
would say, the most remarkable victory, which enabled natural science (in the guise
of Laplace) to declare that they do not need the hypothesis of a creator to
interpret celestial phenomena. This renders all the more paradoxical the viability
of vestiges of theology in matters that are strictly earthly, «in problems of
life, in the study of biological phenomena. One of the important reasons for

this is the inconsistency, which is obvious at first glance, of the axiomatic
approach to biology, the virtual helplessness of mathematical methods. '

The articles assembled in the collection offered to the reader's attention clari-
fies the situation somewhat. The foundation of any mathematical scheme is to
single out elementary elements. In geometry this refers to points, lines and
planes, in celestial mechanics to tangle points and in physics to elementary
particles.

it is in this main point-determination of an elementary object-that axiomatics
apparently has no chances of success in biology. While advancement of cell
"theory" in the last century prompted optimism, the farther research progressed,
the more obvious it became that the cell is not an elementary object in any sense
of the word. It was learned that cells are just as diversified as the previous
"pretender” to. the role of elementary object--the organism.

Some time ago, it appeared that molecular biology would provide the long awaited
theoretical basis for including biology in the orbit of precise natural sciences.
But at present there are few who share these hopes, even with reference to the
problem of structure and function of cellular organelles, not to mention the cell
itself. Even so, the potential of expressly the axiomatic method is still far
from being exhausted in biology.

However, the very concept of axiomatic approach requires serious definition. The
main topic of sxiomatics can be formulated as follows: after difficult, sometimes
over many centuries, screening and selection of experimental facts, one succeeds
in singling out the basic elementary objects and concepts in such a manner that
all the rest of the experimental data can be derived (and defined!) by pure logic
from these main elementary axioms. But the entire point is that not only
tangible objects may be elementary ones; we can also refer on a par with them to
elementary relations (links) and elementary processes.

Hhﬂeelementery objects (material [tangible] points, particles, stars) have been
studied very closely by researchers, relations and links are studied much less
often. The classification of Linnaeus is perhaps the greatest advance in this
direction of biology; it has a formal attitude toward objects (organisms), but
its actual subject is referable to relations, accessories.

But elementary processes really had bad luck. The very formulation of the question
of existence of elementary processes sounds heuristic. "Can one really study a
process, motion per se, regardless of what is moving?" And, although this is
actually what mathematical analysis is concerned with for several centuries,

a clearcut formulation usually elicits resistance and distrust, not only among
biologists, but even physicists.

S
roe omcut us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Perhaps the main result that can be achieved from interaction of biologists with
mathematicians consists of the following. Biology differs decisively from
"mathematical natural science" in that it is extremely "inconvenient" for any and
all frameworks and formalizationa. It is utterly unrealistic, at least at the
present time, to hope to construct a sole theory of biology, like physics. Never-
theless, the extremely rich biological material can and should be formalized by
axpounding special theories constructed by the axiomatic example.

We could conceive of a table of theories with three inputs [accesses]. One lists
elementary objects, the second lists elementary relations and the third eleeentary
processes. Bach special theory takes on several "boxes" from each of the accesses
(in.particular, one from each), and the most elementary“!ea deal with either one
elementary object, or relation, or process. Two important requirements must be
imposed that definitively distinguish the most elementary theory from the most
complex model.

In the first place, there must be good formulation of postulates in the theory-
main, elementary objects, relations and processes. In the second place, any
theory must include the range of its applicability. of course, it would be desirable
for this range to also be examined theoretically, but we can mention the tentative
experimental conditions, under which applicability of the theory is impaired. we
should take axiomatics from mathematics and the principle of conformity from
physics. But, unlike physics, which represents the "principle of conformity"
hierarchically, where new theory embraces the old and contains it as a special
case, in biology theories must he more equal [with equal rights], and it is signi-
ficant that there is an overlapping zone between theories. For-ally, this can be
described as follows: for a pair of theories A and B there must be a theory C
which is the extreme case for both theory A and theory.B. In other words, there
may be conditions when only A is true, conditions when only 3 is true, but there
are also conditions when both theories lead to the same conclusions (theory C).

The principle of conformity [accordanca, correspondence] in biology does not allow
us to expect that such a situation occurs with any two theories; they must not
necessarily have objects in common like species that separated long ago. however,
in complete accordance with the picture of origin of species, any two theories
must be connected by a chain of combined theories.

The present status of science (and, in particular, the part on the boundary between
biology and mathematics) predeterminee the need for axiomatic analysis of at least
three "hypostases"-eleuentary objects, elementary relations and elementary processes.

The desire for synthetic constructions is understandable and warranted; however,
their invalidity is attributable, first of all, to the unilateral nature and
inadequacy of prior analysis.

Let us consider the contents of this collection from these general vantage points.

In the article by B. M. Hednikov, analysis is made of the range of applicability
of classical mathematical genetics. Its main ... [portion of source cut off] ...
when turning to more complex objects and deeper problems becomes rather approximate
and, not uncommonly, wrong. In particular, it is not only the rectilinear prin-
ciple of "one gene-one trait" that is invalid, but the considerably more com-
promising one of "one gene-one enzyme."

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The article of V. V. Halakhov deals with comparative morphology. Among biologists
(as well as mathematicians), it is usually believed that morphology is a truly
biological discipline that has no analogues in other sciences. Yet analogous
ideas and approaches have been developed in precise natural science. The best
developed example is theory of internal stellar structure.. The famous diagram of
Gertsshprung—Rissel (correlation between mass andlnminosity)is the arrangement

of the star population in a comparative morphological series. The next step is
the attempt to interpret this series from the standpoint of evolution. For the
time being, experiments on stars are impossible, even in one's imagination. so
that it soon became necessary to conduct computer model experiments. A comparison
of the results of calculations to experimental data led to the conclusion that
evolution does not proceed always by far along a comparative [relative] morphological
series. There are.situations when a morphological series is a line of forms that
develop in parallel. This is a useful lesson for biology also.

There is one more curious comment that ensues from the above analogy. It pertains
to the problem of the "missing [lost] link." On the "mass-oluninosity" diagram
there are striking gaps. Apparently, expressly these gaps have a profound evolu-
tionary (and not only morphological) meaning and correspond to rapid stages of
evolution. There are grounds to relate them to interesting periods of oscillatory
stages ("Cepheids") and explosive stages ("novas"snd "supernovas") in evolution of
stars.

In the article by M. V. Mina, there is analysis of tie concept of "species," which
is so important to any evolutionary constructions in biology. Theoretical and
practical necessity have long since reduced the question of characteristics of a
species to the question of interaction of populations that make it up, and this
article discusses mainly the content of the concept of "population." The author
stresses the fact that existing approaches are inadequate and limited; all of them
are, as a physicist would express it, "quasistationary." Yet time characteristics
are very important, not only theoretically but from a strictly practical point of
view, with such intensive changes in the landscape occurring in our times, which
are related to man's endeavors.

The article by A. S. Severtsov, "Evolution of Mechanisms of Amphibian Food
Grabbing and Respiration," stands somewhat apart iron the others. It is of inter-
est to interaction between mathenatics and biology for three reasons at once. In
the first place, he provides an example of a full-blooded biological problem and
leaves no hope that modern meager "emaciated"] mathematical models based on ele-
mentary physicochemical or cybernetic conceptions could interest biologists who
are oriented in the classical direction. In the second place, it demonstrates a
different approach to the idea of elementarity, to the concept of "substantial
variables," where spatial “divisibility,” physical "divisibility" and other "non-
atomic“ factors recede to the background, as compared to decisive functional
indivisibility. A most interesting methodological question comes immediately to
mind: can one formalize and, if so, how can one formalize, mathematize such
constructions. There is also a "third interest," having a direct bearing on the
"news of the day"-intensification of ecological processes. But for this, it

is best to give the author the floor.

The “tandem“ articles by S. P. Haslov "Restriction of Possibility of homeostasis
by Multifunctionality and Main Routes for Bypassing It," and by A. S. Severtsov,

"bunctional Differentiation of the Organism in the Course of Phylogenesis," are of

7
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-Z ONLY

special interest to mathematicians. The main point of these works is that evolu-
tion compelled virtually all organs and system to function not only for their
immediate purpose, but many other duties. Obviously, this leads to drastic decline
of efficiency. However, in compensation, the same function can be performed in
different. ways. This is a rather curious situation, where ”every element is
concerned with the business of another," apparently has profound evolutional mean-
ing, and quite probably it is related to the basic nonlinearity of biological sys-
tems. From the standpoint of asthmatics, one could try to conceive of the situ-
ation (of course in a quite simplified and modeled way) as follows: when there

are mild exogenous factors (under "comfortable" conditions), homeostasis is provided
by specialized organs (if you wish, this is the definition of specialisation).

Then, as the situation grows increasingly complex-«with increase in exogenous loads—
more and more interaction is needed—"additional insurance" and, conversely, "de-
parallelization" of systems-which leads to powerful overadjustaent, which is

observed both in the concrete act of excitation and individual development, as well
as in the evolutionary aspect.

The ever increasing interest of mathematicians in the points of bifurcation, criti-
cal modes and complex kinetics must, sooner or later, lead mathematics to the
"littoral." This should be interpreted both in the figurative meaning—on the
boundary between mathematics and classical (qualitative) biology—and in the literal
sense of tie wrd—the really boundless problems and tasks tint appear on the
littoral, related to the littoral and because of the littoral.

An invitation to collaborate is the main purpose of the schools of mathalatical
modeling of biological processes. -

Contents Page-

Poreword ' . . 3
Restriction of Possibility of Homeostasis by Multifunctionality and

Main Routes for Bypassing It (S. P. Haslov) 8
Populations and Species in Theory and Nature (M. V. Mina) 20
Functional Differentiation of the Organism in the-Course of Phylogenesis

(A. S. Severtsov) 41
Evolution of Mechanisms of Amphibian Food Grabbing and Respiration

(A. S. Severtsov) 109
The Organism From the Horphologist's Point of View (V. V. Halskhov) 76
The Genome as a Whole (B. H. Hednikov) 96

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1980

10,657
650: 1840/999

8
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unc: 576.8.095:577.15
MOBILIZATION-OP mzmss AND CELLS or Microoacaﬂisus

Moscow VESTNIK HOSKOVSKOGO UNIVERSITETA, SERIYA 16: BIOWIYA in Russian No 3,
Jul-Sep_ 81 (manuscript received 10 Apr 79) pp 72-78

[Article by-I. P. Baranova, Yu. I. Kozlova and N. s. Yegorov]

[Text] Immobilized enzymes are insoluble and, because they can be readily extracted
from a reaction system, they can be used many times in periodic enzymatic processes
or continuously active columns. In some cases, immobilized enzymes are more resis-
tant to exogenous factors than ordinary enzymes.

There is limited application of soluble preparations of some enzymes because of
their high cost, low stability and difficulty of purification. I-obilized enzymes,
i.e., enzymes artificially bound with a matrix, or stabilized ones (bound with bi-
functionsl reagents), which retain part or all of their catalytic properties, do
not have such flaws.

There are chemical and physical methods for imbilizing enzymes. chemical methods
include covalent bonding with chemically activated matrix--cellulose, porous glass,
synthetic polymers. Physical imobilization methods consist of adsorption on
carriers: concrete, silicates, metal oxides,' activated charcoal, silica gel and
ion exchange resins, glass. etc.. as well as incorporation (microcapsulation) in
gel, particularly PMG [polyacrylamide gel‘I] ("II-obilized Enzymes," 1976; Skinner,
1975).

More recently, imobilized enzymes have found wide application in different sectors
of the national economy. luobilized amylase, glucoamylase and glucoisomerase are

_ used in the food industry to recover syrup from starch with a high fructose content.
‘Imobilized glucoisomerase (intracellular enzyme that catalyzes conversion of glu-
cose to fructose) is used rather extensively in the paper, textile, chemical and
pharmaceutical industries, as well as to treat liquid waste (Bruce et al., 1974).

Immobilized enzymes (in particular, pectin methylesterase) are used to clarify

fruit and vegetable juices (Durand et a1., 1975), while imobilized papain and
pectinase are used in the Japanese food industry to clarify wines and juices (Skinner,
1975). Illaobilized pepsin is used for continuous clotting of skim milk and inno-
bilized invertase is used to obtain invert sugar (skinner, 1975). Proteases (in
particular, pepsin) mobilized on silica carriers are used for hydrolysis of casein
(Kreen et a1., 1976). Continuous hydrolysis of starch by immobilized amylogluco-
sidase has been described (Kucera, 1976).

FOR OHIC?M. USE ONLY
IIIICHHHCJAI.USE1ONLY

Information has been published on the use of immobilized enzymes for bacteriolysis,
and this can also be used in the food industry. It was shown that it is possible
to submit bacterial walls to continuous lysis in a reactor based on membranes

with lytic enzyme (Karube et al., 1977).

In medicine, immobilized enzymes have found applications in diagnostics, clinical
analysis and as drugs (Baum, 1977). Instances have been published of using immobi-
lized enzymes, such as streptokinase, catalase and asparaginase, as therapeutic
biologicals (Selezneva et al., 1977). Imobilized asparaginsse is used to lower
patients' blood asparagine levels (Korsakevich et al., 1977).

There is an interesting method of dissolving blood thrombi and similar structures
by means of immobilized streptokinase (Ginger, Mather, 1976).

There is also discussion in the literature of the use of immobilized enzymes (cats-
lase, asparaginase and others) in medicine, medical technology as material to
create artificial organs-kidneys, blood vessels and others-as well as in diagnos-
tics (in particular, an enzymatic electrode for assaying blood sugar; Murati
Takasi, 1978). '

It is believed that immobilized enzymes should find wide application in clinical
tests (Mattiasson, 1976). Immobilized glucose dehydrogenase is used for continuous
glucose assays, which permits determination of glucose content of biological fluids
and coald be used in clinical tests (Bisse, Nonderschmitt, 1977). Immobilized
glucose dehydrogenase is also used to measure plasma glucose (Kuan et al., 1977).

There has been a description of the use of immobilized cholesterol esterase
and cholesterol oxidese to assay serum cholesterol by the polarographic method
(Huang et al., 1977).

Immobilized enzymes have found applications in antibiotic production. For example,
immobilized penicillinase was used for continuous demonstration of penicillin formed
in the culture fluid of Penicillium chrysogenumlggprnby et al., 1976; Rusling et
al., 1976). Inexpensive 6~APK [aminopenicillenic acid] is obtained by means of
benzylpenicillinase immobilized in PAAG, and then used to produce semisynthetic
penicillins (Kestner et al., 1973; Handel' et al., 1975). '

The possibility of using immobilized trypsin and lysozyme to purify air is being
discussed. These enzymes were immobilized by means of covalent bonding with glass

fibers. A filter with immobilized trypsin is impervious to many viruses. A fil-
ter containing immobilized lysozyme retains up to 87x Micrococcus lisodeiticus

and up to 972 Escherichia coli (Enright, Gainer, 1976).

There is discussion in the literature of general principles of using immobilized
enzymes for detection and continuous monitoring of toxic substance levels in air
and water (Goodson, Jacobs, 1976). Highly sensitive methods can be developed on
the basis of immobilized enzymes for automatic monitoring of insecticides, organe-
phosphorus compounds, etc., which is important to safeguard the health of agricul-
tural workers involved in harvesting citrus and grain crops.

There are indications that it is possible to use immobilized enzymes for fine
organic synthesis in hydroxylation, dehydrogenization and phosphorylation reactions
(Skinner, 1975). In Japan, separation of racemic mixtures of D and L amino acids
by means of immobilized enzymes has been set up. L-amino acids-methionine,

10
INSRIOFIHCIA1.USIIO$0UY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

phenylalanine, threonine and valine-were successfully separated from their racemic
mixtures using immobilized aminoacelsse (Skinner, 1975). There is discussion of
the technological process of recovering L-citrulline and 6-aminopenicillamic acid
with immobilized enzymes. The principle is described of obtaining unnunoadsorbenta
by means of covalent bonding of antibodies to a matrix for the immunoenzymatic
method of analysis and affine chromatography (Skinner, 1975).

In recent years, experiments have been conducted in the USSR and abroad with non-
multiplying immobilized cells of microorganisms. Use thereof may have a number of
advantages over both free cells and immobilized enzymes, for example, it would
make it unnecessary to purify enzymatic preparations and, in some cases, would
avoid the difficulties related to the instability of enzymes. Moreover, immobi-
lization of whole cells would make it possible to obtain polyenzymatic systems, and
it does not require additional use of cofactors. The same methods and types of
carriers are used to immobilize cells as to immobilize enzymes. Cells submitted to
immobilization are directly incorporated in stabilizing material. For example,
Actinoplsnes missuriensis cells were incorporated in cellulose fibers at 70-80°C
retaining 60-652 of their capacity to isomerize glucose.

Electron microphotographs have shown that cells are incorporated directly into
fibers, and this changes the structure of fibers (Links at al., 1977). There was

complete loss of enzymatic activity when the fibers with cells were dried in a
VCCUMQ

Many single-stage processes, including isomerization, oxidation, reduction and de~
hydration reactions, are performed with immobilized cells ("Immobilized Enzymes,"
1976). Host of the work with immobilized cells has dealt with transformation of
steroids (Skryabin et al., 1976; Koshcheyenko et al., 1975). However, immobilized
microbial cells can also perform purely biosynthetic processes.

Immobilized cells can perform multistep processes, for example, propionic acid
fermentation, in which 19 enzymes are involved (Vorob'yeva et a1., 1977), or fixing
molecular nitrogen by bacteriaids of rhizobia, in this case replacing polyenzymatic
systems (Yevstigneyeva et al., 1975).

The facts accumulated to date enable us to speak of the existence of certain dif-
ferences in behavior of free (intact) and immobilized cells. Immobilized cells

are more stable during storage and prolonged culturing. Their enzymatic activity
is somewhat altered. They can be readily separated from a medium consisting of

a solution of metabolizable substrate. They have a broader optimum temperature.
For example, Corinebacterium glutamicum cells entrapped in gel synthesized glutamic
acid in a complex biosynthetic medium for 144 h. The same free cells performed
such synthesis in considerably smaller quantities than immobilized cells during

120 h of cultivation (Slowinski, Charm, 1973).

Immobilization of cells affects vital metabolic processes of microorganisms. It
has been reported that immobilized cells do not multiply in gel. Physiological
aging of the culture occurs; the cells isolated from gel are less viable and

less thermostable. It has been demonstrated that the rate of renewal of 36H-
thymidine labeled DNA is significantly higher in intact Lactobacillus casei cells
than immobilized ones (Divies, 1977). Immobilized Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells
cultured after removal from gel had a lower reproductive capacity than cells in

11
FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFEKJAI.USEGDNLY

a period culture (Kierstan, Bucke, 1977). In some cases, the immobilization process
had little effect on activity of enzymatic processes in cells, and there was a
rather high yield of end product. Decarboxylation of malic acid in a lactic culture
of Lactobacillus casei occurs at pH 3-6, and by immobilized cells it occurs at

pH 3-7, i.e., there is some increase in range of pH for enzyme activity, although
its optimum value is retained. This process proceeds quantitatively for 12 months
when fresh medium is delivered into the column, which_contains glucose, tryptone,
yeast autolysate and mineral salts (Divies, Sieas, 1976). In other studies, no

difference was demonstrable in pH and temperature optimums (Sato et al., 1975; Ohmiya
et a1., 1977). . '

In some cases, the immobilization process causes appearance of new properties in
microorganisms. Transgalactosidase components identical to raffinose were demon-
strated in immobilized Lactobacillus bulgaricus, Bacherichia coli and Kluyveromyces
lactis cells, which had high Begalactosidese activity, i.e., they became capable of
forming oligosaccharidesfromlactose (Ohmiya et al., 1977). -

A new derivative with 20a- and 208- reduction of steroids, as well as ability to
destroy steroids, was demonstrated in Bacillus megatharium cells entrapped in gel
(Koshcheyenko et a1., 1376).

Cell immobilization may be associated with purely morphological changes. The immo-
bilization process elicits changes in cell membranes of Acetobacter suboxydans and
Saccheromyces cerevisiae, although transforming capacity of cells is retained.
(Keirstan, Bucke, 1977; Schnsrr et a1., 1977).

Incorporation of Hicrococcus lactis cells in activaad carboxymethylcellulose is
associated with damage to the cell wall. However, micrococcal histidine ammonia-
lyase activity was retained by more than 75% after transformation of 0.25 H L-
histidine solution into uroconic acid (Jack, Zajic, 1977).

Information has been published concerning the potential of using immobilized microbial
cells as catalysts of a number of processes (Vandamme, 1976). This author indicates
that, at the present time. one can convert steroids, carbohydrates, amino acids and
other compounds by means of immobilized cells. We shall cite several examples of
using immobilized cells to recover a number of biologically active substances.

In the survey of Tibata Itiro and Tosa Tetsuya (1978), there is discussion of the
results of studies dealing with the use of immobilized yeast and bacterial cells for
large-scale production of biochemical reagents and biologically active substances.
In addition to discussion of a number of problems related to hmmobilization of
microorganism cells, there is a description of methods for obtaining immobilized
Escherichia coli cultures capable of transforming fumarate into aspartate, and
Brevibacterium ammoniagenes, which produce L-malate from fumarate.

Similar work was done by Sauaet a1. (1975). In their studies, Escherichia coli
bacterial cells with high aspartase activity incorporated in PAAG catalyzed bonding
of ammonia to fumaric acid with production of L-aspartic acid. There was descrip-
tion of continuous production of L-malic acid from fumaric acid by immobilized
Brevibacterium ammoniagenes cells, which have high fumsrase activity. It was noted
that fumarase activity in immobilized cells decreased to only one-half after 52 days
. (Yamsmoto et a1., 1976, 1977; Abee, 1975). -

12
FOR OilﬂC1A1.(Eﬂ!CMQLY
FKHR(JFFICLAL lEﬂEtMVLY

Escherichia coli cells with high pcnicillinamidase activity, which were immobilized
in PAAG, were used for continuous production of 6-aminopenicillanic acid by means
of hydrolysis of penicillin in a reactor of the column type.

Immobilization in PAAG of Lactobacillus bulgaricus, Escherichia coli and
Kluyveromyces lactis cells, which have high B-galactosidase activity. was used for
hydrolysis of lactose to monosaccharides (Ohmiya et al., 1977). The processes
where immobilized cells are used to recover physiologically active substances can
also be used for pharmaceutical purposes.

We shall give some examples of using immobilized cells in the food industry. Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae cells, which were immobilized in gel with calcium alginate, fer-
mented soluble carbohydrates to ethanol for a long period of time (Bucke, Kierstan,
1977; Kierstan, Bucke, 1977). The same authors reported that chloroplasts en-
trapped in gel retained significant photosynthetic activity for a long time, and
they can be used to develop systems of utilizing solar energy.

Partially purified preparation or whole Streptococcus phoeochomogenes cells with
active glucose isomerase were used in a column reactor with glucose isomerase for
continuous isomerization of glucose to fructose (Ryu et al., 1977). After appear-
ance of information that it is possible to use fructose instead of beet and cane
sugar to manufacture candy, the process of isomerization of glucose syrup to
fructose by immobilized Actinoplanea missouriensis cells was used (Links et al.,
1977).

Immobilized Corynebacterium glutamicum cells synthesized glutamic acid (Slowinaki,
Charm, 1973). Immobilized Lactobacillus casei cells transformed malic acid to
lactic acid (Divies, 1977). This is the main reaction in production of wines with
low organic acid content.

Acetobacter suboxidans cells were immobilized in PAAG or treated with glutaric
aldehyde. In both cases, the cells retained their capacity to oxidize alditols [71'
(d-sorbitol, d-mannitol and others) (Schnarr et a1., 1977).

At present, there are quite a few data on the use of immobilized cells for steroid
transformation. '

He found no information in the literature about biosynthesis of antibiotics by
immobilized cells. However, we have demonstrated that immobilized Streptococcus
lactis cells form the antibiotic. nisin, on a complex biosynthetic medium, but

such cells form several times less antibiotic than free cells. To obtain nisin,
immobilized cells can be reused with the same level of antibiotic activity. Bio-
synthesis of nisin by immobilized cells was observed at the optimum pH and tempera-
ture for growth and development of Str. lactis cultures. Biosynthesis of this
antibiotic by immobilized Str. lactis cells does not depend on degree of aeration
or stirring of the medium (Yegorov et a1., 1978).

Thus, innobilized microorganism cells are capable of performing the most diverse
transforming and biosynthetic processes. Cultivation of immobilized microorganisms,
along with proper selection and preparation of the object and conditions of immo-
bilization thereof, is another method of controlling microbiological processes.
Investigation of physiological and biochemical bases of behavior of immobilized
cells is a task for the future (Rabotnova, 1977).

13
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
1.

2.‘

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8'

9.

10.

16.

IIHICHHNCIA1.USE(ENLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Vorob'yevs, Ye. 1., Alekaeyeva, H. A., Surkova, 1. G. and Gaytun, V. 1.,
"Formation of Volatile Acids by Immobilized Propionibacterium Cells,"
PRIKL. BIOKBIM. I HIKROBIOL., No 4, 1977, 531-537.

Yevstigneyeva, Z. G., Aseyeva, K. 8., Shapoahnikov, G. L.. et al., "Immobiliza-
tion of Rhizobium lupini Bacterioids in Polyacrylamide Gel," DOKL. AH 8888, 222,
No 2, 1975, 689-492.

Yegorov, N. 8., Baranova, I. P. and Kozlova, Yu. I , "Production of Niain by
Immobilized Lactobacillus Str. lactis Cells,” ANTIBIOTIII, No 10, 1978, 872.

Berezin,'1. V., Antonov, V. K., and Hartinek, K., editors, "Immobilized
Enzymes," Moscow, Vol 1, 1976.

Kestner, A. 1., Kreen, H. 1., Handel', N. 0., et al., "Benzylpenicillinaae
of Escherichia coli Immobilized in PAAG," HIKEOBIOL. PRDHYSHL., No 12, 1973, 1.

Korsakevich, A. 8., and Zhasat, R. A., ”Immobilization of LPAsparasinaae,”
IZV. AN SSSR, No 12, 1977, 118-128.

Koshcheyenko, K. A., Barman, Ye. A., Sokolova, L. V., Suvorov, N. N. and
Skryabin, C. K., "Crystal Transformation of Bydrocortiaone by a Culture of
Mycobacterium Globiforme 193," 12V. AN SSSR, 833. 8101., No l, 1975, 25-32.

Koshcheyenko, K. A., Krasnove, L. A., Garsiya-Rodrisea, L. K., Surovtsev,
V. I. and Skryabin, G. K., "Study of 20a and 20§_Requctiqg of Steroids by

Immobilized Enzyme Preparations and Cells of Bacillus megatherium," PRIKL.

Kreen, H. 1., Erin, A. 8., Keatner, A. 1., et sl., "Hydrolysis of Casein by
Immobilized Proteases," in "Haterialy S-y biokhim. konf. pribaltiyakikh '
reapublik v 388R” [Proceedings of 5th Biochemical Conference of Baltic
Republics in Belorussian SSR], Tallin, Vol 2, 1976, pp 73-75.

Handel', M. 0., Keatner, A. 1., Sly-er, B. Rh. and Kleynar, G. 1., "Recovery
and Kinetic Properties of Immobilized Benzylpenicillinaae Preparation,"
PRIKL. BIOKHIH. I MIRROBIOL., No 2, 1975, 219-226.

Murati Iakasi, "Immobilized Enzymes," RZH, 3101., No l, 1978, p 93, 1L566.

.Rabotnova, I. 1., "The Problem of Cultivating Microorganisms," MIKROBIOLOGIYA,

“0-5, 1977, 803.

Selezneva, A. A., Grekova, V. K., Hostvichev, B. V., et al., ”Current Status
of Research in the Field of Producing Enzymes of Microbial Origin for Medical
Purposes," KHIHIKO—PARHATSEVT. ZHURN., 11, No 10, 1977, 27-36.

skryabin, G. 1., Koshcheyenko, K. A., Hogil'nitakiy, G. M., et al., "Study of
Viability and Enzymatic Activity of Immobilized Cells of Steroid-Transforming
Microorganisms," 12V. AN SSSR, SER. 3101., No 6, 1976a, pp 857-866.

1h
Fill(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAl.USE(NNLY
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

me omaAL use ONLY

Skryabin, G. K., Koshcheyenko, K. A. and Surovtsav, V.I., "Transformation of
Steroids by Cells and Acellular Preparation of Mycobacterium globiforme 193
Culture Entrapped in PAAG," DOKL. AN SSSR, 215, No 3, 1974b, 737-739.

Surovtsev, V. 1., "Immobilized Enzymes and Cells," USP. SOVR. DIOL., 80, No 3,
1975, 371-379.

Tibata Itiro, Iosa Tetsuya, "Immobilization of Microbial Cells,” RZH, BIORHIM.,
No 4, 1978, p 31, 4Kh189.

Abee, Michael K., "Enzyme Process to Make L-Malic Acid Detailed," CHEM. ENG.
NEWS, 53, No 34, 1975, 32.

Baum, 6., "Clinical Applications for Immobilized Enzymes," "Abstr. Pittaburg
Conf. Anal. Chem. and Appl. Spectroae," Cleveland, Ohio, Pittsburg, 1977, p 275.

Bisse, K. and Vonderschmitt, D. J., ”The Preparation of Immobilized Glucose
Dehydrogenase and Its Use in Automated Analysis," FEES LETT., 81, No 2, 1977,
326-330. '

Bruce, K., Colton, Clark K. and Cooney, Ch. L., "Glucose Isomerase: a Case
Study of Enzyme Catalyzed Process Technology," "lmmobiliz. Enzymes Food and
Microbiol. Processes," New York, 1, 1974, pp 85-131.

Bucke. C. and Kierstan, M. P. J., "Inmmbilization of Whole Microbial Cells
and Organelles Retaining Biochemical Activity," "Eur. Semin. Biol. Solar
Energy Convers. Syst.," Grenoble-Autrans, 1977.

Divies, C. and Siess, M. H., "Study on L-Malic Acid Catabolism by Lactobacillus
casei Cells Immobilized Into PAAG Lattice," ANN. MICROBIOL., B, 127, No 4, 1976,
525-539.

Divies, C., "Application of ’Hk-Thymidine Labeling in the Study of Reproduc-
tion of Lactobacillus casei Incorporated in Polyacrylamide Gel," ANN. MICROBIOL.,
B, 128, No 3, 1977, 349-358.

Durand, G., Gauges, Y. and Monsan, P., "Equipment and Procedure for Treating
Fluids Pith Enzymes," French patent No 2249625, 21 Oct 73, Mo 7338894,
published 30 May 1975.

Enright, J. T. and Gainer, J. L., "Enzymatic Disinfection of Air Streams,"
ALCHE SUMP., Ser 72, No 156, 1976, 452-255. '

'Ginger, L. C. and Mather, A. N., "Methods of Dissolving Blood Clots and the

Like With Streptokinase Chemically Bonded to a Carbohydrate Matrix," 0. S.
Patent No 185423, 14 Sep 1976.

Goodson, L. H. and Jacobs, U. 8., "Application of Immobilized Enzymes to
Detection and Monitoring," "Enzyme Eng.," New York-London, 2, 1974, 393-400.

Hornby, H. 8., Campbell, J., Inman, D. J. and Morris, D. L., "Preparation of
Immobilized Enzymes for Application in Automated Analysis," "Enzyme Eng.,"
New York-London, 2, 1974, 401-407.

15
FOR OFFICIAL use on“
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

rtutcnnncmat.use<mvtv

Huang, 3., Kuan, S. S. and Guilbault, G. G., "Ampermetric Determination of
Total Cholesterol in Serum With the Use of Imobilieed Cholesterol Ester
Hydrolase and Cholesterol Oxidase," CLIN. CBEM., 23, No 4, 1977, 671-676.

Jack, T. R.. and Zajic, Y. 3., "The Enzymatic Conversion of L-Eistidine to
Uroconic Acid by whole Cells of Hicrococcus luteus Immobilized on Carbodismide
Activated Carboxymethylcellulose," BIOTECHNOL., BIOBNG., 19, No S, 1977,.
631-648. .

Karube, I., Suganuta, T. and Susuki, 8., "Bacteriolysis by nmmobilized Enzymes,"
Ibid, 19, No 3, 1977, 301-409.

Kierstan, H.. and Bucks, C., "The nmmobilization of Microbial Cells, Subcellular
Organelles and Enzymes in Calcium Alginate Gels," Ibid, 19, No 3, 1977, 387-397.

Kuan, J. H., Kuan, 3.. and Guilbault, G. G., "Determination of Plasma Glucose
Hith Use of a Stirrer Containing Immobilized Glucose Dehydrogenase," CLIN.
CHEH., 23, No 6, 1977, 1058-1061.

Kucera, J., "Continuous Hydrolysis of Soluble Starch by Immobilized Amino
Glucosidase,“ COLLECT. CZECH. CHDI. comma, 41, No 10, 1976, 2978-2986.

Linko, Y. Y., Pohjola, L. and Linko, P., "Entrspped Glucose Isomarase for
High Fructose Syrup Production," PBOC. BIOCHEH., 12(b), 1977, 14-16.

Hattiasson, 8., ”Immobilized Enzymes and Their Application in Contamination
Control," "3d Int. Symp. Contaminant Contr.," Proceedings, Copenhagen, Vol 2,
1976, p 357. .

Ohmiya, K., Ohashi. 3., Kobayachi, T. and Shimizu, 3., "Hydrolysis of Lactose
by Immobilized Microorganisms," APPL. ENV. MICROBIOL., 33(1), 1977, 137-146.

Rusling, J. F., Lutrell, c. 3., Cullen, L. F. and Papriello, c. J.,
"Immobilized Enzyme-Based Plowing-Stream Analyzer Measurement of Pencillin
ianermentstion Broths," ANAL. CHBH., 48, No 8, 1976, 1211-1215.

Ryu, D. L., Chung, S. H. and Katoh, K., "Performance of the Continuous Glucose
Isomernse Reactor System for the Production of Fructose Syrup,” BIOTECHROL.,
BIOENC., 19. No 2, 1977, 159-184.

Sato, T., Hori, T., Toss, T.. and Chibata, 1., “Engineering Analysis of
Continuous Production of L-Aspartic Acid by Immobilized Escherichia coli
Cells in Fixed Gels," Ibid, 17, No 12, 1975, 1797-1804.

Schnarr, G. 9., Szarek, H. A. and Jones, J. K. N., "Preparation and Activity
of Immobilized Acetobacter auboxydans Cells," APPL. BNV. MICROBIOL., 33, No 3,
1977, 732-734. .

Skinner, K. J., "Enzymes Technology," CHEM. ENG. NEHS, 53, No 33, 1975, 22-29.

Slowinski, W. and Charm, S. T., "Clutamic Acid Production With Cel-Entrapped
Corynebsctsrium glutamicum," BIOTECHNOL., 310836., 15, No 5, 1973, 973-979.

16
F0! OFFIClAl.lEﬂB(MHLY
FtNIOFFKJALlﬁﬂEONLY

65. Yananoto, K., Iona, T., Yannahitn. K. and Chibntn, 1., "Continuous Production
of L-Hnlic Acid by Immobilized Brevibncteriun ammoniagenea," EUR. J. APPL.
MICROBIOL., 3, No 3, 1976, 169-183.

66. ldaa, ”Kinetics and Decay of Funarnae Activity of lnnmhilized Brevibactetiun
-nmncniagenes Cells for Continuous Production of LrHalic Acid," BIOTECHNOL.,
BIOENG., 19, No 8, 1977, 1101-1116.

67. Vandanae, E. J., ”Immobilized Microbial Cells as Catalysts,"CBEH. AND IND.,
No 24, 1976, 1070.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Hoakovskogo universitetn. "Veatnik Hoakovskogo universiteta"
1931

10,657
CSO: 1840/21

17
INJI‘OlﬂﬂClAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
MWUSEONLY

moms

unc: 57.015774.

BIMMICS, BIONICS AND MRY ,

Moscow 31ml“, BIONIKA I SMTRIYA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 19 liar 81)
pp 2-7, 238-239 -

[Annotatiom introduction and table of contents tron book "Biaechanics, Bionice
and Symetry", by Sergey Valentinovich Petuklwv, Izdatel'stvo "hanks", 1850 copies,
2100 pages] '

[Text] This book deals with synnetry phenomena in living nature and use of mathe-
matical symetry methods to model biological systems and phenomena. Special
attention is given to conformal sy-Ietries and Tibonacci nubers in biological
bodies, particularly in the kinenatic body schema of man and sninals. It is
noted that, from the standpoint of sy-etry in solids, inanimate matter is a
special case of animate substance. The book is intended for a wide range of
scientists concerned with research in biomechanics, biophysics, nethmtical and
theoretical biology, and bionics.

Introduction

This book deals primarily with one of the ancient problems of life, the problem
of symetry of shape of biological bodies. In the terminology of V. I. Vernadskiy
[102-64], who outlined the routes of studying. from the standpoint of mathematical
natural science, of this biological problem, a key one in his opinion, it can be
stated that the book explores syllaetries of the space of living natter. The work
is based on the idea of non-Euclidean nature of this space, the fundamental signi-
ficance of non-Euclidean symmetries in structuriration of living matterand ‘non-
Euclidean basis of laws of morphogenesis.

The results of the studies conducted by the author justify the use of the group

of conformal (circular) symmetries as the fundamental group of synetries of
living matter in nodel'ing the phenomena discussed. In the author's opinion, many
of the mysteries of both formation of biological bodies and all of biology are
referable to the conformal nature of the space of living matter. In this rea-
pect, the book submits data on syuetries and shapes of biological bodies. It is
noted that the well-known synetries of the Euclidean type in these bodies—mirror,
rotatory, translation-~are only special cases of conformal symetry whose manifests-
tions in biological forms are far from linitedto these. The author believes

that there is expression in living nature of .the rather general principle of con-
struction of biological bodies from confornally sy-aetrical blocks [units]. The
book contains a verification of this hypothesis one number of types of biological
bodies, as to the specific crystallization principles of production of living
natter. -

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The described studies are closely related to the teaching, long since discussed in
the literature, concerning generalized crystallography capable of covering the
distinctions of structurization of not only physical, but biological matter. How-
ever, development of this teaching to date by J. Bernal and s. Carlyle [20] is
based on the idea of Euclidean bases of general crystallography. The basic dis-
tinction of the approach discussed in our book to questions of structurization of
living matter is the statement that this structurisation is non-Euclidean and that
it is necessary to construct generalized crystallography on a non-Euclidean (con-
formal) basis. From the standpoint of expressed syusetries, inanimate matter
emerges as a special case of animate matter.

The motor system of man and highly organized animals is the focal biological'object
of the studies reported in our book. Nuerous works by specialists in the most
varied branches of natural science have dealt with organization of this system,
since these problems are closely linked with a number of basic biological problems,
as well as applied problems of ergonomics, prosthetics, sports and others. In
particular, this system serves as the prototype of many bionic and robotic systems.
The specific element in the research on the human and animal motor system dis-
cussed in this book is that the symetrical correlations between its component
blocks were studied. In this direction, many new and interesting findings were made
concerning the patterns of organization and function of the motor system. One of
the results was the discovery of conformal syuetries in the block structure of the
kinematic body schema of man and a broad class of animals, in whom these symet-
ries exist, along with mirror symmetry of the body.

The book consists of five chapters and several appendices. Chapter 1 submits data
on biological symetries. Special attention is given to the link between biolo-
gical symmetries and the series of Fibonacci numbers. General information is given
abut the fundamental significance of methods of symetry and invariant-group con-
ceptions in modern mathematical natural science for definition of the place of
research on biological symetries in the field of general natural science. An
excursion is made to known teachings on biological symetries and generalized crys-
tallography which extend to living matter the geometrical and crystallographic
approaches of theoretical physics.

Chapter 2 deals with investigation of conformal symetries in biology. Data are
submitted on conformal symmetries in the construction of various biological bodies.
A special place is assigned to conformal sy-etry in block principles of structure
of the kinematic body schess of man and highly organized animals. It is noted

that these. symetries, just like synetries of the Euclidean type in biological
bodies, are closely linked with a series of Fibonacci nubers and golden section,
which are known in esthetics of proportions. The submitted data indicate that,
with respect to its block distinctions, the kinematic organization of our body is
much closer than usually believed to organization of the bodies of plants and even
biological molecules, wlich have no kinematic function at all. This means that the
kinematic body schema of man and animals is not constructed by all criteria of
kinematic optimality by far, and it cannot be considerad the ideal kinematic
scheme that should be given to robots. And, if we are considering the kinematic
organization of our body as a patent of living nature, in view of the fact that
kinematic and static requirements were far from the only decisive conditions of
its development, this is unlike the problem of developing a robot according to
the criterion of kinematic optimality.

19
FOROFFIC'IALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the same chapter, the distinctions of conformal geometry are tied in to problems
of genesis of spatial conceptions of the individual, mysteries of geometry of the ‘
space of visual perception and problems of architectural bionics. Approaches are
developed to problems of organization of motor movalents with consideration of
conformal synetriea in kinematic blocks of the harm and animal body. The study
of conformal ayI-etries in biology is accompanied by a brief suuery of data on the
significance of conformal symetry in physics, in particular, data on conformal
invariance of Maxwell's electrodyn-ic equations, which have drawn the attention
of theoretical physicists again and and again for many decades, to disclose its
physical significance and consequences. The prospects of interrelated studies of
problems of conformal symetry in physics and biology is mentioned.

Chapter 3 submits data from an additional study of projective symmetries in biology,
which was undertaken in the search for a fundamental group of spatial syn-attics of
livilg matter. This investigation was largely motivated by the fact that conformal
and projective sylmaetries are mathematically interrelated, as well as the fact that
one cannot rule out a priori the possibility of involvement of projective symmetries,
along with conformal ones, in structurizetion of biological phenomena.

Chapter lo deals with the application of invariant-group conceptions to. the study
of psychophysical phenomena. This branch of biology referred earlier than others
to higher geometry as a source of ideas to interpret observed phenomena and as a
rich arsenal of resources for formal modeling thereof. Attention is devoted hare
mainly to psychological phenomena of constancy of perception and geometric modeling
of spaces of perception. Analysis is made of some examples of application to
bionica of the results of studying biological aynmaetries.

The last, fifth chapter submits additional data on the use of synetry methods in
biomechanics. It deals with the use of invariant-group theory of dynamic likeness
in modeling biomechanical systems and alife-sized physical model of the system of
semicircular canals of the human vestibular system, which the author developed on
the basis of this theory.

In conclusion, we should like to mention that the words of R. Peiman apply
extremely well to the study of biological phenomena: "You will not find anything
simple in nature, everything in it is mixed up and vague. Yet our inquisitivenesa
demands that we find simplicity, it demands that we pose questions, try to grasp
the essence of things and comprehend their many faces as the possible result of
effects of a relatively small number of elementary processes and forces in all
sorts of combinations" [241, Vol 1, p 37). It appears unquestionable that use of
synlsetry methods is invaluable for learning about biological phenomena, to find
the substance and simplicity in these extremely complex class of natural phenomena.
As 6. Neil wrote, "symetry-in the broad or narrow sense, depending on how you
define the meaning of this concept—is the idea by means of which man has tried
for centuries to achieve and create order, beauty and perfection" [60, p 37].

The author considers it his pleasant duty to express his profound appreciation to
K. V. Frolov, corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, for his active
support of this direction of research, comprehensive scientific and organizational
assistance in this work. He takes this opportunity to also express his sincere
gratitude to Prof V. S. Gurfinkel', who was the author's mentor for many years in
the field of biome clanics and made a significant contribution to this book. Sincere

20
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
INJR!0FIWCJAI.IEHE(H§LY

appreciation is expressed for help in conducting the studies and preparing the book
to doctors of sciences S. V. Meyen, who advised the author on morphological questions,
Yu. A. Urmantsev, who offered advice on biological symmetry, 3. M. Chudinov. who

gave advice on problems of physical space and time; to candidates of sciences 8. A.
Vladimirov who gave advice on group theory and its applications, S. G. Smirnov and

F. R. Chernikov who participated actively in the studies and discussion of findings.
Finally, the author cannot fail to mention with gratitude the major role played

by the staffofthe Department of Physics of Living Systems of Moscow Physicotechnical
Institute and Department of Biomechanics of the Institute of Machine Science, USSR
Academy of Sciences in conducting the described studies.

Contents Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Symmetries in Biology 8
1.1. Synmetries in biological bodies and laws of leaf arrangement 8
1.2. Study of biological symmetries as a scientific direction 21
1.3. Symmetries and mathematical natural science 26
Chapter 2. Study of Conformal Symmetries in Biology 30
2.1. Conformal symmetries in physics and phenomena of growth and
shape formation in biological bodies 30
2.2. Conformal symmetries in the kinematic human body schema 38
2.3. Fibonacci series and the golden section ["vurf"?] 46
2.4. The golden section as an esthetic canon. Questions of architectural
bionics 50
2.5. Problem of organic forms 57
2.6. Conformal symmetry in motor system of three-phalanx digits 60
2.7. Study of conformal symmetry of three-element kinematic blocks in
animals . 65
2. 8. Possible involvement of conformal symmetries in genesis of
spatial conceptions of the individual 77
2. 9. Conformal symmetry and geometry of visual perception space 80
2.10. Conception of morphopose and organization of motor movements 86
2.11. Symmetrograms of three~element kinematic blocks in analysis
of motor movements 97
Chapter 3. Study of Projective Symmetries in Biology 106
3.1. Possible involvement of principles of projective geometry in
structuring of biological phenomena 106
3.2. Conception of B. Russel on inherited conceptions of the
individual about theses of projective geometry 109

3.3. Use of "vurfs" {sectional to identify transformed geometric images 111
3.4. Vurf of five points in a plane and pentasymmetrical biological bodies 115
3.5. Search for projective syumetriea in location of five end points of

the human body 119
Chapter 4. Use of Theoretical-Group Conceptions for Modeling Psychological
Phenomena 124
4.1. Group theory and psychological phenomena of constancy of perception 124
4.2. Use of higher geometry in modeling perceptive spaces 131
4.3. Some bionic problems of machine science 136
Chapter 5. Study of the Vestibular System by Symmetry Methods 141
5.1. Theory of dynamic likeness in biomechanics 141
5.2. Physical modeling of semicircular canals of vestibular system 143
21

FOI‘OFFKJA1.UBI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5.3. Experiments with a life—size physical model of the bum system

of semic
5.10. Phys
Appendix I.
1. Fibona
2. Some II
Appendix II.
Appendix III
Appendix IV.
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT:

10,657
cso: 1840/30

ircular canals
iological experiments to check results of model experiments
Additional Information About Fibonacci Numbers
cci numbers and golden section in esthetics of proportions
athematical properties of Fibonacci numbers

Additional Information About Conformal Geometry
. Additional Information About Projective Geometry

Principle of Conformal Blocks and Generalized Crystallography

Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

22
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

158
170
198
198
203
206
210
213
218
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 62.506.2
TABLE OF CONTENTS PROM COLLECTION 'PROBLEHS 0P BIONICS', NUMBER 25

Khar'kov FROBLEMY BIONIKI in Russian No 25, 1980 (signed to press 26 Dec 79)
pp 2, 123

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Problems of Bionics", Ukrainian Republic
Interagency Scientific and Technical Collection, edited by Yu. P. Shabanov-
Kushnarenko (editor in chief) et al., founded in 1968, Khar'kov Institute of
Radioelectronics, Ukrainian Ministry of Higher and Secondary Specialized Education.
"Vyshcha shkola" Publishing Association of Khar'kov State University, 1000 copies,
126+S pages]

[Text] This collection deals with questions of mathematical modeling of processing
of verbal and sensory information, development of software designed to give a formal
description of functions of human intelligence. The possibility of technical
rendition of sensory models and neuron-like information translators is explored.

It is intended for scientists and specialists in the field of bionics, cybernetics
and computer technology, engineering psychology, biology and medicine. There are .
bibliographies at the end of the articles [author abstracts are provided].

Contents ' Page

Analytical Method of Overt Specification of Finite Alphabet Operators

(Yu. P. Shabanov-Kushnarenko) 3
Switch-Over Chains in Intelligence Theory (Yu. P. Shabanov-Kuahnarenko) 11
Mathematical Model of Modification of Nouns. Report 1

(M. F. Bondarenko, V. M. Bondarev) 18
Use of Algebra of Finite Predicates for Automatic Processing of Verb Forms -

(Ye. A. Solov'yeva, 0. T. Banar') 22
Mathematical Model of Grammatical Processing of Type 13 Verbs

(Ye. A. Solov'yeva, O. A. Zhukov) 28

Mathematical Modeling of the Process of Declension of Short-Form and

Possessive Adjectives (V. A. Blagina, Z. V. Dina,

Z. Yu. Shabanova-Kushnarenko) 34
Structural Approach to Solving Morphological Problems (V. A. Lovitskiy) 39
Use of Frames to Analyze Structure of Actions. Report 1 (A. M. Yemel'yanov) 43
Use of Frames to Analyze Structure of Actions. Report 2 (A. M. Yemel'yanov) 51
Some Methods of Studying Man's Intellectual Activity. Report 3(A.P; Il'inskiy,

L. S. Il'inskaya. A. V. Korop) 58
Algorithm of Construction of All Blind-Alley Tests in a Teaching Sample
(Yu. A. Vasilenko, I. P. Kossey) . 66
Method of Construcring Operators for Normalization of a Finite Rank to
Center Images (Ye. P. Putyatin, 0. M. Abramov, S. O. Khomitskiy) 68
23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIDFFNJAL.USE(NVLY

Unit for Creating Variable Infralou-Frequency Electromagnetic Fields Used
In Magnetotherapy (V. I. Loshchilov, P. Ya. Gertsik, Yu. P. Hironenko)

One Method of Interpolation of Quasiperiodic Functions
(P. A. Donnin, A. I. Povoroznyuk)-

Organization of Conbined Analysis of Electrocardiographic and Phonocardio-
graphic Signals on a Conputer (P. A. Domain, I. I. Kostina,
V. P. Poltavtsev, V. I. Lisovskiy)

Transitive Modifications of Group Relations (0. K. Ilyunin. B. V. NovikOV)

Finding the Median for Expert Ordering (0. K. Ilyunin, B. V. Novikov)

Partial Screening of Input Data and Mathematical Interpretation Thereof
(V. F. Korop, N. P. Didichenko)

Model of Thinking Process (V. P. Ananin)

Problems of Modeling and Technical Execution of Synchronous and Asynchronous
Potentials of the Brain (6. A. Kolotenko)

Factor Analysis of Systems of Synchronous and Asynchronous Relations of
the Brain (6. A. Kolotenko) '

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'akoye ob"yedineniye "Vyshcha shkola". 1980

10,657
cso: 1840/999

2h
FOR 0FFKJA1.USE(MHLY

74
77
80
86
90

93
98

107

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 007:573.6
TABLE OF CONTENTS FROM COLLECTION 'PROBLBHS OP BIONICS', NUMBER'Z‘

Khar'kov PROBLEMY BIONIKI in Russian No 2‘, 1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 79)
pp 2, 123

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Problems of Bionics", Ukrainian Repuhl&c
Interagency Scientific and Technical Collection, edited by Yu. P. Shabanov~
Kushnarenko (editor in chief) et al., founded in 1968, Khar'kov Institute of
Radioelectronics, Ukrainian Ministry of Higher and Secondary Specialized Education,
"Vyshcha shkola" Publishing Association of Khar'kov State University, 1000 copies,
123+5 pages]

[Text] In this collection there is discussion of hardware and software for modeling
information processing on different levels of the nervous system. Models and
methods of studying intellectual activity are discussed; the authors deal with
problems of 'verbal information processing, pattern recognition and construction

of specialized computer systems. It is intended for scientists and specialists

in cybernetics, computer technology, engineering psychology and medicine. There

are bibliographies at the end of the articles [author abstracts are provided]

Contents Page
Finite Predicates (Yu. P. Shabanov—Kushnarenko) 3
Modeling Melodic Variations on a Computer (R. Rh. Zaripov) 8
Language for Question and Answer Systems (A. A. Ros', B. N. Sudakov) 16

Mathematical Description of the Process of Declining Adjectives
(Yu. P. Shabanov-Kushnarenko, M. P. Bonderenko, V. M. Bondarev,

2. Yu. Shabanova-Kushnsrenko) 22
A Method of Automatic Recognition of Speech on a Real Time Scale

(A. Ya. Dryuchenko) . 27
New Approach to Practical Expression of Neuron-Like Elements in an

Integral Execution (V. I. Potapov, V. P. Nesteruk, G. F. Nesteruk) 31
Organization of Neuron-Like Domain Elements Hith Presynaptic Interaction

(V. I. Potapov, G. P. Nesteruk, V. P. Nesteruk) ' 35
Model of Postsynaptic Learning Mechanisms (S. L. Zaguskin, S. N. Grinchenko) 40
Adaptive Filtration of Images (Yu. I. Nefedov) . 50
Adaptive Logical Filtration in Pattern Recognition Problems .

(V. F. Prolov. M. N. Shnayder) S7
The Human Retina as a Biological Automatic Regulatory System (V. P. Ananin) 61
Degree of Generality of MR Prograls. Report 1 (S. K. Kolubay) 70
Degree of Generality of MR Programs. Report 2 (S. R. Kolubay) 76

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Extraction of Square Roots by Predicate Algebra (A. G. luraehko,

c. G. Chetverikov) . 83
Controller Question and Answer Syste- With Virtual Senentic Network

(Yu. Ya. Lyubarskiy) 86
Some Hethods of Studying Human Intellectual Activity. Report 2

(A. P. 11' inskiy, A. S. Il'inskaya, A. V. Korop) 93
Description of Biological Structures From the Standpoint of Their Organization

(D. I. Senagurskiy, Ye. A. Goyda) 100
Generalized Harmonic Systel (Yu. I. Zozulya) ' 105
Problems of Nomlization of Nonlinear Conversions. Report 1 ,

(Ye. P. Putyatin. I. G. Dolzhenkova) ' 111
Problems of Nornalization of Nonlinear Conversions. Report 2

(Ye. P. Putyatin. 1'. G. Dolzhenkova) 116

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'skoye ob"yedinen1ye ”Vyshcha shkola“, 1980

10,657
080: 1860/999

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 007:573.6
TABLE OF CONTENTS FROM COLLECTION 'PROBLEMS OF BIONICS', NUMBER 23

Khar'kov PROBLBHY BIONIKI in Russian No 23, 1979 (signed to press 20 Apr 79)
pp 2, 120

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Problems of Bionics", Ukrainian Republic
Interagency Scientific and Technical Collection, edited by Yu. P. Shabanov-
Kushnarenko (editor in chief) et al., founded in 1968, Kharikov Institute of
Radioelectronics, Ukrainian Hinistry of Higher and Secondary Specialized Education,
"Vyshcha Shkola" Publishing Association of Khar'kov State University, 1000 copies,
126+4 pages]

[Text] This collection submits the results of bionic research on information pro-
cessing in sensory channels and neuronal structures. There is discussion of some
aspects of intellectual activity, means of formal description of such activity and
means of reproducing it in artificial reflection and control systems. The authors
touch upon formalization and explication [explanation] of natural language concepts.
and an approach is described for mathematical modeling of verbal information process-
ing. There is development of software (mathematics and data) suitable for modeling
“and computer simulation of human mental functions. It is intended for scientists

and specialists involved hibiouic research with the use of the ways and means of
cybernetics and computer technology. There are bibliographies at the end of the

articles [author abstracts are provided]

Contents Page
Mathematical Description of Finite Logical Systems .
(Yu. P. Shabanov-Kushnarenko) 3
Axiomatic Introduction of Metrics Into Binocular Visual Space. Report 1
(B. K. Lopatchenko) 10
Axiomatic Introduction of Metrics Into Binocular Visual Space. Report 2
(B. K. Lopatchenko) 13
Model of Optimizing Neuron (S. N. Grinchenko, S. L. Zaguskin) - 20
Question of Quantization of Acoustical Information (8. A. Usenko) 27

Formation of 'Knowledge' in General-Purpose Problem Solver by Means of
Concept Forming System. Report 1 (L. N. Bondareva, A. I. Kovalev,

L. S. Krivosheina, V. A. Lovitskiy, V. A. Loginov) 32
Question and Answer System: Presentation of Information and Search for
Answer (H. V. Volchenko) 39
Algorithm for Processing Discrete Sets for Large Teaching Samples
(Yu. A. Vasilenko, V. I. Robotishin, G. Ya. Shevchenko) 46
27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' son omcm. Use ONLY

Technical Execution of Discriminator Trees Pith Consideration of
Importance of Tags (Yu. A. Vasilenko, A. M. Pryanitskiy, G. Ya. Shevchenko) 51
Construction of Analytical Descriptions of Complex Geometric Systems in

Geometric Pattern Recognition Problems (A. I. Kalyuzhnyy) 58
Programing in MK Language of the' <13, k, j, l> Type (S. K. Kolubay) 66
Automatic Conversion of Arbitrary Functions Into System of Shannon Equations

(6. F. Dyubko, Yu. s. Zamaleyev) 74
Program Method of Scaling Integrative Structures (G. G. Chetverikov,

A. G. Zhirov) 80
Parallel Computer System for MK Programs (S. K. Kolubay) . ‘ 85
Mathematical Description of Unary Finite Predicates of Higher Orders

(Yu. P. Shabanov-Kushnarenko) 92
Mathematical Description of Noun Bord-Changing. Report 1

(M. F. Bondarenko, V. M. Bondarev) 98
Mathematical Description of Noun Word-Changing. Report 2

(M. F. Bondarenko, V. M. Bondarev) 105
Some Methods of. Studying Man‘s-Intellectual Activity. Report 1 '

(A. P. Il'inskiy, L. S. Il'inskaya, A. V. Korop) 110
The Question of Ontogenetic Development of Forms of Human Intellectual

Activity (V. N. Chudakov) 117

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'skoye ob"yedineniye "Vyshcha shkola", 1979

10,657 _
CSO: 1840/ 999

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lﬂ)l‘0lﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂB(ﬂHLY

UDC: 62.506

TABLE OF CONTENTS PROM COLLECTION 'PROBLEMS OF BIONICS', NUMBER 22

Khsr'kov PROBLEMY BIONIKI in Russian No 22, 1979 (signed to press 22 Feb 79) pp 2,
162

[Annotation and table of contents from "Problems of Picnics", Ukrainian Republic
Interagency Scientific and Technical Collection, edited by Yu. P. Shabanov-
Kuahnarenko (editor in chief) et al., founded in 1968, Khar'kov Institute of
Radioelectronics, Ukrainian Ministry of Higher and Secondary Specialized Education,
"Vyshcha Shkola" Publishing Association of Khar'kov State University, lOOO'copies,
162+3 pages]

[Text] This collection deals with bionic research_and mathematical description

of various aspects of man's intellectual activity. It discusses the principles
involved in construction of special computer systems, their software [mathematics“
and data] suitable for modeling and computer simulation of algorithms for

data processing in man's sensorium. Studies were made of the possibility of
mathematically deacribing thinking processes and processing of verbal information
by man. It is intended for scientists and specialists concerned with bionic
research with the use of the ways and means of cybernetics and computer technology.
There are bibliOgraphies at the end of the articles [author abstracts are provided].

Contents Page

Intelligence Theory (Yu. P. Shabanov-Kushnarenko) 3
One Principle of Organization of the Computing Process (A. C. Murashko,

S. K. Kolubay) 11
Experimental Studies of Binocular Perception of Space (B. K. Lopatchenko,

I. V. Shul'gin) 17
Structure of Adaptive Multiprocessor Computer System (A. C. Murashko,

Yu. S. Zamaleyev) 26
One Approach to Construction of Internal Language of Computer System

(8. K. Kolubay) 33
Principles of Organization of Adaptive Behavior of Digital Integrator

(Yu. S. Zamaleyev) 38

Coding Biomedical Information on the Example of the Electrocardiogram of
Myocardial Infarction. Report 2 (L. T. Malaya. V. G. Voronov, M. S. Mendlin,

M. I. Kozhin, A. Ye. Shul'man, Ye. Ya. Nikolaysnko) 62
Use of Zero Organ Method in Psychophysics. Report 11
(Yu. P. Shabanov-Kushnarenko) 50
Mechanism of Data Processing in Systems With Marginal Contrast and Some
Optical Illusions (G. V. Aleshin, V. A. Grabina) 60
29

FIIICUHWCMULIEHECﬂQLY
won ommr us: on“

System for Control of Ergononic Signal Panel of Input Unit

(A. S. Volkov, V. F. Gorenko) 65'
Uniator Model of Hierarchic Systems of Tina and Space Relations in the

-Brain (6. A. Kolotenko, G. I. Yevtushenko, S. Yu.‘Didenko) 69
One Method of Using the Mechanism of Mapping-an Image (6. V. Aleshin,

V. A. Grabina) 76
Predicates on'Sets. Report 1 (N. G. Sarnsvskiy, s. A. Poslavskiy) 81
Theorem of Expansion in Predicate Algebra (V. M. Bondarev) 87
Methods of Statistical Evolution of Tags in Pattern Recognition Problem

(L. Ye. Savitskiy) 93
Use of Linguistic Variables in Construction of Topological Model of s

Complex System (Ya. A. Grundspen'kis) ' 99
Transitive Modifications of Majority Relationships (0. K. Ilyunin,

B. V. Novikov) 106
Quantization of Stationary Randon Signals Hith Variable Frequency [of

Delivery] According to Extrema (I. D. Pononsreva) 110
Method of Reducing Listing of Figures (1. Ya. Bereznaya. A. ll. Grigor' yeva,

M. H. 211mm?) . 115

Predicates on Sets. Report 2 (N. G. Sarnavskiy, 2. Yu. Shabanova-Kuslmaranko) 120
Problems of Reducing Units of Text in Natural Language to Canonical Form
and Use Thereof to Process Large Data Arrays (M. P. Bondarenko,

Modeling Granatical Processing of Numerals (A. P. Osyks) 129
Morphological Relevance of Set of Morphenea (V. M. Bondsrev) 137

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'akoye ob”yedineniye ”Wahcha ahkols", 1979.

10,657
650: 1860/999

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDc: 519.95:556.06
DYNAMICS OF ECOLOGICALPBCONOHIC SYSTEMS
Novosibirsk DINAHIKA BKOLOGO-EKONOHICEESKIKH SISTEM in Russian 1981 pp 2-5

[Annotation, part of foreword and table of contents from book ”Dynamics of
Ecological-Economic Systems", edited by L. H. Galkin, candidate of physical and
mathematical sciences, A. I. Hoskalenko, candidate of physical and mathematical
sciences, and V. V. Kontorin, East Siberian Branch, Siberian Department of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo ”hauka", 219+ pages]

[Text] This monograph is concerned with mathematical models that describe the
dynamics of individual populations and processes in the marine environment,

forest biogeocenoses and certain complex ecological ["natural"] and ecological-
economic systems. The economic models direct themselves to regional problems;
they take into consideration depletability of resources and deleterious effects
on the environment. Questions of using secondary raw material and industrial
waste occupy a special place in this monograph. The book is intended for mathema-
ticians working in the field of modeling and research on ecological-economic sys-
tems, as well as geographers, hydrologists, ichthyologists and econOmists.

Foreword

At the present time, questions related to the dynamics of ecologicalesconomic
systems are advancing to the fore in view of the increasing impairment of ecolo-
gical equilibrium of the environment as a result of industrious activities. The
complexity of ecological and economic systems, let alone of combined ecological-
economic, makes it imperative to search for the means of quantitative analysis of
their behavior as related to a given strategy of anthropogenic activity. It is now
generally recognized that one should use mathematical modeling for this purpose.

Ecological-economic processes are comprised of diverse processes in the natural
environment (biological, physical, mechanical, etc.), economics and social area.
Studies that are united by the topic of modeling these processes are referable to
many concrete disciplines and directions, ranging from special mathematical fore-
casting and.control methods to modeling of the different processes in biology and
economics.

This monograph deals with ecological-economic models constructed for forecasting
and decision making purposes. As a rule, the research is focused on one of the
topics-—ecological or economic. In the ecological studies, the controlling factors
or criteria of behavior are economic in nature. while economic systems are examined
with consideration of the dynamics of resources and factors affecting nature. As

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a rule, differential equations (ordinary and in partial derivatives) and discrete
analogues thereof serve as the working mathematical system. Concrete models
described in this book are related primarily to problems referable to Lake Baykal
and its basin; however, by virtue of the universality of mathematical models, they
can be used for rather different regions. This monograph is the third in a series
of works of the_Commission on Long-Term Forecasts of Natural Phenomena under the
Presidium of the East Siberian Branch of the Siberian Department of the 0883
Academy of Sciences, dealing with questions of mathematical modeling of processes
in the environment and economics....

Contents Page

Foreword 5
Chapter 1. Theoretical Questions of Forecasting and Control Based on

Mathematical Models 7
l. Forecasting the state of complex systems (L. M. Galkin) 7
2. Choice of equation type for prognostic models of pollution .
(L. M. Galkin, A. N. Sudakov) 14
3. Direct method of calculating tensor components of coefficients of
turbulent diffusion (L. M. Galkin, A. I. Korneychuk) 18
a. Quasisynthesis of optimum control with incomplete information about
system state (A. I. Moekalenko) 31
5. Qualitative aspects of controlled diffusion process
(A. S. Strekalovskiy) 36
Chapter 2. Models of Processes in the Marine Environment 44

1. Model for forecasting dynamics of planktonic and benthonic unicellular

organisms in a river (L. M. Galkin, G. A. Conan, B. N. Klimova, '

N. F. Solovey) ' 44
2. One-parameter model of distribution of water temperature in active

layer of Lake Baykal (L. T. Aahchepkov. V. A. Krotova, T. I. Mezentseva) 50
3. Forecasting water pollution in North Baykal (I. B. Misandrontsev,

A. N. Sudakov) 55
6. Quantitative study of the problem of optimum control of mode of

discharging industrial waste in the region of the Baykal Cellulose

Combine (A. S. Strekalovskiy. 0. N. Strekalovskaya) 61

5. Mathematical model of formation of underwater coastal slope
(V. Kh. Kompanets) 71
Chapter 3. Models of Individual Populations and Processes in Geosystems 75

1. Discrete model of dynamics of population size and use thereof to
assess effectiveness of ban on fishing for ecological breeds of cisco
[Coregonus] (V. V. Kontorin) 75
2. Possibility of constructing a model that describes satisfactorily
fluctuations in a real predator-prey system (P. M. Brusilovskiy,

G. S. Rosenberg) 84
3. Modeling of a forest-river system from the standpoint of control

problems (A. I. Moekalenko, A. K. Cherkashin) 92
4. Forecasting spatial and time-related dynamics of forests in the tayga

region (A. K. Cherkashin) 107

chapter 4. Modeling Ecological-Economic Processes on the Regional Level 112

1. Model of utilization of resources (V. I. Gurman, A. Ye. Drocdovskiy.

G. N. Konstantinov) 112

32

FOR OFFNJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Optimum control of distributed model of the Leont'yev model type
(A. I. Moskalenko)
3. Submodel of forest resources of the 'Region' model (A. A. Onkhotoyev)
6. Economic-mathematical analysis of regional utilization of agricultural
resources (T. I. Orlova)
5. Linear model for evaluation of the effects of development of
agriculture on allied sectors (V. M. Nikitin)
6. Preliminary evaluation of some external agricultural relations
(V. M. Nikitin)
7. Model for optimum use of raw material in the mica-processing industry
(N. V. Belyayev, R. I. Grigor'yeva, T. T. Orlova)
Chapter 5. Principles for Optimum Utilization of Resources (Methodological
Application) (E. Ye. Drozdovskiy)
1. Scientific and technological progress, and formation of circulation
of material resources in social production
2. Methodological aspects of implementing optimum use of primary natural
resources and waste from social production '
3. Economic effectiveness of optimizing ['rationslizing'] use of
material resources
Appendix: Models ['mock-ups'] (B. Ye. Drozdovskiy)
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Neuka", 1981.

10,657
C80: 1840/999

33
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

123
129

13k
166
156
160
163

170

189
210
219
son omcw. use on“

MEDICINE

UDC: 61.001.57
MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF DISEASES AND METHODS OF PROCESSING MEDICAL INEOKMAIIOM

Novosibirsk MATEMATICHESKIYE MODELI ZABOLEVANIY I METODY OERADOTKI MEDITSIMSIOY
INFORMATSII in Russian 1979 (signed to press 25 Apr 79) pp 2-1:, ...

[Annotation, foreword by Academician G. I.-Marchuk and table of contents from
book-"Mathematical Models of Diseases and Methods of Processing Medical Information",
edited by Guriy Ivsnovich Marchuk. Isdatel'stvo 'Mauksﬂ.81birakoye otdeleniye,
Computer Center of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy.of Sciences,

1850 copies, 103+ pages]

[Text] This book deals with problems of mathematical modeling of disease pro-
cesses, description of the main principles and distinctions of biochemical and
immune processes, methods of processing clinical and laboratory data, as well

as use thereof in clinical practice. It is intended for a wide range of mathema-
ticians and physicians concerned with applications of mathematics to immunology
and medicine.

Foreword

In recent years, mathematical modeling and computer methods are being introduced
intensively in medicine and modern immunology. The intensive development of immuno-
‘logy in the last decade has resulted in formation of the entire picture of the
immunological response of living organisms to antigen (Burnet's clone and breeding
theory.* the work of R.-V. Petrov**). This has deepened our understanding of the
nature and development of viral diseases, enriched with new agents the area of
clinical medicine, made it possible to develop mathematical models of immunological
processes and to further develop mathematical methods of processing clinical and
laboratory data.. To conduct studies in these directions, there must be close con-
tact between mathematicians, physicians, hmaunologists, biochemists and other
specialists. ~

The articles in this collection submit the main results of joint research conducted
by the staff of the Computer Center, Siberian Branch of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
physicians in the department of childhood infectious disease at the Second Moscow

"Order of Lenin" State Medical Institute (2 MOLCMI) imeni N. I. Pirogov, as well
as the staff of the Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the
USSR Academy of Sciences.

*Burnet, F., IICellular Immunology," Moscow, "Mir", 1971, 562 pages.
**Petrov. R. V., "Immunology and Immunogenetics," Moscow, "Meditsins", 1976.
330 pages.

l!Ml(Mﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂ!(M'LY
Methodologically, the contents of this collection can be divided into three sections.
The first consists of articles dealing with mathematical modeling of ilnunological
processes (articles by G. I. Marchuk, L. N. Belykh, A. L. Asachenkov); the second

of mathematical methods of processing clinical and laboratory data referable to
viral hepatitis in children were submitted in an article by a team of authors (M. I.
Nisevich, academician of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, I. I. Zubikova, I. B.
Pogozhev et al.). The articles by I. B. Pogozhev, S. M. Zuyev and N. V. Pertsev
deal with mathematical modeling of the process of functional recovery from diseases,
investigation of stochastic stability of these processes, as well as methods of
estimating parameters from clinical and laboratory data. The third section con-

and immunological processes, which must be taken into consideration in constructing
mathematical models (articles by D. c. Knorre, corresponding member of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, V. V. Vlasov, Ye. V. Gruntenko).

gists and physicians concerned with applications of mathematics to problems of
immunology and medicine.

Immunological Model of Viral Disease (G. I. Marchuk) . 5
Mathematical Model of Bacterial Disease (A. L. Asachenkov) 17
Mathematical Model of Concomitant Disease (L. N. Belykh) 32

Mathematical Methods of Processing Medical Information
Applications of Mathematical Methods in Medicine (N. I. Nisevich, G. I. Marchuk,

I. I. Zubikova, I. . Pogozhev, A. L. Romanyukha) 38
Stochastic Model of the Process of Functional Recovery From Disease

(5. M. Zuyev, I. B. Pogozhev) 46
Evaluation of Parameters of Functional Recovery Process According to

Laboratory Data (5. M. Zuyev) $2
Simulation Model of the Functional Recovery Process (N. V. Pertsev) 60
Some Conditions of Asymptotic Stability of Functional Recovery Process

(N. V. Pertsev) 67

Basic Molecular Principles of Genetic Processes (D. G. Knorre) 73
Regulation of Biopolymer Biosynthesis (V. V. Vlasov), 89

*"Mathcmatical Methods in Clinical Practice.” Novosibirsk, "Nauka", 1978,
120 pages. .

35
ton omcuu. use omv
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010003-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some Distinctions of Antineoplastic Inunity Relevant to the
Construction of Mathematical Models (Ye. V. Gruntenko)

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1979.

' 10,657
CSO: 1860/999

.ll

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600010003-2
MWMWONLY '

P51310111}!

UDC: 681.3:612.172.4
COMPUTERIZED BLECTROCARDIOGRAPHY

Moscow vycmsu'm um nemaomrocmru in Russian 1981 (signed to press a Jan
81) pp 2-1., 165-167

[Annotation, foreword by Prof 1. Sb. Pinsker, preface and tab_l_e of content_s_ from__

'book "Computerized Electrocardiography", by Vsevolod Vladimirovich shakin,
Izdetel'stvo "Nauka", 2000 copies, 168 pages]

[Text] This book is concerned with mathematical models and their numerical ex-
pressions that are used for automated processing of data about the heart's electric
field. There is discussion of methods of cowuter simulation of the actions of

an electrocardiologist in interpreting RKG's. The means of upgrading EKG diagnostics
are described, which ensue from computer interpretation of cardiograms with the

use of statistical methods and biophysical data on the genesis of the EKG. Much
attention is devoted to problems of developing automated systems of BIG diagnostics.
An automated network system of remote cardiologioal diagnostics based on a small
computer with many medical subscriber points (terminals) is described. This

book is intended for specialists in biological and medical cybernetics, physician-
_electrocardiologists, as well as undergraduate and graduate students in relevant
fields. Illustrations 70; references 147.

Foreword

The first automatic systems for recording, analysing and storing electrocardiograms
appeared more than 15 years ago. In subsequent years, intensive research was con-
ducted and knouhow was gained in the use of such systems. However, there had not
been a single monograph stun-arising this research in this country until now. Let
us mention that many questions that arise in developing a system require the
collaboration of physicians, biologists, physicists, engineers and mathameticians
to find the answers. This monograph is an attnpt at finding a cot-son language
among different specialists in solving some of these problems. The material in
this book is presented at the so-called physical level of accuracy ["strictness"].

when scrutinizing the monograph for the first time, one can disregard the mathe-
matical conclusions and concentrate on the final statements and consents to them.

This book reflects the current status of problems that arise when processing
electrocardiograms on modern computers-~recording, transmitting, converting [trans-
lating], storing and interpreting electrocardiograms and other data about a patient.
There is discussion of algorithns for preliminary processing of electrocardiographic
signals (filtration, compression for more efficient transmission of

37.
sosomaumsomv
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electrocardiographic signals and to be economical with the memory of storage units),
as well as parameterization of electrocardiogram, algorithm of syndrome diagnostics
from the EKG and clinical diagnostics on the basis of electrocardiograms and other
data about the patient. '

The algorithm are rendered in the form of a package of applied programs in the
system of special software for the automated SAS-l systou, which was developed
within the framework of collaboration between the USSR Academy of Sciences and
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, on the basis of a small, third-generation computer
included in the Unified Series of computers of socialist countries. The hardware
and software of this system is described, and this is addressed primarily to
readers who plan to make creative use of .the SAs-l and future similar equipment

in their research, as well as developers of such systems. In addition to the
existing versions of the system, which is applicable, for example, for mass screen-
ing of the public to pick up cardiological patients, there is discussion of the
possibility of designing more sophisticated modifications of the system of com-
puterized interpretation of electrocardiograms. Traditional medical knowhow is
being constantly enriched by the concepts of modern biophysics of the heart. Spe-
cial statistical models and methods of processing electrocardiograms are being
developed. For this reason, there is every reason to believe that systems will
soon appear that are even more sophisticated than the “5-1. This book will be
useful to developers and users of such systems.

Preface

In view of the importance, considerable size and diversity of the bibliography,
the author deemed it expedient to provide b'ibliogfaphi‘c' no'te's”a'bout 'all W"—
references, and they follow each major section of the book.

The mathematical expressions and formulas are nubered in order within each
chapter, while the illustrations are numbered in order throughout the book. These
numbers are used for references within chapters. When _a reference is made in the
text of one chapter to formulas given in another, the number of the_1atter is
also used. For example, (1.6) refers to formula 6 given in Chapter 1.

It is the author's pleasant duty to thank the staff of the Institute of Problm
of Information Transmission of the USSR Academy of Sciences in Moscow (IPPI) and
Scientific Research Institute of Comannicationn of the Hungarian People's Republic
(TKI) where most of the original work described here was performed and this book
was written, as well as to express appreciation to all colleagues who stimulated
this study with their contents. '

The author is very grateful to the scientific reviewers: V. D. Zhukovskiy, doctor
of medical sciences, professor at the First Moscow Medical Institute, and V. S.
Fayn, candidate of engineering sciences, senior scientist at IPPI.

The author wishes to particularly thank Prof I. Sh. Pinsker (IPPI) who took on the
job 'of scientific editing and wrote the foreword to this book, engineer Cs.

Csapodi (TKI) who prepared a significant part 'of the material on the SAS-l system,
or Istvan Preda (Institute for Advanced Training of Physicians, lluii'garian"'People's
Republic) and engineer Gy Kozmann (Central Institute of Physical Research, '

38
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR10FFHJA1.USE¢NNLY

Hungarian Academy of Sciences) who collaborated in the study of the heart's electro-
mechanical field, as well as programmer Kataline Haddu (IKI) and engineer N. Ye.
Barinova (IPPI) for their great technical assistance.

Contents Page

Foreword 3

Preface A
Introduction: Directions of Automation in Processing Electrocardiographic

Data 5

Bibliographic notes for Introduction 13

Chapter 1. Mathematical Models
1.1. Mathematical models of electrocardiographic diagnostics and

simulation of physician's diagnostics 15
1.2. Electric equivalent generators of the heart 17
1.2.1. Concept of equivalent generator of the heart 17
1.2.2. Macroscopic consideration 18
1.2.3. Linearity and quasistationary state 19
1.2.4. Local correlations 19
1.2.5. Direct and inverse problems 21
1.2.6. Integral correlations 22
1.2.7. Description and problems 25
1.2.8. Choice of equivalent generator 26
1.2.9. Multipole description of electrocardiogram 26
1.2.10. 0 and 1 order leads 29
1.2.11. Traditional system of leads , 31
1.3. Examples of equivalent heart generators 34
1.3.1. Multipole equivalent generator 34
1.3.2. Potential informativeness of electrocardiogram 36
1.3.3. Informativeness of some leads 39
1.3.4. Equivalent mobile dipole 44
1.3.5. Locally stationary dipole 46
1.4. Diagnostics of equivalent generators 48
1.4.1. Two types of generators . 48
1.4.2. Evaluation of EKG changes 49
1.4.3. Diagnostic classification of electrocardiograms 52
1.4.4. Continual model of the myocardium , 59
1.4.5. More about direct and inverse problems 60
1.4.6. Development of models 61
1.4.7. Epicardial potentials 64
1.5. Statistical models of electrocardiogram and noise 65
1.5.1. Preliminary processing of electrocardiogram 65
1.5.2. Sources of noise 66
1.5.3. Model of signal and noise 67
1.5.4. Main components of electrocardiogram 69
1.5.5. Models of shape of electrocardiogram 70
Bibliographic notes for Chapter 1.. ' 72

Chapter 2. Numerical Methods
2.1. Quasimedical algorithms of EKG interpretation. Algorithms for

construction and correction of solving rule 75
2.2. Methods of evaluating parameters of electrical equivalent
heart generators on electrocardiogram . 76
39

FOR‘OFFKJA1.U§E¢INLY
FORiOFFﬂJAl.USE(MVLY

2.2.1. Inverse problems and accuracy thereof
2.2.2. Evaluation of parameters of locally stationary dipole
2.2.3. Evaluation of density of double layer
2.2.4. Evaluation of volumetric density of sources
2.2.5. Evaluation of multipole components
2.2.6. Evaluation of epicardial potentials
2.3. Filtration, compression and parametrization of electrocardiograms
2.3.1. Algorithm of adaptive compression of vector electrocardiograms

2.3.2. Evaluation of main components after adaptive compression of.
vector electrocardiograms
2.3.3. Parametrization of vector electrocardiograms
2.3.4. Evaluation of isolines and RR intervals
2.3.5. Choice of cycle
2.3.6. Balancing of data matrix
Bibliographicnotes for Chapter 2
apter 3. Automated Systems
3.1. General description of SAS-l system'
3.1.1. Ideology of the system
1.2. System hardware
1.3. System operation
1.4. System software
Medical terminal
Elements [units] for servicing and monitoring medical terminal
Organization of communication with central equipment
Input of electrocardiosignals in on-line mode
Detection and correction of mistakes in on-line mode
Transmission of electrocardiosignala recorded in off-line mode
. Monitoring communication between medical terminal and
tral unit
. Manual control
Description of control system
Work at the central terminal
Work of personnel servicing medical terminal
Actions for input of electrocardiograms
Use of system command HELLO
Use of system command NEH
Use of system command BYE
se of system command EGON
. Choice of parameters
Input of electrocardiogram
Input of ancillary data
. Information about errors
Applied programs
. Organization of work
PAST program
FEXI and FEXZ programs
COMP program
SIX program
NOHURA program
. Special mode
finement of diagnostic methods in automated systems
. Experiments in SAS-l system
. Experiments on compression of vector data

3.

e
e

'
NO NNNNNN
e

1
2
.3
l.

wwwwuuwwwu
I

e

5
6
n
7

U
e

wéuwwuwwwu
o
uuuwww
e

e
e
e

U
m

e
§5§£~
e

e
e
e

1
3

1
2
3
l.
5
6
U
2
I.

u
e

e
m
e

e
s

C
UIUiUIUIUI'JIU'
e

e

U
I
UUO‘UUUWUUWU‘wUU
m

1
2
3
I.
S
6
7
R
1
2

a
0‘0

ho
ma omau. use on“

76
76
79
82
82
83
83
83

85
88
89
90
90.
91

92
92
94
96
97
99
99
100
101
102
102

104
104
105
105
106
106
107
108
108
109
109
110
111
114
115
115
115
119
122
123
124
126
126
126
127
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010003-2

INJR<0F10C1A1.IISIICﬂVLN

Mapping potentials on body surface
Refinement of measuring programs
Compression of mapping data
Main components
. . Hultipole components
_ 3.6.8. Bpicardial potentials
- Bibliographic notes for Chapter 3
Conclusion
Bibliography
Q Subject Index

a
O

0-?“qu
o

O~oa~a~a~
o

N¢U§w
o

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

10,657
CSO: 1840/28

1:1
FOIIOIIICIAI.lEﬂECHVLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010003-2
FORlﬂﬂﬂCIALIIIEONlY

SIMPLE METHOD OF NUMERICAL EVALUATION OF HUMAN BEG POTENTIALS

Moscow BIOFIZIKA in Russian Vol 26. No '5. Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript received 23 SepGO)
pp 89ﬁ-896

[Article by A. Shimolyunas, Institute of Mathematics and Cybernetics, LiSSR
Academy of Sciences, Vilnius]

[Text] It is known that it is important to take into consideration the spasmodic
changes in conduction of the numerous tegmenta of the brain [1] in simulating the
genesis of human EEG potentials with given intrscranisl sources. This, as well

as the virtually spherical shape of the human skull [2], is why different variants
of the model of a multilayer spherical cable are used in digital construction of
the EEG. .Ihe sought solutions, within the framework of these models. are given in
the form of sum of Legendre polynomials taken with specific weights. For example
EEG potential U, from a radial dipole is calculated with the following formula

[3) 4]:

 

11. ~21 amt.- '—
I

(1)

where P; is a Legendre polynomial of the Zﬂidegree.c(l) are weight coefficients
that depend on the means of modeling the tegmsnta of the human brain.

Evidently, it is possible to calculate EEG potentials using formulas of the (1)
type only on a digital computer, and this makes it difficult for practical use
of digital analysis of the human EEG in electroencephalographic practice.

He previously demonstrated [5] that the role of the tegmenta of the human brain

in genesis of the £56 with given intracrsnial sources can be simulated with an
unrealistically thick (~10 cm) layer of electrolyte over the surface of the cerebral
cortex described by a sphere with radius to - 8 cm. i.e., radius mg of the
isolated surface equals 12 cm. This simulation of the cerebral tegmenta, which
does not conform to the real physics of the problem of genesis of the human 886,
does, however, offer the tempting possibility of using simple analytical versions
of a model of a homogeneous isolated sphere [6] for digital evaluation of EEG
potentials. For example, potential 0: on the isolated surface of radiusrgyfrom
the radial dipole situated on radius rd can be calculated in this model, when the

angle between these radii equals y, with the following formula:

.‘ i4;- _
(HP—ﬂour)“ ' (2)

 

U (r.n,.1)-;

where f - rd/rg.

he
ron omcm. use ONLY
FORI0F1WC1AI.IHHB(HVLY

fro

 

Human BEG potential calculated in a model of a multilayer spherical cable
[1, 3] (curve 1) and with the simulation formula (3) (curve 2)

Of will describe the human EEG potential if rd$8 cm and ry - 12 cm, i.e., £50.67.
Calculation of EEG potentials with formula (2) no longer presents any difficulty.
and it can be easily done with desk calculators.

Let us consider in more detail the articularly interesting case of a cortical
dipole (rd - 8 cm), D - l/bn nV-cm ), which corresponds to the transcortical dif-
ference in potentials equaling 1 mV over an area of l cnz. A point dipole can
be well-used to represent cortical dual layers with area S‘n cm: [3]. Comparing
BEG potentials calculated within the framework of an adequate model of multilayer
spherical cable with thin layers [3] to the EEG potential calculated with f - 8/12
according to formula (2), we see that they coincide well (Figure) and, after alge-
braic conversions of formula (2) we obtain the following elementary simulation
formula (BBC in uV from transcortical potential of 1 mV over 1 cm2 of cortical

area):

Uu(Y)-(2.018—|.863cos y)'"-l.00. (3)

Re have discussed a simple numerical simulation of BBC potential of a radial
dipole. A relatively simple formula (17) was obtained with the model of homo-
geneous isolated sphere in [6], used to calculate the potential of an arbitrary
dipole, and formula (2) is a special case thereof. Thus, the proposed simulation
(r9 - 12 cm, rd<8 cm) also makes it possible to readily calculate the EEG poten-
tial from both tangential cortical and arbitrarily oriented subcortical dipoles.

F0!i0llﬂ€%ki.USBlMQLY
1.
2.
3.
lo.
5.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gun-an, A. and Shtnolyunas, A., BIOFIZIRA, Vol 21, 1976, p 129.
Povitakiy, A. 8., Rabinovich, 8. IA” et 31., Ibid, V01 19, 1976, p 1087.
Guano, A. and Shilolyunaa, A., Ibid, Vol 21, 1976, p 551.
Idem, Ibid, Vol 21, 1976, p 898.
Idem, Ibid, Vol 25, 1980, p 569.

Frank, 3., J. APPL. PHYSICS, Vol 23, 1952, p 1225.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'scvo "make", "Biofizika", 1981

10,657
cso: 1840/18

FOR OFFICI’i’i USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DOOR ON FORECASTING BORDERLINB CONDITIONS REVIEWED

Moscow USPEKHI FIZIOLOGICHESKIKH NA!!! in Russian Vol 12, No 3, Jul-Sep 81 (signed to
press 11 Jun 81) pp 141-162

[Review by K. H. Smirnov of book "Prognozirovaniya sostoyaniy na grsni nor-y i
pstologii" [Forecasting Conditions on the Borderline Between Nornal and Pathology]
by R. M. Bayevskiy, Izdatel'stvo 'Hir', Moscow, 1979, 295 pages]

[Text] Predicting naan condition under specific living conditions has constantly
drawn the attention of physiologists and physicians. This explains the interest

of the book under consideration. The author, a physiologist who has been working
on methods of forecasting hut-an states for several years, offers to the reader a
survey of the literature and the results of his own research directed at predicting
disturbances of the physiological norn under different conditions of hunsn endeavor.

The first two chapters discuss the theoretical bases of forecasting as it applies
to evaluation of man's health. Sane of the cited theses taken fro. the literature
are debatable and contradictory. Generally speaking, this is not had. since it
shows different aspects of the problen in question. At the sane tine, the author's
point of view should, perhaps. have been more clearly formulated with regard to
some issues. Thus, with reference to the transition from health to disease, the
book cites several opinions on the gradual nature of this transition, interpenetra-
tion of these states and, at the same time, the thesis is for-ulsted that there
exists an internediate, "third" state, which is no longer health and not yet
sickness, designated as a "state of tension," "unstable adaptation" or "prenosolo-
gical state." As a result, fornulstion in the title of the book of the "borderline
between normal and pathology" becones somewhat vague and indistinct as the object
of prediction.

Some of the definitions used in the book could also be questioned. For example,
adaptation is defined only as protective reactions against factors that bees-e
deleterious if the body's adaptability is inadequate. Evidently, this formulation
requires better definition. For adaptation not only prevents disruption of the
normal, with regard to many factors, but within certain limits it also alters the'
range of normal reactions, i.e., it alters the health level. Sose degree of
adaptation is necessary to achieve the optimal: state. These and certain other
unclear elenents in the text could hardly be considered only asn‘flsw. "they cause
the reader to think and ponder over issues. for which there is still no generally
recognized opinion.

FOR OFFICI‘AsL USE ONLY
-FIHI(NWWCIA1.USEINVLY

Presentation of the author's own data is preceded by a chapter dealing with methods
of predicting states. It is suggested that, in such an evaluation, one single out
the levels of functioning of physiological systems, degree of tension of regula-
tory mechanisms and functional reserves. Primarily the function of the circulatory
system is discussed as a parameter characterizing the level of body function. It
is suggested that ballistocardiography and seismocardiography are capEdient

methods for examining large groups of healthy (or essentially healthy) people. Two
approaches are used to determine the degree of strain on regulatory mechanisms:
mathematical analysis of heart rate and assay of sodium:potassium ratio in saliva.
Depending on the purpose of the studies, the heart rate is evaluated either solely

thereof in a time series. According to the author's experience, the results of

bellistocardiography and seismocardiography also furnish material for_making a
judgment about functional reserves. '

It is recommended that changes occurring over a 26-h period are an effective
approach to assess the state of the entire organism. Two simplified parameters
are proposed to characterize the daily dynamics of a given subject: the parameter
of 24-h adaptability and coefficient of synchronization of functions. The former
is the ratio of difference in values of the measured parameter of the state of

The next chapters submit the results of the extensive research conducted by the
author and his colleagues. The listed methods and a number of other physiological
techniques were used in laboratory experiments for the study of hypokinesia, pro-
longed sleep deprivation, activity simulating operator work, as well as under the
ordinary conditions of work and sports activity. The author validly believes that
the demonstrated signs of strain could be of prognostic value to determine the
possibility of disruption of the norm with further increase in intensity and dura~
tion of loads. At the same time, after scrutinizing the data submitted in this book,
it remains unclear as to whether the demonstrated levels of tension necessarily
indicate onset of pathology if the load is increased. There are few confirmations
of such prognostic value of the levels of parameters studied, and the submitted
data have such meaning apparently in only the concrete cases discussed. Moreover,
in the discussion of factual data, consideration is not given to the fact that

a certain level of tension in routine activity is a mandatory prerequisite for op-
timum existence and complete health of man.

The last chapter is of great interest; it reports on the experience of mass screen-
ings conducted for the detection of prenosological states. A fortunate combination

interest, but can be used for working out specific preventive measures.

The author's tendency to place all of the complicated factors he describes into
prepared charts characterizing the structure and functions of the human body, as

well as a penchant for concepts and terms of cybernetics and regulation theory,
constitute a certain deterrent to the reading of the book. However, such

us
FIlRCNHﬂCIAl.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uniqueness of the presentation by no neans minimises the interest of the work in
question or its significance. The extensive factual Interisl submitted by the
author, as well as the vast literature on the subject, are instructive and useful
to a wide range of specialists working on applied hmnan physiology and my
branches of medicine. No doubt, anyone who has to work with or is interested in
the probls- of predicting health disturbances in nan under different living and
working conditions will refer to the book by 1!. H. Bayevskiy.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nauks", "Uspekhi fisiologicheskikh nsuk". 1981

10,657
cs0: 1860/999

FOR 0M]. USE ONLY
FIHI¢DFIICIA1.§EHE(HVLY

UDC: 615.782-053-033/36

RATE OF HEXENAL DETOXIFICATION AND INDUCTION OF THIS PIDCISS IN RATS RAISED
UNDER CONDITIONS OF HUSCULAR LOADS

Leningrad ZHURNA1.8VOLYUTSIONNOY BIOKHIHII I PIZIOLOGII in Russian Vol 27, no 3,
Hay-Jun 81 p 332

[Abstract of article by V. D. Rosanova, Scientific Research Institute of Normal
Physiology imeni P. K. Anokhin, USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, filed
with the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Scientific and Technical
Information, 1980, 9 pages]

{Text} In view of data to the effect that muscular loads of the physiological
stress type enhance nonspecific resistance, as well as the fact that glucocorti-
coids stimulate the activity of microsomal enzymes of the liver, which metabolize
xenobiotics, a study was made of the effect of muscular loads used in the course
of deveIOpment of rats of both sexes between the 1st and 5th-6th months. It was
demonstrated that there is briefer duration of hexenal detoxification (van) in
experimental rats and increased induction of this process by small doses of pheno-
barbital (l, 10 and 20 mg/kg). The hypothesis is expounded, on the basis of
increased mass. relative weight of the adrenals and their cortical layer in rats
developing with the use of muscle loads, that the inductive effect of muscular
burdens occurs through activation of the hypophyseohypothalamic neurosecretory
system. This influence is more marked in experimental females than males, since
females normally present less motor activity. Moreover, it was demonstrated that
there is an 181 increase in-phospholipid content and 101 increase in protein
content in the liver of experimental females. This, as well as the greater
shortening of nan. are indicative of increased synthesis of microsomal enzymes in
the hepatic endoplasmic reticulum due to masculinisation of females and the
increased activating effect of androgens.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel' stvo "Nauka" "Zhurnal evolyutsionnoy biokhinii i fiziologii".
1981

10,657
080: 1860/999

he
won omcm. use ONLY
FOR!0FFNJAI.USE(MVLY

UDC: 612.006.3
ALL-UNION SYMPOSIUM ON 'SELP-REGULATION 0F FUNCTIONS AND STATBS'

Leningrad FIZIOLOGICHBSKIY ZHURNAL SSSR IHENI I. H. SBCHENOVA in Russian V01 67,
No 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received 29 Dec 80) pp 931-933

[Article by N. N. Vasilevskiy]

[Text] A symposium convened in Leningrad on 2-3 October 1980, which dealt with
the problem of self-regulation of functions and states; it was organized by the
Academy of Medical Sciences and Scientific Research Institute of Experimental
Medicine, USSR Academy of Medical Sciences. Prominent physiologists, pathophysio—
logists and clinicians from 18 cities of our country (Hoscow, Leningrad, Novosibirsk,
Riga, Vilnius, Alas-Ate, Tbilisi, Yerevan, Karaganda and others), representing

32 scientific and scientific-practical institutions, participated in the symposium.
Four problems were discussed at the symposium: neurophysiological mechanisms of
somatic and visceral systems, evolution and ontogenesis of self-regulation of
functions and states, self-regulation of functions during adaptation of man and
methods of adaptive biocontrol in clinical practice.

In his paper, V. N. Chernigovskiy stressed the fact that one of the universal mechan-
isms of self-regulation of functions is habituation. He demonstrated the link be-
tween habituation and processes of reactive inhibition in nerve cells to which
afferent signals are repeatedly directed. The speaker discussed a hypothesis,
according to which the dynamics of excitatory and inhibitory processes conform

with the principle of Le Chatelier.

In recent years, convincing data have been accumulated concerning the importance
of biorhythms in mechanisms of homeostasis and adaptation. Some new data were
reported on combinatory patterns in time and specs organisation of EEG rhythms of
man during adaptation to the extreme conditions of Antarctica: individual varia-
tions were demonstrated in stable associations between different components of

EEG rhythm (s. I. Soroko, s. s. Bekahaysv. V. B. Xutuyev). Cyclically recurring
combinations of EEG rhythm components in man and animals were discovered, which
reflect differentially various functional states (N. N..Vasilevskiy, N. B. Suvorov,
V. V. Ur'yssh, G. V. Kukhtina).

In the paper of V. A. Hatyukhin, analysis was made of the effects of biorhythmolo-
gical and climate factors on man. It was shown that a state of chronophysiological
tension, which leads to so-called circadian and seasonal desynchronosis, develops
when one crosses the time zones. Suggestions were advanced for setting standards
of chronophysiological burdens and climate contrast for pilots and individuals
working on a periodic schedule. ' .

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A series of papers dealt with the distinctions of cardiac rhythm under normal and
pathological conditions. D. I. Zhemaytite distinguished two extreme variants

of functional state of the heart, which are characterized by stabilization of

sinus rhythm at rest and with maximal burden, respectively. When there is pre-
valence of parasympathetic influences, respiratory arrhythmia is a typical finding;
with increase in sympathetic influences slower flucutations of heart rate appear.

A classification was proposed for rhythmograms, as well as algorithms for automatic
analysis thereof, the results of which could be used as prognostic criteria for
athletes and patients with ischemic heart disease (Yu. I. Brozhaytene, A. B.
Zhukauskas, A. K. Kepezhenas, G. A. Varonetskas).

In extreme situations and with nociceptive stimuli, there is development, as
demonstrated by V. s. Khrapov, of disorders referable to the cardiovascular system
and energy supply to the myocardium. Blocking of the adrenergic system prevents
[or eliminates] edema and swelling of the brain.

N. I. Hoiseyeva, V. H. Doronicheva, V. M. Akhutin, A. I. Monakhov and others called
attention to analysis of variable parameters in evaluating man's condition. The
marked time structure of circadian biorhythms of parameters of functions, rela-
tively high average values, constancy of maximum and minimum, and others are
indicators of a stable normal state of the human body.

Low-frequency components of biorhythms in the second and decasecond ranges for
the EEG, so-called quasistable differences in brain potential, cardiac rhythm and
others play an important role in processes of adaptive self-regulation of states
(V. A. Ilyukhina, Ye. G. Vashchillo, N. K. Stepanov, K. F. Peskovskiy and others).
This made it possible to advance the conception of adaptogenic rhythms (N. N.
Vasilevskiy), by means of which, as demonstrated by z. A. Aleksanyan and I. a.
Kiselev, intersystem interaction of functions during adaptation and learning is
provided.

As reported by P. I. Gummer, correlations between fluctuations of heart rate
frequency and parameters of EEG rhyttms in the range of 0.1-0.01 112 are observed
with functional and information loads. In the paper of D. N.,Menitskiy, A. u.
Zingerman and M. H. Kozlovskaya, they submitted the results of a study of the
mechanisms of voluntary regulation of heart rate, demonstrating individual differ-
ences and the possibility of modulation thereof from 50 to 120 beats/min in the
presence of variable psychoemotional tension, which makes it possible to super-
impose specified sinusoids (0.01-0.15 Hz) with the frequency envelope of cardiac
rhythm under visual monitoring.

Formulation of the principle of continuous development and biorhythmological
control of memory, which explains satisfactorily the distinctions of readaptation
and repeated adaptation, the discreteness of arrays of information in manory and
many of its properties related to providing for stable states and distinctions of
reproducing them prompted animated discussion (N. N. Vasllevskiy). G. A.
Vartanyan, Ye. I. Varlinskaya and S. P. Shklyaruk submitted data on neurochemical
(peptide) regulation of stable states in the presence of brain lesions, and
demonstrated that it is possible to transfer them by means of injection of spinal
fluid (or peptide fractions) to intact animals. Yu. P. Gichev reported that,

in the case of adaptation to climate, changes in the reaction of lipid peroxidation
combined with evaluation of antioxidant activity and concentration of blood choles-
terol could serve as useful prognostic indicators of adaptation.

So
son omcm. use ONLY
FINICNHWCJA1.USE2(HVLY

At the symposium, there was also discussion of questions of ontogenesis of bio-
rhythmological characteristics of functions and states. There was demonstration
of the distinctions of rhythms of behavior, EEG, ENG, respiration and neuronal acti-
vity. A. V. Voyno-Yasenetskiy stressed the leading role of autorhythmic mechanisms
at the early stages of ontogenesis in regulation of behavior and physiological
rhythms. In the course of phylogenesis, as in ontogenesis, there is a change from
period, autorhythmic bursts of activity to continuous rhythmic processes. Under
adverse conditions, one observes a return to periodic bursts of activity. 0. V.
Bogdanov demonstrated that there is directional change in motor functions, EEG and
neuronal activity from the 18th day of embryogenesis in chickens, against the
background of synchronization of EEG of different structures of the brain and

a shift to the low-frequency range. I. G. Dik and Ye. L. Hikhaylenok located
synchronizing mechanisms in the nuclei of the srchistriatum.

V. V. Petelina studied the distinctions of formation of skill in controlling
prostheses in disabled children of different ages. I. I. Yevsyukov and V. H.
Sysuyev studied respiratory biorhythms of children of different ages under normal
and pathological conditions. The stability of biorhythm structure is related to
age and severity of illness. Yu. H. Pratusevich submitted data on factor and
discriminant analysis of the EEG of school children, demonstrating individual dif-
ferences in time and space distribution of EEG components and changes therein at

different periods of the school year, and related them to development of supra-
liminal inhibition.

There was broad coverage of the results of studies dealing with directional modifi-
cation and states by the method of adaptive biocontrol, which could be viewed as
instrumental methods of autotraining. In his paper, N. V. Chernigovskiy reported
on the use of these methods in neurology for patients with neuroses, epilepsy

and arachnoiditis. Determination was made of the factors that provide for maximum
efficacy: maximum approximation of the type of biocontrol to the clinical distinc-
tions of the disease, consideration of the functional state and psychophysiological
status of the patient. I. A. Svyatogor, S. A. Hovsisyants, D. A. Stafilova, Ch.
Chopanov and Ye. A. Kaydanova submitted the results of analysis of evoked potentials,
EEG and other functions with biocontrol of EEG and galvanic skin response. De-
stabilization of pathological slow activity served as a positive prognostic element.
A. N. Timofeyeva, V. T. Markman, A. N. Avsarkisyan and A. A. Vereshchagina reported
the results of comparative analysis of voluntary control of the BEG by neurasthenic
patients, as well as in combination with the EEG, galvanic skin response and simple
motor reaction time.

Some of the papers dealt with pharmacological control of functions and states of
the brain and visceral systems (A. V. Val'dman, A. M. Zinger-an, M. . Kozlovskaya,
A. V. Hartynikhin, I. S. Horosov and others). The opinion was expressed that
there are apparently different neurochenical bases for activating and tranquilizing
effects. The influence of tranquilizers is different on effects of psychoemotional
tension. If it is associated with improved quality of a subject's performance,

the tranquilizer improves performance, lowering the tonic effect of stress. Con-

versely, tranqu1lizers improve performance if it was diminished in the presence
of stress.

In the discussions of the main and display papers, it was stressed that new and
original experimental, clinicophysiological and clinical data were reported at this
symposium, which deepen current conceptions of nervous, neurohumoral and metabolic

51
ron omcm use ONLY
FORlDFﬂKJAl.USE(HVLY

mechanisms of self-regulation of functions. The symposium demonstrated the promise
of complex analysis of hierarchically related mechanisms of self-regulation of func-

tions and states.

It was also stressed at the symposium that it would be beneficial to organize, in
the future, special discussions of neurophysiological mechanisms of adaptive regula-
tion of the state of the nervous and visceral systems, as well as of functional'
methods of rehabilitation in sports and clinical practice, as one of the promising
means of linking physiology with practice.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", Piaiologichaskiy shurnal SSSR in. I. M. Sechenova,
1981

10,657
cso: moo/999

52
FINICﬂﬁﬁCJAI.USE(NQLY
FOI.OFIﬂCJAl.lEﬂE(ﬂQLY

ULTBAHBAK RADIATION IN INTERCELLULAR INTERACTION

Novosibirsk SVERKHSLABYYE IZLUCHENIYA V HBZHKLBTOCENYKB VZAIHDDBYSTVIYAKE in Russian
1981 (signed to press 25 Feb 81) pp 2-6, 122

(Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Ultrauesk Radiation in
Intercellular Interaction", by Vlail' Petrovich Kasnacheyev and Lyudmila Pavlovna
Hikhaylova, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 2800 copies. 122 pages]

[Text] This monograph deals with the conception of informational intercellular
interactions within the electromagnetn:communication channel. Experimental data
are submitted on the biological significance of the cell's ultraweak radiation
due to the extreme effects of biological, chemical and physical agents in

remote intercellular interactions. A description is offered of a set of methodo-
logical approaches to recording ultraveak cellular radiation during remote inter-
cellular interactions and its prognostic evaluation. There is demonstration of
the prospects of using this source of valuable information about the physiological
state of cells, integrity and impairment of their structures. This book is in-
tended for specialists in biophysics, biology and biochemistry. Tables 35,
figures 55, references 260.

Foreword

Modern biology has made considerable strides in learning about the diverse mani-
festations of living things, basic foundations, general patterns of organisation
and evolution of life on earth. Continued progress in the science that deals with‘
life requires not only increasing depth of penetration into the essence of pro-
cesses of interaction between matter and energy, but investigation of informative
interactions in biological systems. The founder of this new direction of investi-
gation of the properties of living systems. A. G. Gurvich, demonstrated that it

is possible for information to be transmitted from one cell to another by the
photons of an electromagnetic field, and he expounded the hypothesis that there
are fields in living systems, which he named "biological" fields. Unfortunately,
this direction is not being developed intensively enough in our times. At the
present time, problems of transmission of biological information, recording and
storing it in both cells and between cells and organs are acquiring first and
foremost importance. It is impossible to attribute control of certain metabolic
and trophic processes, which prevail both within cells and in the entire animal
and human body, solely to neurohormonal and humoral (biochemical), as well as the
known biophysical factors (change in various potentials, gradients, etc.). It is
imperative to search for other, more efficient communication channels. At the

53
FOR omcuu use ONLY
l1)! OW1WCJAl.lEﬂE(ﬂVLY

same time, questions were validly raised already in the early works of Soviet
scientists (A. G. Gurvich, B. S. Bauer, V. I. Vernadskiy, A. L. Chiabevskiy and
others) concerning the thermodynamic characteristics of life processes, and efforts
were made to investigate the informational mechanisms that are specifically inherent
to biological phenomena. The existence of ultraweak electromagnetic radiation is
now recognized universally, and it has been experimentally demonstrated in all
tested plant and animal cells. It was found that so-cslled spontaneous fluores-
cence of biological systems is a universal property of living cells (Tarusov, 196$;
Zhuravlev et al., 1961, 1975; Hamedov, 1976; Barenboyn, 1966; Vladimirov, 1966;
Marchenko, 1973; Konev, 1965; Rorr, 1979). The signaling function of this radi-
ation is still debatable.

In this book there is discussion of the literature and results of the authors'
experimental studies of the possibility of transmission of biological information
by means of ultraweak electromagnetic radiation. For a long time, the authors

and their colleagues have been working on the problem of "Ultraweak radiations in
intercellular interactions." Much experimental material has been accumulated,

which makes it possible to derive some conclusions as to the presence of remote
intercellular electromagnetic interactions (electromagnetic bioinformation). Having
studied for many years the ultraweak radiations in animal and human cells and tissues,
we concluded that this phenomenon requires in-depth investigation, not only in the
biophysical, but cybernetic aspects. With reference to ultraweak radiation of
living cells from the cybernetic (informational) point of view, it can be assumed
that control of biological processes is one of the main functions of electromagnetic
radiation emitted by living systems. Radiation is recorded by physical methods,
i.e., it can be identified as electromagnetic (of a specific frequency, very low
intensity). These and other terms related to radiation were taken from physics,

and they retain their physical meaning. However, the term, "biofield," taken from
physics by A. G. Gurvich, cannot yet be identified as any specific physical field
(electromagnetic, acoustic or other). The facts we have described are not ordinary,
and they cannot be interpreted from the "recognised" vantage points of modern
science. We cannot discuss with sufficient competence the obtained phenomenon of
remote intercellular interactions in terms of an optical communication channel in
the cybernetic or physicochemical aspect. At the same time, we must use terms
taken from these sciences, and in some cases we-describetheir content intuitively.
The possible mistake [incorreccness], from the point of view of specialists, is
attributable to the fact that, being biologists, we preferred to retain only the
biological level in evaluating the phenomenon described.

The purpose of this book was to call attention to a very important problem. that

of transmission of electromagnetic biological information. In our opinion, solution
thereof will make it possible to outline new approaches to such biological problems
as development, growth, aging mechanisms and onset of malignant neoplasms. The
search for possible routes of solving such important problems leads to efforts at
generalizing and summing up the results of many years of investigations. which is
what we tried to do in this book.

The authors express their sincere appreciation to the following: 5. B. Stefanov,
who offered considerable help in morphometric processing of our experimental data;
3. H. Vladimirskiy; the staff of the Crimean Observatory and Biophysics Laboratory
of the Institute of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Siberian Branch of the
USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, Prof N. N. Vorob'yeva and Prof A. N. Mosolov, who
offered a number of valuable comments about this book.

Sh
roe omcur use ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

Contents

Foreword
Chapter 1. The Problem of Informative Function of Ultraueak Radiation
in Intercellular Interactions
Chapter 2. Methods and Conditions for Investigation of Intercellular
Interactions
Choice of chambers
Characteristics of tissue culture and nutrient medium
Trays for raising tissue cultures in chambers
Determination of chamber contact exposure to obtain s 'mirror' TsPB
[cytopathogenic cﬁect’t]
General set-up of the experiment
Chapter 3. Remote Interaction in a System of Two Cell Cultures when One
of Them is Exposed to an Extreme Biological, Chemical or Physical Factor
Use of Cossackie virus Arl3 as an extreme agent
Use of FPV virus as an extreme agent
Use of adenovirus as an extreme agent
Use of mercury dichloride (sublimate) as an ektrame agent
Recovery of 'mirror' TsPB'through successive passages
Remote intercellular interactions under the influence of an extreme
physical agent-u1traviolet radiation
Remote intercellular interactions with the use of a model of a
controllable mitotic cycle
Evaluation of reliability of obtained results
Remote intercellular interactions in a system of two heterogeneous
cell cultures
Chapter 4. Electromagnetic Nature of Remote Intercellular Interactions
Chapter 5. Effect of Heliogeomagnetic Situation on Remote Intercellulsr
Interactions
Chapter 6. Discussion of Findings
Bibliography
Appendix

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

10,657
CSO: 1840/10

55
ms OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR43FFKJA1.USEIONLY

UDC: 616-003o96-616.65-001.1/.3-616-084
ADAPTATION, STRESS AND PREVENTION 4

Moscow ADAPTATSIYA, STRESS I PROFILAKIIKA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 12 Dec
80) Pp 2-6, 275-276 '

[Annotation, foreword by 0. G. Gazenko and table of contents from book "Adaptation,
Stress and Prophylaxis", by Feliks Zalmanovich Heyerson, editor in chief--Academi-
cian 0. c. Gazenko, Department of Physiology, USSR Academy of Sciences,
Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 9200 copies, 278 pages] ’

[Text] This monograph deals with the problem of adaptation to physical loads,
altitude hypoxia, difficult environmental situations and diseases. It is.shown
that adaptation to all these factors is based on activation of nucleic acid and
protein synthesis, as well as formation of a structural trace in systens responsible
for adaptation. A significant part of the book is concerned with discussion of
possibility of using adaptation for the prevention of diseases of circulatory
organs and the brain, as well as chemical prevention of stress-induced lesions.

This book is intended for biologists and medical specialists concerned with prob-
lems of adaptation. training and stress, as well as cardiologists, pharmacologists
and physiologists. Figures 50, tables 42, references 618.

Foreword

Adaptation of nan and aninals to the environment is one of the main problems of
biology. This area of research was and is still the source of vivid examples of
amazing perfection of living systems, as well as the arena for interesting
scientific debates.

The last decade has imparted a distinctly pragmatic flavor to the adaptation
problem. The demands made of nan by the intensive development of civilization,
exploration of air space, outer space, polar regions and world oceans have led to
clear realization of the fact that use of the natural route of adaptation of an
organism to environmental factors makes achievements possible that were impossible
yesterday and permits preserving health under conditions that, it would seem, must
inevitably cause illness and even death. It has become apparent that long-term,
gradually developing and rather reliable adaptation is a mandatory prerequisite
for expanding man's endeavors under unusual environmental conditions, as well as
an important factor in enhancing resistance of a healthy organism in general and
prevention of various diseases in particular. Purposeful use of long-term adapta-
tion for these purposes requires not only general understanding of adaptation. not
only a description of its diverse variants, but first of all disclosure of the

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

endogenous mechanisms of adaptation. For the last 20 years. the research of P. 2.

Heyerson, which is summarized in this book. has dealt expressly with this main
problem of adaptation.

reaction of the organism, which is largely imperfect. Appearance of a functional I
system per se is not sufficient for fuller and better adaptation; there must also

be structural changes that fix the system and increase its "physiological power"
in cells and organs that form such a system.

The correlation between function and genetic system of the cell, which exists in
cells, is the key element of the mechanism that implements this process and, con-
sequently, the key element of all forms of phenotypic adaptation. As shown by P. z.
heyerson, a functional load elicited by environmental factors leads to increased

structural trace in the systems that are specifically responsible for the body’s
adaptation to a specific environmental factor. Cytological, biochemical and physio-
logical studies conducted by the author revealed that this is associated mostly

with increase in mass of membrane structures responsible for the cell's reception

of controlling signals, ion transport, energy supply, etc. The forming "systemic
structural trace" constitutes the foundation for reliable, long-term phenotypic
adaptation.

In developing this conception, F. 2. Heyerson found out that the role of the non-
specific stress syndrone in onset of adaptation consists of "erasing" old structural
traces and, so to speak. transferring the released resources of the organism to

the systems where a new structural trace is formed that is consistent with the
existing situation. The author formulates and validates theses concerning immedi-

advanced in this book. The author's ideas that the trace itself is, in essence,
the structural equivalent of the dominanta, that the system responsible for adapta-
tion functions conservatively [economically] and, finally, the idea that anti-
stressor systems exist which enable the organism to adapt even to difficult

stress situations that would appear hopeless at first glance, are interesting and
important. These new concepts are validated in the book by the results of compre-
hensive experimental research done in the author's laboratory, many of which have
gained broad recognition both in our country and abroad.

adaptation to influence animal behavior and resistance to deleterious factors, as
well as to prevent acute cardiac insufficiency, ischemic necrosis of the myocardium
and hereditary hypertension, the pathogenesis of which is very similar to human
essential hypertension, merit the reader's special attention. '"Imitating the
organism," the author used metabolites of natural antistreaser systems and their
synthetic analogues for effective chemical prevention of stress-related lesions

to the viscera. Probably, these results will find application in the future to
enhance resistance of healthy people, to prevent noninfectious diseases that
constitute one of the main problems of modern medicine.

5?
ma omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This book addresses itself to a wide range of biologists and medical men, since
all representatives of biology and medicine essentially encounter in the course
of their work, somehow or other, the problem of adaptation of the sick or the
healthy. '

I believe that this new and interesting work on the problem of adaptation will be
of keen interest to specialists in many branches of biology and medicine, and that
it will serve as an additional impetus for research on this important problem.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Introduction 5
Chapter 1. Main Patterns of Phenotypic Adaptation 13
Immediate and long-term stages of adaptation - 13
Systemic structura1 trace as the basis of adaptation .18
Correlation between function and genetic system as the foundation for
formation of a systemic structural trace 26
Conservatism of function as the main feature of an adapted system 53
System responsible for adaptation as the dominant system of the body . 60
Reversibility of adaptation, phenomena of physiological and pathological
deadaptation 68

Role of the stress syndrome in formation of_systemic structural trace,
correlation between specific and nonspecific elements of adaptation,

main stages of adaptation 76
Structural cost of adaptation - 83
Chapter 2. Development of Adaptation to Hypoxia and Use Thereof for
Preventive Purposes 89
Systemic structural trace and main stages of adaptation to hypoxia 92
Adaptation to hypoxia as a preventive factor 97
Chapter 3. The Compensatory Process as One of the Adaptive Reactions of
an Injured Organism . 115
Chapter 4. Systemic Structural Trace as the Basis of Memory and Higher
Adaptive Reactions 126
Correlation between memory and adaptation 126
Correlation between function and genetic system as the basis of memory
of the brain and higher adaptive reactions'of the organism 128

Role of emotional stress in forming higher adaptive reactions, similarity
of dynamics of formation of the conditioned reflex and other adaptive

reactions 135
Main stages of formation of conditioned reflex; differences and features

in common in higher and simple adaptive reactions of the organism 142
Effect of adaptation to hypoxia on formation of temporary associations,

behavior and resistance of the brain to deleterious factors 145

Chapter 5. Stress and Stress-Induced Lesions 160

Deleterious stress situation and pathogenesis of stress-induced peptic _

ulcer 163
Pathogenesis of stress-induced heart lesions 169

Stress as one of the main etiological factors of pathdlogy, activation of
peroxidation of lipids as the common'element of different stress-induced
lesions 192

58
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. Adaptation to Stress Situations, and Systels of Natural
Prevention of Stress-Induced Lesions
Activation of GABAergic inhibitory system in stress as a natural
mechanism of prevention of stress lesions
Activation of proatsglsndin system as a mechanism of prevention of
stress lesions
Antioxidant factors of the organisl as a systal of natural prevention
of stress- and hypoxia-induced lesions
Conclusion

Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

10,657
050: 1840/999

59
ron omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' UDC: 591.1:591.553.4
ANIMAL ADAPTATION T0 “INTER CONDITIONS

Moscow ADAPTATSIYA ZRIVOTNYKB K ZIHNIH USLOVITAH in Russian 1980 (signed to press
20 Nov 80) pp 2-6, 160

[Annotation, foreword by D. A. Krivolutskiy and table of contents from book
"Animal Adaptation to Winter Conditions", edited by Academician V. Ye. Sokolov,
Institute of Evolutionary Anima1.Horphology and Ecology imeni A. U. Severtsov,
USSR Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Hanks”, 2150 copies, 166 pages]

[Text] This collection is comprised of articles dealing with questions of adapts-
tion of animals of different systematic groups (insects, soil invertebrates, amphi-
bians, birds, mammals) to winter living conditions. The collection was based on
papers delivered at the Soviet-Finnish symposium, which convened in April 1978.

This book is intended for a wide circle of morphologiats, ecologists and physiologists.

Foreword

The collection offered to the readers consists of the papers delivered at the
Soviet-Finnish symposium on the topic of "Animal Adaptation to Winter Conditions,"
which convened in Moscow on 18-21 April 1978, in accordance with the plans for
scientific and technological collaboration between the USSR and Finland. The
symposium was organized and conducted by the organising committee, which was formed
by decision of the Department of General Biology, USSR Academy of Sciences; this
committee was headed by Academician V. Ye. Sokolov, while all the technical work

was done by the staff of the Institute of Evolutionary Animal Morphology and

Ecology imeni A. N. Severtsov, USSR Academy of Sciences. About 30 Soviet zoologists,
as well as 6 zoologists from Finland, participated in the symposium.

The meetings of the symposium began on 18 April 1978 with opening remarks delivered
by Academician M. s. Gilyarov and greetings offered by I. B. strskiy, corresponding
member of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, chairman of the Soviet part of the
Soviet-Finnish work group for collaboration in the field of zoology and experimental
biology.

The topic of the symposium can be viewed as the traditional direction of work of
zoologists and ecologists of the USSR and Finland over a period of many decades.
In the boreal zone of the Palearctic region, where Finland and a significant part
of the USSR are situated, the low winter temperatures and seasonal freezing of
the ground or presence of permafrost place the strongest imprint on ecology of
different animal species, their location over this territory, formation of fauna
and structure of the animal population.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The participants at the symposium demonstrated in their papers that low winter
temperatures, particularly in very cold years, could cause a catastrophic decline
in number of not only warm-blood animals or poikilothermic vertebrates, which was
generally known before, but of many invertebrates.

The considerable experience in working on animal ecology at low teweratures, which
was accumulated in the.USSR and Finland, could not, of course, be used in its
entirety and reflected in the proceedings of this recent symposium, nor did the
organizers have this goal in mind. But the animated and productive exchange of
opinions showed that ecologists of our country and Finland understand each other

well, since they are working on similar problems and using the same investigative
methods.

The symposium ended on 21 April, and one of the oldest Soviet ecologists, N. I.
Kalabukhov, delivered the closing remarks. After the working program, there was
unanimous approval of a resolution, in which the symposium participants noted the
timeliness and benefit of convoking the conference, since the topic of the symposium
reflects one of the main directions of work of zoologists of the two countries.

It is unquestionable that continued research in this direction is very important

to the study of the process of adaptive evolution, development of methods of
controlling animals that are harmful to man in a cold climate, and animal acclima-
tization. The participants of the symposium noted the desirability of continued
collaboration of Soviet and Finnish ecologists in the area of studying animal adap-
tation to low temperatures, cold winters, frozen ground, snow, etc., as well as in
the efficient organization of this symposium.

Contents Page

Adaptations of North-Bast Asian Resident Birds to Winter Conditions

(A. V. Andreyev) 5
Low Temperature Adaptive Mechanisms in Mink and Arctic Boxes
(V. A. Berestov, L. K. Kozhevnikova) ll

Variability of Composition of Pat Reserves in Nibernating Rodents
(Ground Squirrels [susliks] and Chipmunks) and Its Causes

(N. I. Kalabukhov, N. V. Sheykina) 17
Ecological and Morphological Adaptations of Red Squirrel [Sciurus vulgaris I..]

to Winter Temperatures (I. P. Karpukhin) 25
Morphofunctional Adaptations of Heterotherms to Winter Conditions

(P. A. Korzhuyev, G. V. Timoshevskaya, N. V. Borodina) 31
Effect of Temperature and Frozen Ground on Oribatid Kite Complexes

(D. A. Krivolutskiy) 38
Nature of Height Change in Some Passerine Birds Wintering in the North

Temperate Zone (Ye. Lekhikoynen) Mo
Ecological Adaptation of Ungulata to Extreme winter Conditions in the USSR

(A. A. Nasimovich) 58
Analysis of Distinctions of Hybernating Generations of Huridae

(V. G. Olenev, A. V. Pokrovskiy, G. V. Olenev) ﬁlo

Some Seasonal Adaptive Changes in Heat Insulation and Pat in the Great Tit
(Parus major), House Sparrow (Passer domesticus) and Male Black Grouse

(Lyrurus tetrix) in Finland (R. Palokangas) 70
Winter Regression of Body Mass of Rodents as an Adaptive Phenomenon
(P. A. Panteleyev, A. N. Terekhina) 3'5
Ecological-Physiological Adaptations of the Coma Frog (Rana temporaria)
to "inter Conditions (8. Pasanen) 84
61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Role of Snow Cover in the Life of the Forest Reindeer (Rangifer tarandus)

(T. B. Sshlins) 87
Teuperature Conpensation of Tissular Respiration in the Lake Frog (Rana

ridihunda) and Relationship Thereof to Ambient temperature and Hormonal

Influences (A. D. Slonin, G. I. Ibrainova) 93
Histology and Seasonal Distinctions of Eccrine Gland Function in the -"

European Hedgehog (Hrinaceus europaeus) (V. Ye. Sokolov, O. P. Chernovs) 101
Ecological, Physiological and Morphological Adaptations of Yakutsk Manuals

to Winter Conditions (N. G. Solononov, H. V. Popov) 109
Ecophysiological Adaptation of Insects to the Cold Season (R. S. Ushatinakaya) 117
Effect of Winter Temperatures on Spurts of Reproduction of Oporinia

Autmata (Lepidoptera, Geo-etridae) (B. Khaukioya) 126
Nutritional Adaptation of the Reindeer (Rangifer tarandus) to Winter

Conditions (Kh. Khivarinen) ' ' 133
Mortality of Enchytraeidae and Lunbricidae Horns Under the Influence of

Severe Frost (V. Khukhta) 141
Adaptation of the Siberian Hole (Asioscalopa altaica) to Winter Conditions

(3. S. Yudin) 166
Seasonal Changes in Brain Morphology, Main Horphophzsiological Parameters

and Behavior of the Bank Vole (Clethriononys) (V. A. Yaskin) 152

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1980

10,657
030: 1860/999

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR!0FFK]AL.US£(NVLY

UDC 626.02

RIVER FLEET DIVERS

Moscow VODOLAZ RECHNOGO FDOTA in Russian 1978 (signed to press 16 Oct 78) pp 2-3,
103

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "River Fleet Divers”, by

Anton Antonovich Stolbov, Vladimir Georgiyevich Larionov, Leonid Aleksandrovich
Korchinskiy and Abram Borisovich Geyro, Izdatel' stvo "Transport",

6000 copies, 104 pages, illustrated, tables and 18 bibliographic references]

[Text] This book offers information about the lay-out of river vessels, construc-
tion and use of diving gear and equipment, organization and performance of under-
water work from river transport, providing for safety of divers in such work.

It also discusses some problems of river hydrology and diver medicine. The book
is intended for divers, supervisors of diving work, foreman of river work, and

it can also be used as a textbook for instructing third and second class divers
of groups I-II specialization.

The introduction, chapters 1 and 4 were written by v. G. Larionov, chapters 2 and 3
by V. G. Larionov, A. A. Stolbov and A. B. Geyro, Chapter 5 by V. G. Larionov and
A. B. Geyro, and chapter 6 by L. A. Korchinskiy.

Introduction

Development of the national economy of our country under the 10th Five-Year Plan

is inseparably linked with increased transportation of cargo aboard water transport.
For this purpose, new ports and mechanized docks will be constructed, the white Sea-
Baltic Canal and several ports in Siberia and the Far East will be remodeled.

There will be approximately a 221 increase in cargo handled by river transport
under the Five-Year Plan.. The increase in cargo turnover would be impossible with-
out further improvement of navigation conditions on the waterways, without rock-
removing and contraction [river engineering] work.

Divers are used in the construction and remodeling of ports, docks, piers, hydraulic
installations and for improvement of navigation conditions on rivers and lakes.

The volume of diving work on waterways will increase by many times to implement
the future plans for development of river transport, which call for establishment
of a unified deep-water transport system in European USSR and radical improvement
of navigation conditions on Siberian rivers.

The party and government are displaying their concern about the work, life and
recreation of divers. Diving techniques and equipment are being improved, and

63
won OFl-‘IOAI. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

heavy Labor is being mechanized. New prototypes are being created of diving gear
and equipment, rescue vessels and technical floating devices.

The work of a diver is specific, and it is virtually inpossible'to. separate the
labor or to specialize divers when performing diving work. In addition to knowledge
about specialized equipment, the diver nust be proficient in rigging, fitting

and carpentry work, as well as underwater electric and gas welding, underwater
cutting. rules for working with explosives and fundamentals of diver medicine.

For this reason, the diving profession requires special training and constant
upgrading of theoretical knowledge and practical skills.

Contents Page
Introduct ion 3
Chapter 1. Arrangement of River Vessels. Fundamentals of Hydrology lo
1. Arrangement and classification of river vessels 4
2. Some problems of river hydrology 8
Chapter 2. Hydraulic Installations 11
3. Classification of hydraulic installations 11
lo. Hater transport installations 11
5. Contraction and harbor installations 15
6. Underwater installations _ 18
Chapter 3. Orga—nization of Salvage-Rescue, ship-Raising and Underwater ‘
Engineering Work 20
7. Moving stranded vessel 20
8. Raising a sunken ship 25
9. Towing a damaged ship 32
10. Underwater engineering work 33
Chapter 4. Organization of Underwater Blasting 37
11. General rules for preparations and performance of underwater blasting 37
12. Preparing blasting charges and blasting methods 40
13. Methods of underwater blasting 45
11.. Technology of some types of blasting 47
Chapter 5. Diving Gear and Equipment 53
15. Classification of diving gear 53
16. Ventilated gear 55
17. Gear with open breathing system 68
18. Diving equipment and accessories 71
19. Diving tools and monitoring-measuring instruments ' 82
Chapter 6. Specific Diseases of Divers, Treatment and Prevention Thereof 87
20. Physical bases of submersion 87
21. Diseases occurring as a result of significant pressure gradients 90
22. Diseases caused by change in partial gas pressure in inhaled mixture 93
23. Other diseases of divers 96
Appendix 100
Bibliography 102

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Transport", 1978

10,657
CSO: 1840/999

614
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANTHROPOLOGICAL DBVBLOPHBIT OF MAN IN PAST, PRESENT, FUTURE

Moscow CHELOVBK V PROSHLOM, NASTOYASHCEDI I BUDUSHCIIEM (NOVOYB V ZHIZNI, NAUKB,
TEKHNIKB. SBRIA "BIOLOGIYA") in Russian No 5, 1981 (signed to press 22 Apr 81)
pp 2-6, 610

(Annotation, foreword by Prof Ya. Ya. Roginskiy, doctor of biological sciences,

and table of contents from book "Man in the Past, Present and Future. News in Life,
Science and Technology, 'Biology' Series", by Mikhail Isaakovich Uryson, Iat'yana
Ivanovna Alekseyeva and Nina Sergeyevna Sairnova, Iadatal'stvo "Znaniye", 104,390
copies, 64 pages]

[Text] The authors of this collection, who are on the staff of the Institute of
Anthropology, Moscow State University, acquaint us with the current status of
problems of paramount theoretical and practical importance, such as the antiquity
of man, his ecology (correlations with the geographic environment, effect of
climate, landfors and other geographic factors on body schema, physiological and
biochemical processes in the body, etc.), as well as man's evolution (prospects
and tendencies).

Mikhail Isaakovich URYSON, candidate of biological sciences, senior scientist at
the Scientific Research Institute of Anthropology, Moscow State University, has
authored more than 70 scientific works on theoretical problems of anthropogenesis
and evolutionary history of man.

Tat'yana Ivanovna ALEKSBYEVA, doctor of historical sciences, senior scientist at
the Scientific Research Institute of Anthropology, Moscow State University, heads
work dealing with the study of geographic variability of morphophysiological
traits as related to the problem of man's adaptation to extreme living conditions.
she has authored more than 100 scientific works in the field of race studies and
physiological anthropology, including 5 monographs, 2 of which in collaboration
with other authors. Tat'yana Ivanovna has been a member of the World Association
of Human Biologists for many years, and she has participated many times in
international congresses.

Nina Sergeyevna SMIRNOVA, candidate of biological sciences, junior scientist at
the Scientific Research Institute of Anthropology, Moscow State University, has
written more than 30 works on human morphology; she is a constant participant at
international congresses of anthropological sciences, where papers were delivered
on the ethnoterritorial specifics of man's morphological distinctions.

65 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Foreword

This pamphlet was written by major specialists, whose research is widely known in
anthropology. The profound substantiation of the material they selected and its
interpretation are unquestionable. The three articles are connected as the links
of a time chain. Of course, the authors had to dwell only on the most important
problems related to evolution of the human race in such a small popular publication.
The choice of material is entirely consistent with the most current and pressing

The principal content of the first article is referable to paleontology of higher
primates of South and East Africa, covering all of the main finds of austrolopithe-
cines and related forms, including transitory ones to the genus Homo. M. I. Uryson
demonstrates convincingly the importance of these finds in confirmation of Darwin's
theory of relationship of man to African anthropoid monkeys, about Africa as the
ancient native land of the oldest hominids. Finds of the tools of the Olduvai
culture in very ancient layers, the absolute age of which exceeds 2 million
years, confirms the theory of the role of labor in the process of appearance of

man. The author validly observes that the hominid family turned out to be much

more ancient than was previously believed, but that the order of appearance of
"human" traits predicted by c. Darwin and P. Engela' was confirmed: first bipedalism
and then, much later, increase in size of the brain and its differentiation. M. I.
Uryson ends his article with a brief description of the change in forms of extremely
ancient and ancient people, reporting the necessary information about their morpho-
logy and archeology of the Paleolithic age, adhering to stage theory.

The second article was written by T. I. Alekseyeva, who has authored many studies
involving expeditions to different parts of the USSR, including regions character-
ized by extreme climate. She gathered vast material on morphology and physiology
of the indigenous inhabitants of the arctic region. continental and temperate
zones by herself or colleagues under her supervision. Studies were made of types
of constitution, body proportions of indigenous population, metabolic parameters,
levels of cholesterol, gamma globulin fraction, blood pressure and mineral metabo-
lism. Some interesting and important links were demonstrated between the geogra-
phic environment and distinctions of the organism of indigenous population.

T. I. Alekseyeva, making extensive use of data in the literature, offers a des-
cription of different regions in the sense of their effects on the organism-~arctic,
continental, temperate, tropical, desert. Information is given about the effect of
soil composition on skeletal mineralization. The author arrives ultimately at some
substantial theoretical generalizations. The concept of adaptive type should be con-
sidered one of the most important.

Adaptive type refers to the inherited set of properties of an organism, but it is
not the same as racial classification. It emergedlmch later than the major

human races; it is formed in the course of ontogenesis and, not infrequently, at
a very young age. The author describes well the basic differences between man and
animals in adaptation to the geographic environment. One of the possible direc-
tions of future studies of interaction between human groups and the environment

is considered, by this author. to be research on the correlation between the'
normal biological reaction to the environment and economic [industrial?] and cul-
tural type as the norm of the social reaction. There is no need to prove the

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In many respects, the problems raised by the author have not been solved, and

they merit continued comprehensive investigation. Their complexity becomes.ob-
vious, if we bear in mind that the most diverse factors often were present in

the course of the history of people. Thus, when a group arrived in a mountainous
region it was exposed simultaneously to the effects of not only climate conditions
(air temperature, rarefaction, etc.) but of isolation. Moreover, these factors
yielded different results, depending on the duration of the stay at high altitude,
altitude above sea level, influences of the environment from which the people
migrated to the mountains. The intensity of selection was not necessarily the
same, depending on these circumstances.

Further, at some stage of its history an ethnic group in the tundra or forest

zone could have been formed with mixing of various racial elements then, later on,
be subject to the influence of the opposite process, i.e., isolation. Probably,
this complexity of effects is the reason why seemingly analogous studies led to
dissimilar results for different authors. It should also be borne in mind that,
along with the effect of climate and the environment in general, physical conditions
of industrious endeavors (hunting for marine animals, agriculture using a hoe,
fishing in an ice hole, etc.) could also be significant.

The third article begins with a convincing critique of the predictions of J.
Holden and many other authors, who maintained that there would be profound anatomical
changes in the human body in the distant future.

N. S. Smirnova validly observes the enormous flexibility of man, both as an indivi-
dual and in a group, the tremendous abilities contained in man's biological structure.
In this article, much attention is devoted to cultural and historical complexes, i.e.,
ethnos. The author refers to the works by ethnographers, who pointed-to the signi-
ficant stability of ethnic composition of many peoples. In this regard, it is
logical to touch upon the correlation between ethnos and race. As we know, there

is a basic difference between them. Ethnos is a historical concept and, what

is related to ethnic consciousness is a psychological one. Race is a biological
concept. It is not surprising that there may be different racial elements in an
ethnos and, on the other hand, that different ethnoses may consist of the same or
very similar races. However, it is also common knowledge that, in the course of
ethnos history, the range of distribution of ethnoses and races sometimes coin-

cided, although there is no internal, profound and inseparable link between ethnos
and race.

With all the complexity of processes of formation of ethnoses, it is important to
note that there is some general tendency toward enlargement thereof. The process
of formation of tribes, alliances of tribes, peoples and nations proceeded from
generic organization. Apparently, in general, the larger the association, the
more complex was the racial composition at the early stages of this association.
Hence, stability of an ethnos and its internal unity could not fail to be achieved
by means of racial mixing within the ethnos. There are quite a few nations that
are mixed in composition, which retain their integrity as an ethnos.

I believe that this collection will be useful to all those concerned with problems
of modern anthropology. -

67
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(MNLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010003-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- Contents'

Foreword (Ya. Ya. Roginskiy)
Roots of the Human Race (II. I. Uryson)

Modern Man and H18 Ecological Diversity (1‘. I. Alekseyeva)
W111 Han change in the Future? (N. S. Suit-nova)
COPYRIGHT: Izdntel'stvo "lumiye", 1981

10, 657
080: 1840/ 999

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010003-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUNDAMENTALS OF SPORTS METRDLOGY

Moscow osuovz spouivnov u’rmwcn in Russian 1979 (signed to press 3 Sep 79)
pp 2-10, 150-152 ' '

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Fundamentals of Sports
Hetrology" by Vladimir HikhaylovichZatsiorskiy, Izdstel'stvo 'Piskul'tura 1
sport", 30,000 copies, 152 pages, illustrated] '

[Text] This book consists of two parts. The first offers, for the first time in
Russian literature, a systematic description of the main problems of sports
metrology, including test theory, evaluation theory, etc. The second part of the
book is a translation of international standards for measuring man's physical
state and is comprised of the following sections: 1. Personal data and sports
history. 2. Medical examination. 3. Physiological measurements and indexes.
5. Body schema and composition. 5. Principal motor tests. This part of the
book can be used as a manual in examining athletes and as a guide. The book is
intended for all those concerned with measurements and monitoring in sports:
trainers, physicians. scientists, highest rank athletes and students at institutes
of physical culture.

Foreword

This book consists of two parts: ‘

1. Fundamentals of sports metrology.

2. International standards for measurement of man's physical state.*

The first part can be viewed as the theoretical foundation, upon which are con-
structed the described standards. ‘

"Fundamentals of Sports Hetrology" was written for individuals reading about the
subject for the first time. The book can be used as an educational textbook for
courses of sports metrology and biometry, as well as self-education. It is assumed
that the reader is informed within the framework of the curriculum of institutes
of physical culture. In particular, knowledge of fundamentals of mathematical
statistics is essential to comprehend the book. Incidentally, readers who do not
remeber these basics too well can use Appendix 1, where the main concepts of
statistics used in the book are explained.

*Prof V. H. Zatsiorskiy and Prof G. s. Tumanyan provided the translation, scientific
editing and comments.

69
INDR OIIHCJAL USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Readers who are well-acquainted with test theory and rating theory will find
that a number of questions are dealt with differently in this book. From this
point of view, the book will probably be also of interest to them.

In view of the fact that sports metrology is a young science and its terminology
has not yet been completely established, a list of the main concepts and terms in
sports metrology is offered as an appendix (Appendix 2). They have been discussed
several times in public.

Standardness of measurement procedures is a mandatory prepequisite for comparing
results. The international standards make it possible to compare the data of
different researchers in different cOuntries, and they make substantially easier

the work of an individual (not only scientist, but physician, trainer, instructor)
who makes the examination and can direct his efforts toward solving his main problems,
trusting the standards with regard to techniques used for taking measurements. This
is far from a complete list of the advantages of standardizing tests.

Development of such standards is not an easy task. For this reason, it was logical
to make use of international knowhow. The proposed international standards are

the result of 10 years of work done by a large team of scientists from different
countries. This work was done within the framework of the Committee for Standardiza-

tion of Tests, which was founded in 1964 at the Olympic Scientific Congress in Tokyo
(for several years, Prof S. P. Letunov was a member of this committee representing

the Soviet Union). To date, only part of the standards have been approved, and
they are submitted to the reader of this book.

He encountered two difficulties in making the translation and editing:

1. Several of the measurement procedures recommended by this standard do not
.conform to the measurement practice that is popular in our country (this applies,
in particular, to the anthropometry section). Such instances are indicated in
footnotes.

2. There are a number of English terms that do not have precise equivalents in

our terminologicalsysten. This applies, in particular, to such a basic term as
'bhysicsl fitness:'listed in the'heading of the standards. It is not very definite,
even in English (at any rate, it has been submitted to repeated criticism in the
Anglosaxon literature). The difficulty increases when it is translated into Russian.
The literal translation, "physical suitability," does not seem to be quite fortunate;
it seems to be a neologism, and the meaning of the original term (physical fitness)
is broader than the Russian work "suitability" ["prigodnost']. Such terms as
"physical conditioning,” "physical development" are also inaccurate. This term has
been translated as "physical state," although some shades of meaning are lost in
this translation. "here expressly these nuances are the most important, we have
used the terms "physical conditioning" or "physical fitness ["suitability"]"
depending on the context.

Translation of the standards was made without deviatingframthe text, with the
exception of some obvious mistakes and typographic errors. which were corrected
and noted in footnotes. He omitted only a few of the ancillary tables (in parti-
cular, conversion of units from the British to the metric system) contained in the
appendix to the standard.

70 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Learning about international standards will probably be of interest to all who
have any contact at all with monitoring and evaluation of man's physical state:
pedagogues, trainers, physicians, anthropologists, physiologists and scientists
in other specialties.

The author wishes to thank all his comrades who participated in the discussions
about terminology, staff members of the department of biomechanics of the State
Central "Order of Lenin". Institute of Physical Culture-M. A. Godik, T. P. Lazarenko,
V. L. Utkin, who reviewed the first part of the book. as well as N. I. Volkov
(bioenergetica), V. P. Chtetsov, Ye. z. Godina (anthropology) and S. K. Sarsaniya
(cardiology) who offered some valuable comments about the second part.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Part 1. Fundamentals of Sports Metrology 5
Introduction
Fundamentals of test theory 9
1. Basic concepts 9
2. Reliability of tests 10
2.1. Concept of test reliability 10
2.2. Evaluation of reliability from experimental data 13
2.3. Reliability in practical work with tests 15
2.4. Stability of test 16
2.5. Coordination of tests 17
2.6. Equivalence of tests 18
2.7. Means of improving test reliability 18
3. Informativeness of tests 19
3.1. Basic concepts 19 _
3.2. Empirical informativeness (first case-the measured criterion
exists) 20
3.3. Empirical informativeness (second case-there is no solitary
criterion; factored informativeness) 22
3.4. Empirical informativeness in practical work 23
3.5. Meaningful (logical) informativenesa 25
Fundamentals of rating theory 27
1. The rating problem 27
1.1. Basic concepts 27
1.2. Scoring tables for different sports and rating scales 29
1.3. Main rating tasks 31
1.4. The criterion problem 31
2. Rating scales 32
2.1. Standard scales 32
2.2. Percentile scales 33
2.3. Standardized I scale 34
2.4. Scale of selected points 34
2.5. Parametric scales 36
3. Norms . 36
3.1. Variants of norms 36
3.2. Age-related norms - 38
3.3. Consideration of body schema distinctions 40
3.4. Suitability of norms 42
71

FOR‘0FF"JAI.USE(MQLY
Appendix

IN)I.OFTﬂ(1AL USEZCRMLY

1. Basic concepts -and statistical formulas
1.1. Variational series
1.2. Means
1.3. Scatter measures
1.4. Distributions
1.5. Correlation and regression
1.6. Variance analysis
2. Basic concepts and terms of sports metrology

?art 2. Measurement of Man's Physical Fitness
Introduction

Section 1.

Personal data and sports history

A. Personal data
3. Sports history

Section 2.

Medical examination

A. Medical history (filled out by subject)
8. Physical (filled out by physician)
c. Laboratory findings

Section 3.

Physiological measurements and indicators

A. General discussion of the problem

53.0.
54.0.
55.0.
56.0.
57.0.
58.0.

Ability to perform maximum work
Experimental laboratories
Environmental conditions
Standardization of tests

Choice of equipment

General cosments on testing methods

3. Standard tests

59.0.
60.0.
61.0.
62.0.

Description of main methods for standard tests
Treadmill test

Bicycle ergometer test

Brgometric step test

C. Measuring procedures

63.0.

D. Determination of maximum aerobic productivity with submaximum tests

66. 0.
65.0.
66.0.
67.0.

Section 4.

Direct and indirect testing of physical fitness

Standard submaximum test
Submaximum field step test

43
1.3
43
u.
u.
as
45
as
as

61
63
66
66
67
69
70
74
78
80
80
80
81
81

_ 82

82
64

86
87
89
91
93
93
98
98
98

Modified submaximum field step test for children 6-10 years of age 99

Evaluation of maximum aerobic productivity according to

motor achievements
Body schema and constitution

A. Anthropometric measurements

68.0.
69.0.
70.0.
71.0.
72.0.
73.0.
74.0.
75.0.
76.0.
77.0.
78.0.

Main measurements

General requirements of measurement conditions
Instruments used for anthropometric measurements
Main anatomical points

Height measurement

Measurement of height of arbitrary points (standing)

Measurement of height of some arbitrary points (sitting down)
Calculation of length of extremities and segments thereof

Measurement of diameters
Measurement of girths
Measurement of thickness of fat folds

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

100
104
105
105
106
106
106
108
108
109
109
110
111
112
8. Analysis of body components

79.0. Total body fat

80.0. Total fluid content of body

81.0. Total potassiun content of body
C. Maturation

82.0. Determination of stages of sexual maturation
83.0. Bone age
Section 5. Main tests of physical conditioning

Introduction

8b.0. General instructions

85.0. Sprinter's SO—m dash

86.0. Horizontal jumps

87.0. Average and long distance running
88.0. Measurement of hand strength

89.0. Pull-ups

90.0. Hanging with bent arns

91.0. Relay [”shuttle"?] races

92.0. Sit-ups (30 a)

93.0. Forward bending (in sitting position)
96.0. Forward bending (in standing position)

Appendices

Appendix 1. Guide on classification of types of work
Classification of types of work

Appendix 2. Guide on classification of ethnic groups

Appendix 3. Guide for examination of cardiac function
1. Auscultation and palpation
2. Measurement of blood pressure
3. Determination of heart volume [size]

Appendix 4. Nonogram of ponderal index

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Fizkul'tura i sport", 1979

10,657
050: 1840/999
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

RADIATION BIOLMY

000: 577.3
HYPOTHESIS OP ENDOCRPIOUS RADIOBESISTANCE 3mm

Hoscow GIPOTBZA Eunocmoco POM RADIORBZISTKNTNOSTI in Russian 1930 (signed to
press 29 May 80) PP 2-6, 147, 176

[Text] This nonograph deals with conceptions of biophysical and biochemical mech-
-anisms of the radioprotective effect. There is critical discussion of biochemical

temporarily heightened resistance to radiation. The book submits data on the
mechanisms of formation and protective action of endogenous, biologically active
substances. The book is intended for a wide range of different specialists-
biologists, physicists, chemists, physicians, graduate and senior year students
at relevant VUZ's.

Foreword

of preventive agents and validation of the hypothesis expounded by the authors
of "endogenous radioresistance background," which combines well their conceptions
of endogenous radiosensitiaing agents and endogenous radioprotective agents with

Research an endogenous lipid radiosensitizing agents, products of lipid peroxidation,
was first begun by Yu. B. Xudryashov over 20 years ago, in connection with theory
of primary mechanisms of radiation sickness developed by B. N. Tsrusov. Ye. N.

?h
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

advanced the idea of complex endogenous background of radioresistance, which is
the relationship between levels of endogenous protective and sensitizing agents
that determine the system's resistance to radiation.

That same year, the Laboratory of Radiation Biophysics was set up in the Department
of Biophysics on the Biology Faculty of Moscow State University, and under the
leadership of Yu. B. Kudryashov research began there on endogenous radioresistanca-
factors, mechanisms of their productioa and influence on primary and subsequent
processes of radiation damage to biological objects and systems.

The staff of this laboratory obtained extensive experimental material to validate
the endogenous background hypothesis. This material is systematized in the
monograph and compared to data in the current literature.

Introduction

The effect of chemical protection against the deleterious action of ionizing radi~
ation was first demonstrated in aqueous solutions in studies of the indirect
effects of radiation and role of free radicals and peroxides of the aqueous
environment in primary radiation processes. This is how the conceptions of "pro-
tective agents" and "protection" against radiation appeared (Dale, 1940, 1942).

In a study of the mechanisms of indirect effect of ionizing radiation on enzyme
solutions, V. Dale demonstrated that thiourea, colloid sulfur and formiate can
attenuate rsdiolysis of enzymes. He assumed that the observed protective effect
occurs as a result of competition for free radicals of water, which appear when

it is submitted to radiolysis. Subsequently, R. Latarjet and B. Ephrati (1948)
described the radioprotective effect of cysteine, glutathione, tryptophan and
other substances in experiments with bacteriophage. The effect of chemical pro-
tection against radiation was discovered in animals only in 1969, when C. Patt et
al. found that cysteine protected rats against radiation lesion, whereas A. nerve
and Z. Bacq demonstrated the radioprotective effect of cyanide on mice. In 1950,
G. Liperos and V. Hosher obtained data indicative of protection of mice against
ionizing radiation with thiourea. In the early 1950's, the works of Z. Bacq et
al. (1951, 1952) were published, which dealt with the strong radioprotective effect
on animals of cysteamine, serotonin, histamine, tryptamine, norepinephrine and
tyramine. All of the tested agents were effective only when given prior to irradi-
ation; for this reason they were named radioprotectors, while protection.against
radiation was called radioprophylaxis. By 1965, about 3000 radioprotective

agents referable to different classes of compounds had been studied; however,

only two classes-amino thiols and indolyl alkylamines-elicited the strongest
radioprophylactic effect.

Of course. every since radioprotectors were discovered, efforts were made to
explain the mechanism of their radioprotective effect. Numerous conceptions of
mechanisms of protection were consistently based on the idea of attenuation of pri-
mary processes of radiation lesion by the radioprotective agents, i.e., processes
of radiolysis of molecules before pathological changes had time to develop in the
organism. Identification of the mechanisms of the radioprophylactic effect made

it possible to pursue a purposeful search for radioprotective agents; however. the
profusion of hypotheses made it difficult to choose the only route of synthesis

of new radioprotective compounds and was mostly indicative of the large number of
methods of expression of chemical protection of biological systems.

75
ron omcnt use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In subsequent years, much attention was devoted not only to the search for new radio-
protective agents, but modification of drugs in order to enhance their radioprophy-
lactic activity. Radiobiologists and chemists directed their efforts toward
expansion of the therapeutic effect of agents, differentiation of side-effects
from influences determining the radioprophylactic effect, search for the means

of prolonging radioprotective action, study of the effects of protective agents

as related to exposure to local and divided doses of radiation, attenuation of the
toxic effects of radioprotectors, etc. There was intensification of work on the
combined use of protective agents with different biological action. The authors
of many works dealing with the search for and refinement of radioprophylactic
agents were governed by the conceptions of an "ideal radioprotective agent"
(Tomson, 1966; Suvorov, Shashkov, 1975; Il'in.et a1., 1975).

Current conceptions of processes of radiation damage served as the basis for various
hypotheses of the abscopal mechanism of radioprophylactic effect. There are facts
that indicate that the intracellular levels of administered radioprotective agents
are not sufficient to protect systems against ionizing radiation; the amount of
agent given is smaller than effective concentration thereof in irradiated solutions,
while the capacity of a given protective agent to react with intracellular molecules
or their radicals is hardly greater than that of endogenous substances. The very
idea of chemical prophylaxis suggests that it is possible to prepare a biological
system for exposure to radiation in advance. This makes it necessary to specify
the processes that are causatively related to formation of radioresistance. The
conceptions of an abscopel mechanism of radioprophylactic effect include hypotheses
of "biochemical shock," "complex biochemical mechanism," "endogenous thiols" and
"endogenous radioresistance background," which constitute attempts at determination
and experimental validation of the significance of specific biochemical changes in
the organism in the radioprotective effect. According to these hypotheses, a
radioprotective agent is capable of inducing changes in a biological system by

the time it is exposed to radiation that bring it to a state of heightened radio-
resistance.

There are many works dealing with the problem of radioprotection with chemical
agents. Suffice it to mention only some ofthe monographs and surveys (Bacq, 1968;
Grayevskiy, 1969; Grodzinskiy, Gudkov, 1973; Zherebchenko, 1971, 1978; Il'in et s1.,
1975; Mozzhukhin, Rachinskiy, 1964; Hosse, 1976; Rachinskiy, Slavachevskaya, 196$;
Romantsev, 1963, 1968; Savich, 1978; Saksonov, shashkov, Sergeyev, 1976, 1978;
Sverdlov, 1968; Suvorov, Shashkov, 1975; Tomson, 1964; Khanson, Romar, 1978; Shal'nov,
1978; Bydus, 1972, 1977, 1978; Yarmonenko, 1969, 1977, 1978; Roumanou, Satome, 1978,
and others), catalogues (Tiunov et a1., 1961, 1964; Huber, Spade, 1961-1963, and
others) and thereby eliminate the need for a comprehensive description of the entire
problem of radioprotective effect. In this book, we shall limit ourselves to dis-
cussion of some of the most important conceptions, in our opinion, of mechanisms of
preventive protection of biological objects and systems against the deleterious
effects of ionizing radiation, and we shall acquaint the reader in more detail

with the hypothesis of endogenous radioresistanca background. In its general

form, we expounded this hypothesis for the first time in 1969 (Kudryashov,
Concharenko). Since that time, a rather large amount of experimental material has
accumulated and we felt that it was necessary to systematize and discuss it.

76
FOR OFFKJA1.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chart 3.
Routes of expression of endogenous radioresiatance background

    
  
  
 

ADMINISTRATION OF RADIOPROTBCTOR

ELEVATION OP LEVELS OF '

ENDOGENWS MINES

   
 

Lommc 6: LEVELS or mocmous LIPID
mmsmsxnzmc AGENTS

       
  
 

      

 

  

+
I Lysis of products of lipid Direct interaction
—— peroxidat ion . with
bionecronolecules

   
   
 
  
    
  
 
   

Depression of processes of
11 id eroxidation

I Vasoconstriction and7or decrease in

   
    
     

0 en u take

+
Tissular:

-—-—1
l h oxia

+ + +
Inhibition o

 

 

I I
Impairment of I+
'11 id metabolism | Elevation of

   
     
     

 

 

 

l

ELEVATION 0F ENDOGENOU
T'dIOL LEVELS

I CHANGE OF BIOCHEMICAL SYSTBIS m STATE 01’ EERADIORESISTANT METABOLIEE

Key: 1) effect on processes of lipid oxidation
2) hypoxic effect
3) effect on system of cellular regulation
4) interaction with bionacronolecules

I
I Inhibition CAMP level
Change in Of DNA syn-

I ion per- _thesis and +

| ‘ meability ' M11313; Activation ‘

I Attenuation of of cell I of protein
toxic radiation nembranes — kinsses

I effect

I

|

FOR OFFICIAYL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contents

Forevord
Introduction

Part I. Mechanisms of Radioprophylactic Effect
Physicochenical mechanism of action of radioprotective agents
The oxygen effect and radioprotection

Redox equilibrium of the system and the radioprophylactic effect
'Biochemical shock' hypothesis

Hypothesis of 'complex biochemical mechanism of radioprotective agents'
Sulfhydryl hypothesis

Part II. Hypothesis of Endogenous Radioresistance Background
Chapter 1. Endogenous Products of Peroxidation of Lipids and
Radioresistance of Biological Systems '
l. Endogenous toxic lipids

2. Involvement of products of lipid peroxidation in development of
primary radiation processes

A. Capacity of products of lipid peroxidation to implement the
abscopal effect of ionizing radiation
B. Radiosensitizing effect of products of lipid peroxidation
3. Levels of endogenous products of lipid peroxidation and
radioresistance of biological systems
Chapter 2. Biogenous Amines and Radioresistence of Biological Systems
1. Biogenous amines and animal radioresistance
2. Biogenous amines and cellular radioresistance

3. Mechanisms of change in levels of biogenous amines in animal
organs and tissues in the radioprophylactic effect
Chapter 3. Routes of Expression of 'Endogenous Background' in the
Radioprotective Effect
1. Hypoxic effect of biogenous amines
2. Effect of biogenous amines on processes of lipid peroxidation
3. Effect of biogenous amines on the syst- of cyclic nucleotides

Conclusion
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Moskovskogo universiteta, 1980

10,657
CSO: 1840/999

78 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR‘OFIWCIAI.USEiCN§LY

HUHAI FACTORS

UDC: 621.:534

Moscow BIOHEKHANIKA SISTEM CHELOVEKFHASHINA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 5 Feb
81) pp 2-4, 121

[Annotation, foreword by K. V. Frolov, corresponding member of the USSR Academy
of Sciences, and table of contents from book "Biomechanics of Han-Machine Systems",
edited by K. V. Prolov, Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", 1750 copies, 121 pages}

[Text] This collection submits new results of theoretical and experimental
research in the area of biomechanics of man-machine-environment systems. Theory
of metric analysis of the dynamics of man-machine systems is developed; separation
of neuronal systems is simulated; research on non—Euclidean biomechanics is des-
cribed, as well as studies of resonance effects in biological systems; a survey

is made of biomechanics of the visual analyzer; human equilibrium is explored; new
models are proposed for predicting the physiological effect of vibration on man;
theory of vibration protection of man is developed. This collection is intended

for scientists and engineering-technical workers.

Foreword

As technology develops, man "communicates" more and more with machines, and this
leads to formulation of new problems in the area of engineering, mechanics, biology,
theory of oscillations, information theory and others. The advances in these

fields are combined to solve a pressing problem of our times: refinement of exist-
ing machines and development of principles for construction of machines of the
future. This collection, which was prepared in the Department of Biomechanics of
Man-hachine Systems, Institute of Machine Science imeni Academician A. A. Blagonravow
reflects this tendency distinctly.

 

The book contains both new results of theoretical and experimental research, and
new formulations of problems in biomechanics of man-machine-environment systems.
Theory of metric analysis of the dynamics of man-machine systems is developed,
which is necessary for optimum use of modern technology and automation of experi—
ments: mathematical modeling of neuronal net function; research on non-Euclidean
biomechanics with indication of the place of conforms; geometric conceptions in
describing living systems; frequency and oscillatory resonance effects are studied
in biological systems and use thereof for transmission of information is indicated;
there is a survey on biomechanics of man's visual analyzer; equilibrium of man's
erect position is studied; new models are offered for forecasting the physiological
effect on man of vibration; principles of construction and calculation of optimum
systems of protection against vibration which contain pneumatic connections are
discussed. These problems do not reflect the entire broad spectrum of problems

79
[R‘OFFICIAI.USI:(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of biomechanics of man-machine systaas, but they do show some of the main directions
of development of this modern science.

This collection is a continuation and enlargement of the published series of
scientific works entitled "Fluctuations and Stability of Machines" (Moscow, Nauka,
1968), "Nonlinear Oscillations and Transient Processes in Machines" (Moscow, Nauka,
1972), "Vibration-Proof Insulation of Machines and Protection of Man Against
Vibration" (Moscow, Nauka, 1973), "Protection of Man Against Vibration and Problems
of Modeling" (Moscow, Nauka, 1973), proceedings of All-Union symposium on the
effects of vibration on man and problems of protection against vibration (Moscow,
Nauka, 1972, 197a, 1977), as well as the proceedings of the international symposium
on "Man and Vibration" (Italy, 1979), which was initiated and organized by the
scientific staff of the Department of Biomechanics of Man-Machine Systems,
Institute of Machine Science imeni Academician A. A. Blsgonravov.

Contents Page

Foreword 3
Elements of Theory of Metric Analysis of Dynamics of Man-Machine Systems

in Automated Experiment (K. K. Glutharev, S. A. Dobrynin, K. V. Frolov) 5
Theory of Automated Monitoring of Operation of Man-Machine Systems

(K. K. Glukharev, S. A. Dobrynin, K. V. Prolov) 19
Some Principles of Neuronal Network Function (B. I. Kryukov) . 31
Studies of Non-Euclidean Biomechanics (S. V. Petukhov) 37
Vibration and Oscillatory Processes in Biological Systems (A. S. Mirkin) 61
The Human Visual Biomechanical System (Survey) (S. I. Chukayeva) 75
Model Studies of Strategy in Man's Maintaining Erect Equilibrium Near

the Limit of the Stable Zone (V. D. Zhivotchenko) 84
Modeling of Biological Systems to Assess and Predict the Effects of

Vibration (A. B. Novikov, B. A. Potemkin, G. A. Safarishvili) 92

Method of Executing the Pneumatic Part of the Systan of Insulation
Against Vibration of Operator chairs (0. S. Kochetov, Yu. G. szronov,

A. V. Sinev, V. S. Solov'yev) 102
Use of Analogue Modeling Methods to Correct Characteristics of
Vibration Stimuli (E. L. Fridman) 112

COPYRIGMI: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

10,657
CSO: 1840/29

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”081.34 0? INFORMATION PROCESSM m MAN-MINE SYSTEIS

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEMII max 8881!: WICHBSMYA WWI“ in Russian N0 1.
Jan-Feb 80 (manuscript received 1 Jun 78) pp 62-66

[Article by G. V. Vorob'yev and A. G. Yekovitskiy, Moscow]

[Text] Introduction. The problem of selecting the optimal structure of the man-
machine systu arises when processing preliminary intonation. The purpose of this
article is to develop a method for calculating one of the mite of a standard pre-'
liminary information processing scheme on reliability.

The processing scheme has the form of a directional series-connected operational
circuit for intonation processing and monitoring in which fulfill-eat of the next
operation begins after completion of the previous operation.

In the general case this scheme may consist of the following units: a storage de-
vice, sorting unit, coding unit, perforator, checking unit, coeputer calculating
unit and final checking unit (figure). The work of the coding unit, as shown by
operating experience. is the most stressful. '

The problem of determining the ninimum nunber of encoders with restriction on the
probability of processing during a fixed tine of information incoeing during a cer-
tain moment is solved in this article.

l. Postulation of the problem. Let N Poisson requirement flows with intensities
X1. X2. ..., IN enter the information processing sys'ten. The processing system
(figure) consists of seven units in which the information: colprising the require-
ment is processed.

The storage device gathers the requirenents during time T and then traneaits than
to the first unit for processing. The first unit processes the requirements of any
flow during random time n with distribution function 6(t) and then transmits it to

the second unit.

The second unit, the encoding unit, consists of several encoders. Moreover, all
the requirements of the i-th flow (we shall subsequently call thee i-reguirenents)
should be serviced by a single encoder and each encoder can process the requireI-xts
of any flows. If an encoder services several flows, then the order of servicing
can be any order but if i-requirements begin to be serviced, then one can convert

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

I ‘ Rmﬁ) II'
| an (5) Isl

—1 Rompers (5) I G |

Xey :
l . Storege device 4. Perforation
2 . Sorting 5. ducking

3. Coding 6. Outputs:

to requirements of another. flow only if all the requirements of the i-th flov are
serviced. m tine to process a requirement by the encoder is a random velus £1
with distribution function 61 (t). After comletion of servicing the remurment by
the second unit, it is serviced sequentially by the third, fourth, fifth end sixth
units according to the figure.

Let us denote the distribution function of the time required to process the require-
ments in these units by but) (i - l, 2. 3, 4).

Return of the requirements to the first unit froe the fourth end sixth units is
possible, from which they begin to be serviced egein. Besides the inforaation com-
ing from the flows indicated above, the system processes requirements of higher
priority which come into the first unit within fined sweats of time within inter-
vel (n'r, (n + l) ‘1‘). ﬂue time required to process this inforution is deter-ined
in each unit.

The encoders process this information jointly.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following postulation of the problaz is of interest for the system described
above.

Deternine the minimum number of encoders in the second unit at which the following
condition is fulfilled for any value of J:

P(n(T)+S,‘>t)‘P;-o" (1.1)

where Tj is the total time to process all the requiresents belonging to flows ser-
viced by the j-th encoder and coming in during time T, 83 is the tine during which
the system processes information of higher priority assigned to the j-th encoder
and t is the tine during which 'all information must be processed. In practical sit-
uations frequently t - ‘1‘.

2. Solution. Since the group of requirenents is transnitted froe the zero subsys-
tem to the first system within equal time intervals '1', then the nusber of require-
ments in the group coming to the first unit will be a random value distributed by

Poisson law with paramters M, where “'2 I. . however, two additional require-

ment flows (one from the fourth and the oth‘r from the sixth units) come in to sub-
system 1. Let us assume that the probabilities of an arbitrary requirement returning
from the fourth and sixth units are equal to P1 and P2, respectively. The probabil-
ity of an arbitrary requirement .returning to the first unit will then be equal to
P; 4» P2 - 9192. It is obvious that the number of requirements returned to each unit
will have Poisson distribution with parameter MP1 + P; - P1P2)1‘. ‘rhe requireeents
returned to the first unit will again create a group of requirements returned a
second time. The number of these requirements, similar to the previous one, will
again have Poisson distribution with parameter X(P1 4» P2 - P1P2)2‘r and so on. Thus,
the number of requirements passing through the first and second units of the system
will be distributed by Poisson law with parameter

11-172} (P.+P.—P.P.) '-11'[1-(P.+P.-P.Pa) l". (2. 1)
{-0

Distribution of the number of i-requireuents is found in similar fasion.

One must know the types of flows which cone into the second unit to calculate the
number of encoders in it. The input flows of the second unit will be output flows
for the first unit. Let us find the distribution function RMt) of the length of
interval C» between two v-declarations leaving the first unit.

It is obvious that

Rv(:) - 2 P‘n“+ . . . +n..<8|l.¢v, . s s

. . . . l.-.9‘v, l.-v)P[l,¢v. . . . . 1.-.”. LI") .

where n13 is the time required to service an arbitrary requirement by the first unit
and ij is the number of the flow to which the j-th requirement to be processed
belongs.

FOR DIN-1.1% USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the probability, that the next requirenent to be processed by the first unit
will be a V-requirenent.“ equal to Xyl, then

R.(:)- fa-un-'(M)o~m.

Hence, we find that

«(ca-j «mo-mm»

If there exist at least I: flows such that

Magda.) on). (2.2)

then we can distribute the flows by encoders such that a queue will alvays be in

front of each encoder. It is obvious that to do this, the j-th encoder should be-
gin processing with the Vj-requirenents.

If one also assunes. besides condition (2.2), that condition (2.3) is fulfilled for
any value of v (1 1V5. N):

menu. (1-1.2.3,")," ' (2.3)

where 31 is the average tine required to process the requirements. than the distri-

bution function of the time the system is engaged will be determined mainly by the
distribution function of the time the encoders are engaged.

Moreover, in this case we can replace our system by an equivalent system having no
feedback but having input flows corrected in the manner indicated above. Since we

shall subsequently consider an equivalent system, then let us denote the parameters
of the input flows by 11(1 - 1, ..., N).

let 01 (t) be the distribution function of the time required to service all i-re-
guirenents caning in during some mount of time n'r. It is obvious that

. v.(:)-Zup(-z.r)Ma°-(e), (2.4)
F;(‘)-p{1’(n<I)-Uhl,.,OU‘-. “CA” (2.5)

where Aj is the aggregate of the indices of the flows to be serviced by the j-th
encoder.

Ibwever, calculation of Hg ('1‘) > t} -- the probability that the total tine to
process the requirements of3 the equivalent flow by the j-th encoder during the?

8b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exceeds the given time is difficult by formulas (2.4) and (2.5). At the same time
the series (2.4) can be used to estimate probability (2.5). This estimate can be
found by using the following theom [1).

Theorem. If there exist positive constants h; and “5 such that Mexp (381)
< exp (l/2h1x2), for all values «10.3.1 and [3,“, than

P[t,(T)>l)<exp (4/23,): it" o<:<"H,d,.'
p(“l(n>‘)‘“l’ (—‘U/2), ‘2 t>aﬂh

8,- Elk.

Thus. to estimate probability (2.5), one must find h; for all values (BA, and uj
which would yield the best approximations.

(2.6)

Let gi(x) - Hexp (x51). then _
1:: exp (mm-Ian)[MT(1'4(3)-'1))-~ (2.7)

Hence

h.>21.T(£a(z)-i)/r'. (2'8)
Difficulties in using estimates (2.6) arise in some cases, related to the fact that
the value of h; does not exist that satisfies inequality (2.8) at any values of u).
Sometimes one can still estimate Mg ('1‘) > t}. having oriented oneself to random
values 51.

However, far from all constants hi always exist even for centered values of 81.
If the time of accumulation is high compared to the average time between the ar-
rival of the requirements, then making use of the apparatus of renewal theory [2].
one can find the asymptotic formula for calculating the probability under
consideration.

It is obvious that probability P (1’, (t) > t) does not depend on the order of ser-
vicing the requirements and consequently when deriving the'estimate for this prob-
ability one can consider a single requirement flow with intensity 9" 7" . In

this case the distribution function of the time required to service a single re-
quirement from this flow E ()3 will be equal to

1 _.
van-Egmm.

One can then determine 13(1‘) as a process of aocuulation in the following manner
[2]:

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.7
"(7)- 2 ha (NV-‘0‘").

where u, is the nulber o: declarations caning into the storage device during tins 1'.

It the mean values and standard deviation at 5‘1) can be'dsnotsd by uj and d3. then
u(s,(mN,-r)-m,f D(x}('r')_|N;-'r)"-§:" (2.9)

with a sufﬁciently large fixed value or r, the value of 11(1') is approximtely
normal to the mean value and standard deviation (2.9). Consequently its distribu-
tion function or the nounts is equal to

' up (-mPi-‘IMP'L (2.10)

i‘he unconditional distribution function or the moments is equal to the mean value
of expression (2.10) with respect to the distribution of tendon value at, which is
itself approxinately normal to the mean value or To) and to the sane standard devi-
ation at a large value of 'r. Thus, the mean value with respect to the asymptotic
distribution is equal to -

exp {(—uw'mp)rprf‘l.(-sl.P+'/.d,P')'Tn}- I

If this expression is transformed to the distribution :unction of the normalised ‘
value

[um—WM(r/awdédh’rm.‘

then at 'r + «D we find exp (92/2) {1 4» 0(1)}. i.e., the value of t, ('1') is asywtot-
ically normal to the mean value and standard deviation equal to, respectively.

mmm-mr.

2. 11
omun-mmnrmu. ‘ ’

hence, one can easily find the necessary estimate.

Using estimates (2.6) or normal distribution with parameters (2.11) and by distrib-
uting the flows such that the mean times of the encoders being engaged are identical
if possible, one can construct the algorithn for solving the problem in the follow-
ing manner.

1. Let us find 1: flows at - l on the first step) in which the expression
[XMMH/thﬁM seems a nininun value and let us assign it to each encoder tor
a single flow. (In this case we best ensure that condition (2.2) is fulfilled).

86
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. That among the remaining flows is selected in which the maximal value of M81)
is achieved.

3. The nunberofthe encodsrvithaininmaveragetinetoeervicethereguirnents
of all the flows assigned to it is selected.

4. The flow selected in paragraph 2 is assigned to the encoder selected in para-
graph 3.

5. If ell the flows are distributed, let us go on to paragraph 6, otherwise let us
go to paragraph 2.

6. If at least one value of j (j - 1, .... x) };s,‘-Jais;(r)<b , then is: us add an
additional encoder and go on to paragraph 1, otherwise let us go on to paragraph 7.

‘I. Let us check fulfillment of condition 1. If the condition is not fulfilled.
then the number of encoders must be increased by one and we transfer to paragraph 1.
otherwise the problem is solved.

When using fornulas (2.6) , the values of uj that yield the most accurate estimate
should be found. a unit that deternines these values of uj is provided in the pro-
gram realizing this algoriths. The algorithm is realized on the 3294-6 computer.
The program is written in tom-m language.

Example. net the distribution 61(t) be normal distribution with parameters In: and
01. In this case there are no constant values hj for any interval [0, ujl since
the right side of (2.8) approaches infinity at x, approaching zero. At the sane
time if one considers the centered value 31, then

um(2;..1(g.(z)—1)/e)'-i.m+m.o.' "

.0.

and consequently for any finite segnent [0, uj). the right side of (2.8) is limited.
i.e., there are constant values of hi that satiety (2.8). Since

P{n(T)+Sf>tl-P{b(1')>t-3f-u(n(7))).
then to find the estimates it is sufficient to substitute t for t-Sf—Mtﬂf”.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Petrov, v. v.. "Sunny nezavisiuykh sluchaynykh velichin' [Still of Independent
Random values], Moscow, Nauka, 1972. '

2. Cox, D. and v. with, 'Teoriya voestanovleniya“ [Wei Theory], Moscow.
sovetskoye radio, 1967.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'stvo "Nauka". ‘Izvestiya AN SSSR. Tekhnicheekaya kibernetika'.
1980

6521
080: 8144/0236

87
FOR OFHCIAL [SB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: [007:57+007"573.6+615.67](O7)
BIOENGINEBRING SYSTEMS: THEORY AND DESIGN. A T211300!

Leningrad BIOTEKHNICHBSKIYE SISTEHYiTEDRIYA I PRDYEKIIRDVANIYB. UCSBBROH: POSOBIYB
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 15 Dec 80) pp Z-b

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Biotechnicsl Systems: Theory and _
Design. A Textbook" by'?. M. Akhutin, A. P. Nemirko, N. N. Parshin, A. V. Posharov,
Ye. P. Popechitelev and S. V. Romanov, reviewed by N.A. Hikhsylov, deputy chief
designer. Special Design Office for Biological and Medical Cybernetics at the
Leningrad "Order of Lenin" Electric Engineering Institute imsni V. I._Ulfyanov
(Lenin), and K. Yu. Agranovskiy, doctor of engineering sciences (Northwestern
Polytechnical Institute, recommendedbythe .sningrad "Order of Lenin" Electric Engi-
neering Institute imeni V. I. Ul‘yanov (Lenin), Izdatel'stvo-Leningrad University,
1734copies, 220 pages, 4? figures, 5 tables, lZO'references]

[Text] In spite of the promise held in development of bioengineering systems and
possibility of wide use thereof in practice, there have not been special monographs
and especially educational and methodological literature herntofore dealing with
the description of theory of such systems and questions of practical use thereof

in medicine, various types of engineering, as well as scientific research. This
textbook, while it does not presume to cover the topic completely. discusses
comprehensively theoretical questions of systems analysis as it applies to bio-
engineering systems, methods of modeling and synthesizing them, and classifying them.
Bioengineering systems for different purposes-monitoring, therapy, clinical
laboratory use-are discussed on a sophisticated scientific and methodological
level. This textbook is intended primarily for senior year students specializing
in medical instrument making, and it will also be very useful to a wide range of
specialists involved in development and operation of such systems.

Contents Page
Foreword 5
First Section: Biological and Bioengineering Systems As Research Objects 1‘
Chapter 1. A System as the Object of Investigation. Main Concepts 16
l. The systems approach to the study of objects in living _
and inanimate nature . 16
2. Classification of systems 18
3. Methods of describing systems 23
6. Systemic aspects of control 29
S. Main functional characteristics of complex systems 32
Chapter 2.'_Biologica1 Systems 39 '
1. Consideration of the organism from the standpoint of systems
analysis 39
2. Functional systems of the organism 50
88

FORIOFFﬂﬂAl.USEiONlJ
ron omcuu. Us: ONLY

Chapter 3. Problems of Analysis and Synthesis of Bioengineering Systems

1.

2.
3.

Definition, general properties and principles of synthesis of
bioengineering systems

Classification of bioengineering systems

Types and means of control

Second Section: Medical Bioengineering Systems
Chapter 1. Medical Monitoring Systems

1.

2%

3.
4.
5.

Bioengineering aspects of monitoring systems
Classification of monitoring systems
Instrumental monitoring systems
Computerized monitoring systems
Microprocessor monitoring systems

Chapter 2. Monitoring Systems for Monitoring Arrhythmia on

1.
2.

3.
[.0
S.
6.

Electrocardiograms
Specifications for ideal monitoring system to monitor arrhythmia
Electrocardiogram processing in monitoring systems for
monitoring arrhythmia
Reduction of data for immediate processing of electrocardiograms
Detection of QRS complex and determination of its typical points
Analysis of cardiac arrhythmias in real time scale
Structural distinctions of computer systems for monitoring arrhythmia

Chapter 3. Therapeutic Bioengineering Systems

1.
2.
3.
[.0

"se of therapeutic agents in bioengineering systems
Systems for pulmonary ultrasonic inhalation

System for automated correction of potassium homeostasis
Systems for electrostimulation of the heart

Chapter 4. Bioengineering Systems for Laboratory Analysis

1. Tasks of the medical laboratory service
2. Structure and functions of bioengineering systems for
laboratory tests
3. Bioengineering aspects of systems of the laboratory type
4. Ways and means of laboratory analysis
5. Tendencies of development of bioengineering systems for
laboratory tests
Appendix
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Leningradskogo universiteta, 1981

10,657

CSO: 1860/999

89
ron omcm use ONLY

60

60 '
66
82

91
91
94
99
103
112

116
116

119
123
127
130
133
137
137
166
147
168
164
164

166

171
178

189
198
215
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY

SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATION OF LABOR OP MARITIME FLEET PERSONNEL

Leningrad TRUDY TSNII MORSKOCO PLOTA, VYP 253: NADCINAYA ORGANIZATSIYA TRDDA
PLAVSOSTAVA HORSKOGO FLOTA in Russian 1980 (signed to press 9 Jun 80) pp 82984

[Abstracts and table of contents from book" Works of Central 'Order of Red Banner of
Labor' Scientific Research Institute of the Maritime Fleet, “0.253: Scientific Organie
zation of Labor of Maritime Fleet Personnel", edited by Yu. I. Panin, Izdatel'stvo
"Transport". 1605 copies, 84 pages]

unc: 656.612:658.387
USE OF STOCHASTIC METHODS IN THE STUDY OF HORN PERFORMED DY CREW MEMBERS
[Abstract of article by R. V. Shchelgachev]

[Text] There is discussion of methods for studying work processes. which are used
in different sectors of industry, and they are briefly evaluated. Standard obser-
vation charts are recommended, with which one can determine the nomenclature and
duration of work operations for the period of watch duty, as well as in the course
of performing work pertaining to technical maintenance of a vessel and its equipment.
Tables 3.

UDC: [656.612:658.387IOO3.13

EVALUATION OF ECONOMIC EFFECTIVENESS 0P STUDIES DEALING HIT“ IMPROVEMENT 0?
WORKING CONDITIONS ABOARD VESSELS

[Abstract of article by Ye. P. Zagorsksya]

[Text] The described method provides a scientific approach to evaluation of the
economic effect of work pertaining to labor safety for ship crews. A nethod is
described for determining the national economic and departmental effect. A set of
formulas is given, as well as criteria for scoring the work of seamen. Figures 1.

tables 5.

FOR1OFFNJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR¢MHUC1A1.USE(HVLY

UDC: 656.615.06
ORGANIZATION OF COMPLEX FLEET SERVICING DURING ANCHORAGE PERIODS
[Abstract of article by R. V. Shchelgachev and A. B. Vlasova]

[Text] Organization of complex servicing of vessels and their crews, as well as
directions of future research, are discussed.

UDC: 656.612:658.387.015
EFFECT OF AUTOMATION OF VESSELS 0N SEAHEN'S HORKING CONDITIONS
[Abstract of article by Ye. P. Zagorskaya and A. A. Tret'yukhin]

[Text] Analysis is made of the causes of traumatism among ship's crews when
servicing ship equipment. Questions of lowering traumatism as a result of intro-
ducing automation on modern vessels of the maritime fleet are explored. Problems
related to automation of ship power plants to the extent of assigning to the

vessels automation emblems in symbols of the USSR Registry class Al and A2. TablesZ.

UDC: 656.612:658.387.015
ORGANIZATION OF LABOR 0F SHIP CREHS ABOARD AUTOMATED VESSELS
[Abstract of article by N. T. Yeliseyev]

{Text} Experience of operating vessels with the automation emblem in the class
symbol of the USSR Registry is summed up. Tables 1.

UDC: 629.12.06:697.96
INERTIAL HEAT PROPERTIES OF ENCLOSURES AND EQUIPMENT 0? AIRPCONDITIONED PREMISES
[Abstract of article by V. I. Lysav]

[Text] The transfer function is given for enclosures and equipment as related
to change in air temperature in air-conditioned premises. References 3.

unc: 656.612:658.32

METHODOLOGICAL BASES FOR CLASSIFYING VESSELS FOR PURPOSES 0P WAGES AND SETTING
UP PAY SCALES FOR SHIP CREHS

[Abstract of article by R. S. Re: and T. N. Lekintseva]

\
[Text] There is discussion of questions of categorizing maritime fleet vessels
into groups according to wages of commanding officers and setting up pay scales.
A basically new approach is offered to classification of vessels on the basis of
a complex indicator, and the formula for calculation thereof is provided. 'A. -
method is described for scoring the difficulty of labor as the basis for setting
up salary scales. Figures 1, tables 3.

91
ﬁORTOFIﬂCIAI.USE¢WNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 656.612:658.387.015

SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATION OF LABOR REQUIREMENTS REFERABLE TO THE FORE BRIDGE OF A
MARITIME VESSEL

[Abstract of article by V. F. Palastrov]

[Text] Requirements are listed for scientific organization of labor related to
the fore bridge, with its equipment and installations. Figures 3, tables 2.

00¢: 656.612:658.3
PSYCHOSOCIAL ADJUSTMENT TO THE START OF A VOYAGE
[Abstract of article by V. N. Parokhin and R. s. Araslanova]

[Text] Analysis is made of some of the distinctions of psychosocial adjustment
of sailors [or deck officers] to the first days of a voyage and its effect on
sailing safety. Figures 2, tables 2', references 5.

UDC: 656.3

CLASSIFICATION OE CONDITIONS AND NATURE OF SEMEN'S WORK ACCORDING TO DmREE 0P
HARMFULNESS AND INTENSITY

[Abstract of article by 1.. M. Matsevich]

[Text] A system is offered for complex evaluation of working conditions of
seamen according to degree of harmfulness and intensity [tension]. Tables 2,
references lo.

UDC: 656.612:658.3
RESULTS OF TESTING SOME PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAITS OF SAILORS ON A RADAR TRAINER

[Abstract of article by V. N. Parokhin. R. S. Araalanova, A. Ye. Druzhinin and

I. K. Shirokova]
I

[Text] Results are submitted that describe professional training achievement of
sailors on radar trainers as a function of individual psychological traits.
Figures 1, tables 2, references 3.

Contents Page

Use of Stochastic Methods in the Study of Work Performed by Crew Members

(R. V. Shchelgachev) 3
Evaluation of Economic Effectiveness of Studies Dealing Hith Improvement

of Working Conditions Aboard Vessels (Ye. P. Zagorskaya) 15
Organization of Complex Fleet Servicing During Anchorage Periods

(R. V. Shchelgachev, A. B. Vlasova) 27
Effect of Automation of Vessels on Seamen's working Conditions

(Ye. P. Zaborskaya, A. A. Tret'yukhin) 32

82
FOR om AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNIN

Organization of Labor of Ship Crews Aboard Automated Vessels
(N. T. Yeliseyev)

Inertial Heat Properties of Enclosures and Bquipuent of Air-Conditioned
Premises (V. 0. Lysev)

Methodological Bases for Classifying Vessels for Purposes of Wages and
Setting Up Pay Scales for Ship Crews (R. 5. Rex, T. N. Lekintseva)

Scientific Organization of Labor Requireuents Referable to the Fore
Bridge of a Maritime Vessel (V. F. Palastrov)

Psychosocial Adjustment to the Start of a Voyage
(V. N. Parokhin, R. S. Araslanova)

Classification of Conditions and Nature of Sesnen's Bork According to
Degree of Harnfulness and Intensity (L. H. Hataevich)

Results of Testing Some Psychological Traits of Sailors on a Radar Trainer
(V. N. Parokhin, R. S. Araslanova, A. Ye. Druzhinin, I. K. Shirokovs)

COPYRIGHT: Tsentrsl'nyy ordena Trudovogo Krasnogo Znameni
nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut- morskogo Elota (TsNIIHP).
1980

10,657
050: 1860/999

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFEJA1.USB(NNLY

UDC: 519.81
DECISIONS: THEORY, INFORMATION AND MODELING

Moscow RESHENIYA: TEORIYA, INFORMATSIYA, MODELIROVANIYB in Russian 1981 (signed to
press 2 Apr 81) pp 2-3, 328

[Annotation, excerpt from foreword and table of contents from book "Decisions:
Theory, Information and Modeling", by Eduardas Yonovich Vilkas and Yefrem

Zalmanovich Hayntnas, Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyas'", 10,000 copies, 328 pages,
illustrated] 3

[Text] Fundamentals of general theory of decisions, analysis of their informational
aspects and problems of modeling decision making problems are discussed. This book
is intended for scientists and specialists dealing with decision theory, develop-
ment and application of mathematical methods and models to the control of the
economy, as well as development of automated control systems.

Foreword

As indicated by Jonathan Swift, in a conversation with Gulliver Aristotle observed
that new systems in nature change with each generation, like fashions, and that
even philosophers who try to prove them by the mathematical method do not succeed
for long and go out of fashion at the time prescribed by fate. This warning hung
over us, like the sword of Daaocles, particularly since fashions change in our
times much faster than in the times of Aristotle or Swift.

We are living in a rapidly changing world that is growing increasingly complex.
Factors that must be taken into consideration in making every decision are becoming
more and more numerous, diverse and interrelated. Its consequences are increasingly
spread in time and space, and often unexpected. For this reason, intuition and
individual experience missfire more and more often, and interest is growing in
scientific investigation of the decision making process.

It is not surprising that this problem is drawing the attention of many specialists--
philosophers and economists, mathematicians and psychologists, sociologists and
engineers. The scope and diversity of scientific work on decision making have

become quite impressive. In general. two categories of studies and two methods of
analyzing the problem have become rather distinctly evident in the existing litera-
ture. One group consists of relatively abstract research, in which the entire
process of making any decision, some stage or special instance thereof, is discussed
from a selected vantage point. The other group consists of concrete studies dealing
with certain types of decisions in the engineering, economic, military or other

91;
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

field. With rare exceptions, one can again distinguish two means of analysis and
presentation of material in both groups: in the former case, the authors construct
their presentation on formalized models, which are studied by also formal, mainly
mathematical methods; in the latter case, they base themselves primarily ....

Contents Page

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. The Decision Making Process 9
1.1. The problem 9
1.1. Decision making problem 28
1.3. General scheme of decision making process 35
Chapter 2. Information in Socioeconomic Problems 54
2.1. Informational 'model' of the individual 54
2.2. Set of informational factors and sets 76
2.3. Goals and resources of socioeconomic problems: informational aspect 95
Chapter 3. Simple Decisions 128
3.1. Concept of simple decision and benefit 128
3.2. Stochastic alternatives and stochastic preference 144
3.3. Multidimensional alternatives 155
3.4. Demonstrated preference 166
Chapter 4. Complex Decisions 173
4.1. Model of multiaspect decision making 173
4.2. Optimum results of games 181
4.3. Definition of game and its decisions 187
4.4. Hultigoal optimization 202
4.5. Axiomatic construction of decisions 214
4.6. Comparability and aggregation of criteria 227
Chapter 5. Typology of Socioeconomic Decisions 239
5.1. Theoretical problems of modeling socioeconomic systems 239
5.2. Classification and types of socioeconomic problems 266
5.3. Classification and types of socioeconomic models 284
5.4. Mathematical methods of modeling and solving socioeconomic problems 309
Bibliography 316
Subject index 324

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981

10,657
CSO: 1840/999

95
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 629.735.33.015.017.2.001.4(08§)
AIRCRAFT, PILOTS AND FLIGHT SAFETY

Moscow SAHOLET, LETCHIK I BBZOPASNOST' POLETA in Russian 1979 (signed to press
15 Nov 79) PP 3-5, 220—226

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents free book ”Aircraft, Pilots and Flight
Safety", by Grigoriy Senenovich Kalschev, Izdatel'stvo ”Hashinostroyeniye",
6500 copies, 22‘ pages]

[Text] This book deals with the main qualities of an aircraft: stability, controlla-
bility and maneuverability. Analysis of these qualities is made on the basis of
factual material and instrument records during tests and operation; practical
recommendations are offered on aircraft piloting, methods of making test flights and
choice of criteria of important design and aerodynamic parameters of an aircraft.
This book is intended for design engineers, aerodynamic specialists, test pilots

and other aviation specialists.

Foreword

High efficiency of aircraft operation and flight safety depend on both the quali-
ties of the aircraft and of the pilot controlling the flight. The qualities of an
aircraft are characterized by its stability, controllability and manueverability,
as well as reliability and dependability of construction of the aircraft and
various equipment and units on it. Pilot qualities depend on his theoretical
training, knowledge of the physical aspect of the aircraft.and instructions on
operating it, degree of flight training of the pilot if the aircraft encounters
unusualcircumstances, pilot comprehension of the patterns of aircraft traffic
[or movement] in various situations with due consideration of its aerodynamic
features, stability and controllability features of aircraft in general and the
type flown by the pilot at that time in particular.

Stability, controllability, maneuverability and flight safety are the most important
basic qualities of an aircraft, and they are closely interrelated. Problems of
both theory and practice of providing good indicators of these aircraft qualities
are among the rather complex ones. Investigation and comprehension of these
problems are related to many various parameters, methods of calculating and testing
parameters to rate an aircraft, and the constructive elements used. In View of the
increased speed and altitude of flight, it has become necessary to take into con-
sideration comprehensively the effect of compressibility of air on aerodynamics

of the aircraft. The construction of aircraft has become appreciably more
conplicated; wide use is being made of various automatic devices aboard aircraft,
and some new and substantial distinctions have appeared in their stability and
controllability characteristics.

96
FOI,OFIICLAL.USE|ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0

Technically sophisticated design and operation of modern aircraft require that
engineers, designers, operating engineers and pilots have a large volume of know-
ledge. The intensive development of aviation science and practice has been re-
flected in current textbooks and technical literature used in the training of
engineering and flight personnel. However, this literature often contains much
material and calculations referable to special questions of stability, controllabi—
lity and maneuverability, but not enough data on the behavior and piloting of
aircraft in typical flight situations related to the effect of compressibility of
air and deformation of construction on aircraft aerodynamics.

This book discusses problems of the relationship between aircraft, pilot and flight
safety. The aircraft is discussed on the basis of its stability, controllability
and maneuverability; the pilot, on the basis of his requirements as to the quali-
tative and quantitative expression of these characteristics, as well as the
characteristics of his piloting under special (irregular) flight conditions, includ-
ing typical errors. Flight safety is defined, as we have already stated, by the
combination of aircraftandpilot properties under different flying conditions.

To demonstrate aircraft and pilot properties, typical examples of flight accidents
are used in this nook, taken from the incidents that have occurred in the practice
of flight tests and aircraft operation. The author was directly involved in the
investigation of many of these occurrences. In submitting the results of the
investigations, the author tried to offer the general conclusions and concrete
recommendations to improve flight safety.

of course, some of the theses and recommendations developed in this book reflect
the author's personal opinion.

In view of the wide range of expected readers, the author tried to make his presenta-
tion understandable to all and, at the same time, rather strict. Chapter 1 deals
with definition of the main concepts, mainly classical ones, and terms used in the
book. Analysis is made of the correlation between stability, controllability,
maneuverability and flight safety. Then, Chapter 1 also gives a brief history of
development of theory and practice of providing for these aircraft qualities. In
conclusion, there is brief description of the methods and parameters used to assess
stability and controllability according to test results.

Chapters 2 and 3 discuss the effects of different important characteristics of sta-
bility and controllability on movement of the aircraft in air and control thereof
by a pilot under various specific conditions. Most of the instances discussed in
the book are related to unintentional departure of the aircraft beyond the range

of restrictions stipulated in the instructions on operating and flying a given

type of aircraft. Some of the special cases discussed are unique.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Main Concepts of Stability, Controllability and General

Information About Aircraft Movement 6

1.1. Systems of coordinates. General information about aircraft
movement 6
1.2. Concept of aircraft stability and criteria thereof 13

9?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.3. Dimensionless coefficients of aerodynamic forces and moments 24
1.6. Concept and parameters of aircraft controllability 35
1.5. Concept and parameters of aircraft maneuverability 61
1.6. Correlation betveen stability, controllability, maneuverability

and flight safety 50
1.7. From the history of development of methods of assuring

stability and controllability of aircraft - 60

1.8. Evaluation of stability, controllability and maneuverability
of an aircraft according to results of vind tunnel and flight tests 66
Chapter 2. Distinctive Features of Stability and Controllability, and ‘
Exceeding Permissible Aircraft Angles of Attack and Accelerationa 83

2.1. Longitudinal instability of speed and stall 83
2.2. Aircraft 'bumps' in cumulus-thunder clouds 92
2.3. Effect of flying altitude on sharpness of aircraft rolling

in stalls 103
2.4. Piloting an aircraft with consideration of properties of

second flying mode 107
2.5. 'Transonic pickup' of aircraft during deceleration - 119
2.6. Aircraft 'pickup' in maneuver with overload [acceleration] 132
2.7. Short-period longitudinal 'resonant rise' of aircraft 138
2.8. An instance of stalling and spinning of a passenger aircraft

with T-empennage 141
2.9. An instance of repeated stalling and resonant rise of heavy

aircraft 148
2.10. The problem of aircraft stalling and spinning 155

Chapter 3. Hazard of Unintentional Loss of Altitude and Excessive Speed 173

3.1. Pulling aircraft into a dive 174
3.2. Hazard of exceeding permissible tanking angle ' 180
3.3. An instance of aircraft stall inturn-spiral 183
3.6. Aircraft hitting accompanying wake and other instances of

occurrence of asymmetrical banking momenta 187
3.5. Pitching, diving and banking of aircraft when there is

insufficient thrust of pitch control boosters 200

Bibliography 218

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". 1979

10,657
650: 1860/999

98
FOR'OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR!0FFKJAI.USEINVLY

UDC: 612.821.7"5"
PROBLEMS OF TIME ORGANIZATION OF LIVING SYSTEMS

Moscow PROBLEHY VREHENNOY ORGANIZATSII ZHIVYKH $151!! in Russian 1979 (signed to
press 31 May 79) pp 2-7, 143-167

[Annotation, introduction, abstracts and table of contents from book "Problems of
Time Organization of Living Systems" edited by A. H. Genin, doctor of biological
sciences, Izdatel'stvo ”ﬂanks“, 1550 copies, 167 pages]

[Text] This collection deals with problems of biorhythnolosy (ch:onobiology). It
discusses questions of adaptogenesis in living systems in the aspect of their

time organization and dynamics of their circadian rhythms. Data are submitted
concerning development of mathematical analysis of human biological rhythms. Re-
sults are described of experiments characterizing the distinctions of biological
rhythms when animals are exposed to changing illumination and hypokinesia. This
collection is intended for specialists in the field of biorhythmology, physiologists,
biologists, physicians and other specialists concerned with the problem of time
organization of living systems.

Introduction

Throughout the history of natural science, researchers were constantly concerned
with questions of time organization of living systems. As they peeled off the
layers of earth's crust, like the pages of an-emormous book, people became con-
vinced of the variability of the plant and animal kingdom when they were facod,

in the fossilized monuments of that kingdom, of generations of its precursors,

many of which appeared to be the materialized creations of the exquisite imagination
of unusual thinking beings. Half-erased records were preserved on the first pages
of this book about the first representatives of terrestrial life, the primitiveness
of which seemed to be an echo of a remote time that acquired in these records its
0"“ genuine, Benﬂed reality. Who could deny having had the physical sensation of un-
rushed breathing of time in a museum of paleontology? "ho is not captured and
carried by its powerful flow, its mysterious and secret river, fixed in expressly
this image in the monuments to the creativity of ancient peoples? The living

bearer of the continuous course of time-man-is exceptionally sensitive to the
objective truth of real movement, which became for him one of the recognized coordi-
nates of the world around him. the coordinate of time.

Like paleontology, embryology revealed to man the facet of life that is organically
interwoven with the phenomenon of time, imparting to it "tangible" reality.

One refers to philogenesis and ontogenesis as they apply to the actual process of
inception of life in the aspect of its history and the aspect of its individual

FINICHHWCiﬁi.lEIE(HVLY
FOR Oil-[CIA]. US!- ONLY

development. And nothing emphasizes better than Baeckel's law the inseparable
link between the process of development in these two aspects: ontogenesis repeats
phylogenesis.

Thus, in the aspect of both general and individual history of an organism, natural
scientists constantly encounter factors indicative of time organization of

living systems, facts of their continual variability. However, the same natural
scientists suddenly lost the “sense of time" as soon as they turned to analysis
of the current state of such systems and, in spite of numerous facts, viewed life
as some phenomenon like themselves that is independent of time. This thesis in
natural science constituted a uniquely validated status in physiology and applied
biology for several centuries, although there was sporadic publication of works,

in which efforts were made to include the time phenomenon with biological para-
meters. These works include, first of all, the studies of fluctuating, periodic
processes in the organism, particularly those with a period of 25 h. Apparently,
such biological rhythms were first recorded in plants. According to the literature,
the French astronomer, deMeran (1729),* was among the first (if not the first) to
describe the circadian rhythms of movement of leaves under constant temperature
and illumination conditions. Then the representatives of a number of natural
sciences turned to the phenomenon of circadian rhythms. The data obtained from
such studies were not questioned; however, they did not have an appreciable
influence on the general situation in physiology and applied biology, where the
traditions of "static" natural science continued to prevail. Expressly they--these
traditions-were among the serious reasons why researchers disregarded the time
aspect of organization of living systems. No doubt, purely methodological difficul-
ties of studying various forms of life played an important role in this respect
also, with reference to their constant variability, spontaneous, never ceasing
movement, and movement in an ascending line rather than in a circle, movement that
always carried something new to the organism.

There was a noticeable change in world outlook of natural scientists, primarily
with respect to phenomena in organic life, in the first half of this century, which
was related to the major achievements in many branches of science and, specifically,
the direction that was named chronobiology abroad and biorhychmology in the USSR.

The increased interest in chronobiology (biorhythmology) was related primarily to
the rapid progress in means of transportation, particularly airborne. Jet aircraft
can overcome enormous distances in a short time (usually measured in hours rather
than days). The practice of such flights very soon revealed that rapid crossing of
several time zones was associated in a number of people with diverse disturbances of
well-being, work capacity, sleep, appetite and often morbid symptoms resembling pro—
dromal states, i.c., the symptom complex that Selye called the stress syndrome or
general adaptation syndrome. Practitioners very soon realized the significance**

*See Yu. Aschoff, "Exogenous and Endogenous Components of Circadian Rhythms," in
"Biologicheskiye chasy" [Biological Clock], Moscow, Hir, 1966, pp 27-59.

**"Crews," observes Fabbro (G. D. Pabbro, "I Voli di 'Lungo Raggio' ed 1 ritmi
circadiani," MINERVA HEDICA, Vol 61, No 74, 1970, pp 3922-3928), "are well aware
of the difficulties that may be experienced with a change in time zones and
they do all they can to overcome them." In this case, we are dealing with aircraft
crews. Several special studies demonstrated that crews of transport aircraft
tried to curb the morbid disorders occurring with a change to other time zones.
In particular, older pilots tried to leave the airport of their final destination
as quickly as possible in order to return as soon as possible to their customary
place of residence.

100
FINI¢NHﬂ€JAI.lEﬂE<H§LY
Fiﬂl(ﬂﬁﬁC1AL USIZCNVLY

of such a stress syndrome. induced by a time "gradient." ”Business people" also
encounter the same difficulties and, if they do not take this syndrome into con-
sideration, they could find themselves unable to use all their intellectual capaci-
ties. Consequently, all those who make long-distance flights crossing the meri-
dians must rest properly before they start to work.

Disturbances analogous to those that develop after transmeridional flights are al-
ways observed when the usual schedule is changed, which occurs for example in

the case of work in three shifts. According to foreign and Soviet researchers.
working in the evening and night shifts is associated with some decline of labor
productivity and increase in number of mistakes. G. Lenan [1967),* a major special-
ist in the field of industrial physiology, believes that people who work at night,
even for decades, for example nurses, retain the usual circadian rhythm of vital
functions, with a minimum at 0300 hours; consequently, in spite of their apparent
adjustment to night work, their life proceeds against [despite] the biological rhythm.

The situation of working against [or despite] the biological rhythm also applies to
submarine crews who participate in distant voyages, participants of geological ex-
peditions, arctic and antarctic missions, cosmonauts in orbital and interplanetary
flight, as well as athletes who perform in foreign countries.

The stress syndrome, which occurs in all such situations, is related to changes in
customary sleep-wakefulness rhythm, which are followed by changes in phase of all
rhythms of the body that have a period of about 26 h. The mismatch of 24-h (or
close to 24 h-circadian, which equal about 26 h) rhythms has been named deaynchro-
nosis. A closer scrutiny of the desynchronosis phenomenon revealed that it was
related to more than disruption of the usual sleep-wakefulness rhythm. An in-
creasing number of facts also indicated that desynchronosis is not a specific

set of symptoms associated with this type of disturbances. Desynchronosis is the
constant "companion“ of any disease, any impairment of health, any form of stress.
Thus, the problem of this symptom complex advanced to the level of general medical,
general biological problems.

More attention started to be given to rhythm disturbances, deaynchronosis, in the
1960's because of the space flights, particularly orbital ones, when the usual,
terrestrial succession of dark and light periods of the day (day and night) is dis-
rupted.

Thus, there was gradual development of conditions for wider extension of the chrono-
biological (biorhythmological) approach to analysis of living systems. However, one
should not think that such an approach (genuinely dialectical) to problems of bio-
logy (and physiology, as well as a number of other analogous disciplines) was
accepted immediately and without a sturggle by all representatives of modern natural
science. In a number of cases, the requirement that time be considered as an
effective factor in studies of the organism was not understood and, not infrequently1
totally disregarded. The inertia of this attitude has not been eradicated to this
day. But, while in the past (even relatively recently) disregard for problems of
chronobiology played a negative role mainly in the theoretical aspect, at the pre-
sent time its reflection in practice is growing increasingly perceptible. For

—_____—-—-———

*Leman, 6., "Practical Industrial Physiology," Moscow, Heditsina, 1967.

10
FOR ommi USE ONLY
FIMICHHWCJAL.USE(NULY

expressly this reason, our science is presently faced with the task of expanding
the front of biorhythmological research and making wide use of its findings in the
national economy. Each step on this road is warranted. In this respect, one
could hardly overestimate broad discussion of problems of biorhythmology.

The first section of this collection submits works dealing with analysis of some
theoretical issues of biorhythmology and results of studying human biorhythms. The
second section is concerned with the results of studying animal biorhythms. The
works submitted in this section have the same methodological distinctions. In all
of these studies, male Histar rats weighing 180-200 g were the object of research.
The animals were kept in groups (of 5-6 per cage) with the use of artificial
illumination mode: 12 h of light (150-200 lux) and 12 h of darkness (less than

0.1 lux). The light was turned on at 0600 h. The temperature was kept at 2231' in
the experimental room. The animals were given pellet feed at the end of the light
period. Using physiological, morphological,histochemical,autoradiographic and
biochemical methods, determination was made of circadian rhythms of rats, starting
with general physiological parameters (spontaneous motor activity, body temperature,
general exchange of gases), functional state of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrena1
system and ending with rhythms of cell reproduction and morphological state of
systems that are renewed rapidly and slowly, as well as activity of some elements
of nucleic and fluid metabolism in the organism.

Conditions to which rats were exposed with the use of different light modes

Duration of light (L) and Illumination during Start snd_end of light
dark D 'eriods h l :ht veriod lux -eriod time

    

      

  

      

         
 
    
    

     
   
  

   
    
  

12L+12D
6b+lBD
6L+180

150-200
150-200
15-20

0400-1600 hours
0900-1500 hours
0900-1500 hours

UNH

  

In addition. the objective of that study was to determine the patterns of change in
the main features of circadian processes (level, amplitude, position of acrophases,
shape of wave) in different systems of the organism with reduction of the light
period, as well as of intensity of illumination. For this purpose, the animals
were submitted to different illumination modes. The arbitrary designation of rat
groups and main features of illumination conditions are listed in the Table.

The studies were conducted after 3-4-week adaptation of the rats to these conditions.
The second and third groups of animals were examined on a reduced program.

This section also submits the results of studies of circadian rhythms of cellular
reproduction in rats submitted to hypokinesia. The problem of hypokinesia is of
interest to some branches of clinical medicine. The biorhythmological approach to
this problem will help gain better understanding of the mechanisms of development of
pathological states caused by hypokinesia and develop effective means of preventing
them.

102
FI”!(HHH(1AI.USBINVLY
Fiﬁ!€ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USli0NlN

UDC:'616.092;616.008.63
ADAPTATION IN THE LIGHT 0F BIORHYTHHOLOGY
[Abstract of article by B. s. Alyakrinskiy]

[Text] The least studied aspect of the complex phenomenon of adaptation at this
time is the set of changes in biological rhythms, particularly circadian ones.
Analysis of this aspect of adaptation is of great theoretical and practical im-
portance. Such analysis reveals that adaptation to new living conditions occurs
through a struggle between opposing elements (resistance and alarm [anxiety]). A
stable state of resistance does not rule out the unity of these elements, their
cor=tant struggle and constant resolution thereof. An element of deadaptation
is always present in a state of marked well-being, and expressly this element is
a mandatory prerequisite for progress, development and vitality. Such an approach
to the phenomenon of biorhythmological adaptation opens up wide opportunities,
both with respect to diagnostics and prognostics, in a number of areas of man's
practical endeavors. References 70.

"DC: 612.017.2"5"
ACROPHASE HANDERING ZONE
[Abstract of article by s. I. Stepanova]

[Text] Analysis is made of the phenomenon of wandering of acrophases of circadian
biological rhythms, which signifies the instability of daily position of these
phases on a 24-h scale. The segment of the 24-h scale, within which the position

of the acrophase of some functional paraneter varies from day to day over a

period of many days is called its wandering zone. The width of the wandering zone
is used to calculate the so-called coefficient of stability of acrophase position on
the time axis. The phenomenon of fluctuation of numerical values of a functional
parameter at each considered point on the 24-h scale is discussed in relation to

the wandering phenomenon, analysis is made of factors that form this fluctuation.
in particular the changes in level of circadian rhythms that are governed by

weekly, monthly and seasonal periodicity. Literature is cited that confirms the
seasonal changes in level, amplitude and position of acrophases of circadian biologi-
cal rhythms of animals and man. The concept of "seasonal physiological desynchro-
nosis" is formulated, which is used to explain the seasonal periodicity of some
diseases. Figures 6, tables 3; references 56.

unc: 616.008.63

LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS OF HEART RHYTHM
[Abstract of article by A. D. Cherkay and Yu. A. Vlasov]

[Text] A procedure is described for linguistic analysis of sequences of EKG R’s
intervals, which is based on isolating recurrent (matrix) sequences of R—R inter-
vals referable to the t-tube with specified 5. There is discussion of questions of
formation of matrix sequences and their roots. Specific examples are offered of
analysis of cardiac rhythm. Evaluation is made of the statistical significance of
condensation of recurrent R-R sequences around the isolated matrix sequences. There

103
FOR 0FI1C1A1.USE(HVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

is discussion of problems of modeling the rhythm of cardiac contractions. Figures 1,
tables 3; references 8.

000: 616.008.63
MECHANISMS OF ADAPTIVE CHANGE IN CIRCADIAN RHYTHHS
[Abstract of article by V. I. Makarov]

[Text] Changes in circadian rhythms of man due to various stress agents are ana-
lyzed on the basis of the author's experimental results. It was demonstrated that
adaptive changes can be manifested both in the ion f less accentuation of

rhythm and excessive accentuation, excessive constaicy. Both variants of adaptive
changes are deviations from the norm and indicative of development of a stress
state. References 3.

UDC: 616.008.63

CIRCADIAN FLUCTUATIONS 0P EKG INTERVALS IN MAN 0“ THE USUAL SLEEP AND "AKING
SCHEDULE

[Abstract of article by A. A. Koreshkov]

[Text] Studies were made of circadian fluctuations of duration of EKG intervals
in two healthy men isolated from natural light, kept on the usual sleeping and
waking schedule. In both subjects, PQ, QRS and 035T intervals were shorter in

the daytime than at 0600 hours. The obtained results also revealed that a decline
of pulse rate in the first half of the night may occur without change in rate of
excitation of atria and ventricles, i.e., without increase in duration of P0 and
088 intervals. Figures 3, tables 3; references 5. '

UDC: 616.008.63

CIRCADIAN RHYTHM 0? ACTIVITY OF LARGE-CELL NUCLEI OF THE RAT HYPOTHALAMUS AND
ADRENAL CORTEX

[Abstract of article by Ye. I. Zubkova-Hikhaylova, Yu. P. Drushininf,
N. D. Polyakova and L. H. Ponomarenko]

[Text] A study was made of circadian rhythm of activity of different elements of
the hypothalamus-pituitary--adrenal system of Histsr rats kept under different
illumination conditions, using histochemical and morphometric methods. Neuro-
secretory activity was characterized by varying circadian dynamics, depending

on the length of the light period. Figures 7; references 25.

BBC: 616.008.63

EFFECT OF CHANGE IN PHOTOPERIOD AND ILLUMINATION 0N CIRCADIAN RHYTHHS OF CELL
REPRODUCTION IN THE RAT ESOPHAGEAL EPITHELIUH
[Abstract of article by Yu. A. Romanov, S. S. Filippovich and Yu. P. Drushinin+l

[Text] A study was made of cell reproduction in the esophageal epithelium of
Histar rats kept in different modes of illumination using H—thymidine. every 3 h.

 

Tneceased
10b
FOR OFIHCLALIJSEdmﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Honophasic rhythms were demonstrated in number of DNA-synthesizing cells, dividing
cells, dividing labeled cells and intensity of marking nuclei. Changes in photo-
period and illumination lead to desynchronization of both intrasystemic mechanisms
of mitotic rhythm (endogenous desynchronosis) and mechanisms that depend on
lighting conditions (exogenous desynchronosis). Figures 1; references 26.

UDC: 612.016.577.3
CIRCADIAN RHYTHM OF ACTIVITY OF DNAaseB AND STRUCTURE OF DNA IN RAT TISSUES

[Abstract of article by G. S. Komolova, V. P. Makeyeva, F. T. Guseynov, Ye. v.
Belikova, l. A. Yegorov, Yu. P. Druzhininf and G. N. Podluzhnaya]

{Text} A study was made of activity of acid and alkaline DNAases, as well as struc-
ture of supramolecular DNA (SM-DNA) in rat tissues over a 24-h period. Circadian
changes in these parameters were demonstrated. The circadian curves of enzyme
activity in the liver presented one peak and those of lymphoid tissues had two.
The degree of periodicity of enzyme activity was related to intensity of DNA meta-
bolism in tissue. The circadian rhythm of SH-DNA structure in lymphoid tissues,
like synthesis and quantitative DNA content, is described by a single-peak curve.
However, the positions of the corresponding extremums on the curves are shifted in
time. There is reason to believe that the circadian change in DNAase activity is
related predominantly to catabolic metabolism of DNA, while the state of DNA is
related to anabolic aspects thereof. Figures 3; references 33.

UDC: 616.008.63

CHANGES IN THE ORGANISM'S SUPPLIES 0F NUCLEOSIDES-THYMIDINE AND DEOXYURIDINB-
IN THE COURSE OF A 24-HOUR PERIOD

[Abstract of article by V. F. Mikhaylov,yu, P. Druzhinin,f Ye. Yu. Moskaleva and
T. A. Pedorovaf]

[Text] Studies were made of the course in time of excretion of free deoxynucleo-
sides of the pyrimidine class-thymidine and deoxyuridine-in urine of rats kept
under different illumination modes. Nucleoside excretion was higher during the
dark period than the light. A reduction of the light period did not reliably alter
the output of these compounds per day; with decrease in illumination there was a
2.5-fold increase in 26-h excretion of deoxyuridine. Restriction of rat mobility
led to different changes in the stock of deoxyuridine as a function of the base
level in control animals. Figures 2; references 11.

UDC: 616.008.63

CHANGES IN MANGANESE CONCENTRATION IN RATS IN THE COURSE OF THE DAY [26 HOURS]
AS A FUNCTION OF INTENSITY AND MODE 0? ILLUMINATION

[Abstract of article by V. N. Reushkin, N. P. Roslyakov and A. M. Samonov]
[Text] Experiments on rats revealed that the circadian curves reflecting changes in

manganese concentration in the course of a day in the liver and thymus differed
in accordance with illumination mode. During adaptation of animals to a change in

FORIMHHCUSEIEHEONIY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

illumination conditions, the change in these periodic processes occurs at different
rates. Tables 1; references 7.

tinc: 616.008.63
STUDY OF CIRCADIAN RHYTHHS 0P CELLULAR REPRODUCTION IN HYPOKINETIC RATS

[Abstract of article by Yu. A. Romanov, S. S. Filippovich, E. T. Ostroushko,
L. I. Stepanova, Ye. A. Kovalenko and E. A. Kamenetskaya]

[Text] Studies were made of circadian rhythms of number of DNA-synthesizing and
dividing cells, intensity of DNA synthesis, duration of premitotic period of the
mitotic cycle in parenchymal and stromal cells of the liver, in cells of the
cryptal epithelium of the small intestine of rats submitted to experimental hypo-
kinesia for 310 days. It was demonstrated that, under such conditions, there is a
drastic decrease in number of DNA-synthesizing and dividing hepatocytes, and inhi-
bition of rate of DNA synthesis in them. There was considerably less marked re-
duction of stromal cell reproduction in the liver, and none was demonstrable in
the cryptal epithelium of the small intestine. Consequently, the rapidly renewed
cellular system is more resistant to hypokinesia than one that is slowly renewed.
At the same time, in none of the examined tissues did hypokinesia lead to appreci-
able disturbances of phasic structure of circadian rhythms of cellular reproduc-
tion. This indicates that there is no direct connection between periodicity of
cell division and rhythm of motor activity of animals, which is apparently not
among the main time sensors for processes of cellular proliferation. Figures 5,
tables 1'. references 54. '

UDC: 616.003.63
SOME PATTERNS OF CHANGE IN CIRCADIAN RHYTHHS WITH DIFFERENT LIGHTING MODES

[Abstract of article by Yu. P. Druzhinind’ G. N. Podluzhnaya, G. P. Rodina and
V. M. Seraya]

[Text] Results are submitted from a study of the "phase map" of several physiolo-
gical and morphological parameters, periodicity of activity of the hypothalamus—
pituitaryuadrenal system, rhythms of cellular reproduction and nucleic metabolism
in Wistsr rats submitted to different modes of illumination. It was established
that there is the same reaction to both a decrease in light period and in illumina-
tion level. Figures 3; reierences 11.

Contents Page
Introduction (3. S. Alyakrinskiy) 3

Problems of Biorhythm Theory. Studies of Human Biorhythms

Adaptation in the Light of Biorhythmology (B. S. Alyakrinskiy) - 8
Acrophase Wandering Zone (8. l. Stepanova) 37
Linguistic Analysis of Heart Rhythm (A. D. Cherkay. Yu. A. Vlaaov) 62
Mechanisms of Adaptive Change in Circadian Rhythms (V. I. Hakarov) 70
Circadian Fluctuations of EKG Intervals in Man on the Usual Sleep and
Waking Schedule (A. A. Koreshkov) 71.
106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Studies of Animal Biorhythms

Circadian Rhythm of Activity of Large-Cell Nuclei of the Rat Hypothalamn

and Adrenal Cortex (Ye. l. Zubkova-Nikhaylova, Yu. P. Druzhinin‘l', N. D.

Polyakova, L. M. Ponomarenko) 81
Effect of Changes in Photoperiod and Illumination on Circadian Rhythm

of Cell Reproduction in the Rat Esophageal Epithelium (Yu. A. Romanov,

S. S. Filippovich, Yu. P. Druzhinin‘l’) 97
Circadian Rhythm of Activity of DNAasea and Structure of DNA in Rat

Tissues (G. S. Komolova, V. P. Nakeyeva. F. I. Guaeynov, Ye. V. Delikova.

I. A. Yegorov, Yu. P. Druzhinin'f, G. N. Podluzhnaya) 105
Changes in the Organiam's Supplies of Nucleoaidea—‘l'hymidine and Deoxy-

uridine--in the Course of a 24-h Period (V. P. Hikhaylov, Yu. P. Druzhinin‘l',

Ye. Yu. Moskaleva, '1‘. A. Fedorova‘t) 113
Change in Manganese Concentration in Rats in the Course of the Day [26-h]

as a Function of Intensity and Mode of Illumination (V. N. Reushkin,

N. P. Roalyakov, A. M. Samonov) 118
Study of Circadian Rhythms of Cellular Reproduction in Hypokinetic Rats

(Yu. A. Romanov, S. S. Filippovich, E. T. Ostroushko, L. I. Stepanova,

Ye. A. Kovalenko, E. A. Kamenetakaya) 121
Some Patterns of Change in Circadian Rhythms with Different Lighting Modes
(Yu. P. Druzhininf, G. N. Podluzhnaya, G. P. Rodina, V. H. Seraya) 135

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'srvo "Nauka", 1979

10,657
cso: 1840/999 .

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCHOLOGY

THEORETICAL AND APPLIED RESEARCH IN PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY OF SPORTS ACTIVITIES

Kazan' TEORBTICHESKIYB I PRIKLADNYYB ISSLEDOVANIYA PSIKEOPIZIOLDGII SPORTIVNOY
DEYATEL'NOSTI in Russian 1979 (signed to press 15 Oct 80 [sic]), pp 2,....

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Theoretical and Applied Research in
Psychophysiology of Sports Activities" edited by Docents A. P. Kashin and V. M.
Shadrin, published by decree of the Editorial and Publishing Council of Raaan'
University, Izdatel'atvo Kazanskogo universiteta, 500 copies. 101+ pages]

[Text] This publication sheds light on theoretical and applied aspects of complex
studies of individual psychological differences in sports. There is discussion of
some theses of general theory of sports activity. There is reflection of the
psychophysiological distinctions of high-class athletes-fighters, track and field
athlete-sprinters, sailboat sailers and mountain climbers. This collection is
intended for researchers in psychology, physiology and pedagogics, as well as
specialists and trainers working with high-class combined teens.

Contents Page

Construction of General Theory of Sports Activity (V. V. Davydov) 3
Experimental Study of Prototype of Mental Traits Assuring Achievement in

Purpose of Athlete's Performance in International Competition

(L. M. Abolin, A. Ya. Chebykin) 10
Morphological and Psychophysiological Organization of High-Class Track

and Field Athletes as Related to Qualitative Manifestations of

Sprinting Performance (A. P. Kashin, Rh. M. Murtazin) 28
Dynamics of Psychophyaiological Parameters (Yu. T. Varennikov) 87
Distinctive Psychological and Psychophysiologicsl Features of Instructors

in Mountain Climbing (A. V. Yevseyev) 101

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Kazanskogo universiteta, 1979

10,657
CSO: 1840/299

108
FORIOFFNJAL.U$£1ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BHOTIONS AND RECREATION 0F AIHLETBS

Moscow EMOTSII I OTDYKH SPORTSHENA in Russian 1980 (signed to press 8 Oct 80)
pp 2-3, 64

[Annotation, beginning of article and table of contents from book "Emotions and
Recreation of Athletes", by Roman Stepanovich Demeter (”News in Life, Science
and Technology. 'Physical Culture and Sports' Series," No 11). Izdatel'stvo
"Znaniye", 55,300 copies. 66 pages)

[Text] The author acquaints readers with original methods and procedures for
independent control of emotional states of athletes to remove tension and fatigue.
The pamphlet offers advice that can also be followed by individuals who are not
engaged in sports in order to eliminate emotional tension that arises in the
course of their work.

Emotions of Athletes

It is an important national task to strengthen and develop the physical and
spiritual potential of the Soviet people. The Soviet system of physical education
offers vast opportunities for millions of people to engage in sports, develop
physically and strengthen health. Sports bring joy, inculcate a sense of
collectivism and are instrumental in harmonious development of the personality.
This applies if we discuss sports in general. not what about high achievement
sports. major sports? 00 they always bring Joy, can an athlete always show what
he is capable of? On shat does this depend?

There are numerous outstanding athletes characterized by composure, ability to

aim at victory and overcome psychological barriers. Emotional stability is inherent
in them. In a sports competition they display enormous will power, inexhaustible
spiritual and physical strength. For them, competition is a festive occasion.

V. Alekseyev, a veteran of heavy athletics and frequent world champion, is an
example, first of all, of emotional stability of athletes who constantly show

high atheltic achievement. The ability to collect his strength and aim at victory
is inherent in him. Among the young weight-lifters, these traits are prominent in
Yu. Vardanyan, who set a number of world records at the 7th National Games of the
USSR and at the 22d Olympics. Heavy athlete D. Rigert broke records more than

60 times....

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010003-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contents

Emotions of Athletes
Factors of Emotional Tension
Science Dealing Hith Self-Control
Brief Discussion of Sleep Function
Recreation [Rest] of Athletes
Emotions and Ethical Behavior
Self-Regulation of ﬁctional State and sleep (SES Method)
Formation of Athlete's Emotional Stability
' Emotional Exercises in the Educational and Training Process

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Znaniye", 1980

10,657
080: 1840/999

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010003-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SELF-REGULATION AND PREDICTION OF SOCIAL BEHAVIOR OF THE INDIVIDUAL

Leningrad SAHORESULYATSIYA I PROGNOZIROVANIYE SOTSIAL'NOGO POVEDENIYA LICHNOSTI
in Russian 1979 (signed to press 14 Nov 79) pp 2—5, 263-264

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book “Self-Regulation and Prediction
of Social Behavior of the Individual" edited by V. A. Yadov, Institute of Socio-
economic Problems, USSR Academy of Sciences, Izdstel'stvo ”Nauka", 5100 copies,

264 pages]

[Text] In this monograph, analysis is made of the results of a many-year study
conducced by a team of Leningrad sociologists and social psychologists, which

deals with motivation of the personality, the role thereof in self-regulation of
social behavior, objective determination of motivation and its reflection in con-
sciousness. The study is based on the hypothesis of structure of value orienta-
tions and social sets of the personality, which form the disposition system. There
is discussion of the problem of correlation between conscious desires of the per-
sonality and its real actions, as well as prognostic value of information about

a personality's dispositionsfor predictingcertain forms of people's social behavior.
Studies were pursued of the various distinctions of dispositional regulation of
behavior of 1000 Leningrad engineers. This book contains a wealth of methodological
material and describes in detail the main investigative procedures that can be

used to study the personality. The book is intended for specialists in the field

of philosophy, sociology, psychology and pedagogics, as well as all those interested
in problems of personality and human behavior.

Foreword

The offered work was initially conceived as a complex sociological and sociopsycho-
logical study of regulatory functions of value orientations of the personality.*
However, as we developed the research program, we arrived at the conclusion that
value orientations are an element of a more complex,_hierarchically organized
structure of the personality's relations to its living and working conditions.

There is an abundant literature dealing with regulatory functions of various states
of personality readiness for a specific node of action. They are given different
names--vital position. orientation of interests, value orientation, social set,
subjective attitude, dominant motivation, subjective meaning imparted to actions,
etc. All this is nothing other than disposition of the personality, fixed in its

___________________
*See: "The Personality and Its Value Orientations," Moscow, No 1, 1969
(INFORMATSIONNYY BYULLETEN' IKSI AN SSSR, No 6, 19).

111
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

social experience of predisposition to perceive and assess conditions of activity,
as well as to act in a specific manner under these conditions.

It is reasonable to assume that personality dispositions are not chaotic, but that
they form a system. This study was based on expressly this idea.* Investigation
of the distinctions of disposition structure and its properties, objective and sub-
jective conditions of its formation and, finally, its correlz.tiona with actual

[real] social behavior of the personality constitute the main theoretical content
of this book.

From the standpoint of practical feasibilityof predidtingeocial behavior, the
authors' objective was to demonstrate the "prognostic value" of information about
different states of a subject' 3 predisposition for specific behavior under specified
conditions. The latter is quite important also for the reason that subjective
evaluation data are used extensively to gain information about the real behavior

of people in the foreseeable future. Yet the extent to which such forecasts are
well-grounded is still unclear, let alone the comparative value of diverse

methods of obtaining such information.

A sampling group of engineers numbering more than 1000 people, working in planning
and design organizations of Leningrad, were submitted to examination. Prom the
standpoint of the main objectives of the research plan, they did not emerge as a
social and professional group, but as a set of subjects whose activities were
analyzed in different aspects.

At the same time, problems of organizing engineering work and the personality of
the planning engineer, on whose active vital position depends to a significant
extent the immediate integration of science and industry, is a subject that it is
exceptionally important to give special consideration. The authors, who are well-
aware of its importance, devoted a special book to the subject.** Hers, however,
we shall deal with such questions only to the extent that it is necessary to
discussion of the main subject--regulation and self-regulation of social behavior
of the personality [individual].

*it

The following participated actively in different stages of this study: V. A.
Yadov (head of research project), V. V. Vodzinskaya, I. 8. Ron, A. A. Kisael',
G. 1. Saganenko and A. P. Supikov in elaborating the general progral; V. A. Yadov

*See: Yadov, V. A., l) "Dispositionsl Regulation of Social Behavior of the
Personality," in "Metodologicheskiye problemy sotsial'noy psikhologii" [Methodo-
logical Problems of Social Psychology], Moscow, 1975; 2) "The Personality as the
Object and Subject of Social Relations," in "Sotsiologiya i Sovremennost'"[Socio-
logy and Modern Times], Hoscow, Vol 1, 1977; Yadov, V. A., and Vodzinskaya, V. V.,
"Internal Regulation of a Subject's Social Behavior," in "Probleny aotsial'noy
psikhologii" [Problems of Social Psychology]. Tbilisi, 1976.

**See: "Sociopsychological Portrait of an Engineer. From Results of a Survey of
Engineers in Planning and Designing Organizations of Leningrad," edited by V. A.
Yadov. Moscow, 1977.

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(labor), V. V. Vodzinskaya (recreation), A. A. Semenov (psychological tests),

G. I. Saganenko (determination of general requirements as to validation and relia-
bility of procedures) in the design of methods for the main sections of the study,

as well as V. N. Kayurova, A. A. Kissel', V. A. Losenkov, Ye. E. Smirnova and

A. A. Sopikov, who developed some of the methods; V. V. Vodzinskaya, L. D. Doktorova,
L. Ye. Kesel'man, V. S. Nagun, V. P. Rukavishnikov, G. I. Saganenko, A. A. Semenov,
Ya. Tenn and V. A. Yadov in development of methods for analysis of data. design

of summary indicators [parameters] and typological procedures; L. N. Veksha and

L. Ye. Kesel'man (supervisors of field studies), L. V. Bozrikova, G. F. Krasnonosenko,
G. A. Pozharskaya and S. P. Khrshanovskaya in gathering and primary analysis of data;
Ye. I. Ignat'yeva, in preparing the text for publication.

At the preliminary stage, the data were processed at the Computer Center of the

151 [Construction Engineering Institute] of the USSR Academy of Sciences using the
programs of V. I. Molchanov and A. R. Tolstova, and at the Computer Center of Tartu
University using the programs of B. Tiyt and N. Tooding. Final processing was per-
formed at the Computer Center of Estonian Radio and Television using the programs
of L. Vykhandu, A. Laumets and A. Laumets with the participation of Ya. Tamm, as
well as the Computer Center of ISEP [expansion unknown], USSR Academy of Sciences,
by a team headed by I. V. Klokachev and V. T. Perekrest, consisting of 0. N.
D'yakonova, D. V. Igolkins, Zh. I. Panchuk, P. V. Suvorov, T. V. Khachaturova and
Z. V. Shtennikova.

*tt

Different sections were written by the following authors: Chapter I,§14 3, 4—-
V. A. Yadovu §2-A. A. Semenov; Chapter II-V. V. Vodzinskaya, V. N. Kayurova,

A. A. Kissel', G. I. Saganenko, A. A. Semenov, V. A. Yadov; Chapter III,§lr-L. V.
Bozrikova, G. I. Saganenko, A. A. Semenov, V. A. Yadov, § 2-V. A. Yadov, § 3—-
A. A. Semenov, V. A. Yadov, § 6-V. V. Vodzinsksya, V. A. Yadov; Chapter IV, § 1—-
G. I. Saganenko, v. A. Yadov, § 2--L. V. Bozrikova, A. A. Kissel', § 3-V. N.
Uzunova; Chapter V-V. S. Nagun; Chapter V1, 5 l, 3-V. A. Yadov, § 2-G. I.
Saganenko, V. A. Yadov; Appendices: A) Description of Nethods--V. V. Vodzinskaya,
V. N. Kayurova, A. A. Kissel‘, V. A. Losenkov, G. I. Saganenko, A. A. Semenov, Ye.
A. Smirnova, V. A. Yadov; B) System of Main Procedures for Preparation and Analysis
of Data in a Complex Multistep Study-L. D. Doktorova. L. D. Doktorova compiled
the"Table [Index] of Main Parameters [signs, tags] Used in This Book."

The team of researchers expresses their profound gratitude to those who participated
constructively in discussions of the program and investigative methods: G. H.
Andreyeva, Yu. V. Vooglayd; 0. I. Genisaretskiy, H. Gomelauri, V. M. Kvachakhiya,
V. V. Kobanovskiy, V. N. Kudryavtsev, Yu. N. Kulyutkin, H. Lauriatin',.N. S.
Nansurov, Sh. A. Nadirashvili, N. F. Naumova, V. B. Ol'shanskiy, G. V. Osipov,

Ye. V. Osipova, I. N. Paley, F. Pataki, C. S. Sukhobskaya, z. I. Paynburg, E. Khaan,
0. I. Shkaratan, G. P. Shchedrovitskiy and comrades who commented on the text of
this book-—V. B. Golofaet, A. A. Gorbatkov, S. I. Salad, 3. z. Doctorov. Ye. S.
Kuz'min, I. I. Leyman, K. Muzdybsyev and B. D. Parygin.

Contents Page
Foreword _ 3
Chapter I. Regulation and Self-Regulation of Social Behavior of the
Personality: Formulation of the Problem 6
1. Subject of research 6
113

FOR‘OFFM]AI.US£(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Value-standard and social-set approaches to the study of self-
regulation of behavior
3. Hypothesis of hierarchic structure of dispositions of the personality
and its social determination
6. Functioning of disposition system
:hapter II. Logic and Main Investigative Procedures
1. Object of investigation. direction of analysis of data
2. Methods of obtaining base information
:hapter III. Dispositional Structure
1. Value orientations
2. Correlation between value orientations and social sets
3. Integrity of disposition structure
a. Role of general orientation of interests in dispositional hierarchy
Chapter IV. Stability and Variability of Disposition System
1. Value orientations as a reflection of life-style conditions
2. Conditions of professional activity and social sets in relation to
job-related qualities
3. Dispositional changes in a stress situation
Chapter V. Dispositions and Real Behavior of the Personality (‘)
1. Sources of disposition-behavioral discoordination
2. Group disposition-behavior conformity
3. Individual disposition-behavioral discoordination
4. Structure of disposition-behavior discoordination of the personality
5. Effect of indicators of personality maturity on coordination of
dispositions and real behavior
Chapter VI. Dispositions and Real Behavior of the Personality (2)
l. Disposition system as a whole [integral element] and structure of
real behavior
2. The place of dispositions in practical forecasting of behavior
3. Principal theoretical conclusions based on results of study
Appendices
A. Description of Methods
1. Planning cycle (by G. I. Saganenko)
2. Certification (V. N. Kayurova)
3. Evaluation of work [industrial] situation (G. I. Saganenko,
V. A. Yadov)
4. Recreation (V. V. Vodzinskaya)
5. Value orientations (adapted variant of method of H. Rokich;
adaptation by A. Goshtautas, A. A. Semenov, V. A. Yadov)
6. Basic interview (V. A. Yadov)
7. Projective situations (G. I. Saganenko, V. A. Yadov)
8. Logic-semantic differential (V. A. Losenkov)
9. Semantic differential (developed by Ye. B. Smirnova)
10. Situative set (A. A. Kissel')
ll. Satisfaction with occupation and work (A. A. Kissel')
12. Intelligence (developed by Ye. E. Smirnova)
l3. Rigidity (developed by A. A. Semenov, Ye. B. Smirnova)
1a. Impulsiveness (V. A. Losenkov)
15. Behavioral activity (adapted variant of method of c. Jenkins;
adaptation by A. Goshtautas, A. A. Semenov, V. A. Yadov)
l6. Behavior at work (6. I. Saganenko)
l7. Routine recreation (V. V. Vodzinskaya)

111:
mu omcm use ONLY
FOI:OFFHJAI.US£1DNLY

3. System of Main Procedures for Preparation and Analysis of Data
in a Complex Hultiatep Study

Table of Main Parameters Used in This nook
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1979

10,657
CSO: 1840/999

115
son omcw. us: ONLY
FORGDFFKJA1.USE(MULY

SOCIOPSYCHOLOGICAL CLIMATE IN A GROUP: THEORY AND INVESTIGATIVE METHODS

Moscow SOTSIAL'NO-PSIKBOLOGICHESKIY KLIHAT ROLLEKTIVA: TBORIYA I HBTODY IZUCHENIYA
in Russian 1979 (signed to press 28 Nov 79) pp 2-6, ...

[Annotation. foreword and table of contents from book "Sociopsychological Climate
in a Group: Theory and Investigative Hethods" edited by Prof Ye. V. Shorokhova.
doctor of philosophical sciences, and 0. L Zotova,camdidate of psychological
sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 5000 copies, 162+ pages]

[Text] This work deals with theoretical and experimental investigation of the socio-
psychological climate in a group. It describes various approaches to determination
of the sociopsychological climate, discusses the conditions under which it is formed
and analyzes the status of this problem in Soviet social psychology and abroad.

Foreword

The tasks put by the Party in the fields of economics, politics and communistic
training require constant refinement of control of the entire national economy

and guidance of each work group. The practical implementation of these tasks would
be impossible without theoretical.interpretation thereof, without following the
theoretical recommendations in the practical building of communisa. Representa-
tives of the social sciences must also make their contribution to this national
cause.

Comrade L. I. Brezhnev stated: "It is obvious that the tasks put to our social
science can only be performed if itis very closely related to life. Scholastical
theorizing could only slow down our progress. It is only the link with practice
that can raise the effectiveness of science, and this is one of the focal problems
of our times."*

"Other groups are playing an increasing role in solving the main economic, socio-
political and educational problems facing our people. They "participate in the
discussion and solution of national and social affairs, in planning production and
social development, in training and placement of personnel, in discussion and
solution of problems of management of enterprises and institutions. improvement of
working and living conditions, use of funds assigned for development of industry,
as well as social and cultural measures and material incentives."

*"Proceedings of the 25th CPSU Congress," Moscow, Politizdat, 1976, p 73.

116
FOR 0FFKJA1.USE¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Worker groups develop socialist competition, they are instrumental in disseminating
progressive work methods, strengthening work discipline; they educate their members
in the spirit of communistic ethics; they are concerned about improving their
political awareness, sophistication and professional qualifications."*

This collective book deals with pressing problems of immediate practical relevance-
the study of the sociopsychological climate in worker groups.

The participating authors are scientists on the staff of the Institute of
Psychology, USSR Academy of Sciences, and other social psychology centers of the
Soviet Union (Kostroma, Yaroslavl', Leningrad, Kursk), who have tried to reflect

the status of research on these problems at the current stage of development of
sociopsychological science in the USSR and abroad. It offers a system of concepts
of theory of sociopsychological climate, and explores the different factors thereof.
There is a special section of the collection that deals with descriptions of
methods of investigating the sociopsychological climate.

The lack of generalizing literature on problems of social and psychological climate,
the complexity and insufficient development of these problems have resulted in a
diversity of approaches and points of view concerning the phenomena under dis-
cussion, and this was reflected in this collection.

The team of authors expresses its hope that the book will be interesting and useful
to specialist psychologists, philosophers, as well as supervisors of industrial
groups, for whom formation of a beneficial sociopsychological climate is a pressing
task.

Contents Page

Foreword 3

Section 1. Theoretical Problems of Sociopsychological Climate
The Problem of sociopsychological climate in Soviet social psychology.

(V. I. Antonyuk, 0. I. Zotova. G. A. Hochenov, Ye. V. Shorokhova) 5
Development of a System of Concepts of Theory of Psychological Climate in

Soviet Psychology (K. K. Pldtonov, V. G. Kazakov) 25
Ideological Influence as a Factor Affecting the Sociopsychological Climate

(Yu. A. Sherkovin) 41

Factors Regulating the Sociopsychological Climate in a Group (N. N. Obozov) 49
Sociopsychological Climate in Groups Differing in Organization

(A. S. Chernyshev, Ye. I. Timoshuk) 59
Sociopsychological climate in a Group and Socialist Competition

(V. A. Kol'tsova) , 68
Effect of Rating and Publicitv About Results of Socialist Competitions on

Sociopsychological Climate in a Group (I. Kosev) 76

Effect of Organization of Socialist Competitions in Rural Areas on
Formation of Beneficial Moral Psychological Climate (V. V. Novikov,

V. G. Povarov) 83
Studies of Conflicts in U. 5. Social Psychology as Related to
Psychological Climate (V. A. Sosnin) 90

Studies of Sociopsychological Climate in the United States (5. X. Roshin) 103

*"Constitution (Main Law) of the Union of Soviet Socialsit Republics,"
Moscow, Politizdat, 1977, pp 7-8, article 8.

117
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section 2. Hetnods of Studying the Sociopeychological Climate
Study of Sociopsychological Climate in Primary Industrial Groups

(A. A. Rueelinova)
Management Style for Control of Sociopsychological Climate in an

Industrial Group (A. L. Zhuravlev)

Study of Sociopeychological Climate in Scientific and Engineering
Groups (V. I. Antonyuk, G. A. Hochenov)

Experimental Study of Psychological Climate in a Group (R. S. Nemav)

'Color writing" [Coloring‘U as a Procedure for hpiricel Studies of
Psychological Climate in a Group (A. N. LUTOSHKIN‘I')

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Neuka", 1980

10,657
CSO: 1840/999

118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHR()FF!C1AI.IISEI(HVLY

PSYCHOPHYSICS 0F SENSORY SYSTEMS

Moscow PSIKHOFIZIKA SENSORNYKH SISTEM in Russian 1979 (signed to press 17 Oct 79)
pp 2-8, 199

(Annotation, introduction by Yu. H. Zabrodin and table of contents from book
"Psychophysics of Sensory Systems", edited by B. c. Lomov and Yu. M. Zabrodin,
Institute of Psychology, USSR Academy of Sciences, lzdatel'stvo "Nauka",

3500 copies, 199 pages]

[Text] This collection deals with problems of psychophysical studies of sensory
processes. It discusses theoretical aspects of such research, offers an idea
about the main scientific trends that have recently appeared in psychophysics,
discusses some problems of experimental methods and procedures, and submits the
results of research conducted in this field. The book is intended for specialists
concerned with experimental and applied psychology, physiologists, biophysicists,
physicians, undergraduate and graduate students in the relevant specialties.

Introduction

A: the present time, psychophysics is one of the branches of psychological science
that is being developed the most intensively in the USSR. Its purpose is to
investigate the main patterns of sensory mental reflection, primarily of the struc-
ture, content and properties of mental images as related to the objective proper-
ties of external objects and events that are the actual object of reflection. In
other words, psychophysics is concerned with the relationship of reflection to

what is reflected, "it takes the subjective as a characteristic of mental reflec-
tion by comparison thereof to the physical properties cf reflected objects" (3. F.
Lomov, "The Systems Approach in Psychology," VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII, No 2, 1975, p 43).
However, the real relations between the subject and outside world shows us immedi-
ately that any "linear" or "flat" approach to analysis of mental phenomena. includ-
ing graphic reflection, has limitations. Awareness of this circumstance suggests
that it is necessary to turn from former linear and deterministic conceptions to
the principle of systemic determination of the mind, the need to disclose the

real psychological mechanisms of control of behavior and activity of subjects.

It is extremely important from this vantage point to consider the real role and
function of a mental image as the result of mental reflection or regulator of man's
behavior and activity. Unfortunately, there has not yet been proper development in
worldwide or Soviet science of the very fruitful ideas of the outstanding Soviet
psychologist, B. G. Anan'yev (which he advanced as far back as the early 1960's)
concerning the high significance of processes of sensory reflection in the overall

119
ms omen. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system of cognitive and regulatory mental processes. If psychophysics does not
wish to remain a se1f~contained specific branch of psychology, it will inexorably
"proliferate" into allied branches of psychology, and not only psychology, but
neurophysiology, physics and cybernetics, being enriched by their methods, ideas
and findings and, in turn, enriching these allied branches of science.

revising its own subject and internal range of problems on the basis of a stronger
methodology and new paradigms, is a typical feature of modern Soviet and worldwide
psychophysics. This is associated with the emergence of a number of new directions,
theoretical and experimental, basic and applied branches thereof. The desire to
consider the object of research in a systemic way, as well as to organize the
internal categorial system, systematize the range of problems and develop new
investigative methods, is outlining the route of future expansion of psychophysica
and directions of its development in the inmediate future.

First of all, we refer to development and deepening of research in the area of
general and special, concrete methodology of psychophysics, development of

theory of methods of investigation, analysis, interpretation and application of
accumulated knowledge (principles, conceptions, laws, patterns, facts, etc.). One
of the reasons for this is the need, in view of the above-mentioned quantitative

studied and consolidate the depth and precision of analysis that are inherent in
psychophysics as one of the oldest branches of psychology, which have armed them-
selves with the experimental method of investigation.

Work in the area of theoretical analysis of research methods and procedures is
closely linked with this direction. He refer to the development of general theory
of psychological measurements, refinement of the formal apparatus that would be
suitable for describing the phenomena and processes studied, development of history
and theory of experimental methods in psychology and psychophysics, logical and
psychological validation of research strategies (combined dynamic procedures
extending in time; adaptive controlled experiments, etc.). The main idea in this
direction is, in our opinion, to develop the qualitative and quantitative system,
expand and verify the system of models and mathematical descriptions of psycholo-
gical mechanisms of the processes in question.

Another direction is characterized by advancement toward increasing use of data
and methods from psychophysiology of sensory systems and neurophysiology. There
are two min groups of problems determining this direction. The first is related
to the search for additional reliable indicators of mental activity, which would
serve as a reliable enough support for the researcher in Verifying psychophysical
hypotheses and models, including such checks in the course of an actual experiment.
The second group of problems referable to this direction is, as we see it, more
theoretical: comparative analysis of psychophysical hypotheses and data, as
related to results of neurophysiological studies. And, as we have repeatedly
mentioned, one must bear in mind the rather specific, nonlinear nature of rela-
tions between nervous processes, mechanisms of function of systems of the brain
and mental processes, psychological mechanisms of the phenomena under study.

120
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FIHR()FFICIAL lEﬂE(MVLY

While nervous processes constitute a complexly organized dynamic system, mental
processes should be viewed as a sort of "supersystem" [or suprasystem]. In other
words, the relationship between mental and nervous phenomena is a relationship
between two complex systems that are not necessarily organized in a similar way.”
It is our assumption that investigation of the nature of neurophysiological "res-
trictions" could yield a beneficial result, if we compare them to borderline
phenomena and mental characteristics. For this reason, we believe that.one should
expect to discover new and interesting facts and patterns in the area of such com-

parative analysis of expressly psychophysical phenomena and their neurophysiologi-
cal basis.

The next direction, which is important in our opinion, refers to investigation of
dynamic properties of psychophysical phenomena and processes, which have been
little studied thus far. Paradoxically enough, while scientist-psychologists are
well aware of the processual nature of mental phenomena, they are not concerned
(with rare exceptions) with theoretical and experimental research on time,

dynamic and changing characteristics of man's work in solving psychophysical prob-
lems. The same applies, in particular, to setting up research procedures and
methods of processing data.

In recent years, two beneficial lines of work have emerged in this direction: inves-
tigation of the dynamics of sensory characteristics of the observer, dynamics of
parameters of a sensory process--on different levels and scales and of different
origin; psychophysical analysis of the distinctions of reflection and work with
dynamic signals. It must be borne in mind that psychophysics has strived in its
experimental procedures to deal essentially with so-called discrete problems:

the alphabet of stimuli was limited to a set of discrete signals (individual
tests, experiments), while the results of the work were assessed in a discrete

set of responses. of course, psychophysical investigation of continuous problems
is incredibly more complex: strong theoretical arguments and ideas are needed,
that would make it possible to separate in the analysis sensory, extrasensory and
effector (regulatory) aspects of a process, in the manner that psychophysical
theory makes it possible to do in studying the above-mentioned discrete problems.

Finally, investigation of individual distinctions of man's work in solving psycho-
physical problems constitutes another important direction. This direction is
valuable to us not only because it discloses additional opportunities for differ-
ential evaluation of the observer's capabilities, to define the typology of indi-
vidual reactions, although such work could also be quite productive if the

latest advances of psychophysics are used. It is also of great scientific import-
ance to study individual characteristics and strategies of solving psychophysical
problems, which could define the range of the numerous individual variations and
specifics of movement (expression) of the process in this range. The very nature
of research acquires, so to speak, two levels: a search is made of what is cannon
to individual variations and individual invariants as the specific characteristics
of individual execution. Here we find that it is possible to "double" check the
theoretical theses: there is verification of the results and conclusions of
general theory on a multitude of data and a check of the corollaries of general
theory by means of comparing the theoretical description of a process obtained

by defining more concretely the general theory (or model) to the experimentally
observed results.

Such is the brief description of promising directions of development of psycho-
physical research. Of course, the foregoing does not mean that traditional

121
I13Rl0FIWCIAl.(EiE(HVLV’
FOR OF1HCJAI.lEﬂE(HVLY

psychophysicsl research will cease to develop. We find that there is also further
deepening of work in these directions: research methods are becoming more refined
and sophisticated, progress is continuing in the area of investigation of reflec-
tion of complex signals, theoretical descriptions of processes of detection, dis-
crimination and evaluation of signals are becoming more complex and gaining
greater depth.

This book is an attempt to shed light on some new directions in psychophysics of
sensory systems in the immediate future. It was prepared by the Laboratory of
Psychophysics of the Institute of Psychology, USSR Academy of Sciences; the authors
are on the staff of this institute, and they also include our Soviet and foreign
colleagues.

The collection consists of three sections: the first deals with primarily theoretical
research; the second discusses problems of methods of psychophysica; the third sub-
mits data obtained from experimental research.

The first section begins with an article by Yu. H. Zabrodin, V. N. Nosulenko and

A. P. Pakhomov, "Dynamic Aspects of the Detection Process," in which they

sum up the results they obtained from studies of theoretical approaches and pheno—
menology of the dynamics of sensory processes of man's discovery and discrimination
of signals. The purpose of this article is to draw the attention of psychophysi-
cists to this problem, point to the need to develop new approaches, new theoretical
conceptions and the need to develop adequate methods of experimental analysis of
dynamic phenomena in psychophysics (including a search for suitable methods of
processing data).

The article of Ye. Z. Prishman deals with theoretical validation and search for
strong argumentation in favor of the hypothesis of effects of mechanisms and
levels of activation on dynamics of psychophysical parameters. This idea can be
viewed as one of the first steps on the road to analysis of individual typological
distinctions of the observer.

The article by D. H. Green et al. (United States), "Detection and Identification
of Clear Tones in Noise," submits the results of verification of a theorem that
relates data obtained from experiments dealing with detection of tonal signals
against the background of noise to the parameters of man's identification of
acoustical signals of different frequencies. It was demonstrated that the
conclusions of the theorem are valid in cases when it is valid to assume that
input signals are orthogonal (in particular, when the difference between fre-
quencies of identified signals is greater than the critical band for hearing).

The article of H. G. Gaissler (CDR) deals with the main lines of research in

modern worldwide psychophysics and some new advances in this field. It offers

an exemplary classification of the main approaches and demonstrates the possibility
of developing some of them in different branches of psychophysics. H. G. Gaissler
demonstrates convincingly the fruitfulness of systems analysis of psychophysical
phenomena.

In the next two articles of the theoretical section, there is discussion of the
possible psychophysiological and neurophysiological mechanisms and bases of psycho-
physical phenomena. A. N. Lebedev et a1. undertake a fruitful attempt, in our

122
FIE!(HHWC1A1.USE(MNLY
IIHRCMﬂﬂC1A1.USE(NVLY

opinion, to malidate some of the laws of psychophysics on the basis of analysis
of the properties of electrical activity of the brain. These findings are based
on a model of electrical activity of neurons and neuronal nets, which they are
developing, which considers residual (oscillatory) phenomena in the system of
connected neurons.

N. I. Chuprikova discusses the possible sources of the false-alarm reaction and
mechanisms of realization of the observer's criteriongshedescribes three hypothe-
tical mechanisms that provide for maximization of the probability of detection of
a signal: guessing, mechanisms of pretriggering integration, second-signaling
system conscious differentiation between sensations, with respect to quality and
quantity. She demonstrates the specificity of the mechanism of the false-alarm
reaction, the nature of which cannot, in her opinion, be related to simple, un-
organized neuronal "noise."

The second section on methods consists of two articles.

The article by K. V. Bardin, "Instructions in Psychophysical Experiments," offers
some beneficial methodological instructions on planning and organizing psychophysical
experiments. He explains hOw one can eliminate the undesirable influence of in-
complete or inaccurate instructions on the end results of experiments.

Yu. A. Indlin shows how one can use the energetic model he proposes of signal dis-
crimination by man for qualitative evaluation of some parameters of observer work
with the use of the method of constants.

The third section of this collection contains the results of experimental research.

Two articles, by G. S. Shlyakhtin and I. Marinova, and . L. Hitrani (People's
Republic of Bulgaria), deal with evaluation of the time characteristics of
perceived and discriminated signals. In the first of these articles, there is
experimental verification of a model of discrimination of short periods, and it
is shown that when working with different intervals there may be a change in
discrimination mechanisms from evaluation of time of formation of a sensory image
to analysis of amount of sensory information per unit time. In the second
article, evaluation of signal duration as a function of its physical time and
magnitude of standard was obtained; it was found to be an exponential function

of physical time of the observed interval as related to the standard interval.

The article by K. V. Bardin, Yu. H. Zabrodin, A. H. Ivanitskiy and L. V. Matveyeva
submits the results of an experimental study of sensory and extrasensory factors

of detection and discrimination of signals in the presence of some forms of mental
disorders. It was demonstrated that certain disturbances of the sensory perceptive
process are present in schizophrenics and psychopathic personalities. There is also
discussion of the distinctions involved in using methods of classical and modern
psychophysics to study sensory processes in the presence of pathology.

The last article in this section is by A. P. Chernyshev and V. G. Zazykin, who
demonstrated experimentally the stochastic and nonlinear nature of reflection of
physical parameters of a signal in problems of the continuous type: tracking
random and harmonic signals.

Thus, the articles in this collection cover a wide range of trends in modern psycho-
physics, and they may give the reader an idea about new problems and some of the

123
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(INLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

new findings made in recent years in psychophysics of sensory systems. The ideas
and experimental data submitted in this collection may be of interest to special-
ists in the field of psychophysics and psychophysiology of sensory systems and
processes. as well as in experimental and engineering psychology.

Contents Page
3
Introduction
Dynamic Aspects of Detection Process (Yu. M. Zahrodin, V. N. Nosulenko,

A. P. Pakhomov) 9
Variability of Detection Thresholds and Causes Thereof (Ye. 2. Prishman) #6
Detection and Identification of Clear Tones in Noise (D. Green, D. Heber.

J. Duncan) 64
Survey of Advances in Modern Psychophysics (B. c. Gaissler) 81
Physiological Prerequisites of Laws of Psychophysics(A. N. Lebedev, B. G.

Bovin. A. V. Pasynkova, V. A. Sadov, Yu. A. Shpatenko) 94
Instructions in Psychophysical Experiments (K. V. Bardin) 106

Possible Sources of False-Alarm Reactions and Psychophysiological
Mechanisms of 0ptimi7ation of Detection (of Weak Signals) Processes

(N. I. Chuprikova) 121
Qualitative Evaluation of s Subject's Hark With Use of Method of Constants

(Yu. A. Indlin) 129
Heber' a Law and Discrimination of Short Intervals (G. S. Shlyakhtin) 139
Scaling Short Time Intervals Presented Visually (I. Harinova, L. Hitrani)-149

Distinctions of Regulation of Sensory Perceptive Processes in the
-Presence of Some Forms of Mental Disorders (K. V. Hardin, Yu. H. Zabrodin,

A. H. Ivanitskiy, L. V. Hatveyeva) 153
Characteristics of Perception Accuracy in Tracking Continuous Signals
(A. P. Chernyshev, V. G. Zazykin) 189

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1979

10,657
CSO: 1860/999

12h
INDR10FFICJAI.IEHE(HVLY
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY

 

SUMMARY 0? CONFERENCE ON PROBLEMS OF PSYCHOLOGISTS AI INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES

Moscow VESTNIK KOSKOVSKOGO UNIVERSITETA, SERIYA 14: PSIXHOLOGIYA in Russian No 3,
Jul-Sep 81 (manuscript received 3 Mar 81) pp 61-62

[Article by Vladimir Sergeyevich Ageyev, candidate of psychological sciences, junior
scientist in Department of Social Psychology, Psychology Faculty of “60 (Moscow
State University), and Yekaterina Hikhaylovna Dubovskaya, senior laboratory techni-
cian, Department of Social Psychology, Psychology Faculty, HGU]

[Text] A scientific and practical conference convened on 16 and 17 Februaryzhithe
Psychology Faculty of Moscow State University [HGU], which dealt with problems
related to the work of a psychologist at an industrial enterprise . The conference
was organized by the Department of Social Psychology of this faculty and the
Sociology Laboratory of the Tiraspol'skiy Garment Association imeni 60th Anniversary
of the Konsomol. Representatives of some industrial enterprises of Moscow, members
of the department of engineering psychology and industrial psychology, graduates
from the faculty of psychology working in industry, as well as faculty students
specializing in social psychology were also invited to participate in this con-
ference.

In his opening remarks, Prof A. A. Dodalev, dean of the Psychology Faculty, stressed
the urgent need of increasing introduction ot the results of psycuolcgical research
into practice; he also outlined the main directions of applied studies in the

light of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. The paper of A. ?. Pavlova,
deputy director of the Tiraspol'skiy Garment Association for management, social
development and personnel, offered an exhaustive description of the achievements

of this enterprise, both with regard to technical-economical indicators and

social development of the personnel of the association. This association, which

is headed hy V. S. Solov'yeva, Hero of Socialist Labor, has been in first-place for
110 successive quarters in the All-Union competition for this industrial sector.

A. F. Pavlova also noted that the achievements of the enterprise were largely
attributable to applied investigations and practical recommendations prepared by
the staff of the enterprise's sociology laboratory, which is manned by four
psychologists (three of whom are graduates from our faculty).

V. V. Chichilimov, head of the association's sociology laboratory, outlined the
main direction of work by the laboratory staff and the main tasks to further

industrial management by means of temporary appointment (for 1 day per month) to
responsible positions, up to shop supervisors. The speaker demonstrated con-
vincingly the enormous educational potential of such "business games." In con-
clusion, V. V. Chichilimov appealed to the scientific psychological community for

125
FUI‘DFFﬂJAI.USI¢lNLY
son OMCIAL USE ONLY

continued coordination in defining the place and functions of a psychologist at an
industrial enterprise, and he also praised the professional training of graduates
of the Department of Social Psychology, Psychology Faculty of “EU.

The next speeches by the staff of the sociology laboratory (V. H. Kashina. I. R.
Rudkovskaya, A. G. Dumitrashko) defined some of the special "targeted programs":
research on adaptation of young workers to a modern enterprise, the problem of
creating "sociopsychological comfort," some aspects of work on problems of inter-
personal perception, particularly in the system of management and subordination.

After the speeches of guests from Tiraspol', the floor was given to the staff of
the faculty. In their speeches, I. G. Kokurina, K. Ye. Danilin and 0. N.
Chernysheva touched upon a number of extremely important problems confronting
clinical psychologists in a modern industrial enterprise: sociopsychological study
of motivational structure of the personality. determination of functions of the
clinical psychologist, formulation of tasks for the sociopsychological services,
interaction between social psychologists and industrial psychologists in solving
complex problems.

In summing up the outcome of the first day of the conference, Prof G. M. Andreyeva,
head of the Department of Social Psychology, discussed in detail pressing problems
of training psychologist students for work at an industrial enterprise. In his
paper, several specific steps were proposed to improve the quality of training of
future clinical psychologists: transfer of industrial practice to the fourth year,
preliminary vocational guidance of students, participation of prominent clinical
psychologists in working out and conducting different specialized practical
classes, etc.

The second day of the conference was organized in the form of "round table dis-
cussions." There were two focal issues: the first, discussion of the collective
monograph by the staff of the sociological laboratory at the Tiraspol' Association*
and elaboration of a plan and prospects of future collaboration of the Department
of Social Psychology with the sociological laboratory of the Tiraspol' Association.

The staff of the department praised the monograph of the Tiraspol' group. It was
noted that this book was a good example of the genre of a scientific and practical
monograph seldom encountered in psychological literature (A. I. Dontsov, L. A.
Petrovskaya); it was stressed that the book is very important to dissemination of
the progressive knowhow of the sociological service at the Tiraspol‘skiy Garment
Association (I. G. Kokurina, A. U. Kharash). At the same time, several construc-
tive comments were made, in particular, about the need for stricter definition of
the concepts used and separation of sociopsychological, sociological and general
psychological aspects in the study of specific practical problems (G. M. Andreyeva);
it was also indicated that it is imperative to improve the validity of research
results (K. Ye. Danilin, Yu. H. Zhukov, N. N. Bogomolova). Wishes were also ex-
pressed concerning new directions of scientific applied research in the laboratory
(T. Yu. Bazarov, V. S. Ageyev).

*Solov'yeva, V. 8., Kashina, V. M. and Chichilimov, V. V., "All About Us and Our
Group," Kishinev, 1980.

126
FORiOFFK3A1.USE(NVLY
FOIlOFIIClAl.lEHE(HVLY

In the course ofthediscussion, there was definition of the Iain directions of
future collaboration of the two groups: regular exchange of information about
research in progress, periodic meetings of representatives of both groups to
discuss pressing theoretical and practical problems, scientific-usthodological
and consultant assistance on the part of the Depart-eat of Social Psychology.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Hoskovskogo universiteta. "Vestnik Moskovskogo
universiteta", 1981

10,657
CSO: 1840/31

127
FOI‘DFFRJA1.U§B(HNLY
'FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCHIATRY

PSYCHOPHARHACUIHERAPY: OONCISE HANDBOOK FOR PRACTICING PHYSICIANS

Yerevan PSIKHOFARIMKOTEMPIYA: KRATKOYB RUKOVODSTVO DLYA PRAKTICHESKIKH VRACHEY
in Russian 1980 (signed to press 1 Feb 80) pp 2-9

(Annotations, foreword by Prof 6. Ya. Avrutskiy, head of the Department of Psycho-
pharmacology, Moscow Scientific Research Institute of Psychiatry, RSFSR Ministry
of Health, and table of contents from book "Psychopharmacotherapy-A Concise
Handbook for Practicing Physicians”, by Georgiy Awetisovich Burnazyan, edited

by Prof E. S. Gabrielyan, doctor of medical sciences, corresponding member of

the Armenian Academy of Sciences, lzdatel'stvo ”Ayastan", 3000 copies, 346 pages]

in their effects. It is intended for psychiatrists, neuropathologists and other
specialists in clinical medicine. Figures 12, tables 6; references 840.

This book was published at the reconnendation of the Pharmacological Committee of
the USSR Ministry of Health, Scientific Medical Council of the Armenian Ministry
of Health and on the basis of reviews by the following individuals: Prof M. D.
Mashkovskiy, active member of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, head of the
Pharmacology Laboratory of the All-Union Scientific Research Chemical and Phar-
maceutical Institute imeni S. 0rdzhonikidze; Prof A. A. Megrabyan, corresponding
member of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences; Prof G. Ya. Avrutskiy, head of
the Psychopharmacology Department of Moscow Scientific Research Institute of
Psychiatry. RSPSR Ministry of Health, and Prof C. S. Khachatryan, head of the
Laboratory of Biosynthetic Brain Reactions, Yerevan State Medical Institute.

Tue book was written in the department of psychiatry, Yerevan State Medical
Inatitute (headed by Prof A. A. Megrabyan).

Foreword

The wide use of a new class of drugsnpsychotropic agents—opened up new roads
for treatment of mental illness. Unlike former methods of treating mental
patients (insulin and electroconvulsive therapy), psychopharmacotherapy is char-
acterized by relative safety and availability. not only in hospitals, but under

128
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

extramural conditions, and mainly by the fact that it has high and selective thera-
peutic efficacy in most cases. Moreover, it makes it possible to implement simul-
taneously a conbination of drug, sociovocational and psychotherapeutic treatment of
psychopathological disorders.

However, in spite of the broad introduction into psychiatric practice of psycho-
tropic agents that are diverse in efficacy, full advantage is still not being
taken of their qualities as drugs for treatment of psychosis. The main point is
that there is not always a differentiated approach used to dispensation thereof.
For this reason, the method of ”trial and error" continues to be used, on the
basis of "vhat could help."

The task at this stage of development of clinical psychopharmacology is to work out
and define validated indications and contraindications for various psychotropic
agents, optimum methods of altering dosage, changing drugs, combinations thereof

in accordance with the dynamics of the patient's clinical status and nosological
essence of disease.

It must be stressed that psychopharmacotherapy, as a part of pharmacotherapy, is
governed by the principles of strict dosing and purposeful orientation toward
specific symptoms, syndromes and states. For this reason, the chief prerequisite
for achieving psychopharmacotherapeutic success is a differentiated clinically
validated approach to administration of psychotropic agents. On this basis, the
choice of a drug, with due consideration of the range of its clinical action and
method of administration, must be made not only on the basis of correct identifi-
cation of the chief syndrome, but thorough determination of the clinical distinc-
tions of the patient's condition before and during treatment, dynamics and rate
of development of psychosis, its stage and stage within the range of nosological
forms that present certain consistent patterns of development.

Of course,wise use of psychotropic drugs involves not only proper clinical assess-
ment of the patient's condition, but to an equal extent it is determined by know-
ledge of general and individual distinctions of clinical and psychopharmacological
effects of each drug, i.e., the intensity and quality of its spectrum of psycho-
tropic activity (antipsychotic, sedative, thymoanaleptic, stimulant. psychotonic,
antidepressant or depressant) and other psychotropic properties, depending on

the prescribed dosage, as well as its ability to elicit possible somatic, neurolo-
gical side-effects and complications. From the same point of view, it is also
important to be informed on some theoretical questions related to the great comp-
lexity and insufficient investigation of mechanisms of psychotropic action of

the main representatives of current psychopharmacological agents.

Consequently, the success of psychopharmacotherapy depends, first of all, on proper
clinical evaluation of a patient's condition, careful individual selection of an
adequate psychotropic drug with due consideration of its psychotropic activity,
proposed method of treatment and dynamic change therein during therapy. rather

than on the question of whether a "good" or "bad," "potent" or “mild" drug was
used, since there is no clinical validation of such assessments.

However, no matter how great the role of psychopharmacotherapy among other methods
of treating psychosis, exaggeration thereof could lead to mistakes. Combined
treatment of disease is a mandatory prerequisite for achieving a stable therapeutic

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONI.\

response, where an important place must be reserved for sociovocational readapta-
tion and psychotherapy, the way toward which is opened, to a significant extent,
by psychopharmacotherapy. The latter should not be set against insuline-comatose
and electroconvulsive therapy. since they could be more effective than psycho-
pharmacotherapy under certain conditions.

As shown by experience in treatment with psychotropic agents in our country, treat-
ment of psychoses under hopspital conditions is only the first stage of psycho-
pharmacotherapy. After eliminating acute signs and determining the method for

using a drug, prolonged therapy often continues under extramural conditions where,
along with social and vocational rehabilitation, the patients continue with psycho-
pharmacotherapy for a number of years. Stabilization of the therapeutic effect is
achieved expressly under these working and social conditions, which are customary

to patients. In this regard, the role of the dispensary is increasing significantly,
where treatment begun at the hospital is continued under extramural conditions,
rather than functioning solely to provide "maintenance" therapy.

All these and other rather essential aspects of psychopharmacotherapy are covered
to a considerable extent in this handbook, which touches upon a number of important
theoretical and practical questions. Knowledge thereof will help psychiatrists and
physicians in other specialties in their everyday work.

Contents Page
Foreword 7
Introduction 15
Brief Survey on Transmission of Neural Impulses in Synaptic Structures

of the Nervous System 18
Mechanisms of Action of Psychotropic Agents 43
Classification and General Description of Psychotropic Agents;

Pharmacological Terminology 60
Classification of Psychotropic Agents _ 66
1. Psycholeptic Agents 75

A. Neuroleptics 75

1. Phenothiazine derivatives 76
a) Aliphatic phenothiazine derivatives 78
Aminazin [Chlorpromazine] 78
Propazin [Promazine] 90
Tisercin 93

b) Piperazine phenothiazine derivatives 98
Triftazin [Stelazine] 98
Ethaperazine 106
Frenolon [Hethophenazine] 109
Meterazine [Compazine] 115
Fluphenazine 118
Hajeptil 121

2. Butyrophenone derivatives 129
Haloperidol 131
Trisedyl 140

3. Rauwolfia alkaloids 143
Reserpine 145

4. Thioxanthene derivatives 150
Truxal [Chlorprothixene] 151
Sordinol 152

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DI-1"“ 'IAI. USE ONLY

Combined Therapy Using Various Psychotropic and Other Drugs
Role of Analeptics and Sedatives in Combined Psychopharmacotherapy
Side-Effects and Complications of Neuroleptics
Extrapyramidal Side-Effects and Complications of Neuroleptic Therapy
Prevention and Treatment of Extrapyramidal Side-Effects and Complications
of Neuroleptic Therapy
Cyclodol
Ridinol
Akineton
Dimedrol
Mebedrol [Disipal]
Amizil [Benactyzine]
Tropacin [Tropazine]
Arpenai
Dinezin [Diethazinc]
Parsidol [Ethopropazine, Isothazine]
Diprazin (Phenergan, Promethazine]
Thioxanthene derivatives
Clutaric acid derivatives
Central relaxants
Somatic, Allergic and Other Side-Effects of Neuroleptics; Prevention
and Treatment Thereof

B. Tranquilizers

1. Propanediol derivatives
Meprobamate

2. Benzodiazepin derivatives
Elenium [Librium]
Seduxen

3. Diphenylmethane derivatives
Amizil
Metamysil .

a. Trimethoxybenzoic acid derivatives
Trioxazine

5. Other tranquilizers

Oxylidin
Some Distinctions of Therapeutic and Side-Effects of Tranquilizers

2. Psychoanaleptic Agents
A. Antidepressants
a. Tricyclic antidepressants
1. Iminodibenzyl derivatives
Helipramine
2. Dibenzocycloheptadiene derivatives
Triptizol
3. Phenothiazine derivatives
Chlorazicin
b. Honoamine oxidase inhibitors (IMAO)
1. Hydrazine derivatives
Iprazid
Nuredal
2. Nonhydrazine derivatives
Transamine
Indopan

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

B. Psychostimulsnts
l. Amphetamine derivatives
Phenamine
Pervitin [Methamphetamine]
Phenatine
2. Diphenylmethane derivatives
Piridrol
Heridil [Methyl Phenidate]
3. Other psychostimulants
Azoxodon
Acephen

Side-Effects of Antidepressants and Role of Incompatible Combinations
in Occurrence Thereof

3. Psychodysleptics
Brief Information About Some Relatively New Psychotropic Agents
Neuroleptics
Long-Acting neuroleptics (NPD)
Iranquilizers
Antidepressants
Psychostimulants

First Aid for Intoxication and Poisoning by Psychotropic Agents
Bibliography
Subject Index

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ayastan", Yerevan, 1980

10,657
CSO: 1860/999 END

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY