FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10280
25 January 1982

Tronslcmon
OPERATOR PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY IN MAN-MACHENE SYSTEMS

By

K.A. Ivanov-Muromskiy. et al.

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL HS}: ONLY

JPRS L/10280

25 January 1982

OPERATOR PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY
IN MAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS

Kiev PSIKHOPIZICLOGIYA OPERATORA V SISTEMAKH CHELOVEK-MASHINA in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 23 Nov 79) PP 2-342

[Book "Operator Psychophysiology in Man-Machine Systems" by Kirill
Aleksandrovich Ivanov-Muromskiy, Oksana Nikolayevna Luk'yanova,
Valentin Aleksandrovich Chernomorets, Konstantin Vladimirovich
Lyudvichek, Vladimir Yevgen'yevich Alekseyev, and Dmitriy Ivanovich
Chus'. Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences and Order of Lenin Institute
of Cybernetics, Izdatel'stvo 'Naukova Dumka', 2,350 copies, 344 pages]

CONTENTS
Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._. . . . 1
Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 1. Labor and the Laboring Person . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

1.1. The Origin and Development of SOL [Scientific Organisation
of Labor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

1.2. Classifications of the Types of Human Labor Activity . . . . 11
1.3. Scientific Organization of the Schedule cf Labor and Rest . 13
1.4. Vocational Guidance. Vocational Selection. and Vocational
Suitability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Chapter 2. Investigating the Psychophysiological Characteristics
and Social Orientation of the Individual . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Chapter 3. Some Aspects of Evaluating the Activity of the Human
Operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
3.1. Psychophytiological Prerequisites for the Quality of Human
Labor ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
3.2 Human Functions in Ergatic Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
3.3. Objective Methods of Evaluating Operator Hark Capability . . 52
3.4 Description of Operator Activity and Evaluation of
Its Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
- a - [I - USSR - C FOUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. State of the Organism and Operator Activity in a Stress
Situation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1. Changes in the Organism During Stress . . . . . . . . .
6.2. Laboratory Model of the Stress Situation . . . . . . . . .
6.3. Studying Operator Reliability in a Real Situation . . .

Chapter 5. Modeling Operator Activity and Some Aspects of Its
Practical Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.1. Classification of Models of Operator Activity . . . . .

.2. Synthesizing Mathematical Models of Operator Activity .

5.3. Situational Physical Models of Operator Activity . . . .

5 4. The Use of Models of Operator Activity for Expert
Ergonomic Evaluation of Ergatic Systems . . . . . .

5.5. The Use of Models of Operator Activity To Predict

the Professional Success of ASU Operators . . . . . . .

Chapter 6. Methods of Processing Physiological Data on the State
of the Human Operator in Specialized Technical Units . . . . .

6.1. Brief Analysis of the Physiological Parameters and
Characteristics of the State of a Person . . . . . . .
6.2. Methods of Processing Electrograms in Technical
Diagnosis Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Some Questions of Preliminary Processing of Electrograms
a. Sequential-Parallel Analysis of the Shape of a Curve
Based on Expansion According to Base Functions . . . .
6.5. Encoding Time Functions by Artificial Neuron Nets
Accdrding to Their Informative Signs . . . . . . . . .
6.6. Neuron Analyzer of Operator Reaction . . . . . . . . . .

6.
6

Chapter 7. The Fundamentals of Building Complex Bioelectronic
Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Appendix 1. Program of the Simulation Psychophysiological Model
of Operator Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Appendix 2. Program of the Simulation Information Model of
Operator Group Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Appendix 3. Symbols of Variables in Information Simulation
Model of Group Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

- b _

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ass-oooosooao
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Text] Annotation

Research in recent years has graphically demonstrated the need to give special
attention to the problem of raising the reliability of the "hman factor" in
control systems of varying complexity and purpose. Han-machine systems are much
less efficient if the operators do not perform the duties assigned to them.
This monograph presents results from monitoring the condition of the operator
under experimental conditions, modified physical experiments, and in the human
work situation in production. These findings were obtained through the coabined
efforts of physiologists, engineers, and nathemeticians.

The book is intended for specialists working in the fields of ergonomics,
human factors engineering, and differential psychophysiology.

The book has 81 illustrations, 10 tables, and a bibliography that runs from
page 31!. to 3103.

Foreword

Research in the field of neurobionics has become one of the most timely challenges
of conteworary science and technology as the result of numerous factors: the
accelerating pace of scientific-technical progress, the extensive development

and introduction of general and enterprise automated control systess and the
resulting need to improve the reliability of the man-machine syste- by insuring
the reliability of the "human factor," the fight against nerve and psychological

illnesses caused by the steadily increasing stresses on the human nervous system.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

and the search for possibilities of using the "concealed reserves" of the human
brain.

The achievements of scientific-technical progress contrast starkly with the caps-
bility of human beings to control the functions of the human brain, in particular
such complex functions as emotions, memory, and thinking. The reason for this

is that we have insufficient information on the mechanisms of brain activity and

do not have effective and adequate techniques for exercising a controlled influ-
ence on the nervous system as a whole and on the brain in particular.

Study of the role of the "human factor” in man~machine systems has become par-
ticularly important in recent years. This is related both to the fundamental
aspect of the problem and to purely applied questions. with respect to the
general approach to solving the problem, "the conception of full automation of
information processing, which arose in the early days of the development of
cybernetics and computer technology, has not withstood the test of time chiefly
in connection with creative problems."1 (This does not mean we agree that
complete automation i: impossible in general. But at the present time, the only
way to set up qualitatively complex information processing systems is by de-
vising man-machine systems.)

The problem of the artificial intellect occupies a significant place in pure
research and development. Neurobionicists here are interested chiefly in the

system and structural foundationsof the organization of the activity of the
natural intellect.

0n the level of working out the biological foundations of the artificial in-
tellect our collective has attempted to study and model human behavior in the
process of decision—making and learn about human psychophysiology in conditions
where the distinctive features of self-regulation of higher nervous activity
resulting from genotypic and sociological factors are most vividly manifested,
in particular under conditions of street

In working out the foundations of the artificial intellect it is important to
insure optimal interaction of the human being and the machine so that, as V. H.
Glushkov observed, "each side gets room to use its own best talents."

In the applied sense the "human factor," as a term that appeared in the very
beginning of the development of ergonomics and human factors engineering, has
recently been formulated as follows: "Human factors are integral character-
istics of the link between the human being and the machine which manifest
themselves in concrete conditions of interaction between them during the func-
tioning of a man-machine system related to achievement of a concrete goal. But
the characteristics and properties that are embraced by the concept of human

lGlushkov, V. H. et al. "Chelovek i Vychislitel'naya Tekhnika" [The Human
Being and the Computer], Kiev, "Naukova Dunks", 1971, 272 pages.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

factors are not distinct. separate qualities of the cosponents of the man-
machine systen, but rather its aggregate, system quelities.”2 "Human factors,
understood as the key integral characteristics of the man-machine system. thus
represent s certain superposition of the initial indicators. and correspondingly
also represent fixed or dynamic functional links among components of the man-
machine systes."3

If the tern "human factor" is translated into.the language of objective statis-
tics, we obtain some very impressive figures. Thus. only 8—16 percent of the
persons employed in the different sectors of production meet the occupational
requirements with respect to psychophysiological characteristics. This factor is
responsible for more than 50 percent of the highway accidents. 65 percent of the
industrial injuries and accidents in deep underground coal mining. and 80-90
percent of the violations of operating conditions at thermal power plants.“ An
analysis of 565 aviation disasters in the United States (based on information

in the foreign press) showed that 50 percent of these disasters occurred because
the aircraft design did not correspond to the psychophysiologicsl capabilities
of human beings. the pilot had inadequate flying skill, the functional state of
the organism was disturbed, or the level of psychological readiness for flying
was low. According to information from the United Nations, 72-80 percent of
highway accidents, which kill 250,000 persons a year and injure 7 million,
occur through human fault. In 63.3 percent of the cases where ships collide and
sink human error is also at fault.

It is for precisely this reason that ue have concentrated our attention on the
questions of human work in extreme conditions of the man-machine system, in bio-
technical systems. on modeling the activity of the human operator, and_on
developing a system-structural approach to studying the reliability of human oper-
store which envisions an evaluation of their actions from the sociological,
psychological. and physiological standpoints. During this we consider predicting
human actions based on evaluations of the individual's personality traits and
current states. At the same time we attempted to automate the processing of data
from psychophysiological and seminatursl experiments and the results of study of
human activity under work conditions.

All of these studies are the basis for the next stage of our development work:
using neuroelectronic systems for learning and practical purposes.

The lst International Conference "Bionics-75" recognized the creation of bio-
technical systems, in particular neuroelectronic systems, as one of the principal

areas of development of bionics. Research is being done in this area on

 

2 Munipov, V. H.. "The Current State and Developsental Trends of Ergonomics and
Human Factors Engineering," VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII 1978. p 60.

3 Ibid., p 61.

“ See. for example, V. A. Buzunov et al, "Physiological and Psychological Criteria
for Occupational Selection in Occupations That Make Special Demands on the Organ-
isn." in "Tez. Dokl. 10-30 S"yezda Ukr. Piziol. O-va" [Abstracts of Reports at
the 10th Congress of the Ukrainian Physiology Society], Kiev. 1977. pp 1—42.

_ 3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘IAL USE ONLY

different planes and the results deserve our attention.5 The systems that en—
vision active influence by physical and chemical factors directly on the sub-
structures of the brain have even more interesting prospects.

Our studies fit into the area of such disciplines as hman factors engineering
and psychological bionics, about which V. V. Parin, P. P. Kosmolinsitiy, and B. A.
Dushkov have very accurately said: "One of the significant problems of human
factors engineering is devising reliable systems of selfccontrol and self-
regulation for machines while the hussn operator continues to perform monitoring
functions; this requires study and description of the mental processes in order to
reproduce (model) then in technical devices and thereby transfer a number of
functions to the Inchine."6 These problems are matters for us to study later, al-
though there is every reason to hope for significant results.

The present monograph is a sunny of research done by physiologists, engineers,
and mathematicians. The first two chapters and section one of chapter four were
written by 0. N. Luk'yanova and are devoted to labor. methods of identifying
psychophysiological properties, the social orientation of the individual, and
describing the state of operator activity in a stress situation. The third chap-
ter, written by V. A. Chernomorets, describes the problem of increasing the

efficiency of operator activity. The fourth chapter presents findings
obtained from work under the direction of the author of these lines (K. A. Ivanov-

Huromskiy) by the collective of the division of neurobionics of the Institute of
Cybernetics of the Ukrainian 883 Academy of Sciences under both experimental and
actual working conditions. The fifth chapter contains results from the work of
K. V. Lyudvichek and V. Ye. Alekseyev on sodeling operator activity. The mdel
of group activity by operators is especially interesting in this part of the book.

Working in close contact with the bionics laboratory of KVVIAU [possibly Kiev
Higher Military Aviation Engineering School], we considered it useful for the
book to include findings obtained by D. I. Chus'. a mesber of this collective
(in chapter six).

The final chapter, written by K. A. Ivanov-huromskiy with the help of Yu. V.
Paramonov. is devoted to the future prospects of our activity, to the use of

neuroelectronic systems whose principles our collective has been developing since
1967.

 

5 See. ftr example, K. A. Ivanov-hurosskiy and Yu. V. Paramonov, "Ways to
Realize Cowlex Biotechnical Systems," [115“. AR URSR, 1972, Vyp 11, pp 33-40;
K. A. Ivanov-Huromskiy, "Elektromagnitnaya Biologiya" [Electromagnetic
Biology], Kiev, "Naukova Dmita", 1977; N. V. Chernigovskaya, A. S. Putskermsn,
and S. Patolichchio, "Features of Directed Regulation of the Human Alpha Rhythm

with the Use of Feedback," ZHURN. WSSHEY NBRVNOY DEYATEL'NOSTI 1978, No 3,
pp 547-556.

"Kosmicheskaya Biologiya i Heditsina" [Space Biology and Hedicine], Moscow,
"Prosveshcheniye", 1970, p 1&3.

- 4

son orna/u. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The authors express their gratitude to associates in the division of neurobionics
at the Institute of ”hematite of ths Ukrainian SSR Acadenly of Sciences vho took
part in designing the data processing systems. discussing and planning the ex-
perinents, and mathematical processing of their results: B. T. Goluvsn', Yu. V.
Paranonov, I. D. Ponosareva. 1‘. A. Berezanets. T. H. Selniln, 1.. I. Shmﬂina. H- D-
Lobkova, T. H. Zyuganova. B. P. Sinel'nik. N. Ye. Afanasenko, and P. A. Petrenko,
and also to A. N. Yanina for help in technical preparation of the unuscript.

Professor K. A. Ivanov-hhlromkiy

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 1. Labor and the Laboring Person

Labor and labor activities have been with humanity from the beginning. Labor is
the great calling and means of self-expression of each individual person. People
labor all their conscious lives in some field of social activity, attempting to
reveal their talents as fully as possible. If a balance is found between indi-
vidual capacities and the requirements of everyday activity, the person receives
maximum satisfaction from the chosen form of labor. This is a rule for any person.
for any occupation. It is in precisely this form of activity that a person can
attain the heights of perfection.

Labor is always "functions of the human organism, and each such function, no
matter what form and content it may have, is essentially an expenditure of the
human brain, nerves, muscles, sense organs. and the like." [1]

Human beings carry on the process of labor using different technical devices which
have ranged historically from the stone axe to the contemporary coeputer. Re-
finement of the forns of interaction between the human being and the technology
has altered the requirements which the labor process makes of the human being.
whereas the initial labor process demanded that a person expend energy in the
form of muscular force, at the present time people perform chiefly information
functions. monitoring, programming. and controlling them. The refinement of the
labor process has brought about a lowering of the physical requirements of the
human organism and increased the importance of the psychophysiologicel traits of
the individual. For this reason, studying the activity of the human operator is
highly relevant today.

Considering the human being as a laboring individual K. K. Platonov [5] singles
out four aspects: life experience, vocational training, forms of mental re-
flection, and biological and natural traits. He single out three aspects: the
social (species and individual experience, training). the psychological (traits
of reflection and thinking).and the biological (characteristics of the func-

tional systems of the organism).

At the present time the problem of interaction between human beings and technical
devices in the labor process is studied by various types of specialists, while

the problem itself has become part of the subject matter of various scientific
disciplines; psychology, labor physiology and hygiene. human factors engineering,
vocational psychology, differential psychophysiology, and cybernetics.

- 6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, we may draw the following conclusion: labor, which in K. Marx's ex-
pression [1, p 181] is a form of regulating tfe exchange of matter between
human beings and nature, is thus the natural function of the human being and deu
fines a person's full human essence. In turn. the human essence is revealed
during labor activity. The specific labor process makes specific demands of

the social and psychophysiological characteristics of the individual: the indi-
vidual, depending on his or her inherent traits, puts an individual imprint on
the occupation and creates what is called an individual style. In other words,
we have a closed system: laboring person 1; labor, in which we may identify
hierarchical levels that differ in complexity.

The techniques of investigating human labor activities and human interaction

with technical devices can be classified on the basis of various factors:

what aspect of the individual they help to study - sociological. psychological.
and physiological; how the technique is accomplished - subjective and objective;
how the degree of approximation to a real situation is echiaved - questioning.
laboratory modeling. actual activities; how active a role the investigator takes -
observation and experiment; and finally, the degree of complexity - study of
documents, questioning, observation, the labor method, experimentation, and
testing.

Research usually begins with a study of documents. In this case the investi-
gator becomes familiar with the autobiographical data of the test subject and
studies the technology of the labor process, description of the equipment, and
official records of the course of the labor process. accidents. injuries, and
the like.

The next form of familiarization with the labor process and the laboring person
is asking questions. This can be done in various forms. for example talking with
the employees or with his or her fellow workers. chief, or manager. The conver-
sation follows a prearranged plan. Answers to questions that are of interest
may also be obtained by having a specially developed questionnaire filled out.
Questionnaires are usually used for large-scale surveys. Under the questioning
technique we should also include the many standardized test-questionnaires that
aim at identifying (by behavioral reactions) certain personality traits. The
best known of them are the Minnesota Hultiphasic and the Cartel and Taylor tests
[6, 7, 8]. The shortcoming in the questioning techniques is the subjectiveness
of the information that the investigator receives.

A deeper study of the labor process, therequirements it imposes on human psycho-
physiological traits, and the dynamics of the condition of the working person
is achieved in the stage of observation. Observation results can be r~pre-
sented in the form of a stenographic or other reports, motion pictures and
photographs, time-and-motion studies, and the like. It is particularly
important during observation to record the physiological indicators of the
state of the subject being studied. In order to obtain more complete informao
tion on the state of the operator an effort should be made to record indicators
of the activity of the primary functional systems of the organism: cardio-
vascular system (electroCardiogram, measurements of arterial pressure and blood
volume per minute). central nervous system (electroencephalogram, rheogram).

.7 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the respiratory system (pneumogram), the muscular system (electromyogram), and
the involuntary nervous system (skin galvanic reflex). Additional information
can be obtained by the labor technique that was broadly propagated and emv
ployed by Soviet vocational psychologists of the 1920's [5, 9]. In this
technique the researchers themselves meter the occupations they are studying.

The next stage in the study of human labor activities is the experiment, which
enables the investigator to test a hypothesis that is formlsted on the basis of
observation, identify the essential operator characteristics in situations of
varying complexity. and so on. No types of experiments are distinguished:
laboratory and natural.

The laboratory experiment may involve simulating actual activity (the synthetic
experiment using trainers) or a particular operation (the analytic experiment with
psychophysiological modeling). A laboratory experiment may also be done by
mathematical modeling techniques where the investigator expresses the activities
of the operator by means of formulas, equations, and the like derived on the
basis of the findings of specialized writings or preliminary experiments. By
solving these formulas and equations the investigator is, so to speak, studying
human activities under particular conditions. By comparing the results ob-
tained with actual events the investigator can determine the extent to which

the mathematical model corresponds to reality. The laboratory experiment also
encompasses tests made to identify or determine the measure of a particular
psychophysiological trait of the operator ("achievement tests"). Tests are
"brief, standardized psychophysiological examinations to establish, for practical
purposes, interpersonal differences in intellect and ao-cslled special capa-
l.--ities ["sposobnosti"], expressed in comparable quantities'l37]. The test
subject must perfcrm the action with an assigned precision within a set time.

The tests are given in Open form (the "paper and pencil" test) and in the form
of an assignment using specialized equipment [10). The advantage of the labora-
tory experiment lies in the possibility of receiving more accurate measurements
of the parameters that interest us; the weakness is that it is not conducted in a
real situation.

" The natural experiment presupposes studies made right at the work position,
which makes this a full-fledged method [5, 11]. No types of experiments are
distinguished depending on the purpose of the investigation. The first type
contemplates an investigation of the behavior of the test subject when the
investigator (unnoticed by the worker) causes some deviation from the usual
course of the industrial process, some unforeseen situation, and the like; this
is called the verifying experiment. The second kind, the formation experiment.
investigates the formation or transfer of skills when mastering an occupation
or undergoing retraining in connection with the introduction of some refina-
ment. change in purpose, and the like. The verifying experiment enables the
investigator to evaluate the significance of a particular property for operator
activity in different conditions; the formation experiment enables him to form
judgements about the mechanism or fomtion of labor sltills and the possibility
of one personal trait compensating for another in the process of mastering an
occupation.

8 ,

FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The investigator nost frequently uses the scheme of techniques show in
Figure 1 to study 1ahor activity and operator characteristics.

 

Figure 1. Methods of Studying Operator Activity and Charac-
teristics

Key: (1) Methods of Studying Operator Activity and Characteristics;

(2) Study of Documents;

(3) Observation - 1. Time-and-Hotion Studies, notion Pictures.
and Photographs; 2. Recording Physiological Parameters;

(6) Experiment - 1. Laboratory kparimsnt: a. modeling. b. Achieve-
nent Tests and Machine Tests; 2. Natural: a. Verifying,
b. Formation;

(S) Questioning - 1. Conversation, 2. Questionnaire, 3. Survey Tests;

(6) Labor Technique.

 

All these techniques are used for the purpose of better adapting the labor
process and implements of labor to human capacities and also to search for the
optimal conbination of personal characteristics to naster an occupation and nest
its requirenents. Four probless are singled out depending on the aspect of
study: (1) rational organization of the schedule- of labor and rest; (2) vocao
tional guidance and selection; (3) organization of training; (6) reconciling
hunsn capacities and machine requirements (hunan factors engineering). All of
these questions are included in the problem of scientific organization of labor
(SOL) in the broad sense (in the narrow sense 50!. applies to rational organi-
zation of the schedule of labor and rest).

1. The Origin and Development of 901. [Scientific Organization of Labor]

The origins of scientific organization of labor go back to the period of the
birth and development of the capitalist method of production, when the question
of raising labor productivity becase timely. It is customary to consider
Frederick winslow Taylor the founder of scientific organization of labor. In
1882 Taylor made studies of working motions [12, 13]. The purpose of his studies
vas to raise labor productivity. This was attenuated By differential wages for

workers and standardization and rationalization of particular labor operations.

But Taylor and his followers ("Taylorists") did not take account of the indi-
vidual qualities of the vorker and did not strive for a scientifically

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

substantiated organization of the schedule of labor and rest. In the pursuit
of maximum profit the system which they proposed squeezed every bit of
strength out of the worker.

V. I. Lenin, while calling for us to "borrow everything valuable" from this
school, exposed the predatory essence of Taylorism and called it "subtle
savagery" [3, 6].

Scientific organization of labor began to be employed much later in Russia, even
though the foundations for its successful development had been laid in the late
19th century by the work of I. N. Sechenov [16, 15].

The issues of scientific organization of labor received further development in
the works of the vocational psychologists (a term introduced by the German
scientist Stern). Two periods must be distinguished in the development of voca-
tional psychology. The first was the pre-personality period when the investi-
gators working on the problems of scientific organization of labor did not take
account of the individual characteristics of the subject, which made this de-
velopment similar to Taylorism. The German vocational psychologist Muensterberg
was the major representative of this period. The second period is represented
by the works on whose basis scientific trends such as vocational typology and
psychological classification of occupations began to develop. The most striking
representative of the ideas of this period was 0. Lipman [16]. In his work
"On the Psychology of Occupations," be reviews the requirenents which different
occupations make of a person and the relationship between occupational style

and the person's individual characteristics.

The school of Soviet vocational psychologists took shape in the 1920's and 1930's.
Its founders were 5. G. Gellershteyn, s. L. Rubinshteyn, and I. N. Shpil'reyn.
Permanent psychological offices and laboratories were opened at many enterprises
through the efforts of the vocational psychologists. The labor technique that
has already been mentioned appeared during these years. An all-Union congress
of vocational psychologists and the 12th International Conference of Vocational
Psychologists were held in Moscow in 1931. In later years, however, work on
vocational psychology was stopped in the USSR. There were two reasons for this:
first. the USSR was experiencing an acute shortage of labor in connection with
rapid development of its industrial potential (and for a time vocational selec-
tion was not a paramount task), and secondly, the fundamentals of vocational
psychology diverged from the fundamentals of general psychology, which found
expression in undesirable turns and scientifically unsound methodological apv
preaches. Large—scale work on scientific organization of labor began again
after the 1957 conference on questions of labor psychology, which censured the
shortcomings of vocational psychology, and particularly after the 1967 all-
Union conference on labor organization. At the latter meeting, in connection
with the directives of the 23rd CPSU Congress, practical recommendations were
developed to intensify scientific research on the physiology, psychology, and
hygiene of labor. The 2nd All-Union Congress of the Society of Psychologists

in 1963 already had a working section on human factors engineering, and at the
3rd All-Union Congress of Psychologists in 1968 there were sections on labor
psychology and human factors engineering. Many fundamental works were published

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on reconciling the subjective and objective factors in production, a charac-
teristic problem of human factors engineering 117-21]. During these years a
number of major works on the physiological, psychophysiological, and psycho-
logical aspects of labor organization appeared [23, 28-32].

The first all-Union conference on "The Human Being and the Automaton" was held
in 1963. It marked the beginning of a broad range of domestic works on the
problem of the man-machine system (HHS). This line of study is characterized
by development of the systems approach under the influence of cybernetics in
considering the interaction of human beings and technical devices [22, 23-27].

A new stage in the development of 80L took shape abroad also [33].

All the areas of SOL are developing successfully today: vocational selection;
vocational training; scientific organization of the schedule of labor and rest;
and, human factors engineering.

2. Classifications of the Types of Human Labor Activity

The specific features of the tasks, methods. means, and measures of SOL depend
on the type of labor activity for which it is being developed. we have already
observed above that labor activities in their historical aspect have changed
from labor processes that required physical characteristics of a person
(strength, agility, and endurance) in the first stage to primarily operator
types of labor today, a time of universal introduction of full mechanization
and automation of production (tracking, monitoring, programming, and control).
The human functions have also changed in this connection, from energy functions
to information functions.

We still keep the division of labor into physical and mental labor today

[35, 35], but fewer and fewer production processes require physical labor, and
it is usually not in direct form. These two large classes of labor activity
impose demands on different functional systems of the human being and are
described depending on this as muscular and nervous activity or physical and
mental labor (see Figure 2 bCIOl). The criteria of difficulty for the particu-
lar types of activity can be a physical measure of labor for the first class of
labor operations and intensity for the second class [35]. The physical measures
of labor are expressed in kilogram—meters of work done or in gigacalories of
energy expended. For example, jobs that require more than 4.17 gigacalories

per minute are put in the middle category of heavy physical work.

The intensity of labor is usually determined by the density of various types

of information which the operator must receive during a working day. When evalu-
sting intensity it is essential also to evaluate the rate and evenness with

which information arrives, the ratio between primary and secondary information,
and so on. The second class of human labor activity can be broken down into
subclasses which have their own specific features. For example. in her work.

V. P. Solov'yeva [36] studies the following subclasses: (1) mental labor
without nervous-emotional stress (the labor of a proof reader); (2) labor with
nervous tension but without mental stress (a subway engine driver); (3) mental

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure. Types of Labor

Key: (1) Types of Labor; (6) Nerve-Muscular;
(2) Human Functions: ' (7) Mental;
(3) Functional System used; (8) Information (Operator);
(6) Physical; . (9) Central Nervous System.
(5) Energy;

labor with nervous-emotional stress (a dispatcher at the console); (6) crea-
tive mental labor with differing degrees of nervous-enotional stress (junior
and senior scientific associates. graduate students).

K. M. Gurevich [37] classifies occupations by the intensity of ‘labor (intense
at all tines, at certain times, and at indefinite tines) and by the presence
of strain on the emotions and the will.

All of these classifications are constructed depending on which sphere of ac-
tivity and which human functional systen receives the prinary burden. In
addition. attempts have been made to classify occupations according to the
potential and characteristics which a working person me: have to successfully
perforn the labor process. Thus, Lipnan, who was one of the nest prominent
representatives of the personality stage of vocational psychology, had alraady
divided all occupations into two categories [16]:

l. The higher or "intellectual" occupations, characterized
by the lack of a standard style of performance. A ‘
person who has mastered a higher occupation shapes this
occupation to some extent depending on his or her own
individual characteristics. Exawles are doctors,
artists, and the like;

12

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR!DFFMJA1.USEZONLY

2. The lower occupations, which require elenentary,
standard qualities for their perfornance. Bra-plea
night he work on a conveyor line, sorting. and the
like.

In addition to the psychological classification of occupations. Lipman also
worked out an occupational typology. He asserted that the phlegnatic was more
interested in learning. while the sanguine was nore attracted to doing.

K. n. Gurevich [37] divides occupations into two types depending on the cate-
gories of requirenents which the occupation nakes of individual hunan charac-
teristics: (l) occupations that absolutely require sons anthropometric or
psychophysiological characteristics (for steeple, reaction speed for a jet
pilot. strength for handling a sledgehanner); (2) occupations that make con-
pensible requirenents for individual characteristics. For example. people who
differ in the speed of their thinking processes can successfully naster the
sane occupation. Sone will handle the job quickly and easily because their
thinking processes are very fast; others who spend nore tine on the thinking
process also do the job well thanks to their diligent care.

3. Scientific Organization of the Schedule of Labor and Rest

When working out the foundations arl concrete steps of the scientific organiza-
tion of the schedule of labor and .est. the investigator identifies first those
factors which directly or indirectly influence the production indicators of the
worker and how he or she feels. There are some 2.000-3.000 such factors; but
they can be classified by groups. A. I. Prokhorov [38], for exasple. identifies
seven groups of factors: 1 - the type. character, and cesplexity of the task;
2 - the character and characteristics of the person; 3 - organization of the
work position; 6 - organization of production activity: 5 - conditions of ac-
tivity; 6 - notivation for activity; 7 - objective conditions of the setting
of the activity. These are fairly broad groups and any factor can be reflected
in them. Other investigators propose a division of influential factors that
differs from this one by using narrower and ours concrete groups. For example,
A. I. Sasoyolova [39] feels that SOL measures should be concentrated on the
following factors: the pace and rhythm of the production process, the equipping
of the work position and work posture. the schedule of labor and rest, the nitro-
clinate. the air environment and illumination of the work position. special work
clothing and environmental esthetics. and organization of a rational diet.

In the work of A. A. Adanovich-Gerasinov and others [£0], the factors which nust
be taken into account in studies of SOL are broken down into physiological,
psychological, sanitary-hygienic, sociological, and technical-econonic.

N. D. Levitov [bl] identified three groups of factors on which success in waster-
ing an occupation and attaining high production indicators depends: notiva-
tional components (the status of the occupation in society. wages and working
conditions); qualifications conponents (the level of training and natural
capacities), and the individual psychophysiological characteristics.

13

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K. K. Platonov [5] believes that scientific organization of labor should look
first at the impact of the environment, in particular the working collective,
as well as the presence of factors that have a negative impact on the worker's
health, the development of occupational fatigue, and characteristics of the
mental processes and emotional sphere of the worker. The work of V. G. Zhukov
and R. I. Ignat'yev [35] assigns the primary role to the sanitary-hygienic
conditions of labor (condition of the work position). the schedule of labor and
rest, the equipping and mechanization of jobs, and taking account of changes in
work capability during the day and the week.

It seems to us that the factors which are reflected in the labor productivity,
work capability, and physical and mental feelings of the worker can be classified
in four groups.

1. The specific characteristics of the assignment: requirements of the occupa-
tion; complexity, type, and character of the task; degree of responsibility.

2. The potential of the person performing the assignment: experience of life,
motivation, and interest; psychophysiological characteristics, sex, age,
physical measurements, state of health, and behavior in ordinary and emergency
situations; vocational training and qualifications.

3. Organization of the labor process: scientific-technical advances in the par-
ticular sector of labor, furnishings and technical equipment of the particular
production area, organization of the work position; pace, rhythm, and sequence
of operations, rest periods, and industrial calisthenica; relations within the
collective, the necessity of interaction with other members of the collective

in the production process; meeting sanitary—hygienic and physiological require-
ments, the presence of harmful factors; esthetics, special work clothing,
organization of the diet, and availability of rest areas.

4. Changes in functional state and work capability: during the working day;
during the work week; related to the person's biorhythme.

After selecting a particular production area or type of activity for study, the
first thing the investigator must do is write up a so—called "orofessiogramma,"
which contains a description of the occupation, the place of the occupation

in the technological sequence, the principal working operations, the work posi-
tion and sanitary-hygienic conditions, the required level of education, and the
psychophysiological requirements imposed on the worker [62]. Then the list of
indicators of activity is compiled [43]. Thus, the work of an operator in charge
of several weaving machines consists of orientation (surveillance of the ma-
chines) and actuating activity; the latter is divided, in turn into preventive
and urgent (special) operations. The list of indicators of activity also includes
the walking movements of the weaving machine operator to inspect the machines,

do preventive work, and perform special operations.

The time of the labor process is divided, in conformity with the purpose of the
work being done, into primary time (used for special jobs) and auxiliary time
(preventive work and inspection); taken together they determine the operational

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time of the working day. The working day of work time consists of operational
time (primary and auxiliary) and breaks for rest, meals, industrial celes-
thenics, natural needs. and enforced idleness related to incorrect labor or-
ganization.

The list of occupational requirements with respect to the characteristics and
qualities of the worker is a mandatory element in the description of the par-
ticular type of labor activity. This list is compiled on the basis of the
findings of the specialized literature, personal acquaintance with the produc-
tion area, and consulting with experts. By evaluating each requirement in
connection with its significance for successful performance of the assign-
ment the investigator receives a table, graph, or diagram of the distribution
of the significance of the occupational requirements [5, 66]. Then the invesr
tigator determines the workload which the worker experiences during the work-
ing day. It is measured, as already mentioned above, in physical terms for
physical labor and by intensity for mental labor. But the workload of dif-

ferent types of jobs cannot always be defined unambiguously by one of these
criteria.

The workload is usually a multidimensional indicator. It depends above all on
the pace of performance of the work or receipt of information, on the evenness
of distribution of the workload, the required precision in performance of the
assignment. the seriousness of consequences in case the worker makes mistakes.
the degree of responsibility, the complexity of the algorithm of activity,

and so on.

The next indicator of the person's activity, the productivity or efficiency
of labor, is also multidimensional. Bach form of labor activity has its own
specific components. Thus, the efficiency of labor of a locomotive engineer
[#6] may be evaluated by three criteria: (1) reliahility (accident-free
work throughout the entire career; (2) skill rating; (3) conservation of
electricity.

Techniques of recording the activity of different systems of the organism and
functional tests are used to study change in the functional state of the
worker, to determine indicators of functional state that correlate with
changes in work capability, and to identify the moment of onset of worker
fatigue. For example, the state of the central nervous systen is determined
by recording the biopotentials of the brain (electroencephalogram). An enor-
nouaamountofexperimentalmaterial has now been accumulated on correlating
changes in the electroencephalogram and the level of alertness, attention,
emotional and operational strain, fatigue, and the like. Therefore, the
electroencephalogram is a valuable diagnostic technique. The investigator
may receive additional information about the state of the central nervous
system by using various functional tests, in particular analyzing sensory-
motor reaction time, recording the critical frequency at which flashes of
light or discrete sounds merge, reacting to a moving object, picking up the
rhythm of flashes of light or discrete sounds. tracking reactionn. and other
such tests.

15

FOR¢0FFKJAL.USELONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The state of the involuntary nervous system (which often plays the main part in
a change in functional state or increase in the workload on the worker) is
studied by recording the frequency of the heart beat, arterial pressure. blood
volune per ninute, frequency of breathing, the ratio of inhaling to exhaling, the
electrical resistance of potential of the skin (skinogalvanic reflex), body ten-
perature and other such quantities.

Indicators of the activity of the muscular system depend on the functional state
and the state of work capability. Therefore the electromyogram is studied and
dynamic measurements are performed.

It is natural that the state of emotional and operational strain and fatigue are
also reflected in higher mental functions. Fran this standpoint the indicators
of the proof reading test have diagnostic value , as do other techniques: inter-
twined lines; the Schulte technique; adding numbers with carrying; and, repro-
duction of an image seen on a screen (shown for a minimum exposure of 0.05-0.15
seconds). These techniques can be used to form judgements on intensity, switch-
ing, attention span, and operational memory.

The spectral composition of operator speech "reacts” very subtly to changes in
psychophysiological state. This enables the investigator to use the spoken
answer as an additional indicator. Biochemical tests (change of sodium content
in the saliva, sugar in the blood, urine composition, and the like) can also
provide valuable information.

Recording indicators of the activity of different systems of the organism and es-
tablishing the labor productivity and work capability of the obligator enables
the investigator to follow changes in these quantities during the working day,
work week, and work year.

Early in the 20th Century 8. Krepelin described the classic work curve. Ye. A.

Derevyanko sodernized this curve (see Figure 3 below). He showed how maximum
capacities, the productivity of activity, emotional tension, and the state of

fatigue change at different points in the working day. The periods of labor
activity in the course of the day differ by tine Boundaries and quantitative
expressions depending on the type of labor activity, years of experience, age,
sex, and characteristics of the operator, but they are governed by the pattern
described.

For practical purposes a less refined division of working time into three
periods is usually used: 1 - period of beginning work and moving into a work
rhythm, characterized by a gradual increase in work capability; 2 - period of
stable saintenance of the level of work capability attained; 3 - period of de-
cline in work capability, fatigue. This sequence of periods during work time
is repeated twice, at the start of the working day and after the mealtime

break [35]. Investigators note a similar progression in the work week [‘0].
And investigators studying change in the operator's work capability must consider
not only the pattern described above, but also the influence of various factors
(years of experience, age, sex, and personal traits) on it. In addition, the
changes in work capability depend on biorhythss, in particular the 26-hour
(daily) rhythn. It has been established [62] that changes in work capability
and functional states are greater and the tise required to get into a work

16‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pigure 3. Work Curve (by Ye. A.
Derevyanko. 1959):

Key: (I) Level of Maxim Capacities;

(II) Level of Productivity of
Activity;

(m) Level of hotional Tension;

(IV) Level of Fatigue;

0.) Period of Settling Into Bork;

(2) Period of Optimal Pork Caps-
hility; .

(3) Period of Full Conensation;

(Io) Period of Unstable Cogen-
nation;

(5) Final Spurt;

(6) Progressive Decrease in
Productivity.

 

 

rhythm is longer for the second shift, vhile changes in biorhythu at the end of
the shift are greater in amplitude.

Researchers have given special attention to studying the process of fatigue,
which develops as the result of intense or prolonged work. Developing fatigue
can be cowensated for to some degree by motivational factors. efforts of will.
and emtional factors. The folloving types of local fatigue are distinguished
depending on the sphere of activity: physical, mental. and emotional. Fatigue
may also be general in nature. The forms of manifestation of fatigue may vary
depending on its type. Thus, V. P. Solov'yeva has demonstrated [36] that mental
fatigue shove itself in the form of protective inhibition in the central nervous
system (decline in the magnitude and speed of reflex reactions, reduction in
the mobility of nerve processes, and increase in the inertia of the inhibitory
process). Emotional fatigue is characterized chiefly by unfavorable chsnges in
the cardiovascular system and biochemical reactions. fatigue caused by mental
activity with emotional stress shows itself in the form of changes in the cen-
tral nervous system and the autonomous nervous system. Fatigue may be promoted
by a diseased state, mental upset, and other indirect factors.

Prolonged fatigue that is not compensated for may lead to a transition from func-
tional changes in the organism to organic ones. The nervous and cardiovascular
systems suffer particularly in this case.

.17 2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Measures for scientific organization of labor are worked out to preserve a high
level of work capability and prevent fatigue in the worker. These measures,
based on study of changes in the work capability and functional state of the
worker in the course of the working day, aim at shortening and easing the period
of getting into a work rhythm (initial exercises, remm; l. of distracting factors,
rhythmic music), prolonging the period of stable work capability (rational or-
ganization of the labor process and work position). and eliminating the first
signs of fatigue (industrial calisthenits, instituting additional rest breaks,

and consumption of vitamins).

Researchers have been particularly interested in the possibility of maintaining
high work capability and a good general state by instituting short pauses, addi-
tional breaks of a few minutes (in addition to the basic mealtime break). It

is most efficient to introduce 2-3 breaks of 5-10 minutes [35, 65]. In this
period of time it is possible to restore functions without losing the work
rhythm that has been achieved. The need for additional rest is determined by
the magnitude of functional changes at a certain moment in time [35].

One of the ways to combat the development of fatigue is active rest, that is.
industrial calisthenics or changing the work operations and emotional conditions.
From the physiological standpoint these measures should lead to a change in the
focus of stimulation in the brain. The new focus of stimulation restores the
initial state that functioned earlier by inducing inhibition of neighboring
zones [5, 30. 106].

Honotonous work makes special demands for SOL measures. By causing a decline
in the level of alertness it may lead to accidents. This is especially dan-
gerous in those cases where accidents may involve a danger to human life (for
example, the engineer of a locomotive). The simplest steps to cadet monotony
are introducing outside stimulants, periodically changing rhythm and operations,
and consolidating routine. monotonous simple operations into more complex and
diverse ones [28].

The following factors may serve as indicators of a correctly organized schedule
of labor and rest. that is, indicators of the effectiveness of $01. measures:

1. Productivity and econodc efficiency of labor;
2. Satisfaction with work, mobility of personnel;

3. Level of work capability and general state during the working
day, restoration of a normal state after work;

lo. Number and duration of cases of temporary inability to work.
injury. and chronic illness.

Thus, we can identify the following stages in the work of an investigator studying
scientific organization of labor [139]:

1. Study of existing physiological-hygienic conditions of labor
and organization of the labor process;

18 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Characterization of uork capability and the state of
psychophysiological functions during work;

3. Analysis of the state of health (taking into account

years of experience,'ege, sex. occupation, and social-
domestic conditions);

4. Development of SOL measures;
5. Testing the effectiveness of SOL measures.
6. Vocational Guidance, Vocational Selection, and Vocational Suitability

Ar occupation (vocation) is a specific group of labor duties that has existed for
u long time and took shape on the basis of division of labor. The specific group
of labor duties requires that a person show qualities and characteristics that
are specific to the particular occupation. Thus, K. Marx wrote long ago: "Dif-
ferent operations performed in turn by the producer of a good and merging into a
single whole unit in the process of his labor make different deaands of him. In
one case he must develop greater strength, in another greater dexterity, in a
third greater attentiveness, and so on" [2]. He continues, "But one and the
same individual does not have all these qualities in equal measure " [2]. It
follows from this that different people will perform the ease work differently

in qualitative and quantitative terms. using different ssounts of strength and
energy for this. The necessity of latching the capabilities (social, santal.

and biological) of the sorking individual and the requirements of the occupation
is the problem of vocational guidance and vocational selection.

The presence of the essential group of social and psychophysiological qualities
and traits insures that the sorting individual will be successful in mastering
the occupation, achieve highly productive labor, and be satisfied with the labor
activity. These factors are the criteria for the occupational suitability of a
working individual for a particular type of labor. But the tasks of vocational
guidance and vocational selection are not lieited to questions of occupational
suitability. This is just one aspect of the matter, the humanistic side. Voca-
tional guidance also considers the economic and social aspects of the question:
the market for possible application of the labor and the social veight of the
occupation in the given society. Figure 6 below shows the "vocational guidance
triangle" and its forms [5]. Conflicts often arise between the hunanistic and

economic aspects. For example. in the first years of industrialization of our
country when an enormous influx of labor was required for industry. work on the
study of labor psychology. which had been *onducted successfully by the voca-
tional psychologists of the 1920's and 1930‘- was stopped.

Therefore. a researcher beginning work on the proulena of vocational guidance,
selection, and suitability with application to a certain sphere of labor ac-
tivity must first of all study the following questions:

1. The econoeic or social need for the particular occupation;

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(6)

 

Figure 0. The "Vocational Guidance Triangle" and Its Porn
(according to K. K. Platonov, 1970)

Key: (1) Vocational Education;
(2) Vocational Propaganda;
(3) Vocations (Their Requirenents);
(b) Market for Potential Labor;
(6) The Individual (Hia or Her Capabilities);
(7) Vocational Consultation;
(8) Vocational Selection.

 

2. The class of occupations involving the particular type
of activity;

3. The social and psychophyaiological denands of the occu-
pation on the working individual;

I». The characteristics which a person lust have to success-
fully master the occupation. achieve high vorlv. indicators,

and receive moral satiaiaction from the choaan type of
activity.
Approaches to and views of the prohlan of the potential and capabilities of the

working individual are not unifora. Thus. there have Been different estima-
tions of the inortance of natural and acquired characteristics and of the

-20‘..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

manifestation of capabilities in different spheres of social activity. Some
students of the question believe that a person is born with certain already
established capabilities and that no education and training can replace them
if they are absent. Others feel that a person is born with equal inclinations
for all capabilities and that any capability can be perfected by education.

In their works 1’. R. Dmayevskiy, A. K. Gaetev. and others deny that there are
persistent natural differences [48, 1.9]. They believe that a person can de-
velop any quality through long. hard sork.

It is apparent that an orthodox defense of either the first or second point of
view leads to incorrect conclusions. A third point of view on the development
of capabilities is given in the works of I. P. Pavlov and was formulated well
by K. K. Platonov [S]: "Capabilities are a fairly stable structure. but of
course they also change under the influence of education and the individual
psychological characteristics of the personality." This point of view takes ac-
count of the inportance of both the inborn biological principle and the ac-
quired, social principle.

we have considered views concerning human capabilities with respect to mastering
a particular sphere of activity. Views also differ as to the categorical nature
of the requirements which an occupation isposes on a person. Thus. some re-
searchers feel that in principle any person can master any occupation, althc-cgh
the person may not always have all the characteristics needed for the particular
occupation in the necessary degree [53, 50]. This occurs through compensation
for some characteristics by other characteristics. Thus. high indicators in

any type of activity can be achieved by workers with the most diverse psycho-

physiological structure. by means of different personality traits that are re-
flected in the individual style of work. Therefore, occupational selection is
not decisive. Primary rttention should be focused on constructing adequate
training programs that can develop the essential characteristic or a compen-
sating one in order to meet the occupational requirenents.

K. H. Gurevicb elaborates a different point of view [37]. He believed that
there are two types of occupations. The first type makes demands on the
individual for which no compensation is possible. In this case there met be
absolute vocational suitability, which requires careful vocational selection.
The second type of occupation makes demands on the working individual which can
be compensated for by different characteristics. The connon occupations belong
to this type. For them vocational selection is not so important and primary
attention is given to correctly organizing training programs and methods. But
even for the second type of occupations, despite the possibility of cowenseting
for lack of some characteristics with others, not all persons who have mastered
the occupation can attain the highest levels of skill. In this case. therefore,
the coupensatory potential is limited and vocational selection is desirable [51].
This conclusion is confirmed by the fact that a high percentage (up to 25 per-
cent) of healthy people cannot master various occupations that differ by
couplexity because their nervous and cardiovascular systems become overloaded
[52). Thus, in vocational selection it is necessary to consider not only the
existence of characteristics that insure vocational skill and the possibility

of compensation for them, when lacking, but also the load on the organism in

21'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mastering the occupation and carrying on daily activity in the chosen sphere
of labor.

The partial or complete unsuitability of a working individual for a particular
type of activity may show up in different stages of acquiring vocational skills
and in different situations when performing occupational duties. Thus, in the
training process people whose characteristics are most in accord with the re-
quirements of the future occupation master the vocational skills faster and
more easily than people who do not have the optimal set of characteristics for
the particular occupation. The latter may also master the occupational skills
(compensation by other characteristics if it is possible, or persistent, cor-

rectly organized training of the essential characteristics), but they spend
much more effort and time doing so.

Thus, a significant spread is observed between the first and second groups in
the beginning, followed by a convergence of individual indicators of activity
because the second group is raised to the standards of the occupation by com-
pensatory individual characteristics [51]. Under ordinary working conditions
in the second type of occupations (according to K. H. Gurevich),the difference
in characteristics will not lead to a sharp divergence in indicators of labor
activity. But the difference in psychophysiological characteristics shows
clearly in unusual, stress situations. The stress may be the result [53] of
the difficulty of the assignment (high requirements for precision and speed of
performance, work when time is short, work under conditions of information
overloads, and complexity of the assignments), when an emergency is highly
likely or existing, when there are distracting factors, when an unforeseen
change occurs in the ordinary course of the labor process, and so on. Failure
to match the optimal set of characteristics also fosters excessive nervous
tension in the worker. which may result in serious chronic illness.

These factors (taking economic and social need into account. of course)

demonstrate the necessity and usefulness of vocational guidance and vocational
selection.

Vocational selection is done as follows. First the researcher becomes familiar
with the occupation and establishes its classification. place in the economy,
distribution, and future prospects. The "polytechnic" quality of an occupation
is important to study. because this makes it possible in part to apply the re-
sults obtained to other areas of activity. Next a list is made of the operations
that make up the occupational activity. The operations must be broken down into
basic (ones on which performance of the assignment as a whole directly depends)
and subsidiary (preparatory and prophylactic) operations. It is desirable to
rank the operations by time spent and difficulty of performance. The investi-
gator can use any of the methods described above for this purpose.

In conformity with the occupational description obtained in this manner, the
researcher should make a list of the requirements that the occupation imposes
on the working individual. For example, the following list of requirements is
used for vocational selection of locomotive engineers [46]: perception, atten-
tion. memory. ability to make decisions under time pressure. and emotional

..22'.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stability. The questionnaire composed by Lima is usually used to identify
psychophysiologicsl requireaenta; ordinarily it is adapted in advance to the
occupation under study [5]. Then the investigator. beginning with knowledge
that has been accumulated in the special literature. personal experience, and
the findings of preliminary experisents. determines the characteristics which

a person must have to master the occupation and perform its operations. After
this vocational selection proper is done. This usually begins with a medical
examination and ends with identification of the social orientation and determi-
nation of the psychophysiologicsl characteristics of the individual, his or
her compensatory potential, and the need to develop and drill vocational capa-
bilities.

Training is a key element in the preparation of workers for occupations. The
training program must take into account comensetory potential and the need to
develop and train occupational capabilities.

The specific features and significance of the occupation determine the degree
of strictnese in vocational selection, whether it is done according to the
upper or lower boundary of the criteria used.

Thus. vocational guidance and selection should include three basic stages:
compiling an occupational description and list of psychophysiological requirements
of the occupation, identification of the essential capabilities, and working out
ways to develop these capabilities. Figure 5 below diagrams how the criteria of
mastering an occupation depend on the potential of the person and has the strict-
ness 'of the occupational requirenenta depends on the type of occupations.

n mews-I’d omit-n
1' tau/«mud mew
-:,:1:Jvrm::' we"

 

W ems“ ~mwg6)
(5):; ‘0)»:qu Mac”! 3!

“mm
Chapter 5. Criterion of Vocational Suitability

 

Key: (1) Criteria of Vocational (5) 1. Lack of Possibility of

Suitability; Compensating for Characteristics

(2) Ease of Training, Labor (Vocational Selection). 2. Pos-
Achievements — , Satisfaction, sibility of compensating for
Lack of Excessive Stress; Characteristics (Vocational

(3) The Person - 1. Social Aspects, Training);
2. Mental Aspects, 3. Biologi- (6) Strictneas of Vocational Re-
cal Aspects; quirenents.

(lo) Labor - 1. In Ordinary Condi-
tions, 2. In Extreme Conditions:

23.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Investigating the Psychophysiological Characteristics and Social

The methods used by the investigator in vocational selection must be (as in any
investigation) adequate and informative, that is. they must directly identify the
characteristic under study and describe it as fully as possible. Variom methodo-
logical procedures can be used to study the individual person: interrogation.
observation of behavior (in ordinary life, on the job, and in the training
process), and tests (paper and equipment tests).

It is customary to consider Taylor. vho in the 1880's used testing as a tech-
nique for vocational selection in order to raise labor productivity. the founder
of testology. Later testing was used as a method for determining the mental capa-
bilities of school children [54], and during World War I as a method for assigning
soldiers to particular branches of the military. Tests administered using fill-
in blank forms are a fast technique of investigation suitable for large nuders,
but' for the most part they do not identify inborn characteristics (individual
inclinations), but rather acquired knovledge and experience. This is especially
typical of verbal tests vhich immediately assign a semiliterate person to the
lowest level of the evaluation scale, even when the person may possibly have good
natural gifts. Therefore, in the hands of racists and advocates of class dif-
ferences verbal tests becans a discriminatory weapon and in this way discredited
the idea of testology. Tests which use pictures are to some degree without

this shortcoming.

Therefore, tests can be used primarily to determine the level of general human
and vocational sophistication acquired at a given moment in time and are much
less useful to identify inborn capabilities, intellect, and distinctive features
of a person's thinking.

Equipment tests involve technical devices which chiefly investigate the charac-
teristics of the central nervous systen. higher nervous activity, the autonomous
nervous system, and other functional systems of the organism.

Now let us consider the most widely used specific techniques of studying the in—
dividual personality for the purpose of identifying its individual traits and
the characteristics of its organization.

The social aspect of the individual personality includes character traits (ad-

herence to principle, honesty, initiative. activism, organization, optimism.
pliancy). social consciousness (patriotism, progressivism, moral makeup,

24. .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINR()FF1C]AL.USEL(NHLN

collectivism, atheism, and attitude touard oneself, other people, and labor),
capabilities (psychomotor, artistic, technical. mathematical, nusicsl, literary,
scientific, organizational, and so on), experience of life, general level of
sophistication, upbringing. and vocational training (qualifications. time of
service). The motives that inspire activity by the working individual and the
person's interests occupy a special place in the social aspect.

The investigator obtains information on these matters by studying references,
autobiographies. personal records and other documents, applications. and ques-
tionnaires filled out both by the subjects themselves and by persons around
them. The investigator also learns about the person in the process of personal
interviews and interrogation.

Each sociological investigation is a new creative process, and its success de-
pends on the inventiveness. knowledge, and practical skills of the investigator.

Therefore. the experimental method [55, 56] is the principal method in socio-
logical research.

The psychological aspect of the personality is described in terms of the char-
acteristics of mental forms of perceiving and reflecting the world: attention,
emotions and feelings, memory, and thinking. when considering the emotional
sphere of a person and describing it, it is also essential to investigate the
person's volitional (will) capacities because the behavior of a person in emo-
tive situations depends on the characteristics of this purely human quality

(degree of fearlessness. decisiveness, persistence, self-control. purposefulness,
and discipline).

The correction test method is used to determine the stability, distribution, and
concentration of attention IS, 57, 58, S9]. The test subject is given a blank
with a series of letters on it and told to cross out a certain letter. In a
second variation the subject is told to cross out one letter and underline an-
other letter. The test lasts a few minutes (usually up to five minutes), and

on a signal from the experimentor the test subject marks the form after definite
time intervals (30 seconds). A table with Landolt rings can be used instead of
a form with letters [60. 61]. The degree of stability of concentrated attention
can be established by the intertwined lines technique. Several lines (10-25)
are intersected a number of times on the blank. They all start and end in boxes
on the right and left sides of the paper. Their ordinal numbers are placed on
one side of the sheet. The subject must visually trace the line along its en-
tire length and put its number in the appropriate box on the opposite side of
the sheet [5, 62].

Switching attention can be analyzed by the method of adding numbers with switch-
ing [5]. The test is done in two ways. The first way is as follows: two one-
dig1; numbers are given in fraction form; they must be added and the total
entered in the numerator in the second row on the right, while the numerator of
the first proposed row is put in the denominator of the second row, and so on.
In this case, if the total is more than 10 only the the one's digit is written.

lo, 6, Q, §£,£,£, and so on.

2 6 6 0 6 6 2

.25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when the second method is used, the total of the numerator and denominator of
the first row is put in the denominator of the second row while the numerator
of the second row becomes the denominator of the first row. The methods are
alternated by instructions every 30-60 seconds. Switching of attention (which
evidently is accomplished chiefly by the speed of mental processes and the

ease of formation and modification of the mental habit) can be considered

easy if a subject is able to perform 20 or more additions in a minute. Switch-
ing is difficult if the subject performed 10 or fewer additions.

The volume and distribution of attention can be investigated by the Schulte
method. It goes as follows. The subject must quickly find and point out a
natural series of numbers of a given length in a table consisting of an appro-
priate number of boxes in which numbers are written without order. The test
can be made more difficult by introducing different number types and sizes in
addition to the random arrangement of numbers [62].

K. K. Plantonov [5] proposed a modification of this technique (called the
Schulte-Platonov method) which makes it possible to test the volume. distri-
bution, and switching of attention. Numbers from 1 to 25 are written without
any order in two colors in a table. The test subject must quickly name and
point out the numbers in order, beginning one colored series from the largest
(in descending order), and the other from the smallest (in ascending order).
The different colored numbers are found in alternation (for example, red 25,
blue 1, red 24, blue 2, and so on). Attention volume can also be studied by
the method which X. K. Platonov [5] described as controlled display of a

card with 16 boxes on a tachistoscope (exposure time varies from 0.05 to 0.15
seconds). Some (2-8) of the boxes contain dots. The subject must be able to
remember them and write them in on a blank form. Memory volume is determined
by the number of dots accurately reproduced on several cards. The accuracy of
perception is the average percentage of correctly reproduced dots on all the

cards, and depends on the time of exposure. the complexity of the cards. and of
course, on the characteristics of the test subject.

Operational (short-term) memory is an important quality for the operator in
many production processes.

At the Institute of Hygiene and Occupational Illness (Ukrainian SSR) this kind
of memory is investigated by a technique which involves direct memorization of
geometric shapes and subsequently recognizing and selecting them. The test
subject is given an assignment card to memorize. It represents six equivalent
triangular shapes with different internal hatchures. In addition to the assign-
ment cards. a file case containing 24 figures, including theonesrepresented on
the assignment cards, is also used. The time allowed to memorize one card is 10
seconds. Then, in the file case, the subject must find the figures that were
displayed. One minute is allotted for recognition and selection. The number of

figures correctly recognized and selected is the indicator of short—term memory.

Many types of activity make special requirements on characteristics of a person's
thinking. Thought is that mental activity (at the level of the secondary signal
system) which aims at knowledge of objective reality by identifying linkages and

.26.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

relationships between the objects and phenomena under consideration. Charac-
teristics of thinking include the capacity of the working individual to make
optimal decisions in time, to diagnose the state of the entire labor process
by particular manifestations, and to monitor correct performance of particular
operations. The characteristics of a person's thinking determine the ability
to plan strategy and tactics, the creative approach. and inventiveness.

The speed of thinking processes is especially important. It can be measured,
for example, with the set of tests proposed by the English psychologist

Eysenck [63]. In the author's opinion, these tests measure a coefficient of
intellect [Russian abbreviation "KI," possibly English "IQ"]. which correlates
significantly (but not exhaustively) with speed of thinking operations.

Thirty minutes are given to perform each test. The number of problems correctly
solved in this time is the index of the coefficient of intellect. EYSODCK be-
lieves that the coefficient of intellect reflects two aspects of intellectual
development: the genetic, inborn foundation - the speed of thinking processes,
and the social-psychological experience of the particular social group. The
tests which he proposes have the same shortcomings as other fill-in blank tests.
when evaluating this method it is essential to consider that these tests reflect

socioeconomic status more than the inborn foundation of intellectual development
[64].

To reduce the contribution of the social factors to the evaluation of capabilities
some psychologists propose that the index of intellectual capabilities be con-
sidered not the absolute number of problems solved by the subject. but rather

the rate of increase in this number when three or four successive tests are

given. There are also several other methods of testing intellect [6].

The emotions and feelings of a person are one more form of mental processes
which make an imprint on the person's behavior and labor activity [65]. Emo-
tions are the simplest form of reflection (at the level of the primary signal
system) and reveal relationships between environmental influences and the bio-
logical needs of the organism. The limbic system is the morphological substrate
of the emotional processes.

The feelings are the most complex form of reflection; characteristic only of
human beings. They occur following the pattern of the conditioned reflex and
must involve participation of the cerebral cortex. The feelings reflect rela-
tions between the external world and a person's social needs.

The emotions are generated directly by the perception process, whereas feelings
arise indirectly through comprehension of what has been perceived. The difference
in the morphofunctional substrate of these two forms of reflection also gives rise
to different possibilities of shaping and controlling these processes. Thus.
feelings can be effectively influenced by word stimulants, while a particular
emotion can most easily be supplanted by a stronger emotion.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Each person has his or her own quality and intensity of emotional manifestations.
Depending on the nature of their emotional spheres, different people behave
differently in the very same dangerous situation [5]. A distinction is made
among the asthenic reaction or the passively defensive reaction (becoming numb,
purposelessness of actions, and immobilization). the sthenic reaction vhich fol-
lows the type of the actively defensive reflex (panicky behavior), and the
sthenic reaction that expresses itself in militant excitation. The first two
types of reaction are unconditioned reflexes, occur with participation of the
primary signal system, and are classified with the negative emotional manifes-
tation. The third type is one of the conditioned reflexes and results from the
operation of the secondary signal system. At the present time there are vir-
tuslly no methods that allow an objective evaluation of the quality and intensity
of a peson’s emotional makeup. But work in this direction is underway. in par-
ticular at the Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology (Moscow) under the
direction of A. Ye. Ol'shannikova [66]. A number of techniques have been de-
veloped which use interrogation to establish the sign and modality of the emo-
tions typical of an individual in different life situations and to analyze their
dynamic parameters (intensity, duration, and lability).

A. Ye. Ol'shannikova also attempted to establish a relationship between the sign
of the dominant emotions and the background £36 [67]. She showed that test sub-
jects in whom the positive emotions typically predominate have lower values for

the energy indexes of the Delta; Theta, and Beta rhythms.

The volitional (will) qualities of the individual are very important for emotiona1~
type reactions. They can suppress fear of real, existing danger and even evoke
positive emotions.

Attempts have now been made to evaluate volitional qualities characteristic

of a particular individual in quantitative terms. The Institute of Psychology
in Kiev {9], for example, has developed a special instrument called a volunte-
graph. The device consists of two dynamometers which the test subject must
squeeze with the right and left hands. The subject's volitional effort is mea-'
sured by the number of correctly performed assignment cycles or the amount of
work which the subject does on the condition of maintaining an assigned level
of effort for the maxi-um possible time. S. V. Korzh [68] proposes measuring
volitional efforts by the maximum time subjects can deliberately hold their
breath.

In these cases the volitional effort will. of course, be closely related to the
individual's specific physical development. But according to experimental
studies this does not always correlate with intellectual volitional effort [69].
The latter is better studied. for example. by the Thornton test. The essential
feature of this test is that the subject must "restore" a specially garbled text.
Koos cube problems are suitable for this purpose. The subject is told to com-
pose several figures from cube pieces, and the last assignment is insoluble.

In this case the volitional efforts are determined by the time the subject spends
trying to compose the required figure.

The inborn characteristics of the nervous system are the third aspect of the per-
sonality and constitute the object of study for a large branch of physiology,
differential psychophysiology.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The foundational development of the problem of individual differences in the ner-
vous system came in the work of I. P. Pavlov and his school. I. P. Pavolv formu-
lated the principle of the fundamental characteristics of the nervous system
(strength. equilibrium, and mobility of nerve processes). which is the corner-
stone of the hypothesis of four types of higher nervous activity [70].

Further studies done in the laboratories of n. H. Teplov, B. G. Anan'yev, V. 8.
Merlin. and V. D. Nebylitsyn led to elaboration of the ideas developed by I. P.
Pavlov and raising them to a qualitatively new level. They showed that the en-
tire diversity of psychophysiological human types cannot be reduced to four vari-
ations. They formulated the conception of basic characteristics of the nervous
system, “which assumes as its leading premise the proposition that a highly or—
ganized nervous system has a number of characteristics that describe the course
of nerve processes of stimulation and inhibition in it and. in their combina-
tions, make up the neurophysiological foundation of the varied psychological
manifestations with their individual variations." [71. 72].

The following scheme of nervous system characteristics was compiled by B. H.-
Teplov and his students. and with particular clarity by V. D. Nebylitsyn [73].

1. Particular characteristics of the nerve processes of stimulation and in—
hibition of the nerve substrate which receives primary sensory information (that
is. the analyzer):

a. primary particular characteristics: strength - the ability of
nerve cells to endure prolonged, concentrated stimulation with-
out switching to a state of beyond-theelimit inhibition ;
nobility - speed of alternation of stimulation and inhibition
and vice versa; dynamism - ease with which the nervous system
generates the processes of stimulation and inhibition. in pare
ticular during the formation of temporary linkages; lability -
speed of the activity of the nervous system. which is deter-
mined chiefly by the speed of extinguishing the aftereffects
from a stimulation pulse. that is, speed of replacement of one
cycle of stimulation by another when stimuli are fed in series.
The primary characteristics describe changes in the fundamental
nerve processes. stimulation and inhibition . respectively;

b. secondary particular characteristics: balance or equilibrium
of nerve processes - stimulation and inhibition - for each

of the primary characteristics (strength. mobility, dynamism.
and lsbility).

It should be observed that sharply expressed differences among analyzers of
primary and secondary characteristics are seen in 20-25 percent of the people
(therefore, the particular analyzer for which the characteristic was deter-
mined should always be pointed out). The particular characteristics give
partial information on the role of neurophysiological parameters in the dynamics
of mental function, so consideration of the particular characteristics alone
results in an incomplete picture of the neurophysiological foundations of indi-
vidual differences.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is necessary to study the general characteristics of the nervous system, the
determinants of individual features of behavior and its most general manifesta-
tions, to explain individual differences not only in those domains of the psyche
directly related to the function of the sense organs, but also those domains
which relate to the personality generally. '

II. The general characteristics are reflected in the physiological parameters of
the processes of stinulation and inhibition of coaplexes of brain structures not
directly related to receiving primary sensory information. These include the
pareneters of the nerve organization of brain regulatory formations. V. D.
Nebylitsyn [73] considered two general characteristics: general activity and
emotionality. These characteristics may be similar to extrovertism/introvertism
and neuroticism in Eysenok' s typological scheme [76]:

a. general activism according to Nebylitsyn - this refers to the
personal qualities that engender the individual's internal need
and tendency to effectively master the real world and find self—
expreasion relative to the outer world. This need may find ex-
pression on the mental, motor, or social planes.

By extrovertisn/introvertism Eyaenck means the features of an individual's inter-
action with the external environment, in particular with the surrounding social
sphere, in other words sociability. Extroverts are drawn to society and follow
events around them carefully. The source of their interest and enthusiasms is
events in the objective world. They adapt quickly to the surrounding situation
and to new people, and are so absorbed in what is happening around them that they
often "forget themselves." Introverts are people at the opposite pole. Their
interests and enthusiaama are directed to a subjective world. They are withdrawn
and inclined to self-analysis and solitude. They have difficulty enduring changes
in the environment and adapt poorly in a new collective. The morphophysical sub-
strate of this characteristic is the properties of the frontal reticular complex,
which supports extended circulation of stimulation by circular channels. In this
case the reticular formation of the brain is the generator and the frontal cortex
is the modulator of general activism. This complex assigns the energy, rate,
volume, and diversity of an individual's actions.

b. emotionality according to Nebylitsyn - this is the set of
qualities that describes the dynamics of the occurrence,
course, and cessation of different emotional states. This
interpretation of the general characteristic makes it re-
semble neuroticiam according to Eysenck [76] or anxiety
according to J. Taylor [75], which are defined by a
heightened feeling of personal danger, heightened sensi-
tivity to personal failures and mistakes, dissatisfaction
with one ‘s self, attributing mistakes to one 's personal
qualities, and internal unrest. The substrate of this char-
acteristic is the frontolimhic system. In this :ase the
11ub1¢ system 19 thegeneratoramd the frontal cortex is the
modulator of the stimulation, which circulates in the circular

channels of this system.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the current phase, we believe, the number of general characteristics

should be broadened to at least four, including emotional and regulatory sta-
bility, two manifestations of human activity and behavior that have just begun

to be studied. Emotional stability is defined as an integrated personal char-
acteristic that is described by the interaction of emotional, volitional. in-
tellectual, and motivational components of individual mental activity to ac-
complish a goal in a complex emotive situation [76], constancy of mental and motor
functions under conditions of emotional influences [77], and the ratio between the
results of an individual's activity in a calm state and in an emotional state [78].

We define emotional stability as the optimal version of adaptational biochemical,
psychological, and physiological changes taking place under extreme emotional
conditions to keep the purposefulnese of the individual's behavior and activity
at a high level.

The emotional state is purposeful adaptive behavior that occurs as the result of
reflection of surrounding reality [79-81]. But when we consider various cases of
the influence of emotions on a person's state and activity, we are forced to ob-
serve not only the positive regulating role of emotions but also cases of confu—
sion and unpurposeful behavior related to the development of emotional stress.
This usually occurs in difficult situations with a significant intensification
of emotional stimulation [76, 82]. The well-known Yerkes and Dodson curve re-
fleets the relationship of the influence of the strength of emotional stimulation
on activity.

The next general characteristic arises from features of the organism‘s regulation
of reactions. This characteristic reflects individual speed, amplitude. and
duration of reactions in response to a particular influence, which ultimately de-
termines the possibility of preserving optimal conditions for organism func-
tioning under changing living conditions. Viewing the organism as a complex self-
reguladngsystem [83] and using the terminology of automatic regulation theory

we can call this characteristic regulatory stability. It determines the typo-
logical features of adaptation mechanisms [36. 85].

Each morphofunctional system that determines the particular and general charac-
teristics of an individual's nervous system (the system of analyzers and system
of regulatory complexes) has two levels of self-regulation of Behavior: 1 - the
lower, genetically conditioned. automatically regulated level (supperted By the
neuron level of interrelationships); 2 - the higher level, consciously regulated
by speech-oriented thinking or speech and subject to educational and environmental
influences (supported by the interrelationships of the complex of nerve forma-
tions). Each morphofunctionsl system, and even more each level of a morpho-
functional system. can have its own distinctive strength. dynamism. lability.
mobility, and equilibrium of the processes of stimulation and inhibition. This

is the reason for the difficulty of diagnosis and the large number of combinations
of these characteristics, which in turn gives the individual personality its
uniqueness.

Let us now consider methods of analyzing the following characteristics of the
nervous system.

31

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- gynamism of the process of stimulation (referent indicator -— speed of formation
of a positive temporary linkage). Measuring the index of the Alpha rhythm in
the EEG is an adequate method of analyzing this characteristic. The studies of
V. D. Nebylitsyn point to a significant correlation between this quantity and
the characteristic being analyzed [71].

L. B. Yermolayevs-Tomina [86. 87] has proposed techniques to analyze dynamism
by the nature of changes in the skin galvanic reaction [SGR]. She established a
positive correlation between the height of the amplitude of the SGR as a com-
ponent of the orientation reaction to the first application of a new stimulus
and the dynamism of stimulation. In people with high dynamism of stimulation
the $63 is extinguished more slowly as the new stimulus is repeated. This same
characteristic can be analyzed in an experiment to develop a conditioned SGR
(the conditioned signal is a flash of light, and the unconditioned reinforcement
is pressing on a reaction button). The presence of the reaction is tested in at
least three isolated tests of the light flash as the number of combinations is
increased. The indicator of speed of development of this reaction (number of
combinations before the appearance of the first conditioned reflex SGR) cor-
responds to the dynamism of the stimulation process. Study of the assimilation
of the rhythm of light signals in the 326 at frequencies 11-20 Hz gives an idea
of the dynamism of stimulation: the lover the percentage of assimilation,

the greater the dynamism of the stimulation process (the correlation is at the
boundaries of significance) [71].

The dygamism of the process of inhibition (referent indicator - speed and ease
of formation of different forms of internal inhibition). Investigation of the
characteristics of the sen as a component of the orientation reaction to a new
stirwlus and the speed of extinguishing a conditioned sun [87, 88], as well as
the features of the EEG and the BEG-reaction of rhythm assimilation [71, 88] are
adequate methods of analyzing this characteristic.

A high dynamism of the process of inhibition corresponds to a low amplitude of
the SGR and rapid extinguishing of it as the new stimulus is repeated. Low
frequency, a high index, and a high total energy of the Alpha rhythm and a high
percentage of assimilation of the theta and Alpha rhythms (to 10 Hz) correlate
positively with dynamism of inhibition.

The stren th of the nervous s stem in relation to inhibition (referent indicator!—
caffeine test). The existence of a high correlation between this property and

the threshold of sensory sensations (sensitivity). the type of the spontaneous

and induced electrical activity of the cerebral cortex, and the endurance and
"noise suppression quality" of the nervous system are used to analyze this char-
acteristic.

The works of B. H. Teplov and his associates established experimentally that a
higher threshold of sensory sensations corresponds to a stronger nervous system
in relation to stimulation [89, 90]. The existence of this dependence led to the
development of a vhole series of specific techniques for analyzing the strength of
the nervous system: by the threshold of the orientation and reaction to a new
stimulus (the stronger the nervous system the higher the threshold will be [71]);
and, by changing the threshold of sensory sensitivity during the orientation

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reaction (a larger increase in the threshold corresponds to a strong nervous
system [91. 92]) and after it is extinguished in response to an additional
stimulus (decrease in the threshold for a strong nervous system [92]). The re-
action to stimuli of growing intensity is very instructive for analyzing the
strength of the nervous system [71, 90). Regardless of the type of reaction
(reaction time to a sound or light stimulus. critical frequency of merging of
flickers with electrical stimulation of the eye, induction of rhythm in the
EEG for a flickering light stinulus), in all cases we encounter the sane rela-
tionship: the weak nervous system has a larger initial effect and approaches
the limit of the particular function more rapidly. The behavior of the strong
nervous system is the opposite.

The "gradient of force“ technique according to Nebylitayn is used extensively
in practice [71, 78, 93, 94, 95].

The level of strength is determined by the ratio of the average time of the
motor reaction (pressing the button) in response to a weak sound stimulus
(20-60 db) to the average reaction time to a strong stimulus (90-120 db).

More often the sound is taken at a height of 1,000 Hz and reaction time is
totalled for 15 stimulations. The evaluations may be done by the angle of in-
clination of the curve of the relationship of reaction time to intensity of
the stimulation (the angle of inclination is greater for a strong nervous
system).

As indicated above, the strength of the nervous system may be analyzed also by
the type of spontaneous EEG and EEG—reaction of rhythm assimilation. It has
been established that a lower total energy of Delta rhythm [96, 97], low induc~
tion of the Delta rhythm [96, 97], and a low effect of total induction of

rhythm (96-99] correspond to a stronger nervous system. A promising method has
been developed by V. s. Klyagin [100], who established a direct significant
correlation between the strength of the nervous system and the average values
of dispersion of the Alpha rhythm (right hemisphere). In people with a strong
nervous system the Alpha rhythm is generally well expressed, variable, and has a
high amplitutde.

Attempts have been made to analyze the strength of the nervous system by the time
characteristics of a nonspecific slow evoked potential taken from the motor zone
of the cortex [101]. It has been established that a test subject with a large
time segment between the A and C semiwaves has a stronger nervous system.

The laboratory of V. 8. Merlin [102-105] has developed a technique that is widely
used at the present time for determining the strength of the nervous system.

This technique is based on identifying the degree of endurance of the nervous
system. The experiment in this case consists of the following. The subject is
told to press a button quickly following a signal, which may be, for example, a
scund stimulus (65-90 db). The sound is repeated 75-100 times. The interval be-
tween stimuli is 5—15 seconds (the time necessary to restore normal neuron ac-
tivity after the preceding stimulation). The level of strength is determined by
the percentage relationship between the average reaction time of the last 15-20
stimulations and 15-20 stimulations at the start of the experiment (the first
five times the button is pressed are not considered because they are still

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

influenced by the subject's orientation reaction). If the average reaction
time to the last stimulations.if 15-20 percent greater, it means that the sub-
ject has a week nervous system.

V. 3. Merlin also developed the method of analyzing strength by the skin gal-
vanic reaction ($03) [102]. This is the method of extinguishing with reinforce—
ment of a conditioned adaptive SGR. It is based on the ability of nerve cells
to endure prolonged concentrated stimulation created by numerous repetitions of
a conditioned stimulus. The experiment consists of the following. A sound
(conditioned) stimulation (50 db) is given to the test subject. The sound oper-
ates in isolation for 10 seconds, and then (after the researcher gives the
instruction "Press the button!") for another seven seconds against a reinforce-
ment background (the subject presses the button until the command "Enough!").
Thirty sound stimuli are fed at intervals of l-l.$ minutes. The SGR is taken
from the hand which is not occupied working the button. The strength/weakness
indicator based on stimulation is the percentage relationship of the logarithms
of the average amplitude of the three SGR's (in millimeters) at the beginning
and end of the experiment (13 fix/lg H2) . 100 (the first five SGR's are disregarded
to preclude the influence of the orientation reaction). where the nervous system
is stronger the value of this coefficient will be higher. This method is a
modification of a method proposed earlier by V. I. Rozhdestvenskaya [106]. she
evaluated not the amplitude of the $63, but rather the conditioned reflex ef-
fect on the first and nany subsequent repetitions of the conditioned signal with
reinforcement. V. I. norhdestvenskaya [107] also worked out the induction
method of analysing the strength of a nervous system. It is based on facts

that are widely known in the Pavlov school. In the first place, a weak stimulus
causes irradiation of stimulation, while a medium stimulus causes concentration
and a strong one again causes irradiation. In the second place, caffeine has
practically no effect on the focus of stimulation in persons with strong nervous
systems. while it greatly intensifies this focus in persons with weak nervous
systems.

V. I. Rozhdestvenskaya observed the influence of a supplementary light point
stimulus on the threshold of another point testing light stimulus before and
after the administration of small and large doses of caffeine. With subjects
who have strong nervous systems the administration of both small and medium
doses of caffeine changes the shape of the background curves of the influence
of the supplementary stimulus on the threshold of the test subject insignifi—
cantly. In the case of a weak nervous system a distortion of the influence of
the supplementary stimulus is observed under the influence of medium doses of

caffeine. Thus. a weak supplementary stimulus (in the initial state causing a
lowering of the threshold for the stimulus being tested as the result of irradi-

ation of stimulation from a weak center of stimulation) now evokes an inhibitory
effect (as the result of intensification of the focus of stimulation and induc-
tion of inhibition to surrounding zones). As the result of an increase in the
sensitivity of nerve tissue after administration of the caffeine the average
supplementary stimulus acquires the properties of a strong stimulus and as a re-
sult the concentration of stimulation (inhibitory effect to the stimulus being
tested) is replaced by irradiation (heightening of sensitivity to the test
stimulus).

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The strength of the nervous system in relation to stimulation may be ana—
lyzed as the possibility of withstanding the distracting effect of an outside
stimulus (the "external inhibition" method) [108]. The indicator of strength
is the relationship of the average times for 15 simple motor reactions to a
sound stimulus where there is an outside signal to the average time of 15 reac-
tions where there is no such signal. The sound stimulus (6—5 seconds long) is
given every 5-6 seconds, which is about six times a minute. The greater the
strength of the nervous system, the lower this ratio will be.

The strength of the nervous system in relation to inhibition. At the present
time the adequate methods of analyzing this characteristic in human beings have
a limited arsenal of means. In 1963 V. I. Rozhdestvenskaya proposed measuring
the effect of lengthening and multiple repetition of a differentiating stimulus
on absolute light sensitivity (by analogy with animal experiments) [109].

When the differentiating stimulus is extended or repeated a number of times for
people with weak nervous systems in relation to inhibition, the stimulus loses
its inhibitory effect and begins to operate like a positive stimulus. But in
people with a strong nervous system in relation to inhibition the differenti-
ating stimulus continues to act as an inhibitory stimulus in both cases.

The mobility of nerve processes is the speed of replacement of nerve processes
(stimulation and inhibition). There are various adequate techniques of ana-
lyzing this characteristic: finding the speed of delaying and following con-
ditioned reflexes [110, 111], the dynamics of the aftereffect (subsequent
irradiation and induction) of the stimulus [63, 112, 113, 116, 115, 116, 117];
and, urgent alteration of the signs of inhibitory and positive stimuli after
preliminary production of the corresponding conditioned reflexes [63, 110, 118,
119]. However, these methods are not monometric indicators of mobility. Thus,
the speed and ease of production of delaying and following reflexes depends not
only on mobility but also on the strength of the nervous system and the dynamism
of nerve processes [120]. The aftereffects of the stimulus and alteration of
the signs of stimuli also depend on the mobility and strength of the nervous
system: the weaker the nervous system is, the deeper and longer the after-
effect of the stimulus will be [112, 116, 115]; the stronger the nervous system
is, the quicker and more easily the signs of stimuli are altered [110, 118, 119].

The method proposed by N. S. Leytes can serve as an example of analyzing the
mobility of nerve processes by the aftereffect of a stimulus [113]. The sub-
ject is shown a series of letters on a screen in rapid sequence (roughly one
every second). The test subject knows from the instructions that there are
three types of letters: positive (after which, for example, a button is to be
pressed), negative (after these letters a positive letter should be perceived
by the subject without pushing the button, that is, negative + positive letters -—
“conditioned inhibition"), and indifferent letters. They are shown in random
order. By measuring reaction time to a positive signal coming in the immediate
vicinity of an inhibitory one (after one, two, or three intervals) and in the
background (after at least four intervals) it was established that for people
with high mobility of nerve processes the reaction time against the background
is very important, while the reaction to a positive signal coming one or two
intervals after an inhibitory signal does not reflect the inhibitory effect of

35

rot OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the earlier stimulus. People with low mobility of nerve processes show a
shorter reaction time against the background; after the Inhibitory stimulus
reaction time to a positive stimulus coming one. two. or even three intervals
later is significantly greater. when measurements are repeated a number of
times during one test adaptation may occur (a shortening of reaction time, ap-
proaching the background level).

The modification of the above-described method devised by Ye. A. Klimov [63]
can serve as an example of analyzing mobility by a special alteration of the
stereotype. He substituted colored flashes for the letters. The subject prev
duced a motor reaction only to the red light (R), and was not supposed to react
to the blue light (B).

Standard signals were alternated at intervals of five seconds using a scheme of
RBBR - lS-second pause - RBBR - lS-second pause - RBBR, and so on (20 times).
After the stereotype was reinforced, an alteration of it was undertaken: the
subject was supposed to press the button for the blue light and not press the
button for the red light (signals continued to be fed in the same pattern).

For subjects with high mobility of nerve processes reaction time decreases quickly
during formation of the new habit, but continues to be variable during the tests;
with "inert" subjects reaction time decreases slowly, but the degree of variation
decreases rapidly. The number of mistakes is also indicative. L. H. Abolin [78]
used the percentage relationship of the average latent time of the six reactions
after alteration of the stereotype and before it as an indicator of the mobility
of nerve processes. A lower value for this ratio corresponds to greater mobility.

Labilit of nerve recesses - s eed of occurrence and cessation of a nerve
process. The independence of this characteristic is hypothetical; it may pose
sibly coincide with mobility [89, 121]. A number of indicators have been pro-

posed to analyze the speed parameters of the work of the nervous system [71, 115.
122, 123]: (1) critical frequency of flickers with an intensity of flashes 15

times greater than the individual threshold; (2) speed of restoration of light
sensitivity after "lighting up" (possibly. exposure to strong, direct light];
(3) ratio between the thresholds of appearance and disappearance of a spot of
light when measuring light sensitivity; (6) adequate optical chronaxie.

It has been established esperimentally [124] that these indicators, which ini-
tially were adopted on a hypothetical basis as an indicator of the high-speed
processes of nervous activity (lability), produce a significant correlation with
those characteristics of inducing rhythms in the EEG which many authors believe
correspond to the level of lability of the cortical cells of the cerebral cortex
[125-127]. This proved the actual existence of lability as an inalienable char-
acteristic of the nervous system.

work done under the direction of E. a. Golubeva [96] has demonstrated that the
lability of nerve processes may be measured by indicators of the total energy of

Beta rhythms (the greater the energy. the greater the lability) and assimilation
of rhythms in the Beta frequency range (the greater the assimilation, the higher
the level of lability).

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the present time many studies propose different EEG indicators as indicators
of lability. For example, a significant negative correlation has been estab-
lished between asymetry in the lengths of the ascending and descending phase

of the EEG at rest and the indicators of induction of high frequencies of stimu-
lation (that is, lsbility) [128]. The ratios of the energies of the Alpha
rhythm with eyes opened and closed and the energy of the Alpha rhyttm in the 10-
16 Hz range with eyes closed to the same vhen an Ashner test is conducted have
also been proposed as measures of lability [129]. We should also note the deter-
mination of lability by the technique of registering the aftereffect in the
myogram developed by A. Ya. Kolodnsys and modified by H. K. Akinova [130].

There are two types of self-regulation for the above-listed, so-called primary
characteristics of the nervous system: lover, and higher, consciously regulated
by speech-oriented thinking. Both levels can have characteristics that dis-
tinguish each of them from the primary characteristics and therefore. they re-
quire independent study. The methods ve have considered deal chiefly with the
lover-level primary characteristics.

At the present time a great deal of attention is being devoted to sorting out
methods that analyze higher—level primary characteristics. The speed charac-
teristics of nerve processes at the higher level (speed of thinking processes)
can be analyzed using the above-described Eysenck technique [63]. as sell as

the method developed in the laboratory of K. H. Gurevich and V. T. Kozlova [131].
In the latter method the subject develops a thought-speech stereotype (for
example, the experimenter names sniuls and plants and the subject must say
"Nyet" ["No"] to every third animal name); then the stereotype is altered (for
example. the subject must say "Nyet" to every fifth animal name). The same
characteristic can be studied by having the subject uke numerical associations
in random order within the first 10 numbers. The subject must multiply even
numbers by two. Then it can be suggested that this operation be performed with
odd numbers. The time which it takes for the subject to make the change and the
number of mistakes that the subject makes serve as indicators of the nobility

of nerve processes. Similar tests can be made by the technique described by 0. N.
Luk'yanovs and co-authors [52].

The lability of thinking-speech activity can be analyzed by means of the "per-
formance of instructions" and "code" methods [132]. Using the first method the
investigator gives the subject instructions: listen to the assignment care-
fully (the assignment is repeated once, and no questions can be asked). begin
performance of the assignment only after the canned "Begin," and stop after

the command "Stop." The subject works with a set of cards. each of which has a
specific assignment. A certain time is allocated for performance of the assign-
ment on each card. At the end of the experiment the number of assignments not
completed and done incorrectly is counted, and this is the measure of lebility.
The "code" test uses a set of cards with different variations of standard symbols.
A number between one and 10 corresponds to each symbol and the subject has a de-
coding table to use during the experiment. The goal of the subject is to assign
the appropriate number to the standard symbol as quickly as possible without malt-
ing mistakes. Subjects who have higher levels of lability do better vith this
task.

37-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The speed characteristics of thinking—speech activity can also be studied
using the A. Ye. Khil'chenko method [1321.

Research is underway today on the speed characteristics of specific forms of
thinking. The work of Ye. A. Rushkevich and I. D. Golovs [133], for example,
studies the speed of formation of conditioned reflexes for complex groups of
symbolic stimuli taken from mathematical logic. This makes it possible to'sna-
lyze the characteristics (in particular dynamism) of abstract thinking necessary
for successful assimilation of mathematics and mathematical logic.

Thus, we have reviewed some methods that allow study of the characteristics of
the nervous system at the highest hierarchical level. at the level of analytic—
synthetic activity which characterizes the features of thinking. Following V. D.
Nebylitsyn's classificar.on we have reviewed the particular primary character-
istics of the nervous s:Jtem. The particular secondary characteristics are
equilibrium (balance), :hat is, the ratio of each of the above-listed charac-
teristics related to stimulation and inhibitions: balance for strength of

nerve processes in relation to stimulation and inhibition, balance for mobility.
dynamism, and lability. In principle two types of ratios are possible: inde—
pendent variation of characteristics where any level of the particular charac-
teristic relative to the process of stimulation may correspond to any level of
the same characteristic relative to inhibition (type A).or dependent variation
of characteristics where the values of any characteristic for stimulation cor-
respond strictly to a certain value of this characteristic for inhibition (type B,
which in turn can be broken down into 31 - positive dependence, and 82 - nega-
tive dependence).

It has been demonstrated experimentally that an intermediate type of dependence
(semi-independence) is possible where one level of a certain characteristic re-
lated to stimulation correlates with the same characteristic for inhibition for

type A. while another level correlates with type B; or 32.

Analysis of the secondary characteristics is more complex, and there are only a
few methodological procedures available today for rapid and precise analysis of

them.

Investigation of the balance of nerve processes for dynamism revealed the
existence'of both type A and type 32 dependence and semi-independence [71].
The authors of this work believe that the interrelationship of nerve processes

for dynamism is accomplished according to type A. In their opinion, the

referent indicator of the predominance of the dynamism of the stimulation

process over the dynamism of the inhibition process is low values for the Alpha
index (no higher than 65 percent)[88], low total energy of the Alpha rhythm [96].
and high values for assimilation of frequencies in the 1.5-7 Hz range in compari—
son with assimilation in other ranges [136].

The opinion concerning the type of relationship among nerve processes according

to strength is more clear—cut: any level of strength of the inhihition process

may correspond t: any level of strength of the inhibition process. This is
vividly demonstrated in the study by Ye. F. Helikhova [110], who processed an

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enormous amount of experimental material from the literature. Works devoted to
studying balance for mobility describe relationships of type A [135], 81 [136].
and semi-independence [137].

Thus, we have considered the particular characteristics that describe the work
of those branches of the nervous system that are directly involved in receiving
primary sensory information. that is, the work of the analyzer systems. It
should be remewered that the results of measurement of the particular primary
and secondary characteristics for one analyser may not coincide with the sane
measured for a different analyzer. In this respect the manifestation of char-
acteristics of the nervous system is partial.

The general characteristics of the nervous system are an integrating indicator
of a set of personality traits (not related to direct reception of primary
sensory information) which constitute the basis of different types of perception
of the world by a person and behavior in different life situations. In addition
to working out direct experiments to analyze a particular general characteristic,
the investigator searches for correlations between this characteristic and the
particular characteristics. and with the physiological parameters of various
functional systems. At the beginning of this chapter we cited the classifica-
tion of general characteristics according to Nebylitsyn. The first of them.
general activism (extrovertism/introvertism according to Eysenck .- primarily re-
flects the type of activity of the frontalereticular cowlex: to what extent
the activism of the reticular formation is expressed, what particular'division
of it, and how strong are the regulating influences of the cortex. General
activism unquestionably depends also on the nature of the primary and secondary
particular characteristics of the analyzer systems.

Eyesenck tried to find correlates of axtrovertism/introvertism among the particu-
lar characteristics of the nervous system by experiment. The findings of his
studies were treated in the monograph by V. M. Bleykher and L. s. burlachuk [138].
There is reason to believe that extrovertisn is positively related to the
strength of the process of stimulation and to the mobility of nerve processes.

General activism can be analysed using the Eyssenck questionnaire and modifica-'
tions of it [74, 139, 160] based on the correlation between this characteristic
and the type of behavior in different situations (the questions were written
relative to the character of behavior). A modification of the Byesenck ques-
tionnsire could he the L. D. Gissen questionnaire [139], which contains 57
questions: 24 questions determine the level of extrovertism/introvertism. 2/.
questions analyze the level of neuroticism, and the remaining questions define
the degree of authenticity of the answers. The subject's answer nIust be un-
equivocal: "yes" or "no."

General activism is related to the individual pace of motor activity, the indi-
vidual's inclination toward diversity of actions, and the need for activity;
it correlates with the expression of the Beta rhythm in the 21-30 he range
when an 826 is taken from the frontal region [73]. This reflects the ascending

influences of the reticular formation. Because of their characteristics extro—
verts do better with work that requires maximum activism and intensity.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Introverts work better under monotonous conditions, but in such a situation
extroverts develop reactive inhibition.

The second general characteristic is emotionality, anxiety, and neuroticism.
This characteristic describes features of the emotional background of the indi-
vidual and is analyzed by means of the questionnaires compiled by Eyaenck and
Taylor. as well as various modifications of them [141-164]. The indicators of
the EEG are used in addition to questionnaires to measure the level of neuroti-
cism. It has been proven experimentally that there is a direct correlation
dependence between the expression of this characteristic and Beta activism [165,
166]. A low Alpha index, a high frequency and low amplitude of the Alpha
rhythm [147-169], and the existence of periods of desynchronization against a
background of a low-amplitude and high-frequency alpha rhythm [150] correspond
to a high level of neuroticism.

The relationship between the level of anxiety and indicators of a person's ac-
tivity and behavior is not always unambiguous. In ordinary situations a
heightened level of anxiety promotes more attentive, circumspect, and scrupulous
performance of the assigned task [151]. It is customary to consider [166] that
in extreme conditions a heightened level of anxiety reduces the effectiveness of
action.-introducing disorganization into performance of assignment and the pur-
posefulness of behavior. But L. D. Gissen [139, 141] and L. H. Abolin [78] have
shown that this dependence is observed only for an extraordinarily high level of
'anxiety. In other cases a high level of anxiety, as an indicator of positive
adaptational mechanisms, strengthens emotional stability and helps achieve good
results of activity in extreme situations. Thus. the dependence of the results
of activity on the level of anxiety is probably described by the Yerkes-Dodson
curve.

The third general characteristic, uhich is also an integration of a number of
personality traits, is emotional stability [9, 76, 77, 78. 152-155]. This is
also a multidimensional parameter, and at the present time researchers are trying
to find its physiological, mental, and behavioral correlates (for example, see
[78]). Emotional stability is determined by many qualities of the individual.

It is influenced by both the social and psychophysiological characteristics of
the person. Thus. people who have roughly the same level of emotional reac-
tivity reveal differences in emotional stability depending on the level of
motivation [76]. Emotional stability also depends on mental characteristics
such as the ability to orient oneself quickly and to distribute or concentrate
attention, as well as on the speed of thinking. The emotional makeup of the in-
dividual, that is, the character (sign and modality) and intensity (depth and
duration) of the emotional manifestations typical of a particular person in
different situations, exercises a special influence on emotional stability.

L. H. Abolin [78] has established a significant positive correlation between the
emotional stability of soccer players and positive intensive emotions. The
players who are characterized by intensive negative emotions have low-emotional
stability in important games (emotionogenic situations).

Emotional stability also depends on such a general characteristic of the person-
ality as anxiety. According to L. H. Abolin [78], a fairly high level of anxiety

~40 '

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFFKJA1.USEZONLX

combines with high emotional stability. The same kind of positive correlation
exists between this general property and general activism (or extrovertism).

It is apparent that a fairly high level of general activism and anxiety is

an expression of the broad capabilities of adaptationsl mechanisms and promotes
emotional stability [78, 139]. This relationship continues to a certain point,
after which a rise in the level of these qualities lowers the enotional sta-
bility of the individual.

Many studies have found that particular characteristics of the nervous system in-
fluence changes in state and activities in extreme situations [36, 37. 78, 95,
156-161). It has been established that in difficult situations created by the
conditions of work themselves (high pace, information overloads) or by accidents,
such properties of the nervous system as its strength in relation to stimulation,
the balance of nerve processes, lability, and mobility become very important.
The relationship between emotional stability and different characteristics of
the nervous system is not always unambiguous or significant and depends not only
on occupational requirements, but also qualifications and age. L. M. Abolin [78]
showed that the emotional stability of young soccer players correlates signifi-
cantly with the strength of the nervous system relative to stimulation. This
dependence is not found in older, more experienced players, but they show a sig-
nificant correlation between emotional stability and the quality of regulation.
This subject is considered in more detail below.

A persistent search is now underway for the physiological correlates of indi-
vidual emotional stability. The work of Z. P. Turovskaya [161] gives findings
that testify to a positive correlation between emotional stability and equilibrium
of nerve processes and present an 326 characterization of a balanced individual
who is resistant to stress. In the background 386 of such a person, the Alpha
and Theta rhythms are usually well expressed, and under stress the indicators of
the Alpha and Theta rhythms decrease while the indicators of the Delta rhythm
increase slightly. A person who is not resistant to stress (unbalanced) shows a
low content for the Alpha and Theta rhythms in the background EEG, and under
stress shows an increase in Theta and, especially, Delta activity against a
background of reduced Alpha activity.

Various laboratory models of emotional states have been developed to analyze the
level of emotional stability. For example, there is the well-known conjugate
methodology technique proposed by A. R. Luriya and modified by K. K. Platonov
and L. H. Rozet [32]. The technique goes as follows. The test subject must
perform a certain action (squeezing a Hareyev capsule with the thumb) under
ordinary conditions and in an emotive situation (falling forward onto a soft
mat from a "standing" or "kneeling” position on the command "Ready, got").
Emotional-motor stability is determined by the relationship between results of
perforning the assignment in an ordinary situation and in a stress situation.
The experimental findings almost (85 percent) coincide with a real situation.
The ratio of reaction time in a calm state to the time for the same reaction
under threatening conditions may be an indicator of emotional stability [78].

Some works give physiological descriptions of the state of test subjects during
the period of waiting for unpleasant influences. These correlate with poor

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020049-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

   
  
    

___.. .“

 

J
_- (mm m “41 mm
' ‘ﬂ%$“” _ .H l”? r
M (u LuEI £.'L‘L.LA'_.', v)
(3142
mm [W‘ﬁm‘i-
a
- ﬁummmud mm (0ft) (z , an
' wJﬂlmuu
m" 5%...” cc «1)
'“' iiIIII-” ' I?“ T:_,ee)
, ‘ f,
' uuhnkumawd ruuuwm laggﬁaﬁiii
Muuuﬂbu banana.
an énuwwméhg
alumna) (88) uuwcm) )

      
    

  
  
 

M unawaug
haan

(y) Long-Tern;
_ (2) Biological Aspect (Self-
Adjuating System)
(as) General Activism;
(bb) Particular Characteristics

(3;) Stimulatin

of Analyzer Systens; Lability,
(cc) General Characteristics of (hh) Inhibitio
Regulatory Foruations; Lability,
(dd) Emotional Stability; (ii) Balance (
(ee) Anxiety; Lability,

(ff) Quality of Regulation;

(33) Quality.

.102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020049-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stability under stress (for example, see [162]). Among these correlates are
a state of confusion, bradycardia. retardation of EEG frequencies, general
hyperhydrosis. arterial hypotension, and a decrease in venous tension.

The fourth general characteristic is regulatory stability. Like the other
characteristics, it can be considered on different hierarchical levels. This
characteristic can be evaluated at the central nervous system level [86. 85, 163,
164] by analysing the EEG and evoked potentials. It is clear that this param-
eter reflects characteristics of the interaction between specific and nonspe-
cific systems of the brain in the perception of deviation in the environment.
This quality should also be considered on a different functional level: with the
example of change in the parameters of various autonomous reactions. Individual
differences in autonomous reactions to any stimulus can be reduced to two types:
plastic and inert, areactive and reactive. with low and high autonomous reactivity,
or with different levels of emotional reactivity [78, 85, and others]. Such a
division reflects the typological characteristics of regulation of autonomous
functions, whose highest center is the hypothalamus.

The features of regulatory stability in the sphere of higher nervous activity
manifest themselves in regulating one's own actions and behavior L, evaluating
a given situation [87, 165, 166].

The indicators of the regulatory stability of different hierarchical levels and
morphofunctional systems do not necessarily correlate among themselves. of course.
Thus. we have grouped all the many characteristics of the social worldview and
thinking and living processes (usually studied separately) in three aspects of
manifestation of the human essence: the social, mental. and biological. Figure 6
(previous page) presents a chart of individual characteristics drawn on the

basis of studies of these aspects.

The time has now come when we need a generalization of the conceptions of per-
sonal characteristics proposed by various researchers. "e have proposed our

version. which may be far from perfection. Similar attempts are being made by
other authors [16].

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. Some Aspects of Evaluating the Activity of the human Operator

Through the entire history of the development of technology and almost to the
present day the mutual relations of human beings and machines have been one-
sided. involving human adaptation to the machine. During the development of
technology machines increasingly look over human motor functions, broadening the
human capability for processing matter, while the human being performed prepara-
tory and repair work. The limited range of jobs done in systems of this type,
the low speed. and the simplicity of control promoted rapid development of dy-
namic stereotypes of movements in human beings. ﬂhen these systems were em-
ployed, the primary workload fell to human muscular systems. while psycho-
physiological characteristics were considered secondary and the designers of
machinery did not have to consider them.

The continuing increase in the capacities of nachinery and the growing com-
plexity of control processes caused a shift in the human workload to the nsntal
sphere, making increasingly higher demands on such human characteristics as
speed and precision of thinking; quickness of reactions. and the like. Finally,
in sons areas of technology these requirements came very close to the limits of
human capabilities under the given conditions. For this reason questions arose
concerning matching human and machine characteristics. mutually adapting then.
For the human part this meant selection by special criteria, a high level of vo—
cational training for work in a limited class of systems, and so on. For the
machine part. it involved refining techniques of representing information appli—
cable to human analyzers, coordinating the input devices of the machine with
human effector systems that perform control actions, taking account of human
anthropological characteristics. and others [73]. Moreover, it became necessary
to transfer a number of human functions to faster and more reliable automatic
devices. and at the present time the growing trend is to assign human beings only
those technically complex functions involved with selecting system strategies,
monitoring the work capability of the system, and the like. Under these condi-
tions the environment. with which human beings had direct contact during labor
activity in earlier times, is replaced by a certain information model of the
environment [97]. Thus, the most important issues today are no longer human
interaction with some particular machine. but rather the more general problena
of the interaction of the human being and a certain artificial environment 1107].

Until recently, concrete problems of interaction between human beings and machines
were solved by separate study of human and machine characteristics [26], whereas

. .41.. '

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIJC1AI.USE!DNLY

the very concept of the "man-machine" system (H-HS) presupposes that it is in.
correct, in the general case, to analyze and synthesize such systems on the basis
of findings from separate study of the characteristics of the human being and the
machine. From this comes the problem of evaluating the sort of the H—HS es a
whole, despite the qualitative differences among processes taking place in the
machine and the accompanying human mental activity. But from the standpoint of
systems analysis, which presupposes an adequate breakdown of a complex system
into simpler subsystems, the problem of studying human characteristics does not
lose its timeliness; on the contrary, it becomes even more significant and mean-
ingful. Representing the operator as a functional element of the urns assumes
from the standpoint of the systems approach that exhaustive descriptions must be
given of all the "inputs" and "outputs" that exist for the work of the given sys-
tem. Furthermore, this description must be done on the same level (and in the
same language) as the description of the entire H-HS. In addition, because this
element has memory, its output signals are determined by a function whose inde-
pendent variables are not merely the input signal, but also a state. In this
case memory means both the ability to accumulate information and the inertia of
psychophysiological processes.

The sections that follow present a brief survey of work in the field of studying
the characteristics of human beings and M—Hs'a. Proceeding on the basis of our
ideas, we sill consider in order a description of human activity, a description
of the human psychophysiological state, and the evaluation of results of ac-
tivity.

l. Psychophysiological Prerequisites for the Quality of Human Labor Activity

The methodological foundation for understanding the interrelationship between
human activity in a system and the accompanying mental processes is the principle
of the unity of the psyche and activity, according to which there exists a spe-
cial psychophysiological mechanism betusen the environment and human behavior
[161, 188].

From the many approaches that analyze the interdependence of the goal and strategy
of human behavior we may single out the following: the "theory of the functional
system" [8], the "physiology of activity of the living organism" [21]; ”feedback
for forecasting" [106]; the "conception of the set" [219]; the "model of the
future" [237]; "plan" [161]; the "nerve structure of the stimulus" [200]; and,

the "image" [19].

It is possible to generalize these approaches in an interpretation of any ac-
tivity from the standpoint of self-regulation of one's own behavior not only at
the level of the conscious, but also enlisting other mechanisms [239].

M. D. Hesarovich and co—authors [256] introduce the principle of "satisfactoriness"
to explain the nature of interaction among systems in the organism. "Satisfac-
toriness" is interpreted as folloss: "Being subjected to the influence of unde-
sirable disturbances, the organism changes its control so that the basic vital
characteristics of its systems remain in a certain satisfactory range as long

as the disturbance continues, and any control that brings about this state is
preferable for the organism in the given conditions."

. 45.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Work [125] considers a possible model of the process of self—regulation of be-
havior by the operator. In the author's opinion, self-regulation involves re-
distribution by the operator of stress to the performance of particular stages
of the activity in conformity with an assessment of the degree of the significance
of performing particular stages in the overall structure of the activity. The
diagram of self-regulation can be represented in the form of two components con-
nected in series. The first of them relates to heightened energy expenditures
to activate the appropriate systems of the organism and includes feedback ac-
cording to the probability of not achieving the goal. During thinking activity
based on past experience images of a higher level of generalization are gener—
ated and increase the probability of achieving the goal. Thus, in the first
case a more complex task is compensated for by increasing energy expenditures,
while in the second case this is accomplished by an intensification of informa-
tion activity. It may be supposed [170] that self-regulation of behavior by a
person involves an empirical determination of the tension of the organism's
physiological systems adequate to achieve the results of the activity and meet
the required quality criterion.

work [238] shows that in its interaction with the environment the organism
strives to stabilize the parameters of the particular physiological systems in
a certain range of their states. The tension of the physiological systems
corresponding to this state makes it possible to use the different resources of
the organism more economically taking into account the specific features of the
activity.

On this level learning can be viewed as the process of acquiring special habits
that enable operators to perform their functions with minimum stress.

As a result of the ability to forecast the time of action of stimuli and their
properties. the operator can optimize the distribution of stress in different
phases of the activity. The characteristics of human forecasting of time and
structural characteristics of signals are closely linked to the individual
characteristics of rhythmic processes in the organism. For exalple. the over-
estimation and underestimation of the same time sequences made by people with
heart rates up to 86-102 and 58-64 beats per minute were commensurate with
these heart rates [1441. People with a normal pulse rate may deviate in either
direction. No relationship has been discovered between the basic rhythmic
processes, the frequency of the Alpha rhythm, the rate of heart activity. and
frequency of breathing. Variation in signal processing time is linked to the
strength of nerve processes. But this condition is inadequate for rhythmic
activity [119]. In addition to it the constancy of reactions is influenced by
the ongoing functional state and degree of automatism of the activity being
carried out, that is, adaptation. The operator's adaptationsl capabilities can
be assessed by a quantitative description of the sensomotor reaction constructed
with due regard for the number of signals in a training series [126].

Adaptation to the activity being performed is accompanied by changes in the
parameters of physiological indicators. These changes are proportional to the

activity being performed. The impossibility of adaptation shows itself in a
significant deviation of physiological indicators from background indicators
[110]. Brief nerve disturbances related to abrupt changes in the nature of

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

activity are defined as a "state of prostration" [153] uhich is accompanied

by a sharp drop in the effectiveness of activity, all the say to cessation

of it. Despite the individual character of these reactions, they are accom-
panied by relatively singular physiological reactions of different degrees of
expression. There is a sharp increase in the variation of cardiac cycles in

the direction of retardation (from 8‘ to 66 beats a minute), followed by a

sharp increase in the rate. The amplitude of the skin galvanic reflex grows and
high-amplitude slow waves appear in the EEG. The action of nonstationary sig-
nals that the operator does not expectcausea.a state of emotional unstahility.
which sharply increases the spread of indicators of the quality of activity
[186]. Complete operator adaptation takes place in two stages. first the indie
cators of sensomotor activity stabilize, then the indicators of autonomous func-
tions stabilize. Quantitative evaluations of the processes of restructuring the
functioning of the organism applicable to ongoing tasks can be determined by

the characteristics of the EKG [34].

work [2061 investigated the adaptation characteristics of the brain in the
process of information overload. The methodology of intensive foreign language
study was used. Two types of change were observed in the restructuring of the
bioelectric activity of the brain in different stages of learning. These stages
were clearly linked to the nature of the basic activity of the test subjects.

It may be supposed that multiple repetitions of the conditions of appearance of a
signal and performance of a series of actions would not lead to the elimination
of thinking operations through the development of "automatism" but rather to de-
veloping a higher-level program of actions taking into account the statistical
structure of the learning sequence.

Evaluation of the level of training can be constructed taking into account the
amount of information which the operator processes in a unit of time [80. 203].
For the case where the number of possible snsvers by an untrained operator may
be large and the probability of selecting alternatives in work is not identical
[83], an integrated criterion is obtained by computing the number of cases of
correct behavior in response to an indefinite signal and relating this sum to

the total number of operator actions for each of the habits being formed.

work [114] considers the case where operators do not receive information on the
quality of their activity. In such conditions as the number of signals in an
array that the operator processes increased, the average signal processing time
for this array approached a certain range characteristic of the particular oper—
ator and signal parameters. The degree of adaptation was determined by the
rrobability of finding processing time in the range of these values.

Work [2031 established that there are two components in the structure of a
habit: level of training in the procedures and technique of the particular type
of activity and operator adaptation to the concrete conditions. The levels of
development of these components are measured by different statistical paraseters
of the initial set of realizations of the process:

1. the mode defines the actual level of training in the habit;

- 67:;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. the median evaluates the actual habit taking background
into account;

3. the arithmetic mean evaluates the effectiveness of the
practical action.

As the tests are repeated asymmetry decreases, and therefore it is proposed that
this phenomenon be explained on the basis of the following functional relation-
ship:

level of training

bias ' adaptation

x diatractability.

2. Human Functions in Ergatic Systems

There are many different forms of interaction between human beings and technical
devices in man-machine systems. The operator can perform a broad range of tasks
to support the work capability and operation of such a system. Accordingly,
operator activity can be analyzed from different standpoints. In the literature
devoted to the problem of the human operator we can identify the following basic
areas today: classification of man-machine systems; physiological aspects; and,
human interactions with technical devices and development of special mathe-
maticsl apparatus oriented to describing the functioning of systems of this class.

In work [182] the systems that require human presence (ergatic systems) are
classified by a functional characteristic defined by the degree of human partici-
pation in the work of the system. Two boundary classes are identified: deter-
ministic systems and probabilistic systems. In deterministic systems the oper-
ator can estimate the values of parameters in the future at any time according to
a known law of change. In these systems the operator's functions involve servic-
ing various program units. The operator performs preparatory work: repair,
adjustment, preparation of programs, and the like. In nondeterministic systems
the values of system parameters may be predicted with a certain probability.
Therefore, human presence in all stages of its activity is extremely essential.
This is owing to the purely human capabilities which determine successful oper-
ator activity as a part of the control contour (98]. It is proposed that inter-
mediate classes be ranked by levels of the hierarchy, dynamic properties, form

of data representation. and other such features. Work [216], in classifying
ergatic systems, uses the following factors as determining: number of persons
working in the system; degree of operator participation in the work of the
system (in systems of the first type the operator performs the tasks of monitor-
ing, analyzing malfunctions. evaluating work capability and the like; in systems
of the second type the operator is directly engaged in control in a tracking
mode).

The works of A. I. Gubinskiy (for example, see [157]) classify systems of this
type by the following features.

1. By mode of functioning. Depending on the degree of their use at the moment
under consideration systems may be in the standby mode, mode of preparation for

functioning, and functioning mode. Moreover, there may be one-time preparation
and functioning or repeated preparation and functioning.

48»

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. By the role of the human being in them. Systems of the first type are sys-
tems in which the operator performs the functions of monitoring and restoring
work capability. In systems of the second type the operator works together with
the technical units. In systems of the third type the operator works only after
a machine malfunction, performing its functions. In systems of the fourth type
the operator handles requests only when the machine is loaded with prior re-
quests.

The comprehensive approach, which includes two inseparably linked areas, the
static and the dynamic, is used to etaluste the functioning of an ergatic system.
Work [181] gives a general description of these areas. In the opinion of the
authors. the static component of systes state is a set of parameters that describe
the properties of the system, while the dynamic component is a set of values of
the parameters that describe the processes which take place in the system at cer-
tain moments in time. The system-structural approach is used to describe the
essential activities performed by the operator [160]. The distinctive features
of this approach are clarification of the specific activities of the operator.
determining the concrete difficulties that arise during the process of mastering
this type of labor activity, the effect of individual characteristics on work
indicators. and the like. Realization of the system-structural approach with ap-
plication to operator tasks involves describing the general structure of oper-
ator activity in order to establish the psychological and causal relationships
that determine the reliability and efficiency of operator labor [75, 142, 145].

A generalization of psychological findings from the study of operator activity in
different branches of industry made it possible to identify the following basic
groups of operator-type workers [159]:

l. the technologist-operator. who performs the functions
of observation. monitoring, and regulating industrial
processes to maintain them within assigned limits;

2. the supervisor-operator, who performs traffic organiza-
tion tasks;

3. the operator who performs remote control of a mobile or
immobile object;

4. the operator who directly controls a mobile object.

A number of researchers try to classify the mental activity of an operator in
performing various control tasks. For example, work [79) proposes that oper-
ator mental activity be broken into three types: sensory, sensomotor, and logical.

Sensory-type mental activity covers operators who receive information on one
channel and transmit it. without conversion, on several channels. The typical
example of this type of activity is the work of a person in a communications
system. Sensonotor-type mental activity involves processing directive information
and outputting results in standard form for the particular process. This type of
activity is typical for drivers, pilots, dispatchers, and operators of industrial
systems, among others. For the most part. the motor form of labor involves the
operator's performance of sequential actions in response to a directive signal or

.49.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a change in the situation in the system. This type of activity is typical for

several stages of pilot activity, for adjustment or preparatory jobs done by an
operator. and in other such situations.

During logical-type mental activity operator functions involve receiving and
processing information, making decisions, and issuing control actions to the
appropriate units of the system. In this case the operator experiences the prin-
cipal workload during information processing and decision-making. With a limited
number of problems to solve operator actions take on features of automatisn and
this type of activity can be classified with one of the above-listed groups. In
actual situations all three types of activity by an operator occur. Therefore,
the ratios among the different types within the limits of a selected time inter-

val can be the basis for describing operator activity according to the selected
characteristics.

According to work [131], operator functions in an ergatic system can be repre-
sented as the realization of three modes of activity. The monitoring mode is
characterized by the operator's receiving information on the work of the system.
In this case the number of parameters being monitored, their features, the
periodicity of monitoring, economic and psychophysiological indicators, and other
such factors may be taken into account. The regulation mode presupposes periodic
operator intervention in the activity of the machine part to maintain certain
parameters or for purposeful change in these parameters according to an assigned
program in conformity with control objectives. The control mode involves direct
intervention by the operator in the activity of the machine part of the system
for the purpose of controlling system parameters. This approach to some extent
echoes the ideas presented in work [12] relative to levels of control in a liv-
ing organism.

At the present time many authors are inclined to interpret man-machine systems
as single-channel data processing systems (for example, see [98, 179]). Ac-
cording to this idea operator activity can be represented in the form of a
sequence of elementary control cycles consisting of distinct, completed stages.
The following stages are identified as the principal ones: receipt of informa-
tion, processing and decision-making, and issuing control actions. "here
necessary these stages can be broken down into more detailed components. For
example, work [166] breaks the control cycle down into the following parts:

1. receipt of information - isolating the signal from the
information background and determining the message which
the signal carries;

2. processing and decision-making - extracting the algorithm
for processing this signal from memory, processing with
due regard for computation and logical conclusions, and
formulating the result (formation of information-instructions);

3. carrying out control actions - searching for a means to

realize information-instructions, and realization of the
result: issuing information-instructions.

. 50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The control cycle is considered to begin at the moment that the operator re-
ceives information on a change in the parameters of the process being moni-
tored. and the basis for execution of all stages is the point where these
parameters reach or approach the Boundaries of permissible values. The total
time of realization of the control cycle, including the time of change in con-
trolled parameters, is defined by the signal delay caused By the human being
and the hardware.

The quality of operator performance of functions in different phases of signal
processing differs. According to figures given in work [222] the largest number
of errors (81 percent) made by a pilot comes in the phase of receiving informa-
tion. The process of visual perception is broken down into several more de-
tailed phases: porception, recognition, and classification [7, 228]. The final
goal of this process is to assign the specific object to a certain category [57].

Investigation of the stage of information receiving is based on the dual function
of the signal. 0n the one hand, it is a carrier of information that elicits a
certain reaction in the sensory system; on the other hand it is an indicator of
the characteristics of the state of the environment or technical units and has

a certain meaning to the operator. Therefore, the principal areas of research

in this field today involve identifying methods of optimal coding of informa-
tion by display means [149], study of the psychophysiological characteristics of
perception of information by the visual analyzer [187]. study of errors occurring
when the operator is performing the tasks of discrimination and identification,
and investigating the relative sensitivity of different analyzer systems [88].
Because the visual analyzer of the operator of a contenporsry control system is
heavily loaded, the possibility of converting part of the flow of information

for receipt by other analyzers such as the tactile analyzer is under investi-
gation [235].

Another approach to the investigation of these operator functions involveB esti—
mating the influence of internal factors on the quality of information receiving
by the operator. The individual topological characteristics of the operator's
nervous system. ongoing characteristics of functional state, mtivation, and
level of training are considered the principal ones [229].

Work [79] showed that the signal classified in the stage of information receiving
determines the nature of subsequent operator actions. In the opinion of the
author. the operator works out a control strategy in the form of operations to
make decisions on the situation in the system and necessary techniques to influ-
encc it. According to [96], the operator in this case uses a conceptual image
model of the situation.

The selection of the necessary signal processing algorithm by the operator is
largely determined by the operator's ability to extrapolate future situations.
This capability has been studied by many researchers (for eagle, see [55, 180]).
Extensive findings have been made on processing discrete signals [122]. It is
observed that the results of predicting depend on many factors related to the

probabilistic structure of arrays of signals, motivation, the presence of feed-
back, and the like. All decisions made by the operator in the process of
activity are divided into groups. One of the groups is based on logical

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deductions that follow from an evaluation of the situation, while the other is
confined to selecting decisions worked out earlier. It is not possible to draw
a clear boundary line between these groups of decisions because they involve
close interaction by the primary and secondary signal systems [108]. Based on
the results in work [78], A. A. Krylov [131] supposes that most reactions are
transitional between reactions of the first and second types.

A special scale that includes different categories of decisions has been pro-
posed to evaluate the intellectual level of difficulty of a decision.

The stage of operator realization of control actions is carried out today in the
form of motor or speech reactions. The basic requirements for the corresponding
devices were considered in work [73]. Attempts are being made to use bio-
electric signals that arise in the nerve-muscular tissue for these purposes [6].
Raising the efficiency of realization of this stage is closely linked to con-
sideration of the anthropological characteristics of the person [65] and formu-
lating rational methods of coding signal information on the results of activity
[40].

3. Objective Methods of Evaluating Operator Work Capability

Evaluating the Quality of Operator Performance in the Stage
of Receiving Information

Evaluating the quality of inforsstion receiving involves analysis of a number of
informative indicators which adequately reflect the influence of ”internal

factors" on this process [18]. Because most of the information in operator ac-
tivity comes to the visual analyzer, operational monitoring of its work capa-

bility is an important component part of the general problem of monitoring the
efficiency of operator activity. The muscle balance of the eyes, the size of the
pupil opening, the length of sequential images. the "stability of clear vision."
the frequency of eyeblinks, the critical frequency of image merging, the
thresholds of electrical stimulatability, reaction time, and other qualities
change under the effect of fatigue [28, 99, 127, 183].

Hork [118] reviews methods of evaluating the visual work capability of a person.
No classes of criteria for evaluating this type of activity are identified:

a priori, and empirical. The class of a priori criteria include criteria in
which visual work capability is evaluated indirectly:

l. the optico-physiological criterion (qualitative and quanti-
tative evaluations of visual functions — sharpness of vision,
binocularity, and the like);

2. information criterion (carrying capacity of the visual ana-
lyzer working under different conditions).

The empirical criteria include the criteria according to which visual work capa-

bility is evaluated by the results of performance of a particular type of ac-
tivity: - .

52

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. productivity of labor (yolume of work in a unit of
time. number of mistakes);

2. operator fatiguability.

The a priori criteria, despite their high prognostic value. involve interven-
tion in operator activity, which significantly limits the possibility of using
them for the problems under consideration [207].

With respect to the general problem of evaluating operator work capability to
evaluate the quality of information receiving it is necessary.to analyse a
number of informative indicators that reflect ongoing psychophymiological char-
acteristics of the sensory system. Many investigators have shown that change in
the activation of the sensory systems is reflected in the parameters of the

EEG, the EKG. the £06 (electrooculogram). the run, pulse. and respiration (for

example, see [230]).

Work [229] singles out shifts in the indicators of the EEG. ECG. and son (skin
galvanic reaction) caused by the detection of signals as the activation complex
which characterizes the functional state of the operator during signal receiv-
ing. It notes the individual quality in selective distribution of activation of
those systems which occurs when a signal appears. It is believed that this fac-
tor may serve as an indicator of rational expenditure of psychophysiological
reserves of the organism in the process of performing this type of activity.

V. I. Myasnikov and I. P. Lebedeva [162] recorded 338's. EKG's. and EHG's of
the muscles of the deep flexor of the fingers of the right hand in the process
of information receiving by the operator and identified a direct correlation
between the latent period of the response reaction and the expressed orientation
reflex. '

work [13] established differences in the process‘of_fatigue of the visual ana-
lyzer when working with a mandatory rate of perception and a random rats.

The electrooculogran (E06) and the biopotentials of the eye movement muscles
are an important indicator of the state of the visual analyzer and in large
part meet the requirements made for monitored parameters. Recording the BOG
makes it possible to obtain many important characteristics of the process of
operator receipt and processing of visual information practically without inter-
ference to the operator. The main types of eye movements and_their physical
characteristics are given in [59]. The work of the eye movement apparatus is
closely linked to certain functions of operational memory, which determines the
preservation of traces from earlier fixations [87]. In this sense eye movement
activity in the process of the "information search" is instrvctlve [96]. The
essential feature is active identification and conversion of elements of the
information field relevant to the problem being solved. In certain stages the
information search may be viewed as an independent type of activity that in-
cludes ordering objects, identifying useful information by assigned criteria
and sorting, recalculation end nonselective retrieval of objects, and so on.
These tasks are performed by means of perceptive and mimicking actions which

. 53

FOR 0F1ﬂC1Al.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

manifest themselves in prolonged fixation of the eyes on particular elements of
the information field. Attempts to divide time expenditures into perceptive
actions and intellectual actions proper are extremely complicated because work

is done in this case with a conceptual image model of the situation formed during
the familiarization process [61. 60].

Depending on the nature of tracking movements. eye movement activity is sub-
divided into three levels [197]. The lowest level reflects imprecise tracking
movements, while the middle level is the second type of imprecise tracking move-

the effectiveness of performance of visual activity: the most complex regime,
the optimal regime. and the preferable regime. Indicators of the activity and
certain objective indicators of the information search process (number of steps,
length of fixations, and the EEG and EKG) are used as quantitative characteris-
tics of the regimes.

The frequency of blinking movements is an important characteristic of the reli-
ability of the visual analyzer of an operator. An increase in the frequency of
blinking movements may occur as the result of various irritants in the air. ab-
normal lighting. and the effect of other physical factors [127]. During oper-
ator activity this characteristic of the visual analyzer changes mainly as the
result of fatigue. According to findings given in work [103], the number of
mistaken actions by the operator increases synchronously with increase in the
frequency of eyeblinks. A study made by the authors of this book on the fre-
quency of eyeblinks for an operator performing the operation of feeding data to a
computer under time deficit conditions showed that the number of mistakes grows
as the volume of information processed increases. when the density of the in-
formation flow reaching the visual analyzer increases, the area of the EEG
decreases, the frequency of the Alpha rhythm rises, and it becomes desynchron-
ized. In this case the energy expenditures in the eye movement system decrease,
pulse frequency increases. and slow high-amplitude oscillations occur in the

SGR [230]. K. K. Ioseliani and co-authors [112] recorded Eﬁc's (integral ac-
tivity for five seconds). 206's (vertical and horizontal components), axc'c,
sca's (amplitude and length of reactions), Eﬂc's (flexors of the fingers of

the right hand), electrotensograms, and spoken answers during the process of

the operator's search for and recognition of cartographic objects. The results
of activity were evaluated by these criteria: recognition time, accuracy and de-
gree of confidence (according to the latent period of the spoken response). The
experiments showed that the most sensitive indicators of the complexity of an
information search are the ocuologram and its basic characteristics: time of
eye movement activity, number of steps. and average length of fixationa. In the
EEG during intensive activity the Theta rhythm dominated when difficulties ap-
peared and the Beta rhythm dominated when work was done efficiently.

The conditions of activity have a large influence on the visual work capability
of the operator. The resolution capability of the eyes declines with an in—
crease in the frequency of vibration. The resonance frequencies 4.5 Hz are
particularly sensitive for an operator [58]. P. H. Suvorov [209], who studied
the effect of accelerations on the work capability of an operator. observed an

. .51..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intensification of Beta activity in this period without significant shifts in
the spectra of the other rhythms; this intensification continues when visual
impairments appear. The appearance of a "gray" or "black" shroud in the 'ield
of vision is preceded (by 3-10 seconds) by the disappearance of pulse from the
vessels of the floor of the auricle or a decline in pressure there to 40 mm more
col. Indicators such as the EEG, 3K5. respiration, and the systolic indicator
do not change significantly; some indicators also remain unchanged during the
period of loss of consciousness.

The parameters of the EEG, which are simple in a computational sense. are used
for purposes of diagnosing and monitoring the state of the visual analyzer.
Attempts to relate the average values of EEG amplitude and the value of the
Alpha index to sensomotor characteristics have produced some results [2&5].
More promising findings have been obtained by investigating the interrela.
tionship of the form of oscillation with the speed of information processing in
the visual-motor system [50].

In work [51] a calculation of the mutual correlation of the average level of
asymmetry and average period of the spontaneous EEG and various indicators of
sensomotor activity showed that the average period of oscillation is not re-
lated to these characteristics. According to the findings of this work the
number of mistakes made during a correction test with rings correlates well
with the average level of asynmstry of the EEG, but also depends strongly on the
motivation of the test subjects.

Another approach to evaluating the visual work capability presupposes the ex-
istence of a relationship between oscillations in the pulsation of central
neurons and mental processes taking place in microintervals of time [143].

A theoretical calculation of some patterns of visual perception by frequency
characteristics of the EEG revealed a direct relationship between the frequency
composition of the oscillations of brain structures and typical features of
visual images, in particular the information capacity of the images. After
working out a frequency model of the neuron, the authors [136-139] obtained a
good coincidence of calculated results with experimental results for the time
of the sensomotor reaction in a choice situation, for the time limits of per-
ception of a sequence of visual signals, for the minimum time from the monent of
the visual effect to the moment of maximum operator readiness to receive subse-
quent visual stimuli, and for various other characteristics. In our opinion.
the experiments confirm the hypothesized relationship between the frequency
composition of the EEG and the "spatial frequency" of elements in visual
images. This made it possible to use the results of processing evoked poten-
tials to determine accurately which stimuli were perceived by the operator.

Analogous results were obtained by B. Berna, who used a different approach
[20]. The patterns detected cannot yet be used to monitor the state of the

systems of the operator organism related to receiving information, but there is
no doubt of the promise of this approach for these problems.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Evaluating the Quality of Information Processing

Recording and analyzing the EKG is an essential part of monitoring the state of
the operator. This is related to the high informational value of the cardiac
rhythm for these problems and the methodological simplicity of recording [175.
176]. Work [79] establishes the existence of an almost linear dependence of
pulse rate on the amount of information coming to the operator. A number of
works have shown change in the variability of the heart rhythm in different
stages of mental activity. Thus, work [135] observes that the phases of getting
into the work rhythm and active work are accompanied by a decline in the vari-
ability of the heart rhythm. when work capability decreases slow waves appear in
the EKG and may be used to forecast the work capability of the operator [84].
Findings on oscillatory components of the EKG during prolonged mental activity
are given in work [135]. when the intensity of activity grows there is an abrupt
increase in the frequency of heart contractions and their variability [30, 195].
work [247] contains data on the existence of a correlation between the varia-
bility of the frequency of the heart rhythm and the number of mistakes made by
the operator.

The mathematical expectation and coefficient of variation of pulse frequency

were used as the most informative indicators to evaluate psychophysiological ten-
sion in work [25]. Maximum efficiency of activity was observed for minimum de-
creases in the coefficient of variation.

V. A. Duahkov and co-authors [78] recorded the average number of heart contrac-
tions and the instantaneous values occurring at each contraction in order to
evaluate the effect of mental tension on change in the functional state. They
established that the correlation coefficients between time of performance of
the assigment and change in pulse were statistically significant, but these
indicators are not well protected against individual differences related to
motivation. level of training, characteristics of compensatory mechanisms, and
the like.

The authors of [44] used a set of eight indicators of the cardiovascular system,
including pulse rate. tachooscillographic adrenalin values. and data from phase
analysis of the cardiac cycle and stroke volume to distinguish the state of rest
and emotional tension caused by waiting for stroke loading. They evaluated in-
formational value by the linear discriminative functions method according to
Fisher. Pulse frequency and average adrenalin proved most informative.

According to the results presented in work [236), the average values of the
amplitude of the EKG and RR intervals taken at one-minute intervals do not have
a reliable correlation. Under physical loading the periods of existence and
absence of a correlation during'the transitional process occur in regular order
which reflects individual characteristics and is preserved regardless of the
number of tests.

A generalized indicator characterised by the ratio of the averaged frequency

of the background BBC to average amplitude was proposed to evaluate the current
functional state of the central nervous system.

56'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFFKJAL.USEZONLN

A. V. Chuharov and V. V. Petelina [231] showed that it is most convenient to
use an inverse relationship to simplify the apparatus in this case. This in-
dicator reflects Operator activity in the addition node very well.

A number of works have noted the tendency for errors to appear when operators
who have spent more time on computation multiply pairs of two-digit numbers.
In this case the test subjects who normally had a low amplitude for the Alpha
rhythm or transformation of the £26 in the unfavorable direction (irregular
acute and Theta waves, and lowrfrequency Alpha rhythm transforming into Theta
oscillations of 7 he) allowed concealed malfunctions (errors) more frequently.

The Alpha index, the amplitude of the Alpha rhythm of both hemispheres, asym-
metry of oscillations, and difference between the ascending and descending
wave phases are considered to he psychological indicators that determine the
productivity of operator activity. The indicators of asymmetry, amplitude,
and frequency of the Alpha rhythm correlate significantly among themselves.

Work [215] notes the existence of a relationship between dispersion of the re-
action time to directive signals and the coefficient of opening and closing
the eyes (the ratio of the rate of synchronization of biopotentials of the
brain to the rate of desynchronization). It is also emphasized that there is
an extreme value of this indicator where the efficiency of operator activity
is maximal (for the accepted time criterion). Its numerical values are not
constant, even for one subject, in different experiments and vary within the
limits of a certain range of values. The intensity of a person's activity is
reflected by change in certain parameters of the EEG. Thus, it was observed
earlier [2&8] that as tension related to concentration of attention increases,
desynchronization (depression):of the Alpha rhythm occurs. In addition, a de-
crease in the number of spontaneous depressions of the Alpha rhythm has been
observed when the probability of the appearance of an expected signal in- '
creases. A number of works, however, have also described the opposite phe-
nomenon during mental tension: a rise in the Alpha rhythm. According to the
findings of work [198], moderate tension is accompanied by a rise in the in-
tegrated capacity of the Alpha rhythm, but a further increase in tension leads
to its depression. Investigators attempt to interpret these contradictory
findings by considering depression to be the result of directed thinking,
while ezaltation is viewed as the result of generalized thinhins.

Direct differentiation of a person's states by the parameters of the EEG was
first presented in work [49]. During analysis of the interrelationships of
three BEG readings (from just below the crown, from the hack of the head, and
from the temple), the author found statistically reliahle differences for
different types of mental activity. he used the average level of asymmetry of
the oscillations of spontaneous activity as the indicator. In later studies
using this indicator several types of mental activity were consistently classi-
fied, despite individual differences. In certain cases the correct classifi-
cation of arithmetic counting, squeezing the left wrist, and reproduction was
85, 88, and 70 percent respectively [50]. A similar study with other 236 indi-

cators was done in work [260] to classify five different mental states. In
this case the average amplitude of the Alpha rhythm in the crown-hack of the

57-

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

head region, the average period in the crown region, coherence in the zone be-
tween the back of the head and the crown, and coherence in the zone between the
crown and a biopsipitsl reading sensor selected from a group of 15 indicators
were recorded in advance. The average results of classification of states were
correct in 62-69 percent of the cases. In the work of A. A. Genkin [51] two
types of activity were correctly distinguished by the coefficients of interac-
tion of phase length and correlation of the period and amplitude in 91 percent
of the cases.

Recording the EEG during a correction test with circles revealed a significant
decline in the average level of asymmetry during periods of skips. In addition,

the dispersion of slow oscillations of secondary values of asymmetry in the
back-of-the-head and forehead readings increases at the moment of an error.

A number of authors [167, 227) consider the dispersion and mathematical expec-
tation of integrated activity in the zone of the Alpha rhythm to be the most
informative parameters in the BBC. The coefficients to distinguish these

stages have been established based on the parametersofthe distribution laws of
the Alpha rhythm for operational rest and in a state of heightened attention.
Change in the nature of the distribution law of the background EEG with a change
in the person's functional state is also noted in work [169].

Hark [6S] proposes a method of obtaining a "current index of activity“ of the
EEG based on computation of the ratio of the low-frequency index to the high-

frequency index.

Evaluating Operator Uork Capability by Data from Multi-
channel Recording of Physiologic Indicators

Under actual conditions different types of difficulties may face the operator
in different stages of the functioning of an ergatic system, and for this rea-
son the load on the physiological systems of the operator's organism may vary.

Therefore, monitoring of the current state of the organism involves all systems
related to the performance of operator functions. Evaluation of the current

state by analysis of one physiological system is not a reliable technique for
this purpose in many cases.

According to work [79], the basic reasons for the need to monitor multiple
parameters of state are the following:

a. the significant spread of individual characteristics of
operators;

b. the presence in the organism of possibilities of compen-
sating for disruption of the function of one physiological
system by means of other systems;

c. the multiple elements of a "functional system" responsible
for performance of a particular type of activity, which cre-
ates the problem of determining the weakest element in the
system at the particular moment;

. 58

FOR OFT1C1AI.USE1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

d. the requirements of predictability of monitoring pree
suppose an evaluation of reserve work capability. This
evaluation can be obtained on the basis of an analysis'
of the characteristics of specialized structures by

preferential processing of information and energy sup-
port for the vital activities of the organise.

V. l. Hyasnikov and I. P. Lebedeva were among the first to investigate the pos-
eibilitiea of semieifector analysis of the operator's state during the proc-
essing of visual information [162].

work [71] proposes identifying leading and secondary parameters in the set of

symptoms that characterizes a certain functional state of the operator. They

suggest using weighted ratios of parameters as the basis for automatic diag-
nosis.

The authors of work [168] recorded 336's, EKB's. 363's, and respiration. They
found that a rise in the sectional tension of the operator manifested itself in
an increase in the amplitude of high-frequency rhythms, the amplitude of the
SGR, and increases in the frequency of the EKG and respiration. V. A. Bordov
[271 recorded pulse rate, respiration, skin temperature, local perspiration, and
a umber of biochemical indicators while tension was created by various means.
He observes that the most significant changes in all the indicators monitored
were observed when performing discontinuous counting at a sat pace, dis-
tinguishing tonal signals under time deficit conditions, in the case of infor-
mation redundancy, and with an increasing flow of information. In work [79]
while the test subjects performed assignments at a given rate using accounting
methodology their 326's. monopolar right and left frontal readings, 838's, 803's.
and Eﬂn's were recorded. The results of the experiments showed that during the
period of block work in the EEG a maximum frequency shift is observed in the
direction of the high-frequency rhythms. A change in the objective indicators
of state was noted only for those mistakes of which the operator became aware
during moments of complications in the work. The most informative indicators,
signaling the approach of a breakdown in work, were the EMU and 863. The peak
values of the EH6 for nonworking muscles differed by 300-600 percent from inio
tial values, while for the EKG the difference was 20 percent. Proceeding from
this, the authors [79] concluded that there is not an unambiguous correlation
between the character of breakdowns in the work of the human operator and their
functional natv"~. Indicators of the dynamics of functional state which precede
or accompany the time of an error described a physiological situation fraught
with the danger of all kinds of error. The authors of work [90], analyzing the
very same experimental material, think that the physiological indicators re-
flect not the quality of activity, but rather a subjective characterization,
tension.

work [66], investigating the sensomotor reaction with choice under conditions of
uncertainty and with a warning signal, recorded a number of Physiological indi-
cators sinultaneously. In addition, before and after the experiment they measured

arterial pressure, analyzed the blood for content of sugar and adrenalinvlike
substances, and analyzed the urine for corticosteroid content. The greatest

. 59 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

changes were found in the SGR. EKG. and biochemical indicators in experiments
with uncertainty.

V. S. Genes and V. A. Hakotchenko [53] compared the information capacity of 10
different indicators of the adrenal cortex and peripheral blood with carriage
of mercury (without signs of intoxication) and with mild mercury intoxication.
The most informative indicators tested were those related to the functional
test. The results of comprehensive processing made it possible to establish
that the information value of the complex is no greater than the information
value of the best indicator included in the complex.

Work [213] proposes that the distinct physiological indicators of the dynamics
of operator state he joined in groups. Its author believes that change in the
intensity of operator activity is reflected above all in change in relations
within the groups.

The requirements for parameters subject to monitoring are presented in work
[90]. The authors believe that the optimal operator state is zonal in nature.
so the work capability of all the systems of the operator’s organism cannot be
evaluated by separate indicators.

In the opinion of V. V. Kopayev and co—authors [123]. the overall effect of the
influence of all physiological systems can be represented, when evaluating
functional state, in the form of a certain "physiological index." They suggest
that for identifying the existence of correlations among particular physiological
indicators considering that quantitatively equal components of a physiological
index are not always physiologically equivalent, the particular physiological
reactions should be integrated into a single expression based on the principle of
central nervous regulation of work activity. The authors of [123] believe that

a precise evaluation of functional state presupposes the use of criteria for the
information value of the particular physiological indicators and sets of symptoms.

Studies of operator activity under real conditions, on trainers. and in labora-
tory experiments have shown that a uniform qualitative structure of physiological
shifts is observed in all cases.

According to the findings of [201]. changes in the physiological indicators of
operator-type workers (proofreaders, subway engineers. power systen supervisors,
and air traffic controllers) depends on the volume of information received by the
operator, the level of its complexity, and accountability for decisions made. The
greatest changes in the EKG (increase in the pulse rate to 130 bits per minute)
occur in persons in whom high-frequency rhythms predominate in the EEG.

Hort [2] gives a comparative description of physiological changes that occur in
operators during monotonous work and tension-filled work. The author shows that
the indicators of lability of the visual analyzer and the memory and attention
functions decline toward the end of the working shift for an operator engaged in
monotonous activities. No deviations on the part of autonomous functions were

identified. but during tense activities disruptions occur in the visceral and
autonomous spheres [113].

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Growth in the frequency of heart contractions relative to a state of rest, the
aathenatical expectation. nean quadratic deviations. and envelope of the EKG. and
the area of the 868 were used as indicators. Linear diacritinant functions me
calculated to evaluate Information quality. This made it possible to express

that in this case the most informative parameters are the 863, length of cardiac
intervals during moments of activation of the SGR. ratio of the length of inha1e~

adrenalin. EEG, pulse rate, SCR, 800, and a number of other indicators obtained
by special techniques were used for an objective evaluation of state. Anon;

operational memory, decision-making. types of motor reactions, and solving prob-
lens involving maintaining an operational link. In construction of the general-

relationehip, but rather by change in state. For each type of activity the
quality indicator was represented in the form of a polynomial of a certain fixed
degree from corresponding values of selected psychophysiological indicators. The

indicators related to evaluation of the quality of activity and indicators of
the variability of parameters are most informative. But the information value
of the particular physiological indicators is not the same for each type of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The contradictory character of shifts in parameters of physiological indicators
of operator states. especially when the operator's activity becomes more complex,
is noted by many authors [4. 37, 167]. In work [117], the EKG, respiration, time
of the pilot's spoken reaction, and flight parameters were recorded in an emer-
gency situation artificially created when the plane was approaching the runaway
for a landing. The types of pilot reactions were found in similar situations.
The first type is characterized by an increase in the parameters of all physio-
logical indicators at the moment that the emergency signal is expected and rapid
restoration when the problem is removed; the second is characterized by a de-
cline in all indicators at the moment of expectation and more prolonged restora-
tion. Hork [210] hypothesizes that such manifestations of individual charac-
teristics are caused by the prevalence of sympathetic or parasympathetic regula-
tion. Work [62] considers operator fatigue during tense activity to be the re-
sult of additional mobilization of the organism's internal resources. in con-
nection with this it proposes that the stages of fatigue be classified by certain
indicators of the sensomotor reaction.

A number of devices have been proposed to automatically monitor the values of
physiological indicators. As standard values they use data on mean statistical
norms of these indicators or their background values [71].

The vast biomedical findings received from experimental work are not always sub-
ject to adequate mathematical processing. This is primarily because of the

lack of sufficiently correct methods of describing-a complex objectlikethe human
organism. In addition. study of operator activity under real conditions is made
more complex by the lack of necessary apparatus for taking and recording many
potentially highly informative indicators of work capability. Therefore, the
traditional psychophysiological methods which successfully handle the problems
of vocational selection are poorly suited in practice for evaluating actual oper-
ator work capability.

Psychophyeiologicai Aspects of Operator Reliability

The reliability of performance of functions by an operator is broken down into
three types [67]:

1. psychological reliability -— reliability in relation to ir-
regular failures (errors) because particular actions are
done incorrectly or at the wrong time;

2. physiological reliability - reliability in relation to
temporary. regular failures owing to shortage of time or
the development of fatigue. injury. stress, and the like;

3. demographic reliability - reliability in relation to ul-
timate failure (aging, injury with disability, and death).

Work [163] considers operator reliability together with the operator's individual

characteristics in light of the doctrine of types of higher nerve activity.

From the work characteristics the author singles out those which are based on in-
born properties of the Operator's nervous system: long-term endurance. endurance
in relation to extreme tension, resistance to interference, ability to ' ltch.
and the like.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This viev has been confirmed in numerous later works (for example, see [69, 152]).

According to the findings of Te. A. Hileryan [159], psychological study of the
structure of operator activity makes it possible to identify several regimes of
operator activity in which reliability indicators differ substantially. The
optimal and extreme regimes are considered basic. The gradation of regimes is
done by indicators of operator activity, and so the questions of operator reli-
ability in these regimes are discussed. A number of authors [53, 95, 202] note
the great inpact of the individual operator's volitional qualities on reliability
indicators. 3. V. Bondsrev and co-suthors [29) believe that operator activity in
extreme conditions is characterized by selective redistribution of functional
capabilities. In this case the primary activity is done with maximum efficiency,
while other functions are performed with gradually decreasing results as psycho—
physiological resources are exhausted. Some works (for example [251]) cite date
to the effect that psychological tests do not reflect change in the psychophysi-
ological capabilities of the operator under these conditions.

Operator activity in extreme conditions caused by various factors is analysed in
works [1, 101. 199, 211, 233, 2&2, 250]. Hork [128] studied operator activity
during prolonged waiting for a signal (2-10 minutes). for an objective evalua-
tion of the operator's state they recorded the time of the simple sensomotor
reaction, reaction time and number of mistakes in differentiating two light
stimuli, time required to solve thinking problems, the monopole: BEG from the
back of the head, the SGR, the EKG, the vertical component of the 306, the EH5
[expansion unknown], and eye movements. A relationship between the probability
of error when solving thinking problems and changes in physiological indicators
was experimentally established. Thus, a decrease of 20-30 percent in fre«
quency of the EEG relative to the background 236 before an assignment is given
increases the probability-of error. The best results for the sensomotor reac-
tion were obtained against a background of diffuse alertness: a stable Alpha
rhythm in the £86, a constant ERG frequency for the particular operator, a

large number of eye movements. and maximum observed value of the 363. Errors ins
volving skipping signals occurred against a background of a slight decline in
the level of alertness: appearance of the Theta rhythm, decline in the frequency
of the EKG. lack of the 306 of reactions, and a minimal are. The character of
errors in operator activity is an important source of information to the oper-
etor. Operators correct their activities by the qualitative distribution of
such errors. In this case operator motivation has an importrnt influence on
shaping the tactics of subsequent behavior [16h]. Hany works note that regard-
less of the degree of emotional stability. in all cases operators change their
tactics depending on the magnitude and nature of deviations in results received.
But according to the findings of [232] during the stages of training and getting
into the work rhythm. increasing the completeness of information on the quality
of work done does not always have a positive effect on the formation of the
required habits. This is because there are two categories of information
moving in the feedback channels: (1) information which does not hinder operator
adaptation; (2) information which does hinder operator adaptation. The second
type is typical for cases when the operator's sensomotor habits are inadequately
developed and feedback increases the activation of the corresponding nerve
centers. -

63

FOR OFIHCIAL USEZCNNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b. Description of Operator Activity and Evaluation of Its Results

Numerous authors use logical-probabilistic methods to describe operator activity
[56, 47]. In this case the algorithm of operator activity is considered as a

set of elementary operations to process information and the selected logical
conditions that define the order of their performance in performing control tasks.
Performance of elementary operations is characterized by average time of execu-
tion and probability of errors. The logical conditions may be deterministic and
probabilistic; they can also be considered as distinct operations. The time of
the logical transition and the probability of errorofree performance of the
logical transition are used to evaluate these conditions.

In work [92) c. H. Zarakovakiy introduces the coefficients of logical complexity
and assignment stereotyping to evaluate concrete operator activity. This ap-
proach to describing operator activity is based on the assumption that time expen-
ditures to carry out particular operations in the algorithm of activity have ade-
quately stable statistical features. Work [157] systematizes known data on time
expenditures for particular elementary operations (such as reading information
from various types of display media, processing time, decision-making, pressing
buttons, and the like).

The structural method of describing operator activity [157] involves represent-
ing operator functions as distinct completed operations that are joined together
depending on concrete conditions into blocks of operations from which the algo-
rithm of operator activity is formed. The advantage of this method is that it
permits a preliminary assessment of system reliability because statistical data
on the time and quality indicators of performance of particular operations are
used. But its significant drawback for practical application is that these

data are obtained without reference to the impact of constraints on time of
performance of the corresponding operations, which must be taken into account
when using logical-probabilistic models.

Information theory methods are somewhat more free of this problem. The first
works in this field gave a substantiation of Nick's law [253]. It appeared
later, however, that the linear relationship between the amount of information
in the stimulus and reaction time is preserved within a limited range of experi-
mental conditions, but the amount of information which a person can process
varies widely depending on conditions of activity, age, criteria for evaluation
of the quality of activity, and so on [32, 67, 72, 132, 179].

work [66] showed that in the process of training a person forms an internal model
of the environment and conditions of activity and optimizes behavior in con-
formity with this model. Applicable to the problems of information retrieval,

at first the operator groups elements, then devises an internal sequence for
processing them, and carries out the required action.

0. K. Iikhomirov and co-authors [2171 present findings to the effect that when
solving problems of classifying objects the operator first uses heuristic solu-

tion techniques, and then gradually makes up more informative tests. In this
case operator activity is reduced and may coincide with the optimal algorithm
for the given conditions. Other authors also note the increase in the operator's

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carrying capacity during the process of increasing skills [80. 81, 132]. This
process is linked to change in the significance of the infomtion received.
No approaches are being worked out today to evaluate this indicator. One of
then involves determining the significance of the information received: the
extent to which it promotes achievement of the goal [81]. According to the
second approach [126], the significance of the information will be greater

when it testifies to a lower probability of achieving the goal. A. Ye.
Ol'shannikova [167]. studying the activity of highly qualified operators, es—
tablished that where they worked by the criterion of avoiding all errors in
action, reaction time to stimuli of different intensity hardly d‘pended on level
of training at all. Ber explanation was that the operators eonitor their activ-
ity extensively.

According to the findings of work [70], the use of pilot monitoring instrummts
to give the pilot the most simificant intonation on flight parameters does not
proaote an increase in the pilot's time reserves. The authors believe that the
pilot prefers to operate with an internal model of the significance of the in-
formation being received. \

Work [80] proposes that ongoing reserves of carrying capacity be evaluated by the
amount of additional information which the operator is capable of processing
while performing the primary activity. Work [166] gives sullery findings an
operator carrying capacity while performing different operations, but the condi-
tions to which these operations correspond are not stipulated. Marks [16, 83]

also review probabilistic-information sethods of evaluating operator activity.

V. 'N. Trofimov [218] uses the intensity of the flow of information. an indicator
of the speed of creation of "diversity." as the measure of the efficiency of an
ergatic systea for the tracking regime. In this case the criteria of efficiency
are the intensity of the information flow and matching errors.

The following requirements. presented in work [l79],may be considered general
constraints for information theory techniques: '

a. constancy of conditions in which assignments are given;
b. constancy of operator characteristics;

c. the period of signal tracking must be greater than the re-
fractory period of operator reactions;

6. assignments should be similar in complexity. type, and sig-
nificance.

Work [76] also considers the number of conditions, number of possible solutions,
character of the decision algorithm, level of assimilation of the algorithm,

and existence or nonexistence of feedback on result of activity as limitations
on the operator's carrying capacity when processing information and tasking deci-
sions.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Despite the heuristic character of human thinking activity, many operator
characteristics can be obtained through probabilistic information mdels of
operator activity in the form of mass service systems. in this case the human
operator is considered as the service apparatus and the time required to
service a request is a random quantity [10, 155]. In this case "requests"
mean signals that cone from technical units to the operator. The flow of re—
quests is broken down into classes whose characteristics may be regularity of
arrival. requirements for precision and reliability of execution (service),

. priority (order of processing), and so on.

The distribution of request arrival time is found from the algorithm of the
system's functioning. The law of distribution of time of request handling is
determined experimentally or on a model. The workload on the operator and its
boundaries are characterized by the average queue length. waiting time for ser-
vice. and intensity of service. In this the indicators of the quality of
operator activity are the probability of failure and the extent to which results
obtained froa processing particular signals correspond to the given criteria for
processing them.

One possible approach to the application of mass service theory in problems of
evaluating operator activity is given in work [115]. In this case the ergatic
system is viewed as a mass service system with an input flow consisting of
failures of the object. The normal regime for this system's functioning is
where the failure is handled immediately after it is reported. The mathe-
matical expression obtained for time of servicing requests and probability of
the occurrence of a queue may be used as a preliminary evaluation of the relia-
bility of a control systen.

The works of B. A. Smirnov propose that all types of couples human operator ac-
tivity be represented as sums of particular elementary operations according to
procedure, information processing, and implementation of control actions on ap-
propriate units of the machinery. 'Iiae expenditures to solve any complex problem
without experiment are calculated by means of the hypothesis of the independence
or parallel-sequential eaecution of particular elementary actions with known

time expenditures for these operations. A good correspondence between calculated
and experimental findings has been shown for the sensomotor reaction. Dork [196s]
considers the operator as a single—channel mass service system with waiting.

The index of the reliability of its functioning is the probability of errors,
which includes the following factors:

Pw-E‘PIXPm/h

where P1 is the probability of overfilling operational memory; P2 is the proba-
bility of occurrence of a time shortage (where operational memory is not over-

filled); P3 is the probability of information overload; and Po. 1 is the condi-
tional probability of occurrence of an error during the processing of algorithm 1.
In the opinion of the author of this work, given an exponential law of service
with parameter M and an elementary input flow with parameter 7x , the probability
of the existence of queue P, in the system can be computed by the formula
‘. r l \
p,.=(—‘§-) x(1— 7T,"

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When developing various control systems that presuppose the presence of a human
operator. a precise quantitative consideration of its characteristics in dif-
ferent regimes of functioning of this class of system is necessary. The appar—
atus of graph theory [56], sensitivity theory [105], and others [189] may also
be used to determine the quantitative characteristics of operator vork. From an
engineering point of view. the most convenient way to describe operator func-
tioning is the method of equivalent transfer functions [186]. The transfer
functions of the human operator may be used to analyze the stability of manual
control systems and to determine the constraints ignited by the dynamic range

of operator characteristics on the corresponding characteristics of the control
object. In the process of designing control systems these data make it possible
to evaluate the controllability of the object when it is impossible to use full-
scale modeling. In addition, this offers an opportunity to reproduce factors

which affect the quality of operator activity but are difficult to evaluate under
real conditions.

The essential feature of this technique is that the characteristics of the opera-
tor performing the role of a link in the control system are described by a certain
linear transfer function. The part of operator reactions that does not correspond
to this transfer function is represented in the form of interference applied at
the same point as the operator output. If the interference is commensurate with
the magnitude of the usable signal corresponding to the transfer function. the

function is subject to further adjustment. In the general case, the transfer
function of the operator has this form

x M
w, :s) -= J’s—(ﬂ e-S‘.

-\ (5)
where KP is the coefficient of intensification; ‘l' is the delay time of the reac-
tion (0.13-0.2 seconds); ms) and N(s_- are polynomials whose coefficients are
determined by the concrete conditions of the problems being solved.

In the elementary case when interpreting this class of systems in the form of s
single-contour tracking system, the operator receives an error signal and produces
the control actions. attewting to nullify the matching error. The dependence of
the parameters of the transfer function on the fore, spectrum, and range of control
signals and the dynamics of the control elements is investigated in work [266]. It
is an important result to establish the fact that the type of operator transfer
functions obtained in concrete systems is applicable to a restricted class of sys-
tems. Operator transfer functions, while meeting the requirements of preliminary

investigation of ergatic system. have limited capabilities in those cases where
precise evaluation is required.

The limitations presented in work [240] can be considered the principal shortcomings
of models in this class. In the opinion of the author. the rust significant short-
comings are the following:

67'-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Linear analog models cannot have at the output frequencies
which are not present in the input signal;

2. These models cannot interpret experimental facts which
testify that the operator in many cases acts discretely;

Work [259] has proposed a pulsed model of the operator to eliminate the short-
comings of linear analog models. This model includes a linear continuous part
and a pulsed element in the form of a periodically operating key. The linear
part of the model consists of a corrected linear transfer function and a shaping
circuit which is an extrapolator that constructs the function of the input signal
in time based on information obtained at the moment that the key is closed.

This type of model describes operator actions very well using transfer functions.
But it is poorly suited for describing multichannel systems. As a rule, operator
actions are linked to the results of processing information that arrives by dif-
ferent channels. These may be scalar instruments, digital indicators, sound and
optical signal devices. and the like. A model of this type is based on the as-
sumption that the operator is for the most part a single—channel regulator who
switches among different controlled contours. The model permits evaluation of

ment readings and obtained a good correspondence. The basic ideas realized in
his modelhavebeen confirmed in many works by other authors [125]. situations
are possible in operator activity where the operator acts as several regulators,
controlling several variables [113]. In this case each parameter has its own
contour of regulation. Preferable conditions for the use of types of models to

eralized work characteristics that give functional descriptions of the param-
eters of the input signal and processing algorithms he used.

Discrete models of the human operator give an adequate representation to fre-
quencies of 2 Hz (analog 1 Hz). The spectrum of output quantities of discrete
models of the human operator corresponds better with experimental data [174].

Adaptive models of the human operator are presently in the development stage.
But certain successes have already been achieved in this area [15].

The general drawback of the purely technical approach to describing the func-
tioning of the operator is that it does not adequately consider the unique
character of information processing by a human being. Such features of the func-
tioning of the human element as the effect of motivational aspects on indicators

of activity, the use of personal experience, and the existence of vast compen-
satory capabilities raise the challenge of working out a special mathematical

68

Iron omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apparatus to evaluate the reliability and efficiency of compoaite man-machine
systems.

Comprehensive Methods of Describing Operator Activity

Methods of this type attempt to combine a strict formalized description of pur-
poseful activities by a person halving various applied problems with natural
science data on the human being as a oiological system with an individual prior
history, individual characteristics. and an individual current state, The indi-
cators of operator activity are viewed as a result of a certain "integrated"
state of the nan-machine system [63. 165, 221].

The simulation modeling technique is most highly developed at the present time
[95]. To obtain preliminary evaluations of the reliability of complex human—
machinery systems the authors of this work use the techniques and data of reli-
ability theory, mass service theory and human factors engineering. The simula-
tion modeling technique, which considers the technical specifications of the
devices used, the structure of operator activity. the parameters of the internal
states of operators, and their impact on the quality of activity. makes it
possible to obtain average characterisation of system efficiency with due re-
gard for psychosocial factors (emotional state of operators, motivation, team-
work in crews. and the like) in the stage of system design. The drawback of the
method is the averaged character of the resulting descriptions, which makes it
difficult to consider the impact of individual data on the quality of group ac-
tivity. In addition, the psychological structure of the group of operators
(leaders, followers. theoreticians. and the like) is not adequately taken into
account.

The operations psychology method [#7] is based on a consideration of data on the
contentual aspect of psychophysiological processes realised in actions and pay-
chological operations. It is based on the following propositions:

a. The breakdown of activity is done by dividing the struc-
ture of operator activity into standard actions for which
initial values of time and reliability of performance are
obtained;

b. When synthesizing the structure of activity consideration
is given to the influence of particular types of tension
on the integrated indicators of activity and to the mutual
influence of particular actions;

c. when calculating the reliability of performance of particular
operations and groups of them it is assumed that human
beings can monitor their actions with more than the afferent
system. In this case, self-monitoring of results obtained
is specific in nature.

The method developed in the works of V. V. Pavlov is a promising approach to
describing the characteristics of ergatic svetems. In this case the man-machine

69

FOR 0FHK]AI.US£IDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

complex is viewed as an "ergatic organism" which has the following basic fea-
turea:

a. functional homeostasis, directed to solving the prov
foumdly technological problems of self-preservation;

b. the principle of minimum interaction, which means that
operators in all cases try to organize their work to
obtain the maximum efficiency of the entire system with
minimum tension;

c. the principle of functional compatibility, according to
which the functional capabilities of the operator included
in a certain way in a closed system must permit purposeful
actions by the entire system. The met‘ﬁd of nonlinear in-
variance and autonomism proposed by the author of work [170]
is used as the mathematical apparatus. The calculation of
a space "ergatic organism" done by this method in work [171]
shows that the method already has vast potential in its con-
temporary level of development.

The integrated approach to evaluating the efficiency of ergatic systems is elab-
orated in [172, 181]. The authors of these works consider the integrated states
of man-machine system and conclude that in the particular case interaction of the
human operator and technical devices is so strongly manifested that it is prac-
tically impossible to evaluate then separately. Therefore. they pose the problem
of developing a branch of reliability theory applicable to the evaluation of

such systems.

Numerous investigators try to perform factor analysis of the influence of dif-
ferent environmental parameters on indicators of the functional state of the
operator.

Work [255] describes a model of operator stress. The input parameters of the
model are temperature, acceleration, vibration. motivation, training, and com-
plexity of the task; the output parameters are time constants, dispersion of the
noise of the motor reaction, and dispersion of the noise of observations. The
identification of the model according to experimental data was done on the basis
of the principle of maximum probability relative to the vector of state.

Development of integrated methods of describing operator activity is one of the
problems of the swiftly developing science of ergonomics. The first results ob-
tained in this area synthesize data from the natural sciences with an ade-
quately correct use of mathematical methods to analyze them. This makes it pos-
sible to suppose that analysis of all elements of an ergatic system from a uni-
form standpoint is the most promising approach.

Tension of Operator Activity

The concept of “tension" [napryazhennost'], which is used as one of the evalu-

ators of operator activity, does not have a clearcut unambiguous definition to-
day.

' 70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. Sidzhel and Dzh. Vol‘f [191] draw a parallel hatmeen tension as an indicator
of the psychophysiological state of the operator and the time resources that

the operator has. In their interpretation tension is the emotional state of the
operator before solving subproblem i, which is computed according to the formula

JI= 7—7:)"

 

where H is the indicator of tension; T: is the average time available to per-
form all remaining significant and insignificant tasks on the assumption that
the operator makes no mistakes; P! is the total time used to solve preceding

problems; T is the total time allocated for problem-solving.

It is easy to see that the average time of problempsolving, when used to evaluate
tension, does not reflect the actual psychophysiological state of the operator,
in other words. the actual level of tension reached at the moment that signal 1'
is processed. '

In works [215, 216] the term tension of the ergstic system is used for a state
characterized by identification of the processes circulating in it under the in-
fluence of external factors. The authors distinguish two types of tension: Q-
tension, which is the state of a system to which it switches under the influence
of physical factors (vibration, noise. illumination, and the like). The opera-
tion of these factors disturbs the interaction of particular machine units and
increases the probability of failure. which increases the load on the operator.
The second type is s-tension, which is the state of the system caused by human
reaction to the occurrence of a time shortage. The quantitative measure of

the second type of tension is determined by the formula given above.

Many authors describe the measure of difficulty of conversions done by the oper-
stor with a signal in terms of the time during which the operatOr performs func-
tions with a given level of accuracy. The quantity inverse to the mathematical
expectation of time of trouble-free operator work in an ergstic system is defined
in this case as tension. It is considered expedient to represent this quantity
in two components. deterministic and random, which refer respectively to the
mathematical expectation and dispersion of this indicator. The dependence of
tension on precision of performance of the algorithm of signal processing and
their complexity is nonlinear in nature, and several extremes of tension are ob-
served for different combinations of these parameters.

V. V. Pavlov [171] believes that tension is a measure of difficulty in operator
performance of functional conversions on a signal, quantitatively equal to the
average time of existence of the quasistable state of the system.

The authors of work [23] believe that the degree of operator tension may be de-
fined as the ratio between the number of unfulfilled assignments and the time
remaining to fulfill them. Some investigators try to evaluate the tension of
operator activity by the results of processing psychophysiological indicators

of operator state and the results of operator activity (for example. see [101]).

, 7L

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In work [67] the types of tension are subdivided into specific, nonspecific, and
specific pace tension. The coefficients of the influence of these types of ten-
aion on the qualitity—time indicators of activity presented by the authors were
obtained on the basis of their own findings and data in the literature using a
point scale and converting the points to percentages.

Works [70, 257] find the numerical values of psychophysiological tension from a
criterion function determined by the deviation of selected physiological indi-
cators relative to background value taking into account the weights of the par-
ticular indicators.

The authors of works [116, 208] interpret growth in tension as a copmensatory
intensification of "autonomous support" against a background of declining capaci-
ties for higher nerve activity. With this approach tension is considered a mea-
sure of human energy expenditures in the process of labor activity.

3. A. Smirnov [196a] gives an evaluation of operator tension taking into account
conditions of operator activity. He believes that the primary factors that pro-
mote growth in tension are the load on the operator, overfilling the operator's
operational memory, the existence of a service queue and a time shortage.

It seems to us that the approaches considered above try to invest the concept of
"tension" with both the meaning of an indicator of the economic characteristics
of operator activity (precision, time. reliability, and the like) and at the same
time indicators of the measure of difficulty of the activity for the particular
persons. It seems to us that for convenience in analyzing operator activity a
distinction should be made between tension ["napryazhennost'"] as an indicator of
the complexity of the activity and stress I"napryazheniye"] as an indicator
of the changes in the functioning of the physiological systems of the operator
organism that occur in this case.

State of the Operator

Because the organism represents a complex hierarchical system, there is good rea-
son to use the apparatus of systems theory to describe its functioning. But the
concept in systems theory that interests us does not have a clearcut, unambiguous
definition. Thus, work (5] uses the term ”state of the system" to refer to a set
of existing characteristics which the system has at the moment under considera-
tion. In work [36] state is defined as an ordered set of coordinates of the
system in'a configured space whose dimensionality coincides with the number of
its degrees of freedom. Numerous authors [151, 156] consider the state of a
system to be a certain instruction for conversion of input signals to output
signals that meets definite requirements. In other sciences which use this con-
cept, for example physics, the method of its definition depends on the level of
consideration of a dynamic system. The macroscopic level makes it possible to
analyze integrated characteristics of an object which are formed by the param-
eters of the particular components of which the given object is composed. In
this case the state of the object means the current value of these integrated
characteristics. At the microscopic level state is defined.as a description of
these components which depends, in turn, on the nature of their interaction

- 72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

within the limits of the volume under consideration. In both cases the term
"state" describes the Instantaneous values of the parameters of the object under
consideration [134].

He intuitively understand the concept of the state of a human being to be some
kind of characterization of the processes taking place in the person's organism.
A precise definition of the psychophysiological state of a person involves
numerous difficulties. The main ones result from the lack of techniques for a
clearcut definition of the levels of functioning of the physiological systems
of the organism [226]. The divergence of opinions on this issue relates chiefly
to defining the norm for an organism. Some investigators assert that it is not
possible in principle to give an exact definition of the concept of the "norm"
because it is a purely abstract concept without physiological meaning.

Work [79] proposes that the norm be defined as the range of changes in physio-
logical indicators within which the organism maintains optimal vital activity
for the given conditions. In the opinion of its author. in relation to oper-
ator activity the norm restricts the range of the organism's compensatory capa-
bilities which defines the optimal functional state for the given activity.

Many authors take the term "psychophysiological state" of the operator to refer
to a certain variable that depends on the values of the indicators of function-
ing of the physiological systems of the person's organism. Thus, in work [108]
the current psychophysiological state is interpreted as a multidimensional vec-
tor for which the values of a set of physiological indicators are taken as
coordinates.

In work [52] the state of the operator is considered a function depending on
neurophysiological phenomena in the organism and on external factors that influ-
ence the organism. The state itself is characterized by a certain range of 7
stable values of the multidimensional vector; the axes of its coordinates corre-
spond to the selected indicators. The authors of this work believe that it is
most expedient to use the apparatus of image recognition theory to diagnose the
state of the operator. They mention the following factors which make this

task significantly nore complex:

a. the variability of the responding reaction even with
the same subject:

b. the similarity of the reaction with significantly dif-
ferent states;

c. the variability of the reaction among different persons;

d. the relationship between characteristics of the reaction
and the phase of oscillatory processes in physiological
systems.

V. G. Denisov and co-authors [74] define the current functional state of the oper-
star on the basis of an analysis of the modified function of the cardiac rhythm.

. 73.

For omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which is a Euclidian norm of the initial level and a derivative of the fre-
quency of heart contractions. They Believe that the influence of the organ-
ization of activity on indicators of operator efficiency can be evaluated by
these parameters of the cardiac rhythm.

Such contradictory definitions of the state of the operator are a result, in our
opinion, of the formalistic application of the techniques of medical diagnosis
to the problems of operator activity. But with the contemporary level of our
knowledge on the nature of mental processes we cannot consider a change in the
parameters of the indicators of the functioning of physiological systems of the
operator's organism isolated from the essential features of the activity being
performed by the operator. This is because various deviations in the state of
the operator are primarily the result of adaptive reactions to situations in
the system of which the operator is an element. The flow of information re-
ceived by the operator becomes unobserved from the moment it enters the human
sensory systems. Therefore, when considering its impact on operator charac-
teristics the observer must be guided entirely by signals circulating outside
the operator and by certain objective indicators of the operator's state.

Thus, the "state of the operator" may be viewed as an integrated description of
operator stress and the tension of operator activity.

Optimal working Stress on the Operator

Evaluation of the efficiency of operator activity on the psychophyaiological
plane involves a determination of the optimal stress on the physiological systems
of the human organism while performing operator functions [89]. This problem
was first considered by Yerkes and Dodson (1908). They noted that a person must
maintain a definite function of the physiological systems in order to attain the
best results in any form of activity.

The concept of the "optimum of a physiological process" was proposed by N. Ye.
Vvedenskiy [39], but he referred to the strength of the stimulus. not to the physi-
ological process itself.

works by contemporary authors contain information on particular properties of op-
timal physiological processes obtained on isolated fibers. in the study of the
secretory and motor systems of humans and animals [226], and in study of the full
organism; but available findings are inadequate to solve the practical problems
of evaluating the integrated efficiency of operator activity.

In reality. these Questions today are decided by means of searching for empirical
relationships among working conditions, individual characteristics, and indi-
cators of the person's activity [109]. The activity of the human operator in
processing signals arriving at certain time intervals has been most fully inves-
tigated in this respect. In this case the indicators of activity are usually de-
termined by criteria of the precision and length of the process of processing in-
coming assignments [157]. The last criterion can be given in the form of a
period of tracking assignments within which the operator distributes time expen-
dutures independently for particular operations in the processing algorithms.
Accordingly, the activity of the operator can be considered as fulfillment of as-
signments at the natural pace and at a forced pace [146]. Based on this monoto-
nocity is divided into two types [11. 100].

,qa.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Operator activity in an unchanging situation with passive
observation of the process;

2. Operator activity at a high pace with repetition of the
sane actions.

In the first case the main factor of tension is related to the need to maintain
at all times a higher level of activity without the toning effect of afferent
stimuli; in the second the main factor is the high level of the local load.

work [62] gives data on results of observations of change in work capability for
different types of occupational activities. In jobs with low stressand short
duration working procedures are carried out on the basis of dynamic production
stereotypes. Later, as tension grows, continuation of the work is possible only
by additional mobilization of internal resources.

Opinions differ on the usefulness of assigning a certain type of time criterion.
Some authors prefer work at a forced pace, while others consider it advisable to
organize people's activities so that they themselves set the pace. According to
the findings given in work [166], special experiments that modeled activity in
both regimes identified a significant decline in operator stress when switching
from an assigned pace to one they could regulate themselves. After a certain
time of activity under these conditions 95 percent of the test subjects showed

a desire to step up the pace.

5. T. Sosnovskaya [204] investigated operator activity, including 26 motor opera-
tions (throwing switches on and off. pressing buttons and the like) and infor-

mation retrieval and tracking at different assigned paces. The highest quality
indicators were achieved for work at an average pace.

It has been shown that the maximum possible pace of a person's activity is de-
termined by adding the latent period to the response time. Systematic errors
begin to appear when this quantity exceeds the period of signal tracking.

Applied to the complex reaction of choosing at a forced pace, work [3] has es-
tablished that there is a positive relationship between initial and final.re-
sults. If the quality criterion of activity is given in the form of achieving
a uniform pace, the activity of the slower operators (according to initial tests)

in the final phase is characterized by a sharp increase in the number of mis-
taken actions and s refusal to continue the activity. Hchemar [25‘] noted that

drill does not lessen the genetic influence on the speed potential of a person.

To select the optimal load for work on a conveyor it has been proposed [198] to
compute the load at the ratio of the averaged least time of performance of the
operation based on stopwatch results to the average arithmetic time. In this
case the variants with the lowest values often coincide with the minimum values
obtained in special tests.

"hen processing discrete signals one of the indicators of conpletion of the proc-
ess of training and adaptation to the given type of activity is rhythmic reaction
to incoming signals [121, 23a].

. .75; .

FVMR‘OFIIC1A1.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the findings of [135], when rhythm is disrupted erroneous actions re-
lated to uneven distribution of stress occur. With rhythmic action if errors are
made, they are highly stable in time and frequency.

Hork [2511 established that when signals come to the operator at different periods,
the processing and tracking time for them are inversely related. This relation-
ship is disrupted only through the action of interference that causes competition
between stimuli. The stability of processing time for rhythmic signals may occur
through compensation for the functions of a weak element by means of other sys-
tems [81].

A. V. Levshinova [160] gives experimental results on modeling typical visual and
motor functions of a dispatcher, carried out with a steady increase in the pace
of activity. The physiological indicators (EEG from the back of the head, in—
ternal speech - taking an BNG in the upper lip region, the BOG - horizontal and
vertical components, and EHG's of the general extensor, the general flexor, and
the extensor of the right thumb) had the same high cross-correlation given func-
tional comfort and in other regimes, but in the opinion of the author this corre-
sponded to different levels of activity for the systems tested.

Efficiency of the Human Operator's Activity

The contemporary interpretation of the efficiency of operator activity is pre-
sented most thoroughly in work [181], where the conclusion is drawn that
"'efficiency of operator activity' should be taken to mean the ability to per-
form assigned tasks in a timely and precise manner within the assigned time (re-
liably) and with minimum expenditures of efforts, energy, and materials."

With this approach the concept of the efficiency of human activity in a control
system has two components: efficient performance of assigned tasks and effi-
cient use of reserves, which encompasses both material-energy reserves of the
system and the psychophysiological reserves of operators themselves.

At the present time operator activity is being studied in several closely re-
lated fields concerned chiefly with evaluating one of the components of "inte-
grated efficiency."

Natural science techniques that study human labor activity are being enlisted to
evaluate the efficiency of use of the psychophysiological reserves of the oper-
ator's organism [92]. To evaluate the quality indicators of operator activity

as an element of the control system, veil-developed methods for evaluating ensla-
gous characteristics in technical devices are employed.

Despite the qualitative difference between processes taking place in a machine

that is processing information and in human mental activity. many indicators
of their functioning can be defined from the same standpoint [68]. Because the

operator is viewed as an element of the control system, there is every reason to
use the methods of formalized description of dynamic objects applied in the cor-
responding fields of engineering to evaluate operator functioning.

. 75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The tern "efficiency of a technical system" ordinarily neans a quantitative evalu-
ation of the results of its use under concrete conditions [9]. The different
schools of analysis of the efficiency of technical systems are basically linked

to evaluating their technical or economic indicators [38, 190]. The concept of
"reliability" is used to evaluate the technical state of a system and its work
capability in every possible state. A generalized indicator of the technical effi-
ciency of a system can be obtained from this expression [68]

ﬂ
E-EEIPI.

)-l

where E1 is a particular indicator of efficiency; P1 is the reliability of the sys-
tem in each possible working state; n is the number of possible working states.

With a purely technical approach to the evaluation of operator activity, its effi-
ciency is characterized by operator productivity in different regimes of systel
work. Thus, work [92] defines the efficiency of human operators by the number of
operations which they can perform according to a definite algorithm, in a unit of
time, under given working conditions.

A. I. Gubinskiy and co-authors [66-68] have proposed, by analogy with technical
systems, that a distinction be made between ideal and actual operator efficiency.
Real efficiency is measured by multiplying ideal efficiency times the probability
of trouble-free work.

work [224] reviews the influence of the specific features of functioning of the
human element on actual efficiency. Its author believes that the indicator of
real operator efficiency should include an evaluation of the operator's heuristic
capabilities, the parameters of the environment and technical units, the length
of time in which the operator performs functions, and so on.

Work [66] has investigated the effect of failures on the indicators of the effi-
ciency of receiving and processing information and issuing control actions.

Some features of the functioning of the human element in a system, related to the
influence of motivational aspects on indicators of activity, the use of personal
experience, and the existence of vast compensatory capabilities in human beings,
impose certain limitations on the range of use of technical methods for evalu-
ating and forecasting operator activity.

Indicators of the Quality of Operator Activity

According to work [18], any human activity in a system may he reduced to these
four stages:

1. search for and decoding of information;

2. evaluation of information and identification of informative
features;

-'77--

IN3R OFTNCJAI.USEZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. forming a conceptual model and making a decision;
4. practical realization of the decision that was made,

In the general case. considering the accepted definition of efficiency of operator
activity, we may consider two criteria systems of quality indicators of the per-
formance of their functions by operators. The first system is a set of time,
precision, and reliability characteristics, while the second considers the effi-
ciency with which the available psychophysiological reserves of the organism are
used [155].

A number of works [33, 126, 157] include the following basic components in evalu-
ations of the quality of activity:

1. indicators of precision, specifically:
a. current error;
b. average error;
c. integral error;

2. time indicators:
a. latent period;
b. motor reaction time;
c. time signal is held at given level;
d. full time for processing incoming information;

3. information indicators:
a. amount of information processed;
b. quality of information processing.

A number of authors think that a generalized quality criterion for activity can be

formulated by combining particular criteria with different weight factors that take
account of the distinctive characteristics of the particular type of operator ac-
tivity [228].

To evaluate the efficiency of activity investigators use data on the output charac-
teristics of the system, for example economic indicators, and data on the func-
tioning of the physiological systems of the operator's organism during the per-
formance of.the assignments. The indicators of bioelectric activity of different
physiological systems or the results of solving test problems are used to evalu-
ate the psychophysiologicsl reserves of the organism [111].

The indicators of quality of operator performance of functions are usually evalu-
ated on the basis of a classification of the particular type of activity. The
evaluation uses concrete criteria adopted for the particular type of system. In
special cases where difficulties arise with evaluation of the predominant type

of activity, it is suggested that efficiency be evaluated by the most complex
algorithm of activity encountered in the particular system [18].

Work [139] reviews the criteria for evaluating the quality of operator activity
in controlling a spacecraft. It singles out particular criteria that allow

.73”

FOR OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consideration of different types of mistakes made during flying, and identifies
the main criterion as the area of the intersection of the particular and sup-
lemmentary indicators.

Despite significant differences among the many technical criteria used to evalu-
ate particular cases of operator activity, most of them can he reduced to two
types: precision indicators and speed indicators. In some cases the criterion
of maximum speed is not specially stipulated. but can he an implicit pert of

the precision criterion. This is especially typical for work under conditions of
limited information processing time.

Work [157] analyzed the relationship between these criteria. It established ex-
istence of an analytic dependence between indicators of operator activity re-
ceived according to the criteria of precision and speed. Work 1205] presents
averaged figures on indicators of precision of operator performance of particu-
lar operations and combined indicators of precision and speed.

Generalized quality criteria are usually oriented to evaluation of concrete ac-
tivity. Various indicators may be used here depending on the purpose of the
investigation. For example. the number of error-free read-outs in a unit of
time was used in work [68] to evaluate the efficiency of information receiving.
V. N. Trofimov proposed that functional efficiency be used to evaluate activity
when an operator is working in tracking regimes. By functional efficiency he
means the ability of an ergstic systen to achieve its goal by the nest rational
means [218]. Work [31] proposed a criterion for evaluating the effect of train—
ing on indicators of activity. Works [62, 129] also used their on criteria.

Evaluating the Reliability of the Human Operator

Reliability characterizes the capability of a system or element to perform its
functions in a given time. Changes in the system that cause partial or complete
loss of work capability are defined as failures [14, 105].

Work [67] proposes that the criteria for evaluating the reliability of technical
equipment which say be used with application to the problems of human factors

engineering be put into three groups:

1. criteria of no-failure operation;
2. criteria of restorability;
3. readiness criteria.

These criteria include the following basic indicators:

- probability of no—failure operation;
- average time of no-failure operation;
- frequency of failure;

— average restoration time;

- readiness factor.

Quantitatively. reliability is expressed as the numerical value of the proba-
bility of no-failure operator work under definite conditions for a given period
of time [45]. With respect to human operators failure is considered as

. 79'.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

complete or partial loss of work capability as the result of which the operator
can no longer meet one of the given efficiency criteria 1154].

Technical methods of evaluating the reliability of control systems presuppose a
determination of the quantitative indicators of static reliability (the ability
of the system to maintain adequacy to assigned goals for a given time) and dy-
namic reliability (ability to maintain quality of functioning above an assigned
level) [68].

The apparatus of reliability theory is well-developed applicable to determining
static reliability. Attempts to use it to evaluate operator reliability have
demonstrated that it has limited potential in relation to diagnosing stable
failures because it does not take account of the specifics of the person's work
capability. Therefore, a number of authors have proposed their own techniques
for determining the reliability of ergatic systems taking operator error into
account. In particular, A. Sueyn [160] introduced the method of forecasting
system reliability by evaluating the probability of an error during performance
of elementary operations in the algorithm of operator activity.

R. Kaufman [160] showed that simple empirical formulas may be used for prac-
tical calculations of reliability. In this case the number of operator errors
is defined as a function of the product of the cost of equipment. its weight,

and its volume. Other methods of calculating operator reliability are given in
work [160] .

The most highly developed calculation method of determining operator reliability
today is the structural method [157]. which is based on the following prin-
ciples:

-’ evaluation of system reliability based on analysis of the
structure of operator activity;

- a hierarchical structure of levels of description of the
activity.

Assuming that operator activity can be represented in the form of distinct ele-
mentary operations, the author proposed evaluating the results of activity by no-
fsilure operation and speed of performance of each structural function. In this
case the reliability indicators can be determined on the basis of experimental
findings or data in the literature. The author believes that operator relia-
bility when performing the particular actions that make up the algorithm of ac—
tivity comprises program, parametric, and time reliability. Program reliability
is determined by the probability of error—free or erroneous performance of par—
ticular operations, while parametric reliability is an indicator of the proba-
bility of precise or iaprecise performance of operations and time reliability
means the probability that the operation will be done on time.

The method presented in [62] is based on searching for a certain functional of the
indicator of the goal of control. Operator reliability during control of an
actual system is determined on the basis of modeling the environment

80

FOR (‘ TIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that influences the system. It is proposed that the probability of system
failure owing to operator failure be determined by modifying its impact within
the working range of the system and assigning weighted coefficients.

Types of Failures Permitted by the Operator

A. I. Gubinskiy and G. V. Sukhodol'skiy [67] have proposed a classification of

failures taking account of human psychophysiological characteristics. They con-
sider a failure to be an action performed by the operator either mistakenly or

at the wrong time. Work [68] gives an example of designing a "system to monitor
the human being."

All mistakes made by the human being can be arbitrarily broken into three groups:
1. mistakes in time of performance of action;
2. mistakes in the actions themselves;

3. gross blunders.

Gross blunders involve substituting one action for another. According to the
findings in work [131] this most often occurs as the result of operator fatigue,
poor health, or lack of training. But gross blunders may also be made by

experienced operators when the activity is well-organized. In work [26] oper-
ator failures are classified into predictable and random. The predictable
failures include errors which may be identified by the research process and
eliminated when creating optimal conditions for the activity, while random
failures involve errors caused by the stochastic nature of human behavior. Hote-
over, the latter type of errors cannot. in the author's opinion, be identified or

studied because its nature is unknown.

when performing a series of arithmetic operations the true answer. according to
the findings of work [212], can only be obtained after numerous repetitions of
the process of computation, which is improbable for actual conditions. There-
fore, it is proposed that a modal value of the answer he used as the correct re-
sult of calculations. According to the findings of this author, the distribution
of precision of responses can be represented in the form of two parts: a trun—
cated symmetric.! part that is close to normal, and the remainderson the left and

right resulting from gross blunders (misreading, carrying mistakes, and the like).
The estimated probability of these responses is 0.2. The answers, whose devise
tions are not more than 1.5 times from the modal, make up a symmetrical distribu-
tion. Despite the random character of the results, the probability of receiving

the correct answer grows with an increase in the professional training of the
person doing the calculation.

Works [66-68] distinguish types of failures by how they are eliminated:

- temporary, unstable failure - a failure whose cause is
self-eliminating;

81-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-— operational failure caused by failure to achieve the goal
owing to shortage of time;

- terporary, stable failure. which is eliminated by creating
special conditions;

— terminal failure, which cannot be eliminated or is eliminated
only after replacement of the system.

A special feature of the functioning of an ergatic system is that its reliability
depends on the amount of time allowed for the operator to carry out the algorithm.
In this case. even though the tecnical equipment and operator are in working con-

dition, failures related to inadequate time to perform the series of operations
within the algorithm occur [191].

A decline in operator reliability in the time area may occur not only as the re-
sult of a time shortage, but also because the operator's operational memory is
overloaded. This type of mistake is quite thoroughly analyzed in work [196a].
The author there believes that it is most convenient to analyze the probability
of errors related to information overload as the result of time shortage or over-
loading the operator's operational memory by the methods of sass service theory.

Numerous authors [17, 63] distinguish errors made by an operator into those re—
sulting from inadequate qualifications and those determined by the characteristics
of the individual person.

The information given above is far from complete. Rather it illustrates the multi—
plicity of problems that arise in studying the rules and patterns of human labor
activity, which are thoroughly illuminated by advances made in this field. None-
theless, on the level of meeting the challenges of diagnosing and forecasting
human work capability in control systems we may consider the following fact to be
established: there is a definite relationship between the results of operator
activity and the dynamics of the psychophysiological indicators of the operator's
state. and this relationship is in some way linked to internal (individual char-

acteristics, the person's previOus history) and external (content of the activity)
factors.

The methods used today to identify this relationship were developed for solving
similar problems in relation to technical devices. Adaptation of these tech—
niques to the new problems requires a more flexible consideration of the nature

of work capability in the object under study, in particular. the special features
of purposeful human behavior.

We know that in the process of activity to achieve an assigned result the operator
chooses the necessary sequence of actions with due regard for the technical capa-
bilities of the system, the magnitude of existing disturbances, analysis of
analogous situations in the past, and so on. Investigators believe that in this
case a certain "functional system" oriented to achieving the concrete result is
formed within the operator's organism. The material foundation of the "functional
system" and the carrier of the essential sequence of control operations will be

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE, ONLY

the psychophysiological systems of the organism, Between which linkages are es-
tablished for the period of working toward the result. In other words, the
formation of the "functional system" is accompanied by a change in intersystem
interaction within the organism, which must inevitahly he reflected in the dy-
namics of the psychophyaiological indicators of the operator's state that are
recorded.

In addition, the physiological systems (carriers of the program of action selected
by the operator) perform functions related to the vital activity of the organism.
Therefore. the "functional system" formed on their hasis performs at least two
tasks: support for the functioning of the operator as an element of the control
system, and support for the functioning of the operator's organism as a bio-
logical object. It is difficult to differentiate the features of the impact of
the information flows related to these tasks on the character of interaysten
interaction within the organism because signals on the "internal sphere" of the
organism cannot be observed. This may mean that even in similar situations (from
the standpoint of conditions of activity), the character of the relationship be—
tween the results of activity and the parameters of psychophysiological indi-
cators will be unique, that is.corresponding only to the given interval of obser-
vations. This is probably why existing models of operator activity have limited
spheres of application.

Because these features of describing operator activity apply to the analysis of
purposeful behavior by biosyatems in general, they can he sumaarized in the form

of a principle of adequacy of description of behavior, which we will state as
follows.

When describing purposeful behavior by biosystema. the form of the relationship
between indicators of the process of pursuing the goal. the characteristics of
signals on the process. and change in indicators of the functioning of informa-
tion processing and vitalsystemsia preserved only while there exists a con-
crete "functional system" formed to achieve this goal.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘DFFNJA1.USE(MVLY

Chapter b. State of the Organisn and Operator Activity in a Stress Situation

1. Changes in the Organism During Stress

The contemporary phase of development of human society has an exceptionally in-
tensive rhythm of life. This rhythm is dictated by the conditions of highly in-
tensified production processes and the need to process an enormous amount of
every possible kind of information daily and to participate actively in different
areas of human activities. This sitcntionis an organic consequence of contem-
porary social transformations and scientific-technical progress which (consider-
ing the significance, speed, and extent of the transformatﬂmo)nuy he called a
second scientific-technical revolution.

In the given stage of technical development the principal structural unit of
production is the automated "man-automaton" complex. Therefore. the problem

of human beings in automated control systems has become a pressing one, in par-
ticular preserving the efficiency of activity of the human operator and the oper-
ator's functional state within optimal ranges. The state of operators and their
work capability must be monitored constantly to prevent emergency situations.
Many investigators ll. 2, and others] have demonstrated that operator activity
has a nonmonotonic dependence on the degree of the physical and mental loads that
accompany the particular production process. The efficiency of activity in-
creases with growth in the intensity of the labor process; it is as if the oper-
ator's potential were stimulated. However, this relationship lasts only to a
certain point. Further growth in the intensity of the production process leads
to a decline in the quality of work all the way to a complete refusal to work.
The capability for steadily maintaining optimal working parameters (work capa-
bility, "vigilance," noise resistance, and so on) during assigned time intervals
and with every possible complication of the situation determines the operational
reliability of the worker [3].

There are many different ways to improve the efficiency of operator work and re-
duce the number of energency situations caused by the human factor in automated
systems. Among these ways are vocational selection, training, and turning oper-

ator functions over to automatic machinery. But it scene to us that these
methods will not be adequately founded until we have learned to reliably analyse
the state of maximum exertion of the operator's mental and physical strength,
which precedes an eaergency situation. It is also important to define this state
because prolonged tension may have a bad effect on the person's health.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cardiovascular problems, in particular hypertonia, ulcers, neuroses, and pay-
choses, may result from excessive nervous tension.

The problem of stress, of mental tension , is a multifaceted one. It can be
viewed from a general biological standpoint as a system of adaptive acts that
was developed and refined in the process of evolution. In its physiological
aspect stress involves mechanisms to regulate the activity of various func-
tional systems of the organism. The psychological consideration of stress looks
at its influence on various aspects of nantsl activity: perception, memory.
attention, mental operations, links to personality traits, character, and ex-
perience, adaptation to different types of stress, questions of preventive psy-
chological training, and the role of the psyche in post-stress recovery [4].
The social aspect of stress involves behavior in a collective, Biological com-
patibility in stress situations, and the influence of the collective atmosphere
on change in the functional state of a person. If stress as considered from
a medical point of view the main interest is disruptions of the normal activity
of various functional systems. organs, and the psyche as the result of long—
operating or especially harmful stress stimuli and working out recommendations
for treatment based on subtle knowledge of the mechanism of stress-related

changes in the organism. He will consider the problem of stress in greater de-
tail in the physiological aspect.

Stress may be referred to as a multifaceted problem in another respect as well.
which is to speak of the integrated (overall) activity of the organism, including
biochemical changes and changes in physiological indicators. behavior, and mental
functions. When studying this problem one must not overlook any of these facets.
This is especially important because many schools of physiologists assign the
principal role in the course of a state of stress to Biochemical changes, con-
sidering them the primary correlates of the state. But experience demonstrates
that biochemical changes during stress are well expressed in acute periods but
poorly expressed during prolonged chronic strain. where there is mild strain
practically no changes at all will be detected because the mechanisms of homes-
static regulation nullify the changes almost immediately. In addition, there are
individual differences which produce a great spread in the quality and magnitude
of biochemical changes. In view of these factors, biochemical changes cannot

be considered preeminent among the correlating changes.

Based on material that has now been accumulated, we may say that biochemical
changes are the background against which different mental and physiological

changes occur. But no one physiological parameter, nor biochemical change, can

be a reliable indicator of the state of tension. This is graphically illustrated
by cases described in the literature where arterial pressure is invariant in stress
situations because the increase in the systolic volume of the heart is compensated
for by a decline in pressure in the peripheral vessels. Somatic changes are more

or less subject to arbitrary regulation. The mental categories, unfortunately,
are difficult to subject to direct objective monitoring, while the indirect tech-
niques used in these cases introduce an element of suBJectivity and do not take
account of the possibility of random influences. The forms of behavior that re-
flect internal changes in the organism are also to some degree subject to random
regulation. Thus, we may acknowledge that we do not have an adequately reliable

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

correlate for tension. The only say to make diagnosis of the state of tension
better is to increase the number of indicators of this state.

The term “stress“(in Russian "napryazheniye") is borroued from physics (deriva-
tive of force and resistance) and in translation to biological language signifies
the impairment and defensive reactions of the organism (the action which leads to
the changes is called stress). The biological concept of stress was formulated
some 60 years ago by the Canadian scientist Selye, who said that stress is
”excessive strain." "a state that occurs under the influence of some particular
stressor and is found in the form of a specific syndrome which includes all the
changes nonspecifically reproduced in the biological system" [5]. He called the
full set of reactions in a state of stress the adaptation syndrome. because it

is the basis of adaptive behavior.

Therefore. stress is a set of adaptive and defensive reactions by the organism
to all influences which have a tendency to disturb the dynamic equilibrium of
various processes in the organism. As we will see later, the set of adaptive
and defensive reactions is a neuroendocrine cycle of great complexity which

causes changes in literally all manifestations of vital activity of the or-
ganism.

A number of works use the term "stress" not to mean general stress, but rather its
highest point, when organic changes take place in the organism. Pre-stress states
are viewed as various types of emotional states [6]. But this division does not
cover a whole number of states which are unquestionably states of heightened
tension and have virtually no emotional coloring (for exanple, solving "indif-
ferent" problems that require great self-control and intensity of thought).

After analyzing information available in the specialized literature, we made an

attempt to classify the different states of extreme stress and the methodological
procedures necessary to create it (see Table 1, next page).

Systematic study of the state of stress began in the 19th Century. The famous
French physiologist Bernard (1813-1878) stated the proposition that the funda-
mental feature of all living beings is their ability to maintain constant in-

ternal environment despite changes in the external environment. Any change in

the environment that matters to the organism elicits defensive reactions by the
organism to restore the disturbed balance. This occurs through special regu-

latory mechanisms that monitor the constancy of different parameters of the
internal environmv nt [7].

The American physiologist H. B. Cannon (1871-1965) introduced a special term.
homeostasis, for the ability of the organism to maintain a constant internal
environment [8]. Any influences leading to disturbance of homeostasis lead, the
scientists believe, to vegetative and hormonal changes that can be viewed as a
manifestation of the organism's mobilization of energy to avert the danger'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mianwonow. aunrno-o. nun
yuan-anon on annnnnnuﬂ

on o<u~cunaon. «swoon on
vcanoriaan. nun nun pure

myocwuw u ask! on vunncno.
«so vuauoaooamon «soaw.on
unwoum. caravan can <nnuu
och ouncun»on¢ Ha nro
Iﬁba

wuvonouuno. nanoa-wnu.
nun no on
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mechanisms and irreversible if the magnitudes of the deviations are signifi-
cantly greater than the range within which the homeostatic mechanisms can
function normally. In the latter case the organism dies.

Russian and Soviet scientists made major contributions to formulation of the
theory of stress long before Selye. I. P. Pavlov wrote many times that harmful
influences on the organism elicit local reactions and reflex-nerve-humeral changes
which are a "physiological measure" of the organism's defense. L. A. Orbeli [9]
and his students made detailed investigations of the adaptationsl role of the
coordinated activity of the cerebral cortex, sympathetic nervous system,

pituitary body, and adrenal glands.

At the present time the concept of stress is an established concept and it is
most commonly defined as the attempt to restore the disrupted homeostasis of
mental, physiological, and biochemical processes in the organism. Stresses are
caused by any conditions that disrupt homeostasis [10, 11].

what are the regulatory mechanisms that guard the well-being of the organism?
All attempts to explain the adaptive reactions of the living organism can be
schematically classified as follows [12]:

l. the hume. ‘ theory of medicine, which goes back thou-
sands 0L 1rs;

2. the theory s- neurism, which has developed in the last
150 years;

3. the "cellular" theory of Virkhov;

6. the neohumeral theory, whose founder can be considered

At the present time the neurism theory and Selye's. neohumeral theory are gen-
erally accepted, and we will deal with them in greater detail. Selye's theory
considers the endocrine-biochemical aspect of stress in detail [13-16].

Any adequately strong and unusual influence of exogenic or endogcnic origin
(sound or light, infectious disease, and so on) on the organism. except for an
effect specific to the given agent (for example, vibration of the tywanic
membrane to sound) evokes a whole complex of nonspecific reactions. These re-
actions aim at better adapta:ion of the organism tothe unexpectedly changed live
ing conditions and, as already mentioned, were called the adaptive syndrome by
Selier. while the state of mobilization of defensive forces itself wee called
stress.

Selier distinguishes between the generalized adaptational syndrome (GAS) and the
local adaptational syndrome (LAS) or adaptive reactions in the limited part of

the body which is directly affected by the stimulation. The generalized syndrome
is a response reaction by the entire organism which goes thrOugh three successive
stages when the action of the streasor is sufficiently long (see Figure 7 below).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 
 

Level of Resis- Stage-
tance in Initial .
State

Figure 7. Stages of the Generalized Adaptation syndrome

 

During the first stage — alarm -— the initial level of organism stability and
resistance at first declines slightly (shock), and then returns to the norm
(countershock). Selye called this stage the "call to arms of the organism's
defensive forces." If a very strong or harmful agent acts on the organism, it
may perish during the alarm period. But if the effect is moderate, the alarm
stage is followed by adaptation to the influence, the stage of resistance.

The level of organism stability in this stage exceeds the initial level [16. 15].
Reactions in the alarm and resistance stages are opposite. When the harmful
agent is active for an extended period. the resistance stage may be followed by
the third stage, exhaustion and death of the organism. The symptoms of the
third stage recall the symptoms of the first stage, but now they are irreversible.

But what happens in the organism during stress and allows its resistance to vary
within quite broad limits? During the first stage (shock or alarm) a number of
phenomena are observed in the organ‘sm: hemoconcentration, hypochloremia, hyper-
calcemia, generalized tissue damage with predominantly dissimilation phenomena
(catabolism), hypothermia, lowering of blood pressure, vascular and muscular
hypotonia, leukopenia. eosinopenia, and heightened permeability of the serous
membranes of the capillaries. In the second stage there are changes in the oppo-
site direction, specifically thinning of the blood. hyperchloremia, anabolism of
tissues with return to normal weight, alkalosis. and so on. The reactions of

the exhaustion phase resemble the alarm phase.

During the development_of stress a nurber of morphological changes are also ob-
served. The most expressed changes are involution of the thymico-lymphatic
apparatus and enlargement of the adrenal cortex with signs of intensification

of secretion. It has now been established [17. 18, 19] that changes are ob-
served during stress in other organs and tissues as well: pituitary body,
epiphysis. thyroid gland, parathyroid gland, pancreas. sex organs, liver. myo-
cardium, kidneys, membrane of the stomach and intestines, and cells of the brain.
In each of these organs histologists find two groups of phenomena: damage and
defense [18]. In the first stage two groups of reactions are observed, while in
the second defensive phenomena predominate and in the third damage phenomena are
dominant. In a number of his works Selye tries to represent the intimate
mechanism of changes that lie at the foundation of the generalized adaptation
syndrome on the basis of vast experimental material (see Figure 8 below).

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 8. Mechanism of Changes _ .._- .__
Taking Place in the Organism
During Stress

Key: (1) Somatotrophic Hormone;

(2) Pituitary Body, adreno~
corticotrophic hormone;

(3) Adrenal Gland;

(4) Anti-Inflammatory Corti-
coid;

(5) Inflammatory Corticoid;

(6) Target;

(7) Field;

(8) Stressor.

.

In some way (which Selye does not explain) the stressor causes stimulation

of the hypothalamus, which produces a certain adrenocorticotrophic liberating
factor. This stimulates the pituitary body and causes it (the front part) to
secrete adrenalcorticotrophic hormones, which stimulate the secretion of hormones
of the adrenal cortex. The adrenal cortex hormones are divided into two groups:
the anti-inflammatoryhonmxesorglucocorticoids (of the cortisone type) and the
inflanmmtory hormones or mineral corticoids (such as desoxycorticosterone and
aldosterone).

 

The anti-inflammatory hormones affect carbohydrate metabolism (which is the source
of their second name. glucocorticoids), enhancing glycogenesis through proteins.
which increases the sugar in the blood and intensifies the precipitation of gly-
cogen in the liver. They intensify the breakdown of proteins, which promotes

coids. They promote an increase in inflammatory potential of the organism
(resistance to infections and rapid healing of wounds), increase protein syn-
thesis. and have little effect on carbohydrate metabolism but a sigriiicant effect
on water~salt metabolism (therefore they are also caused mineral corticoids) by
retaining sodium in the organism and removing potassium. During stress more anti-
inflammatory hormones than inflaummtory hormones are usually secreted. It is in
precisely this elelent of the organism's response reactions to the effect of a
atressor that the meaning of the term "stress" as an integrated response by the
organise, including elements of daaage and defense. is very graphically

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It should be noted that the front portion of the pituitary body affected by
stimuli from the hypothalamus secretes not only adrenocorticotrophic hormones,
but also somatotrophic hormones. which affect overall growth of the organism
and cause enlargement of the thymus, lymph nodes. spleen, and liver and hyper-
trophy of the adrenal cortex, while increasing sensitivity to corticoids. This
hormone is similar to the mineral corticoid in its effect on the internal
sphere. The hormones of the front part of the pituitary body and adrenal cortex
are customarily called the adaptive hormones.

In addition to the general reaction of the organism which follows the "law" of
the GAS. a local inflammatory reaction, the local adaptation syndrome (LAS),
appears at the point of the damage. This reaction has the same stages as the
cgs: shock during which a certain necrosis of cells and connective tissue

fibers and an acute inflammatory process are observed; resistance during which
different types of cells form (defensive granulation barrier). If the influence
is especially harmful and long-lasting, the third stage ensues: necrotic dis-
integration of tissues. The LAS and GAS not only share common features in their
courses, but are closely interrelated [15]. Any agent which causes a local in-
flammatory process also produces a general effect because pulses frOm the damaged
area reach the hypothalamus and set the mechanism of the GAS in action. Then
the corticoids. having been secreted in a certain stage of the organism's general
reaction. affect all tissues of the organism and thus influence the local center
of damage.

In a number of works Selye acknowledges that not everything occurring in the
organism fits perfectly within the proposed scheme. For example. it cannot be
said that the adrenal cortex-pituitary body system is the only system responsible
for the full range of GAS reactions. It is the main one. yes. but not the only
one. The reactions observed with the GAS can occur partially when stressors

act on animals whose pituitary bodies and adrenal glands have been removed. It
is thought that the reactions observed in this case are the result of the ac-

tion of hormones from the thyroid gland [1b, 20. 21]. The liver probably also
plays a significant part in adaptation processes. and it is where steroid hor-
mones are broken down [21]. Works have been written on the role of the pancreas

in the CA8 [20].

The conception presented by is interesting for its abundance of experi-
mental material. lt has received wide distribution in domestic literature

[4, 10, ll, 13 12, 21-26. and others]. But Soviet specialists take a critical
approach to 5* Y“ S conception. correctly noting that it has a number of
shortcomings. Above all this refers to the one-sidedness of the conception:
attention is directed exclusively to humeral-endocrine reactions. The role of
the central nervous system and cerebral cortex in regulating the activity of
the internal secretion glands is overlooked. The author makes only incidental
mention in some works of the fact that he is not denying the significance of
the nervous system in shaping theGAS. it is possible that an unclear under-
standing of the leading position of the central nervous system and the
organism's systemic reactions to maintain its optimal state was the basis for
Selyc's idealistic philosophical views. Attempting to construct a general
theory of medicine. he declares himself an advocate of the teleological prin-
ciple in biology and medicine {11, 27]. Thus. Selye's conception represents

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

only a partial manifestation of total vital activity, one link (the humeral) of
the long and complex chain of processes which unfold in the organism in response
to an extraordinary stimulus.

Leading scientists of the past and our contemporaries today, especially Soviet
physiologists, have developed the materialistic direction defined by I. P. Pavlov
as "nervism." which recognizes the decisive importance of the higher sections of
the central nervous system for all vital manifestations of the organism. and
particularly for adaptive behavior. The foundation of "nervism" as a scientific
school was laid by S. P. Botkin and I. M. Sechenov. who proved that the nervous
system influenced the very diverse processes in the organism.

The works of V. H. Bekhterev convincingly demonstrated the dependence of the ac-
tivity of internal organs and internal secretion glands on influences from the
cerebral cortex. The conditioned reflex method of I. P. Pavlov and his school
made it possible to use the internal organs and different systems of the organism
as indicators of the state of the higher parts of the brain. The work of the

A. D. Speranskiy school [28] demonstrated the importance of the central nervous
system for restoring the normal state of the organism disrupted by disease-
creating factors.

The works of K. H. Bykov and his associates were a major contribution to the
theory of nervism. They established the direct role of the cerebral cortex in the
activity of internal organs (the cortico-visceral theory of the pathogenesis of
certain illnesses). The works of L. A. Orbeli [9i and his students, devoted to
studying the morphological and functional links of the cerebral cortex with the
autonomo.s nervous system, which integrates the activity of the internal organs
and internal secretion glands,arevery interesting in this respect. They showed
that the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems are represented in the cortex of
the large hemispheres. They establish the leading role of the cortex and the
mutual influence of the higher segments of the central and autonomous nervous
system, gave a detailed description of the adaptational role of the coordinated
activity of the sympathetic nervous system, pituitary body, and adrenal glands,
and investigate also the trophic function of the sympathetic nervous system
(adaptation processes in the tissues of the organism).

Many works have now appeared devoted to regulation of the activity of the internal
secretion glands by the central nervous system and regulation of the adaptation
syndrome by the cortex of large hemispheres of the brain [6, 25, 27, 29-35].

we should note the entire school in physiology which considers an increase in or-
ganism resistance resulting from the action of any stressor (tne second stage of
resistance according to Selier) to be the result of an inhibitory influence from
the central nervous system on the response reactions of the organism. which is
subjected to unfavorable influences: the Pavlov theory of defensive inhibition,
and dominant inhibition [23]. Many examples can be given from everyday life where
the quality and intensity of reactions and behavior in a stress situation depend
on the evaluation of this situation and the social motives of the individual,
which again indicates the coordinating role of the central nervous system in the
state of stress. More evidence of this is found in studies where hormonal changes
characteristic of a state of stress were evoked by conditioned reflex [36, 37].

92

FFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to represent the organism of the complex set of organism reactions in a
state of stress, let us look first at its morphological substrate. Analyzing the
factual material presented in works [6, 38-60, and others], we will draw a flow-
chart of formations and nerve linkages that participate in the realization of this
state (see Figure 9 below). The pulse from the receptor which is affected by ah

manual/mm“- 1-95: (S -ec i f i c P = ' '

 
 
  

   

 

l._._.—___—__—._

Figure 9. Flowchart of Formations and Nerve connections
Participating in Realization of the Adaptation Syndrome

Key: (1) Receptors;
(2) Reticular Formation of the Hedulla Oblangata and Spinal Cord;
(3) Limbic System of the Middle Brain;
(4) Hypothalamus;
(5) Nonspecific Nuclei of the Thalamus;
(6) Linbic System of the Forebrain;
(7) Neocortex.
[The dotted space represents the reticular formation of the stem of
the brain.)

adequate stimulus travels along two paths: specific (to the projected zone of the
cortex of the large hemisphere) and nonspecific (to the reticular formation of the
brain). Branching out from the specific path into the reticular formation may be
accomplished at different levels of the central nervous system. For the stress
state mechanism to be triggered, the pulse must reach the hypothalamus-limbic
system [7]. or as it is usually put, the limbic system. This system includes
formations of different levels of the central nervous system: formations of the
middle brain (central brain matter, operculum) and nonspecific nuclei of the thal-
amus (anterior nuclei. nuclei of the middle line, and reticular nucleus). In the
forebrain the limbic system includes the areas of the archicortex and old cortex
(nippocampaland singular convolutions, the hippocampus. and the olfactory bulb) as
well as numerous subcortical formations (the nuclei of theamygdaloidcomplex and
septum). The center of the limbic system, the hypothalamus, is a kind of nodal
point that connects the above-mentioned formations. The existence of strong
morphological ties between the hypothalamus, the nonspecific nuclei of the
thalamus, the singular convolutions, and the hippocampus enables us to hypothesize
the existence of a cyclical system in which stimulation can circulate between the
hypothalamus and the limbic system of the forebrain (see Figure 10 below). It is
possible that this system is the neurophysiological foundation of emotional mani-
festations.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 10. Linkages Between the Hypo-
thalamus and the Limbic System.

Key: (1) Neocortex;
(2) Hippocampus;
(3) Singular Convolution;
(lo) ﬂypo ths lamus ;
(S) Front ‘luclel of Thalamus;
(6) From Peripheral Sources.

 

 

From the limbic system pulses go to the neocortex. In this connection we should
note the role of the limbic system of the forebrain as a transmitting link be-
tween the neocortex and the hypothalamus. because practically no efferent fibers
go directly from the new cortex to the hypothalamus. The return linkage of the
hypothalamus and limb’ic area of the middle brain with the reticular formation of
the stem of the brain plays an important role. afferent pulses from these for-
mations give rise to descending (toward the spinal cord) and ascending (toward
the neocortex) stream of pulses.

The functional interrelationships among these structures of the complex are ac-
commplished as follows. The imediate generator of all functional and biochemical
changes is the hypothalamus, which represents the highest center of the autonomous
nervous system and is closely linked to the activity of the pituitary body. The
lower-lying structures (reticular formation) are the energy base, so to speak, of
this formation. The mutual influences of the hypothalamus with the above-lying
formations — the limbic structures of the forebrsin and the cortex of the large
hemispheres, are more complex and differentiated. If the hypothalamus is stimu-
lated directly or by reflex (stimulation of receptors), diffuse stimulation of

the cortex is recorded parallel with stimulation of the hypothalamus. If the
hypothalamus is incapable of perceiving these stimulations, no activation is ob-
served in the cortex, which gives reason to hypothesize direct participation by
the hypothalamus in diffuse stimulation of the cortex. The cortex of the large
hemispheres has a dual influence on the hypothalamus [6]. The frontal areas re-
tard its activity (early stages of narcosis, removal of the forebrain, and cutting
its efferent paths are associated with an increase in vegetative activity), while
the sensory projection areas, by contrast, stimulate it (placing filter paper
soaked in strychnine against the projection zone causes "strychnine" discharges
not only in the cortex, but also in the hypothalamus).

The mutual influences between the hypothalamus and different lintic structures of
the forebrain are also ambiguous. complex, and not fully clarified. Some authors

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[23] single out an inhibitory system (hippocampus, singular area, and septum

of the brain) and a stimulation system (ansdaloid nuclei, and posterior orbital
surface) which have corresponding effects on the activity of the hypothalamus.
He should emphasize specially the importance of the functional link Between the

hypothalamus and the hippocampus for diurnal periodicity and secretion of adreno-
corticotrophic hormone.

The existence of the above-described morphological and functional links among
different structures of the centrnl nervous system and clinical and experimental
observations give reason to think that the mechanism of all the changes taking
place during the state of stress is determined by the coordinate activity of the
hypothalamus-limbic system. reticular formation, and neocortex. All changes dur-

ing stress may be divided into three types of reactions: changes of the internal
sphere (metabolism. and the functions of organs and systems), external reactions

which are the result of internal changes (expression of the corresponding emo-
tions), and external reactions aimed at active intervention in the surrounding
situation after comprehension of what is happening (flight. attack, and defense).
The first two types of reactions are accomplished by the coordinated activity of
the reticular formation of the stem of the brain, the limbic area of the middle
brain, the hypothalamus, and the limbic system of the forebrain. This complex is
the "general staff" of the visceral activity of the organism.

Perception, comparison with past experience, comprehension, choice of tactics. and
deliberate regulation take place at the highest level, in the neocortex. It has
been proven experimentally that stimulation of the sympathetic part of the autono-
nous nervous system or injecting adrenalin into the blood. which is the basis of
humeral changes in full-fledged stress. leads only to diffuse stimulation. The
same biochemical changes. but aroused by a certain situation, are accompanied by
an integrated act of purposeful behavior. The coloring of the behavior in this
case may differ and depends on the organism's interpretation of the situation.

If the threatened factor can be eliminated, the response reaction is rage; if not,
fear arises [36].

Thus. stress is a systemic reaction of the organism which may be elicited without
the participation of the cortex of the large hemispheres of the brain also. but in
this case fundamental changes in the state of the organism will be observed on

the order of general stimulation without involving the individual's feelings.

The interpretation of this general stimulation of the organism and an active and
conscious attitude toward the situation are possible only with active partici-
pation by the cerebral cortex [4]. Defense reactions. if we exclude influence
from the cortex, are unconditioned reflexes. But if the connection with the
cortex has not been broken, the adaptation-defensive complex follows the type of
the conditioned reflex.

This kind of "division of duties" follows from the general evolutionary purpose
of the cortex of the large hemispheres as an organ which critically evaluates a
changed situation and works out further tactics of behavior based on life exper-
ience. But what happens when the integrative system of the stress state
described above is activated? The main result of its activity is activation of

the autonomous nervous system and pituitary body. whose highest regulating center
is the hypothalamus.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Activation of the higher autonomous centers located in the hypothalamus (the
centers of the sympathetic part of the autonomOus nervous system are in the pos-
terior hypothalamus and the centers of the parasympathetic parts are in the
anterior) leads to a change in the activity of the internal organs. The sympa-
thetic effect is characterized by an increase in the frequency of heart contrac-
tions, a rise in arterial pressure, dilation of the pupils. a narrowing of the
blood vessels (paleneas) , a weakening of peristalsis and the activity of the
glands of the gastrointestinal tractI an increase in perspiration, a reduction in
the spleen (as a result of which the number of erythrocytes in the blood in-
creases). a lessening of salivation (dryness in the mouth), and so on. Special
note should be taken of the hyperfunction of the brain matter of the adrenal
glands resulting from the arrival of the stimulation along the sympathetic nerve.
The adrenalin secreted by the brain matter causes an imediate increase in sugar
content in the blood by breaking down the glycogen of the liver. This measure
to increase the resources of muscular energy was essential on the evolutionary
level for adequate organism reaction in changed conditions (flight and attack).

In most cases of the stress state the sympathetic effect is dominant, in some
situations the influence of the parasympathetic nervous system can be detected
(urination, defecation. dilation of blood vessels. reddening of the skin and
drop in arterial pressure, lowering of body temperature, tears. and so on).

Just like the sympathetic system, the parasympathetic system has a powerful hor-
monal action on the biochemical balance of the internal environment of the
organism in addition to reactions of nerve origin. The arrival of parsympathetic
pulses in the pancreas stimulates the pancreas to secrete additional amounts of
insulin. which reduce blood sugar content.

It is obvious that any stress situation is the algebraic sum of the sympathetic
and parasympathetic effects. As a rule one of these effects is stronger; and it
is what is manifested, despite the existence of opposite reactions which, owing
to their small scope. are not recorded. Since the time of Shirrington, the
method used to isolate one of the effects in pure form has been to sever or destroy
the competing section. The participation of one of the systems can also be es-
tablished by determining the amount of adrenalin (hormone from the cortical part
of the adrenal glands) and insulin (hormone from the pancreas). Figure ll below
shows P. V. Simonov's diagram [61] of the participation of these parts of the
autonomous nervous system in different situations.

Gel'gorn [6] uses this breakdown: sympathetic reactions prevail for unpleasant
passive emotions (fear), while pleasant emotions are accompanied by parasympa-
thetic effects; but, unpleasant active emotions (indignation, rage, and fury)
are associated with both sympathetic and parasympathetic effects (for example,
a rise in blood pressure. frequency of heart contractions. and blood sugar and
intensification of the activity of the gastrointestinal tract). .

We do not think, however. that the proposed scheme can be literally applied to
all situations in life. Existing individual differences may cause significant
changes.

96

)FFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

H3). IE1": (5) gl
| | - I
(6

l l(4) I

Figure ll. The Participation of the Sympathetic and Para-
sympathetic [arts of the Autonomous Nervous System in the
"Design" of Various States.

Key: (1) Sympathetic Part;
(2) Parasympathetic Part;
(3) Comfort, Tranquility, Relaxation, Imperturbability;
(ﬂ) Satisfaction; Confidence, Triumph, Superiority. Joy;
(5) Revulsion, Suffering, Worry, Stress, Rage;
(6) Shock, Grief, Depression, Terror, Torpor, Frenzy,_Prostration.

 

In addition to the vegetative (autonomous) changes we have considered which are
caused by increased activity of the sympathetic and parasympathetic parts of the
nervous system and find expression in the action of nerve stimuli and hormonal
changes (adrenalin and insulin), there is change in the activity of the pituitary
body. It is so closely linked to the activity of the hypothalamus that they are
often considered a single complex. Stimulation travels from the hypothalamus to
the pituitary body by a neurohumeral route. The neurosecretion produced by the
nerve cells of the hypothalamus reaches the pituitary body, first of all. through
the blood vessels that run from the hypothalamus to the pituitary body through its
peduncle, and in the second place, along the long axons of the nerve cells of the
hypothalamus, which also reach the pituitary body through its peduncle. It should
be noted that the axons go mainly to the posterior part of the pituitary body,
being nerve tissue, while the chemically active matter in the blood vessels is
transferred to the anterior part of the pituitary body, represented by glandular
cells. Thus, any region of the hypothalamus where neural secretion is produced
can exercise an influence on the anterior part of the pituitary body, but the pos-
terior part of the pituitary body reacts chiefly to change in the activity of for-
mations of the anterior hypothalamus, which has long axons running to it from its
cells. But this is not the only difference between the anterior and posterior
parts of the pituitary body. The anterior part of the pituitary body has a more
important role in constructing the state of stress. It produces the "trophic"
hormones, in particular adrenocorticotrophic hormone, thyrotrophic hormone, and
hormones that stimulate activity in the sex glands.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The posterior part of the pituitary body, which is not a gland, produces anti-
diuretic hormone and a few other hormones (oxycitih and others) which do not
disrupt biochemical balance as significantly as the hormones of the anterior

part do. Antidiuretic hormone maintains the normal osmotic pressure in the
liquid environments of the organism by regulating the ahaorption of water in the
tubules of the kidneys and also stimulates the secretion of adrenocorticotrophic
hormone by the anterior part of the pituitary body. The secretion of "trophic"
hormones by the anterior pituitary body causes a whole cycle of biochemical
changes which were described in detail during our consideration of Selier'a ideas.

He must also consider somatic effects to get a fuller idea of the components of
the state of stress. It is cormon knowledge that the state of stress, and espe-
cially that area of these states that carries an emotional coloring, is ac-
companied by activity of the skeletal musculature (posture and mimic reactions).
These reactions are caused by descending influences of the hypothalamus through
extrapyramidal routes (contractions of the somatic muscles may be evoked by
stimulation of the hypothalamus after preliminary removal of the hemispheres of
the brain) or influences from the motor part of the cortex which arise owing to
hypothalamus-cortical activation. It should be noted that an increase in the
tone of the skeletal musculature reflects an increase in the activity of the
sympathetic part of the hypothalamus. Thus, stimulation of the posterior hypo-
thalamus ia accompanied by turbulent emotional manifestations and an increase in
the tone of the skeletal musculature, whereas stimulation of the posterior hypo-
thalamus (higher centers of the parasympathetic part of the nervous system) is
associated with relaxation, decrease in activity. and sleep. The entire complex
of reactions is depicted schematically in Figure 12 below.

As specialists working in the field of neurobionics, we are especially interested
in attempts to formulate a theory of stress in the organism as a closed system.
In such a system (by analogy with general physics) stress is regulated by special
mechanisms [62]. These mechanisms are based on direct links and feedback [63].
Positive feedbacka support processes at the highest level of intensity, while
negative feedbacks maintain the constancy of a certain state by transmitting a
certain amount of energy from the latcr components of the system to the earlier

ones in order to withstand the stimulus at the input of the system (interrela-
tionship of input and output).

Under conditions of an emotional disruption of purposeful behavior. a structural
decline in the constructive capabilities of the system is observed [64], which
means that qualitative changes (the quality of regulation of equilibrium) occur.

and feedbacks. For example, the works of S. A Yeremina [45. 46] view the stress
state as taﬂing the system out of a balanced physiological state. All the reac-
tions of the system (organism) are classified as specific (corresponding to the
specific features of the operating agent) and nonspecific changes or properly
compensatory-adaptive processes. In this case the nonspecific changes will have

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

Figure 12. Complex of Neurohumersl Reactions During Stress.

Key: (1) Blood; (22) Reduction;
(2) Afferent Pulse (Exteroceptors); (23) Corticosteroid;
(3) Afferent Pulse from Internal (24) Enlargement;

Organs; (25) Cortisone;
(6) Limbic System; (26) Desoxycorticosterone;
(S) Neocortex; (28) Sympathetic Innervation;
(6) Antidiuretic Hormone; (29) Internal organs;
(7) Blood Sugar; (30) Autonomous Nervous System;
(8) Insulin; 31) Hypothalamus;.
(9) Pancreas; (32) Sympathetic;
(10) Parssympathetic Innervation; (33) Somatotrophic Hormone;
(11) Tubules of Kidneys; (3k) Adrenocorticotrophic Hormone;
(12) Parasympathetic; (35) Gonadotrophic Hormone;
(13) Anterior (Trophotropic); (36) Posterior (Ergotrophic);
(16) Posterior Part; (37) Pituitary Body;
(15) Osmotic Pressure; (38) Posterior Part;
(16) Adrenalin; (39) Sex Glands;
(17) Brain Matter; (60) Thyroid Gland;
(18) Adrenal Glands; (A1) Thyrotrophic Hormone;
(19) Cortical Matter; (62) Noradrennlin;
(20) Internal Secretion Glands; (63) Hotor Area of Cortex;
(21) Blood; (‘4) Somatic Nervous System.
99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

greater weight where the functional system on which the stressor is acting is
more significant to the organism.

In the opinion of s. A. Yeremina, two systems are the most important components
of the process of controlling the internal environment to maintain equilibrium
(that is, controlling adaptive processes). These are the hypothalamus-
pituitary body-adrenal glands system and the sympathoadrenal system.

Coordination of the processes of vital activity is accomplished by means of a
single neurohumeral regulatory mechanism: the highest integrated centers insure
adequate and rapid reactions by means of efferent synthesis. An all-encompassing
generalization of regulatory influences is achieved by means of transforming the
nerve pulse into local and general humeral influenCes.

The entire set of changes that occur during the action of a stressor on the or-
ganism has the pattern shown in Figure 13 below. Stimulation from the receptor
on which the stressor acts is transmitted to the hypothalamus, stimulating the
neurosecretory function 0. its neurons. which is the basis of change in the func-
tional state of the hypothalamus and activation of the pituitary body-adreno-
cortical and sympathoadrenal systems (the nuclei of both the anterior and
posterior hypothalamus participate in regulation of the systems).

 

Figure 13. System of Regulation of the Neuroendocrine Cycle
During the Action of a Stressor.

Key: (1) Stressor; (10) Blood;
(2) Receptor; (11) Increase in Corticosteroids;
(3) Specific Changes; (12) Brain Hatter (Adrenalin);
(4) Nonspecific Changes; (13) Adrenal Glands;
(S) Hypothaiamus; (14) Cortical Hatter (Corticoids);
(6) Neurosecretion; (15) Adenohypophysis (Adrenal Cortico-
(7) Adrenalin; trophic Hormone);
(8) Positive Feedback; (16) Negative Feedback.

(9) Decrease in Corticosteroids;

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following factors promote stimulation of the centers of the hypothalamus,
which stimulates the activity of the pituitary body:

1. change in the ratio of noradrenalin and adrenalin in the
direction of exhausting resources of noradrenalin and acv
cumulation of adrenalin as the result of the arrival of the
afferent pulse in the tissue of the hypothalamus;

2. the release of massive amounts of adrenalin into the blood
by the brain matter of the adrenal glands and its penetra-
tion to cerebrospinal fluid and the tissue of the hypo-
thalamus; '

3. intensified absorption of corticosteroids from blood by

tissue (thanks to a decrease in the bonding of the cortico-
steroids with blood proteins owing to the stress). which re-

duces the number of circulating corticosteroids and activates
positive feedback.

The secretion of hypothalamic neurohumeral substance stimulates the output of
adrenocorticotrophic hormone by the adenohypophysis. which in turn activates the
secretion of corticosteroids by the adrenal cortex. The corticosteroids accumu-
late in the blood (as we have already indicated. their bonding with protein in

the blood is diminished by the action of the stress factor), penetrate the hemato-
encephalic barrier. and inhibit the adrenocorticotrophic hormone function of the
pituitary body on the model of negative feedback.

Additional information concerning this interpretation of stress in the organism
as a closed system is given in the monograph by T. I. Kositskiy and V. H. Smirnov

[23].

They view the system of regulation of the neuroendocrine cycle as a system of
multistep linkages. which allows manyfold intensification of the action of an
insignificant amount of neurosecretion by hypothalsmic cells and causing general
biochemical changes in all the organs, tissues, and media of the organism.

The system of multistep linkages also insures fine regulation of the level of the
hormone by means of direct links and feedback in every stage. The superstructure
in the form of the central nervous system is the highest integrated center. It
regulates the entire cycle by means of the inhibitory systan (hypocanpus. singular
area, and septum of the brain) and stimulation systen (amygdaloid nuclei. and
anterior orbital surface) (see Figure 14 below).

The material presented above pernita drawing the following conclusion. The prob-

lem of stress today has become especially important. Macy laboratories in our
country and abroad are studying it. But many aspects of this problem are still
not finally clarified and beyond dispute. Thus. a great deal has already been
done to clarify the morphological substrate and functional linkages among difv
ferent formations of the central nervous system which participate in shaping the
stress state. But we still do not have a well-ordered theory convincingly sup-
ported by factual material for stress in the organism as a dynamic balanced system.

101

FIIlCIHWCIAl.USIZ(NVLY
I'VE VIPI‘ IRI- UG‘ VI‘L.

 

Figure 14. The Influence of the Central Nervous System on the
System for Regulation of the Neuroendocrine Cycle.

Key: (1) Pituitary Body. Adrenal corticotrophic Hormone;
(2) Central Nervous System;
(3) Stimulation System;
(4) Hypothalamus;
(5) Cortical Matter;
(6) Adrenal Glands;
(7) Brain Matter;
(8) To All Organs and Tissues;
(9) Stressor;
(10) Inhibitory System.

 

If we did have such a theory it would not only offer researchers new possibilities
for refining and explaining many facts. but most importantly. would outline reli-
able ways to normalize the organism functions that have been impaired by stress.

A second and equally important aspect that requires immediate solution is timely
and reliable diagnosis of the stress state. It is common knowledge that all man-
ifestations of the organism's vital activity are involved during the development
of the state of stress: the biochemical indicators of the organism's media
change, various physiological indicators undergo deviations, and changes in
mental functions and behavior are observed. But can it be said that any of these
manifestations of vital activity reflect the development of a state of stress
fully and promptly? Of course it cannot. Some manifestations are indicative
only in the critical period, while others are subject to deliberate regulation

in one degree or another and still others are nullified by combination with op-
positely directed changes in other elements of the same functional system.
Therefore. we must find an adequate and reliable indicator of the state of

stress in order to be able to influence the state and activity of a human oper-
ator working under conditions of heightened tension and to do so on a real time

scale. Work is going forward with this objective, both in scientific labora-
tories and at actual production sites.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Laboratory Model of the Stress Situation

In our attempt to define operator reliability in a stress situation and ob—
jectively evaluate changes in the functional state of the operator we considered
it useful to direct research in the first stage along the following path:

1. development of a method for creating stress that can be ac-
curately calculated with respect to load under laboratory
conditions;

2. determining what properties of the nervous system an oper-
ator must have to possess the greatest reserve of relia-
bility under conditions of extraordinary stress;

3. printing out the various physiological parameters of the
operator in order to identify the most informative ones.

For conducting our studies we selected one of the methods of creating opera-
tional stress under laboratory conditions, specifically the method of creating
extraordinary stress owing to a shortage of time to perform the particular work
assignment. We consider the method of K. K. Ioseliani and A. L. Narinskaya to be
the simplest and most effective [1]. It goes as follows. Black and white num-
bers between one and nine are displayed in random order on a screen for the test
subjects. The subject must add or subtract this number from the result of the
preceding operation depending on the color of the number that has appeared on the
screen. By increasing the speed at which the numbers are shown, the intensity of
the subject's work can be increased greatly. A series of experiments conducted
by this method demonstrated that this formulation of the problem has certain
difficulties. In particular, when an error had been made it left its mark on

all subsequent answers. The second incorrect action made the picture even worse,
and so on. All this made it hard to calculate and differentiate erroneous ac-
tions during the full cycle of work operations. We modified this technique to
eliminate the accumulation of error and correlate it with the concrete assign-
ment. To accomplish this, the test subject had to perform the operation with

the number that had appeared on the screen regardless of the results obtained
from manipulating the preceding number.

The subject is told to perform more complex operations with the numbers than in
the Ioseliani method. specifically, for white numbers to square them and sub-
tract two, while black numbers are squared and three is added to the result.
After a prolonged break on the screen occurs -he subject must reverse the oper-
ations and perform with the white numbers those operations that had been done
with the black numbers. and vice versa (switching moments). is designated these
series I and series If. The subject pronounced answers out loud.

We changed the degree of operational stress by altering the speed of the film
(the length of exposure of each number can vary from 1.5 to 8 seconds). In
conformity with this, throughout the experiment we consider the state of the
operator at moments S] (rate of information presentation - one number per eight
seconds), 32 (one number per four seconds), 53 (one number per two seconds),

5, (one number per two seconds, change of algebraic operations), and 55 (one

103

FOR OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FORiOFFK1Al.US£

number per 1.5 seconds, same actions as in Sn
plan for presenting numbers to the subJect.

ONLY

). Figure 15 below shows the
During the experiment the subject

        
 
      
    
 

eries I _ series 11 “
maximums armaments
seesaw “News

-..”t‘dh"tWN‘Kim
NBHTb‘dﬁl m‘

l)

' ﬁbﬁ’tﬂﬂtﬁ‘ﬁm lyi‘t‘Shi‘ "HEM
Nkitlkﬁi't‘dﬁb‘d Eﬂt‘ﬂﬁ‘ﬁiﬁ‘ W

MWK‘N‘N‘

“”h‘ﬂxﬂﬁti‘mm .(2)

   

 

-.- VKWti‘b‘dtx K‘h‘dﬁihﬂh‘dbi'h
515%??me Riki "NNNMA

 

 
 
   
 
   
 

K‘K‘hb‘t‘SM‘ "Kiti’
REKERKW

  
 
   
 
   

  

accesses
rmwmmwnwam

  

     
  
  

 
 
   
   
 
   

  

”FANK’EMN
.. “$3?th ‘lﬁlhi’

  
  

smashes.

    
 

EM’Wm NEE Eﬁﬁlkfﬁlﬁlhﬂh
NPFM‘ENE‘KN ﬁbﬁ‘t‘ﬂﬁkm ,1

Tammany: ﬁkl‘b‘dbi‘mi’ﬁ: I W

Figure 15. Diagram of Presentation of Numbers to the Subject.
Key: (1) One Number in Eight Seconds; (3) One Number in Two Seconds;
(2) One Number in Four Seconds; (4) One Number in 1.5 Seconds.
[Number in upper right half of each square is number shown to sub-
ject (black background indicates "black" letters). Number in lower
left half of each square is result of performing operation accord—
ing to instructions.)

———______.———————

was seated in a specially equipped armchair in a darkened, isolated room. To pro-
vide sound isolation the subject put on ear phones and during the experiment
monotonic white noise was played through then from a noise generator. The ex-
perimentor gave instractions through the same earphones. An engineering group
from the division of neurobionics at the Institute of Cybernetics of the
Ukrainian 538 Academy of Sciences installed a set of equipment that made it
possible to create and record operational stress in the test subject (see Figure
16 below).

Considering the limited possibilities of defining all the factors that influence
the reliability and efficiency of operator activity and the complex relationship

between these factors and the operator's state, developers of systems to monitor
the state of the operator proposed obtaining and processing a certain set of

physiological indicators for the purpose of monitoring and predicting a given
reliability and efficiency for operator activity.

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 16. Flowchart of the ﬁxperimental Complex.

Key: (1) Experimentor; (6) Subject;
(2) Control Console; (7) Polygraph;
(3) Unit for Conununicetion with Subject: (8) Preliminary Data
(In) Unit for Displaying Visual Information; Processing;
(5) Test Action; (9) System of Sensors.

Several techniques exist today for solving the problen of automatic monitoring of
the functional state of an operator. These are:

1. use of a limited set of physiological indicators that are
processed by specialized couputer equipment;

2. use of a broader group of physiological indicators. some of
which sust be processed on s general-purpose cowuter;

3. combining specialized and general-purpose computer equip-
nent.

The selection of physiological indicators of the operator's state to be noni-
tored is determined by the concrete conditions of operator activity. In many
cases a dichotomous evaluation of the operator's state relative to assigned nor-
nal boundaries is adequate. The parameters of certain indicators are used for
this purpose. The mat frequently used indicator is the electrocardiogram. which
has high diagnostic efficiency. Vast clinical experience with diagnosing pathology
of cardiac activity significantly simplifies the problem of autoutic diagnosis of
the operator's state. The frequency and rhythm of heart contractions are used as
diagnostic signs of growth of stress in operator activity. The devices that carry
out the algorithms for identifying these signs are quite sinple and reliable [2,
3‘s

in order to search for more subtle diagnostic signs of gradations of state the EKG
is recorded on different information carriers for subsequent cmuter analysis.

in this case the algorithms nodel the actions of a doctor in fornulating the diag-
nosis [4] or use the characteristics of a learning matrix [S]. The problem of
efficient coding of EKG signals for transmission by conunications channels or stor-
age of large arrays in compact form has been successfully resolved [6, 7. 8].

105 |

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’V- Ufl'lL IRA. DJI- Ul‘h.

The parameters of the electroencephalogram are an important Indicator of the current
stateof the operator during the process of information processing. Instruments for
quick analysis of the operator's state based on BBC data realize algorithms of
spectrum analysis [9, 10] or statistical analysis [11].

Various types of specialized devices are also used to analyze the bioelectric ac-
tivity of the muscles (electromyograms). the parameters of the function of ex-

ternal respiration, the state of the analyzers, blood circulation, and the like
[12-16].

A more precise evaluation of the operator's state requires processing a broader set
of physiological indicators. For diagnosis on a real-time scale low-frequency in-
dicators of the state of the organism are usually used. The raw data may be data

from plethysmograms, pneumograms, motor reactions, pulse, the skin galvanic reac-
tion. temperature. and so on [15, 16].

For automatic monitoring of a limited class of states specialized devices make it
possible to identify sets of symptoms - combinations of informative parameters of
certain functions [17] - or to make dichotomous diagnoses of the monitored param-
eters relative to assigned normal boundaries [6]. The automatic logical devices
of these systems provide evaluation of the set of parameters according to an as-
signed program which is determined by their design. Analysis of high-frequency
indicators under conditions where a broad class of operator states is expected re—
quires an expansion of the capabilities of analog-digital convertors [l8] and
primary data processing on multichannel convertors [19] or specialized complexes
[20]; another possibility is recording on magnetic tape for subsequent processing
on general-purpose computers. The required computing power may be significantly
lessened by a regime of semiautomatic processing of experimental results. that is,
using the computer only to process data on the most distinctive stages of the
transformation of state [21}. Forecasting the work capability of the operator in-
volves a precise diagnosis of the operator's current state and requires processing
a large number of physiological parameters on a real time scale.

Existing computing equipment does not permit this problem to be solved on the
basis of known methods of processing biomedical data.

The experimental system developed at the Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian
SSR Academy of Sciences for testing the state of the operator under conditions of
heightened tension of operator activity is designed to solve a number of problems:
selection of parameters which are subject to monitoring; selection of methods of
primary data processing to identify informative characteristics; testing diag-

nostic and prognostic algorithms; clarifying methods of raising the efficiency of
man-machine systems, and the like.

Preliminary analysis of findings in the literature made it possible to formulate
a number of requirements for systems of this class: (1) methodological univer-
sality; (2) multiparameter processing of experimental results in different

regimes, including real time; (3) visual monitoring of the course of the experi-

ment: (4) the possibility of creating feedback between the test subject and the
unit which controls the complexity of the problems being solved during the ex-
periment.

106-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The design of the system is based on the principle of maximum use of. standard bio-
medical equith and available computer equipment. The system consists of a

set of equipment that carries out the procedure to evoke a state of tension in
the test subject and a set of equipment for recording and processing physio--
logical indicators.

To realize the selected procedures in hardware we designed a caplet consisting
of equipment for the purpose of giving the test subject a certain type of as-
signment and equipment for cormunication with the subject and recording the course
of the experiment (see Figure 17 below). The assignments (numbers) corresponding

 

 
   
  

Figure 17. Flowchart of
Realization of Procedure and Communica-
tion with Test Subject.

  
  

l— Key: (1) From Regional Switching
[ .- n Center.
[El—M”

Ill
EB

  

 

to the experimental procedure selected were projected by a modernized Luch movie
projector on a screen in a darkened room.

A marker for the beginning of displaying the number was fed to the tape of the
tape recorder recording the experiment by means of special photoelectric con-
vertor 12. The signal was produced at the moment that the marker on the movie
film. a clear segment in the perforation corresponding to the start of the dis-
play. passed in front of the photocell. The action of this signal triggered a
relay which with its contact closed the input to tape recorder 8 from multi-
vibrator 10.

The equipment for comunication with the subject and recording the course of the
experiment consists of the following elements: a mixer to mix the signals and
feed them to the headphones of the test subject, experimentor. and tape recorders
that are recording the experiments; 62-1 noise generator 9; the TA-S6 headphones
of the test subject 5 and experimentor 2; the DEM-6H microphone oi the test sub-
ject 6 and the Pin-610A microphone of the experimenter l; tape recorder 3 to delay
the response of the subject (this performs the part of e progra-ing unit).

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NJK Ufl'lt [AL USE. ONLY

ject’s microphone comes to the second input of amplifier-mixer 7. Thus, the

signal at the output of amplifier 7 is a mix of the signals going to the test sub-
ject and the subject's responses. The total signal on the course of the experiment
goes to the input of the tape recorder that is recording the experiment and to the

the following indicators of functional states: EEG, BHG, SGR. EKG, reaction of
opening and closing the eyes. and pneumogram. The system also envisions taking a

take readings. equipment to amplify the signals of the sensors. a comuting com-
plex. and equipment to link up with a telephone channel. Provision is made to
record physiological indicators on paper tape for visual analysis of the course of

the experiment. With the exception of the BBC, the physiological indicators are
taken with standard sensors. The common methods of taking EEG's have certain

drawbacks. A specially designed sensor was developed to eliminate the unpleasant
sensations experienced by the test subject and reduce experiment preparation time.

The ink-recording instruments C1-C1; are the automatic recorders of the

electroencephalograph. Amplification filter 30, which is connected parallel
to the EEG channel, and the block of filters 01 - 65 are designed to

broaden the possibilities of visual monitoring and preliminary analysis
of the EEC. They per-it evaluation of the spectrum of the 886. A standard UBPl-OZ
biopotentiai-type amplifier was used as the filter saplifier. The active low-

frequency filters 01 - 05 were designed for the purposes of our experiment and
make it possible to single out five frequencies in the band of 1-30 Hz in any

combination. The preanplified signals of the sensors go to the block of output
amplifiers 78,- "l6: which amplify them to five volts and feed them to the input

of the analog-digital convertor. UBPZ-OJ biopotential-type amplifiers were used
in the block of output amplifiers.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 18. Flowchart of the Complex for Taking and Alplifying
Physiological Parameters.

Key: (1) Dnepr-l Regional Switching Center.

 

In design terms the entire cowl'ex is built in the form of two self-sufficient
bays. The 336016-02 and equipment that realizes the procedure are mounted in
one of then, while the l6UBP2-03 anlifiers with a remote mnitoring console and
a VK7-10A/l digital volt meter are placed in the other. Signals on the state of
the test subject are fed from the output of the prealplification cowlex to the
regional switching center (see Figure 19 below) . It consists of a Dnepr-l

 

Figure 19. Flowchart of the System for Processing Bio-
medical Data.

Key: (1) Biomedical Complex;
(2) Dnepr-l Regional Switching Center;
(3) Data Transmission Unit;
(4) Buffer Processor (Pl-220);
(5) Central Processing Processor “ESE-6).

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a total memory capacity of about 3 million 26-bit words. The regional switching
center is connected with the biomedical complex By hardware and software. Switch-

The series-produced Akkord-lZOO data transmission unit is used to link the Dnepr-l
with this channel. The data transmission unit transmits data with a probability
of error of 10“, which meets precision requirements for the formulation of the
experiment. The data transmission unit is not designed for joint work in the com.

computer as well as automatic setting of the communications channel on instruction
from the computer.

The work of the regional switching center in the mode of collecting experimental
data was organized as follows. From the output amplifiers of the complex for pre-
amplification of the parameters of the physiological indicators biomedical infor-
mation goes to the input of the analog-digital convertors of the Dnepr-l computer.
The channels are queried in conformity with an assigned algorithm. The query algo-
rithm was developed with due regard for the different frequency characteristics of

the processing processors. Alldatagoes to the buffer processor, for which an
M-220 is used. The buffer processor organizes the service queue in conformity with
the localization priority and index for the particular communications channel and
when necessary transmits to the BESH—é central processor. Solution results go

through the buffer processor to the regional switching center, where they are
printed out.

ﬁpEtware of the e erigeng. The algorithms for processing indicators of the func-
tional state of the operator are procedures for analysis of discrete and continuous

processors. Discrete processing includes analysis using histograms of different
orders; the functions of autointcnsity and cross-intensity: the logical-

probabilistic method; phase monitoring; and. entropy analysis.

Processing of the continuous curves of the EEG uses algorithms for autocorrelation
and cross-correlation analysis with subsequent spectrum expansion, dynamic spectral

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR‘OFFICIAI.IJSE2(HVLV

The very same set of algorithms can he used to analyse 836's and myogrsmm. The
data is selected at different rates: the sensor query interval is five milliv
seconds for the EEG and two milliseconds for the Inc. Algorithms for auto-

correlation and cross-correlation analysis with subsequent spectrum expansion are
used to analyze spectral densities.

Correlation analysis is a powerful tool that identifies the statistical struc-
ture of a random process. But in those cases where the dominating'frequency
(periodic component) and power output are indicative, it is sufficient to
process the £36 with discrete algorithms (finding histograms and functions of
autointansity and cross-intensity). In this case the BBB is converted to a

pulsed process where the pulses nark extreme points. This method is more effi-
cient than the polar-correlation method, the phase method, and others.

Dynamic spectral analysis is based on computation of the ongoing and instantaneous

spectra. It is used to study the dynasics of functional reorganizations in brain
structures.

Expansion into a Carunen-Loew series is used to identify the electrograms that
correspond to different functional states. The 386's and EHG's. viewed as s
random process, are expanded into the series

 

[(1) =- i} M» (t). ' (3-1)
(-1

where 11 is Eigen values, whileoi (t) are Eigen functions of a first-order
Predholm linear integral equation:

o(x)-lSK(x.:)o(a)d: '(3.2)

 

 

where K(x. s) is the correlation function of a random process.
The analysis algoriths involved sequential performance of two stages:

a. calculation of the correlation function by the formula
r

Kt!) - + 5 2(1):“ + ndt. (3.3)

b. finding the Bigen functions of integral equation (3.2),
which amounts to solving linear homogeneous equations
of the type

' (l-l)y.+K.(t)y,+K.(ﬂy,+ +K.V-l(‘)UN-I-0;
K.(t)y.+(1-1~)0.+K,(r)y.+ +Ku-Wy-x-0:

Ku_.(t)y.+Kx_:(t)v.+K.v.z(t)y.+ +
+ (I — Mm.-. - 0.

Processing the EKG requires a large set of algorithms realized using high-powered
computer means. Histogram analysis. calculation of the sutointensity function,

and construction of integral histograms of different orders were used to analyze
the EKG.

lll

ItHICIWUCJAl.USE(ﬂVLY
DUI 0"“.th USO. ONLY

The skin galvanic reaction to emotional stress manifests itself in protracted

change in skin potential (on the order of five seconds), which is exponential

in character. Exponential change in the SGR is approximated by the formula

Y - 8(1 - e°t),where H is defined as the amplitude value of stable exponential
deviation, and o is a time constant that characterizes emotional stress. The

time constant is determined by a set of points separated by intervals of 20

milliseconds. After this the averaged value a is found; to do this the mean
quadratic error is calculated.

Histogram analysis of the phases of inhalation and exhalation and the respira-
tory cycles was done to study the basic patterns of the breathing rhythm. (The
coincidence of results with different methods of statistical processing is con-

vincing evidence of the reliability of the experimental material obtained from a
comparatively small number of subjects.)

Results of investigation. The first part of our investigations was devoted to
identifying the psychophysiological characteristics that insure high subject
reliability in work.

The general efficiency of activity of the test subject was calculated by the
formula

3-(1— "°°")500%.

 

where n.‘q is thc total number of errors, and n is the number of assignments
given. The efficiency of a concrete type of error was calculated by the same
formula. except that the value n of the concrete error was substituted for n.ug.
The experiment showed that the test subject makes mistakes that can be classified
in the following categories:

1. correction (correcting an incorrect result of action
announced earlier);

2. mistakes proper (incorrect result of proposed actions);
3. failure (failure to perform the assignment);
4. breakdown (series of failures);
5. refusal to go on.
The total number of mistakes included the first four categories.

Our test subjects were divided into three groups by efficiency of activity:

Nos 3 and 6 who had efficiency scores of more than 50 percent; Nos 5 and 6 who had
50 percent efficiency; subjects Nos 2 and 1, whose efficiency was below'SO per-
cent (see Figure 20a below). The subjects were men between the ages of 25 and 60.
working at the same institution, with higher technical education. and in good
health. The conditions of the experiment were identical for all of them.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F!Nl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1al.lEﬂE(MULY

.-.___\
I!

"(2)33: Kg
E§§[...Ill s!”

319250 2 205103

‘1’ .3 (4)8: (5
5w ; . 5
g. ' m 5.
l

1‘5621 365521 21566.!

Figure 20. Distribution of Test Subjects by Efficiency of
Performance of the Assignment (a) and Expression of Basic Char-
acteristics of the Nervous System (b). (Numbers of test sub-
jects given across bottom; dotted line shows efficiency under
conditions of sound interference.)

Key: (1) Overall Efficiency, percentage;
(2) Dynamism of Stimulation, standard units;
(3) Dynamism of Inhibition, standard units;
(4) Strength of Stimulation Process. standard units;
(5) Lability. standard units.

 

Using the electrophysiological method of determining the basic characteristics of
the nervous system [22], we ranked our subjects by strength of the process of
stimulation, dynamics of stimulation and inhibition. and lability of the nervous
system (see Figure 20b). It turned out that the maximum carrying capacity in a
definite type of activity is determined by the lability of the subject's nerve
processes; the higher the indicator of this characteristic, the higher the indi-

cators of efficiency.

For the type of activity which we propose the characteristic of noise resistance
is very important to the human operator. The main thing is not the level of
lability of nerve processes, but the strength of the nerve system in relation to
stimulation. The lower the level of strength of the nervous system is, the lower
noise resistance will be. and this can nullify the strong points of an operator
who has high lability of the nervous system and outstanding work indicators in
the absence of distracting factors (see Figure 28). The obvious explanation for
this is thst a strong nervous system produces a stable dominant center in the
cortex of the large hemispheres when performing an assignment..and outside
stimuli cannot break it down [23, 24]. But a weak nervous system cannot counter-
act the influence of outside stimuli, which act as an external inhibitor.

The transition from the first series of tests to the second (where actions with
white and black colors were changed to their opposites) enabled us to study one
more important characteristic of the operator, ability to switch. 0n the basis
of our findings we can assert that ability to switch is even more closely bound
to level of lability of nerve processes than maximum carrying capacity. This
conclusion agrees with the opinion of many other researchers [25].

113

ltﬂltlﬂﬂCJAl.US£1NVLY
I'VE Ul’flkll‘l. UDI'. UIVLI

In the next stage of experimental work we analyzed changes in various physio-
logical indicators during the period of development of extreme stress in the
test subject.

Changes in the EEG. The results of EEG analysis showed that during the period of
the stress state the most distinctive change was in the Alpha rhythm: its index
and intensity declined. The more complex the situation became, vith a faster
pace of work and introducing the switching elements. the more strongly this phe-
nomenon was expressed. An intensification of the Theta rhythm (see Figure 21
below) was noted at moments of extreme stress. In a series of tests the inten-

sity of the Beta rhythm definitely increased (almost three-fold compared to the
initial level) for test subject No 3 (the most "reliable").

_. .—
‘—

      
   

8.

Immune: mm. ya. g4

 

 
    

a 2 5 s s a
(2yammana smith
Figure 21. Change in the EEC of Subject No 3 During Intensive
Work (l- before film; 2 - after film; 3 - film. series I;

6 - film, series 11).

Key: (1) Intensity of Rhythm. standard unit;
(2) Frequency of EEG, Hz.

Individual differences in EEG deviations were most clearly expressed during the
period of recovery after completion of the work. The subject who had a signifi-
cantly strong nervous system in relation to stimulation and comparatively low
lability of nerve processes underwent a prolonged after-effect and gradual restor-
ation of the initial level of the Alpha rhythm. In the other subjects the Alpha

rhythm was restored almost immediately after the film ended, and in some cases
the index and intensity of this rhythm exceeded their initial level, indicating
exaltation.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY

Additional information was taken from analysis of the EEG reaction of assimi—
lating rhythn. It was found that during intensive work the most "reliable"
operators (Nos 3 and 6) had high indicators for assimilation of the Beta and
Alpha rhythms; the least ”reliable" (Nos 1 and 2) had a low level of assimila—
tion of the Theta rhythm, but in a number of tests their assimilation of the Beta
rhythm increased. In addition, the general induction effect was higher for the
"reliable" operators than for the less "reliable" ones.

Changes in breathing. in view of the specific features of our experiment we can-
not form judgements on the "pure" influence of the nature of the functional state
on changes in breathing. A significant share of the changes were a result of the
need to pronounce the result of the calculation out loud. The need to simultane-
ously maintain the functions of pulmonary gas exchange and create an acoustic ef-
fect was the cause of the distinctive pictures of speech-related breathing (see

Figure 22 below). Therefore, the parameter of frequency of breathing appears to

  
    

“w“ 2 a... “mm”

Figure 22. Dynamics of Muscle Movements. Respiratory Cycles.
and Cardiac Rhythm During Performance of the Assignment:

(1 - number of blinking motions, interval of 10 seconds;

2, 3 - length of exhalation and inhalation in standard units;
A, 5 - maximum and ninimun distances between R waves of the
EKG at lO-second intervals).'

Key: (1) Initial State;
(2) Series I;
(3) Series II;
(6) After Performance of Assignment;
(5) Time of Experiment.

 

be an indicator of the pace of work and most likely depends on the rate at which
francs are shown, not on change in functional state. It should be noted that
when assignments were displayed at low rates. the rate of breathing could still
be found under the control of the subject and was. so to speak, an expression of
the subject's style of work (stretching out the answer. getting set for the be-
ginning of the next frame, and so on). At a high working speed the frequency of

breathing increased and was entirely governed by the rate at which assignments
were given.

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He can note the following changes in indicators of breathing, which reflected the
functional state of the subject: decrease in the ratio of the lengths of inhala-
tion to exhalation owing to progressive shortening of inhalation; the appearance
of delays in breathing at momenta when unexpected stimuli were expected (instruc-
tions, the beginning and end of work, functional tests, and the like). On some
occasions here it was possible to record an EKG on the plateau of protracted
respiratory movement.

The dzgamics of blinking motions. Analysis of experimental findings showed that
blinking motions can be a rather sensitive indicator of growth in tension in the
subject. The second valuable feature is the precise interrelationship between
the number and form of blinking motions and the attention function. At those
moments when the subject's attention was engaged (waiting, switching on the film)
or concentrated on a certain type of activity (problem-solving) blinking motions
decreased sharply in frequency or practically stopped. Only when the activity
was completed or almost simultaneously with the spoken answer was a precise
blinking motion of the forms specific to each subject recorded.

Changes in the number of spontaneous oscillations of the 56R. The skin galvanic
reflex is a generally recognized indicator of stress. Owing to the procedure we
adopted. we recorded only spontaneous oscillations of the SGR. By analysis of
change in the number of these oscillations before and during subject performance
of an assignment demanding significant intensity, we were convinced of the fairly
high sensitivity of this parameter (see Figure 23 below).

Changes in the EKG. In our analysis of the electrocardiogram we observed that
intensive activity caused changes which may provide evidence of the development
of a state of stress. The most frequently encountered changes were the follow-
ing: increase in the height or density of the P and T waves. splitting of these
waves or the appearance of two-phase modifications of them, and a shift in the

segment 3-? relative to the isoline. In some subjects the interval P-Q in-
creased and extrasystolia was observed.

Interesting results were obtained by calculating the frequency of heart contrac—
tions at lo-second intervals. As the stress of the subject increased we recorded
a significant increase in the frequency of heart contractions (from 60 to 150
beats a second [sic]). and a significant decrease in the degree of arrhythmia,
which was defined as the difference between the maximum and minimum pulse inter-
vals in a given time segment (lo-second intervals) (see Figure 22). Summarizing
what has been presented above, it must be observed that according to our analysis
of the activity of the test subjects on the assignments using our proposed
methodology, the subjects who did best were those who had the highest lability of
nerve processes. In the presence of distracting stimuli, however, the most im-
portant characteristic of the nervous system for successful activity was strength
in relation to stimulation. Thus, our research showed that it is not possible to
standardize any one characteristic of the nervous system for purposes of voca-
tional selection [26, 27]. It is wiser to agree with those researchers who
believe that optimal efficiency in a particular type of activity requires spe-

cific characteristics of the operator's nervous system [28]. Operational stress
includes not only the work indicators of the subjects,but also their functional

116

FOR 0FF“JAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

          

 

              

I”. H” I?“

I?» I I»
Figure 23. Change in the Number of Spontaneous Oscillations
of the 56R During Performance of an Assignment (1 - before
performance of the assignment; 2 - during film series I;

3 —- during film series 11; A - after performance of the
assignment [numbers on top of columns indicate individual
test subjects]).

 

state, which we judge by change in the parameters of activity of different sys-
tems of the organism.

Comparing the data from our analysis of change in the 326's of test subjects
with data described in the specialized literature, one may conclude as follows.
We and other investigators [28) are inclined to the opinion that there is no
one, uniform EEG exnression of the state of stress in a human operator. In the
first place. the picture of change depends on the degree of stress (the initial
stages are characterized by a decline in the index and intensity of the Alpha
rhythm. then as stress grows. the activity of the Beta and Theta rhythns in the
EEC increases); in the second place, individual differences introduced consider-
able variability. The latter point is related to the basic characteristics of
the nervous system of the subject. and is seen clearly in our experiment. The
literature points out that during stress situations one may observe intensifi-
cation of Beta activity [29. 30]. weakening of the Alpha rhythm [28]. and change
in both slow and fast rhythms [28, 31]. But this diversity of changes does not

correlate strongly with the basic characteristics of the subject's nervous sys-
tem and the degree of stress.

The reaction of Alpha activity and intensification of the Beta rhythm observed

in our experiments were probably caused by activation of the stem reticular forma-
tion during the state of stress [32]. Intensification of the Theta rhythm in

117

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FUR Otf'lL'IAI. USE ONLY

certain cases, especially when the pace of work picks up, may be related to in-
tensification of the inhibitory process as the result of the development of mental
fatigue [33].

While tracing changes in the pneumogram, we observe an increase in the frequency
of the respiratory rhythm. which occurred mainly as the result of shortening of
inhalation. Breathing became more regular as stress grew. In part these changes
may have occurred as the subject adjusted to the increasing pace of spoken re-
sponses. But in our opinion, the principal contribution to these changes was made
by a change in the functional state of the subject. This is illustrated by the
recording of EKG oscillations on plateaus of respiratory movements at monents of

significant stress and by the shortening of inhalation in relation to exhalation
[36].

Analysis of the blinking motions of the subject produced interesting findings.

The feature we discovered, that blinking motions precede a spoken response (by up
to 1.5 seconds) enables us to recommend this indicator as one of the first mani-
festations of decision-making. This may possibly prove very useful to those
investigators who. owing to the nature of their job, must clearly identify the
central time of making the final decision. It seems to us that recording blinking
motions permits a more exact estimate of these moments than recording other motor
reactions (spoken response, pressing a button).

When comparing our findings with data available in the literature. the following
must be observed. We cannot agree with the view of certain investigators [35]
that concentration of attention entails an increase in the frequency of blinking
notions. We are inclined to assert the opposite. The reason for these different
views is possibly that the above-mentioned authors, when giving the operator an
excessive load and recording an increase in the number of blinking motions, con-
sidered it self-apparent that the operator must have experienced an intensification
of attention. But it follows from the description of the type of activity and
errors made during it that the procedures used by the investigators led to dis-
organization and dispersion of attention, and this was expressed indirectly by

an increase in the frequency of blinking.

Thus, we consider it more accurate to say that there is a negative correlation
betw n the frequency of blinking motions and the attention function.

Analysis of spontaneous oscillations of the SGRconfhmedtheir high sensitivity
relative to reflecting growth in operational stress. But we noted the absence of
a linear dependence of this indicator on degree of stress. Thus. in the second
film series when stress continued to grow, the indicator of spontaneous oscilla-
tions of the SCR was often lower than in series I (see Figure 23 above).

It is possible that this contradiction can be explained by the fact that in the
first series, when stress was lower, there may have been selfocontrol of state
which exercised an additional influence on the SGR~ But owing its high pace,
the second series did not allow the subject time for self-control, but rather

"automated" the subject's activity and this, in many cases, slightly lowered the
number of spontaneous oscillations of the SCR.

118

FOR 0FF1C1AL USEiCMHLV
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analysis of change in the pulse and EKB of the teat snhjects before and during
work convinced us that the procedure enployed Has highly efficient to create a
state of extraordinary stress. Evidence of this is seen in the flattening of
the T-Iave, the elongation of the T—Q interval, the shifting of the segment 9-!
in relation to the isoline, and extrasystolia. A number of works [26. 29, 36—39]
have described these changes as reliable indicators of stress. These works

testify to significant changes in the functions of the automation, conductivity,
and stimulatability of the cardiac muscle and to its trophies.

The degree of pulse arrhythmia is a good indicator of change in the level of
stress. This quantity reflects individual characteristics more precisely than
other indicators and is evidently linked to the central sechanismaforregulsting

autonomous functions. Thus. in most of our subjects arrhythmia was practically
zero at the moment of greatest stress. But in subject No 5 it was well ex-

pressed even at critical moments. He became convinced that this difference was
linked to the intimate mechanisms of regulation by an analysis of graphs con-
structed from cardiac interval diagram data in the inhalation-exhalation test.
The curve of subject No 5 differs from the curves of the others (see Figure 26
below). whereas the curve of subject No 6 may be cited as an example of plastic

M1

nmsooasowmaoqs)

Figure 26. Change in the Cardiac Interval Diagram for the In-
halation-Exhalation Test Before (--) and After (- - -) Per-
formance of the Assignments for Subjects Nos 3, b, 5, and 1.

Key: (1) Inhalation; (6) Time of Cardiac Interval;

(2) Exhalation; (5) Time, seconds.
(3) Respiration;

adaptation of cardiac activity to a changed situation, the curve of subject No 5
demonstrates the opposite type of reaction, reactive. This is obviously directly

related to the large range of frequencies of heart contractions maintained by sub-

ject No 5 even during noments of heightened stress which, judging by the other
subjects. demand maximum rhythm.

119

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result of statistical processing of the experimental material it was found
that the most informative indicators of growth in operational stress of the oper-
ator are quickening of the pulse, decline in the variability of the cardiac
intervals, increase in the total area of oscillations of the son, decrease in
the alpha index and area of alpha activity of the EEG, and decrease in the total
area of all rhythms of the 886.

In conclusion, we would like to present the following considerations. In our
opinion, traditional methods of analyzing physiological experimental materials
do not allow sufficiently complete extraction of information from the organism
reactions that are recorded. These methods "work" well when we are dealing with
a stable, steady state. In the case of great variability of reactions when the
state is undergoing rapid changes, if we use conventional methods of analysis
we lose very important nuances of the transitional states by attempting to at-
tain the essential reliability. For this reason investigators are increas-
ingly resorting to the methods of cybernetics, automatic regulation theory,
information theory, mass service theory, and the like. At the present time there
are already a number of works in which different facets of vital activity are
considered from the standpoint of systems organization [31, 60-45].

It is evident that even a state of extraordinary stress can be considered from
the standpoint of the structural systems approach. The first attths in this
area have already been made [46, 47]. This approach makes it possible to apply
the methods of classical automatic regulation theory to the study of this state.
Thus, the method of transitional characteristics can be used successfully to
analyze the response reactions of the organism to short-term test stimulation
(flashes of light, tactile stimulation). "hen we consider the potentials in the
EEG and $03 to a concrete stimulus evoked by a flash of light and view the car-
diac interval diagram in the inhalation-exhalation test as a system deviation
in response to a short—term disturbance, we can judge the quality of regulation
in the central nervous system at the particular moment of the person's activity.

The experimental findings we have made also provide material for frequency
analysis, which is used in automatic regulation theory in cases of steady
oscillatory practices.

Thus, it was shown in Figure 22 above that the changes in the physiological in-
dicators represented are oscillatory, and different spectra, magnitudes of os-
cillations, and "base" levels correspond to different functional states.

It appears possible to analyze the stability of a system in its initial state and
as the stress on the subject grows until the subject refuses to continue the
activity. This quality of the system can be determined by means of the reaction
of assimilating rhythms, assuming that when a system is more stable there is

less possibility of inducing some particular rhythm in it.

3. Studying Operator Reliability in a Real Situation

From our investigation of stresses created under laboratory conditions we moved
on to study difficult states of the operator in real ASU's [automated control
systems I, in particular to the study of operators of asu's for galvanizing

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL (SE ONLY

production. This system employs a three-level hierarchical structure (control
computers - autonomous unit for linkage with the object — local automation of
galvanizing lines). This makes it possible to work in the autoutic, semi-
automatic, and manual regimes and gives the systea a high degree of continuity
of service.

The A50 operator performs the following functions: preparing the system for oper—
ation. receiving and feeding raw data to the system, checking the schedule pro-
duced by the control cosputer and sending documents to the work positions,
launching the system in the automatic control regime, observing the course of
execution of industrial processes, managing industrial processes in the semi-
automatic control regime when necessary, identifying and eliminating malfunc-
tions, and preventive maintenance of the systes.

Operator work in the semiautomatic regime deserves special attention. This
regime is used in emergency situations and in the case of a malfunction in the
control computer for the purpose of cowleting industrial processes that have
been begun or carrying out the shop’s production progra.

When working in this regime, operators themselves must cmile the schedule of
industrial processes to process the essential parts and independently control
the course of processing by scans of the unit for linkage with the object.
This situation greatly increases the responsibility of the operator, which
gives rise to significant mental stress and is reflected both in how the oper-
ator feels and in the productivity of the operator's labor. It was precisely

this circumstance that led our work to study the activity of the operator in
emergency situations when system work is switchd to the semiautomatic regime.

After mastering the occupation of operator (by studying the- technical documents
and actually working at the console of the linkage unit) and studying the re-
sults of a survey of leading specialists, we wrote up a functional model of work
in the semiautosstic regime based on a specific nn-machine system, the
"Gal'vanik" [galvanizing worker] A50 (see Figure 25 below). Based on this model
we formlated the problems for our investigation:

1. what effect do operator characteristics have on labor
productivity?

2. what effect does the functional state of the operator have
on labor productivity?

3. what effect do operator characteristics have on the func-
tional state of the operator?

In the present work we will consider the first question.

The following indicators were chosen as criteria of the quality of operator
labor in the seniautomatic regime: knowledge of the industrial routes and ex-
posure time of the parts being processed (which influences developnent of the
optimal schedule for efficient loading of industrial lines), .behavior during
emergency situations on the industrial line, and the presence of mistakes in
receiving inconing information on orders, making decisions. and carrying out

121

MWWONIX
FUN 00"“,th U8}. ONLY

-._—~

2 Imam" Mum

dexglu‘o‘l’ane,
mv ,
peat": (1’4)

06mm ynpautnn

 

hummer W l 7)

Figure 25. Punctional'nodel of a Han-Hachine System Appli-
cable to the "Gel'vanik" 450.

Key: (1) Control Object; 10. Receptors;
(2) Signal Sources; 11. Signals on Course of Production
(3) Operator; , Proceaa;
(4) Information on Orders; 12. Reliability;
(5) Functional State; 13. Labor Productivity;
(6) Initial State; 16. Decoding. Synthesis. Deciaion:
(7) Operator Characteristica; 15. hargency Signals;
(8) Intensity of Labor; 16. Menory;

(9) Expenditures of Psychophysio- 17. Control Action.
logical Energy;

\

control actions. After evaluating the work of each operator in the seaiauto-
Inatic regime by these criteria, we divided then into two groups: "reliable"

and "unreliable." Then we began our inventigation of the characteristics of each
operator. We began here from the need for a detailed consideration of charac—

dependent development of such a questionnaire (or fundamental adaptation of a

Our questionnaire was designed to identify character traits, social consciousness,
motives and interests in production activity, breadth of outlook. feeling of

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

satisfaction. and sensation of the symptom of fatigue and overfatigue. that is,
the basic moving forces ("output") that guide the actions of a person working
in a particular production sphere.

The questionnaire blank consists of four parts:

1. personal information (demographic data on the subject);

2. statement to the test subject for the purpose of preparing the
subject for the investigation;

3. the questions proper;
15. evaluation table and "keys."

The questions are put in indirect form, that is, they relate only indirectly to a
particular characteristic. The questions identify behavioral correlates of the
characteristic under study. The questions are "closed," in the sense that the
subject must answer with one of the alternatives given. From our point of view
this questionnaire makes it possible to clarify the following matters.

1. Practical qualities (qualities relating to public activity and work):
1. initiative (inner inducement to new forms of activity,

enterprise. leadership role in certain actions, inno-
vativeness);

2. prudence (ability to foresee possible results and events in
the future. endeavor to prepare for possible changes);

3. denandingness (making high demands on someone or something.
strictness, high standards, and persistence);

lo. scrupulousness (precision to fine points, extreme care-
fulness).

II. Igulse-volitional Qualities (balance between involuntary igulsive action
and behavior and the possibility of conscious. volitional control of them):

1. discipline (acceptance of discipline, consciousness of per-
sonal and public duties, obedience to established order);

2. decisiveness (boldness, readiness to sake and carry out a
decision, firmness in actions. steadfastneas, inflexibility);

3. self-control (patience, firmness. self-possession, con-
sistency. and absence of tenet and irritability);

lo. aggressiveness (forceful-aggressive character, endeavor to
force subordination to one'a will);

5. recklessness (excessive bravado in behavior, neglect of
safety precautions out of bravado).

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
III. Moral

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uslities (attitude of the individual toward generally accepted

social norms of behavior):

1.

2.

3.

(O.

5'

6'

sense of honor (social-moral dignity, honesty, adherence
to the “word of honor," pride, and personal dignity):

consciousness (honest performance of one'a duties and ob-
ligations);

principle (unfailingly guided in action by firm principles
and fundamental beliefs);

sensitivity (empathy, sympathy);

modesty (restraint in revealing one's strongpoints and ac-
complishments, moderation and order in the way of life and
behavior);

egotism (narcissism, preference for one'a personal interests
to those of others, neglect of the interest of society).

IV. Qualities that determine motives of behavior:

1.

2.

ambition (excessive hunger for honors, aspiration to a
position of honor);

purposefulness (existence of a clear goal).

V. Qualities that determine attitudes toward the world around:

1.

2.

VI. Social

3.

curiosity (inquisitiveness. inclination to acquire new
knowledge);

optimisn (cheerful and lively attitude toward the world,
permeated with faith in the future and in success).

consciousness:

attitude toward labor as purposeful and socially useful

activity that requires mental and physical exertion;
labor enthusiasm and accomplishments;

attitude toward moral norms (ethical precepts, rules
that define behavior, and spiritual qualities neces-
sary to a person in society);

collectivism (adherence to the principle of conmon
interest. the collective principle).

124

FOR 0FFN3AL.USE(MQLY
FOIIOFFKJAI.USEIM‘LY

VII. Vocational natives Sinstigptipg factorsI factors to substantiate the
choice of an occppation .

VIII. Production interests (sigpificance and attractiveness of production ac-
tivitz). '

1x. Breadth of outlook (volune of knowledgeI ggperisnceI and interest):

1. professional experience (aggregate of professional habits
and skills acquired in practice);

2. experience of life (aggregate of rules and habits of every-
day life acquired in practice);

3. cultural level (social and intellectual development).

X. Level of satisfaction (feeling of satisfaction egperienced b2 persons
working to seet their needs and carp! out their wishes gpd aspirations):

l. with one's self;
2. with the production collective;

3. with the particular production site;

6. with one's material welfare and living conditions.
XI. Existence of slaptons of fatigue:

1. fatigue;

2. overfatigue;

£11. Falsehood indicator (desire to appear better than one reallz is).

The falsehood indicator is introduced so that the investigator can know how far
to trust the test subject‘s answers, how sincere the subject was.

In writing up the for. we used the advice given in works [1-6].
Questionnaire Porn
(Developed in the division of neurobionics of the Insti-
cuts of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian ssn Acadeny of
Sciences)
1. Full name.

2. Sex.

3. Year and date of birth.

125

FOI.OIi1CIAI.lEﬂE(HVLY
DUI WIILIAL WE. UNLY

4. Party membership.
5. Education.

6. Occupation.

7. Family status (number of persons in the family, number of children).
8. Living conditions (common or separate apartments, area, communal facilities).
9. Material support (how many rubles per family member).

10. State of health (existence of chronic illnesses, frequency of illness-related
absence fron work).

11. Who in your production collective knows you well?

12. who in your production collective do you know well?

Esteened Comrade!

The present study is being done for scientific and practical purposes. Test re-
sults for individual subjects will not be nade public at any time.

The objective of the study is to give recommendation for better organization of
labor at your enterprise. Your answers will help us in this. During the test-

ing process you can learn more about yourself. A rational schedule of labor and
rest for you will be recomended.

He invite you to participate in this work. Address it. please. with full serious-
ness. Answer the particular questions in the questionnaire as truthfully as
possible. Particiche actively and conscientiously in this proposed study. The'
correctness and accuracy of the final results will depend entirely on the sin-
cerity of your answer. We thank you in advance.

Instructions

The questionnaire consiste of 112 questions. The time for answering them is un-
limited. But we advise you not to think at length about the answers because in
most cases the experimenter needs your first reaction to the question. A number
of alternative answers are given in the form for each question. You lust select

those choices which correspond to your answer (mark then with a check). Ques-
tions cannot be skipped.

Questions

1. Have there been cases where you were the initiator of some neasure, Job, or
innovation?

(1) fairly often; (2)
(2) I remesber 1-2 cases; (I)
(3) No, I do not remember any cases. _ (0)

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mi omen. use own

2. Before undertaking a job do you always think over the results it any bring?

(1) Yu. days: (2)
(2) Sonetines I do; (1)
(3) lo, I do not. (0)

3. Are you strict with yourself and other people? Do you alvnys dennnd that
things be done properly? -

(1) Yes, always; (2)
(2) Sonetines; (l)
(3) No, I an not strict or densnding. (0)

a. Do you try to investigate any job down to the fine points, even if you knov
that you will not be working on it later?

(1) Yes. of course; (2)
(2) Not always: (I)
(3) No, I do not. (0)
5. Do you obey established procedures in production absolutely?
(1) Yes. always; (2)
(2) Not always; (1)
(3) No. (0)
6. If you have decided to do sonething, do you act decisively and carry it out?
(1) Yes, of course; (2)
(2) Not always; (1)
(3) No. I always lack the deter-ination. (0)

7. Are you always outstanding for self-control in difficult situations? In it
typical of you never to do anything in anger?

(1) Yes; (2)
(2) There are cases where I lose self-control; (1)
(3) No. I often act tron anger. (0)
8. Do you dislike it when you are contradicted if you are sure you are right?
(1) Yes, absolutely. (2)
(2) There are such cases; (1)
(3) No. I always listen to objections. (0)
9. Do you like to amaze people by your daring. even when it involves risk?
(1) Yes, very nuch. (2)
(2) There have been such cases; (1)
(3) No, I do not. (0)

10. Do you think that if you have given your uord of honor you should not break
it in any case? .

(1) Yes, of course; (2)

(2) Depending on circumstances; (1)

(3) No, I do not think so. ' (0)
127

FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY _
I‘Vﬂ Uf'l‘ DAL 03'. Ul‘L'

ll. Do you think that when you have begun a job you are obligated to finish it
and do it vell?

(l) Absolutely; (2)

(2) The Iain thing is to finish, but (1)
not necessarily Hell;

(3) It say be possible not to finish if un- (0)

foreseen obstacles arise and there will
be no punishment for this.

12. Are your convictions on nany issues of principle so strong that you never
go against then?

(1) Yes they are; (2)

(2) In some situations principles can be (1)
forgotten;

(3) One must do what others do. (0)

13. Do you set aside your affairs (even matters very isportant to you) if some
one is in trouble and needs your help?

(1) Yes, always; (2)

(2) Only if I an absolutely sure that I (1)
can help;

(3) Only if it will not cause no great un- (0)
pleasantneas.

lb. Do you think that you must tell of your achievements yourself, and not unit
until others notice them?

(1) Absolutely; (0)
(2) Sonetines; (l)
(3) No, I do not. (2)

15. Do you notice that your personal interest hinders you from participating
actively in public activities?

(1) Yes, this happens often; (0)
(2) Such cases rarely occur; (1)
(3) No, I cannot renenber such a case. (2)

16. Do you find it very pleasant to be praised? Is this one of the reasons that
makes you try to work better?

(1) Yes. I like it very much when I an praised; (2)

(2) Yes, it is pleasant but I do not strive (l)
for it;
(3) No, 1: doesn't matter to ne. (0)

17. Do you have a clear major goal in life to which you subordinate all your
actions and behavior?

(1) Yes; (2)
(2) I have some aspirations. but I cannot (1)
say that I have one single goal;
(3) I have not thought about this. (0)
128

FOR¢0FFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY
POI OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

18. Do you have a constant desire to learn nu things? for this purpose do
you read nany books. watch television, go to lectures. and the like?

(1) Yea. elm: (2)

(2) Sonatina I have a strong interest (1)
in chines:

(3) no, I an only interested in what I (0)

need for work and honelife.

19. Do you often have a good attitude. positive and cheerful?
(1) Yes, alsost always; (2)
(2) lo, soutines I an in a had nood and (1)
nothing sakes ae happy;

(3) I an very rarely in a good nood and (0)
cheerful.

20. Do you think that each ester of society should engage in socially useful
labor (regardless of the naterial reward)?

(1) Yes, of course; (2)

(2) I'n not sure; (1)

(3) Only if the person wants to or needs to. (0)

21. Do you think that social norms of behavior should be followed by all persons
at all tines?

(1) Yes, of course; (2)

(2) In sone circa-tomes they can he (1)
ignored:

(3) lo, I do not think so. (0)

22. Do you think that a collective of people is a powerful force that can
handle any task?

(1) Yes, of course; (2)
(2) Sonetines; (l)
(3) No, I do not. (0)
23. Did you choose your present Job because it has any of these advantages:
(1) Closeness to the place of residence; (1) .
(2) Snall workload; (l)
(3) Clean work; (1)
(4) Availability of institutional child (1)

care and nursery schools;
(5) Possibility of receiving an apart-cot; (l)
(6) (if the list has (1)
onitted a factor which led you to
choose the job. write it in the blank).

26. Do you like your occupation enough that you have decided to devote your en-
tire life to it? If you were able to choose your occtpation again, would you
choose the sane one?

( 1) Yes; (2)

(2) Possibly: . (1)

(3) No. (0)
129

MOFFIOALUSEONLY
IQMCUFFKJAL.USE(NNLY

25. What professional training have you?

(1) Graduation fron secondary school, (0)
without vocational education;

(2) Graduation from tekhnikun or (1)
specialized school;

(3) Graduation from a higher educational (2)
institution.

26. What is your experience of life?

(1) Less than 30 years old; (1)

(2) More than 30 years old; (2)

(3) Living separate fron parents since (1)
the age of 20 or sore;

(6) Living separate from parents fron (2)
the age of 17 or less;

(5) Do not have (have not had) your own (1)
family;

(6) Have (had) your own fsndly. (2)

27. Do your interests and knouledge concern only your specialization. or

(1) Are you knowledgeable about and in- (l)
terested in painting (often visit
nuseuns. collect slides, reproductions,
and literature on painting):

(2) Are you unfamiliar with and uninterested (0)
in painting;

(3) Do you like the theater, and are you (1)
knowledgeable about it and faniliar
with the repertoires of theaters in
your city and leading theaters in the
country;

(6) Are you unfamiliar with the theatrical (0)
life of your city and country?

28. Do you often feel dissatisfied with your behavior in solving certain prob-
lems, during arguments. and the like.

(1) Yes, all the tine; (0)
(2) Sonetines I feel that way; (1)
(3) No. I do not feel that vay. (2)

29. Do you think that your production collective is a strong and unified col-

lective which can handle any prohlens of production organization and molding
character?

(1) Yes; (2)
(2) I am not completely sure; (1)
(3) No. (0)

30. Do you think that your production site has good organization of labor and
correct selection and placenent of personnel?

(1) Yea. (2)

(2) Not entirely; (l)

(3) No. (0)
130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:0FHKJA1.USEINVLY

31. Do you think that your wages are the nexinun that you can earn? Do you
think that you should change your place of work in order to sake lore?

(l) I an satisfied with my wages; (2)

(2) I would like to earn sore. but I (I)
do not intend to change jobs for this
reason;

(3) I an not satisfied with lg wages and (0)
for this reason intend to take a new

job.

32. Do you notice that you experience fatigue where you did not before with
heavy workloads, and sonetines even with ordinary workloads?

(1) Yes, all the tine; (2)
(2) Sonetines; (l)
(3) No. I do not. (0)

33. Do you notice that your work capability has declined sharply and your
memory and attention have weakened noticeably?

(l) Yes,-I notice this all the tine; (2)
(2) Sonetines I notice it; (I)
(3) No. I do not. (0)

36. Do you always keep your pro-ions in all circumstances?
(1) Yes. always and in all circunstances; (l)
(2) No, not always. (0)

35. Do you try to do any job that you have undertaken note simply. quickly.
and economically than is custonary?

(1) Yes, definitely; ‘ (2)
(2) If there is such a challenge; (I)
(3) No. ' (O)

36. If you have undertaken sane job, before beginning do you think ower what
you will need to do it and outline a clear plan of action?

(1) Yes, always; (2)
(2) Sonetinea I do not; (I)
(3) No. (0)
37. Are you careful in choosing friends, partners at work, and acquaintances?
(1) Yes, of course; (2)
(2) Not always; (I)
(3) No, I an not. (0)
38. Do you ever have thoughts that you would like to conceal fron others?
(I) No. never; (1)
(2)“ Sonetines. (0)

39. Do you perform everything you undertake very carefully, down to fine points,
even if there is no need for it?

(1) Yes, always; (2)
(2) Sonetines; (l)
(3) No, if there is no need I do not do (0)

it carefully.
l3l

INJI‘OFIWCJAI.IISEZ€”ILY
I!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.US£lJNLN

60. Do you notice a slight decline in your work capability? Is it sometimes
difficult for you to concentrate? Have you been forgetful?

(1) Yes. I notice these things all the (2)
time;
(2) They sometimes occur; (1)
(3) “0- (0)
61. Do you follow all the requirements of public order without exception?
(1) Yes. always; (2)
(2) Not always; (I)
(3) No. (0)

62. Are you unwavering in carrying out a plan. even if you have to overcome
various obstacles and someone's resistance?

(1) Yes, always; (2)
(2) Not always; - (1)
(3) No. (0)

b3. Do you notice the appearance of fatigue even with a minimal workload or none
at all?

(1) Yes, I notice it all the time; (2)
(2) I sometimes notice it; (1)
(3) No. I do not. (0)
64. Do you ever want to do something bad to someone and do you do it?
(1) No. I never want to and I never do; (1)
(2) I cannot make this statenent. (0)
65. Do you show great patience and self-control in situations which irritate you?
(1) Yes. always; (2)
(2) Not always; (1)
(3) No. (0)

46. If someone disagrees with you, do you try to convince that person that you
are right? Or do you consider it unnecessary to convince the other and go ahead
in the way you find necessary (even if you must use force)?
(1) I do not consider persuasion necessary; (2)
(2) It is rare, but there are cases where (l)
I use force, not persuasion;
(3) The other person must be convinced first. (0)

47. Are all your habits good and desirable?
(1) Yes; (1)
(2) No. (0)

48. Can you neglect the rules of personal safety and take risks from a desire to
test your boldness?

(1) Yes, I can; (2)

(2) Possibly; (l)

(3) No, I will not do this. (0)
132

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(H‘LY

69. Do you think that your sense of personal dignity suffers if you permit
yourself even the slightest deception or unworthy act?
(1) Yes. of course; (2)
(2) Sometimes for practical reasons (1)
one may act this way, and the sense of
personal dignity should not suffer;

(3) No, I do not think so. (0)
50. Do you think that the work assigned to you must be done well and on tine?
(1) Yes, unquestionably; (2)
(2) It depends on what kind of work it is; (l)
(3) No, I do not. _ (0)

51. Have you had arguments with friends or relatives because you did not want to
do something against your conviction?

(1) Yea, I have; (2)
(2) I can renenber such a case: (1)
(3) No. ~ (0)

52. Do you ever gossip?
(1) No, never; (1)
(2) I cannot say categorically that I never do. (0)

53. Can you compensate for a decline in work capability by greater effort of will?

(1) Yes. I an always able to do so; (0)
(2) Sometimes I can; (1)
(3) I can only conpensate slightly for a (2)

decline in work capability by greater
exertion of will.

54. Do you feel a constant need to oversee sonsone, to give advice and material
aid?

(1) As long as I can renember I have been (2)
concerned about someone;

(2) There was once such a case; (1)

(3) No. (0)

55. Do you like to talk about your achievements?

(1) Yes. an achievement is a fact and there (0)
is no need to be embarrassed to talk
about it;

(2) Sometines; (l)

(3) No. I do not like to. (2)

56. Do you think that anyone considers personal interests to be closer than pub-
lic interests and people will not do things that will cause then inconvenience
and worry? .
(I) Yes, I think so; (0)
(2) There are sonetines cases where one (1)
must give up-- one's own personal
interest and peace of mind.
(3) No. I do not. All our actions should be (2)
subordinate to public, not personal interests.

133
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
PU“ UPPILIAI. UBI'. ONLY

57. what is your attitude toward persons enployed in yard clean-up, garbage col-
lection, junk dealing, and sewage disposal? Could you under certain circumstances
work in these jobs or do you consider them unworthy?
(l) I believe that a person should aspire to (2)
more worthy occupations and I personally
would never work cleaning yards. col-
lecting garbage, and so on;
(2) Possibly I could if there were no choice; (1)
(3) These are occupations like any other. (0)
If it were necessary. I could becoae a
garbage collector or junk dealer.

58. Are you coapletely free of any superstitﬂxun Do you believe in oaens?
(I) I do not believe in any swemtidona or omens; (1)
(2) I cannot say that I an completely free of (0)
811 superstitions.

59. Myou have a clear major goal in life for which you would endure tenporary' in-
conveniences and deprivations?

(1) Yes, I do have such a goal; (2)

(2) It depends on the inconveniences and (l)
deprivations;

(3) No, I would not put up with inconvenience (0)

and deprivation.

60. If you saw a new kind of device at a fair. in a store. in the aoviee, or on
television. would you definitely be interested in how it works and where it can
be used?

(I) Yes, of course; (2)
(2) Possibly; (1)
(3) No, I as not curious. (0)

61. If you have undertaken a task, do you have doubts about your success? Are you
confident that you will handle it?

(1) Yes, I always believe that I can handle it; (2)

(2) Sometimes I'm not confident; (I)
(3) I am not confident of success until I have (0)
done it.

62. Do you believe thAt labor is strictly necessary to a person, even if it de-
mands great physical or mental exertion?

(I) Yes, of course; (2)
(2) Possibly; (1)
(3) One must choose work that does not re- (0)

quire great expenditures of effort and
energy, and if possible it is better not
to work at all.

63. Do you always censure a person who has connittad an amoral act?

(1) Yes, always; (2)

(2) It depends on the circumstances; (1)

(3) No, I do not. (0)
134

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

66. Do you think that the collective is a great force that can handle any task?

(1) Yes, of course; (2)

(2) Sonetinea; (1)

(3) no, I do not. (0)
65. Why did you choose your present job?

(1) Good pay; (2)

(2) It is the nost convenient teaporary (l)

leans to prepare for getting another.

preferred job;
(3) It latches your interest and inclination; (2)
(6) It is a profession of the future; (1)
(S) It is the profession of your parents. (2)

66. Do you want to know as much as possible about your occupation, the best wey
to master it, and how to raise your qualifications?
(1) Yes, I an always vorking to iaprove Iy (l)
qualifications and expand ny specialized
knowledge;
(2) Sonetines one must expand one's knowledge (I)
of the occupation;
(3) No, I do not think that I need to know (0)
nore about my occupation. -

67. Do you ever brag?

(1) No, never; (1)
(2) On occasion. (0)
68. what is your work experience?

(1) Less than 10 years of work experience; (1)

(2) More than 10 years of work experience; (2)

(3) Less than three years in the present (1)
occupation;

(6) More than three yen-a in the present (2)
occupation;

(5) You have nastered one occupation; (l)

(6) You have mastered several occupations. (2)

69. Have you had rich experience of life?

(1) You have not had to change your geographic (1)
place of residence frequently;

(2) You have had to change your geographic (2)
place of residence nunerous times;

(3) You have not encountered special diffi- (l)
culties in life because you have always
had strong guidance (parents and relatives);

(Is) You have had to achieve everything in life (2)
through your own efforts because you did
not have strong guidance;

(5) You have never been abroad; (0)

(6) You have been abroad. (l)

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

70. Your Interests and knowledge center mainly around your specialization,
or:
(1) You have a good knowledge of Russian (1)
literature and the classic Russian writers;
(2) You have a poor knowledge of Russian liter- (3)
ature;
(3) You have a good knowledge of contemporary (1)
Soviet literature;
(4) You have a poor knowledge of contemporary (0)
Soviet literature;

(5) You have a good knowledge of classic and (1)
contemporary foreign literature;
(6) You have a poor knowledge of classic and (0)

contemporary literature.

71. Do you ever lie?
(1) Never; (1)
(2) I cannot say I never lie. ' (0)

72. Are you satisfied with what you have achieved in life or do you consider your-
self a failure?

(1) Absolutely unsatisfied; (0)
(2) Partially satisfied; (1)
(3) Satisfied. (2)

73. Are you confident that when it is hard for you in the production collective
you will receive help?

(1) Yes, of course; (2)
(2) Possibly; (1)
(3) No, I am not confident at all. (0)

74. Are you satisfied with your work position and prospects for growth at your
production site?

(1) Yes: (2).

(2) Not completely; (1)

(3) No, I an completely dissatisfied. (0)
75. Are you satisfied with your living conditions?

(1) Yes; (2)

(2) Not completely; (1)

(3) No. (0)

76. Do you observe in yourself a decline of interest in work and an inconsistent
attitude?

(1) Yes, very often; (2)

(2) Sometimes; (1)

(3) No. (0)
136

FOR 0FF"JA[.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFIClAl.lEﬂ§(HdLY

77. Do you suffer from sleeplessness? Are you sometimes helplessly sleepy
during the day?

(1) Yes, I often note this; _ (2)
(2) Seldom; (l)
(3) No, never. (0)

78. Do y0u always act honestly in all things?
(1) Yes, of course, dlvays and in all things; (I)
(2) No. (0)

79. when you are in a difficult situation, do you try various steps to come out
of it successfully? Do you search vigorously for a way out of the difficulties?

(1) Yes. always; (2).
(2) I try, but not always successfully; (l)
(3) No. I wait until everything is over. (0)

80. Do you like to purchase reserve supplies (food, work materials, and the
like)?

(1) Yes, very much; (2)
(2) I sometimes do; (1)
(3) No, as s rule I do not. (0)

81. Do you always insist that people around you (at home and at work) and you
yourself carry out promises?

(1) Yes, always; (2)
(2) Not always; (1)
(3) No, I do not. (0)

82. If you are doing soaething, do you try to do only the basic job or do you
try to call attention to every little point, go into detail, and do the job not
only well but elegantly?
(I) Yes, I always go down to fine points (2)
and carry every little thing through
to completion;
(2) Not always; (1)
(3) If it is not necessary to go down to (0)
fine points, I do just the basic job
and do not pay attention to the rest.

83. Do you think that labor discipline cannot be violated in any case?

(I) Yes. of course; (2)
(2) It depends on circumstances; (I)
(3) No, I do not think so. (0)

84. If you have decided to do something, do you carry it through with vigor and
determination?

(1) Yes, if I have already decided I as (2)
‘ confident of success and act with de-
termination;
(2) Not always with determination; (l)
(3) No, I do not act with determination; (0)

I have doubts about success and wonder
if I should drop the matter.

137-

IN)! OWWNCJAI.IEHE(MNLN
DUI! 0"“.th USE ONLY

85. How do you behave in an argument? Do you get mad or do you try to prove
your point calmly?

(l) I never get mad, but calmly prove my (2)
point of View;

(2) Sometimes I get mad; (1)

(3) I lack self-control in an argument and (0)

always get mad;

86. Do you resort to forceful means when you have to prove your rights to
something?

(1) Yes, fairly often; (2)
(2) It has happened, but rarely; (l)
(3) No, I try to convince people with words. (0)
87. Do you enjoy types of entertainment where you can show off your daring?
(1) Yes, very much; (2)
(2) Sometimes; (1)
(3) No. I do not. (0)

88. If friends or acquaintances ask you to do something and you understand that
it is not exactly a proper, honest thing to do, what do you do?

(I) I never do anything that offends my (2)
sense of dignity and honor;

(2) It depends on the circumstances; (1)

(3) I will sacrifice my honor for a friend. (0)

89. If you do anything, do you always do it conscientiously?

(1) Yes. always and in everything; (2)

(2) Sometimes I do work improperly and it (1)
bothers me; '

(3) If I know that no one will check and no (0)

one will be harmed by it, I do things
"any old way."

90. Do you express your convictions and defend them among your friends or at a
meeting if they do not agree with the opinions of others?

(1) Yea. I alwsys state my opinion and defend (2)
it vigorously;

(2) Sometimes I express it. but not always; (1)

(3) If my opinion or conviction does not agree (0)

with the opinion of the majority, I as
better off to keep quiet.

91. Are you always ready to help someone who needs outside help?

(1) Yes, of course; (2)

(2) Yes, if it is a good acquaintance or friend; (1)

(3) If it does not hurt me. (0)
138

FOR‘OFFNJA1.US£(NVLY
l-‘Oll_0ﬂ-'IC1AL use ONLY

92. Do you like to stand out in a group at work by your behavior, clothing, or
statements?
(1) Yes, of course. (0)
(2) Sometimes: (l)
(3) No, I do not like to attract attention for (2)
any reason.

93. Are you ready if necessary to undergo inconveniences and infringement on
your own interest, to suffer material loss for the sake of other people.

(1) If a person is in trouble, I will alvays (2)
help, even if it is not entirely in my
advantage;

(2) Only if I am absolutely convinced that my ' (1)
help is absolutely necessary;

(3) If the person is not a friend or someone (0)
close to me I will not help if it would

bring unpleasantness for me.

94. Do you believe that a person absolutely ought to strive for a position of
honor in any chosen occupation?

(1) Yes. of course; (2)
(2) It is desirable but not obligatory: (l)
(3) No. I do not. If I an satisfied with (0)

the material situation I will never
strive to attain a leadership position.

95. If you are undertaking to do something do you always consider how this will

relate to the basic goal which you have set for yourself in this period of your
life?

(1) Yes, if something may hinder the main (2)
goal I will reject it;

(2) Sometimes I do not consider this; (I)

(3) I do not have such a main goal. In each (0)

case I do as I think necessary.

96. Are you interested in the problems and advances of various areas of the
economy, science, art, and technology which are not related to your specializa-
tion?

(1) Yes, I always take a lively interest and (2)
know a great deal about them;

(2) Sometimes I am interested to read or (I)
hear about them, but I do not do this
systematically;

(3) No, I'm only interested in my own field. (0)

97. Do you believe that life is all right and that even if unpleasant situations
occasionally arise, everything will work out and be fine again?

(1) Yes. I an confident of this; (2)
(2) No, sometimes I doubt this; (1)
(3) No, there is more bad than good in life (0)

and this constantly spoils my mood.

139

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
DUI 0"“.th Dbl UNLY

98. Are you familiar with the uplifting feeling that comes from a consciousness
that your labor was useful to society.
(1) Yes. I know that my labor is es- (2)
sentisl to society, I love to work,
and I often experience this uplifting
feeling;
(2) Sometimes I feel moral satisfaction from (1)
my labor. but not always;
(3) No, I consider my labor a heavy and unfair (0)
burden and receive no special pleasure
from it.

99. Do you think that a person who constantly violates ethical norms and rules
of social behavior deserves not only censure but also strict punishment.

(1) Yes, absolutely; (2)

(2) Sometimes; (l)

(3) No, I do not think so. It is a personal (0)
matter.

100. Is it easy for you take up all the good initiatives that come from the col-
lective of persons around you (at work and at home)?

(1) Yes, I as always ready to take up a good (2)
iniative and love to work and relax in the
collective;

(2) Not always; (1)

(3) I do not like collective initiatives; (0)

I like to work and relax alone.

101. In choosing your present job which of the following attracted you?

(1) Prospects of rapid growth; (2)
(2) Good organization of labor; (2)
(3) Glamor; (1)
(a) work with interesting people; (1)
(5) (1)
(6) (write in factors which (1)

guided you in coming to work if they are
not included in a list above).

102. Do your professional interests concern you in nonworking time also (do you
think about work. read specialized literature, attend lectures, and the like)?

(1) Yes, all the time; (2)
(2) Sometines; (1)
(3) No, at home I shut myself off completely (0)

from work interests.

103. In what stage of mastering the highest skills of your occupation do you find
yourself? -

(1) You have the lowest rating; (0)

(2) You have an average rating; (1)

(3) You have the highest rating. (2)
~1A0

FORGDFFKJAL.USEIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

106. Have you had great upheavals in your life (death of people close to
you, serious family and work conflicts, natural disasters, and the like)?

(1) Yea, many of them; (2)

(2) One or two cases; (I)

(3) No, there have been no serious up- (0)
heavals.

105. Your interests and knowledge for the most part center only on your occu-
pation, or:
(1) You love and are knowledgeable about (1)
the music of the Russian composers and
often go to the opera and symphony;

(2) You are not very familiar with the (0)
music of the Russian composers;

(3) You are very familiar with foreign (1)
classical music;

(b) You do not know foreign classical (0)
music;

(5) You are knowledgeable about con- (1)
temporary Soviet and foreign music;

(6) You are not very familiar with (0)
contemporary Soviet and foreign
music.

106. Are you satisfied with your character?

(1) Yes, completely; (2)
(2) Not entirely; (l)
(3) No, I am very dissatisfied. (0)
107. Do you like your production collective?
(1) Yes. there are very good people in (2)
our collective;
(2) Not entirely; (l)
(3) No, ve have a bad collective. (0)

108. Do you think that your job will be able to satisfy all your material and
living needs quickly and well?

(1) Yes, I think that it will; (2)
(2) Possibly, but I‘m not sure; (1)
(3) No, I do not. (0)

109. Does your material situation enable you to organize your everyday life in
conformity with your desires, taste, and needs?

(1) Generally. yes; (2)
(2) Not entirely; (1)
(3) No. (0)

110. Is it hard for you to get to sleep and stay asleep? Are you sometimes
sleepy during the day?

(1) Yes, I notice this all the time; (2)

(2) Sometimes; (I)

(3) No, I do not notice this. (0)
-141

INDR‘OFIWCIAI.USE:(NULY
I'UI Ufl’lLIAI. U” UNL'

111. Do you notice that you are often in a state of great irritation or de-
pression?

(1) Yes, I often notice this; (2)
(2) This sometimes happens with me; (1)
(3) No, I do not. (0)
112. Are you a disciplined person?
(1) Yes, I never violate discipline (1)
and working order;
(2) No. I cannot say that about myself. (0)

Scoring and Decoding the Questionnaire Data

After the subject has answered all the questions the experimenter begins decoding
the data from the questionnaire. 0n the questionnaire opposite each possible
answer (in parentheses on the right) is the point value used to evaluate the par-
ticular answer. The experimenter transfers these points for each answer marked
by the subject onto special Evaluation Table 2 (below); each box has a number
corresponding to the number on the questionnaire blank. The point value is put
in the box to the right of the question number separated by a red line. If the
subject has given several answers to one question (this is possible, for example.
in the answer to question No 23 about motives for selecting an occupation), the
total number of points for all answers marked by the subject is written in the
box with the number of the appropriate questions.

When the entire evaluation table has been filled out in this way. a set of "keys"
must be used to figure the evaluation of the specific characteristics of the sub-
ject. Each key is a sheet of paper corresponding to the evaluation table in
format, with a number of holes framed by different colors or different types of
hatchuring. By placing each sheet on the evaluation table in turn. we will see
the evaluations for each question related to the particular characteristic

framed by one color or type of hatchuring. By adding the point values in boxes
of one type we receive the general evaluation of the characteristic which is
marked on the particular key (in the lower right corner) by this color or
hatchuring. The maximum possible score is given on each key next to the name of

the characteristic being analyzed. If the experimenter wishes, it is possible
to make a quantitative evaluation by groups of characteristics. which was men-

tioned in the introduction to questionnaires (practical qualities, volitional

qualities, moral qualities. qualities that define motives of behavior. qualities
that define the attitude toward the world around. social consciOusness, breadth
of outlook, level of satisfaction, and existence of symptoms of fatigue).

To make the data on each test subject more objective. the questions on the ques-
tionnaire should be answered not only by the subject but also by his or her com-
rades at work. It is very interesting to consider the opinion of people who know
the test subject well. For this reason, two special questions are included in

the personal data part: 11. Who in your production collective knows you well?
12. Hho in your production collective do you know well?

After processing the questionnaire materials we were able to form an idea of the
social aspect of each operator. Then we begin studying the mental and biological

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VIII”

1 I
I I
,-,

‘IHIIIIA

  
  

  
  
 
 
  

Question

Numbers

222 umwauuvamHANMN
SJ. "WW
'0’. mmugu 12 km) \uotivation in Choi

- lem of Occupation (m1
’ ‘mzywowiml 0f 22 points)

# \ Principle (lax - 6 poir
mmeAMWMOW

. mmquudﬂuuﬂ

" \

\

Initiative (tax - 6 points)
,. I—l

m
a: munch-0W unm—
m

7‘ u, mum/u 0 MM)

- H
"g,“ «madam»; \

a W
2.36 mic-11:61:73”

” \
030”“ $111111

m mad-ram
. —___.Hod -
“9‘2” 3,55%. ﬁ eaty (m 6 pte)
J
a iulm'ullyulrgm my”
.- INrofesaiml Experience
’45" (3%” (max - 6 9:3)
Denandingneu

(max - 6 pte)
E Experience of

” Life (“I '
M/ 6 9“)
g WOW
1-?" “W”
t m Lack of 330:1“
I’ll/Ill], g \ (m - 6 PCO)
‘5‘? ”'9'“

g \Scmulmneu

(lax - 6 pt.)
H: i 5.136;:

Cultunl Level
/(qu - 8 pt.)
m mmom

Ambition

(Qt-awn ) (m - 6 ptl)

\

Discipline (lax -

6 ptn)
I-I
E Satisfaction
91th Oneself

0% r' / (lax ~ 6 pta)
g, lulu-91' “1&5"
W
Purpoaeful-
T. M51565?! " uses (m-
g 6 pts)
E3 my» "4
.6, mmﬁ 3..
3* \Detemnation
E

éW’

[5” (wrung-v ﬂan”)

g-g ? WWW \ c
Ei: Hannah-9M)
e5.
05

\

Self-Control
(max - 6 pta)
E

m
“a” Satisfaction with
a 1” —-" One's Work (m -
a wmupMWI 6 P“)
a a 19, (mmomuﬁ/
I l’ 5'. \Optinisn (lax -
lllllll . '7
a m 6 pts)
5_ infra-u NM!
u
" \
Aggrouiveness

(m - 6 pto)
w
8mm Satisfaction
m%m _.with Material

{2 madam Stat“, (M -
6 pts)
[It’ll/g? WN-

mm
‘98 ’m“" ”m". Attitude toward

‘\‘\

”” Labor as Purpose-
EE 'amc ful Activity
“’0- W‘"’ (m - 6 pts)
‘7

\

Daring, Bravado
(nu - 6 pts)
I“
anwuau: M ‘

7!. wuauyu 5&1‘
63.

99
- #933396 -

10. (“ma-1mm; \
b9.

80

5:3 720101111:

31 (Iona-ug'u Maw}
w /

Fatigue / I
no
(In: - 8 pts)
I”
r
‘- , llllll’
,-

       

!

III/II

My
Mom

an thm
H. tram-0w 6 Intel)
5a

as

mailman-I
? (Jmuyudﬂlﬂ)

6i. \
m

a ”Iv-THU!
3:. ($4.. mm

Lu,
.§=

59.33;:
:5»;

mmnuwmnau
aunmqvllunw

Falsehood Coefficient
(max - 10 points)
I'UK UH“ IAL USE ONLY

made it possible to identify those characteristics which correlate with reli-

ability and can therefore be used as indicators to predict operator behavior
in an emergency situation.

The "unreliable" operator is characterized, on the sociological plane, by lower
indicators for professional interests. practical traits, and volitional quali-

ties. Two operators who are very close to the "unreliability pole" showed marked
traits of melancholy temperament.

Concerning psychological functions we may say the following. The "reliable"
operator has higher indicators for attention switching and stability. The in-
telligence quotient according to Eyesenck approaches 120 and higher for “reliable"
operators; for "unreliable" operators it is in the area of 100.

It is interesting that "unreliable" operators have a higher indicator of short-
term memory than do "reliable" operators. A possible explanation is that short-
term memory was studied by mechanical memorization of a meaningless series of
numbers. "Reliable" operators, with a higher intelligence quotient, are probably
more inclined to logical memorization than mechanical. Significant differences
were also found between "reliable" and "unreliable" operators for the class of
characteristics of the nervous system. "Reliable" operators have lower dynamism
of the stimulation process, higher lability and mobility of nerve processes, and
greater emotional stability.

It should be noted specially that in an emergency situation "unreliable" oper—
ators show signs not only of fatigue, but also overfatigue. It is apparent that
the mismatch between their individual psychological characteristics and their
chosen occupation have a negative effect not only on the production process, but
on the state of their own health. Figure 26 below gives a profile of the "reli-
able" and "unreliable" operators.

Figure 26. Profiles of the "Reliable" (
"Unreliable" (----) Operators

) and

 

Key: (a) Quantitative Expression of Characteristics,
standard units;

 

t (b) Operator Characteristics;
i (1) Professional Interests;
E' (2) Practical Qualities;
g (3) Volitional Traits;
‘ ‘——.—"——' (4) Overfatigue°
a! J~557 Imam .
(b)ahmwwwmimm (5) Stability of Attention;

(6) Switching Attention;
(7) Short-Term Memory;
(8) Intelligence Quotient according to Eyesenck;
(9) Quality of Switching (Mobility);
(10) Dynamism Related to Stimulation;
(ll) Lability;
(12) Emotional Stability.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chapter 5. Hodeling Operator Activity and Some Aspects of Its Practical
Application.

1. Classification of Models of Operator Activity

Basic Concepts
There are dozens of definitions of such concepts as system, mdel, activity, and
so on today. He understand that for each of these concepts it is possible to
formulate another definition, which will be no better and no worse than the old
one, and substantiate its usefulness. Therefore, we have chosen definitions
which for certain reasons seem to us to be convenient for practical use.

A system is a set of elements that are related and interconnected, forming a
definite whole, integrated unit [1].

An ergatic system is a system consisting of operators and the technical teens
with which they carry out their labor activity under certain conditions of a
work environsent.

The systems approach In consideration of the individual elements of a system with
due regard for their interrelationship and mutual influence.

Ergonomic indicators are those interrelated indicators that characterize various
aspects of the functioning of an ergatic system and of operator activity [2].

The operator is a person whose labor activity involves controlling an object.

Labor activit, is a dynamic structure that includes a human being and converts
information and energy. -

Operator activity is labor activity to control an object.
Group activity is labor activity by more than one operator to control an object.

The model is a system of objects of arbitrary nature, devised for a definite pur-
pose and homomorphically representing another system of objects.

Modeling is the study of couple: phenonena by investigation of models of them.

157-

F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The mathematical model is a mathematical system, formulated for a definite pur-
pose which homomorphically represents another system of arbitrary nature.

The physical model is a system of physical objects, devised with a definite pur—
pose, which homomorphically represents another system of physical objects.

The Systems Approach to Modeling Operator Activity

The systems approach to modeling operator activity presupposes preliminary iden-
tification of the hierarchical structure and degree of expression of the ergo-
nomic indicators of the activity under study and then modeling these indicators
with due regard for their interdependence and mutual influence.

If the operator activity under consideration can be described by a certain set A
of ergonomic indicators are A, then after assigning definite weight factors to
the elements of set A depending on degrees of expression it is possible to obtain
ordered set 8 of normalized ergonomic indicators y.e B, which occupy a definite
place in the hierarchical structure, that is

y. <51: < <ys. (5.1-)

where S is the power of set 8. Then modeling operator activity consists of rep-
resenting set Y of normalized ergonomic indicators in set M of models of these
indicators, that is, f : Y + H.

Mathematical Models of Operator Activity

Considering the definition of mathematical model given above (5.1), mathematical
modeling of operator activity consists in representing a set of normalized indi-
cators Y in set M“ of mathematical models, that is, f : Y + H“.

Existing classifications of mathematical models of the activity of human operators
(for example, the classification given in work [6]) usually begin from the prin-
ciple of functionalism. The systems approach to modeling made it possible to
develop a more refined classification of mathematical models of occupational
activity [3]. But it does not meet the purposes of research, because it does not
directly reflect the principle of homomorphism.

When classifying mathematical models of operator activity, we base our classifi-
cation on the nature of the homomorphic representation of the set of ergonomic
indicators. As a result, we obtain three basic classes of mathematical models of
operator activity: subject-mathematical. sign-mathematical. and cybernetic (sub-
ject-mathematical in form and sign-mathematical in content). This classification
is represented in Table 3 (next page).

The subject-mathematical (analog) models can be used to study any spectra of oper-
ator activity which can be described by the same mathematical relations as the
phenomenon being modeled (the principle of isomorphism). The servomodels are an
example of subject-mathematical models. Their essential feature is that they
describe operator activity by means of transfer functions. In this case operator
activity is formalized by selecting the type of transfer function according to the
type of transfer function of the control object. The dynamic characteristics of

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Substance of Homo- <natical
graphic Representation apparatus

Description of operator func- Apparatus of

tions by means of transfer
functions

Study of neostochastic
algorithms of operator
activity

Study of stochastic algo-
rithms of operator
activity

Stochastic model of
decision-asking

Description of profession-
ally inportant operator
characteristics

Forecasting occupational
suitability of operators

Forecasting efficiency of

________ -ardaﬂ rv

automatic regu-
lation theory

Algorithm
theory

Graph theory,
matrix algebra

Probability
theory

Factor and
correlation
analysis

Correlation
analysis

Multidimen-
sional
l||||llll|l|l|lll|l

 

ovoguoa oauao uncuouono

coco: .zuocsu mo maouu o no guacamau

coauoauouuu uaqmuuuo onu no cauuaaau>m

aneuanono

avozual Oar—so no macaw a we antigen no
«use! £30....» .3333. 0.5 no cauulauu>o 535.38. naouw
anuuuowu< voucoauo maauuooaosoanm mo ouovoa acuuunsaum

    

  

manque < couuuucaaou 0: on: an mauve: cauunucomuu um mango
Havana! nose: mo con-uonsm mo mouaunsm oasauuwoao: no unauaz

nunuuz canon
.voacuucou m onpwh_

 

    

160
FOR<0FFHJAI.USE(MVLY

CIA-RDP82-00860R000600020049-1

2007i02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the operator transfer Emotions are synthesized by the techniqus of automatic
regulation theory.

The sign-mathematical models are mathaaatical symbolic systems that homo-
morphically represent a system of ergonomic indicators. The models of psycho-
physiological activity based on analysis of nonstochastic algorithms [6] where
ergonomic indicators are homomorphically represented in algorithmic structures
(logical-mathematical models according to the classification in Table 3) are an
exaqle of the sign-mathematical models.

The cybernetic models are mathematical symbolic system and definite coQuter
structures that homomorphically represent a system of ergonomic indicators.
The cybernetic models simulate the basic patterns of operator activity using a
computer.

Regardless of the class of mathematical models. the process of mathentical
modeling of operator activity can be broken down into four stages.

The first stage is study of particular aspects of operator activity (ergonomic
indicators) and forming qualitative representations of the links among ergo-
nomic indicators in mathematical terms. For exawle, after analysis of the
psychophysiological structure of operator activity in work [5], a multifactoral
mathematical model of the following type was synthesized

x - oz + u, (5.2)

where x is the matrix of original factor space. 2 is the factor matrix, Q is the
natrix of loads of the col-son factors on the signs being investigated, and U
is the matrix of residual factors.

The second stage is analysis of the model using the chosen mathematical appar-
atus and computer technology. This produces the output data (values of ergo-
nomic indicators). In the examples cited the mathematical apparatus is multi-
dimensional statistical analysis. and a computer is used for computation.

The third stage is evaluating the adequacy of the model, that is. evaluating the
degree of correspondence between the results of operator activity and the
theoretical consequences of the model.

The fourth stage is subsequent analysis and updating of the model, because in the
process of the development of ergonomics new findings on ergonomic indicators ac-

cumulate and there comes a time when in light of these findings the originally
proposed mathematical model is outdated.

Physical Hodels of Operator Activity
Considering the definition of a physical model (5.1), physical modeling of oper-
ator activity involves representing the set of normalized ergonomic indicators
Y in set M. of models of arbitrary physical nature, that is, f : Y + 11..

Physical modeling of operator activity is based on the physical resemblance of
ergonomic indicators and the model, that is, at similar moments in time the

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK UPPII. Ind. 03!. UNLY

values of the ergonomic indicators should be adequate to their values for the
model. The existence of adequacy makes it possible to compare experimental data
obtained for the model with real operator activity.

The work of an operator on a simulation trainer that models the dynamics of the
controlled object is an example of physical modeling of operator activity. This
means that each element of information model ae A can be mutually and uniquely
matched with an element of the real equipmentlae 3; each operation P; of a cer-
tain class of operations which transforms element 816 A into a2 e A, Fa(a1) -
oz, can be mutually and uniquely matched with operation Pb, which transforms ele-
ment ble 3 into bze 3, Pub!) - b2. that is F; + P1,. In other words, operator
activity on the trainer is a reflection of the structure of the real activity.

2. Synthesizing Mathematical Models of Operator Activity

Analysis of Mathematical Models of Operator Activity from the
Point of View of Practical Application

Considering the classes of mathematical models of operator activity proposed (see
Table 3 above), we can state that from the standpoint of practical application
the analog models have the greatest limitation.

Because ergonomic indicators depend on many factors, "creation of an adequate
mathematical model of operator activity using the apparatus of automatic regu-
lation theory is a very complex problem" [7]. Therefore, the usual procedure

is to devise mathematical models that consider some one characteristic of the
human operator that predominates in a particular type of activity. This makes
it necessary to formulate a new transfer function in each particular case and

to test the adequacy of the model under conditions of the very rigid constraints
imposed on ergonomic indicators.

Sign-mathematical models of operator activity have received the widest applica-
tion at the present time. Their indisputable advantage is formalization, which
makes it possible to represent particular components of activity and relation-
ships among them in the form of symbols. This makes it possible to manipulate
them in conformity with rules established by such formal sciences as logic and
mathematics. work [7] describes certain multidimensional statistical models and
nontrivial ways to apply them in practice.

In our opinion, simulation modeling of operator activity is most promising. This
is because human behavior is distinguished by great complexity and is described
by a system of ergonomic indicators, only some of which can be formalized without
serious limitations. In these cases simulation modeling makes it possible to ob-
tain quantitative values of ergonomic indicators with adequate computer memory
and available machine time.

It should he noted that logical-mathematical models of operator activity, in par-
ticular algorithmic models. are often an essential attribute of simulation
modeling.

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Simulation Psychological Hodel of Operator Activity

The construction of a simulation model of group activity is based on the prin-
ciples set forth in works [8, 9]. The nodel aiaulates the activity of two
operators interacting in the process of running a technical system, as well as
the work of this system. An essential condition for modeling is the availa-
bility of a known sequence of actions by both operators, that is, an algorithm
of operator activity. Thus, the algorithmic model obtained by analysing the
algorithm of operator activity is a constituent part of the simulation model.

The algorithm of operator activity was constructed by the methodology of G. K.
Zarakovskiy [4]. But the special features of ainulation modeling necessitated a
certain modernization of the graphic representation of the algorithm.

In constructing the algorithm of operator activity a word algorithm (presented in
operating instructions) that describes the functioning of the ergatic systen is
taken as the basis. The algorithm being analyzed is usually represented in

tabular form where the operations (actions, instructions, and the like) carried
out concurrently are written on one line. The table also notes fixed moments in

time before which the operator does not have the right to begin work.

After further analysis the algorithm is broken down into line-subtasks, each of
which belongs to one of the following types:

1. joint, if operations performed by several operators are
written on one line of the table;

2. mchine, if only equipment work is written on the given
line;

3. individual, if operations performed by one operator are
written on the given line.

For each aubtask the degree of iaportance is established, that is, an evaluation
is made of the impact of successful performance of the given subtask on suc-
cessful execution of the entire algorithm.

A line entry of the algorithm of operator activity is written. for example;
I i
E." 4 01.1: t was. (5.3)
where E. D, and I are machine, individual, and joint subtaaka respectively; V is
the index of significant suhtask; N is the index of insignificant subtask; El,
12, and la. are subtasks l, 2, and 6 respectively; 03 1 is aubtask 3 performed by
by operator 1:05 2 is subtask 5 performed by operator 2; and the arrows H indi-

cate the further order of performance of subtasks if the subtask preceding the
arrow pointing upward has not been performed.

 

the construction of algorithms of operator activity is an important stage of
modeling, because the final efficiency of the investigation depends on con-
structing the algorithm correctly (an over—detailed algorithm leads to an un-
justified increase in the volume of work and nehine time, while an over-
simplified algorithn reduces the precision and reliability of results).

163
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The line entry of the algorithm of operator activity (5.3) is not sufficiently
graphic. which makes it difficult to use it during analysis. Therefore, it is
useful to represent the algorithm in graphic form. Figure 27 below gives an
example of writing an algorithm of operator activity. The diagram represents the
work of just one operator performing monitoring and control actions.

 

Figure 27. Example of Writing an Algorithm of Operator Activity

 

In the figure the following symbols are employed:

(:> - an elementary statement - pressing and/or releasing a but-
ton. throwing a switch on or off, and so on. The numbers
inside the circle represent the conventional number of the
control organ (if the number is underlined the button is
pressed; if it is overlined the button is released; if there
is no line the button is pressed and released);

’ - a logical condition (layitins up a transparency); the number
a 1 is a branch which work takes if the logical condition is
o fulfilled, that is, if the transparency is lighted; the num-
ber 0 is the branch which work takes if the condition is not
met. that is, if the transparency is not lighted;

number 1 means the transparency is extinguished; the number

«I — logical condition (extinguishing of the transparency); the
0 0 means it is lighted up;

9 - the symbol + is a jump from one element of the algorithm to
another;

1 - expectation of a certain moment in time before which the op-

eration must not be performed; 1.8 seconds is the moment in
time from the beginning of performance of the particular
algorithm;

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

[I] - signal for equith malfunction.

The basic parameter of the model is the time of operator performance of the par-
ticular action (subtssk), and as a result the time of performance .of the entire

job (task). The time of performance of the subtssk is determined stochastically
according to normal distribution by the Monte Carlo method. The average time of
performance of subtask 113 (average time necessary for operator 1 to perform sub-
task i) for typical subtssks can be obtained by calculation from the relationships
and tables given in work [9]. Where there are special control and monitoring or—
gans for which reference figures are not available, experiments are made with 30-
40 operators as the result of which it is possible to obtain the value F11 and

mean quadratic deviation 6'11 .

The mean probability of success in performance of subtssk F” (the probability that
operator 1 will successfully perform subtssk i) is an isportant parameter of the
model. The quantity 713 can be obtained from the tables given in work [10].

The time of performance of subtssks and the probability of success depend on the
level of tension and speed of the operators.

Simulation of operator activity involves sequential computation of the values of
the variables for each subtssk. The task is considered completed when both oper-
ators have successfully performed all subtssks in the allotted time.

The work of the modeling program begins with feeding the parameters and initial
conditions of simulation to the main computer memory (see Figure 28 below). In
this case the control punchcard contains the following quantities: Tj - maximum
time of performance of the assignmnt by operator J; N" — assigned number of
iterations in the run; Nn— number of operators; N1 - number of subtasks in the
algorithm.

The input values n" and N1 are used to determine the dimensions of the matrix of
raw data, after which the logical structure of the algoritln is fed to the main
computer memory: 1 and ii: are the numbers of the subtssks performed by operators
3 and j'; d1j are t e numbers of the subtssks performed by operator j after per-
formsnce of subtssk 1; I1 is the code of subtssk type (11 - l is a joint subtssk;
I1 - 0 is an individual subtssk; I1 - 3 is an equipment subtssk); B1 is the code

of significance of the subtssk (E1 - 0 is an insignificant subtssk; E1 - l is a
significant subtssk).

in addition to logical quantities, each subtssk uses the following parameters:
'E1j — average time of performance of subtssk i by operator ,1; 013 : mean quad—

ratic deviation of time of performance of subtssk i by operator 5; P13 — average

probability of success in performance of subtssk i; 111 - early moment of comple—
tion of subtssk i by operator 1.

Then the operator characteristics are introduced: H3 - tension threshold of

operator 1; F5 - indicator of individual speed of operator 1; GJ — level of
demands of operator 1.

165

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 28. Feeding Parameters and Initial Conditions of Simu-
lation.

Key: (1) Input of Initial Conditions of Simulation;
(2) Determination of Dimensions of Arrays of Raw Data;
(3) Input of Logical Structure of Algorithm;
(6) Input of Subtask Parameters;
(5) Input of Operator Parameters;
(6) Printing of Data Fed;
(7) Setting Program at Starting Point for Beginning of Next Iteration.

The parameters fed and the initial conditions are printed out to monitor correct

compilation of data, and then the program is set in the initial state for the be-
ginning of the next iteration and simulation of the suhtask.

Selection of the operator is done in the first sta e of modeling (see Figure 29

below). This is done by comparing tines TYj and T 3' used by operators 1 and j'
by the moment of simulation of the particular subtask. The operator who has
spent the least time is selected, and if the times are equal the operator with
the lower number, that is operator 1, is selected. If the operator selected must
wait for the partner (this is determined by the logic of the algorithm, in other
words by the value dgj'), the actions of the other operator are simulated in ad-
vance. If this is not the case, a determination is made whether the operator
aust wait for the arrival of moments in ti 113 to perform the next subtask i.
If time T - 111 has not yet arrived, then T13 is set equal to I11 and the operator
whose actions are to be simulated is determined again. Next it is established
whether subtask i is one of the joint type (11 - 1). In this case the full time
of the operator who worked longer is taken as the time of the slower operator.

For the operator finally selected, a computation is made of the urgency of situ-
ations, tension, and the cohesion of the group during performance of the particu-
lar subtask (see Figure 30 below). First the tine T.¢yleft available to the
operator to perform the entire task is determined, and the urgency of the situa-
tion is analyzed. If there is enough time remaining to complete all subsequent

aubtasks, the situation is considered nonurgent and the operator is not under ten-
sion, in other words tension is taken equal to one (‘13 - l).

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

 

Figure 29. Operator Selection and Synchronization of working

Tine.

 

 

Figure 30. Conpuution of Urgency. Tension. end Cohesion

Key: [na- Yen;
Hem— No.)

In the case where the title retaining in eufficient only to coqlete the nignificent
eubteeke. the progre- ignoreo insignificant eubtuke. coneidering tension on - 1.
But if the tine reuining ie less than is needed to perforn the rennining signifi-

cant nubteeks, operator tension in cowuted by the formula

"'/ '—‘-.,

N“ it
g " (5.4)

’0" —V’ ~
TI—TU

167-
FOIOFI'IGMJBEONLY
I‘UK UPPILIAL UDI. UNLI

A
where $217.; is the sum of average times of performance of remaining significant
d U

subtasks; N13 is the number of significant suhtaaks in the tasks; 11 is the time of
performance of an assignment (determined by initial modeling data); and, TY: is the
time spent for performance of preceding subtasks.

In the model group cohesion is a variable whose magnitude ranges from 0 to l, and is
a function of tension. The cohesion coefficient, which permits an assessment of the
condition of the group. is determined for performance of each subtssk by the formula

c.,-- "{‘"f__‘1 , (5.5)
J 1'
where 013 is the indicator of group cohesion; 313 is the tension of the operator per-
forming suhtask 1; s15' is the tension of the partner; H5 and Hj' are the tension
thresholds of the operator and partner being simulated in the particular subtssk
(the tension threshold is the tension value at which activity is disrupted and the
number of mistakes and time of performance of sucn tasks increase sharply).

 

Next the time of performance of subtask i by the operator is determined (see
Figure 31 below). The pseudorandom quantity K15 formed by generator 1 according to

 

Figure 31. Determining Time of Performance of Suhtask i.

Kc.: (l) Generator;
| ﬂu — Yes;
Hem- NO-l

(K1) . 0; 5K - 1.0) is selected for this. The quantity K13 is used to calculate

the intermediate quantity U11. which takes account of the initial parameters of the
aubtask

Vb - (In + K03.)-

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When calculating the ties of perfornance of mhtasha it is necessary to use the
nsgnitude of total tension, which is equal to

‘u'd-H-io.‘ _'_' (5.6)-

ehere A“ is the aptitude of teneion sriaing in the operator when the partner is
mder tension. It is taken as squel to zero if the partner feels no tension, that

is. 311' -l. Uheres11> H1 andAu-l,i:therensiningsitmtiensitisde-
tel-lined by the for-Ida
“=11:—

Por the case where t'otal operator tension is less than the threshold value

(811 < H1), the tine of performance of the suhtaeh is counted in the following
sequence:

 

(l) The standardized value of total operator tension

sn—l

1‘ determined 1 - F;

(2) The coefficient of distortion of tins of perfornsnce
of the subteek under teneion is calculated

2., .3 w + w“ + + c: + 4. (5-7)

vhere a. b. end c are polynonisl coefficients; n is
the indicator of the power of the independent variable;
and. d is the intersection;

(3) The tine of perfornence of euhtaek i is deternined
teking into account the operator' s individual speed

( 5) 10-52%, .,- (53;

In the case where an > + l. the tine of perfornance
of subtask i is deter-in ~from the expression

Qli - 3V; - 21;.
where Q1131 is the tine of perfomnce of the submit with-
d

out can erina individual operator speed. Finally. we
receive
h;-'0nFr . (53)

In the renaining cases, the following order is eqloyed to deterlline t“:

(l) The internediate quantities are cosputed
lla,-2:.,-+1J-2M,-; tho-Hm Leash-Mai“:

(2) The tine of perfomnce of the suhtaek in celculsted
by the formula

It, - (“’0 + LID—7‘;- I (5.10)

 

169

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
I'UI UI'I'IUAI. U3!- UNI-I

The quantityutij determined by one of the expressions (S.8)—(5.10) is added to
total time '1': used by the operator from the beginning of the iteration. Then

comes the nex stage of nodeling. determining success and failure in performance
of the current subtaek (see Figure 32 below).

 

 

Figure 32. Determining Success and Failure.

Key: (1) Generator;
[ﬂu — Yes;
Hem— No.1

Analysis of success and failure begins with selection of a pseudorsndom nunber R
formed by generator 2 according to a uniforn law of distribution in a unit inter-
val. This number is used to compute the criterial quantity :1. There are three
variations for determining e1 (depending on the value of current operator tension).
In the case where s15< H3, these intersediate quantities are found

cz-(Alyd1)n-:I:; d-Jli-‘ljs‘

 

a... “:f‘ . (5.11)
where a“ > H: + l, the following expression is used
n- L? . (5.12)

In the remaining situations, intersediste quantities are detersined by these
formulas

eQ-s.,--;M5+B: 2}=:,—M,+i.
after which we finally find
4 ' (5.137

The value of the criterial quantity CJ , obtained fron one of the expressions

(5.11)-(5.13) is used for comparison with a given probability of success in per-
formance of subtesk i:

h- Pu-u.

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIMIOFFKJA1.US£IDNLN

In this case f1 > 0 signifies successful cowletion of the subtask; other cases
are continued failures. The success or failure is registered by a success or
failure register, and then the subtask vhich must be performed in the next step is

determined .

The modeling sequence fncludes sn evaluation of the level of operator demands.
which takes the operator's purposefulneas into account (see Figure 33 below).

 

Figure 33. Evaluation of the Level of Demands and Cowletion
of Computation.

Key: (1) Generator;
(2) End of Computations;
(3) Printing of Results;
I ﬂu — Yes;
Hcm— No.1

To analyze the influence of this characteristic the degree of divergence between
the operator's goals and the results of the operator's labor are comuted for each

subtask:

1 71

MWCIALUSEONLY
PU“ VI’U'ILII‘I. 0-95 Ul‘hl

 

‘v
2.5 \‘ "" " -‘
13.6,- ‘V‘ , (5.14)

where B is the degree of divergence in goals; 61 is the level of demands of oper-
Iv
ator 1: i223" is the number of subtasks successfully performed by the operator;

‘2'!) is the total number of subtasks performed by operator 3.

P

After this one of five situations may arise with using the quantity B to correct
operator activity.

If B > +0.02, then two cases are possible:

(1) where :13 > M , the value of the probability of successful
performance 0 the next subtask by operator 1 is lowered:

p(+u - pg“ - 0.033].

(2) where s 4 M . the value of the probability of successful
1.1
performance 0 the eubtaak by the operator increases

ﬁi-H.) II pull + 0,088].

If the divergence in goals is within the range -0.02 < B < +0.02 no correction
of operator activity is made. If B < -0.02, two cases are also possible:

(1) where s1 > NJ. the magnitude of ongoing operator tension is
restricted to the threshold value (s13 - H5);

(2) where 311 4 NJ, the level of operator claims is increased by
quantity R11. formed by random number generator 1 according
to the normal law (E11 - 0, 0, 011 - 1.0).

The computations of one iteration are cosplated when the numbers of the next aub-
tasks of both operators are equal to zero; in this case the number of remaining
iterations until the end of the run N, is analysed. If N, i 0. the program is
set in the initial position for the beginning of the iteration of the algorithm;
in the opposite case. the necessary results of modeling are printed out and the
process of simulation is stopped.

The simulation model of operator activity was realized on a Minsk-32 computer.
The computer program is given in Appendix 1.

The possibilities of using a model can be illustrated with the example of esti-

mating the necessary level of automation of one of the models of monitoring-
testing equipment and evaluating the efficiency of the testing process.

172

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FCHI()FIWCJAI.I£SEZ(HNLY

As H. the efficiency of the testing process, we will take the ratio of the number
of subtasks successfully performed by the operator to the total number of sub-
tssks. Proceeding fron this it is interesting to learn how testing efficiency
depends on limiting tine T of performance of the assignment by the operator. In
the process of nodeling th s relationship was investigated while changing the
values of T from 220 and 270 seconds. Efficiency depends signficantly on the
individual haracteristics of the operator. In the process of modeling, therefore,
we simulated a nornal operator (P) - 1.0), a fast operator (P3 - 0.7), and a slow
operator (P1 + 1.3). Figure 34 below presents the results of the nodeling. It

....—...

,‘4_——__———— —————

 

 

  

    

      

ma

$0 an

no as zw G.sec

Figure 3a. Dependence of Efficiency of Algorithm Performance
on Liaiting Tine of Operator Work.

 

became clear in the process of investigation that the magnitude of the threshold
of tension H does not have a significant impact on H. Therefore, an average
value H5 - 2 was adopted.

The results of modeling showed that a fast operator (P - 0.7) works more effi-
ciently, while a slow operator (F - 1.3) works less e ficiently. For example,
where T3 - 240 seconds. the efficiency of the testing process with the fast
operator was "0.7 - 0.98. while.for the normal operator it was "1.9 a 0.89, and
for the slow operator "1.3 - 0.7b. This enables us to define work standards for
operators depending on the assigned efficiency of the testing process.

Analysis of the results of modeling showed that where T is small (less than 220

seconds), the efficiency of the process is low (H - 0.7 ). As T increases it

rises, and is equal to one for a fast worker when I} - 250 secon s, for a normal
operator where Tj - 260 seconds, and for a slow operator when Tj - 270 seconds.

173

NROHKMLWEOMX
a van vs 0 assas- vua. VAC...

Therefore, when testing large batches of instruments with adequate tile highly
efficient testing can be achieved. If it is necessary to test a large number
of instruments in a limited time, the efficiency of the tests becomes inadequate.
In this case the need arises to automate the monitoring and testing equipment.

Synthesis of an Information Simulation Model of Group Operator
Activity

The proposed model simulates the interrelated group activity of operators when
processing information. The essential features of this activity are that a
group consisting of n operators is given a certain amount of information R; ,
which takes a certain time T to process. The information subject to processing
is divided into parts in equal proportions according to the number of information
channels (operators). thus establishing a certain initial intensity of information
flows -
”s (5.15)

F,=T'

 

where P is the initial intensity of the information flow in information channel
j; H: is the total amount of information being processed; n is the nuaber of
information channels; and. T is the tine allocated for information processing.

The operators process the information signals presented to them. forming appro-
priate actions with elements of the control consoles according to assigned
algorithms. In the course of work the differences in the intensity of flows of
information presented and processed in each channel are measured. Information
(signals) correctly processed by the operators is summed in the resulting infor-
mation receiver. The ratios of the information submitted and processed are
calculated with a selected step to quantify time At for each operator:

"'3' iiiiii I (5.16)

“Ll-T67.
where a1 is the indicator :8 quality of work for the operator in information
channel a in work cycle j; 1 is the number of signals correctly processed by
the operator in information c annel j including work cycle 1; N25 is the total
number of signals presented to the operator in information channel 3, including

work cycle i.

The values of a; are used to compute standardized coefficients of information
loading of the channels in the next cycle:

 

. s
bid-M a + ’ (5'17)
)2‘0
1-!

where b1+1.j is a standardized coefficient of information loading of channel 1 in

'I
_‘

the next cycle (i + 1); and, }_s” is the sum value of the indicators of work

i-I

quality of the group of operators in step i.

174

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The intensity of the information flow which should he presented to the operator in

the next step, taking into account the activity of this individual and of the
entire group, is determined from the expression

’i-hlﬂut " ”0:0 (543)
T — Ti

where H91 is the total amount of information correctly processed by the group of

operators by the completion of cycle i; 1'1 is the time from the beginning of work
to the completion of cycle 1.

 

Fiﬁ.) a

Thus. a lowering of the quality of work by any operator in the group causes a
slight reduction in the information loading of this operator by a corresponding

increase in the loading of the operators. "here the proposed method is used, the
following are selected as criteria of group activity:

a. The quality of group activity, defined by the expression
Q-%. (5.19)

where s‘ is the total number of information signals pre—
sented to the group of operators and s2 is the total number
of signals correctly processed by the group;

b. The efficiency of group work, measured by the ratio of the
initial intensity of the total information flow to the cur-
rent value of intensity of the total information flow:

 

’r (5.20)
E - T;- I
H
where F; t T— is the initial intensity of the total infor-
mation flow; P _ $8} is the intensity of the total
:I -37-
information flow in step i. Thus, expression ($.20)
assumes the form
H:(T—r') . (5-2‘)
B -

Tkﬂg‘ﬁgd .

c. Coordination and smoothness of operator work, determined by
the uniformity of the coefficients of information loading of

the channels: a _
Z - n“ n b). (3.2;
ha

where n“ is e standardizing coefficient. and b1 is the coef-

ficient of information loading of channel 1 in the final
cycle.

The integrated criterion of group activity in the model is the value of the
threshold magnitude of intensity of the total information flow. with this in

mind the initial intensity of the information flow for the group of operators
being modeled is increased by a certain quantization step from run to run.

175

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
0 vs. moo gas—acme; u...- v. a...

This is done either by increasing the flow or reducing the time necessary to
process it. The magnitude of intensity of the information flow at which the
group could not handle its assignment (did not process all information) is con-
sidered the threshold for the particular grOup.

Figure 35 below shows a flowchart of the simulation model. The model works as

Key: (1) Input of Raw Data;

(2) Setting in Initial Position;

(3) Determining Work Intensity;

(6) Evaluation of Tension;

(5) Determining Number of Information
Symbols Presented in a Cycle;

(6) Simulation of the Presentation and
Processing of One Information Symbol;

(7) Computation of the Parameters of
Group Activity;

(8) I Cycles;

(9) t Iterations;

(10) Printing.

    
 

   
   
  
 
   

If e Mugﬂa: “can:
, ﬂounder-rt .v um

 
  

{Ii m u... .'
L"! ”01727.1":

Figure 35. Flowchart of the Simulation Information Model lf
Operator Group Activity.

_—_———

 

follows. Before simulation is begun the raw data are fed to the program. The
data may be divided into three types. The first type comprises raw data that
simulates characteristics of each operator separately: time spent by the oper-
ator to process information R (time of simple sensomotor reaction). rean
quadratic deviation 0 of reaction time, tension threshold M, probability of
error-free work P, and the polynomial coefficients of tension* (5.7). The second
type comprises raw data that characterize the group as a whole: amount of in-
formation processes H. and time T in which the information submitted must be

.___—————.

*Section 3 gives a detailed consideration of the process of obtaining polynomial
coefficients of tension.

176

FOR Ol-‘ﬁClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

processed. The third type comprises parameters necessary for the work of the
model (iterations) and for printing. In addition. the number of operators in
group H is an important parameter that is essential for the work of the model
and to describe the group. The order of inputting data to the program is shown

in Figure 36 below.

 

Figure 36. Inputting Raw Data.

 

All parameters must be reset in advance for the work of the model. In this case
they are broken into two groups: parameters which are reset before each itera-
tion, and parameters which are reset more than once uithin each iteration. The

order of resetting is shown in Figure 37 below.

 

Figure 37. Resetting the Model.

The work of the model begins by simulating the breakdown of the intensity of

the total information ﬂow F by channels. In the first stage here the presenta-
tion of information flow FIX] . F!!! to each operator at uniform initial inten-
sity is simulated. In subsequent stages the intensities of the intonation flous

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
are determined depending on the coefficients of information loading of the
channels BIx] and t‘e current value of the intensity of the total infatuation
flow Fl. This stage of work of the model is shown in Figure 38 below.

 

rm-am Fl

 

Figure 38. Distribution of the Initial Information Plow
by Channels.

Each computation of the intensity of information flows is done after a time in-
terval during which at least one operator must process one information symbol.
During this time the remaining operators should process one or more information
synbols. A special subroutine was devised for the next stage of coqmtation in
each iteration. The basic feature of this subroutine is that it presents all
remaining informtion symbols H0 in the time remaining to the group T0. The time
during which each of the operators must process one informtion symbol is de-
fined as Tlx] - l/Plx). This time allows an evaluation of the tension of each
operator. which is the ratio of the time required to process the information in
an ordinary state Rlx] to time remaining: s[x]R[x]/T[x]. The magnitude of
tension Slx] and the polynomial coefficients 1([1], 1([2]. RD], [([6], and KIS]
make it possible to evaluate the influence of tension on information processing
time by determining the distortion coefficient of time DIX]. Where tension is
greater than the threshold ﬁlm], the time distortion coefficient is taken as
equal to a constant value D[x] - 2 so that it is known that the operator will
not handle the information processing in time. The computer algorithm for
evaluating tension is shown in Figure 39 below.

During the simulation process it was established that if even one of the oper-
ators has a tension value twice as high as the threshold (slxl > ZIile), the
tension value for the other operators will also be above the threshold value.
In other words. performance of the work by the group is disrupted by tension.

Figure 1.0 below shows the algorithm for computing the number of information
symbols U[x] presented to each operator in one cycle. The quantity CIx] repre-
sents additional information (number of symbols) presented to an operator who
is working successfully to compensate for the failures of the operator who is
behind, and INT is a symbol that signifies raunding to the lower whole number.

Next the model simulates the processing of informtion symbols by each of the
operators (see Figure 41 below). Pseudorandom nudiers are used here. The first
pseudorandom number. uniformly distributed in the interval (0, l), is used to
select the action for the assigned probabilities of alternatives which add up to
one. If Ple - RND(x) > 0, we consider that the information was processed cor-
rectly; in the opposite case we consider it to have been done incorrectly. The
second pseudorandom number is used to determine the time required to process

one information symbol R0. which we consider to be distributed by the normal law.

178

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     
 

_..-._—-

—- Dlli'i‘l'lj'ﬂlﬂ'ﬁf'
_—.[::___u-:]\\\\‘ 4
it“ now ,r’”
At:
/A no
[6'C6'l 56'”
I ”(In

Figure 39. Evaluating Operator Tension.

 

Key: [Ha-o Yes;
Hcm- No.1

 

It is assumed here that if R0 < 0.15 seconds. it is necessary ' \ take R0 = 0.15
seconds in later calculations. If R0 is greater than the time required to
process one information symbol Tle, the operator is reckoned to have failed.

Figures 42 and 103 helou show the computation of the parameters necessary for
further work of the model: the coefficients of intonation loading of channels
le], ongoing 'ime Tl. the number of information signals remaining for the group
to process H0. the time left available to the group To, and parameters for evalu-

ation of group activity (quality of group activity Q, efficiency of group ac-
tivity B, and coordination of operator work 2).

Depending on the goals or. modeling, the data of interest my be printed out
after each iteration (nee Figure 66 below) and after calculating N iterations
(see Figure 145 below).
I’Vﬂ UI'I'ILIAI. U5; UI‘L'

____———.-. _———\

C(xl-CIII'VW':

   
   

vhrnﬂﬂﬂ”

Figure 60. Determining the Number of Information Signals Presented
to Each Operator in a Cycle.

 

The modeling program in the BASIC language and the symbols for the variables
are given in Appendices 2 and 3 respectively.

To assess the possibility of practical use of the proposed model of inter-
related activity by a group of operators, evaluate the workability of the cri-
teria given, and assess possible work regimes, statistical modeling of inter-
related group activity was done in an information overload regime.

The modeling was done on an H—6000 digital computer. As initial data. which
were not changed from one "run“ to another. we selected the number of oper-
ators in a group H - 3. a polynomial of tension the same for each operator of
the group with coefficients KIl] - 1. KIZ] . -2.35. K[3] II 3.472. and K[lo] -
-l.829, processing time for information RIx] - 0.4 seconds equal for all oper-
ntors. as was mean quadratic deviation Glx] - 0.1 seconds, threshold of tension
MIX] = 2. The time during which the information presented had to be processed
T - 10 seconds was also made unchanging through all iterations. The variable
parameters are the number of information symbols B which the group must process.
and the probability of error-free work Plx] for each operator of the group.

The computations were stopped and data of interest were printed out after 10
successful iterations in a "run" or after 10 failures owing to tension. Table 4
below presents the initial data and results of modeling.

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure ‘1. Simulating the Process of the Operator's
Processing of an Intonation W1.

 

Figure 102. Determination of the Coef-

ficients of Infomtion Loading of the
Channels.

 

 

The following relationships were constructed on the basis of the results of

statistical nodeling: a dependence of the coordination and smothness of oper-
ator work on the nunber of intonation signals presented to the group, 2 - POI);

181

MWUSEONIX
a v» v. o .90.... wu v. C...

10'70‘ 7!

 

Figure A3. Deter-ination of the Partnetera of Operator Group
Activity.

 

Figure 44. Printing Out the Results of One Iteration.

182

FTHICNWHCJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 65. Printing Out the Results of N Iterations

 

a dependence of the efficiency of group work on the number of information sym-
bola E - P(ﬂ); a dependence of the quality of group activity on the number of
infatuation symbols Q - F(ﬂ) for three groups of operators. The first group in-
cluded two operators with a probability of error-free work P[l] - P12] - 0.9 and
one with a probability P[3] - 0.7. The second group comprised operators with
differing probabilities of error-free work: Ptl] - 0.9, P[2] - 0.8, and P[3] -
0.7. The third group represented the activity of operators with the same proba-
bility of error-free work: P[l] - PIZ] - PI3] - 0.8. The relationships ob-
tained for 2 - F(H), B - F(H). and Q - ?(H) for each of the groups are presented
in Figures 46, 47, and 68 respectively.

An analysis of the relationship 2 . P(h) permits the conclusion that when the
number of information symbols is increased one should expect the smoothness and
coordination of work to remain constant or rise slightly until the tine when
failure owing to tension occurs for the group. After the number of information
signals is increased to the level when tension failures begin to appear, there
is a sharp drop in smoothness and coordination of work. Hhen the number of in-
formation signals is increased further this drop becomes sore fluid. The rela-
tionships B - P(H) and Q - P(H) have a similar appearance.

Analysis of the coordination and smoothness of work of each of the three groups
of operators revealed that despite the maximum uniformity in the third group
(P[l] - P[2] - PIS] = 0.8), its smoothness of work after the onset of tension-
caused failures was not much higher than that of the second group, which had
operators with different probabilities of error-free work. In this case the
quality of group activity and efficiency of work are higher in groups which have

leaders, evidently because in this case they will compensate for the poor work
of one of the other operators.

This also explains the fact that during simulation of the work of the uniform

group the number of iterations that ended in failures caused by tension was
greater than in the other groups.

183

INN! OHHHCIAI.IIHECHULY
a vs. vs . ova-sa- nun v.~ua

Table 4. Initial Data and Results of Hodeling.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Number of l l |

: I N a s a
Variation P'l P P3 . n r l c - Q

—————'———————_—-
I 0.9 0.9 0.7 35' 10 0 10 0.943 0.917 0.832 0
2 0.9 0.9 0.7 ‘0 i0 0 i0 0.951 0.8‘8 0.155 0
3 0.9 0.9 0.7 50 10 (I 14 0.678 0.539 0A8»? ‘
4 0.50 in." 0.7 60 10 0 15 0.015 0.525 0359 5
5 ".9 ".9 0.7 70 10 0 17 0.51 0.518 0.457 7
G ".9 0.8 0.7 30 10 U 10 0.943 0.928 0.820 0
7 0.9 0.6 0.7 60 £0 0 10 0.9‘3 0.876 0.777 0
8 0.5! 0.3 0.? 50 i0 0 i? 0.560 0.6% 0.005 7
9 0.14 0.8, 0.7 00 10 0 i8 0.“? 0.476 0.381 8
1:: 0.9 0.8 0.7 70 10 0 20 OM‘ 0.05 0.349 10
1! (LR 0,8 0.8 30 10 0 10 0.961 0.915 0.819 0
i2 ".5 0.1.1 0.9 ‘0 10 0 H 0.876 0.687 0.638 1
1! «as 0.3 0.8 50 10 0 17 0.561 0A“ 0.4“ 1
if: 0.5 0.8 0.8 GU 10 0 13 0.536 0.332 0.301 8
i'» 0.8 ".8 0.5 70 in 0 15 0.313 0.270 0.230 10

 

The results obtained correlate significantly with experience in operator ac-
tivity. Thus, even successful perfornance of a task in an ergatic system
usually involves unequal personal contributions by the individual operators.

It is almost always possible to identify an operator who guides the general
strategy of the group (the leader). whereas the other partners, involuntarily
and often not fully aware of it, subordinate themselves to the leader's actions.

It is important to observe here that each operator nay under certain conditions
take the role of leader.

Thus, the results of modeling showed that the criteria of group activity pro-
posed in the model are correct and to some extent reflect the processes that

take place within a group when working under conditions of information over-
loads.

Pactor Models of Operator Activity

The psychophysiological factors of operator activity are not subgect to direct
measurement. Therefore. they are frequently investigated by reflection in ob-
served or specially elicited actions by the human operator. One of the varia-
tions of these actions is "testing" - a natural or specially designed influence
on the psyche which evokes a reflection of latent characterisic P which mani-
fests itself in an objectively recorded action 2. where Z is an unknown function
of F. In other words, the factor structure of operator activity can be disclosed
by the techniques of factor analysis based on the results of testing.

The mathematical essence of factor analysis is as follows [11]. An empirical
matrix of standardized data 2 - [213] is given where each 211 is an evaluation
of individual 1 according to test i. It is assumed that

184

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFICIAI.USB‘0NLN

 

    

.30 00

ion and Smoothnees of
f Information Presented.

Figure #6. Dependence of the Coordinst
Work by Groups of Operators on Amount 0

 

Figure 67. Dependence of the Efficiency of lurk of Groups of
Operators on the Amount of Information Presented.

 

 

Figure 68. Depenfence of the Quality of Group Activity on the
Amount of Information Presented.

185

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NWLY
a vs. vs a ova-mm. u..-- U. can

=-.-hu¢u—:l:m+ +1..o.,--:- +1..¢..,-, (5.23)

where 11, is the factor weight of test 1 for factor r; and, .r3 is the r—factor
for Individual 1.

The matrix of factor weights has thelfolloﬁing appearance.
un ""

13.1,: ...12, ... Ia

...........

l;l 1,2.1,
The matrix of factors may be :epresented as follows
Iq'u‘o 1: - Q5!) - -¢l.\' |_

 

‘sz‘h: - W, «as
Then on the basis of (5. 23) we may write that 2 - LP. In turn, 22' - R, where

2' is a transposed empirical matrix; and, R is a matrix of correlations among

tests. Then 9
R 3 LL, 9 (5 __4-)
where L' is a transposed I :rix of factor weights.
The equation (5.24) expret-. Thurston's basic theorem of factor analysis. It

follows from it that the eieo nts of the main diagonal of matrix R represent
the sums of the squares of the elements of the corresponding lines of matrix L.
on each line of which are the factor weights of a certain indicator 1 for all
the common factors, that is 111. 112...., 11;, ..., 113. The squares of these
d 3 " D a a

factor weights are inter ependent [hi-1&4- +1.}; +12. = hi.
where h1 is the generality, that is, that part of the test dispersion which de-
pends on the common (general) factors.

Factor models were used to identify the general psychophysiological structure
of the activity of operators of automated control systems (ASU's) and to clarify
the microstructure of operator activity in a specific ASU.

As an example let us consider investigation of factor mathematical models of
the microstructure of operator activity.

The activity of the operator in an ergatic system is a dynamic organization of
actions and operations directed to performing definite labor tasks. As a

rule operators of ergatic systems during their work perform not one, but several
tasks. each of which presupposes performance of a definite set of actions in

an assigned sequence, that is, execution of a definite algorithm. In the
general case. therefore. operator activity has a hierarchical structure con-
sisting of a series of algorithms A1. A2. ..., A“. each of which includes a

set of actions (subtasks) (:51, :12, ..., 2 In its turn. each subtask
consists of a subset of elementary joperatiohs) {811: 812. ..., 91H} Thus,

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

investigation of the nicroatructure of concrete operator activity requires de-
tersination of the hierarchical structure. that is, coeputing in a noncontra-
dictory and convenient nanner the levels of collective and individual activity,
work rsgines, and tasks and suhtaahs perfornsd by operators in each particular
case. Structural analysis [3]. which envisions sequential perfornance of the
following actions, my be used for this purpose:

1. deternining the range of duties for each of the oper-
ators of the ergatic systen;

2. identifying work regines when perforning operational
tasks;

3. identifying subsets of tasks that met be perforned in
each work regilae.

Based on analysis of the activity of an AS“ operator, three basic algorithns for
perforning operational tasks were identified:

1. nonitoring the paraneters of one of the elenents of the
A50;

2. changing the regine of functioning of the A80;

3. performing the job of external cont. \1 contour for
the system.

Analysis of the instructions that control procedures for perforning these tasks
made it possible to identify the characteristic actions perforned with systen
control elenents and the logical conditions of their application.

A conparative analysis of quantitative evaluations of algorithm, done by the cri-
teria proposed in work [A], shows (see Table 5 below) that despite its snail total
nunber of elenents. algorithn three has the highest values for relative .nuiaers of
efficient operators and logical conditions. logical conplexity. and dynaaic in-
tensity. This allows it to be classified with the nost difficult tasks in the
set under consideration. Therefore. algori'hn three is the nest interesting as
an object for further investigation.

A natural experinent was conducted to clarify the psychophysiological structure of
the chosen algorithn of activity. Operators of the particular ASU were enlisted
as test subjects. During the process of executing the algorithn the tine spent
by each operator for error-free performnce of work cycles was recorded and the
average tine of perfornance of each action was deternined.

The second stage of investigation was to test this group of operators with equip-
nent and questionnairetechniques. As a result more than 30 variables. which are
shown in Table 6 below were obtained and a astrix of intercorrelstions was cal-

culated. A standard conputer progran in Portran was used to factor the corre-
lation matrix [2, p 255].

187

FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
Table 5. Quantitative Characteristics of Algorithms

Algorithms

Evaluation Criteria 1 2 3
fferent Operators in the Algorithm 20 32 15
Eferent Operators in the Algorithm 16 21 16
pgical Conditions in the Algorithm 6 7 7
r of Elements of Algorithms 60 60 38
ﬁst of Afferent Operators 0.50 0.53 0.60
mer of Bfferent Operators 0.35 0.35 0.63
mer of Logical Conditions 0.15 0.11 0.16
Quality of Algorithm 35 56 31
plexity of Algorithm 6 7 7
l of Performance of Algorithm 90 60 20
Le Intensity 0.66 1.5 1.9
music Intensity 0.15 0.52 0.80
gicsl Intensity 0.28 0.97 1.15

 

Table 6. Variables Investigated

Name of Indicator
Time Indicators of Performance of the Algorithm

Switching off signals

Pressing keys on console

Finding and pressing button 3 on console

Switching off safety device

Resetting control elements

Perceiving information group m

Finding and pressing control element

Transmitting information on execution of the algorithm

Testing Indicators

Individual speed

Thresholds of tempo-cased tension

Addition with switching (productivity)

Addition with switching (relative frequency of errors)
Entangled lines (productivity)

Entangled lines (relative frequency of errors)
Arrangement of numbers (productivity)

Arrangement of numbers (relative frequency of errors)
Landolt rings (productivity)

Landolt rings (relative frequency of errors)
Compasses (productivity)

Compasses (relative frequency of errors)

Memory (absolute indicator)

Establishine oatterns (productivity)

[Table 6 continued next page]

188

Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂ£(ﬂﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Table 6 continued]

Nunber of
Indicator Nane of Indicator
Testing Indicators
23 Establishing patterns (relative frequency of errors)
26 Number-letter combinations (success coefficient)
25 Tine sense (average value)
26 Tine of sinple reaction to light
27 Tine of conplex reaction to light
23 KChSH [expansion unknown]
29 Teppiag teat (difference)
30 Tepping test (general)
31 Coordination (success coefficient)

 

As a result of the calculations nude, four basic factors which deter-inc the pat-
terns of the process under study were identified. Table 7 below shows the factor
natrix obtained in the course of 11 iterations of rotation. Our problen does not

Table 7. Factor Matrix

 

 

Factors
Nuaber of
Variable 1 Z 3 ‘
1 0.13776 0.86682 0.25365 0.30767
2 0.18767 0.86279 0.23733 0.27796
3 0.12859 0.86773 0.25803 0.31129
6 0.88965 0.07203 -0.09562 -0.10179
5 0.93261 -0.02203 -0.66390 -0.06l60
6 0.91906 -0.00381 -0.07566 -0.06265
7 0.66369 0.18100 0.08561 0.07721
8 0.52286 0.21663 -0.22535 0.66156
9 0.29716 0.57006 -0.l7729 -0.12938
10 -0.26695 0.35232 -0.50921 0.21786
11 0.16032 -0.15007 0.62921 -0.09l69
12 0.21256 0.20619 -0.51232 0.29727
13 0.16616 -0.66291 0.36256 0.16502
16 0.19368 -0.12890 -0.27666 -0.26039
15 -0.36666 1.9796 0.26685 0.05320
16 0.35315 ~0.05695 0.21901 0.13096
17 -0.06330 0.19126 -0.02799 0.53608
18 0.26126 0.22768 0.19601 0.20358
19 ~0.19286 0.12661 0.59552 0.26938
20 0.28078 -0.16165 —O.37763 -0.16086
21 0.05886 -0.11983 0.06066 0.53855
22 ~0.00769 +0.08776 0.02630 0.55000
23 0.11296 -0.10201 -0.53937 0.26602
26 -0.17331 -0.11019 0.56376 0.18685
25 -0.17837 0.60625 0.12268 -0.19106

[Table 6 continued next page]
189

FOR OFFNJAI.USI(HQLY
I‘UK UI'PILIAL UDL UI‘LI

[Table 7 continued]

Factors
Number of
Variable 1 2 3 6
______________________________________________._.__________________________

26 0.07675 0.b3620 -0.11627 -0.l8166
27 0.08123 0.06523 0.20956 -0.05066
28 0.17049 -0.12080 -0.16l38 0.59780
29 -0.l3352 -0.01152 0.00013 0.31640
30 0.06866 -0.27331 0.05663 0.37507
31 -0.21587 0.50260 -0.17567 -0.06801

_________________—___.———————

include a meaningful interpretation of the factors. Nonetheless, analysis of
the ‘actcr load of the variables (see Figure 69 below) makes it possible to
define a fairly clear factor structure in the algorithm under investigation.

 

Figure «9. Matrix of Factors of Algorithm of Activity

Thus. factor 1 makes it possible to use variables 9, 10, 12, 15, 16, 18, 20. and
31 to construct the psychophysiological structure of actions characterized by
Indicators 4-8. Indicator 8 is also closely linked in factor k with variables
22, 23. and 28. The high loads of variables 1. 2. and 3 in factor 2 make it
possible to identify test indicators 9, 10, 12. 13, 18, 25, 26. and 31 which are
closely linked to them.

To analyze the factor structure of an isolated action of the algorithm we se-
lected the indicators shown in Table 8 below.

190

FOR 0011CLALI£§E¢MQLY
Table 8. Content of Variables

Number of
Indicator Blane of Indicator
1 Threshold of tempo-based tension
2 Addition with switching (productivity)
3 Addition with switching (relative frequency of errors)
6 Entangled lines (productivity)
5 Entangled lines (relative frequency of errors)
6 Arrangenent of ntders (productivity)
7 Arrangement of nuﬁers (relative frequency of errors)
8 Landolt rings (productivity)
9 Landolt rings (relative frequency of errors)
10 Compasses (relative frequency of errors)
11 Memory (absolute indicator)
12 Establishing patterns (productivity)
13 Establishing patterns (relative frequency of errors)
16 Number-letter conbinstions (success coefficient)
15 Time sense (average value)
16 Time of siaple reaction to light
17 Time of conplex reaction to light
18 KChSH [expansion unknown]
19 Switching off signals (tine)

 

The computations revealed the two basic factors that determine the mutual cor-
relations betveen variables. Table 9 below gives the factor matrix for-ed as
the result of eight iterative cycles of rotating the axes.

Table 9. Factor Matrix

Factors Factors
Number of ‘ 2 lit-bet of 1 2
Variables ‘ Variables
1 0. 62838 0. 00078 11 0. 07397 -0.65085
2 -0.62886 0.31729 12 0.08628 0.17153
3 0. 71377 -0. 10579 13 0. 36680 0.61100
6 -0. 31966 0. 07397 16 0.63108 -0. 30962
5 0.11396 -0.37233 15 -0.36908 0.53506
6 -0. 12060 0. 38556 16 -0. 01872 0. 33655
7 0.10308 0.07631 17 0.63663 0.05129
8 0.67270 0.66253 18 0.11085 0.25191
9 0.66560 -0.02331 19 0.39687 0.51533
10 -0.17651 0.73367

The significant load on indicator of labor activity 19 in factor 2 pernits us to
identify a comparatively simple and clearly expressed structure of the psycho-
physiological content of the action. reflected in its links with indicators 10,
11. 13. and 15.

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By analyzing the factor matrix of the labor action (see Figure 50 below) and
comparing it with the factor matrix of the algorithm (see Figure 49 above), it
may be concluded that the dimensionality of the factor space that reflects the
pattern of the processes under consideration is reduced as the level of the
hierarchy of the organized structure of activity decreases.

  

a a n n a ,1 u(Pactors) 2

Figure 50. Matrix of Factors of Labor Action.

Investigation of the activity of operators in an ergatic systen by factor
analysis techniques nade it possible to identify the psychophysiological content
of labor processes and obtain a qualitative evaluation of the nature of the in-

fluence of the principal conponents of these processes at different levels of
their organizational structure.

Development and Investigation of Regression Models of
Operator Activity

Qualitative investigation of operator activity, in particular factor analysis of
its nicrostructure. enables us to speak of a stable link between indicators of
labor actions and the psychophysiological qualities of the operator, that is, of
the existence of inertia in the interrelationships.

Considering the random character of the quantities that reflect individual charac—
teristics of a particular person, it is possible for each labor action to deter-
mine a system of random quantities x1, Xz, ..., xn which are statistically
linked to the indicator of success of action D. Then in each test n values X1,
X2. ..., X from the domain of definition of the corresponding randoa quantity
x1 (1 - l, 2, ..., n) are realized concurrently. Such a set of n values of X1
may be considered the coordinates of realization of random point 0* from the do-
main of definition of indicator D in n-diasnsional descartes space. If point 0*
is connected to the beginning of the coordinates, the set of values X1(i -

l, 2, ..., n) may be considered as the set of coordinates of projections of
realization of randon vector 00* on the coordinate axes.

192

IN)! OFINCJA1.UGIL(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, an n-dimensional system of random quantities is Interpreted as a random
point in hyperspace or as a random n.dimensional vector and is assigned by a list
of its realizations, each of which is defined by a set of n projections of x,,
x2. ..., Xn to the coordinate axes.

As a mathematical model of the hyperspace of the indicator of the labor action it

is possible to use a certain nonrandom function of n random independent variables.
the individual characteristics of the operator:

D=q(X,.X:. x"). (5.25;
where 6 is a certain linear or nonlinear regression function.

 

A forecast of the results of the action may be obtained by substituting the values
of independent variables into the regression equation (5.25) with numerically
evaluated parameters. that is, substituting the values of individual operator
characteristics identified by testing.

In practice an effort is made to reduce relationship (5.25) to a hyperplane
equation

_’—~_

D = )3 a..\'. + a. + 2‘. (5.26)

[II
where a1 is a linear regression coefficient; so is intersection, and. c1 is errors.

The least squares method was used to obtain linear regression models of the labor
actions of an ASU operator performing algorithms. The computations were done with
a standard step-by-step multiple regression computer program in FORTRAN [12]. The
results of the computations were linear regression equations that express the
relationship between time of performance of labor actions and test results. For
example, the regression equation for time of signal switching T1 looks as follows:

r, a _ 0.171 . 1073,, + 0.101” T1671; + 0,003 - 10-h, +
+1mnu+mwhu+mwa , ﬁjﬂ
The numerical indexes for the variables of equation (5.27) correspond to the num-
bers of the variables given in Table 5 above. The interrelationship of a de-

pendent variable and a number of independent variables is measured in each equa-
tion by means of a multiple correlation coefficient.

Analysis of the standard errors of regression coefficients showed that the re-
gression equations are significant. Therefore, the labor actions of the algo-
rithm may be evaluated a priori according to time of error-free performance
predicted by means of linear regression models.
3. Situational Physical Models of Operator Activity

Models of Operator Activity Under Tine Deficit Conditions

Physical modeling of operator activity as a whole raises substantial difficulties.
Therefore. the usual practice is to devise situational models that make it

193

F‘Hl(”ﬂﬂ(1Al.U§B(MVLY
I vn vs O'IHOI‘.‘ Uh,“ Vl‘h.

possible to reproduce certain situations that occur in the process of operator
activity. Several such models have been developed and studied. They reflect
the most typical situations in the work of A80 operators. One of the funda-
mental features of this activity is the high degree of readiness of operators
for emergency actions, that is, actions under conditions of a time deficit.

Analysis of the characteristics of the functioning of complex systems enables

us to identify four objective conditions for the occurrence of a time deficit
situation [7]:

1. high speed of processes occurring in the control system,

in particular because it causes information signals to
arrive at a fast pace;

2. shortness of time in which signals are presented;

3. the complexity in multiple elements of the controlled

object, which causes a large volume of information to
arrive in parallel;

6. unexpectedness of disruptions in the functioning of the

controlled object, demanding emergency intervention of
the operator.

A time deficit causes the state of tempo-based tension in the operator. This
state is characterized by temporary change in the stability of mental processes
and vocational work capability [2]. Existing views of the influence of tension
on the results of an operator's labor [8] presuppose two basic phases of action
by extreme factors. In the initial period of occurrence the tension mobilizes
the operator, demanding faster and more accurate work. But as the level of ten-
sion and operator activity continues to grow, there comes a time when psycho-
physiological capabilities preclude a further improvement in the results of
labor. The tension value at which its influence becomes negative is called the
threshold, and it differs for each individual operator.

A device was developed to make it possible to measure the ongoing value of oper-
ator tension as the pace of operator activity increases and to identify the

threshold value of tension [13]. The functional diagram of this device is shown
in Figure 51 below.

The device works as follows. In the first stage it measures the speed of the
human operator in the absence of tension, which is characterized by the average
value 73 which is necessary to an operator-trainee for error-free execution of
the prescribed algorithm without a constraint on working time. To determine 13
the key of the switch for speed of information display 7 is set at zero by the
performer, then the "Start" button of pulse generator 6 is pushed. This causes
the pulse generator to produce a single pulse, which goes to the input of the
commutator control circuit 5. This circuit triggers the op code switch 9, which
changes the code value at the input of decoder 8. Each of n possible ctde values
at the input of the decoder corresponds to a certain combination of information

196

FOR'OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pigure 51. Functional Diagram of the Device To Measure the
Threshold of Operator Tension

KEY: (1) Information Display Panel; (10) Counter for Nuder of Displays;
(2) Control Console: (11) Block To Monitor Ongoing Magni-
(3) Time Counter: tude of Tension;
(é) Comutator; (12) Register Block;
(S) Commutator Control circuit; (13) Error Identification Block;
(6) Pulse Generator; (14) Unit To Measure Operator Speed;
(7) Switch for Speed of lnfor- (15) Block To Identify Threshold

nation Display; Value of Tension.

(8) Decoder;
(9) 0p Code Switch;

 

symbols at its output. This corbination assigns one of n algorithms of activity
which are equal in difficulty for the operator being tested. Then the com-
tator control circuit switches on «warm lo to transmit the intonation
combination from the output of decoder 8 to the intonation display panel 1.

The subject operator, who has been trained in advance to operate the device,
monitors the state of the indicators of panel 1 and, when the transmitted infor-
mation is displayed. performs operations with control eleaents 2 (switches and
buttons) in a sequence that is determined by the type of incoming signal.

whether the algorithm is executed correctly is monitored by error identification
block 13 which compares the signal arriving from the control console with a
standard signal at the second output of. the decoder. In case of erroneous ac-
tions by the operator block 13 issues a signal to the first input of the unit to
measure operator speed lb. Horking time is measured by time counter 3 and upon
completion of the cycle is transmitted to the second input of the unit to measure
operator speed.

This cycle is repeated several times; information on the number of cycles per-
formed goes from the output of number counter 10 to the third input of the unit

to measure operator speed. This unit 16 sums the values of the tine of error-
free performance of algorithms coming from the time counter in the absence of

195

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a vs. vs a swung van: ensue

signals at the output of the error identification block, and when_the number of
error-free cycles performed reaches a given value N, it computes_Tn by dividing
the total time of error-free work by N. The resulting value of Ta is trans—
mitted to the memory register of block 11 which monitors the ongoing value of
tension, and this is the signal to begin the second stage of work: measuring
the threshold of tension of the human operator.

To measure the threshold of operator tension the key of switch 7 for rate of in-
formation display is put in the position where the pulse generator produces a
sequence of pulses at even intervals that are less than Th. Bach pulse of the
generated sequence changes the setting on the information display panel. requiring
that by the time of its arrival the operator have completed the preceding algo-
rithm. Time Tan, available to the operator to execute the algorithm. is limited
by the interval between pulses and demand that the test subject increase the

speed of performance of operations on the control console. This gives rise to
emotional tension .

Bach position of switch 7 corresponds to a certain frequency of pulses at the
output of generator 6 and a certain time Tn". The value of operator emotional
tension in each cycle is computed by block 11 for monitoring the ongoing value
of tension. It does this by dividing the value Th, which is available in the
memory register, by the quantity Thnsrriving from the second output of switch 7
for rate of information display.

The investigator increases the frequency of pulses at the output of generator 6
by steadily moving the position of switch 7. This reduces time T,” allocated to

the operator to perform the given algorithms correspondingly, and therefore the
level of operator emotional tension rises.

The current value of tension of the test subject in each cycle is transmitted to
the register block 12 and to the third input of block 15 for identifying the
threshold magnitude of tension. Block 15 monitors the timeliness and correctness
of performance of the assignment in each cycle according to signals that arrive
from the outputs of time counter 3 and error identification block 13 re-
spectively.

The tension value at which the test subject made a mistake or exceeded the allowb
able working time Tan is considered to be the threshold value and is singled out
by block 15 and then recorded in register block 12. The measurement process is
repeated several times to improve the precision and authenticity of the determi-
nation of the operator's tension threshold.

Using this model the following relationship for average time of the simple senso-
motor reaction as a diminishing polynomial function of tension was obtained:

 

/___
. .,.,.'1—I “I“ .. 1—1 .. 'x—i‘
/, .-_ Jamal-ml, —103.“J|T:T) -r110,94‘m—1J _
. ‘ .t—I z—i 1
- HJ‘J\‘I_1J “.80( "—1)
—1.:¢0A’,—:"— +1.00:0.14. (5.28)
196

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where Z is average reaction time in seconds; s is the current tension value; and,
H is the threshold value of tension (it ranged from 1.5 to 2.5 for the operators

tested).
Model of Operator Activity in an Extreme Situation

An important objective accomplished in the process of training ASU operators is
evaluation of their emotional stability when working in extreme regimes. One way
to obtain such an assessment is to compare the results of operator labor under
optimal conditions with the results in an extreme regime. A trainer which uses
electrical effects on the skin as a stress factor was developed to make it pos-

sible to create extreme conditions of operator activity [16].

Figure 52-53 below presents a functional diagram of the trainer.

Figure 52-53. Functional Diagram of
Control System Operator Trainer.

 

Key: (1) Display Panel; (7) Evaluation Unit;
(2) Control Panel; (8) Unit to Measure Skin Electrical
(3) Contact Electrodes; Conductivity;
(6) Program Block; (9) Adaptive Action Block;
(5) Register Unit; (10) Power Supply Block;
(6) Comparison Unit; (11) Block To Evaluate Emotional Tension;

(12) Protective Monitoring Block.

 

The trainer works as follows. Program block 6, following one of the possixie se-
quences of symbols. feeds signals to the input of display panel 1. The operator,
under instructions. operates according to a strict algorithm and ceacts to the
signals presented with control actions using the elements of the control console 2.

197

IN)! OIIHCJA1.IIBE1(ﬂ§LY
I U. VO'I axons- U-‘h “I‘M.

Signals go from the control console to the conparison unit where they are com-
pared with signals for the "ideal operator." which are transmitted iron the
output of program block 4. If the incoming signals do not match or the oper-
star is late by a time greater than pernissible, an error signal appears at the
output of unit 6 and is recorded in evaluation unit 7.

Upon completion of the program, program block A feeds a signal to the second
input of unit 7, after which the work of the operator is evaluated according to
the given criterion. Register unit 5 records the character of the sequence of
information signals presented throughout the entire job, the errors made during
the job aligned with their places in the algorithm, and the final evaluation at
the end of the program.

After several practice cycles of work during which the operator reaches a given
level of training. the evaluation of the operator's emotional stability is be-
gun. The process of evaluating emotional stability consists of alternating a
given number of work cycles in optimal conditions as described above and cycles
under extreme conditions.

To create extreme conditions, contact electrodes 3 are secured to a segment of
the subject operator's skin and connected to the adaptive action block 9 through
the unit to measure electrical skin conductivity 8. Before the cycle begins an
electric current sufficient for unit 8 to measure electrical skin conductivity
is passed through the electrodes. The required value of the electrical skin
stimulus current used as a stress factor is set up on adaptive action block 9
with due regard for the measured quantity.

During the process of work when an error signal appears at the output of com-
parison unit 6. block 9 switches off the measuring circuits of unit 8, feeding
brief shots of current of a given magnitude to the contact electrodes 3. The
sensations of pain that the test subject feels in this case create extreme con-
ditions for activity.

when there is no error signal at the output of comparison unit 6, adaptive ac-
tion block 9 feeds a weak current through the measuring circuits of unit 8 to
the electrodes. At this time a signal that characterizes the magnitude of
electrical skin conductivity is taken from the output of unit 8. Block 11 for
evaluating emotional tension determines, according to the measured value of
conductivity. the degree of change in the functional state of the operator and
adjusts the value of the stimulus current so that it matches the assigned magni-
tude. The value of emotional tension is recorded in register unit 5.

In case one of the units of the action circuit malfunctions and the action cur-
rent goes oeyond the threshold value of danger to the operator's life, the pro-

tective monitoring block 12 switches off power supply block 10, giving a warning
of this by a standard signal on the front panel of block 4.

198

INJl.(NﬂﬂK1A1.l£SE1(HHLY
IN)R‘OFF1C1AI.|£§EZ(NNLY

b. The Use of Models of Operator Activity for Expert Ergonomic Evaluation of
Ergatic Systems

Expert Ergonomic Evaluation: Its Objectives and Methods

Before giving a definition of expert ergonomic evaluation, let us look at the con-
cepts of the expert evaluation and technical expert evaluation.

The expert evaluation ["ekspertiza") is an investigation of some particular
questions by persons who have specialized knowledge in the particular field

[15. 16]. Accordingly, the technical expert evaluation is an investigation of a
set of technical questions done on invitation or assignment by persons who have
specialized scientific knowledge in the fields of engineering being investigated
[17].

Such a definition of the expert evaluation emphasizes just one aspect, the
methodological (at the expense of the practical). In what follows when we speak
of a method or methodology, we will juxtapose these concepts to the concept of
"practical activity."

The definition of the expert evaluation that is proposed below has the other
shortcoming: it emphasizes the practical aspect of activity at the expense of
the methodological.

An ergonomic expert evaluation of a man-machine system is a program of activities
aimed at investigating t huaan factors in different stages of functioning of
the systems in order to evaluate how well they are used.

This definition also differs in that it does not have a subject that conducts
the evaluation and determines whether the decisions made are correct. This is
because the expert evaluation can be done by automated systems using computers,
where the human being (subject) takes the part of operator or programmer. Of
course, the program is prepared, just as automated complexes are built, by
human beings in the process of investigating the structure of the ergononic ex-
pert evaluation.

lnvestigating the structure of the ergonomic expert evaluation (BEE) is a spe-
cific problem in the sense that it must be directed to solving problems that
arise with practical EEE. Such an investigation, aimed at solving problems in
a particular area of practice, should be considered methodological in relation
to the area under consideration.

Thus, the problem of investigating the structure of the EEE should be resolved
in the subject of EEE methodology. Because the EEE is also practical activity,
we will try to depict it schematically, identifying its elements and structure.

There are many approaches today to a schematic representation of practical ac-
tivity [6, 18, 19]. The most successful is the diagram presented in work [18].

Figure 56 below shows it with certain modifications. The objective part of the
activity includes the initial material of the objective transformation, the

199

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ€1al.USE(lVLY
av” vs savanna was. was“.

 

Figure 56. Representation of Practical Activity According
to [18].

Key: (1) Goal:
(2) Inplenent of Transforsation;
(3) Initial Material;
(b) Product;
(5) Actions.

 

inplenents of transfornation, the actions performed by the huun being (11;, ....
11k). and the product obtained froa transfornation of the initial naterial If
(the actions together with the ispleaents for- the procedures of the activity).
The subjective part of the activity coabines the individual. the goal facing the
individual, and the internalized means (v) and capabilities (O) necessary to
manipulate the scans and construct the procedures of the activity.

This diagram fits that type of practical activity where the individual has a good
knowledge of the goal plus the scans and capabilities to acconplish it. But the

333, which is practical activity, cannot be done by the proposed diagram (see
Figure 55 below). In this case the expert lust be assisted by methodological

(3)n,_...n, .4)

(S)@V @6)

Figure 55. Representation of the Expert Evaluation According to

 

[18]. '
Key: (1) Goal; (6) Inplenents;
(2) Methodological Principles; (5) Initial Material;
(3) Actions; (6) Product.

200

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

principles formulated by specialists in related fields of knowledge (human
factors engineering. ergonomics. and hunan factors designing) as a plan for
the upcoming activity. But this plan can he developed only on the basis of an
analysis of procedures already performed. This kind of diagran is shown in
Figure 56 below [18].

 

Figure 56. Depiction of Activity To Pomlate Methodological
Principles (18, p 19).

Key: (1) Goal;
(2) Initial Materials;
(3) Actions;
(6) Implements;
(5) Means;
(6) Product;
(7) Methodological Principles.

The initial laterial for a person who is colpiling nethodological principles
(in what follows we will call this individual a specialist. as differentiated
from an expert) is the set of distinct actions of the practical activity which

201

FOIKOFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
ltﬂlOFFﬂJAl.USEIMNLY

n
were the object of analysis (2:) , while the product of the activity is the
I

methodological principles with which the open-ended practical activity of the BB!
is carried on.

Based on this definition of the BBB. the subject of its methodology is an inves-
tigation of human factors. By human factors we will mean the variables that
influence human characteristics, machine characteristics, and the relations
among then [19]. Human factors should be assigned in quantitative terms and
specifications for the systea (for example, a frequency of five signals a
minute). It is not useful. however. to investigate all the human factors separ-
ately in order to establish the influence of each one of them on the quality of
operation of the system. The reasons are, for one, the difficulty of singling
out the influence of any one particular factor on the quality of operation of
systems because it by itself may not have a significant impact and, for two, the
interdependence of the factors. where change in one factor leads to change in
another.

It is essential to study the algorithms of operator activity, because it is pre-
cisely the characteristics of the algorithms that ultimately summarise the re-
sults of the influence of all human factors on the quality of operation of an
ergatic system. Possible exceptions are factors of the external environment and
technical-esthetic factors whose influence on indicators of quality of operations
is unquestioned. even though it is extremely difficult to find a correlation be-
tween them and the algorithn of operator activity.

The methodological principles of conducting the 238 are considered in three as-
pects.

l. The methodological principles are a means of constructing a new type of ac-
tivity, the 23!. Their form and content follow from this, and this determines
what must be in the methodological principles.

2. The methodological principles are a generalization of knowledge received in
the process of human factors designing and evaluation. Thls generalisation re-
flects the possible content of the methodological principles.

3. Methodological principles are a product of methodological activity. Thus,
knowing the features of the methodological principles considered in these three
aspects, it is possible to define the type of the corresponding methodological
principles.

As can be seen from the diagram given in Figure 56 (above), the methodological
principles must contain references to all the elements of the activity facing the
expert:

- type and nature of results of BEE;

-» type and nature of initial material for transformation;

202

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

— imlements and means essential for the transformation;

-- nature of individual actions which. must he performed,
and their order.

The initial material for transformation does not remain constant during the
process of 883. This is because the £28 in the process of functioning passes
through such different stages as design, production, and operations. Depending
on the stage the initial material will be, respectively, the design of the ar-
gatic system. an experimental or series-produced prototype of the machine under-
going testing in factory conditions, and the ergatic system in operation.

A change in the initial material for transformation makes it necessary to use
other means and to carry out actions corresponding to them, in orher words, to
change the entire objective part of the BBB.

It follows from this that the £23 must he done in each stage of functioning of the
ergatic system, and humn factors must be investigated and evaluated with due re-
gard for the particular features of this stage.

In the design stage the initial material of the 288 is the design of the ergatic
system, and the product is the ergonomic evaluation, which is a prognostic evalu-
ation of successful functioning of the ergatic system in operation. when we con-
sider also the comlexity and multifaceted nature of the human factors subject to
investigation, we must recognize that the only possible way to predict the work of
system is simulation modeling.

A simulation problem prepared for automatic processing can be repeated a number

of times with different alternatives of workload. resources, decision-making logic,
service personnel, machine speed, levels of automation, and the like. This kind
of model can make it easier to produce a preliminary evaluation of the ergatic
system and to identify the most strained aspects, related to overloading equipmen
or personnel. .

Returning to the diagram of the 282 (see Figure 56 above), it should be specified
that the imlement of the expert in the design stage will be a comuter, and the
actions will be analysis of human factors in the design of the ergatic system,
programing the data received, and feeding them to the counter.

Of course, one expert alone cannot handle such diverse tasks. Therefore, it is
wise to have a group of at least two persons: an expert in human factors and a
programing engineer. In this case the programing engineer will be, in a sense,
the "implement" of the human factors expert (see Figure 57 below). The form and
content of the methodological principles follow from this. They should consist
of two parts: methodological principles for analysis of the human factors, and
methodological principles for programing and feeding data to the comuter.

The activities of the specialist also vary. when working out the methodological
principles forprograming and feeding data to the computer, the specialist

should at the same time develop the rules of functioning of the system in the form
of a computer program consisting of encoded instructions.

203

MOWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

    

(101,. ,1, I

@
@L/QD‘”

Figure S7. Diagram of Activities To Formulate Methodological
Principles and Conduct the BBB.

 
 

H
—

Key: (1) Goal; (8) Methodological Principles for Analy-
(2) Initial Material; sis of Buaan Factors;
(3) Implement; (9) Progranner;
(6) Actions; (10) Methodological Principles for Pro-
(5) Means; gramming;
(6) Product; (11) Computer.

(7) Expert;

The initial material in the stages of production and operation differs froa the
initial material in the design stage in the same way as the design of any system
differs from an experisental nodal or a system that has been tested in operation.
Therefore. changes occur in the implements of transformation, actions. and. of
course. methodological consequences. But the initial material in the design stage
also has features in common vith the initial material in the stages of production
and operations.

Therefore. many of the methodological principles adopted in the design stage must
be kept in the stages of production and operations. In the succeeding stages the

204

mommiussonu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

methodological principles must be supplemented as the initial material changes.
In the design stage, for example, an experimental model or dummy may appear,
which makes it possible to investigate human factors and conditions that approxi-
mate the conditions of system operations. Moreover, this offers an opportunity
to compare the results of modeling with data on the functioning of a real system
and to refine the simulation model. The same thing is true of the stage of oper-
ating an ergstic system.

Investigation of human factors in different stages of the functioning of an er-
gstic system is done to evaluate the quality of system operations. Thus, these
indicators should be reflected in the methodological principles as norms or re-
quirements.

The following indicators are used to evaluate the quality of operation of an er-
gstic system:

1. the readiness coefficient K, - K (1", F“), that is,
the probability that the ergstic system will be in_
working condition at the moment that an instruction
to perform work arrives (In, is human factors, and
PM is machine factors);

2. the probability of trouble-free work by the ergstic
system '1‘ - P07." PM, and 1’);

3. the indicator of timely performance of the task
1' - Mr... P").

The job of the specialist in formulating methodological principles is to identify
that part of the indicator of quality of system operations that depends on human
factors. For example, on the condition that F.‘ and PM are independent, we may
write Kr - K,(F\.)Kr(F,.\), where Kﬂl’g) is the part of Kr that depends on human
factors and 19-05,) is the part that does not depend on them.

Devising a General—Purpose Ergonomic Model of an Ergatic Systen

In different stages of functioning of the ergstic system. the BBB has distinctive
features related to the special characteristics of the simulation model of the

system.

In the design stage the simulation model of the ergstic system, formulated by a
specialist, is the implement of expert E] at the design bureau or scientific re-
search institute (see Figure 58 below). Section 2 dealt with synthesizing such
models. The type of model depends on the type of operator activity. The reader
must not be confused by the equating of the concepts of "simulation model" of
operator activity and of an ergstic system. Practically speaking, they perform
the same functions.

Expert El. conducting the BBB in the design stage, receives a preliminary evalu-
ation of the ergstic system that helps to refine the design. Moreover, the model

2 05

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 58. Diagram of Conduct of the Ergonomic Expert Evaluation.

Key: (1) Conputer; (7) Refined Evaluation;
(2) El [Expert Nol], design bureau, (8) Refined Model;
scientific research institute; (9) rinal Evaluation;
(3) Preliminary Evaluation; (10) Final Hodel;
(lo) Model; (11) General-Purpose Model.
(5) Specialist;
(6) Hanufacturing Plant;

serves as a foundation for expert B; at the manufacturing plant. This expert,
using additional leans (dually, experimental prototype, and situational models). re-
ceives data for asking the simulation nodel nore precise.

Because it is a specialist who is directly involved in writing the machine program
that deternines the logic and sequence of operations to store information, process
it, and print it out, the specialist also refines the nodal. cornering modeling
results with data on the functioning on the experinental prototype. Data on the

206

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

refined model goes to expert 52 in the form of a refined evaluation of the er-
gatic system.

The refined model serves. in turn, as the foundation for expert 33. who uses
data accumulated in the process of operating the ergatic system to obtain re-
sults for the final refinement of the model. These data go to a specialist who

compares modeling results with results of the functioning of the real system and
does the final refinement of the model.

Data on the final model go to expert E3 in the form of a final evaluation of the
ergatic system. It should be considered that there is no reason in principle

why one expert could not work instead of three (31, 22, and 33) or, by contrast.
there could be a fourth expert so who coordinates the work of the others.

The work of theexperts(Eg, ..., E.) to investigate the human factors in other
ergatic systems goes ahead parallel with expert evaluation of the first ergatic

system. In this case the specialist or specialists formulate the final Iodels
(n, ..., K).

During the investigation of a system of some one class in a certain stage of de-
velopment of the final model, as they are enlarged in breadth by increasing the
number of components being modeled and in depth by differentiation of operations,
breaking them down into components. and instituting new links and factors which
were neglected earlier, the models acquire the characteristic of co-onality.

A general-purpose ergonomic model which provides a great savings of computer re-

sources during the process of the BEE can be formulated on the basis of these”
models.

In addition, in the stage of universality the model acquires a new quality and

becomes a convenient means of accumulating information when essential data are in-
cluded in the algorithm of computer functioning.

The general-purpose ergonomic model constructed on the basis of the models
described in sections 2 and 3 was tested experimentally and demonstrated good
capabilities for conducting expert ergonomic evaluations.

5. The Use of Models of Operator Activity To Predict the Professional Success
of A50 Operators

The Problem of Predicting Professional Success of Operators

Of course. the decision to admit people to training and practical activity in the
operation of ASU's is made on the basis of an evaluation of their academic and
vocational progress before undertaking the actual work of system operators. There-
fore, it can only be obtained by prediction. The initial data here are descrip-
tions of the individual characteristics of the operator. and the final result is
the expected efficiency of their manifestation in the process of practical work
within the system.

207

FOR OFTHCJAI.USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The task of predicting the professional success of an operator can be formulated
in general form as follows. Suppose we have the results of activity by subject j
in regime k of testing his or her individual characteristics:

07 - I I67 (I). v.6 I'I. 1-1.. (3.29)

where Gth) is the vector of descriptions of the activity of subject a in regime
k; vke is the vector of descriptions of the factor structure of regime of ac-
tivity k; and. to is the current moment in time.

 

It is necessary to determine this functional:

u U) 6 “so"

(uaa' here is the function of the space of permissible transformations), and with
this functional it becomes feasible to make the transition to an a priori evalua-
tion of the results of practical activity of subject j in the process of operating
a particular ASU:

___’-——

(5:56)

 

ml»D?=/'I67(t). rem. tern”. (3.31)
where d v(t) is the vector of descriptions of the practical activity of subject j
in the placess of operating the A80 for the most informative level of the organ-
ized structure of labor processes v; rel! is the vector of descriptions of the
factor structure of the processes of operating the A80; and. 1', is the confi-
dence limit of prediction time such that the error of the prediction is minimized.
in other words

I D} - 5.314 min. (5.32}

where 61 is the a posteriori evaluation of the vector of results of practical ac-
tivity by subject j in the ASU being operated.

Development of Methods of Predicting the Professional Success
of Operators

Mathematical models of multiple regression are often used for the desired func-
tional u(t). These models consider the domain of change in the parameters of

the subject's professional success in the form of a hyperplane in den-dilensional
Cartesian space of the individual characteristics (factors) of the person

xl, X2, ..., X“. But investigations that have been made have shown that the di-
mensionality of factor space increases sharply in the case of complex multi-
algorithm operator activity; moreover, numerous factors have different impacts on

the results of execution of the same algorithm. For these reasons regression
sodels become insensitive to the results of operator activity as a whole.

The most informative level of the organizational structure of activity for the
application of regression models is that of distinct labor actions of the algo-
rithm (see section 2) which have a comparatively simple, easily differentiated
factor structure. He know from work 18] that when an extreme situation occurs

the results of the operator's labor actions undergo distorting changes that are
the result of the individual characteristics of the person's stress stability.
Investigation and evaluation of these characteristics of the subject is done using
situational physical models that recreate the extreme conditions of labor

208

F!”l(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂ!(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(see section 3). but the complexity of the interrelationships among particular
actions in the labor process. even taking into account the patterns of distortion
of their results, makesic impossible to obtain characteristics of the operator's
execution of the algorithm and activity as a whole analytically.

In this case it is possible toProposea method of predicting the professional
success of operators that combines the results of the application of mathematical
regression and situational physical models on the basis of simulation modeling of
operator activity. The digital simulation model takes account of the statistical
links among labor actions, the laws of distribution of random quantities. and the
psychosocial and other factors of activity. It makes it possible to carry out the
transition from more informative levels of the organizational structure of labor
processes to forecasting their integrated results.

The functional for predicting the results of practical activity by subject j in
performance of algorithm m is described by the iterative procedure

u m z 0;, - 5;_.,; + 5;. If. (x?) Z .61-... 0‘ (t). ‘1), +
+£6.40}. 1 VI... new. 1). (5.33)

where F1(X“) is the regression function of the results of action 1 depending on
the characéeristics of n-dimensional vector x“ of the individual characteristics
of subject j; 2(6'-1 . 01(t), } ‘s the function of distortion of the results

of action 1 depending on the vet or of results of the preceding action 01-). ,
the vector of characteristics of the situation 01(t), and the vector of indiv dual
characteristics H . which describe the stress stability of subject j; s 001. E) is
£he function that considers the mean quadratic deviation of the results of action
01 and the law of distribution of results that is reflected by pseudorandom quan-
tity E1; and In is the set of labor actions included in algorithm A..

 

The multidimensional vector D* of the parameters of the labor process is formed
by running a large number of iierative procedures with data that describe the

individual characteristics and stresssbility of subject j. This vector is sta-
tistically reliable material for an a priori evaluation of the professional
success of the test subject in performance of algorithms of activity m. With a
known, high convergence of the results of prediction with data from practical ac-
tivity, the vector U30 can be evaluated on the basis of standards and criteria
that evaluate operator activity in the process of operating an AS". But as a
rule the simulation model produces a certain shift in the values of the param-
eters being predicted. In this case. it is possible to use the mathematical ap-
paratus of discriminant analysis [20], which assigns boundary hyperplanes in the
q-dimensional space of output parameters of the model under investigation in the
form of linear classification functions

k... (D) - ”LT”... '5' Ben (5'34)

where km is a parameter of the classification group of individuals with a certain
definite level of professional success in performance of algorithm of activity m;
B' is the vector of coefficients of discriminant functions; and. so is the vector
0 intersections of the discriminant functions.

 

209

FOR<MHHEJALIEEIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Identification of the classification function with.the maximum value for parameter
K.(D) makes it possible to assign the test subject 1 according to professional
success in performance of algorithm m to the group of operators corresponding to
the number of the given function with a_probaBility of

I" f - -
p. _ '.\-—__ , (0.30)
v '(II—lar

I-|

where fl is the value of discriminant function 1; f. is the value of the largest

discriminant function; and, N is the number of discriminant classification func-
tions .

The final evaluation of the test subject's professional success in relation to
the activity as a whole is determined from the expression

 

. " t . 1 . , _*_ .
lina.-.—Ii-Tag'.—:J-f"'+4mam’c (536)

where all is a coefficient that considers the frequency and relative importance of
performance of algorithm In in the cycle of operator activity.

Experimental investigation of the proposed technique for operator activity, in-
cluding the three basic algorithms, showed that it has significant advantages
over well-known methods, in particular when compared to the method that uses re-
gression models of activity as a whole.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. Methods of Processing Physiological Data on the State of the Human
Operator in Specialized Technical Units.

In most contemporary technical control systems no matter what the level of automa-

tion is. the human being continues to have the basic, decisive organizational and
monitoring role in the control process.

Raising requirements for the reliability of control systems led to the develop-
ment of automatic unite to monitor and diagnose the state of technical control
systems [1]. Therefore, it is entirely natural that there be interest in the ques-
tions of building automated systems to diagnose the state of the human operator
during various types of activity.

The problem of diagnosing the state of the operator during labor activity involves
establishing the degree of ongoing correspondence between the operator's capa-
bilities. personal characteristics, and state of health and the structure of the
production activity and suitability of the operator to perform the assigned task.

Three basic scientific problems are resolved during the development of systems to
diagnose the state of the operator: '

1. search for and study of characteristics of the state of the
operator;

2. development of methods and principles of diagnosing operator
states;

3. development of principles for constructing technical diagnosis
systems.

The choice of the method of technical diagnosis of the state of the operator is
determined by the psychological structure of the professional activity and the pos-
sibility of employing the method by technical means under the concrete conditions.
The most widespread techniques of diagnosing the state of the operator at the
present time use these indicators:

1. parameters of labor activity;

2. results of work on modeling installations;

211

FOR OIIICIAI.USEIMNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. psychological parameters;
4. data from physiological measurements.

Each of these methods has strengths and weaknesses, and no one of them can be given
preference. It appears that only an intelligent combination of all these methods
will result in the most complete determination of the capabilities and state of

the human operator. Despite the difficulties of obtaining physiological data and
identifying them with the psychological state and the necessity of correlating
mental functions with the state of acquired skills. however, the methods of evalu-
sting the operator's state based on physiological data are attracting a growing

number of investigators because of the possibility of continuously monitoring
the process of labor activity.

It is extremely necessary to evaluate the ongoing state of the operator during the
preparatory period and in the process of labor activity in many cases both to
monitor the operator's work capability and for the purpose of timely intervention
in the process of controlling the object where the state of the operator abruptly
worsens owing to critical overloads or other causes. The problem of increasing
flight safety for aircraft, reducing the accident rate in railroad and motor
vehicle and transportation, raising the quality of industrial processes, and the
like. that is, those probleas in which one person combines all three types of oper-
ator activity (observer, manager, and performer) during the control process and
overloads or even brief disruptions of the activity of the human operator may lead
not only to failure to perform the assigned task but to very grave consequences,
cannot be resolved at the present time without building technical systems for
automatically monitoring the ongoing psychophysiological state of the operator.

let us consider certain questions of diagnosing the state of the operator during
preparation for performance of the assignment and in the process of labor ac-
tivity (or when working on aodelinginstallstiona based on data from physiological
measurements. In particular. let us briefly consider the questions of selecting
informative physiological parameters and characteristics for monitoring the state
of the operator, certain questions of constructing specialized technical moni-
toring systems. and techniques for processing and classifying electrical physio-
logical data in such systems.

1. Brief Analysis of the Physiological Parameters and Characteristics of the
State of a Person

The possibility of an operator's performing assigned tasks is closely related to
the state of the operator's health and mental functions. A set of mental proc-
esses and definite relations among the constituent parts correspond to each
action by the operator. If even one of the constituent parts is outside toler-
ances the quality of performance of functions by the operator suffers. and in
some cases this may even lead to failure to perform the task.

In its turn, the mental state of the operator depends on the state of the nervous
system and the state of the various physiological systems. Disruption of the

activity of these systems can lead to impairment of the composition and area of
normal functioning of the set of mental functions.

212

FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICLAL LﬁiliﬂﬂLY

The close interrelationship and Interdependence of the human mental and physio-
logical states permits concluaions about a person's psychophysiological state to

be dravn on the basis of an analysis of the set of physiological parameters
[3. '0]-

At the present time, of course. it is difficult to assert a complete correspondence
between the physiological and psychological states. All the recordable physio-
logical parameters are generalized parameters of complex interrelated physiological
systems and describe integrated indicators of mental activity. But research in
recent years has established many stable correlations between the state of the
operator's physiological systems and mental activity lb, 5, 6].

The principal difficulty of using electrical physiological data for purposes of
diagnosing the state of the operator lies in the complexity of mathematical proc-
essing and interpretation of the resulting data. The primary indicants of oper-
ator activity are often used as criteria to evaluate the operator's labor
activity. But this labor activity is determined by the state of mental processes,
which are already secondary indicants. Finally, the physiological parameters that
determine the state of the mental functions are tertiary indicants of the labor
process. Therefore, when determining the state of operators and their ability to
perform assigned tasks on the basis of physiological parameters, one must have an
adequately complete idea of the interdependence of all processes.

Hhen monitoring the state of an operator based on physiological data. the initial
information on the state of the person is represented in the form of a set of
components of electrical signals - various medical electrograms that describe
the physiological state of the systems of the entire organism [3, 6, 5].

Table 10 below lists the most important physiological parameters that carry infor-
mation on the state of the organism.

Table 10. List of the Most Important Physiological Parameters

Parameters Preguency BandI a: Amplitude RangeI mv

Electrophysiologicsl Parameters

Electrocardiogram 0.2-100 0.1 -5
Blectroencephalogram l -100 0.01-0.5
Electromyogram 10 ~500 0.01-5
Electroretinogram 0.3-100 0.1 -l
Electrooculogram 0.5- 15 0.01-3.
skin Potentials 0 - 0.5 0.1 -10
Electrical Conductivity of Skin* 0 - 0.5

Rheocardiogram* 0.1-100

[Table 10 continued next page]

213

INHICHHHCIA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Table 10 continued]

Parameters Frequency Band, a: égplitude Range, IV
Nonelectrophysiological Parameters
Body Temperature 0 -l
Pneumogram of the Thorax 0 -50
Sphygmogram 0.1-20
Frequency of Breathing 0.1-2
Arterial Tachooacillogram 0.2-20
Arterial Pressure 10 -lSO
Frequency of Heart Contractions 0.5-5 Depending on the sensor
Plethysnogram 0 ~5
Phonocardiogram 16 -500
Kinetogram 5 -50
Spirogram 0 -lOO
Voice and Speech of Subject 50 -3000

[Note: Asterisk indicates that amplitude range depends on measurement schemes;
for nonelectrophysiological parameters amplitude range depends on the sensor.)

 

Changes take place in the entire organism. that is, in all systems and organs,
during measurement of the psychophysiological state of a person. But the degree
of change in physiological functions differs significantly. There is a great
difference in the reaction time of physiological indicators to an influence.
Some physiological indicators such as arterial pressure. frequency of breathing.
and pulse rate react immediately to overloads. The change in other parameters

such as composition of the blood and morphological change in the blood vessels is
protracted in nature, and sometimes results only from the repeated effect of over-
loads IS, 6].

Therefore. all physiological functions are conventionally broken into three
groups according to the degree of reflectionof functional changes that take place
during a change in the state of the organism:

1. functions that have marked inertia (changes in the internal
environment of the organism, the content of metabolites in
the blood, body temperature, and the like);

2. functions that have alight inertia (pulse rate. frequency of
breathing, and the like);

3. functions that reveal changes only concurrently with change
in the state of the organism (muscle biocurrents - the EMS.
brain biocurrents - the EEG. and others).

The informative quality of a physiological parameter is a result above all of a
high degree of correlation between change in the paychophysiological state of a
person and change in the physiological indicator; a second factor is the speed
with which the particular parameter reacts to the disturbing influence. The

latter is quite important for predicting the state of an operator.
215

FOI.0FFKJA1.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic requirements for selection of recordable physiological parameters for
technical systems to monitor state are conditioned by the requirements made of
the element of the systems being analyzed. and include the following:

- an adequate group of informative physiological param-
eters to insure reliability in the evaluation of state:

- automation in taking the physiological parameters:

- reliability in taking and recording the physiologi:a1
parameters, that is, reliability of the sensors;

- weight and dimensions of bioaensora. recording devices.
and converters;

- continuity of recording the physiological parameter;

- possibility of rapid decoding of physiological data
to enable the diagnostic system to work in real time;

- ability of the operator to wear the biosensora without
detriment to the work process.

It should be noted that when the state of an operator is diagnosed by electrograms
taken from the operator. the discomfort associated with the presence of different
sensors on the body of the operator has a certain significance. Studies have
shown that significant numbers of ostial follicules on the face and neck, derma-
titis, and the like are sometimes observed in persons who have worn headphones
and sensors for physiological and clinical equipment for several days [7]. But
an intensive search is now underway for new parameters and new methods of re-
cording and amplifying physiological signals and engineers are working to develop
new types of sensors and methods of securing them that reduce the level of dis-
comfort and harmful consequences and raise the level of reliability of the in-
formation recorded [8, 9].

In light of the requirements presented above for the selection of physiological
parameterg,let us consider some of then with due regard for the possibility of
using them as a source of physiological information to monitor the state of an
operator in the process of immediate preparation for performance of the assignment
and during work on modeling installations or in labor activity itself.

The electrocardiogram and its various modifications reliably reflect the work of
the heart and are the most objective indicator of changes in heart work. The BKG's
of a person taken on three leads during the action of external factors that differ
in magnitude reveal substantial changes [6].

Fairly broad sets of signs have been obtained as a result of extended medical
practice with the EKG. These signs are constructed by identifying in the medical

curve particular characteristics of states (waves, deflections. and troughs) and
their numerical measurements. Thus. in the EKG we identify the P, Q. R. and T

215

F1HICHHWC1AI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

waves, describe characteristics of their form, aeaaure certain distinctive dimen-
sions, and so on. Bork underway recently to autonate analysis of the amplitude
and fora of no waves is making this parameter one of the highly informative physi-
ological indicators for systems to diagnose the state of an operator.

The sphygnogram has a couple: structure and describes the state of a person's cardi-
ovascular systen quite completely. There is a strong correlation between this curve
and dynamic phenonena occurring in the heart and arterial systen during the cardiac

cycle. Such important characteristics of blood pressure as the following can be de-
termined by the sphygnogran curve:

a. final diastolic pressure, corresponding to the nonent of
transition fron one cardiac cycle to the neat:

b. msximun systolic pressure;
c. dicrotic wave (censor).

The importance of direct measurement of arterial pressure for evaluating the state
of a person has been recognized for several decades now. In recent times snall,
highly sensitive sensor's for recording the sphygnogran have appeared. They help
increase the efficiency of monitoring the state of the operator [10].

Identification of artifacts plays an iaportant part in nonitoring blood pressure.
The nest strongly manifested artifacts in the aphygnogran are those evoked by
movements of the test subject. interference from the electrical circuit, and the
potentials of the skeletal muscles. Because they are unpredictable, sphygmogran
investigation and aeasureaent of its characteristic quantities is done for a
period of time corresponding to several cardiac cycles.

Arterial pressure is one of the nest indicative physiological paraneters for evalu-
ating the state of a person in general, and for the syncopic state (faintness) in
particular. Systolic bronchial arterial pressure is cut alaost in half, froa 120
to 70 :- mercury colum during faintneea. This drop in blood pressure reflects
veil the organism's transition to the syncopic state. Abrupt changes in blood
pressure also occur with the action of various accelerators. and there are dif-
ferences in the effect of differently directed accelerations [6].

All of the proposed methods of neasuring arterial pressure are based on periodicity
of neasurenent (the shortest cycle is 50 seconds). In other words, they do not
provide continuous information and for this reason are ill-suited for use in sys-
tees for automated diagnosis of the state of an operator. Pro- a nedical point of
viev these techniques also have a significant shortcoming, nanely that repeated
constrictions of an artery and the adjacent blood vessels causes stagnation in the
veins and disruption of blood supply. vhich itself becones the reason for an aggre-
vetion of the state of the organise. Therefore, the curve of arterial pressure.
the spyghnogran, is the technique of greatest practical interest for systeas to
diagnose the state of an operator.

\

Frequency of breathing is a paraneter that reacts quickly to a change in the state
of an operator. Brperinents with graphic recording of respiration (the pneunogram)

216

FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

showed that when accelerations increased a slowdown of breathing is oBserved,

and with significant overloads respiratory waves may be erased altogether.
Paintness and sleep are always characterized by a decrease in frequency of
breathing [6]. The frequency of breathing may be one of the basic physiological
indicators for systems to diagnose the operator in the process of labor activity.
Good pneumogram sensors have been developed which are reliably secured and do not
disrupt the work process. Information is recorded continuously and automatically.

The electrogslvanic reflex - the galvanic reaction of the skin (change in the
electrical resistance of the skin) to a change in the state of the person - is
very sensitive to a change in the state of the person. The states of sleep. work.
and stress can be distinguished by the magnitude of the electrogalvanic reflex.
Good skin galvanic reaction sensors have been developed.

The pulse rate correlates quite clearly with the state of a person [6]. Many
studies on the effect of accelerations and overloads on frequency of heart con-
tractions have shown that when the magnitude of an existing acceleration or
overload increases the pulse rate also increases, reaching a maximum of 100 beats

a minute. The pulse rate drops sharply when the syncopic state is reached,

some times going to zero because of a complete, temporary heart stoppage.
Information on the pulse rate may be obtained using sensors for other physiological
parameters such as the EKG (in order not to overload a person with sensors) or by
special pulse rate sensors.

The electrooculogram records eye movement reactions. The technique for taking
readings has been quite well developed. Because movements of the eyeballs slow
down when fatigue develops and sleep approaches, and stop when a person loses
consciousness. changes in the electrooculogran have a fair amount of information
about the state of the operator.

The electromyogram records the electrical signals of the muscles and reflects the
functional state of the muscular apparatus. It has been established that the level
of muscular tension is higher when the mental work of the operator is more complex
and intensive. When the person loses consciousness muscle tone is usually re-
laxed. muscular hypotonia [11]. During faintness. however, changes in the electro-
myograa are ambiguous. According to clinical statistics 13 percent of all cases

of faintness are accompanied by a convulsive state of the muscles. even though the
beginning of changes in the electromyogrsm is the same in all cases of faintness,
including convulsive ones: relaxation of the muscles. A good methodology for
recording muscle biocurrents has been developed, as have good electromyogram
sensors [11). The informative value of the electromyogram as part of the set of
physiological parameters is quite high.

The electroencephalogram records electrical brain signals. They are the most
direct indicators of the work and state of the brain cells. Because the 326 is
the summary signal of the activity of numerous nerve elements, it is very diffi-
cult to decipher. It is considered possible to use three types of 336's: de-
synchronized, transitional. and synchronised with an external stimulus. These
types of EBG's can serve as the criterion of the functional state of the central
nervous system [12].

217

F03<MﬂﬂCJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considering the possibility of continuous recording of the EEG, the fairly well
developed system of sensors and convenience of securing them, and techniques now
in existence are under development to analyze and decipher the EEG, it may be
considered an Informative parameter for diagnostic systems on the condition that
the set of other physiological parameters is taken into account.

Each of the above-listed electrograms gives certain information about the state
of the organism and the central nervous system. But this information is still
inadequate to judge their significance and the superiority of one parameter to an-
other during the selection of parameters. We know that if certain parameters are
not significant with respect to the criterion of evaluation chosen, this does not
mean that all parameters or the group of them cannot be significant. A final
evaluation of their information value can only be obtained in the process of
studying the diagnostic system using appropriate algorithms that make it possible
to disclose the influence of each parameter on the result of diagnosis.

The above-listed parameters are considered most appropriate for use in systems of
automatic diagnosis in the sense that they react most noticeably and quickly to
changes in the psychophysiological state of the operator and recording them is
most convenient and, to some degree, has been solved.

During analysis of electrograms a distinction is made between direct signs of the
shape of a curve and indirect ones [6]. Direct signs have resulted from extended
medical experience and are based on identification and description of typical
characteristics of the curve (wave, deflections, and troughs), their numerical
measurements, and certain relationships among them.

These signs are good because they make it possible to alternate the process of
assembling the techniques found by medical scientists for describing them. But it
is very difficult to consider this approach to the analysis of electrogram promis-
ing. This description is not complete and economical; the signs themselves do

not always permit precise statement and formal description. Even for the EKG, the
best-studied curve, these signs do not carry all the useful information that the
record itself has. We have learned that complete systems of EKG signs permit
diagnosis with greater reliability than is possible with the use of direct signs.

work [13] gives a fairly detailed review of methods of analyzing and classifying
direct signs in technical diagnosis systems.

From the standpoint of adequate information value and economy of coding, indirect
signs of signals are extremely interesting. Among them we may identify some ex-
pressive and easily fixed part of the shape of the signal (for example, its
extreme projections, the slant of the front or back, the perimeter or median line,
clearly marked asymmetry, and so on) or the result of interaction between the
signal and another known signal. At first glance indirect signs do not seem in-
formative enough. But we have learned that these signs of electrograme obtained
by condensing information have high information value and low redundancy [4, S,
10, 13, 15]. In what follows, therefore, we will consider methods of processing
electrograms that reflect the state of the physiological system in the shape of
the curve.

218

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂCJAl.lEﬂE(ﬂ‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Methods of Processing Electrogrsns in Technical Diagnosis Systems

Automation of the process of diagnosing the state of the operator by physiological
parameters promotes a significant improvement in the efficiency of this process.
This is particularly true of automating analysis of the various medical electro-
grams recorded from the operator. '

Automating the process of diagnosing the state of an operator by physiological
parameters became possible thanks to the development of methods of formal descrip-
tion and encoding of electrogrsns and to the development of specialized and,
general-purpose computers capable not only of performing the tasks given to then
but also of searching for ways to solve complex "intellectual" problems: image
recognition [13].

At the present time the tasks of image recognition are formulated in deterministic
and statistical forms, and the instruction of automatic image recognition systems
divides into instruction with a teacher and without one [151.

The statistical approaches are most useful in the stage of analyzing the informa-
tion value of signs and establishing the degree of correlation between mental and
physiological processes and medical diagnosis and diagnosing the state of the
operator by psychological parameters and the parameters of labor activity [11.].

The deterministic techniques are most suitable for analysis and classification of
electrogrsm that carry information on the state of a physiological systea in the
form of a curve (EKG, sphygmogram, and electrooculogram). frequency of oscilla-
tion (pulse rate recording. frequency of breathing). or statistical character-
istics of the process (826. electrosyogram. and KGB [expansion unknown].
Deterministic formulation of the problem of recognition of electrograms involved a
preliminary determination of the areas of distribution of the signs that charac-
terize different states of the operator based on statistical samples of electro-
grams and the instructions of the teacher. and then distinguishing curves offered
that are not part of the teaching sane, without the teacher's instructions.

Digital computers are widely used under hospital conditions to analyze electro-
grams. But the techniques of sequential analysis of electrograms based on the
use of digital computers are complicated by the need for additional censideration
of the concrete conditions of performing the task, the presence of mnerous arti-
facts. the requirements of work on a real time scale, and limitations related to
the finite nemory volume and cost of the equipment [10, 13].

One of the causes of these limitations is the fact that before electrograms can
be analyzed continuously by computer they must be coded. "ban this type of in-
formation is coded on the basis of the Kotel'nikov-shsnnon theorem, the number of
sign- may reach several thousand and it becomes difficult to construct a classi-
fication algorithm using then. When several continuous curves are processed
synchronously the problem of memory arises. even for contemporary computers.

Analysis of initial physiological information shows that it cannot always be fed
directly to the computer because of the limited sensitivity of the input units and
the presence of interference. Table 10 above shove that the frequency spectrum of

219

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

human physiological parameters ranges from zero frequency to frequencies on the
order of several kilohertz, and the large majority of these parameters sreisnthe
infrasound frequency range. Analysis of the amplitude of electrogram is coupli-
csted, however, by the nature of the signal being received. The dual amplitude
of most signals recorded from a human operator is in the range 0.01-10 mv, but it
is most often hundreds of microvolts. The complex shape of the curve and its
lack of periodicity make it difficult to receive a high initial signal/noise
ratio. The main problem here in the process of recording electrograms is the ap-
pearance of undesired interference in the output signal from the electrical cir-
cuit, bias currents in the wires and on the body of the operator, and so on [16.
17, 18]. Appropriate compensation techniques must be used to reduce them.

These and many other factors necessitate some preliminary processing of initial
data to amplify and filter it and reduce its volume as much as possible.

All of these factors stimulate the development and construction of specialized
units for processing and analyzing electrograms that are simple and convenient to
use and permit diagnosis during the process of the operator's labor activity or
in the stage of preparation for it.

In specialized devices designed to analyze particular electrograma, the state of

the operator may be diagnosed by analyzing its amplitude components [13. lb, 17].
In this case the estimates of the values of particular segments of the curve that
have been found are compared with standard values stored in the long-term memory

unit. The results of the comparison are used to make the diagnosis of the state
of the operator.

Diagnosis according to the results of analysis of amplitude components is one of
the particular cases of the more general technique based on the use of the ob-
served dependence of the shape of the electrogram curve on the physiological

state of the operator. In most practical cases the shape of the electrogram

curve (BKG,aphygmogram.electrooculogram, and the like) carries fuller information
about the state of the operator than the amplitudes of its components. There-
fore, diagnosis not only by amplitude components but also by analysis of the

shape of the curve is the most reliable technique.

The only known devices for analyzing the shape of particular electrograms are
units to analyse the EKG [8. 18]. But EKG analysis in this case is not done on
a real time scale. but rather by subsequent analysis of its amplitude components.
Direct-action units that work in real time are essential to diagnose the state of
the operator both during the preparatory period and in the process of labor ac-
tivity.

This statement points up the need to develop and use the methods of parallel and
parallel-sequential processes and analyze methods of processing information in
biological neuronal structures to solve the problem of physiological diagnosis of
the state of the operator [19]. The use of bionic principles for preliminary
processing, coding. condensing information, and above all parallel inputs and
analysis of physiological parameters in real time in specialized diagnostic units
will make possible a significant reduction of diagnosis time and increase its
efficiency. .

220
FINI(HHW(1AI.USE¢MVLY
FORGDFFK3A1.USE(NHLY

The thing most necessary to diagnose the state of a person using automatic de-
vices is to have an adequately complete set of electrogrsm signs that reflect
the functional state of the primary physiological systems of the operator. As
noted above. the electrograms and distinctive signs are selected on the basis
of existing medical practice,and experiments that aim at identifying the inforv
mation value of the particular electrograma.

The problem of image recognition in its most general form consists of identifying
a certain subset characterized by some particular qualities out of a set of im-
ages presented. If the problem of automatic recognition is posed, it is neces-
sary to indicate some procedure which an automatic system can execute. that is.
its algorithm of functioning must be assigned.

To formulate such a procedure it is necessary to write. at least in general
form, a mathematical model of the images to be classified.

when solving the problem of automatic classification of the state of the operc
star by physiological parameters. each state of the operator is usually matched
against a set of electrograms as functions of one or several variables and then
the recognition problem is solved in functional spaces.

The model flowchart of the recognition process in specialized devices is given
in Figure 59 below. The input signal recorded from the opertor by means of a

 

Figure S9. Flowchart of a Technical System To Monitor the
State of the Operator by Physiological Parameters.

Key: (1) Operator; (4) Encoding Signs;
(2) Sensors; (S) Classifier;
(3) Preliminary Processing (6) Solution.

sensor goes to the preliminary processing unit where it is amplified, filtered,
and normalized. The encoder is used for a quantitative evaluation of the basic

parameters of incoming electrograms. Following the encoder is a classifier,
which is an adaptive decision system or a signal divider whose structure is

based on a priori knowledge of the signs. The output signal of the classifier is
an encoded representation of the classification images.

The choice of the method for encoding signs. in particular electrograms, plays a
large part in the tasks of recognizing and classifying the state of the oper-
ator. Signs are usually selected and the method of coding chosen on the basis

of a person's experience and intuition. In the case of a complex relationship
between state and the signs being recorded (which is true, for example. for the

EKG and EEG), however. a person's experience and intuition are inadequate.

221

FOR‘OFFICIAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with currently known methods of encoding continuous curves (electrogrsms); the
number of signs can be quite considerable, up to several hundred and even thou-
sands for just one curve [13]. It becomes difficult to construct an algorithm
on their basis. this necessitates working out or choosing s method of encoding
which permits raximum reduction in the volume of initial data.

There are several methods of reducing the description and encoding of electro-
grams today. The essential feature of these techniques is to work out a formal
mathematical statement of the transition from functional space to finite di-
mensional space. As a result of this juxtaposition the set of functions that
interests us moves to a certain domain of multidimensional space and each func-
tion newly presented for recognition is a point in this space. Then the recog-
nition problem comes down to determining whether the point presented belongs in
the given area or not.

One of the important steps in development of ways to shorten the description and
encoding of electrograms has been the techniques of dispersion in factor
analysis [20. 21]. In this case base functions are found which are in some sense
adapted to encoding the curves under consideration. They are optimal in the
sense of average static mean quadratic error, while during preliminary norming
of the curve being encoded they are optimal in the sense of minimum entropy of
expansion coefficients.

But practical realization of these methods encounters significant difficulties in
view of the need to compute the latent vectors of very high-order matrixes. The
order of the covariation matrix for electrograms fluctuates in the range 102-10“.
It is the difficulty of practical realization of these methods that limits their
broad application for analysis of electrograms not only in specialized devices,
but also using digital computers.

One of the most widespread methods that permits a significant reduction in the
initial description of continuous curves with a high quality of approximate
representation of the continuous process f(t)(tx < t < t2) is the method of ex-
pansion of the represented function f(t) according to some orthogonal system of
functions 91(t)(i - l, 2, ...):

1(1) - S «mum. (6.1,

where

b
c. - flaw. um. (6.2)

Coefficients c1 are called Fourier coefficients in the expansion of function f(t)

hy orthogonal system (01(t)l. Comparing each function f(t) with a certain
finite set of its Fourier coefficients, we receive the notation described above

from the space of the function into finite dimensional euclidisn space with a
definite level of precision. This method is described in greater detail in

works [13. 16]. for example.

222

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ‘

But when the orthogonal system of the function is arbitrarily selected. the
structure of the domain of finite dimensional space reflecting the class of
images that interests can he very complex. Por this reason the task of classi-
fication, that is, determining whether the point represented belongs to this
area or not, can be very difficult to realize in technical classification equip-
ment.

Therefore. the orthogonal system of functions for all possible variations should
be chosen to simplify the task of the classifier as much as possible.

3. Some Questions of Preliminary Processing of Electrograms

As has already been noted, in most cases it is not feasible in practice to make
direct us: of electrogram signals taken from the sensors for encoding and classi~
fication. The levels of the signals are usually quite low and, in addition. the
signal is significantly "colored" by interference caused by induction in the
connecting wires in human beings, the movements of the operator. and the large
spread between internal and transitional resistance of the operator at the re-
cording pointa of the electrograms.

Let us briefly review some algorithms and devices for preliminary processing of
electrograms that make it possible to identify the curve segments necessary for
analysis, to normalize them by amplitude. and to remove noise from the recording.

Figure 60 below shows a flowchart of the preliminary signal processing unit.

 

Figure 60. Flowchart of the Preliminary Electrogram Processing

Unit.
Key: (1) Sensor; (5) Low-Pass Filter No l;
(2) Preamp; (6) Lovaass Pilter No 2;
(3) K-var Amplifier; (7) Invertor.

(a) Integrator:

 

The signal from the sensor_usually goes to an amplifier with inertial automatic
regulation of amplification. This type of amplifier has a number of significant

advantages over other types (logarithmic amplifiers. amplifiers with highcspeed
automatic regulation of amplification, and the like) for amplification of

223

FOR 0511(1AI.[EIE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electrograas. Inertial automatic regulation of amplification maintains the
constancy of asplitude of the output signal with a high degree of precision,

and as the input signal increases latent noise and various fluctuations which
are less than the signals are suppressed in an amplifier with inertial auto-
aatic regulation. In addition, this type of amplifier is simpler in practical
realization. Use of it leads to an insignificant loss of information on the
individual characteristics of the operators and preserves the shape of the curve,

while the constancy of signal amplitude significantly simplifies analysis of its
shape.

For purposes of preliminary anplification and level stabilization. the circuit
can use be integrated microcircuit amplifiers (types KsloloUDlA, KZBbUDlA, and
others) with input series on field transistors. These amplifiers have high in-
put impedance (tens and hundreds of megaohms). a low level of latent noise (a

few microvolts), a broad pass band, a large amplification factor, and low drift
for the constant component.

Figure 61 below shows one variation of the circuit for preliminary aaplification
and level stabilization of signals. This version was obtained by modifying the
well-known scheme of work [22]. The technical specifications of this layout are

 

Figure 61. Schematic Diagram of Nornalization of an Electro-
gram by Amplitude

Key: (1) Inverting;
(2) Noninverting.

as follows:

a. input impedance in the frequency band 0.1-1.000 Hz in the
range 2-5 megaohms;

b. coefficient of suppression of cophasal noise of at less:
110 decibels;

224

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c. voltage of no more than six microvolts for intrinsic
noise at the input;

d. pass band within the range 0.1-10,000 Hz at the 0.9
level.

The amplification factor of the first microcircuit M1 is chosen as a small
value (20-50) to preclude he influence of the constant voltage of polarization
on undistorted amplification of the usable signal by expanding the dynamic range
of the input series. The second series of anplifisr H2 provides amplification
up to 1.000. At point (4) where the sources of the field transistors of inte-
grated circuit H1 are connected, inverting amplifier H3 with an amplification
factor of 40-50 is connected in. It forms negative feedback between the ampli-
fier and the object of measurement according to the cophasal signal. The use

at the output of circuit H1 for preliminary amplification of series with a
controlled anplification factor (type K286PUl) and integrating operations ampli-

fier H5 makes it possible to stabilize the amplitude of the signal being inves-
tigated.

The problem of removing high-frequency noise from signals being recorded and
suppressing fluctuations in the constant component of the signal is very im-
portant for the preliminary signal processing unit.

One of the well-known methods of singling out signals against a background of
additive noise is to pass a mixture of the signal and the noise through a
filter in which the noise is suppressed. while the signal is virtually un-
changed. The design of such filters is the objective of optimal filtration
{23].

The filters used to single out the signal can have constant parameters or be
adaptive. Calculations for filters with constant parameters is based 008 priori
knowledge of the characteristics of the signal and noise [23].

Because the frequency spectrum of electrograms is located in the range of sound
and infrasound frequencies, active filters are most suitable for filtering sig-
nals in specialized units. These filters permit an octave greater attenuation
in the suppression band and insignificant attenuation in the transmission band
(high quality); at the same time. the device is small in weight and dimensions.

Figure 62 shows variations of widely used active low-frequency filters with
constant parameters using discrete elements and integrated DC amplifiers [22,
26]. They have been slightly modified by the author. These filters are quite
simple, reliable, and convenient for filtering high-frequency noise and induc-
tion and completely satisfy practical requirements for the quality of filtration
of most signals. Because some methods of encoding the shape of the signal are
figured for work with unipolar signals (positive or negative), the signal goes
from the output series of the filters to the encoder with a constant component
on the necessary level.

Drift in the magnitude of the constant and infralow.frequency components of the
initial signal may lead to significant random change in the magnitude of the

225

FOI.OFIICLAL.USE¢)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

5200‘" ft’f‘vhl [”36]! W

 

Figure 62. Diagrams of Lou-Fess Filters: (a) Using
Discrete Blenents;'(b) Using Integrated Dc Amplifiers.

signs when describing the shape of the curve. Increase in the dispersion of

"inages" in the space of the signs leads to nutual overlapping. uhich reduces
the quality of recognition. Change in the constant conponent (drift) can be

significantly reduced by compensation methods. A signal which comes free an

additional infralou-frequency filter can he used for these purposes (see

Figure 60 above) .

Analysis of the frequency range of the basic electrophysiological signals that
carry information on the state of the hunan operator in the fore of a curve
(EKG, sphygmogran. electrooculogras. EEG, and others) shows that the band of
their basic frequencies is higher than 0.1 as. This gives grounds for a fre-
quency breakdown of the drift signals and usable signal. norning the level of
the conpensating drift signal. and then subtracting it in the primary channel.
As a result drift noise in the prinary channel is reduced or suppressed cos-
pletely. The infralow-frequency filter is easily constructed following the
diagran shown in Figure 62a (above). Methods of conpenaating for noise (high
and low frequency) under stationary conditions using more conplax devices and
adaptive procedures are quite thoroughly covered in works [20, 21].

226
F0!‘0FF“JAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Adaptive filtration procedures have great potential for cleaning up usable
signals. But in most cases in practice. their realization requires either digi-
tal computers or a complex specialized digital or analog computing machine.
memory units. and the like. This is not always efficient when building simple
specialized units to diagnose state. Therefore. we will not consider them.

After amplification. normalization. and filtration of the signals it is necessary
to look for the segments of the electrogrems that are needed for further encoding
and recognition. This is ordinarily accomplished by threshold processing of the
normalized signal. Because the basic electrophysiological curves are linked in
time with cycles of cardiac activity. when processing several curves together
they are usually synchronised with the EKG. One period which reflects the elec-
trical processes occurring in the corresponding physiological system with each
heart contraction is singled out from the electrograms. The BIG period is usu-
ally counted from R to R of the EKG wave because these waves have greater ampli-
tude. shorter length. and the greatest stability. This makes it most simple and
reliable to find then on a real curve.

when working with just one curve the period of analysis is between the corre-
sponding maximums identified for this curve. The work of the entire analysis
unit is then synchronized by the pulses received for the beginning and end of the
period of analysis.

The segments of the curves that are selected have a significant spread by length
depending on the individual characteristics of each operator. Therefore. the
problem arises of normalizing the segments of the curves by length. This is
simple to do in analysis systems based on digital computers. To do so norming

coefficient K - TO IT is introduced. where T is the length of the real curve seg-
ment and To is the standard fixed interval. Then the amplitudes of points on

the curve are recalculated according to a linear interpolation expression [13].

When developing specialized devices to diagnose state. normalization of the
length of the curve interval being analyzed is usually accomplished by arti-
ficial means. in each particular case beginning from the work algorithm of the
unit. Therefore. the concrete variations of normalization techniques are con-
sidered in the section devoted to particular data processing algorithms in spe—

cialised diagnosis units.

4. Sequential-Parallel Analysis of the shape of a Curve Based on Expansion
According to Base Functions

Many works have been devoted to the questions of describing methods of encoding
electrograms by means of systems of base functions for purposes of functional
diagnosis [10. 13. 25]. But generally these questions have been considered with
application to approaches oriented to processing data with digital computers.

We will review some of what we think are the most interesting methods of encoding
and classifying the shape of the curve in specialized diagnostic units.

From a mathematical point of view. any full orthonormal system of functions may
be taken as the base functions ¢l(t). 62(t) ... for encoding a continuous sig-
nal, because an approximate representation of continuous function f(t) with a

227

FOIJOIIICLAL.USBGNNLY
ros OFFICIAL use ONLY

preassigned degree of precision is possible with any of them. But in the case

of an arbitrary selection of a system of functions during technical realisa-

tion of a device there often arises, in the first place.theprobles of generating
the set of components {61(t)} of the system of functions selected and, in the
second place, the structure of the domain of finite dimensional space in which
the signal analyzed is represented in this case may be highly complex. for

this reason. the structure of the classifier may also prove difficult to realise
in simple specialized devices. In other words, when the system of functions is
being selected attention must be paid to the possibility of realizing it.

Let us look at several systems of functions which are easily realizable in spa-
cialized technical devices for analysis, simplify the classifier, and avoid the
necessity of self-instruction for the decision unit.

Suppose (a. b) is a finite interval on a real (material) axis on mhich two funCv
tions f1(t) and f2(t). which assume real values. are given (see figure 63 below).

 

101,!"

   
   

CH! 9'

Figure 63. Encoding Blectrograms by the Pulse System of Base
Functions.

For the sake of simplicity we will consider functions f1(t) and f2(t) continuous
in the closed interval (although. as will be seen later, this condition can be
weakened). Furthermore we assume that f1(t) < f2(t). The recognition problem
will consist of automatically identifying from the set of graphs of functions
given in the interval (a. b) those which are between the graphs of functions
fl(t) and f2(t). It is natural to cell functions f1(t) and £2(t) the lower and
upper envelopes of the family of functions that interests us.

Let us divide interval (a. b) into ll equal. nonoverlapping parts of length At
(the choice of the number n is discussed below). we will construct the following
system of functions using this breakdown. We assume function ¢1(t)(i - l. 2, ...,
n) is equal to l in subinterval i of the described division and to 0 at all other
points:

1 for ze[a+a—1;i:—’. a+-:T(b—d)].

e'I "
"‘m 'io for te[a+(i-U‘b%a" “+T(b‘a)]
l

“-1.2, ..., m.

228

FOR 0i1ﬂ¢1A1.USE|NNLY
I
FOIOFIICIALUSEONLY

hon the relationships

-~—*
b—
Stps(l)'l-;“)d‘-5b‘—.' ‘

“to foo 1-H.

n
it follows that the ayetea of fmctions {91.0)} i - l is orthogonal in (a, 5)
(although it obviously is not cowlete).

Corresponding to each function f(t) assined and continuous in interval (a, h)
we set n nusbers in the following nanner:

Q+ -:- (0-1!

c.m-§/(z)¢.(:)dz - 5 mm _ (1-1. 2. a).

0+ ﬂ(one)

Based on coefficients {c1(_t)} i - 1 it is possihle to construct the function

In“) I- V CIUHM‘).

which differs fron :(c) by the quantity A. - mxllm - in ("I , which has the
neaning of the error of the nethod. It is obvious that this error can be nde
anller than any preassigned nunber by increasing the nuﬁer n. This considera-
tion is the basis for choosing the Mr n.

The approach described. from functional space to finite dinneional snclidian
space has several special features which are what justifies its application.

Flore precisely. free the basic characteristics of the integral (for male see

work [26], it follows that if for the two functions f(t) and g(t) the following
inequality in correct

[(1) < 3(1).

then the following inequality is also correct.
CI(I)<€I(:) (1-1,.2'_.;..-n).

Therefore, if the graph of the function f(t) is between the graphs of factions
f (t) and f (t) (see Figure 63 above), that is _

I. (0 < I (l) < h“).
then, it follows that

 

at (A) < ca (I) ‘ cl (/g)- (6-3,

This scans that a point in finite dimensional space that corresponds to function
ﬁt) in located within or on the edges of the parallelepiped whose edges are__
parallel to the coordinate axes. while the points with the coordinates (c. (1.)an

229.

mmmmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(the least far fron the beginning of the coordinates) and 161 (190.. (the
furthest free the beginning of the coordinates) are located at two opposite

apexes .

0n the other hand, if the point in finite dinensional space corresponding in the
ways described above to functions f(t) is located within or on the edges of the
parallepiped described, the graph of function f (t) is located between the graphs
of functions f1(t) and f2(t) (allowable error depends on the choice of nuher n
end ney'be asde as snall as desired by increasing n).

It follows iron the above that the class of ineges which interests us is depicted
in the manner described in the parallepiped in finite dieansdonal space. whose
edges are parallel to the coordinate axes. This sakes the prohlen of classifica-
tion such easier. It involves testing inequality (6.3) for all coefficients and
nay be done by an autonatic classification systen constructed froa coqerison
circuits using neuron-like elenents [19].

The equation for the surface of the hypercube for each coefficient has the follow-
ing forn

n
2 :r,—m,.|—R.-0. (54)
1-!

where n 1 is the aethanstical expectation of sign 1 in standard is and. 31 is the
value 0 half of the diagonal of the hypercube. Obviously, the realisation of x
is an internal point of hypercube i if

ff lg.- m,. I — R. < o. (6.5)

Pi

The separating planes (6.5) in the neuronal classifier are forned in the aanner
described in work [27]. The reference voltages of the average values of the
signs and length of the diagonal of the hypercube are stored in potentioneters
which are set during the instruction process.

Let us consider one acre systen of base functions which permits sinple technical
realisation in specialized devices. This systen of functions is e nodification
of the "slab functions [35]. This syeten of functions is continuous. so it is
preferable for analysing continuous functions because it provides nore rapid con-
vergence of expression (6.1).

Let us consider the systen of piecewise-linear base functions uhich result fro-
integrating the Halsh functions [36).

The welsh functions were initially defined recursively [23]. Then work [36]
showed that each Walsh function say be defined independently of the others.
The first eight walsh functions Val (i, t) are short in figure 66s (Below).
This figure shows how the group index k is assigned. The first Walsh function
Hal (0 t) is equal to +1 at (O, T/Z) and to -lat (1/2. ‘1‘). Val (2. T) and

Val (3. ‘1') 1k: up the next group for It - 2. The other Halsh functions asks up
a group of 2 " eleasnts. It. - 3. b. ... and nay be foraed recursively iron the
elsnsnts of the preceding group.

230 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M72!)

mm.»

 

, z . . a 2 O 6 a c z b 0 6

\_‘___s_.L—_'_ u—t—L—L—A—

n m m J!“ r 0 m 7/? w. I: a 7/0 1/? 37/6 I:
(a (b) (0

ﬁgure 64. Syatm of Base Functions: (a) ﬁlth, and (b, c)
Piecevtu Linear.

 

Let us define the system of hue ptocuin-linur function {PL(£, t)) a

.___—Q

‘
PL u + 1. x) - ; \'\\’nl(1,t)dr, 0 <1< r. (6.6)
a

231

IDIOFIICIALIBIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for i - 0. l, 2. ..., h. The multiplier zkl'r in (6.6) is used for normalization,
while k is the group index of the original welsh function. It is easy to show
that the piecewise-linear functions are linearly independent at [0. T], as are
the Walsh functions. The first nine piecewise-linear functions are shown in
Figure 64h (above).

The systen of functions {PL(i, t)} forne the basis of the functional space be-
cause they are linearly independent at [0. T]. The orthogonal hase functions
pernit direct deternination of {c1}, as shown in (6.2).

The systen of piecewise-linear functions {PL(i, t)} is not orthonornel or even
orthogonal. But this should not cause difficulties hecause it is easy to show
that the coefficients of expansion are uniquely determined. The set of expansion
coefficients c1 in (6.1) is determined as follows:

‘0 = “0)»

 

\

I a I - .c'. 6’7
C.“—_2‘T§l(t)\\a| (1—1.!)dt. ‘ “2' ‘ ’

where Hal' (i. t) is a derivative of ﬁnish function i or the 0-function. and k is
the group index of Hal (i-l, t).

To denonatrate that there is a unique way to obtain the coefficients of expansion
(6.7), we will nultiply (6.1) by Hal' (n. t) and integrate at interval (0. T):

 

. h. “E
r . 1

Sun \\'all' (m. mi: - ya; [Wal’(m. 1) PL (1. m d: -
0 II!)

T
= c, 5‘ \\'al'(m. l) +

" t (°‘ rw 1 d 4:
+ \‘c. \Val'(m.!) —'— 310— .r) tl .
.. H T”

Integrating by parts considering that Walsh functions are equal to zero where
t - 0 and t - T. we obtain

 

1.

( [war (m, l) a: - o):

r
\' I (I) \\':ll' (m. t) (It -

II‘ o. 1"
- _ \ (27):. '\ Wal(m.!)\\'al(i-— 1.1m.

— _ a
Aal I!

232

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from which we find, from the orthogonality of Walsh functions,

In) \an' (i — 1. 0d:

 

T

l
c.=-7

for i - l, 2, . Because PL (1, O) - 0 for i 3 1, co I f(0).

Let us note that Hal' (1, t) is a sequence of delta functions vith a variable sign
and weight equal to two (with the exception of the final points where the weight is
equal to one). Thus. equality (6.6) shows that the expansion coefficients are
linear combinations of values 1" (t).

For example, where k - 3 the first nine expansion coefficients have the following
form:

 

cu a: [(0):
c. = — m0) —/(T)|:
c, = — 'i,l/(0)-2/:T:‘-’) -'—/(T)I:

r. = — 'Al/ l0)— 2H“) e 2; (3734) —/(T)l:
6. — — ".l/ (0) — 2I(T-‘-’n + 2/(7/2) — 3/(31'14) + I (TN:
‘3 - - ". II (0) — 2! (1/3) + 2/ (31/8) —- 2/ (ST/8) +
+ 2/(7778) — / (1')]: (6.8)
c, .- — '1’, IN); — 2/ (71-8) —- 21(37/8) — 2/(1‘12) +
+ 2/ (ST/8) _ 2; (77:8) +10“:
c. = — 'I. ll (0) — mm) + 21 (M) — 2/ (37/8) +
-;- 2/ (57:3) — 2/ (32%) + 21073) — l (7')]:
t. = - ‘1'.ll(0)- 21(7/8) + 2/(TI4) ~ 21(377‘) ~I- 3/(7'1'2) -
— 2/ (5778) ; 2/(31'x4) — 2/(7178) + [(2')].

Any continuous signal can he represented by means of this system of piecewise-
linear functions.

Because many engineering problems of approximation include piecevise-linearization
[15, 28] . this form of representation has certain advantages over other base sys-
tems. In particular, the use of this base makes it possible to choose the neces-
sary type of piecewise-linear approximation a priori and immediately determine the
number of base functions necessary to achieve the assigned precision of point ap—
proximation.

The next advantage of the base {PL(i, t)} consists in the fact that the functions
are formed by means of Walsh functions. This makes it possible to use familiar

233

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICML USE ONLY

realization schemes. Because the operation of shaping the system {PL(i, t)} is a
weighted integration of Walsh functions, it becomes unnecessary to generate piece-
wise-linear functions when restoring the signal.

There is no question that a great advantage of the piecewise-linear basis is that
the coefficients of expansion are determined in a trivial manner. as a linear
combination of values of the function being expanded. and'in this case it is not
necessary to multiply out the functions and integrate the results. Moreover, the
corresponding linear combinations are found through derivative Walsh functions
which may be formed recursively because the linear combinations are determined
without complex computations.

The area of assignment of each of the states (set of corresponding curves) in the
system of functions presented may also be depicted in the form of a hypercube.
The equation for the surface of this hypercube is described by expression (6.6).
while the classification is done according to expression (6.3). The sign of the
Curve being analyzed must be made constant for this.

Figures 65 and 66 below show flowcharts of devices for encoding electrograms by
these systems of functions.

Let us consider the flowchart in Figure 65. The sample interval At (time of con-
putation of coefficient c1) in the circuit of the unit is assigned by means of
controlled cycle frequency generator 3, decoder-register 9, and the set of analog
key elements 10. At the Output of the seuqentislly switchable key elessnts are
installed integrators 11, which execute the transformation

The values of all coefficients at the end of interval T are analyzed by parallel
classifier 13 on neuronal (or threshold) eleaents. The classifier tests condi-
tion (6.5) for each coefficient.

As the results of research have shown, lb-20coefficienta c1(f) are sufficient to
analyze most electrograms with a relatively high level of detail. The parallel
principle of construction of the classifier greatly simplifies the problem of
"memory" and generating the system of base functions. Because the system of

base functions under consideration is not invariant to the length of the interval
of analysis T. the scheme envisions constructing sampling interval At of the
system of base functions when the interval of analysis T changes by means of con-
vertors: length of period T + voltage 6 + frequency of generator 3 and transfer
coefficient of amplifier 2. It is very difficult to control the length of the
initial signal without using complex and expensive memory units with long-term
memory and variable reading speed. It is much simpler to change the frequency

of generation of the system of base functions and, in accord with this. normalize
the amplitude of the signal. The other functional relations are fairly clear
from the figure.

234

Fill(ﬂﬁﬂ(1Al.USE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 65. Flowchart of an Analyzer of the Operator's State
Using the Systen of Pulsed Base Functions.

Key: (1) Threshold Unit; (9) Decoder;
(2) Coefficient; (10) Key;
(3) Pulse Generator: (ll) Integrator;
(b) T + U Convertor; (12) r,.;;
(5) Identification of Beginning (l3) Classifier;
(H) and End (K) of T; (15) Honory Unit;
(6) Pulse Shaper; (15) Recalculation Unit;
(7) Key; (16) Analysis;
(8) Length Sensor; (17) Clear.

 

Figure 66 below shows the flowchart of an analyzer of the shape of the curve
based on the piecewise-linear system of base functions. The laments of interro-
gating the analyzed signal are also deter-ined by means of a generator of ﬂhlah
functions 6, a device to identify the points uhere Walsh functions pass through
zero 8,a circuit to identify the sign of the derivative 9,and decoder 7. The
value of coefficient c1 and its sign are computed by an appropriate switch of the
input signal using key elements 11 and decoder 7 at nouent t1 to the input of the

235
FINICNHHCJAI.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 66. Flowchart of Analyzer of Operator's State Using
Systen of Piecewise-Linear Base Functions.

Key: (1) Threshold Unit: (10) Shaper;
(2) T + U Convertor; (11) Key;
(3) Identification of Beginning (12) Integrator;
(ii) and End (K) of T; (13) Classifier;
(6) Pulse Generator; ‘ , (lb) r3463
(5) Key: (15) Memory Unit;
(6) Function Generator; (16) Recalculstion Unit;
(1) Decoder; (l7) Invartor;
(8) Differentiator; (18) Clear;
(9) Divider; (19) Analysis.

 

sunning anplifier vith short-tern nenory based on integrator 12. At the nonsnt
of conpletion of interval T the parallel classifier evaluates the value of the
coefficient and makes a decision. The ache-e also envisions adjust-ant of the
generator of the cyclical frequency of interrogating the input signal 6 (base
function generator) when there in a change in the magnitude of interval T.

It is interesting that the solution to the prohlen of classifying situations con-
tains three stages: description of the classes (encoding) of situations.

236

FIIICMHNCJAI.USE(MVLY
FIMICNNHCIAL USE‘DNLN

synthesis of the dividing Surface. and making a decision on the affiliation of
the given state with one of the classes of states. Let us consider in more de-
tail some questions of synthesizing the dividing surface. At the present time‘
the theory of elementary classifiers has been broadly developed. These classi-
fiers divide the assigned situations or images into two classes by means of a
linear discriminant function [13, 21].

Let us assume that a situation is represented by s set of signs :1, mg, ..., xn.
They are constituent parts of n-dimensionsl vector x. vs sill designate the m
possible classes'of states w], ”2' ..., u.. The job of the situation classifier
being trained is to assign each given vector of signs 2 to a definite class of
situations «1. The ultimate goal of training is an opt l division of n-
dimensional vector space into m nonintersecting areas. The boundary or decision
surface can be determined by means of discriminant function d1(x), i - l, 2, ...,
n. It is selected so that if X1 belongs to situation mg, than a1(x) > d (X) for
all i i 3. This means that if the object being monitored is in a cart class
of states. this should insure the extremum of the corresponding discriminant

function. which differsfromthe values of the other functions. This function
should assume the largest value of all the others. ’

The decision surface between classes of states m1 and mi is described by the

equation _ . ~~w
an (X) — d' (X) - 0. (6-9) .

It is a hyperplane of a particular system of complexity.

The natural desire to simplify the classification scheme leads to attempts to 4
simplify the form of the boundary surfaces. This is done mainly by replacing
nonlinear decision hypersurfeces sith linear ones, that is. hyperplanes. In
this case the decision surface is described by the equation '

|
- S ((05: "' w;r)1'r +(0.*+1— ”n+0 I 0.

suppose (a. -w.. -— m,.,r - 1.2....,k+1. ; than expression (6.9) seems the
form -—-

h
2 (DI-tr + (01+: . 0.

v-I

Study of the properties of biological neurons and modeling them demonstrated that
the existence of threshold characteristics and the presence of a linear analog
segment of the input-output characteristic enable biological analyzers to
broaden the logical capabilities of neuron networks and realize fundamentally
neurological functions. This makes it possible to transfer from one logical
function to another. Modeling analog and discrete characteristics of the neuron
in technical analogs and using then to construct monitoring systems substantially
broadens the capabilities of these systems [19].

237

FOR‘OFEKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

while considering the slgoritha of functioning of the neuron, it any he noted
that the frequency of generation of pulses at its output depends on the aaount
by which the sun input signal exceeds the threshold signal. We know that the
functioning of a neuron is described by the expression

,/‘-"——_ ' —" ‘ _

I I
k()_: am —6) For 2 am >9. \
°“’ ' "' 'T.‘ (6.10)

0 for- : 0.1. < 6,

where '9 (t) is the frequency of pulse generation at the output of the neuron; a1
is the asgnitude of synaptic coefficient 1; x1 is the numerical value of the input
action; 0 is the neuron threshold; k is the steepness of the input-output charac-
teristic of the neuron; and. n is the nunber of inputs of the neuron.

A cowarison of expression (6.9) and (6.10) makes it obvious that the neuron
realizes a hyperplane in the space of the input signals and is a decision ale-
nent. when the vector-iuage th. xz, .... an} is presented to the neuron, it
may be either excited or not excited. If the neuron is not excited. this nesns
that the linear function y - xt'A - 01s less than zero at the point represented
by set ’{x}, and the end of the vector is outside the hyperplane (on one of the
sides of the space). In this case A - a1, a2, .... an is the vector of weight
coefficients. If the neuron is excited, the linear function aasuass a value
greater than zero and the end of the vector is located in another area relative
to the hyperplane. Therefore, the neuron assigns every set of input signals to
one of the senispaces, and this division is accoqlished by means of the linear
function y - Xt A e. '

Thus. the neuronal structure can realize a large nuaber of hyperplanes and evalu-
ate the location of the point that depicts input infomtion. 'By changing the
weight of particular "synapses" and the value of threshold 6, we obtain dividing
hyperplanes yl, 72' ..., yn. whose slope can be changed in the process of train-
ing or adjustment..

It is clear free the above that devices that aodel the primary characteristics
of the neuron can be used for the purpose of shaping the dividing situation of a
surface, and will siwlify the classifier in this case.

A large nuaber of various devices have been developed today that aodel the pri-
‘aary functional capabilities of the biological prototype (29, 30). A mﬂer of
algorithms have been written for adjusting the weight coefficients and

threshold according to the set of situations presented in order to optimise the
quality of situation recognition. Host of the training algorithm proposed for
linear adaptive situation recognition devices are systens that search for the
vector of weight coefficients and neuron thresholds and minimize a preaasigned
error function. The gradient netbod is lost widely used [31].

The neuronal classification structures obtained by changing the training pro-
cedure are such siapler than classifications on digital coaputers. Sons
variations of then are considered below. '

238

FOROFFICIALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Encoding Time Functions by Artificial Neuron Nets According to Their
Informative Signs.

Let us consider one more method of encoding couple: time functions, based on
using the principles of processing data in the sensory systems of biological
systems.

Research done by Bccles. Matthews, 3. I. Katets. P. G. Kostyuk, and others on
stimulation of nerve-muscular structures has identified the basic principles

of neuron processing of time signals [28, 32]. They showed that the reaction of
nerve tissue is described by the expression

.-— '__-\

, . .. ‘
IVs-[[UU). fume].
6
i
where U(t) is the anplitude of the signal; 1 is its length: and, (u “)4,

is the energy conponent of the stimulus signal. Thanks to the action of the
adaptation mechanism, the excitability of nerve tissue depends significantly on
the first and second derivatives of the stimulating signal. Therefore, its

reaction is expressed by the function

”’
,_—————-—'

z - v
w..;[v(o. \u(z)dt.4ame.—d’7§£-].
6

whose independent variables are the primary components of the signal. Each of
these cosponenta has its own weight (a, B, y. 6) so control of excitability in
general form can be represented linearly:
—'-\
' . r .
aU(t)+BL,,‘” +v(U(t)d:+6—d%‘1(9—-i.
d

The mechanism of adaptation, which influences the process of encoding signals,
is linked to the interaction of the processes of stimulation and inhibition in
the membrane of the neuron and, dynamically, to the characteristics of the
neuron. 'Analysia of processes on the membrane permits us to hypothesize that
the passing stimulation signal triggers a simultaneous inhibiting process
which develops exponentially and compensates for the stimulating process after
interval T.

i”

The process of conversion of information in the synaptic cell and summator of the
neuron leads to the structural diagram shown in Figure 67 below. Link 1 of the
diagram is proportional to the input signal. Link 2 with the transfer function
of the aperiodic link develops reactive inhibition. The transfer function of

the summator is represented by aperiodic link 3. The transfer function of this
segment of the neuron model is described by the expression

 

.—-——-"
"JP," tTup-i-mwrl) ‘

239

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

figure 67. Flowchart of a Neuron Hodel.

Key: (1) Input;
(2) Synaptic Cell with Smator;
(3) Output;
(lo) Model of Axon hillock ["Kholnik") of Neuron.

 

Because Tl n.1,, delay in the sun-ator may be ignored. The transfer function
assumes the fore ___... h
W _ *TP-Hk -k)
0.00 -L47;:;§-L‘-

0n the condition that k; - k2 (inhibition colpletely cmmatu for attenuation).
it is converted into the transfer function of the differentiating link

kTp _

W-‘PV'Tﬁ-T'

Investigations of neurone of different nodalitiea lead to the conclusion that
the neuron in the differentiating elenent of the nervous ayatea. Neuron-type
"on." "off." and "on-off" reactions also testify to this [28-30].

The potential that develops according to the transfer function acte on the
threshold generator of standard pulses lo. As a result, the output signal of the
neuron is described by the expression

 

v0 - kr'lw. (p) 5 emu!) - 9.
f-‘I

 

where l.‘1 is an inverse Laplace trancforn, and k is the coefficient of anplifi-
cation of the conversion characteristic of the neuron. The neuron or neuron
enacﬁle realizes a certain trenefer function only on the condition that

7 gr
g am(07

210

MOMCIALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Combining the positive and negative rigid and flexible feedbacks, it is possible
to receive a number of essential transfer functions of neuron structures. Thus,
in Figure 68 below part a shows a structure with. a transfer function Vn(p) - kTp
(differentiating link or neuron with rapid adaptation). while part b shows a
structure with a transfer function Va(p) - k/ZT It Up (integrating link).

Figure 68. Functional Model of (a) Dif-
ferentiating Neuron. and (1:) Integrating
Neuron.

 

These characteristics of the neuron model were used to encode the informative
points of the shape of the curve of electrograms. The ability of neurons and en-
sembles of neurons to single out the informative components of time functions
was investigated on technical models of neurons including synaptic cells and s
model of a neuron with sun-later. The basic synaptic cell is an operational
amlifier that works in the regise of an aperiodic filter with the constant 1:
depending on the parameters of the circuit.

when it is stimulated the threshold of the neuron increases exponentially
UH - U'c1- exp (-t/r) , where U'cq- is the alplitude of the stimlus. Change in the
stimulating postsynaptic potential is described b1 the expression

~ I l

Unucn - - U-v -U. I: - Ué.(1—c"7).

where Us“, is the amplitude of the stimulating postsynaptic potential. Figure
69 below shows change in "a and ﬂu". An "on" reaction or adaptation is ob-
tained at the output of the neuron model depending on the value of r selected.

Figure 69. Change Over Time in Total
Signal at Input of Neuron Model.

 

2/01

FORWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pigure 70. Example of Neuron Coding:

Key: (1) Minimums of Time Signal;
(2) Haximums of Time Signal;
(3) Positive and.Negative Derivatives of Input signal;
(6) Points of Signal Passage Through Conventional Zero;
(5) Maxi-use and Minimums of Time Signal.

 

To obtain a code that is invariant to the magnitude of the amplitude of the signal
being analyzed, it is enough to feed it to the input of the neuron structure shown
in Figure 71 below. Bork [33] considers the mechanisms of identification of the
informative components of a signal in greater detail.

It can be seen from the above that differentiating neurons and ensembles of them
efficiently convert continous functions and can be used as devices to feed in-
formation to a digital computer or classifying neuronal structure. The task of
the latter may be reduced to comparing the time intervals between informative
points of the time code with standard intervals and outputting the results of

this process.

Measurement of the time interval between two packages of pulses and production of
the signal when it is located within the established clearances can be done by
means of a neuron ensemble (see Figure 72).

It is possible to identify a broad class of informative components of the time
signal by means of individual neurons and elementary neuron ensembles by changing
their thresholds and the parameters of the synaptic cells included in the stimu-
lating and inhibiting inputs of the neuron (see Figure 70 below). This ensemble

242

INDR1OIWHCJAI.1£§EI€NVLY
ron‘oman use ONLY

Figure 71. Neuron "Nothing" Structure.

 

Figure 72. Neuron Structure for Identi-
fying s Given Tins Intervel.

 

'.(t‘-',) 6‘7"”

6(b'r«5)

 

uses elenents with short-tern nenory. Neurons 1 end 2 of the ensenﬁle reslize
the logical tine functions 71(t < TI) and P2(1 < T2) respectively when

T; > Tl. where r is the ongoing tine intervel between pscksges, snd T1 end T2 ere
the lower end upper pernissible values of tine intervals. Neuron 3, which
reslises the function P3(Tl < t < T2) will be stinulsted only on the condition
that T; < t < 7:. Hsving s set of tine function detectors of the type

F(T;1 < T < 121). it is possible to construct e neuron structure thst rescts only
to s definite code of the infornstive signs of the process. Such s structure is
shoun in Figure 73 below. The circuits of the neuron detectors ere tuned to
the time intervsls between pscksges of pulses coning sequentislly in the code,
and slternstely stinulste neurons 1. 2. 3, end 6. A signsl sppeers st the

243

lilt¢lﬂﬂC1AI.USE(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 73. Neuron Structure for

Identifying a Given Sequence of
Tine Intervals.

 

output of the neuron structure (neuron 6) only if the intervals between packages

are within the established clearances, that is, the structure realizes the func-
tion

-h
1.:h At,

F 1': 3: At:
1, :1: At,

\t‘ it At.

VF3(T9<I,<T”)VF.(7u<T.<T..).

 

-F|(Tu<‘t<ru) VF.(T“<1,<T,,)V

where the symbol V aeana conjunction.

In the general case, a chain of an arbitrary number of R neurone equal to the
number of packages of pulses in the code. realizes for process 1 a logical tine
function of the type ___

r. (m .. 11 F, (n. < 1. < m-
't

Thus. the differentiating and special characteristics of neurons and enaeablea
of neurons say be used in aonitoring the state of an operator for efficient con-
version of tine functions with subsequent analysis of then and decision-asking.

Let us briefly look at the flowchart of the unit to analyse the shape of a curve
based on its informative signs using the neuron structures considered above.
Figure 74 below shows the flowchart of the unit.

The differentiating block is used to receive the derivative of the input signal.
The block for analyzing the shape of the curve identifies typical aeglents of

the shape of the curve under analysis f(t) and its derivative f'(t). specifically
the aegaents with the positive derivative

dfgt) df'gtz ,
( dt ‘“d dt

264

FOI1OFFHJAI.US£(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 76. Flounhart of a Unit to Analyze the State of the
Operator by the Shape of Electrogran Curvee.

Key: (1) Differentiation Block;
(2) Curve Shape Analyzer;
(3) Control Block;
(4) Integrator Block;
(5) Claeeitier;
(6) Adjuetnent Block;
(7) Indicator Block; , -
(8) Alplifier with IARU [Intertial Auto-atic Regulation of
Anplification];

(9) Filter;

the aegnente with the negative derivative
s 2 OS 1
(' ditt ‘nd ‘ ‘5: t )‘

the lazine- (lax f(t) and In: f'(t)); and, the minimum (Iain 1(t) and min f't)).
To identify these eegnenta in the initial signal Iodele of adaptive neurone
21-2.. are uaed. while nodele of neurone 25-25 are uaed for the derivative of the
input eignal. In thie caee one nodal of the neuron and adaptation l in eut-
ficient to identify the required'eegnent of the ehape of the curve.

The averaging block in uaed to average the eigne o! the eignal identified during
several periode of the analyzed curve. It hae co-on control input for all

averagera ("Initial Position," "Start." and "Stop") and an input to coepeneate for
change in the rhythn in the analysed curve.

265

FOIOWICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The classifier is used for automatic recognition of the physiological state of
the operator based on results of parallel analysis of curve signs. It may he
made with operational saplifiers or models of neurons. Figure 75 below gives

the structure of a classifier built on models of neurons 8.15. The classifier
also has regulating inputs for individual adjustment where the period of the ana-
lyzed curve is changed by changing the thresholds of output neurons 13-15.

Figure 75. Flowchart of Neuron Classi-
fier.

Key: (1) Integrator Block;
(2) Classifier;
(3) Decision.

 

The indicator block serves to display the results of diagnosis.

The control block consists of switch-on circuit 33, comparison circuit 32, and
counter 33. It sets blocks k and 7 at zero, and selects the moments for starting

and stoppingaverageraé after a certain number of periods of the analyzed curve
given by counter 33.

Adjustment block 6 is used to take account of certain individual characteristics
of the operator being tested during the diagnosis process. It contains a cir-

cuit to take account of change in the rhythm of the analyzed curve 61, and an
individual adjustment circuit 62.

The work of the shape analysis unit involves the following. The signal goes from
the sensor to amplifier 8. which has Ian". and filter 9, where it is normalized
by amplitude and high-frequency noise and infralow-frequency drift are filtered
out. It is then fed to the input of the block for analyzing the shape of the
curve, directly and through differentiating block 1 with the purpose of broaden-
ing the initial set of signs. Block 2 identifies the signs of the curve indi-
cated earlier and sends them into the integrator block.

In block 3 the signal being investigated goes to switch-on circuit 31. ﬂhen it
is triggered. the signal goes to a comparison circuit 32 where. after threshold
processing, it produces a pulse to prepare all circuits for work. In addition.
the signal launches cycle counter 33. After cycle counter 33 is filled upon coar
pletion of the assigned number of periods of analysis T, a stop signal is pro-

duced for all processing and result-recording blocks.
Averaging the signs in block 6 makes it possible to reduce the impact of random

factors on reliability of processing. The averaged values of the signs, which are
invariant to change in the rhythm of the analyzed curve, are fed to the input of

246

INJR‘OFFICIAI.IHHE(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

classifier 5. It perforns parallel analysis of the signs of the initial curve
that are identified and operates as a difference-type neuron structure pre-
trained according to the averaged values of the signs of the analyzed curve.
During the process of training the classifier, the signs which increase, deo
crease, or remain constant for pathological states of the organism relative to
the normal state are grouped and then the corresponding changes are underlined
and divided by a set of hyperplanes using difference processing.

Appropriate corrections are fed to the thresholds of the output neurons from
block 62 to eliminate individual differences of different operators.

The indicator block may produce a quantitative evaluation of the physiological
system parameter being monitored or a "suitable" — "unsuitable" signal in the
case of admittance monitoring.

6. Neuron Analyzer of Operator Reaction

Depending on the type of activity and jobs performed by the operator. the methods
and criteria for evaluating work capability or operator suitability for the par-
ticular type of work may vary greatly. We have considered methods of continuous
monitoring by physiological parameters. Sometimes it is necessary to monitor
the state of operators and their professional suitability for performance of an
assignment only at certain moments in time, for examle when an operator is pre-
paring for work. Naturally, all the methods presented above are suitable for
this mode of monitoring and evaluating the state of the operator.

we will consider below the test method of checking operator reactions using a
monitoring device built with neuron elements. In most such cases abrupt changes
in the situation are possible in the work of the operator. The trajectory of
change from one state of the control system to another is usually not rigidly
assigned, and the operator mat be guided only by the limitations imposed for
the maximum and minimum values of the monitored parameters that are changing.
Vivid examples of such operator activity are the work of the driver of a motor
vehicle. a pilot. a dispatcher. and the like. The criterion of success for per-
formance of the job by the operator which is usually selected in such cases is
the degree of disagreement.

The problem of evaluating the operator's ability to do such work can be solved by
modeling the control object using appropriate test signals.

Methods of diagnosis by parameters of labor activity have one significant draw-
back - the lack of information on the tension of operator work and the physical
and mental expenditures of the operator in performing the task. But they allow
a good evaluation of the operator's level of training, fatigue. and the like.

We will begin with the stipulation that the work and evaluation of state are done
on an analog of the controlled system, under working conditions. and immediately
before performance of the specific task. The multifaceted “man-machine" control
system permits stimulation of the input and has corresponding sensors of the out-
put signal that take account of the operator's control action on the control
system.

2107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the nonitored "man-machine" system permits stiaulstion of the input, comra-
hensive monitoring can be accomplished by a method based on the following
considerations [310].

Suppose that stimulating signal x(t) is fed to the input of a dynamic systa
described by s transfer fmctionof the following type

0m 0‘)

wm=PN)m>my

 

where Q.(p) and Pn(p) are exponential polynomials of n and n respectively, and
p is a representation of the differentiation statensnt d/dt.

To simplify analysis of the output signal and subsequent decision-asking on cor-
rection of the transfer function we will demand that the output signal y(p) meet
the following conditions: output signal y(t) should be It tines the continu—
ously differentiated function; the differential relations

d.H) _ an“) r ..
In-“ —C0|lslv '1“ d:(l) ECOI'ISI, "'1 h--"

db. 1!)

El ml;— ll coast,
where
I)
y(t) u' (r) u“- U)
4W=Tw-¢‘VW~"JHW"VW"

should be constant; d°(t), ..., dn-1(F)v r0, ..., 'n-z are called the first and
second differential relations respectively. specifically. the following statement

out be realized _____-
HIN'U)
r,,=- ly'UIII

 

- CDDSL

 

 

Let us note that __———'—- 'n‘ ‘71—.“ ‘
H!) " . ,_ y. y = __ .
(7WJ'PW ‘erl‘ “
Integrating both parts. we receive
HI) =(1-ro)¢+,|' (0.“)

v' (I)

where A is an arbitrary constant. The case where ro - 1 does not interest us be-
cause relations d1(t) are already constant.

Having designated 1 - to - o and solved equation £6.11), we find y(t) in the form
y(t) = cu -:- D)”.
where 8- l/o. For this function the relations qland r1 will take the form

248
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR' Oman use ONLY

 

l __ ‘_ 0—: -
“on?“ D). I", T. H\
a I ‘ '(‘+D) r - 3—:
i 5 '1 ' a '51—] .
1a Iﬁﬂ-i-D). r...‘ 3%, (6.12)

The desired function also exists for Ihole e. In this case we have (B'- 2) non-
zero secondary relation.

Let us fix the arbitrary constants c - l and D - 0 then the function y(t) I t“.
It is not difficult to check condition (6.12) for it.

The constant relations r1 may he used for adnittance evaluation of the nonitorad
operator and to decide on the advisability of continuing to use this operator in
the given situation. Knowing the required output signal and the transfer func-

tion of the monitored systen. it is not hard to find the corresponding stiau-
lating signal x(t).

Beginning from the definition of the transfer function

um -321'1‘
W”). L[:(() - Pal“

and performing an inverse Laplace transforn, we receive

 

0 _
m -iL. (6.13)
we)

Substituting the value of y(t) found into (6.1?) we have
P, (a: )tn-Q,,(-£—)z(t).

 

Fron the last equation, knowing coefficients so. a1. .... an of exponential poly-
nomial Pn(d/dt) and ho, bl, ..., h. of exponential polynonial Q.(d/dt). we find
x(t) as the solution of the resulting differential equation vith constant coeffi-
cients and an exponential polynomial in the righthand part. In the general case
the stieulating signal is an exponential tine polynomial

II
1(1) .. \‘ n.1‘.

Representation of continuous input and output signals by a segment of an exponen-
tial tine series is econonical fron the standpoint of physical realisation. This
has been confirmed by nany studies of the mechanisms of encoding the information
of the sensory systems of living organisms.

We know that neurons which have "on-off” reactions are the foundation of the
structure of biological nechanisma for encoding infornation. Analysis of the

249

F0§<0FHKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

neuron transfer function [3S]confirms the.hypothesis that such.neurons are
threshold differentiating elements. The differentiating spatial characteristics
of receptive fields [33] and the possibility of expanding continuous functions
into time series [28] may testify to the uniform mschanisn of encoding informa-
tion contained in the input signals of the sensory systems.

The differentiating and threshold characteristics of the neuron are the basis of
the neuron structure that singles out the first and second differential relations
and makes the decision on the functional suitability of the dynamic syste-

heing monitored. '

Pigure 76 below shows such a structure. It works as follows.

A standard stimulus for-ed with due regard for the order of the transfer function
and its coefficients is fed to the output of the dynamic system. The output
signal analyzed, which is taken from the sensor of the systee controlled by the
operator, goes to a sequential chain of differentiating first-layer neurons
which possess the property of unilateral differentiation, because analysis of

the reaction is done in s monotonically rising segment. The neuron thresholds

P are selected on the condition 6- 0.

Each of the first differentiating relations is obtained by means of a structure
consisting of neuron ln. s synaptic cell (Ci). and controlled linear voltage
generator (vans) and works as follows. Signal y'(t) is fed in the for- of an
inhibiting link free the output of differentiating neuron P to the input of
neuron 1.1. A linearly growing signal from the controlled linear voltage gen-
erator goes-to the stimulating input of this neuron. When the stimulating
signal is slightly greater than the inhibiting signal neuron 1.1 produces the
first pulse at its output, which resets the linear voltage of the generator at 0.
After the voltage is clear the process is repeated again. Time interval T be-
tween successive voltage resettings depends on the magnitude of the inhibiting
link and the steepness of its characteristic k. for cell 1.1 it is T - y'(t)/h.
while the frequency of pulsation of neuron 1.1 is f - k/y'(t). Feeding an out-
put signal of this frequency through synaptic weight l/k to the stimulating input
of the synaptic cell with a controlled amplification coefficient together with-
signal y(t), we receive the first differential relation do. The other first-

layer cells work in a similar fashion, singling out the first differential
relation.

It should be noted that coefficient k is selected on the condition k 3 10 in
order to reduce error in obtaining the quantity do, ..., dn.

The second differential relations are computed by the second layer of neurons.
The computation operation and work of the neuron structure are similar to those
presented above. Change in the coefficients of the transfer function of the
control system owing to a worsening of the operator's reaction causes change in
the system reaction. which in this case is described by an exponential poly-
nomial. Then the second relations will not be constant quantities, but rather
functions of time. Upper and lower limits on change in ties functions of the
second relations are set for the normal operator state. The second differential
relations calculated. which have upper end lower limits. are fed to the third

250
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 _ #
fenmman 'm '.. 0.:

mandamus»

   
  

(Not Suitable) item” fad:n(Suitab1e)
Figure 76. Flowchart of Neuron Device for Admittance Honitoring
of the State of the Operator. '

Key: (1) Standard Stimulus Generator;
(2) Controlled Linear Voltage Generator.

 

layer of neurons, which is a set of neuron comparators for each r1 described
in work [35]. Each of the neuron comparators produces a "suitable" or "not

suitable" signal. These signals converge on sunning neurons 3 end 5, which
perform the "0R" operation.

when the values of the second differential relations go outside the upper or
lower limits. neuron 3.5 of the "not suitable" channel is triggered. "stimulated"
by the positive feedback, and sends a strong inhibiting link to neuron 3.5 of

the "suitable" channel.

Thus. the output signal of the "man-eachine" system is analysed by juxtaposing
functional relations and comparing their current values with noeinal values
corresponding to proper working state of the system.

251

FOROFFICIALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The proposed monitroing methodology was tested on e system described by a
second-order equation and set up on sn nun-10 analog machine. The results

of experimental studies confirmed the effectiveness of this methodology. which
permits the following:

s. monitoring tht dynamic characteristics of the system;

b. precluding the possibility that the system will go into
a dangerous regime by analysing the process at the front
and switching the system off in emergency situations;

c. identifying the weight and impact of the monitored
parameters on the transitional process of the system.

252

FOI:0f1ﬂClALllﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 7. The Fundamentals of Building Complex Bioelectronic Systems

when studying the psychophysiology of the operator in extreme conditions and
considering the further development of methods of normalizing the human state in
these conditions, we must look at research on questions of self-regulation in
the nervous system and methods of active influence on the brain.

P. V- 3034290. N. P- Bekhtereva, and Yu. L. Gogoliteyn [1] note that the dis-
tinctive feature of the neurocybernetic approach to studying the functions of
controlling biological systems. including the study of regulatory functions of
the central nervous system,C°IRB above all in the attempt to give an algo-
rithmic description of the processes of self-regulation. In this case, as
Pitsner correctly emphasizes [2], a knowledge of the algorithms of functioning
of biological control systems is necessary not only to physiologists. but also
to specialists of technical automatic control systems. Studying the algorithms
of normal and pathological regulation of functions is even more important for
purposeful organization of the processes of optimal biological control and com.
pensation for impaired brain functions.

For this reason it is especially timely to use automatic control theory for quan-
titative analysis of the processes of adaptive regulation in the central nervous
system [3-5]. '

As Crodings has pointed out [6], however, the use of known methods of analyzing
technical automatic control systems in the study of biological control systems,
especially the regulatory systems of the cerebral cortex. is extremely compli-
cated. The primary reason for this is the hierarchical and dynamic nature of
the functional brain systeas, which are constantly influenced by many external
and internal receptors. As a result, it is extremely complex to achieve even a
temporary stabilization of the functional state for testing the regulatory
characteristics of neurodynamic systems.

Here we encounter the problem of self-regulation of the nervous system. in par-
ticular of the cerebral cortex, its highest part. This problem is presented in
sufficient detail in the literature (see for example [5. ll. 12]).

The structural foundation of the processes of self-regulation is the closed sys-

tem of connections among distinct subsystems of the central nervous systems of
living organisms and the fluctuating character of physiological activity [5-12].

253

me omaat use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problem of control and self-regulation in the living organism was widely

discussed in light of the ideas of cybernetics, above all the principle of
feedback [7, 13, 16].

0. Zager [15], reviewing the mechanisms of self-regulation in cortical—
subcortical relationships, points out that cortical-eubcortical regulation of
inhibition and easing the corticofugal tract are accosplished by the influence
of the cortex on the subcortical centers. The activity of the latter is
"modeled" depending on information received by the cortex along specific and non-
specific paths. P. v. Bundzen [16], using the methodology of electroencephalog-
raphy with automatic frequency analysis and automatic autostimulation in the
rhythm of oscillations of the envelope of alpha activity, is also inclined to
accept the leading role of cortical structures in organization of the auto-
regulation process directed to finding and maintaining optimal dynamic charac-
teristics of cortical neurons (their excitability and work capability).

Ye. Ya. Voytinakiy and V. Ya. Pryaniehnikov also used the electroencephalo-

graphic methodology to employ the techniques of technical cybernetics in
neurophysiology [17].

Analysis of the averaged elicited responses to electrical stimulation of the
cortex from the standpoint of automatic regulation theory made it possible to
view the cerebral cortex as a population of inhibition and stimulation neurons
anong whoa connections are determined by the time constant of the neuron chain
and the asplification factor of feedback. Linear differential equations with
variable coefficients, in the opinion of many investigators, permit establish-
ment of a correlation between the activity of a single neuron and the evoked
responses. between the electroencephalogram and behavioral activity. It has
been established that asynmetry in the length of the phases of oscillations of
potential in the electroencephalogram plays a certain part in the sechanisns of
brain self-regulation [18]. Yu; A. Budonis, studying the average anplitude of
the electrocorticogram of animals, its frequency characteristics, spectrum of
output, and average value of extremes for 10 seconds of the process, found that
during adaptation the nervous systea is constantly changing its functional

level and. carrying on the search like a self-adjusting system, tries to find the
most optimal work regime to match the existing situation.

Flory and coauthors [l9] consider it possible to introduce the concept of neuro-
psychic homeostasis as a dynamic equilibrium of psychophyeiological processes,
andixnpsrticulsr the concept of the existence of certain mechanisms that guar-
antee constancy of mental activity under conditions of the constant influences
to which a normal organism is subjected.

Attempts have been made recently to reflect the complexity of biological auto-
mstic regulation systems more accurately. Thus, 6. I. Polyakov [20] identifies
six functions to which distinct anatosical-physiologicel sechsnisms correspond:
regulation and self-regulation, monitoring and selfumonitoring, and control and
self-control.

The sphere of self-regulation comprises systems that maintain a constant internal
environsent. Self-monitoring is carried on by analyzer-coordination nechanisms

256

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the cerebellum and upper "dvukholmiye" [double mound] of the middle brain
types.

Monitoring involves the influences which the analyzer systems exert on self-
monitoring reflexive adaptations: self-control involves the forms and compose
ents of behavior whose programs are worked out over the life of the species
(instinctive reactions). Finally, 6. I. Polyaksv uses control to mean both
"free" or arbitrary (in human beings conscious) control and automated (in human
beings unconscious) control.

6. V. Voronin [21], emphasizing that the theoretical foundation of the investi-
gstion of complex dynamic systems is the structural approach. believes that the
consideration of biological systems should proceed as follows: break the complex
system down into elementary elements by successive division at points of applica-
tion of control actions: classify the elementary elements only by their dynamic
characteristics; the dynamics of the elementary elements should be described by
differential equations of no greater than the second order. As examples of ele-

sentary elements the author identifies receptor cells. motor neurons. and af-
ferent neurons.

V. H. Khayutin [22] made a detailed study of the need to use the principle of
regulation related to disturbance using the example of the regulation of blood
circulation. He points out that this was done by A. A. Ukhtomskiy in 1938 with
respect to the nervous system [23]. Indeed, Ukhtomskiy criticized the "biased
description of the reflex instrument as a mechanism to reject and eliminate en-
vironmental influence on the organism," noting that "it is easy to become one-
sided if we picture the apparatus of reflection as a kind of giant mirror" [23].
V. K. Khayutin believes that regulation based on deviation is inefficient; a
regulator working on this principle can only eliminate a harmful effect after it
has been permitted. Pointing toPOncelet'Oprinciple, he remarks that analysis of
the mechanisms of the vasomotor reflexes from tissue receptors makes it possible
to establish the step-by-step inclusion of the effector organs involved in the
vasoconstrictive effect as the stimulus grows stronger. In other words. the
vasodilstion loads are compensated for by reflex constriction of the vessels of
other organs. Even when analyzing such a limited system as the isolated part it
is possible to identify traits of a combined control system (N. M. Amosov and
others [26]).

Since 1968 we have been developing views of the brain as a combined control system
(for greater detail see work [5]). This is one of the aspects of fundamental re-
search in the f1£md of neurobionics.

One of the most important objectives of neurobionica is to move from the analog
principle of modeling to the composition method, to creation of systems that in-
clude living and manmade elements.

Formally speaking, beginning from the functional role of the living organism in the
full contour of the organism. the bioelectronic systems generally can be divided
into two classes: (1) those in which the organism or its subsystem is the object
of regulation of a technical device; and (2) those where the organism or its sub-
systemregulatesa technical device [25].

255

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hith respect to the system the statement of J, Delgado is striking: "in the
near future 'stimosivery' - people with feedback between neurons and technical
equipment - will become a significant element in the 'man-computer' system."

The term "medical system" is used today for the first class. He will designate
the second class "biotechnical system."

This division is just as arbitrary as the division into the object of regula-
tion and the regulator, and refers more to the objective of setting up the par-
ticular system, whereas the difficulties of realizing then are common.

It is possible to identify these fundamental problems on the road to solving
these questions:

a. evaluating the state of the biological object on the basis
of analysis of a set of physiological signs;

b. studying the dynamic characteristics of change in physio-
logical factors influenced by a set of external actions.

Intensive research has been underway for some time in the first area and there
are already many works devoted to this problem. With it, moreover, it is often
possible to achieve precise formalization which, in turn, permits broad appli-
cation of mathematical methods of establishing algorithms for the process of
evaluating the state of the organism according to a given set of signs.

At the same time, the second problem, in precisely that formulation which is
dictated by the objectives of control or stabilization, is comparatively new.
And here, in turn, there arise a whole series of issues which go beyond the
framework of the present book.

Our further presentation will deal with the questions of realizing and employing
biotechnical systems.

Biotechnical systems, in particular neuroelectronic systems, can be used as a
tool to study the work of the brain, on the one hand, or, on the other hand,
to build devices to control industrial processes when it becomes necessary for
an automatic backup unit to take over the functions of an emotionally dia-
turbed operator, to optimize training processes, and finally, to develop new
automatic recognition and tracking systems with due regard for the patterns
identified during study of the human brain.

Consideration from certain general atandpoints of the full diversity of instru-
ments and systems that include a biological object as a functioning element

can conveniently use a flowchart that reflects the purposeful behavior of an
organism in an environment (see Figure 77 below). The flowchart reflects the
case where a biological object,1nf1uencing a local segment of the environment,
is attempting to achieve a definite goal. The concept of "environment" here is

used in the broad sense and may include both natural surroundings and some tech-
nical system. Input 1 of the nervous system is the channel along which

256

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FIMRINFFICIAl.lh5E:CVdLY

 

Figure 77. Flowchart of Purposeful Behavior by Organism.

Key: (1) Cerebral Cortex; (b) Organism;
(2) Nervous System; (5) Environment.
(3) Effectors;

information on the state of the environment arrives. The signal from the block
which we have arbitrarily called "cerebral cortex" and which serves to assign

the goal (motivation) of behavior goes to input 2. The purpose of including
this block in our consideration is to in some way differentiate the functional
activity of the nervous system in the performance of vegetative functions,

which continues in an anesthetized organise. for example. from purposeful be-
havior in the environment. There is no need here to consider all the many

ways of assigning the signal at input 2. They depend on many factors, including
the phylogenetic level of the organism. It is also unimportant for our further
discussion whether the signal is formed at this input under the influence of
external factors or endogenic factors. The only important thing to emphasize

is that the existence of this input is an essential condition for purposeful
behavior by the biological object.

Because when we consider the flowchart (see Pigure 77 above) we are not stipu-
lating the specific nature of the living organism, the "cerebral cortex" block
means a certain brain mechanism which assigns the direction of action and is

switched off in a definite physiological state, for example systemic inhibition.

Depending on the functional load of the biological object biotechnicsl systems
can be preliminarily divided into the three following classes:

1. systems of the "bottom" level of complexity where the bio~

logical object is used as a ”sensor" for the technical
device;

257J

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. systems of the "intermediate" level of complexity
where one (or several) homeostatic regulators of
the living organism are used for control purposes;

3. systems of the "highest" level of complexity, using
purposeful behavior by the biological object.

Let us consider each of them separately.

1. In this case we receive a system without direct feedback to the biological
object. and regulation of the technical device takes place on an ope: contour.
A flowchart of this is shown in Figure 78 below. One or a whole set of

 

Figure 78. Bioelectronic System with Open Contour.

Key: (1) Organism; (3) Conversion Block;
(2) Environment; (b) Actuating Unit.

 

electrograms of biophysical or biochemical factors by the organism which reflect
changeu in physiological organs is used as control signals for external devices.

Examples are the attempt to use the eye as a sensor of the angle of direction for
an automatic sight (based on the reflecting characteristics of the cornea), the

use of a fly to analyse gas composition, or biocontrol manipulators. It must be
noted that the term ”sensor" is used in the broad sense. in other words we allow
the existence of local feedback. for example proprioceptive. in the use of motor
output. In this case the external unit becomes a kind of part of the organism,

enlarging its physical capability.

This class of biotechnical systems is purely machine-like and lacks the basic ad-
vantages of biological organization; in other words. they a:s systems which, once

258

II)RI0FIIC1AI.IﬁSI:(IﬂLY
INJR¢0F1WCIAI.lﬂSE2(MNLY

established. possess no other qualities but those which were designed into

them. The use of a biological analyzer, for example, to recognize images is
equivalent to replacing the problem of direct recognition with the scarcely more
simple problem of recognizing the state of the brain’s neuron system. This ap-
plies to the problem of using the full range of functional characteristics of

a biological analyzer. because if we are speaking of using only a natural re-
ceptor to find a certain fixed sign, this problem can usually be solved by purely
physiological techniques. For example. a conclusion can He drawn relative to
the position of a straight line in the field of vision on the basis of an
analysis of the biopotentials of the retina. and Pribam showed that it is possible
to establish which set of images is in an animal's field of vision by the pat-
tern obtained by taking multiple electrical readings from the visual area of the
cortex of a monkey. But we are considering a fixed. limited set of signs which
can also be established by technical means. Therefore, the use of such a bio-
technical system can be justified on the condition of short-term work and strict
economic requirements or with limited weight and volume.

The main difficulty of realizing this class of systems lies in solving this

problem, and it is only by solving it that a decoding block can be synthesized
(see Figure 78 above).

2. A number of interesting works involving quantitative description of the
pupillary reflex, the oculomotor function. maintaining and controlling body tem—
perature, and the like have been devoted to organism regulatory systems on the
"intermediate" level of complexity. These homeostatic systems. which are the
foundation of the vegetative functions and unconditioned reflex activity of a
biological object. are a convenient object for investigation because they can
be considered with fairly good approximation as independent subsystems of the
organism. Figure 79a shows a flowchart of this type of biological regulator in

the general case, where the inputs and outputs are vectors of fairly large di-
mensionality.

It is obvious that the problem of realizing this class of biotechnical systems
can be solved in two ways: when the technical device is connected in parallel
to the biological object of regulation (Figure 79b) and when the technical
device is connected in place of the biological object of regulation (Figure 79c).
In the first place parallel connection (we are disregarding the questions of
physiological methodology because they are dictated by the actual content of the
task) leads to a change in the nature and quantity of input information of the
biological regulator and, consequently, to a change in the functioning of the
entire system. (Figure 79 a, b. and c below.)

In a number of cases here it would be possible to figure on the plasticity of

the nervous system and a corresponding reorganization of the functional archi-
tecture of the nerve apparatuses, although there is every reason to think that
this property of plasticity is fairly limited. But for normal work by the system
(see Figure 79b) it is also necessary that the dynamic characteristics of the
external object correspond fairly well with the dynamic characteristics of the
biological object.

259

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

  

Figure 79. Bioelectric Systems of the
"Intermediate" Level of Complexity.

Key: (1) Biological Object;
(2) Neuron Regulator;
(3) External Object.

 

The requirement of a fairly small difference in dynamic characteristics also re-
mains in force in the second case. Here too we will not dwell on the difficulties
of physiological methodology. which are furthered by the fact that it is not al-
waya possible in a living organism to draw a clear line between the object of
regulation and the regulator.

From a formal point of view both problems are equivalent to the following situa-
tion: there is a regulator with a definite range of change in parameters
(determined, for example, by the plastic properties of the nervous system) and it
is necessary to select an object with dynamic characteristics lying in the appro-
priate range. It is obvious that this statement of the problem becomes less
meaningful when the boundaries of this range are narrower.

Everything stated above gives reason to exclude the class of biotechnical systems
of the "intermediate" level of complexity from consideration in an applied,

bionic aspect. At the same time, the systems are axtremely important as an object
of experimental research because they allow a closer approach to formalization and
quantitative evaluation of certain physiological concepts such as plasticity of
the nervous system and self-regulation of the cerebral cortex. In addition. it is
especially important that this field stimulates study of dynaaic characteristics
and the laws of conversion of information in different functional systems of the
organism.

260

ltﬂl(ﬂﬂﬁC1Al.USE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. This class. includes above all systems involving participation by a human
operator. The necessity of operator participation in the work of automated
systems follows directly from the limited capabilities of conteqorary means of
automation, and at the same time the operator often Becomes the "Bottleneck,"
limiting the speed and efficiency of the system as a whole. An example of a
solution with differing types of complexity is a proposal to use pigeons to guide
intercontinental Ballistic missiles to the target.

One of the devices designed for special training of animals is the Skinner box.
named after the man who developed it.

In 1964 American scientists conducted a series of experiments to investigate the
formation of complex visual images in pigeons. In the course of the experi.
ments the birds were shown slides in which a human image was camouflaged by
trees, motor vehicles, window frames, and the like. These experiments, which also
investigated the questions of categorization and sorting of elements of an image,
provide proof of the possibility of animals' forming fairly general visual images.

We may also mention the experiments of Verkhev. He was working as a psycho-
pharmacologist in a large pharmacological company and suggested using pigeons
for quality control. The company produced pills (gelatin capsules containing
medicine), and monitoring their quality by conventional methods, that is die-
carding "empties," damaged capsules, and the like, demanded enormous expenditures
with a production volume on the order of 20 million pills a day.

The fundamental drawback of biotechnical systems using purposeful animal behavior
is that they are limited to fixed, predetermined objectives. This is a result of
the limited assortment of means of influencing the brain for the purpose of fix-
ing the necessary "signal" at output 1 (see Figure 77 above).

It is difficult to predict today whether systems using purposeful animal be—
havior will find application. The only thing that can be said with confidence
is that building them and experimental study of them are justified for several
reasons. In the first place, this will promote formalization, and consequently
also quantitative evaluation of such concepts as the complexity of purposeful
behavior, whether from the standpoint of information theory or using an evalua-
tion of the logical depth of sequentially performed operations by some other
technique. In the second place, the search for direct, effective ways to influ-
ence the animal brain to assign some particular character to purposeful behavior
[Russian text incomplete at this point].

The results obtained are important both for building diagnostic and therapeutic
medical systems and for improving the symbiosis of man and machine. We do not
mean here just the development and construction of system that insure stabiliza-
tion of a given physiological state of the human operator, but also normalization
of the mental state of the operator. At the present time the latter problem is
far from solution. It is being held back by difficulties on both the technical
and psychophysiological levels (searching for effective ways to purposefully in-
fluence the brain and mental activity) and moral factors. But the high cost of
operator errors and its tendency to increase sharply in the future force us to
ponder this problem.

261

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He can conclude from the discussion above that in the applied aspect the most
timely biotechnical systems are two types:

a. systems where the biological object is used as a sensor;

5. systems which use purposeful behavior of a living or-
ganism.

we should remark that the problem of what is called "cyborgization" of the human
and animal, that is. developing functional artificial organs and systems for
them. belongs to this class of problems. Properly speaking. already today when
artificial heart pacemakers are working in the human organism and attempts are
being made to devise artificial hearts.blood vessels, tracheas. digestive

tracts. joints, and tendons. cyborgization is already beginning. In the United
States alone 250,000 persons have artificial organs in their bodies. He are
confident that in the next 15-20 years the world will witness successful develop-
ment of artificial replacements for distinct segments of the central nervous
system, and in the year 2000 cyborgization will acquire the necessary scope.

For example, already today successful attempts are being undertaken to give
sight to the blind.

works have appeared in recent years which investigate the general principles of
information processing by the cerebral cortex with the objective of building
neuroelectronic systems. In such systems the brain (as control unit) and a
technical device function together. Attempts to automate regulaion of the state
of anesthesia belong here. This is an important task in practical medicine.

It appears possible to use the electrical signals of the brain and information
on the state of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems to begin designing
an instrument that automatically regulates the feeding of anesthetic to the
human organism. There are also systems to regulate blood pressure and respir-
aLion by means of biopotentials. Heart biopotentials are used to control X—rsy
equipment. blood circulation. and the course of a thoracic operation. to en-
gage an electrical stimulator. and for other purposes. Another example of a
neuroelectronic system is the use of the smooth motor system to control the

movement of a technical object (for example. some manipulator working in a
"hot" chamber [12. 26. 27]).

After numerous studies in the USSR and abroad. experiments with the use of feed-
back provided new impetus in studying the mechanisms of self-regulation and
controlled change in definite organism functions. It was demonstrated that test
subjects in experiments with feedback that informed them of the results of ac-
tivity improve the precision of motor acts significantly and learn more rapidly.
Moreover, the test subjects can monitor the frequency spectrum of their own 236
if they receive visual or aural feedback on the results of this monitoring.

Studies have shown that under conditions of biological feedback an epilepsy

victim learned to monitor epileptic attacks and suppress them by intensifying
his sensomotor rhythm.

262

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, we have come to understand the possibility of using the biological feed-
back of the BBC to study the interrelationship between the behavior of a test
subject and change in the subject's EEG. Primary attention in these experi-
ments was devoted to studying the possibilities of regulating the Alpha

rhythm, although works have appeared recently devoted to operant learning

using Beta activity of the EEG. The usual methodology in these studies is to
give the test subject light or sound signals when certain pictures of Bioelectric
activity appear in the BBC. The inclusion of feedback (stimulation) depends on
the level of the triggering threshold, which is set By the experimentor.

We have also conducted such experiments. The system represented in the flowchart
in Figure 80 below was tested in our laboratory. It is designed to maintain an
optimal speed of presentation of visual information for various states of the

human OPBYBCOY- The criterion of optimality in this case is the efficiency of

.—_——_.

 

 
    
   

 
 

as any
ﬂ 9(1)

 
 
  
 
 

513' 9'3”!
~0xmwwummv

  

        

640:: men

Whﬂﬁnmwiﬁah-
amnmwwv

“new: Jaw/ion)

  

£M1kﬂhu
5 ycxauuuemaé

Figure 80. Flowchart of Neuroelectronic System Developed
in the Division of Neurobionica.

Key: (1) Operator;
(2) Comparison Block;
(3) Unit To Present Visual Information;
(a) weighted Coefficient Block;
(5) Heighted Coefficient Block;
(6) Block To Control the Rate of Presentation of Visual Information;
(7) Block for Preliminary Processing of Physiological Information;
(8) Standard;
(9) Block To Evaluate Efficiency.

operator work. which is determined by the amount of input information processed
and the number of mistakes made. The system is tuned by showing a test tape

263

FOR‘0FFICJAI.USE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where the operator's answer is compared with a standard and the comparison
unit issues an error signal when the answer deviates from the standard.

Signals on the rate of movement of the tape and the existence of an error go to
the efficiency evaluation block through the weighted coefficients block. The
values in this block are determined on the basis of a preliminary analysis of
the nature of operator activity. -

The efficiency evaluation block is realized on an analog computer. The block
to control the speed is a linear servo—amplifier.

Further work by the system showing random visual information is done with an
open feedback loop for errors. This is possible because the efficiency of ac—
tivity (as defined above) changes only slightly within the range of regulation
of the speed of presentation of visual information related to change in the
state of the operator.

In the process of development a discrete variation of the system to control the
rate of presentation of visual information is found where the moment of change
in frames is computed on the basis of an evaluation of the ratio of the outputs
of the Alpha and Beta rhythms. This criterion has different values for dif—
ferent types of activity depending on the "cost" of errors and coefficients
that determine the “cost" of the total amount of information processed. Thus,
the device to evaluate the efficiency of the system forms a control signal

that maximizes the total "cost" of operator activity in the system.

The physiological mechanism on which the system is based is the following: in
a state of rest the output of a person's Alpha rhythm in the EEG spectrum is
greater than in a state of random mental activity. Thus. the appearance of an
information picture on the screen causes a sharp decline in the output of the
Alpha rhythm in the EEG spectrum of the operator which then grows as the oper-
ator resolves the experimental visual information (end of processing). With
respect to the Beta rhythm, in general the opposite relationship is observed.

Based on this physiological mechanism. the preliminary processing block in-
cludes an encephalograph, a narrow-band active filter to single out the Alpha
rhythm component, a linear amplifier. a detector, and an integrator with a
regulated time constant. Because of change in the conditions of taking the
encephalogram for each concrete case and its individual character (in particular
the distribution of energy in the spectrum by frequencies), this block enviv
sions preliminary regulation of signification.

Methodologically speaking. the visual information is presented in the form of

a picture with an assignment that is projected on the screen by a film pro-
jector. The rate of feeding of visual information is regulated by regulating
the rate of movement of the film in the projector (where each frame of the test
film has the same information content). It has been reported in the press that
the scientific research administration of the U. S. Navy has concluded a con-
tract with a certain company to investigate the possibility of controlling
weapons systems or other mechanical systems "by thinking about them.” Another
example is prostheses which are controlled by electrical signals from the
muscles.

266

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In practice there is a tendency to use systems of the first and second types dis-
cussed above together. An example of such a combination is the work of V. M.
Akhutin [28], which discusses the questions of evaluation and stabilization of a
given physiological state of a human operator. In this sense, setting up certain
biotechnical systems of the first type, for example Biocontrolled manipulators,
is by no means a gosl-in-itaelf, but rather aims at broadening the area of pur-
poseful behavior. Independent control contours are formed by this kind of com-
posite use of systems of the first and second types. Thus. the flowchart shown
in Figure 81 below differs from that given in Figure 75 (above) by the addition
of two blocks. The conversion unit analyzes the functional state according to

£3:-
r.’ (Salt-‘39:; (3)

 

Figure 81. Composite Bioelectronic System.

Key: (1) Organism; (3) Conversion Block;
(2) External Environment; (h) Actuating Unit.

an assigned algorithm and set of electrogrsms and outputs a signal to the actu-
sting unit. The concrete nature of the particular external units, of course, is
determined by the purpose of the additional regulation contour. In particular.
it may be viewed as a unit to monitur or rescue the human operator. Then the
block, converted on the basis of an evaluation of physiological information,

should output a signal to the actuating block of the unit calling for the human
being to be rescued or switched out of control.

When solving the problem of building neurotechnicsl systems, of course, the job
arises of thorough analysis of the electrical signals of the nerve structures
and of excited structures in general (the "interface" of living and nonliving
systems at the present time can only be conceived of in electrical terms).

265

FOR OFHKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet scientist P. V. Simonov and F. Ye. Temnikov believe that in the future
adaptive bioelectronic systems will find application for studying the rules that
govern human or animal perception of sense images and signals with an emotional
coloring in order to build devices that maintain the attention of a person in the
control of industrial processes where, when critical situations occur, the func-
tions of a disoriented operator must be taken over By an automatic device; to
optimize the training process (development of teaching machines capable of con-
sidering the emotional impact of the learning material); and finally, for the
development of new automatic recognition and tracking systems that take account
of patterns revealed during the study of analogous human activity.

Neuroelectronic systems can also be used to study brain functions. Thus. at the
Institute of Experiment . Medicine of the USSR Academy of Hedical Sciences P. V.
Bundzen and others [29] were able to take a new step forward in understanding the
processes of autoregulation of the brain by controlling the oscillations of the
Alpha rhythm using a photostimulator. Their studies offer precise recon-ends-
tions for creating optimal conditions and for selection of operators. In this
respect, the research of A. M. Zingerman, D. N. Henitskiy. and L. S.
Khachatur'yants [30], associatesat the same institute. is instructive. 0n the
basis of data in the literature and studies conducted under laboratory condi-
tions and in space flight. theyusedone of the modifications of bioelectronic sys-
tems and reached interesting conclusions on defining the "quality" of operators,
in particular the "predisposition to accidents."

0n the basis of generalization of domestic, foreign, and his own experience. the
author proposes the following classification of bioelectronic (neuroelectronic)
systems.

Class A. Passive Systems:

1. Study of psychophysiologicsl indicators to diagnose and pre-
dict the state of humans and animals in different (including
extreme and pathological) conditions using technical equip—
ment to process and display information. Construction of
various levels of monitors to automate the collection and
processing of information on the state of human and animal
organisms, above all the mental state;

2. The use of biological systems as sensors (optical, aural, and
tactile) for technical systems. Construction of systems that
use biophysical and biochemical test signals on the state of
the organism based on physicochemical and biological prin-
ciples;

3. The use of the resources of theoretical and technical cyber-
netics to study the_brain ("antineurobionics").

266

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(NVLY
F(HICNHHCJA1.USE10NLY

Class 8: ActiveI Adaptive Systems:

1.

2.

3.

Q.

Use of the principles of negative and positive feedback
and self—regulation for purposeful study of and influence
on various systems of the organism, aBove all the brain.
Determination of ways to use the "latent reserves" of the
central nervous system. Self—control of the functional
state of the central nervous system;

Construction of neurohionic systems for the purpose of nor—
malizing and intensifying the activity of the human operator
and eliminating pathological states of varied etiology
(mental disorders; delaying the action of poisons. shock.
causing factors. and ionizing radiation; anesthesia. hypnosis,
and so on). Control of the organism using dynamic models of
brain activity and the electrical activity of "active points"
on the body surface;

Searching for new forms of building hybrid bionic systems that
use the purposeful behavior of living organisms (in particular,
stimulation of "start" and "stop" zones) for contact or tele-
metric control of technical devices;

"Neurocyborgization" (morphofunctional prosthesis of the ner-
vous system).

Thus, we have considered some basic ways to build neuroelectronic systems appli-
able to the problems of the psychophysiology of the human operator.

267

FOR¢0i11CJAI.lEHBCHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Appendix 1. Program of the simulation Psychophysiological Model of Operator
Activity.

 

INTRO!!! MIDWJWLSOLNSNw.
'NIW‘LN III(I).II'IZ(8).IYC(‘)

INTBGIR MU“)
’.NBNM(4).NB|IIN(‘).N8II(‘)
‘.NP(0

GHBRVDIIIII DBPZIIIIBHB - BBIIIEC‘I'BIIIHOI‘O TIIIIA

““5 mmmmmmmu(“most-m).
wmoswomam.enomnmsuw.“«mum.
'TW‘M’R“).BH(0.KIIK(0.ENI(4).KII .88“)
ﬁll .111 I." I 3120.1?" (I).TPN8(6)

ﬂ 8A!) 1'8N4).TPMO.1U(Q.SI8(().8K8(Q,
’BMI“).BMINI‘).33«).P88(().TAZS(I).
’Na‘).SIll(‘).CKS(0.Bl|3(‘).Bill‘s“).
‘EW‘).HP(&50).HE(‘.50).TH3(‘.50).Pﬂ(‘.50).
o32mmammsonsmmmusum.
‘thSSYGmSNWJPPW30’“)

OOMIION NMNTIJI."A.N0.ITI.NP.NIIPOI‘.IIIAX.
0T.“.P/KITI.AA.PRI.PRZ.PRS.PR‘.PR3

OOMIION IUIUI.UWRSIKIIKII

DATA IMOMTMLMLNTZWMWSLWI
’MHJIJJJ BBBEEDDDDDCGZOCHBCVIIICYIIIBC/MTZU).
'IITROVIOHHBVJLYCII BXI

COMMON IQ/NY.PR Y.TIBS.NC,SSY.SSN.APP.PR3.
"I‘SRJ‘CBJPNSJAZSJPRS

COMMOR lB’SIIIﬁSUMﬁMSﬁKS.“IN.NBIIN.BIM.
’N BUM.

'88.!KS.EHI8.SCP.CKS

DATA IYC(I).|YC(1).IYC(3).IYC(0
'/ NHYCII BIIIHO. HBVRA‘II'IO. I

CALI. CIIBINBAKPJKIJI '41)

01 - 8.16150”

02 - 0.500881

38011 11A" II bl X

unmr - 0

[Continued , next page]

268

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

- ————_.. ‘ ——

10 CALL POINT
CALL m3“(0'm.3.n‘li)
HA‘IAJIO UPON“
IT - 0
NY - 0
1135 - 0.0
DO N I - LNA
TPNO) - 0.0
T88“) - 0.0
TPRSU) - 0.0
7C3“) - 0.0
8'80) - 0.0
8K8“) - 0.0
SUN“) - 0.0
WIN”) - 0.0
58(1) I 0.0
P380) - 0.0
TAZSU) - 0.0
NC“) - 0.0
“UK” - 0
SHIN" - 0.0

CKSU) - 0.0
SSYU) - 0.0
88M” - 0.0
SCH" II 0.0
ENISU) - 0.0
ENKSU) - 0.0

80 ENS") - 0.0
DO 31 I '- LNA
DO 31 I - LINAX
“PO.” - 0.0
H30. I) - 0.0
THE“. I) II 0.0
PHUJ) - 0.0
BZPUJ) - 0.0
SPHUJ) - 0.0
9030.1) - 0.0
8C0.” - 0.0

3‘ ""5“." Ii 0.0
"A‘IAJIO HTEPAIIHM
VCTAHOBKA a HCXOHHOE COCTO’IHHE MK PAWOTPEH'H'
1 llOﬂaAﬂA‘lu

‘2 0040 J - LNA
TU“) - 0.0
1U“) - 1
TAU) " 0.0

I], 10°

'[Continued, next page]

269

FOROI'FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

190) I 0.0
OK“) I 0.0
8N0) '- 0.0
8Y0) I 0.0
88(1) I 1.0
TPRU) I 0.0
8M0) I 0.0
NSMO) I 0
8K“) - 0.0
CKO) I 0.0
TAZO) I 0.0
”(1) I 0.0
PRU) I 0.0
no 60 I I 1.04”!

‘0 IVUJ) :- 0
DO ‘3 J I LNA
“(n I 0.0
NBNU) I 0
3mm I 0.0
NBMIU) I 0
MI) I 0.0
BA‘MJIO HTBPAulﬂl O‘IBPBAHOR nonaanmn

‘3 BMMJ) I 0.0
[T I IT + I

52 J D I 0

6 J I 0
Kl I 0
TM I IM0.0
DO 60 H I LNA
1'1 I TUUI)
"(I U“ 1))“.5‘.“

56 XI I Kl + 1
6010 50

55 "(II — "”9505!

83 "(1'1 — 11051.50.”

51 TI I 1‘!
l I l I

80 CONTINUB
"(Kl — "”053”,!”
l — HOIEP nonauuuu. ROTOPYD HAJUIERIIT BHHOJIHMTB
OﬂBPA‘I‘OPV I

03 l I IUO) '
IIPOBEPKA DlliJil
III AMNA-I- NA+J+ I —I.l)
)1- AA(NA + NA +1 + Ll)
scan It’ll I 0, TO VCJIOBHOH “ASPIRIN HB‘I‘

(Continued. next page]
270

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l!(l1°M)61.60.6|
01 mlvunm —z)oz.00.ao
00 CONTINUE
u m - 110.!)
ox - Iu — Tum
IﬂDmeom
02 JD -)
6010 65
11 rum- Ill
1'90) - rpm + ox
GOTO 52
aunonusm BABFICS llPOCl‘Oﬂ
nPOBBPIM mm 1
70 "(ANNA 4- LI) — ”0.12.80
cuaxpoauaauun BPBIIBH TU
12 m - 0.0
00 78 u - LNA
nx - woo
wmx — “nun.“
7‘ m - ox
73 “ONTINUB
no 15 u - MM
15100 0) - “m
nmucneaus BPBMBB T" I! 11'.
00 TN - 0.0
1‘s - 0.0
00 8! l6 - 1.“le
INIVUJORBLM
02 ox-‘rlnu-t-l “—1.10
"(Mum)“.aa.“
as TN - TN 4- ox
necvmmnnaon anus m
6010 a.
86 IE - TB 4- nx
spam aunonneaua Grumman: consul“ n
a: CONTINUE:
OCTABIIIEBCR 3P3!!! - TA:
us - Tu) — Tuu)
Imumﬁm
N su - nu)
IF(AMJ.I»02.92.m -- '
00 WT“ - (TN 4- "mom.“
m 311 - 4.0
uAnPamanocn mam I
6070102 -
onPBnBJIBHIIl cvmmlauocn mu - ' -

104d]. 7

 

[Continued,

271

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

92 mm) - z
I - AM"NA + l + J - 1.1)
mm - I
0010 as

too mus — mm .9191

m su - Terms
msu — uu»m.102.97

91 mssm.so.1.o)su - Ma)
asap - o.o
mnmmeuuocn su < s
IP(8|J.G1'.5.0)SIJ - 5.0
cvummua mnpnmsmlocrs

we 9m - 1.0
00 us u - mu

. mu — moamaaoa

m n: - 0.0
u - rmu) ,
00 m M - w
Imvm.umm.m.m

m ox - ‘I‘I(NA + u + u — m)
www.mmzszIo ,

no 1's: - TB! + ox

1:2 oommus
Ira-(u) — rm + tummmmsns

us ox - 1.0
0010 m

m ox - Tan/mu) - rum»

no IP(DX.L1'.8IH)GOTO us
suqucnwo Hansonunes summing am
am - ox
um - mm

113 commus
auqncnzun: mmunnoro meow — an
m - o.o _
mam —1.omo.m.m

m msm — mmzzazma

m m - (3m - 1.0mm — 1.0)
can no

in All-1.0
nuancnsaun cmauuocm — on

no cu - (su-sm -1.mI(u(n°un—1.m
nuqucnanua CVIIIMPl-loﬂ mnmmenuocru— as”
susov musoaunero aHA-Isuua mnpmzunocnl
aw - sn + m
sum - su
msu - suumzumu

[Continm

272

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

124. «51111) - I _—
sum - an
125 cum - cu
8cm) - 809(1) 4- cu
”11111111301111: nonannmu
131 Irwum + 1.1) — $110,130,110
130 P1 - TlG‘NA + 1.1)
u - Tum/P)
1r(u°PJ.0r.‘wm)u - u - 1
Pl - N 1m + 1)
ox - w — 1‘00)
n2 — spun mammal! 0391101“ unknnuzcnon non»
nAqu
nzm - nun + 0::
run) - P1
HOASAIIMIA osownoomun mm a)
110 trauma «1- 1.11— mmamum
1102 m - man +1 +1—1.n
no) - mm + 1'11
001'0 15:1
aunucnenas 393113311 sunonannua Housman
«01 can. aomx
susop aonwwo pacnnnwanuoro ‘1!!an smoamnv
11:12)
am - ‘rmu. + J + 1.!)
vu - nu + 111103111
111 rm - mm + I + J — 1.1)
IFWIJ.LT.0.15°1'III)VIJ - 711100.15
nu - no)
In - w)
mas" - 111110450450
11: ox - (8le —1.o)lou — 1.01
ox - “-1.be + “mom: - wrnx + 1.0
m - nova-0x
0010 153
150 mssu - m — 1.o)1s1.1s1.1sz
151 m - 12.011331: + 0.5 - un‘vu — (ssu — unmmm
00m 1.1.1
15: m - (3.00m - mum
153 mam - 1‘01: 11°60) - tum - mmuassass
151 9080.100» - 9000.100» + 1.0
155 ruu) - 1'00) + ‘m
3290.!) - 0290.1) + 1‘"
mm.» - SPROJ) + an
000.1) - sea.» + on
1mu.0'r.umuu.o - no.0 + 1.0 - - ‘

I0 In...

‘ [Continued . next page]

273

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

mlwm + 1.1) - z)156.158.156
150 u - 0
00151 M - 1.1111
mu —- ”150,151,150
150 'mu) - TN“) + 'm
157 CONTINUE
comm
15! 1‘60) - TC“) 4- m
ounnsnwns vcnsmnocm 31.111011113111111 [10113111151111
«0 CALI. ammo
81‘0 osumauls 11 auqucnsumo PABHOMBPHO “c119.
. 111mm as
«10 Pm - 11(1-101 + I.I)°BB(J)
ms" - m)101.102.102
«11 c1 .- 11111 — 1.0M: -— 31) + 1.0mm — 311)
6070 no
10: ms" - 111 -1.o)m.103.101
1011 61 - ($11 - I” + 11:)!(911 — 111 + 1.01
6070170
101 01 - 05-110 + 113)
170 1'1- rm — 01
1r(rl)111.11.1.173
111 sum - sum + 1.0
Wu." - 1
111311.0- mm." + 'm
11an) - NIIBUJ) + 1.0
msmn + sv111-1o.o)112.112.1ao
11: 1x - AMP.“ +1+ 1.1)
[Y - o
IOU) — Ix
0010 200
m 3110) - 8110) + 1.0
mam!) + 810) - 10.0)111.m.1ao
m 11111.1) - 3
1v - 1
1x - AMPNA + J + 1 - 1.1)
IUU) - IX
0010 200
100— IIBPBXOII K amucn numux no 011503 11011311111111!
onnnsneaua wanna manual!)
10 011 - mm“ + 1.1) + 6x11)
Bum - 1.0
1100(1) - 11001!) +1
611(1) - 0.0
a - on — 9101113111) + 3N0»
um - 880) + 8

[Continued , next page]

2711

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

802 mum - a
ma — “(manna
189 EX”) - 8
"351(3) - I
188 IF(B — Ell(l))800.801.801
ecu Bum) - B
New“) - l
810 BHBOPHAMBOJINIIBH H amusmmsn PABHHIJH “£8118
BOOBK‘I‘MBHOCTBD H VPOBREH upmaamua
001 mu — momentum
182 INS" - ll)183.183.186
m nu) - 1.0- 0.03.:
6010 185
ass and) - 1.0+ 0.0m
6010100
181 "518.63. — 0.02)001‘0 I!)
msu — umsmsmeo
m 58(1) - 1.0
D 6070 190
185 CALL HOPIA
3T0 OBPAIIIEHIIB K HOPMAJIBBOMV BARON?
Kl! - (105+ 0.03%“)
IP(KII.L1‘.0.M)KIJ - 0.01
"(BMIOANAOO
‘00 61(0) - 0K0) — Kll.
6010190
410 GM!) - 0M!) + K!)
no mﬂn'lun. 114
HEPBXOA K BNSOPY CHEAWOIIIEFO OBEPATOPA
8“!qu MHHHX no onHOH nonaanms OJIHOI‘O ODEPATOPA
:00 mm— ”311,214.21:
218 )2 - J
n - 1
NZ — 3.0m. nonannmu. sz — HmanauuoC‘rb.
ssz - cvuMAPHM 3“:anme .
Ivz - “(12.12)
87. - su
ssz - ssn
‘roz - mm
“rap - Tu
Toz — nnun omunAHuﬂ. 1‘3? — ”Bun Bunonusﬂun non-
uAnA'm. '
m — Tun Housman. TUZ - BPS)!!! Bun. BCBX DOCJIEIL
nonaAn/m
Tuz - 11:02)
I! - 1 - )‘anX. o - HEYRA‘IA. cz - CﬂAﬂHHOC‘I‘b

[Cont1nued, next page]

275

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

CZ II CI)
In - AMNA + IZJZ)
I|’(ITZ.L'I'.2)ITZ - 6
210 FORMATOII OI'IBPATOPJZJOI’I "OnaAllA‘M.I3.6H TIIIIA.
’AI,A0.9I'I BP.BblII.-.I’6.2.8H BP.O)I(.-.P6.2.9I'I “CREE-£61.
’SH SI) -.I’6.2.68 SSIJ -.I7§.2.5H CI) -.I".2.2X.A6)
213 WRI'I'Bm‘IIJIOIIZJLITZUTZ — HMTZGVZ + 5).
"I’BPJ‘OZJUZSZSSLCLMTZO + IY)
2“ 607052
IIAIIIIIIIB O HTBPAIIIIM — I'I‘ -- HOME? IITBPAIIIIII. IYI’ ..
YKA3A‘I‘. PBaVJIbTA'I‘..
TIE — I'IOJIIIOB “€00,153. BPEMEHM. 'I'PR — BPEIIR IIBPEI’AG
X01“
:2 IYP '- 0
00210) - LNA
lrcrum.c'r.1(mm - u
no CONTINUE
BH‘IHCJIBHIIB IIOJ'IHOI‘O IICIIOJIKBOBAHHOI‘O BPBHEHM
TIB - 0.0
00 221 I -- LNA
II’UUII).GT.TI3)T|B - ‘ID“)
at CONTINUE
‘I'II -- 1W0
DO 350 IS - LNA
1‘5 E 11105)
"(T5 - TH)225.250.260
as W II 'I'S
IX .- 15
250 CONTINUE
'I'IB - ‘I'IB + TUOX) - 'I'COX)
‘I‘IBS II ‘I‘IBS + TIB
DBPKI’ACXOH BPBHBI'IM
DO 230: - LNA
no TPIIII) - 10(1) —‘I‘(I)
DPOIIaBOJIIITBJleOCTB
DO ”I I - LNA
”1 PRO) - 8Y(I)/(SY(I)+ 8N0»
no PORUA'I'MXJOHIITBPAIIIIII.H.128 BHDOJIHEI'IAJM
'Mﬂ IIOJIIIOB BPBMﬂsz‘IICBKJI/IZSHXO MO) '(I)
’TO YI‘UU )‘I'PRU )‘I'MJ )SNU )SKU )CK (I )TAZU)
’BNIUWIIU)BMIUIPNIJYI'PU»
“I [ORNAT(I2.778.2.I2.5'8.2.“18.2.I2.2I’8.2)
8880A PNVﬂbTATOB OllIIOﬂ II'I‘SPMIIII, COR“ l‘l'l- 3
INITI — amawz‘a
w WRITBIII‘IIJWNTJYCIIYP + IYI’ + NJYCUYI’ + "9+ 2).'I‘IB
DO 2“ J - LNA

{Continua}, next page]

276

FOR om I. USE ONLY
FORGMﬂKJAJ.USE(NNLY

 

wm‘mn‘uma):.ua).P(J).T(J).TU(J)MNDJMHHO).
msmnskuxcxuMAM).EHK(J).III(J).NBIO).BII(I).
ousunnmnmxrm
2“ com-mus
Konuqzc'rao vcnamuux mun!!! : m!
as warnsqmm - NY + 1
DO 25: J - mm
mm) - mm) + rum
'rpnsu) - ‘mtsm + 7mm
'resu) - 113(1) 4» mm
susm - 53130) + sum
sxsu) - susu) + sxu)
Balsa) - ms“) + Ella)
zuxsm - euxm + auxsm
smsm - zmsu) + sum)
Pnsu) = pasu) + no)
TAZSU) - “250) + nzm
ncu) - ucm + svu) + sum
11mm - 11mm + 'mn
ssvu) - ssw) + sya)
sssm - $st) + snu)
menu) — anummonow
w aumn- sum
NBMMU) - new»
260 mama) — sumumozmm
m sumo) - 3mm
uamnm - usmm
293 lﬂSMMU) — 851(1))264385305
2“ 53mm - sum
usnmu) - "sum
as: cxsm - cxsu) + cm)
251 common
91-0 WPMHPVIOTCR mums: mm uonmaaua cp. ousnoa
nrorom
DO 210 J - LNA
L1 - mm)
DO 210 x - 1.1.1
0431‘ tmcm nponvcxoa nonaanm
mm”) — 2)272.271.m
211 mu." - mm." + 1.0
:12 1mm.» — ”210313.210
cum- nsmmonnaauux noaaanm
m usu.n- um.” + 1.0
:10 cou'rmua
xouau u'ramuun
mn- — magma»

[Continued, next page]

277

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. 0le

KOBE“ UPOI‘OHA
zoo DN - 1.0m
0028! J - LNA
13R“) - TSNJPDN
TPRSU) - TPR8(J)°DN
113(3) - TGUPDN
8M5“) - SUSUFDN
8K5“) I SKSO )‘DN
SCPU) - 3C?“ VNCU)
PR8") - PRS(J)°DN
TAZSU) - TAZSU)‘ DN
TPNSU) - TPN(J)‘DN
3N5“) - “SOPDN
EMKSU) - BIKSUVDIQ
EMISU) - EMISOPDN
IP(IIU(J))28L281.295
296 ES“) - BSUVHUXJ)
281 CKSU) - CKS(J)‘DN
DO 2901 - LNA
L1 - NPUI
APPO) -- 0.0
00 290 l - LL!
APPO) - APPU) 4- "PO."
390 CONTINUE
NHPOI‘ - NUPOI‘ +1
TIWS - TIBS’DN
059A“: PBEVJIBTATOB 8A 0A]!!! ﬂPOI‘OH
PBY - NY'imﬂlN
CALL PRINT
GOTO 10
BM)

Subroutine for Feeding Raw nodding Data

svanourma POINT
INTscgn AA (u.50).Npu)
as“. T(¢).'rlm.so).lw.r«).1'x(9.50)
0.1m cmrnuom
common Ionoma
couuou NAA.NTI.N.NA.N0.ITI.NP.NnPOI‘.mAX.
onummmmym.9nz.rna.9a4.pns
CALL cnsmsmmmmm,
cau. CﬂBlﬂO’l‘hLBJI‘M)
s ronumuooa ——————————————————————
O

________________ II)

{Continuum next -
278

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

o roam'nmao)

1 Foaummxmuxomnuuaﬂru nucupuuumn'mux
Mammal)

o FORMAT(5F20.5)

ao ronuar(ax.sla.m.o)

u manna/«a CTA‘I'HCTMQBCKIR memos onsvarovcxon
‘nEﬂTEJleOC‘rﬂ/l)

12 roamnsxnxs)

u roammx.1m.0)

co ronmmmrom

as mammals“)

ao sonunwauwsrcznrem

21 roaum/aon menus CPEAHBFO onarxron: 51-.“st
s -.n.2)

22 ronumunxmnncxonuun manna “mums/I
03m sumac: qucno unmana.............w
ma non new-m Psaynunoa..............w/

'93 OHEPATOPJXJOHKOJIM‘IEC'I‘BOAXJHIﬂOPNATuBHOE
ospaumx.mmxsnnonaanmas.x.eansoru)

23 Ponmnuax.32HKoaoouuuamu ynnnsnna rnrpaocum

u FORM..T(15.9X.15.6X.F11.3.5H cw.)

25 Fonumom.5) '

a ronunumxxuonzmmraamx.onuonaanmA.
05x35" msse Bun. oneuro —
'18X.OHDOJRAIIA‘IA.BH.3X.13H—CJIEJIYDIIIA8 nonaumu B cav-

my
tax N.1£HCYI11ECT. mn.6x.mu.7x,mpou.;x.
usavcnzxa Havnmu)

as FOMIAT(I3.I6.I1.IG.I9.2I8)

a roam-rum“ ucnuweuummMJxm.m..M.m..ax.
munpaosmaoamuus RAHHHE)

so roamnmox.wnmrmnpu nonauuq)

32 FORMA‘IUIBH Housmaxsnnnnumn unsu..3x.
mucnnn. nspuon.2x.1zn3£poar- ”0—!
ma nonaa— NOMEH‘I‘ omuum. o'nmo—. mum.
'HOCTb asnussnnmu HA‘IMM Brennan
mums. nona. vcnsxa nm.)

as roam-rm.“1.3.m.3.m.3)

35 roam-rum" ucnmnsnummwaxm.m.m.m..zx.
'2HM-.N.2.£H r -.r4.2.mc -.N.2.axnou nomnwu 73mm.
wsx.2m).£13.5.m 2).313.5.‘H anus:

-5x.2m).m.s.m 5).Bi3.5.‘ll 0,313.51
~5x.2nn.m.5.m 0.313.»
nrmnrornowaoo
w cm. CﬂBu(OTB.nOR3A.BKI)
REANBKI.IO)N.NA.N0.ITI.(NP(I).J - magnum - mu)

{Continua}, next

279

Poi: omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

..___— ‘—

 

Iqu - 1
OUPEnEnEHuE uwmmsro qucm nonamq
DO « 1 - 1.!“
m - NPO)
mm — ummuuz
t2 uux - III
a CONTINUE
NAA - G'NA
NTI - G'NA
numsmnzxuuxn.) - 1.NAA).I - mum
CALL CﬂBLKSABJIOIlSAJM)
2 CALL cnsmormmmmam)
NEANEMMNUIUJM - :.NAA).I - UNA!)
CALL mentanmnmmut)
onPEnEJIENME HON-IPA CPBIUISI‘O OHEPATOPA
a 88011 HO munux
a CALI. Cllsu(0Tn.onEPI.Em)
DO 50 I - LNA
IﬂNo — mam.“
l3 numemmmnxu)
50 CONTINUE
CALL anUBAEnnEW 31m
3301: Human RomuquNTon Yunnan)!» ran-cum:
6 CALL CIIEIMOTBJ‘OWJKI)
I. - NP(N0)
RBAD(BK1.18)((TK(J.I).J - 1.0) l -1.L)
CALL anumABmoaomsm)
Nc - 3
NR - 10
93011 hummus! uoaoouuunu‘ros nummmmnn 5 mx
ovuuunn '
9 CALL cnsmormnncxnam)
no 51 l - LNG
RBAD(BKI.6)(TD(J.I).J - LNK)
n CONTINUE
CALL CﬂBll(3AB.IlHCKP.BK1)
amuca EEEAEHHux mnﬂux
wmrsmm.22)N.NA.No.lT|
DO 521 - 1.NA
wnnmnmmnmmmm)
a CONTINUE
no so I - 1.NA
m - Nrm
wmrmmmu
DO .5: I - m: _
WIIITEm‘l1.28)l.AA(J.l).AA(NA + J.I).AA(2'NA + 2.1 — 1.1).

[Continued , next pa

230

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

oua'm + max/mama + 2-) — I.I).AAH'RA + 201.1)
N CONTINUE
wmnmmm a
wmrammm)
no u I - my
wm‘mnm.un.'rm.mum + J + J — 4.1mm“ + I + LI).
'TI(3‘NA + mum-NA + I.I).‘I‘I(5°NA + u)
so commuz
no common
DO u I - a.“
mno - mum:
o: wm1*smm.21m(l).l'm
a comma:
wm‘muqms)
wmn(nm.2sxcrxu.l).s - mm - 1.1.)
wm‘rzmmm
WRITE(I'I‘H.8)((TD(J.I).I -1.10).x- LNG)
sou CALL cnauw‘rmecmjnn
amoum1.20)vua“2.9hummus.“(N0).r(N0).cn
04“ch - 1.9)
CALL cnemsna‘ecmsm)
mmcmzounuomoro ‘0
Imuom.so.222222.0)coro 2
museumxosmaanwom 3
npaosmaoamua aasnsnnux “use unmsnon
nous/mm
c ammo.“ unnuaunvmsaux cnoacrn
ucnmn‘cuoro onnrnom
wan-2mm.»
wmrammm
wnnsmmsswn1.Pn2.933.Pm.9ns.umo).9m0).on.
°(ANG(I).I - 1.8)
x - 9
no no: - 1.1.
as - mum)
DO 105 I -1.3
as - as + munuucm
ms commas
mum-.02)” - 0.2
mm + N0 + N0 —1.n- as
I‘ll?!“ + no.1) - on
no common
3AnﬂCb IIPEOBPA308AHIIOH unwuu nmaux
IF(ANG(9).NE.555555.0)GOTO m
wnl'rsxnmzowm.Pnz.Pn3.Pm.pns
wmmnmm

DO 120 I - LL
WkITEII’I‘I1.3‘)I.TI(N0.I).TI(NA + N0 + N0 — I.I).TI(NA + N0
+ NOJ).
TI(3‘NA + NO.I).‘I'I("NA + N0.I).TI(5‘NA + no.1)
m CONTINUE
IIB‘I‘UNN
END

281

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subroutine for Feeding the Results of Simulation
Modeling

sunnourmz PRINT
unseen “msoxupm
am“moxzumnmsuum
as“. m).‘n(24.5mmm.P(4).rDuo.so).ssv(4).
cssnmnpm.pnsuusn«).-rcs«).'rpus«).nzs«). ,
~nam.suum.sus«).sxsm.zumu).
~auuu).wo.susm.au1w).scm),cxs«).cmm.
oxsmuo).uc«)
common NAA.NTI.N.NA.NO.ITI.NP.NnPOl‘.IMAX.
'1‘.M.FII(I1'I.AA.PR|.P82.P33.PN.PR5
cosmos lemmav.'r|ns.nc.ssv.ssn.app.pns.
muncsnvnsmzsxrpns
commonIa/suu.usun.sus.sxs.zummaumxuu. '
menu.
‘BS.£NS.EMIS.8CP.CKS ,
couuon IDITD.NG
CALL cnzmammmmn
mu. cnzumu.c.nqn

ao muummzx.1oupaavnunu43m moron/w
~on uonuqacno manuun. 7x.wzsn us aux aunonnano
oycnamuomzeu nrouem ycnamuux liTEPALlMﬂJ’OJI
can cpanuae npaun nunonusuna:ox.9mnrommu.nx.
07932.5" can.)

an maummzxmnHams-um msow onapnomw
mm 01511153 uucno sunonusmmx nonaanm....no.z.
was. as aux — auno neuo VCIIEIIIHO....PIO.ZI
mu — aunonnauo H vn.wno...r:o.2/
mu osmee qucno nponymennux nonaanm....m.21
mu creams nponanonmanwocm.........ns.m
ma cpsnnsa spans paso'ru .......... ......nw.5n cam
ma crannas arena omunmua.............m.a.sH cm:
03611 cpsnues 3mm nPocroa...............n1.3.5" cm:
can cranuze 3m» omanmnn/
mm a mmnmacxux non:mnmax............n1.3.5" cm:
can" crenmm neramcxon uveuamt..........n1.3.5“ can.)

so FORMER/ISO“ MAKCIIIMJIHIMI HAIIPMIBIIHOC'I'L............P&3I
'2“! (BO3HIIKJ'IA B IIOAIMIIA‘IB N.l3.1HV
'39" CPBAHBB MAKCIIMAJIBIIHX HAIIPIIRBHBOC'I‘EI....M
'39" CPMHBB KOHB‘IHHX HAUPIIIIIBHHOCPBII........I&3I)

‘0 PORMATUMH PA3HOC’I‘b "my MBKTIIBBOCTBD II
VPOBHBSI

'IIPIITﬁakﬂﬂﬂ/MH — MIIIIMIMJIBHMI............N.S.

‘IIII (nonaAﬂA'lAJSJHMH - MAKCIIMAJIBIIMI.......«.
'N.5.1lll (ﬂOﬂSAJIA‘IIAJJJIIVaOH —- CPBIIHBB aﬂA'IBHIIB....
‘I’9.5/30ll —CPBIIHBB 3HA'I8IIIIB IAKCMMYMOB..N.5I

’1)" —CP311HBE KOHE‘IHOB 8HA‘IBIIIIB....N.UI

"0H CPEAHMI CIIAﬂHHOCTb 8A nPOI‘OH..........N.§I

"OII CPEIIHIM CITAIIHHOCTI) 3 K08!!! IITBPAIIIIII.....N.5I)

 

 

[Continued, next page]

282

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

w 'oauA‘r"6X"6HOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOI

'38“ 888011: 110 PNYRBTATAI UPOFHONIPOBAHHW
°8XJOHHCTIHTVBMNHAX$A£1X.A1.1H..A|.ﬂi.l
‘8X.20HMOJKBT 5m OTHBCBH “.13.”! PPVUUU
’SXJSHOHEPATOPOB C BBPOﬂTHOCTbn.nU/I)
J - N0
Cl“) - NC“)
CHI) - 83W”
C|(3) - 38"“)
CI“) II APP“)
01(5) ' ”‘30)
CNG) - 13R“)
Cl(7) - 3315(1)
CNS) - 83(1)
CH.) - SCPU)
K - IO
DO 00! I l.NO
BU - TDUCJ)
DO 55 I» - LO
"8 - 88 + TD(I>.I)‘CI(L)
XBANI) - 83
Ll II I
08 - XBANI)
DO 70 K - LNG -
”(88 - XBARM))“.70.70
65 U I K
88 - XBANK)
70 CONTINUB
PL II 0.0
00 80 K II LNG
w PL - PL + BXHXBANK) - 33)
P - LOIPL
WRITB(II‘H,IO)NHPOI'.N.NY.?RY.TIB$

WRITBGI‘HMNCU).$YU LSSNU).APP(I).PRS(J).T8RU).
'1’th )J‘PNSU ).TAZS(J )J‘PRBU )

W II 1 1'3“] ‘1 |MHMU LNSMMU has“ )3‘30)

WBITBm‘l1Jo)!“IN(1).NEIIN(I).EIH(J).NBIN(J).ES(J).
’EISU ). WIS“ ).8CP(J ).CK8(J )

WRlTBdl'li.50)?!“.PBlPRI’JR‘JBSLLP
881' URN

END

88

283

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Appendix 2. Program of the Simulation Information Model of Operator Group
Activity

 

 

III-2M “011335 I'PYIIIIOBOB B3AIIIIOCBFI3AHHO“ 118578!!!»-
IIOC‘I’M

DIN RISI.KI‘I.MISI.PISI.NISI.GI5|
DIM CISIM- u5l.ll5l.YI5|.UISI.Al5I
READ KII: "‘.K[3].KIA].I(I5|
LB‘I‘ N I 3

LET I I 6

READ RIII.RI2|.I\I3I.RI‘I.RI5|
READ GIII.GIZI.GI3I.GI‘I.GISI
READ MIII.MIZI.MI3I.MI‘I.NI5I
READ PII].PI2I.PI3].PI‘].PISI
LET NI I 0

LET NI I NI 4- I

PRINT ollPOI'OI'Io;N I

PRINT dI.'l'.N.CIO;

INPUT II.'I‘.N.CI

LET HO I II

IAI‘ I I 23!!

IA'I' A I 238

MAT Y I ZER

LBTCSICSI QIBIZIO
LB‘I‘LISOIZIIQIIIITI I0
NAT C I 288

IA‘I‘ N I 23!!

NAT 0 I ll“

NAT W I 238

LET TO I 1'

“AT I) I 288

I00 LE‘I'PI III HIT

110 F’OIIXII 1'0 II

I20 L31” BIXI I III!

882888338888888tﬁ888883§83

(Continued. next page]

284

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020049-1

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

128 LET PIX! I [WM

130 NEXT X

“0 LET ml I Blil'l’l

150 LET P0 I I’ll]

100 FOR X I 2 TO M

170 LET PIX] I BlXI'PI

m I? PIX] > P0 THEN 2W
190 LET [’0 I l’lXI

200 NEXT X

30) LET‘N I UFO

310 "2°19 > T0 THEN 1300
320 POR X I 1 T0 II

330 LET TIXI - I/PIXI

360 LET SIXI I RIXI’TIXI

342 ”'3le >1 THEN 350

3“ LET 8le I !

850 IPSIXI < MIX] THEN 380
300 LET DIX] I 2

810 GOT0430

880 LET 0le I (sum-1mm -t)
385 LET NO I OIXI

800 LET but] I Kl! + KIZI'OIXI
400 FOR) I 3 T0!

606 LET N0 I N6°OIXI

“0 LET DIX] I DIX] + KIJI'NO
00 NEXT)

‘30 LET VIXI I MX)

“0 LET CIXI I (2le + VIXI -—i
‘50 IPCIXI <1 THEN W

400 LET Vle I Vle + CIXI

070 LET (3le I 6le - INT(CIXI)
680 LET VIX] I lNTWle)

530 NEXT X

560 LET R! I 0

550 FOR X I I TO M

500 LET L I L + VIXI

670 LET LIXI - LIXI + VIXI

575 LET N5 I VIXI

580 TOR Y -1 T0 N5

300 LET no I 0

000 ton 20 I I TO“

010 LET R0 I RO+ RHINO)
no NEXT“

030 LET BO I GIX!’RM 4- (llle ~13°O£XD
“0 LET 00 I RO'DIXI

050 I! 80 > Tle THEN 070

2 85

\H

[Continued,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—RDPBZ-00850R000500020049-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

coo Irmxl - 3110(0)) > 0 man coo
no on NIXI — NIX] + 1
coo 0010 no
no anlxl- wlxl +1
100 L31 so - 89 + 1
110 NEXT 11
112 ll? mm 41: 0 THEN no
714 LET cs - cs + 1
no urr n1 - 111+ wlxvuxl
no nzxr x
no LET zo - 1
no Iron x - 1 10 u
m "‘05 - 0 man 'no
101 L31 am - 1111
7:151! 111 - 01mm 700
no 0010 no
101 II WIXI - 0111311 no
‘no m BIXI - (\VIXIILIXIVM
no LET zo - 20mm
135 LET utxl - 0m + suxl
no next x
m L:..T c5 - o
ooo LET zo - zn-m — :1)
810 1.31 21 - 21+ zo
no one: - c2 + 1
aao 1.31' BO - m1
310 1.3731 - 81+ so
1150 1.31 01 - 50/1.
no LET 1'1 - 11 + 1‘9
300 1.3110 - 'r -- 'n
000 LET 110 - H - so
no [PTO < - 0 THEN No
no LBT r1 - HOITO
930 0070110
no LET 21 - zucz
oso LET 1:1 - 31Ic2
coo P011 x - 1 to u
no 1.21' cm - wtxvuxl
on 1.21 am - (rmvnxl
m 1.31 um - ulxucz
990 NEXT x
no Irc1- 0 THEN 1000
m 1mm .xmscroo. mam... manna... ammo. comma.»
1000 7011 x - 1 1'0 11
was PRINT om. elxl.UIXI.uxl.Wlxl -
woo nexr )1

[Continued, next pa

286

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1010 PRINT 121 It; 21331 IozEIchI -o;Ql

1060 PR INT «III .051ch Inszdlo -o:HO

1050 PRINT

1” LET Z - Z + 21

1070 LETE- E+ E1

1M LET Q I- Q + 01

10W POR X - 1 T0 II

1:00 LET IIXI - IIXI + QIXI

1105 LET YIXI - YIXI + EIXI

ma LET AIXI - AIXI+ UIX]

1110 NEXT X

1120 LETCS - a + 1

mo "63- N THEN 1150

1110 cm I)

1150 PFINT ammmranuun.

1153 PRINT «onan...mnmv..,mmmac...aoozur...
aﬂAI’ll‘IIIKJ

1155 POR X - I TO M

1100 PRINT X.PlX].IlXI/Q.YIXVCS.A[XIIQ

1165 NEXT X

1170 PRINT «2 -o;2/CI1;¢E InEICSnQ -.;Q/cs

1200 PRINT

1220 PRINT «K011 PABOTbIol

12” INPUT N2

1210 IP N2 -1 THEN 88

mo GOTO“

18!) LET T9 - TO

1310 LET I11] - INTm0ﬂ1l+.5)

1815 LET VI -- VIII

1320 PORX-2 TO .\I—1

13” IP I’IX — 1| > EIX —1l'VlX -1}ITO THEN 1300

1310 LET VIXI - INTG‘O‘PIXI)

1350 GOTO 1310 '

1300 LET VIXI - INTU'O’PIXI +.5)

1310 LET VI -- V1+ VIXI

1380 NEXT X

mo LET VIIII .- IIO - V1

1100 GOTO 510

1500 DATA I.—2.35.3.£72.-1.820.0

1550 DATA .1..1..A.0.0

1600 DATA .1..1..1.0.0

10:50 DATA 23.2.0.0

mo DATA .0..0..1.0.0

1000 END ‘

READY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Appendix 3. Symbols of Variables in Information Simulation Model of Group
Activity

ll

'1'

H
RIx]
Glx]
KIJ]
Hlx]
Plxl
Cl
TIx]

FIX]
Vle
ClX]
S[x]
AIx]
Dlx]
L
LIx]
"[x]
lel
lel
80
20
21
CZ
BO
31
T1
T9
T0
so
no
Elx]
le}
C6
C3
Jlx]
le]

number of presentable information symbols

time of work

number of operators in group

matrix of average times of information processing

matrix of mean quadratic deviations of information processing time

matrix of coefficients of stress polynomial

matrix of stress thresholds

matrix of probabilities of success

print code for one iteration

matrix of times in which each operator processes one information
symbol

matrix of intensities of information flows

number of information symbols in cycle

matrix of supplementary information symbols

matrix of stresses

matric of independent variables (arguments) of polynomial-

matrix of coefficients of time deformation

number of information symbols presented

matrix of information symbols presented to each operator

matrix of successfully processed information symbols

matrix of erroneously processed information symbols

matrix of coefficients of information loading of channels

time of processing an information symbol

product of coefficients of information loading

current value of operator teamwork

cycle counter

efficiency of work of group in cycle

current value of work efficiency

time used

time of last cycle

remaining time

total number of successfully processed information symbols

remaining number of information symbols

nitrix of values of work efficiency of operators in cycle

matrix of values of quality of operator activity in cycle

number of stress-related failures

iteration counter

matrix of values of quality of operators' work in n iterations

matrix of values of efficiency of operators' work in n iterations

288

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

To Chapters 1 and 2

l.

2.

3.

6.

9.

10.

12.

13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

K. Marx. "Kapital," in K. Marx and P. Engels, "Sochineniya" [Works], 2nd
Ed, Vol 23, Book 1, pp 80-93.

K. Marx, ibid, p 361.

V. I. Lenin, "The Scientific System of Squeezing out Sweat," "Poln. Sobr.
Soch." [Complete Works], Vol 23, pp 18-19.

V. I. Lenin, "The Taylor System -- Enslavement of. the Human Being by the
Machine," ibid, Vol 210, pp 369-371.

K. K. Platonov, "Voproay Psikhologii Truda" [Issues of Labor Psychology],
Moscow. "Meditsina." 1970, 219 pages.

R. 8. ’ 1ttel, "Personality and Motivation Structure and Measurement," New
York: Yonkers-on-Hudson, 1957, 968 pages.

P. B. Berezin, M. P. Miroshnikov, and R. P. Rozhanets, "Metodika
Mnogostoronnego Isaledovaniya Lichnosti" [Methodology for Multifaceted Study
of the Personality]. Moscow, "Meditsina," 1976, 176 pages.

J. A. Taylor, "A Personality Scale of Manifest Anxiety." J. ABNORMAL AND
soc. PSYCHOL, 1953, 68, No 2, pp 285-290.

Ye. A. Mileryan (editor), "Psikhologicheskiy Otbor Letchikov" [Psychological
Selection of Pilots], Kiev. 1966, 234 pages.

A. V. ll'in, "The Rhythm of the Psyche and the Labor Process," in "Na
Psikhologicheskon Fronte" [On the Psychological Front], 1931, Vol 2, pp 60-61.

K. K. Platonov, "Psikhologiya Letnego Trude" [The Psychology of Flight Work],
Moscow, "Voyenizdat," 1960, 351 pages.

F. Taylor, "Scientific Organization of Labor," 3rd ed, Moscow, "ltd-w i tip.
l-ya in. Vorovskogo Transpechati," 1921., 292 pages (translation from English).

1“. Taylor, "Scientific Foundations of the Organization of Industrial Enter-
prises," Moscow, "Levenstern," 1916, 114 pages (translation from English).

I. M. Sechenov, "Uchastiye Nervnoy Sistemy v Rabochikh Dvizheniyakh Cheloveka

-- Izbr. Proizvedeniya" [Participation of the Nervous System in Human Work
Motions -- Selected Works], Moscow, "Izd-vo AN SSSR," 1952, Vol 1, pp 510-517.

1. M. Sechenov, "Ocherk Rabochikh Dvizheniy Cheloveka -- Izbr. Tr." [Essay on
Human work Motions -- Selected Works], Moscow, "Vzesoyuz. In-t Bkaperim.
Meditsiny," 1935, 139 pages.

0. Lipnan. "Vybor Professiy" [choice of Occupations], Prague, 1923, 32 pages.

M. I. Bobneva, "Psychological Design as the New Coal and Facet of Human Factors
Engineering," in "18 Mezhdunar. Psikhol. Kongr.: Tez. Soobshch." [The 18th

. . 289
roe omcm. use ONLY
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

FOR:0FFKJAL.USE(NVLY

International Psychological Congress: Abstracts of Communications], Moscow,
1966, Vol 2, pp 652—é53.

V. P. Zinchenko, A. H. Leont'yev, and D. Yu. Panov, "Problems of Human
Factors Engineering," in "Inzhernaya Psikhologiya" [Human Factors Engineer-
ing]. Moscow, "Izd—vo Mask. Un-ta," 1964, pp 5-23.

A. N. Leont'yev, and B. P. Lomov, "People and Machines," VOPR. PSIKHOLOCII,
1963, No 5, pp 29-37.

K. R. Platonov (editor), "Lichnost' i Trud" [The Individual Personality and
Labor], Moscow, "Mysl'," 1965, 365 pages.

. Yu. Panov, and D. A. Oshanin, "The Human Being in Automatic Control
Systems." in "Kibernetiku na Sluzhbu Kommunizmu" [Cybernetics in the Service
of Communism], Moscow, "Gosenergoizdat," 1961, pp 173-184.

M. I. Bobneva, "Tekhnicheskaya Psikhologiya" [Industrial Psychology], Moscow,
"Nauka," 1966, 127 pages.

G. M. Zarakovskiy, G. M., "Psikhofiziologicheskiy Analiz Trudovoy

Deyatel'nosti" [Psychophysiological Analysis of Labor Activity], Moscow,
"Nauka," 1966, 114 pages.

0. A. Konopkin, "The Speed of Information Receiving by a Person and Conscious,
Deliberate Regulation of Human Activity," in "Sistemy Chelovek i Avtomat“
[The Man and Automaton System]. Moscow, "Hauka," 1965, pp 119-127.

B. P. Lomov, V. M. Nikolayev, and V. F. Rubakhin, "Timely Theoretical Prob-
lems of Human Factors Engineering," in "Materialy 3 Vsesoyuz. S"yezda o-va
Psikhologov SSSR" [Materials of the 3rd All-Union Congress of the Society of
Psychologists of the USSR], Moscow, 1968, Vol 3, Vyp 1, pp 57-58.

V. N. Pushkin, "Operativnoye Myshlenlye v Bol'shikh Sistemakh" [Operational
Thinking in Large Systems], Moscow-Leningrad, "Energiya," 1965, 375 pages.

V. N. Pushkin, "Some Fundamental Issues of Psychology and Cybernetics,"
VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII, 1967, N0 1, pp 168-171.

M. I. Vinogradov, "Fiziologiya Trudovykh Protsessov" [The Physiology of
Labor Processes], Moscow, "Meditsina," 1966, 367 pages.

S. A. Kosilov, "Ocherki Piziologii Truda" [Essays on Labor Physiology],
Moscow. "Meditsina." 1965, 379 pages.

Z. M. Zolina, "Fiziologicheskiye Osnovy Ratsional'noy Organizatsii Trude na
Konveyyere" [The Physiological Foundations of Rational Organization of Labor
on the Conveyor Line], Moscow, "Meditsina," 1967, 176 pages.

A. I. Kikolov, "Umstvenno-Euotsional'noye Napryazheniye za Pul'tom Upravleniya'
[Mental-Emotional Stress at the Control Console], Moscow, "Meditsina," 1967,
176 pages.

290

F!”l(ﬂﬁﬂ(1Al.USEdMVLY
32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

4].

42.

43.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K. K. Platonov, "Psychological Foundations of Scientific Organization of
Labor," in "Psikhologicheskiye i Esteticheskiye Osnovy NOT" [Psychological

and Aesthetic Foundations of Scientific Organization of Labor], Moscow,
1967. pp 35-54.

"Issues of Production Organization in the United States: Report of the
Brigade of English Specialists on Issues of Production Organization in

the United States." Moscow, "Izd-vo Inostr. Lit.." 1965, 230 pages (trans-
lation from English).

V. V. Rozenblat, "Definitions of Certain General Concepts of Brgononics and
Labor Physiology Related to Characterizing the Functional Stress of the
Organism During Labor Activity," in "Haterialy Vseros. Mezhvuz. Konf. po
Nauch. Org. Truda i Upr. Pr-vom. Sektsiya 'Ergon. Vopr. Org. Truda'"
[Materials of the All-Russian Interschool Conference on Scientific Organi-
zation of Labor and Production Control. The Section "Ergonomic Issues of
Labor Organization], Sverdlovsk, 1970. pp 3-6.

V. G. Zhukov, and P. I. Ignat'yev, "Piziologo-Cigiyenicheskiye Voprosy NOT"
[Physiological-Hygienic Issues of Scientific Organization of Labor],
Sverdlovsk, “Sverdl. In-t Nar. Khoz-va," 1972, 62 pages.

V. P. Solov'yeva, "Mental and Nervous-Emotional Stress in Different Types of
Labor Activity," abstract of dissertation for the degree doctor of medical
sciences. Moscow, 1972, 31 pages.

K. H. Gurevich, "Profsssional'naya Prigodnost' i Osnovnyye Svoystva Nervnoy
Sistemy" [Occupational Suitability and the Basic Characteristics of the
Nervous System], Moscow, "Nauka," 1970, 272 pages.

A. I. Prokhorov, A. A. Ramyalis, and H. V. Freydina, "Monitoring State as

a Technique for Evaluating the Effect of Various Factors on the Efficiency

of Operator Activity," in "Kontrol' Sostoyaniya cheloveka-Operatora" [Monitor-
ing the State of the Human Operator], Moscow-Vilnius, 1971, pp 13-21.

A. I. Samoylova, "Experiment with Comprehensive Study of working Conditions
and the State of Health of Female Workers in a Scientific Organization of
Labor System,“ in "Haterialy Vseros."... op. cit., fn 34, pp 18-22.

V. A. Adamovich-Cerasimov, D. I. Vasil'yeva, V. N. Hargolin, and V. A.

Plankin, "Development of Rational Regimes of Labor and Rest under Conditions
of a Five-Day Work Week," ibid, pp 61-64.

N. a. Levitov, "Psikhologiya Truda" [Labor Psychology], Moscow, "Uchpedgiz,"
1963, 340 pages.

H. A. Gendin, and R. A. Gisova, "Professiograms as a Constituent Part of
Scientific Organization of the Labor of Workers." ibid., pp 85-87.

Ye. A. Klimov. "Individual'nyy Stil' Deyatel'nosti v Zavisimosti ot'
Tipologicheskikh Svoystv Nervnoy Sistemy" [The Individual Style of Activity

Dependent on Typological Characteristics of the Nervous System], Kazan',
"Izd-vo Kaz. Un-ta," 1969, 273 pages.

291

IW)R OIWHCJAI.I£5Ei(ﬂ¥LY
46.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

S3.

54.

55.

56.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. V. Mochalin, "Evaluation of the Psychophyaiological Criteria of Vocational
Selection by Means of a Newly Developed Set of Instruments (Using the Example
of the Occupation of Railway Engineer," author's abstract of a disseration
for the degree of candidate of biological sciences, Moscow. 1966, 32 pages.

L. N. Zafirov, G. A. Aminev, V. I. Volodin, and S. V. Sudnitsyn, "Study of
Marking Conditions and the Physiological State of Rotary Conveyor Workers,"
in "Materialy Vseros. Mezhvuz. Konf." ... op. cit., fn 34. PP 40-43-

I. M. Sechenov, "0n the Question of the Effect of Stimulation of the Sense
Nerves on a Person's Muscular work." in "Izb. Tr." [Selected Works], Moscow,
"Vsesoyuz. In-t Eksperim. Meditsiny," 1935, pp 151-163.

F. R. Dunayevskiy, "Problems Professional'nogo Otbora (Vybor Professiy)"
[The Problem of Vocational Selection (Choice of Occupations)], Khar'kov,
"Izd-vo In~ta Trude i Zhurn. 'Put' Prosveshcheniya,"' 1923, 68 pages.

A. K. Gsstev, "Ustanovka Proizvodstva Metodom TsITa“ [Setting up Production
by the Central Institute of Labor Method], Moscow-Leningrad. "Gosizdat,"
1927, 148 pages.

V. 8. Merlin, "The Psychological Foundations for Teaching Self-Control,"
sov. PBDAGOGIKA. 1939, No 11/12, pp 138—148.

C. Z. Bednyy, and F. A. Voskoboynikov, "The Issue of the Adaptability of
the Individual to the Objective Requirements of an Activity.“ in
"Psikhofiziologicheskiye Osnovy Professional'nogo Otbora: Tez. 1 Vsesoyuz.
Simpoz." [The Psychophysioiogical Foundations of Vocational Selection:
Abstracts of the let All-Union Symposium], Kiev, 1973, pp 9-10.

A. A. Bagrov, M. P. Yegorov, and 0. V. Goncharova, "tbdical-Physiological
Selection in Planned Professional Advancement of Personnel at the Volga
Automotive Plant." in ibid., pp 7-8.

0. N. Luk'yanova, T. A. Berezanets, T. M. Semik, L. I. Shumilina, and
Yu. R. Varenik, "Experiment with Creating Operational Stress under Lab
Conditions," in "Neyrobionika i Problemy Bioelektricheskogo Upravleniya"
[Neurobionics and Problems of Bioelectric Control], Kiev, 1975, pp 18-28.

A. Binet, "Introduction to Experimental Psychology," St. Petersburg, "Tip.
v. Bezobrazova," 1903. 215 pages (translation from French).

Br. Simon, "The English School and Intelligence Tests," Moscow, "Izd-vo
APN RSFSR," 1958, 252 pages (translation from English).

V. N. Shubkin, "Sotsiologicheskiye Opyty" [Sociological Experiments],
Moscow, “Mysl',” 1970, 288 pages.

6. I. Andreyeva (editor), "Lektsiya po Metodike Konkretnykh Sotsisl'nykh
Issledovaniy" [Lecture on the Methodology of Concrete Social Research],
Moscow, "Izd-vo Mosk. Un-ta," 1972, 202 pages.

292

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
S7.

58.

S9.

600

61.

62.

63.

66.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1‘. I. Tepenitsina, "Investigating Attention by the Correction Test Method
During the Process of Expert Evaluation of Work Capability." VOPR.
PSIICHOLOGII, 1959, No 5, pp 145-153.

V. H. Bleykher, "Klinicheuksya Patopsikhologiya" [Clinical Pathopsychology],
Tashkent. "Heditsins UzSSR." 1976. 325 pages.

A. N. Leont'yev. and Yu. 8. Gippenrsyter (editors), "Prsktikum po
Psikhologii" [Practical Course in Psychology]. macaw. "Izd-vo Mask. Un-ta."
1972, 2107 pages.

P. I. Grishko. "Methodology for Determining the Speed of Information Pro-
cessing (by means of stles)."GIGIYENA I SANITARIYA. 1974. No 3, p 68.

A. 0. Navakitkyan. and V. V. Kryzhanovskaya. "Determining the Speed of
Information Put-easing by Means of Tables," FIZIOL. ZIIURN.. 1970. No 10. p 697.

G. K. Sereda (editor), "Inzhenernays Psikhologiya" [limo Factors Engineer-
ing], Kiev. "Vishcha shkola." 1976, 308 pages.

H. J. Eysenck. "Test Your Abilities." Moscow. "Mir." 1972. 176 pages.

K. M. Gurevich, and I. V. Rsvich-Shcherbo. "What Should Be the 'Criterion
of Intelligence?” LIT. CAL, 1975. No 5. p 13.

V. S. Derysbin, "Chuvstvs. Vlecheniya. Emotsii" (Feelings. Inclinations.
and Emotions], Leningrad. "Nsuks." 1974. 258 pages.

A. Ye. 01'shannikovs. V. V. Semenov, and 1.. M. Smirnov. "Evaluation of
Methodologies for Diagnosing Bmotionality." VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII. 1976. No 5.
pp 103-113.

A. Ye. 01'shsnnikova. "The Sign of Dominant Emotions and Background 836's
in Adolescents," NOWYB ISSLED. V PSIKHOLOGII, 19710. No 1, pp 60-62.

S. V. Korzh. "Quantitative Evaluation of Strength of Hill." VOPR.
PSIKHOLOGII, 1976. No 1. pp 118-121.

Ye. S. Hakhlakh. and I. A. Rapoport. "The Question of Measuring Efforts
of Hill and the Volitional Qualities of an Individual." VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII.
1976. No 2, pp 133-137.

I. P. Pavlov. "Physiological Doctrine of the Types of Nervous Systems and
Temperaments." in "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete Works]. 2nd Ed. Moscow-
Leningrad. "Izd-vo AN SSSR." 1952, Vol 3. pp 77-78.

V. D. Nebylitsyn. "Osnovnyye Svoystvs Nervnoy Sistemy Cheloveka" [Basic
Characteristics of the Human Nervous System]. Hoscov, "Prosveshcheniye,"
1966. 381 pages.

V. D. Nebylitsyn. "Psikhofiziologicheskiye Issledovaniya Individusl'nykh

Razlichiy" [The Psychophyaiological Investigation of Individual Differences].
Moscow, "Nauka." 1976, 336 pages.

293

.l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
73._

76.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

60.

81.

82.

83.

86.

85.

86.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. D. Nebylitsyn, "Timely Problems of Differential Psychology," VOPR.
PSIKHOLOGII, 1971, No 6, pp 13-26.

N. J. Bysenck. "The Structure of Human Personality," London, Nethuen,
1968, 668 pages.

J. A. Taylor, "The Relationship of Anxiety to Conditioned Eyesid Response,"
J. exp. PSYCHOL., 1952, 41, pp 81-92.

P. B. Zil'berman, "The Emotional Stability of the Operator,“ author's
abstract of dissertation for the degree of candidate of psychological
sciences, Kiev, 1969, 21 pages.

V. L. Harishchuk, "The Question of the Emotional Stability of Flight Cadets
and Possibilities of Improving It Using Physical Training Equipment,"
author's abstract of dissertation for the degree of candidate of psycho-
logical sciences, Leningrad, 1969, 25 pages.

L. H. Abolin, "The Relationship of Psychological and Physiological Cor-
relates of Emotional Stability (Based on Findings from a Study of Soccer
Players of Different Ages and Skill Groupsx" author's abstract of disser-
tation for the degree of candidate of psychological sciences, Moscow,
1976, 25 pages.

G. Kh. Shingarov, "Emotsii i Chuvstva kak Forma Otrazheniya Dayatel'nosti"
[Emotions and Feelings as a Form of Reflection of Activity], Moscow,
"Nauka," 1971, 223 pages.

P. Press, "Emotions," in "Voprosy Motivatsii i Emotsiy" [Questions of
Motivation and Emotions], K’scow, 1973, pp 131-189.

P. V. Simonov, "Teoriya Otrazheniya i Psikhofiziologiya Emotsiy" [Theory
of Reflection and the Psychophysiology of Emotions], Moscow, "Nauka,"
1970, 161 pages.

N. I. Nayenko, and 0. V. Ovchinnikova, "Distinguishing the State of
Emotiona1 Tension," PSIKHOL. ISSLED., 1970, Vyp 2, p S.

F. Grodins, “Teoriya Regulirovaniya i Biologicheskiye Sisteny" [Theory of
Regulation and Biological Systems], Moscow, "Mir," 1966, 256 pages.

P. V. Bundzen, N. N. Vasileyevskiy, A. N. Zingerman, D. N. Henitskiy,

N. B. Suvorov, V. V. Trubachev, A. V. Chubarov, and B. H. Mishkin, "Ocherki
Prikladnoy Neyrokibernetiki" [Essays on Applied Neurocybernetics], Leningrad,
"Neditsina," 1973, 232 pages.

A. M. Zinger-an, V. D. Volkova, D. N. Henltskiy, P. V. Bundzen, and B. H.
Hishkin, “Typological Characteristics of Adaption That Determine the Effec-
tiveness of Labor Activity," FIZIOL. ZNURN. SSSR, 1976, 9, No 10, pp 1681-
1693.

L. D. Yer-olayeva-Tomina, "Individual Differences in the Skin Glavanic
Reaction," in B. N. Teplov (editor), "Tipologicheskiye Osobennosti Vysshey
Nervnoy Deyatel'nosti Cheloveka" [Typological Characteristics of Human Higher
Nervous Activity], Moscow, "Prosveshcheniye, 1965, Vol 6, pp 212-238.

IIA l.
87.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L. D. Yernolayeva-Tonina. "Evaluation of Indicators of the Dynanisn of the
Nervous System by the Skin Galvanic Method." PROBL. DIFFERENTS. PSIKHOLOGII,
1969. 6, pp 214-227.

2. G. Turovskaya, Ye. L. Berezhkovskaya, and 2. H. Aleksandrovskeye. "The
Individual Style of Work and Psychophysiological Characteristics of Opera-
tors in Chemical Production." VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII, 1972. No 5. pp 77-78.

8. H. Teplov, "Current State of the Issue of Types of Human Higher Nervous
Activity and Hethodology for Defining Then," in "7 Hethdunar. Kong.
Antropolog. i Etnogr. Nauk." [7th International Congress of Anthropological
and Ethnographic Sciences], Moscow, "Nauka," 1966, pp 1-15.

2. G. Turovskaya, "The Relationship of Certain Indicators of the Strength
and Mobility of the Human Nervous System," in “Tipologicheskiye

Osobennosti Vysshey Nervnoy Deyatel'nosti Cheloveks" [Typological Charac-
teristics of Human Higher Nervous Activity]. edited by B. H. Teplov. Hoecov.
"Izd-vo APH RSFSR," 1963, Vol 3, pp 248-261.

L. B. Yernolsyeva-Tomina, "Sone Characteristics of Attention Related to the
Strength of the Nervous System," DOKL. AKAD. PED. NAUK, 1957. No 3,
pp 97-100.

L. B. Yernolayeva-Tonina. "Concentration of Attention and the Strength of

the Nervous System." in "Iipologicheskiye Osobennosti"... op. c1t., in 90.
Vol 2. pp 92-106.

v. D. Nebylitsyn. "Reaction Time and the Strength of the Nervous Systen,"
00mm RSFSR, 1960, No 4. pp 93-100.

A. Ye. 01'shannikova, and N. I. Aleksandrova, "The Reliability of Indicators
of the Motor Reaction." PROBL. DIFFERENTS. PSIKHFIZIOLOGII, 1969, 6,
pp 253-265.

0. A. Sirotin, "Some Psychophysiological Correlates of the Emotional Stabi-
lity of Athletes," HOVYYE ISSLED. V PSIXHOLOGII, 1976. Ho 1, pp 62-65.

E. A. Golubeva, "Studying the Bioelectric Correlates of Helory in Differen-
tial Psychology." VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII, 1972. Ho 1. pp 25-36.

E. A. Golubeva. "The Reactions of Reorganizing the Biocurrente of the Brain
and Psychological Characteristics of the Nervous System." in "Tipologicheskiye
Osobennosti"... op. cit.. in 86, pp 111-129.

V. I. Rozhdestvenskaya, E. A. Golubeva, and L. B. Yernoleyeva-Tonina,
"General and Partial Factors in Strength of the Nervous System." PROBL.
DIFFERENTS. PSIKHOFIZIOLOGIZ, 1969, 6, pp 15-37.

V. I. Rozhdestvenskaya, and I. A. Levochkins, "The Functional State During
Honotonous Work and Strength of the Nervous System," PROBL. DIFIERBNTS.
PSIKHOLDPIZIOLOGII, 1972, 7, pp 194-223.

V. S. Klyagin, "Band Analysis of the EEG and the Strength of the Nervous
System." NOVYYE ISSLED. PSIKHOLOGII, 1974, No 1. pp 53-55.

295
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

T. F. Bszylevich, and N. A. Leonova, "The Manifestation of Strength as a
General Characteristic of the Nervous System in Set Circumstances,"
NOVYYB ISSLED. V PSIKHOLOGII, 1974, No 1, pp 51-52.

V. 5. Merlin, and E. I. Mastvilisker, "New Techniques of Investigating the
Strength of the Stimulation Process," VOPR. PSIKHOLDGII, 1971, No 6,
pp 151-155.

L. A. Kopytova. "The Individual Style of Labor Activity of Mechanics
Depending on Strength of the Nervous System in Relation to Stimulation,”
VOPR. PSIKROLOGII, 1964, No 1, pp 25-34.

S. A. Solov'yeva, "Individual Psychological Differences in the Impact of
Motives and Nervous-Mental'Stress on Menorization.“ PROBL. EXPERIM.
PSIKBOLOGII LICHNOSTI, 1968, Vyp 5, pp 23-26.

N. S. Utkina, "Typological Differences in the Influence of the Pedagogical
Evaluation on Certain Characteristics of Attention ," in "Tipologicheskiye
Issledovaniya po Psikhologii Truda" [Typological Studies in Labor Psycho-
logy], Perm', 1964, pp 113-151.

V. I. Rozhdestvenskaya, "Manifestation of Strength of the Nervous System
in the Ability of Nerve Cells to Bndure Prolonged, Concentrated Stimula-
tion," in "Tipologicheskiye Osobennosti"... op. cit., fn 90, 1959, Vol 2,
pp 39-48.

V. I. Rozhdestvenskaya, "Experiment with Determining the Strength of the
Process of Stimulation by Characteristics of Its Irradiation and Concen-
tration in the Visual Analyzer." VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII. 1955, No 3, pp 90-99.

P. G. Saprykin, and Ye. A. Mileryan, "Experiment tith Development of a
Methodology for Experimental Study of Individual Characteristics of Human
Higher Nervous Activity.’ in "Dokl. na. Soveshch. po. Vopr. Psikhologii"
[Reports at the Conference on Issues of Psychology]. Moscow, 1954, pp 31-35

V. I. Rozhdestvenskaya. "Deter-ining the Strength of the Inhibition Process
in a Human Being in Experiments Involving Prolonging the Action of a
Differentiating Stimulus," in "Tipologicheskiye Osobennosti"... op. cit.,
in 90. Vol 3, 1963. pp 108-117.

Ye. F. Malikhova. "Correlation Analysis of the Results of Separate Tests
for the Strength, Balance, and Mobility of Nervous Processes in Dogs,"
ZHURN. VYSSH. NERV. DEYATBL'NOSTI, 1964, 14, Vyp 5, pp 808-813.

V. I. Iozhdestvenskaya, "The Manifestation of Typological Characteristics
of the Human Nervous System in Producing Delayed Photochemical Reflexes,"
in "Tipologicheskiye Osobennosti"... op. cit., in 90, 1963. Vol 3,

pp 117—133.

K. M. Gurevich, "Investigation of Positive and Inhibitory Stimuli in the
Motor Reaction," in ibid., pp 240-248.

296

FOIiofFﬂlALIEIIONLN
113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

126.

125.

ron'omcul. use ONLY

N. S. Leytis, "The Question of Typological Differences Following Stimu-

lation and Inhibition Processes," in "Tipologicel Oeobennoeti"... op. cit.,
fn 90, 1956, V01 1. pp 182-307.

2. G. Iurovskaya, "The Nature of Iypological Differences in the Mbnifes~
tation of the Aftereffect of Nerve Processes," VOPR. PSIKEOLOGII, 1963,
No 3. pp 33-47.

2. G. Turovskaya, "The Relationship of Certain Indicators of the Strength
and Mobility of the Human Nervous System," in "‘ripologicheskiye
Osobennosti"..., op. cit., fn 90, Vol 3, pp 248-262.

N. I. Chuprikova, "The Question of the Dynamics of Nerve Stimulation in

the Interaction of Visual and Moror Reactions," Izv. APN DSFSR, 1954.
No 53, p 291.

N. I. Chuprikovs, "Local Summation of Positive and Inhibitory Pulses
from the 01d Signaling System in Direct Cortical Projections," in
"Pogranichnyye Probleny Psikhologii i Fiziologii" [Boundary Problems of
Psychology and Physiology]. Moscow, "Izd-vo APN RSPSR," 1961, pp 52-63.

H. s. Koleenikov. "Slabyy Tip Vysshey Nervnoy Deyatel'nosti Zhivotnykh"
[The Weak Type of Higher Nervous Activity in Animals], Minsk, "Ind-v0
AN BSSR," 1963, 168 pages.

V. K. Pedorov. "Study of the Mobility of Nerve Processes in Mice,"
FIZIOL. ZHURN. SSSR, 1951. 37, No 2, pp 145-151.

P. D. Kharchenko, "Zapazdyvayushchiye Uslovnyye Refleksy" [Delaying
Conditioned Reflexes], Kiev, “Izd-vo Kiev. Un-ta," 1960, 302 pages.

3. H. Teplov, "New Findings on Study of the Properties of the human
Nervous System,’ in "Tipologicheskiye Osobennosti"... op. cit.. in 90,
V01 3. PP 3-47.

I. V. Revich-Shcherbo, and L. A. Shvarts, "Relationship of the Speed of

Occurence and Speed of Cessation of Nerve Processes as Indicators of the
Mobility of Nerve Processes." VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII, 1959. No 5. pp 97-106.

L. A. Shvarta. "Speed of Recovery of Absolute Sensitivity After Exposure
to Light as an Indicator of the Mobility (Lability) of Nerve Processes
and Other Tests for Mobility," in "Tipologicheskiye Osobennosti"... op.
cit., fn 90, V01 3, pp 232-250.

2. A. Golubeva, and L. A. Shvarts. "Relationship of Bioelectric Indica-
tors of Lability with Critical Rate of Bhnking and the Speed of Recovery
of Light Sensitivity," in "Tipologicheskiye Osobennoeti"... op. cit..

fn 90. Vol 3, pp 130-140.

R. s. Mnukhina, "The Mechanisms of Interdependence of the Cerebellun and
the Cortex of the Large hemispheres in Light of the Vvedenskiy-Ukhtomskiy
Theory," FIZIOL. ZHURN. SSSR. 1952, 38. No 3. pp 288-297.

297

FOR‘0FFKJAI.U§E(HNLY
126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

136.

135.

136.

FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

N. N. Zialina, "Electrophysiological Investigation of the Functional
Mobility of the Child's Brain by the Technique of Rhythmic Light Stimuli,"
ZHURN. VYSSH. NERV. DEYATEL'NOSTI, 1955, S, Vyp 5, pp 677-685.

A. C. Kopylov, "Evaluation of the Functional State of the Human Cerebral
Cortex by the Technique of Electroencephalographic Curves of Assimilation
of a Rhythm," in "Voprosy Teorii i Praktiki Elektroentsefalografii"
[Questions of the Theory and Practice of Electroencephalography], Leningrad,
"Izd-vo Leningr. Un-ta," 1956, pp 96-108.

S. A. Izyumova, "Characteristics of the Assymetry in the Length of the
Ascending and Descending Phases of the EEG at Rest as a Possible Indicator
of Stable Individual Differences," NOVYYE ISSLED. PSIKHOLOGII, 1974, No 1,
pp 55-57.

V. V. Gorbunov, "Study of the Hunan EEG with Different Typological Charac-
teristics of Higher Nervous Activity for Purposes of Vocational Selection,"
in "Psikhologicheskiye Osnovy Professional'nogo Otbora: Tez. 1 Vsesoyuz.
Simpoz." [Psychological Foundations of Vocational Selection: Abstracts

from the First All-Union Symposium], Kiev, "Nauk. Dunks." 1973, pp 28-29.

H. K. Akimova. "Formation of a Speed Habit in Relation to Individual
Characteristics of Strength and Lability of Nerve Proczsses," VOPR.
PSIKHOLOGII, 1972, No 2, pp 60-65.

V. T. Kozlova, "The Manifestation of the Lability-Inertia of Nerve Pro-
cessesin Thinking and Speech Activity," in "Psikhofiziologicheskiye
Voprosy Stanovleniya Professionals" [Psychophysiological Questions of the
Formation of a Professional], Moscow, "Sov. Rossiya," 1976, pp 141-157.

N. V. Hakarenko, V. V. Sirotskiy, and V. A. Troshikhin, "Methodology for
Evaluating the Primary Characteristics of Human Nerve Activity," in
"Neyrobionika i Problemy Bioelektricheskogo Upravleniya” [Neurobionics and
Problems of Bioelectric Control], Kiev, "IK AN USSR," 1975, pp 61-b9.

Ye. A. Rushkevich, and I. D. Golova. "Atlas dlya Issledovaniye Vysshey
Nervnoy Deyatel'nosti Cheloveka pri Nekotorykh Logicheskikh Operatsiyekh"
[Atlas for Investigation of Higher Nervous Activity of Human Beings in
Certain Logical Operations], Kiev, "Neukova Dunks," 1975, 2'1 pages.

E. A. Golubevs, "Attempt at an Investigation of the Reaction of Reorganiza-
tion of Biocurrents of the Brain as an Indicator of Individual Differences
Related to Equilibrium of Nerve Processes." in "Tipologicheskiye
Osobennosti"... op. cit., fn. 90, Vol 3. pp 166-180.

V. K. Krasuskiy, "Methodology for Evaluating the Characteristics of Nerve
Processes in Dogs, Used by the Laboratory of the Physiology and Genetics

of Types of Higher Nervous Activity," ZHURN. VYSSH. NERV. DEYATEL'NOSTI,

1963, 13, Vyp 1, pp 165-176.

E. P. Kokorina, "Methodology for Evaluating the Characteristics of

Primary Nerve Processes in Defining the Type of Higher Nervous Activity of
Animals by the Technique of Motor Food Conditioned Reflexes," ZHURN.
wssn. neav. DEYATEL'NOSTI, 1963, 13. Vyp 2, pp 361-370.

298
FOI.0F1ﬂClAl.USElDNLY
137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I. 0. Mayyer, "Osnovnyye Svoystva Nervnykh Protsessov u Detey
Doshkol'nogo Vosrasta" [Primary Characteristics of Nerve Processes in
Preschool Children}, Tbilisi, "Sabchota Sskartvelo," 1963, 175 pages.

V. M. Bleykher, and L. F. Burlachuk, "Psikhologicheskaya Diagnostika

Intellekta i Lichnosti" [Psychological Diagnosis of Intelligence and Per-
sonality], Kiev, "Vishchs Shkola," 1978, 142 pages.

L. D. Gissen, "Study of Certain Characteristics of the Personality of
Athletesof Composite National Teams," in "Materialy Itog. Nsuch. Sessii
In-ta as 1968 g." [Materials of the Final Scientific Session of the Insti-
tute for 1968], Moscow. "Vsesoyuz. NII Pia. Kul'tury," 1970, p l.

D. A. Grey, "Strength of the Nervous System. Introvertism-Extrovertism.
Conditioned Reflexes, and the Reaction of Activity," VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII,
1968, No 3, pp 40-46.

L. D. Gissen, "Psikhologiys i Psikhogigiyena v Sporte" [Psychology and
Psychological Hygiene in Sports]. Moscow, "Pizkul'tura i Sport," 1973,
150 pages.

N. V. Imedadze, "Anxiety as a Factor in Preschoo1 Learning," in
"Psikhologicheskiye Issledoveniya" [Psychological Research], Tbilisi,
"Metsniyereba," 1966, pp 49-58.

T. A. Nemchina, "Study of the State of Anxiety in Neurotics Using the
Questionnaire Technique," in "Voprosy Sovremennoy Nevrologii" [Issues
of Contemporary Neurology], Leningrad, 1966, pp 51-54.

V. E. Mil'man, "Some Methods of Studying Individual Psychological Differ-
ences That Affect Behavior in a Stress Situation," VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII,
1968, No 2, pp 160-168.

C. L. Mangan, and C. J. Adrak. "EEG-Correlates of Perceptual Vigilance
and Defense, " PERCEPT.)0¢0R SKILLS, 1962, 14, pp 197-198.

C. K. Nelson, "The Measurement and Significant- of Brain Rhythms,"
FRANC. S. AFRIC. INST. ELBCTR. ENCRS, 1960, 51, pp 2-10.

M. A. B. Brazier, J. E. Pinesinger, and S. A. Cobb, "A Contract Between
Electroencephalograms of 100 Psychoneurotic Patients and Those of 500
Normal Adults," AMER. J. PSYCHIAT., 1945, 101, pp 443-448.

H. Gastaut, G. Gastaut. A. Roger, J. Corriol, and a. Naguet, "Etude
Electroencephalographique du Cycle d'extitabilite Cortical," EEG. CLIN.
PEUROPHYSIOL., 1951, 3. PP 401-406.

L. J. Saul. H. Davis, and P. A. Davis, "Psychological Correlations [of]
the Electroencephalogram," EEG, CLIN. NEUROPHYSIOL., 1949. 1, pp 551-557.

H. Castaut, "The Brain Stem and Cerebral Electrogenesis in Relation to
Consciousness," in "Brain Mechanisms and Consciousness," Oxford, Blackwell
Sci. Publ.. 1956, pp 249-283.

299

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NMLY
151.

152.

153.

154 O

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. N. Yakovers, "The Readiness of the Human Operator for Emergency Action
Related to Attitude Toward the Job," author's abstract of dissertation
for the degree of candidate of psychological sciences, Tartu, "Izd-vo
Tart. Un-ta." 1971, 19 pages.

K. K. Platonov, and L. H. Shvarts, "Ocherki Psikhologii dlya Letchikov"
[Essays on Psychology for Pilots], Hoscow-Leningrad, 1948, 192 pages.

S. H. Oya, "Characteristics of Pre-Competition Changes and Emotional
Stability in Representatives of Various Sports," in "Psykhologicheskiye
Voprosy Trenirovki i Gotovnosti Sportsmenov k Sorevnovaniyam" [Psycho-
logical Questions of Training and the Readiness of Athletes for Competi-
tion], Moscow. "Pizkul'tura 1 Sport," 1969, pp 21-26.

0. V. Dashkevich, "Emotions in Sport and Their Regulation," author's ab-
stract of dissertation for the degree of candidate of medical sciences,
MosCuw, 1970, 23 pages.

P. B. Zil'berman, "Emotional Stability and Stress." in "Haterisly Vsesoyuz.
Simpoz. 'Psikhol. Stress v Sporte'" [Materials of the All-Union Symposium
on Psychological Stress in Sports], Perm', 1973, pp 14-17.

R. H. Gurcvich, and V. V. Hatveyev, "The Suitability of Operators and
Ways of Determining It," in "Voprusy Professional‘noy Prigodnosti
Operatorskogo Personals Energosistem" [Questions of the Professional Suit-
ability of Operator Personnel in the Power Systems], Moscow,
"Prosveshcheniye," 1966, pp 9-13.

K. A. Ivanov-Huromskiy, and O. N. Luk‘yanova, "Human Beings in the State
of Operational Stress," PIZIOLOGIYA CSBLOVEKA, 1975, No 3, pp 659-668.

V. P. Hatveyev, "Psychological Manifestation of the Primary Character-
istics of the Nervous System in Power System Operators under Emergency
Conditions," in "Tipologicheskiye Osobennosti Vysshey Nervnoy Deyatel'
Deyatel'nosti Cheloveka" [Typological Characteristics of Human Higher

Nervous Activity], Moscow, "Prosveshcheniye," 1965, Vol 0, pp 34-60.

S. H. Oya, "Possibility of Regulating the Pre-Competition State on the
Basis of Objectively Measured Data," in "Psikhologicheskiye Voprosy
Sportivnoy Trenirovki" [Psychological Issues of Sports Training], Moscow,
"Pizkul'tura 1 Sport," 1967, pp 28-31.

A. V. Rodinov, "Investigation of the State of Athletes with Different
Characteristics of Nervous Systems at the Start of Competition," in ibid.,
pp 17-23.

Z. c. Turovskaya. "Characteristics of Change in the Blectroencephalogram
during Stress and Its Aftereffect," VOPR. PSIKBOLOCII, 1970, No 1, pp 53-62.

R. Wherry. "Model for the Study of Psychological Stress," AEROSPACE HED.,
1966. 37, pp 695-500.

V. V. Gnezditskiy. "Quantitative Evaluation of Reactive Changes in the BBC
-- Normal and with Focal Impairment of the Cerebral Cortex (Use of the

300
FOR‘OPFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY
164.

165.

166.

167.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Technique of Automatic Regulation)," author's abstract of dissertation
for the degree of candidate of biological sciences, Moscow, 1974, 27 pages.

A. M. Zimkina, A. H. Zingerman, T. D. Dokutov, and B. M. Shiahkin, "The
Functional State of the Central Nervous System as a Factor That Defines
Hork Potential." in "12 S"yezd Vsesoyuz. Piziol. O-va" [12th Congress of
the All-Union Society of Physiology]. Leningrad, "Nauka," 1975, Vol 1,
pp 285-286 (abstracts of reports, Iibilisi, 1975).

D. A. Oshanin, and O. A. Konopkin (editors), "Psykhologlcheskiye Voprosy
Regulyatsii Deyatel'nosti" [Psychological Question: of Regulating Activity],
Moscow, "Pedagogika," 1973, 207 pages.

H. Kotik. "Samoregulyatsiya i Nadezhnost' Cheloveke-Operatora" [Self-
Regulation and the Reliability of the Human Operator], Tallinn, "Valgus,"
1974, 166 pages.

A. H. Zingerman, and B. H. Shishkin, "The Issue of Individual Differences
in Self—Regulation of Physiological Functions," PIZIOLOGIYA CHELOVBKA,
1977, 3, No 1, pp 124-135.

To Chapter 3, Section 1

1.

5.

6.

10.

P. Patkai, "The Secretion of Catecholamines and Activity," in

"Emotsional'nyy Stress" [Emotional Stress], Leningrad, "Heditsina." 1970,
pp 63-66.

M. Frankenkhoyzer, "Some Aspects of Research in Physiological Psychology,"
in ibid., pp 26—36.

V. D. Nebylitsyn, "Osnovnyye Svoystvs Nervnoy Sistemy Cheloveka" [Primary
Characteristics of the Human Nervous System], Moscow, "Prosvsahcheniye,"
1966, 381 pages.

M. Rogovin, "Mental Stress and Mental Disorders," ZHURN. NEVROPATOLOGII
I PSIKHIATRII, 1962, 62, Vyp 11. pp 1731-1760.

H. Selye, "The Stress of Life." New York, HcGrav-Hill, 1956, 200 pages.

E. Gel'gorn, and Dzh. Lufborrou, "Emotsii i Emotsional'nyye Rasstroystva"
Emotions and Emotional Disorders], Moscow, "Mir," 1966, 672 pages.

K. Bernar, "Lektsiya po Eksperimentel'noy Petologii" [Lecture on Exper-
imental Pathology], Moscow-Leningrad, "Heditsina." 1937, 512 pages.

H. B. Cannon. "The Wisdom of the Body," New York, R. w. Norton Co. Inc.,
1932, 333 pages.

L. D. Orbeli, "Lektsiya po Fiziologii Nervnoy Sistemy" [Lecture on the
Physiology of the Nervous_$ystem], Moscow-Leningrad, 'ﬁhdgiz," 1938,
312 pages.

P. V. Zdrodovskiy, “Adaptive-Protective Mechanisms of the Organism,"
VESTN. ANN SSSR, 1960, Vyp 5, pp 657-661.

301
FOIlOFFKJA1.USE¢NVLY
11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. M. Morozov, "The Theory of Stress in Psychiatry," ZHURN. NBVROPATOIOGII
1 PSIKHIATRII, 1957, 57, Vyp 5. pp 657-661.

Ya. Ya. Gordon. "Some Theories Current in Western Medicine," MED. ZHURN.
UZBEKISTANA, 1960, No 5, pp 5-11.

H. Selye, "Na Urovne Tselogo Organizna" [0n the Level of the "hole
Organism], Moscow, "Nauka," 1972, 122 pages.

H. Selye,"Monspecific Resistance," PATOL. PIZIOLOGIYA I EKSPERIM.
TERAPIYA, 1961, S, No 5, pp 3-15.

Ibid.

H. Selye, "Ocherki ob Adaptatsionnon Sindrone" [Essays on the Adaptation
Syndrome], Moscow. "Hanks," 1960. 254 pages.

I. T. Kurtsin. "Psychogenic Stress and Its Physiological Mechanisms," in
"Materialy l7 Nauch. Konf. Fiziologov Yuga RSPSR" [Materials of the 17th
Scientific Conference of Physiologists of the Southern RSPSB], Stavropol'.
1969, Vol 1, pp 34-35.

I. I. Pinkel', “Indicators of Reactivity in the Morphology of the General
Adaptation Syndrome," 2ROBL. ENDOKRINOLOGII I GORHONOTBRAPII, 1963, 2,
No 1, pp 82-89.

0. K. Khnel'nitskiy, and Yu. A. Medvedev, "Pathological Aspects of the
General Adaptation Syndrome," ARKH. PATOLOGII, 1972, 33. Vyp 12, pp 62—72.

L. L. Lengli. "Hormonal Synergis- in Reactions to Stress," PIZIOL. ZHURN.
SSSR, 1958, 44, No 2, p 153.

A. A. Shteyn, "Selye's Conception (Stress, the General Adaptation Syndrome,
and Adaptation Sickness)," VESTN. DERMATOLOGII, 1961, No 12, pp 22-29.

V. T. Bakhur, "Emotional Stress and Neuroses," VOYENNO-MED. ZHURN., 1971,
No 9, pp 26-28.

G. I. Kositskiy, and V. M. Snirnov, "Nervnays Sistena 1 Stress" [The Nervous
System and Stress], Moscow,"Nsuka." 1970, 200 pages.

V. M. Morozov, "Mans Selye: History of the Adaptation Syndrome," ZHURN.
NEVROPAIOLOGII I PSIKHIAIRII, 1955, 55, Vyp 3, pp 223-230.

M. M. Reydler. "Stress. Excessive Tension of the Organism. Causes. Rays
to Avoid It," PRIRODA, 1965, No 5, pp 51-56.

D. 3. Enter, "Clinical Remarks of a Clinical Doctor on Selye's Theory of
the Adaptative Syndrome,” ZHURN NEVROPATOEOGII I PSIKHIATRII, 1962. 62,
Vyp 80. pp 1253-1261.

c. . Tssregorodtsev, and S. A. Chesnokova, "Pilosofskiye Prohleuy Meditsiny"
[Philosophical Probleas of Medicine], Moscow, "Znaniye," 1962, 48 pages.

302

IIHI(HHHCIA1.USEIIVLY
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. D. Speranekiy, “Blementy Poetroyeniye Teorii Mediteiny" [Elements of
the Structure of the Theory of Medicine], Moscow-Leningrad. "Ird-vo
Vsesoyuz. ln-ta Bksperim. Meditsiny" 1935, 3“ pages.

F. c. Agarkov, "The Role of the Nerve Components of Regulation in the
Mechanism of Development of Specifically and Nonspecifically Beightened
Organism Resistance to Unfavorable heat Influences," in "rhterialy Kent.
po Probl. Adaptatsii, Trenirovki 1 Dr. Sposobam Povysheniya Uetoychivosti
Organizma" [Materials from the Conference on Probl-e of Adaptation,
Training, and Other Ways of Increasing Organism Stability]. Vinnitea,
1962, pp 12-13.

P. K. Anokhin, "General Principles of Formation of the Organism's Protec-
tive Functions." in "16 Sessiya Obshch. Sobr. AN“ SSSR: Tez. Ranch. Dokl."
[The 16th Session of the General Meeting of the USSR Academy of Medical
Sciences: Abstracts of Scientific Reports], Moecom 1962, pp 3-8.

I. D. Cervaziyeva, and G. I. Lyubovskaya, "The Processes of Stimulation
and Inhibition in the Higher Parts of the Central Nervous System and the
Function of the Adrenal Cortex as an Expression of Organism Adaptation to
Changed Environmental Conditions," in "Materialy"... op. cit. , fn 29.

pp 94-95.

P. D. Gorizontov, "Stress," in "8MB" [Great Medical Encyclopedia],
Vol 31, pp 608-628.

B. B. Kayranskiy, "The Adaptation Syndrome Arising from the Prolonged
Effect of High Air Temperature," in "Materialy"... op. cit., in 29, pp 22-23.

R. Lerish, "Osnovy Piziologicheskoy Khirurgi" [Fundamental of Physiological
Surgery], Leningrad, "Medgiz," 1961, 292 pages (translated from French).

"Soveshchaniye po Problems Kortikal'noy Regulyatsii Zhelez Vnutrenney -
Sekretsii: Tez. Dokl." [Conference on the Problem of Cortical Regulation
of Internal Secretion Glands: Abstracts of Reports]. Moscow, 1953. 85 pages.

I. A. Eskin, "Neurohumoral Regulation of the Adrenocorticotropic Function
of the Pituitary Body and Adrenal Cortex," PATOL. PIZIOLOGIYA I EKSPERIM.
TERAPIYA, 1957, 1, No lo, pp 10-15.

I. A. Eskin. Yu. B. Skebel'skaya, and N. V. 'Mikhaylova, "The Role of the
Nervous System in the Formation and Mechanism of Action of the Hormones
of the Pituitary Body," in "Mekhanizmy Deystviya Gor-monov" [Mechanisms of
Action of the Hormones], Kiev, "Zdorov'ya," 1959, pp 70-74.

J. Brady, "The Paleocortex and the Motivation of Behavior," in "Mekhanizmy
Tselogo Mozga" [Mechanism of the Whole Brain], Moscow, "Izd-vo Inostr.
Lit.," 1963, pp 138-174.

V. s. Deryabin, "Chuvstve, Vlecheniya, motsii" (Feelings, Inclinetions,
and Emotions], Leningrad, "Nauka," 1971., 257 pages.

303
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
b0.

41.

62.

43.

44.

45.

106.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

P. Broca. "Anatomic Compares des Cirkonvolutions Cerebrales. Le Grand
Lobe Limbique et la Scissure Limbique dans la Serie des Manniferes,"
REV. ANTROP. 82R” 1878, 21, pp 285-498.

P. V. Simonov, "Chto Takoye Bmotsiya?" [What Is Emotion2], Moscow,
"Nauka," 1966, 93 pages.

R. H. Russel (cited by M. Rogovin, "Mental Stress and Mental Disorders,"
ZHURN. NEVROPATOLOGII I PSIKBIATRII, 1962, 62, Vyp 11, pp 1731-1740).

R. C. Davis (cited by M. Rogovin, ibid.).

R. Barker, ‘1'. Dem’oo, and K. Levin, "Frustration and Regression: an
Experiment with Young Children," in "Studues Topological and Vector
Psychology [sic]." Univ. Iowa Stud. Child. Helf., 1941, 18, 1, pp 1-316.

8. A. Yeremina, "The Mechanisms of Stress," author's abstract of disser-
tation for the decree of doctor of medical sciences. Rostov-na-Donu,
1970. 3!- pages.

S. A. Yeremina, "The Mechanism of Negative Feedback in the Pituitary
Body-Adrenal Cortex System in a State of Stress," FIZIOLOGIYA, BIOICHIMIYA
I PATOLOGIYA sunoxnluuov SISTEMN, 1973, Vyp 3, pp 26-26.

To Chapter 3, Section 2

1.

3.

7.

K. K. Ioseliani, and A. L. Narinskaya, "New Methodology for Studying the
Consistency of Performance under Time Deficit Conditions," vomo-mn.
ZHURN., 1963, No 11, pp 52-51..

6. Astardzhiyan, Kh. Radev, Ch. Nachev, and K. Boyev, "Digital Informtion
Device to Analyze Rhythmic Biological Processes of a Certain Class," in

“Metody Shots 1 Ansliza Piziologicheskoy Informatsii" [Methods of Collect-
ing and Analyzing Physiological Information], Moscow, "Nauka," pp 102-117.

V. I. Kudryavtseva. "The Problem of Predicting Mental Fatigue," in
"Problemy Upravleniya Punktsiyami Cheloveka i Zhivotnykh" [Problems of
Controlling Human and Animal Functions], Moscow, 1973, pp 97-102.

U. R. Eydi, "Computer Analysis of Electrocardiogram," in "Vychislitel'nyye
Ustroystva v Biologii i Meditsine" [Computer Units in Biology and Medicine],
Moscow, "Mir," 1967, pp 153-199.

V. P. Shval'b, "So-e Simple Methods of Identifying Diagnosticelly Valuable
Signs in Analysis of the EKG," in "Metody Shore"... op. cit., fn 2,
Moscow, "Hanks," 1969. pp 37-46.

R.M. Bayevskiy. "Fiziologicheskiye Izmereniya v Kosmose 1 Problems Ikh
Avtomatizatsii" [Physiological Measurements in Space and the Problem of
Automating Them], Moscow, "Nauka," 1970, 255 pages.

V.I. Kozharinov, N. P. Rasskazov. and A. A. Nemoy, "Cyclical Compression
of the Electrocardiogram," in "Aktual'nyye Voprosy Kosmicheakoy Biologii
i Meditsiny" [Current Issues of Space Biology and Medicine], Moscow,
1971, pp 137-138. 304

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. h. Kukunov. "One technique of Automatic Diagnosis and Experience
Using It for EKG Analysis," in "detody Shore"... 0p. cit., in 2, pp (06-50.

V.B. Alekseyev. V. H. Akhutin, I. A. NeroslaVakiy, and N. K. Syroyegin,
"Autontic Operational Analyzer of the EEG Signals of an Operator," in
"Avtoraticheakoye Regulirovaniye Piziologicheskikh Punktaiy v Usloviyakh
Patologii" [Automatic Regulation of Physiological Functions in Pathology],
Leningrad. 1972, pp 3-5.

A. P. Grishanovich, and V. A. Ivlcovich, "Method and Device for Measuring
the Activity of the EEG of a Human Operator." in "Avtomatiratsiya Hediko-
Biologicheakikh Isslsdovaniy v Oblasti Diagnostiki, Prognozirovaniys i
Bioypravleniya" [Automation of Biomedical Research in the Areas of Diag-
nosis. Prognosis, and Biocontrol], Minsk, 1972. pp 7-10.

6. A. Sergeyev. and V. C. Yegrafov, "The Question of Honitoring the State
of the Human Operator in an Automatic Control System," VOPR. VOYDINO-INZB.
PSIKBOLOGII, 1970, Vyp 3, pp 76-91.

V. N. Zhishko, "Automatic Evaluation of the Amplitude and Frequency of
Muscle Biopotentials," in "Nekotoryye Problemy Biologicheskoy Kibernetiki"
[Some Problems of Biological Cybernetics]. Leningrad, "Nauka," 1972.

pp 158-153.

A. h'. Luk'yanov, and V. L. Gaubkin. "Device to Measure Ongoing Values of
Pneusogram Parameters," in "Novyye Hetody i Apparatura dlya Nauchnykh
Issledovaniy v Oblaati Vysshsy Nervnoy Deyatel'noati i Neyrofiziologii"
[Nev hethods and Apparatus for Scientific Research in the Fields of Higher
Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology]. lbscow, "Nsuka," 1973, pp 27-33.

6. Homer. "The Use of an Analog Computer to Analyze the Mechanisms of
Regulation of Blood Circulation," in "Elektronika i Kibernetika v
Biologii i Meditsine" [Electronics and Cybernetics in Biology and Medi-
cine], lbscow, "Izd-vo Inostr. Lit.," 1963, pp 270-272.

A. H. Zingerman. "The Influence of the Statistical Description of a System
of Signals and Their Values on the Formation of Motor and Vegetative
Reactions of the Human Being in the Norm and in Extreme Conditions," in
“Ocherki po Prikladnoy Neyrokibernetike" [Essays on Applied Neurocyber-
netics] , Leningrad, "Heditsina," 1973, pp 137-181.

B. A. Lushkov, "Study of the State of Emotional Stress of the Operator-
Pilot Using an Experimental Model of the Stress Situation," in "Ir. 3
Veesoyuz. Konf. po Aviats. i Kosm. Heditsine" [Works of the 3rd All-Union
Conference on Aviation and Space Medicine]. Kaluga, 1969, pp 85-87.

R. S. Dadashev, and S. P. Khleonikov, "Automatic Device for Determining
the Functional State of the Ewan Operator," in "Sistema 'Chelovek i
Avtonet'" [The "Han-Machine" System], Hoscow, "Neuka," 1965, pp 96-112.

V. D. Dipmen, "Higher-Speed Analog-Digital Convertor for the Dnepr-l
Computer," ERGONOHIKA, 1972, No lo, pp 226-230.

305

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. 1. Kaplan, "Multichannel Programming Units for Physiological Research."
BIOL. NAUKI. 1972, 2, pp 131-136.

C. V. Abuladze, M. A. Cilinskiy, N. N. clushkov, and R. Yu. Il'yuchenok,
"The Application of Computer Equipment in Neurophysiological Research,"
in "Avtomatizatsiya Nauchnykh Issledovaniy na Osnove Primeneniya EVM"
[Automation of Scientific Research Based on the Application of Computers],
Novosibirsk, 1970, pp 6-10.

B. N. Malinovskiy, and A. T. Mixernyuk, "System for Automating a Scientific
Experiment in the Field of Oncology," in ibid., pp 305-308.

V. D. Nebylitsyn, "Osnovnyye Svoystva Nervnoy Sistemy Cheloveka" [Primary
Characteristics of the Human Nervous System], Moscow, "Prosveshcheniye,"
1966, 381 pages.

Yu. A. Gagarin, and V. A. Lebedev, "Psikhologiya i Kosmos" [Psychology and
Space], Moscow, "Molodsya Gvardiya," 1976, 207 pages.

0. N. Konopkin, "The Dependence of Rate of Information Receipt on Indi-
vidual Expression of the Primary Characteristics of the Nervous System,"
in "Tez. Dokl. na 2 S"yezde Psikhologov" [Abstracts of Reports at the
2nd Congress of Psychologists], Moscow, 1963, 176 pages.

3. M. Teplov, "Some Questions of the Study of General Types of Higher
Nervous Activity in Humans and Animals," in "Tipologicheskiye Osobennosti
Vysshey Nervnoy Deyatel'nosti Cheloveka" [Typological Characteristics of
Human Higher Nervous Activity], Moscow, "Izd-vo APN RSFSR," 1959, Vol 2,
pp 11-12.

K. M. Gurevich, "Psychological Questions of Studying the Professional
Suitability of Operational Workers in Power Systems," in ibid., Vol 4,
1965, pp 23-33.

V. F. Matveyev, "Psychological Manifestations of the Primary Characteris-
tics of the Nervous System in Power System Operators Under Conditions of

Hypothetical Emergency," in "Tipologicheskiye Osobennosti"... op. cit.,
fn 25, Vol 4, pp 34-59.

2. C. Turovskaya, Ye. L. Berezhkovakaya, and E. M. Aleksandrovskaya, "The
Individual Style of Hork and Psychophysiological Characteristics of
Operators in Chemical Production," VOPR. PSIKHOLOCII, 1972, No 5, pp 77-89.

P. V. Euryanov, and P. P. Koamolinskiy, "The Signifiance of Emotions in
the Professional Activity of a Pilot," VOYEN.-MED. ZHURN., 1966, No 6.
pp 63-65.

A. E. Kogan, "The Expression of the Processes of Higher Nervous Activity
in the Electrical Potentials of the Cortex during Pree Behavior," in
"Elektroentsefalograficheskiye Issledovaniya Vysshey Nervnoy Deyatel'nosti"

[Electroencephalographic Studies of Higher Nervous Activity], Moscow,
"Izd-vo AN SSSR," 1962, pp 42-53.

306

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

‘0.

41.

42.

(.30

FOR'OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY

V. V. Suvorova, "Change in the Activity of the Slow Rhythms in the EEC
as an Indicator of the State of Discomfort," VOPB. PSIKBOLOGII, 1966,
No 2, pp 75-83. ‘ ‘

R. Arnandes-Peon, "Neurophysiological Correlates of Accustonization and
Other Manifestations of Plastic (Internal) Inhibition," in
"Elektroentsefalograficheskiye"... op. cit., fn 30, pp 96-109.

G. A. Sergeyev, L. P. Pavlova, and A. F. Ronanenko, "Statist14heskiye
Metody Issledovaniya Elektroentsefalogranny Cheloveka" [Statistical Methods
of Investigating the Human Electroencephalogram], Leningrad, "Nauka,"

1968, 207 pages.

3. A. Dushkov, A. N. Zolotukhin, P. P. Kosnolinskiy, 3. P. Lonov, and V. D.
Nebylitsyn, "Study of the State of Emotional Stress of the Operator-Pilot
Using an Experimental Model of the Stress Situation," in "Aviatsionnaya

i Kosmicheakaya Meditsine" [Aviation and Space Medicine], Moscow, "Mauka,"
1969, Vol 1. pp 204-208.

A. N. Zolotukhin, and M. T. Nesterenko, "The Frequency of Blinking Move-
ments as an Indicator of the Reliability of the Visual Analyzer of Mili-
tary Specialists," VOYENNO-MED. ZMURN., 1972, No 2, pp 59-60.

N. M. Kulikova. "Change in the EEG 1f Plight Personnel After Extended
Continuous Flights," in "Aviatsionnaya i Koanicheskaya Meditsina:
(Materialy Konf.)" [Aviation and Space Medicine: Conference Materials],
edited by V. V. Parin, Moscow, "Neuka," 1963, pp 324-326.

V. M. Marishchuk, K. K. Platonov, and Ya. A. Pyetnitskiy, “Napryazhennost'
v Polete" [Stress in Flight], Moscow, "Voyenizdat," 1969, 120 pages.

G. I. Gurevich, and V. A. Yegorov, "Psychophysiological Problems of
Flight Labor and Medical Support for Extended Flights," VOYENNO-MED.
ZMURN., 1969, No.3, pp 93-94.

V. M. Helvey, G. A. Albright, and A. E. Azalrod, "A Review of Bionedical
Monitoring Activities and Report on Studies Made on P-lOS Pilots,"
AEROSPACE $0., 1964, 35, No 1, pp 23-27.

6. Drishel', "Dynamics of Regulation of Vegetative Punctions," in
"Protaessy Regulirovaniya v Biologii" [Regulatory Processes in Biology],
Moscow, "Izd-vo Inostr. Lit.," 1960, pp 125-157.

K. A. Ivanov-Muronskiy, "Semoregulyatsiya Colovnogo Mozga" [Self-
ngulation of the Cerebral Cortex], Kiev, ”Nauk. Dunks," 1971, 247 pages.

"Ocherki Prikladnoy Neyrokibernetiki" [Essays on Applied Neurocybernetics],
Leningrad, “Mediteina,” 1973, 232 pages.

0. N. Luk'yanova, and L. V. Petrushko, "0n the Mechanism of Electro-
Anaestheaia," in "Neyrobionika" [Neurobionica], Kiev, "In-t Kibarnetiki
AN USSR," 1972, pp 85-90.

307

FOR1OFFNJA1.USI(HVLY
54.

45.

66.

47.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

P. V. Bundzen, "Self-Regulation of the Information-Control Functions
of the Cerebral Cortex," author's abstract of dissertation for the degree
of doctor of medical sciences, Leningrad, 1976, 32 pages.

V. V. Gnezditskiy, "Quantitative Evaluation of Reactive Changes in the
BBC in the Norm and with Focal Impairments of the Cerebral Cortex,"

author's abstract of dissertation for the degree of candidate of biologi-
cal sciences, Hoscow, 1974, 27 pages.

S. A. Yeremins, "Stress Mechanisms, " author's abstract of dissertation
for the degree of doctor of medical sciences," Rostov-na-Donu, 1970,
34 pages.

A. H. Zingermsn, V. D. Volkova, D. N. Menitskiy, P. V. Bundzen, and B. H.
Shishkin, "Typological Characteristics of Adaptation That Determine the
Efficiency of Labor Activity," FIZIOL. ZHURN. SSSR, 1974, 60, No 10,

pp 1681-1493.

To Chapter 3, Sections 3 and A

1.

2.

7.

V. S. Aver'yanov, and K. S. Tochilov, "The Question of the Dynamics of
the Hark Capacility of the Operator," NERV. SISTEHA, 1970, Vyp 10,
pp 34-42.

V. A. Ayrapetyants, "Comparative Description of Physiological Changes in
Operators During Stressful and Monotonous Activity," author's abstract of

disseration for the degree of candidate of medical sciences, Moscow,
1970, 23 pages.

H. K. Akimova, "Formation of s Speed Habit Related to Individual Charac-
teristics of Strength and Lability of Nerve Processes," VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII,
1972, No 2, pp 96-101.

G. I. Akinshchikov, "Teloslozheniye i Reaktivnost' Organisms Cheloveka"
[Body Build and the Reactivity of the Human Organism}, Leningrad,
"Izd-vo Leningr. Un-ta," 1969, 91 pages.

R. Akof, and P. A. Emeri, "O Tasleustremlennykh Sistemakh" [Goal-Directed
Systems], Moscow, "Sov. Radio," 1974. 271 pages.

L.S. Aleyev, and Sh. Yu. Yakupov, "Evaluation of the Functional Mobility
of the Nerve-Muscle Apparatus of an Operator in an Ergatic System Based
on Data from Multichannel Bioelactrical Activity," in "Brgonomika na
sluzhbu Proizvodstvu" [Ergonomics in the Service of Production], Kiev,
1973, pp 11-14.

3.6. Anan'yev, "Teoriya Oshchushcheniy" [Theory of Sensations], Leningrad,
"Izd-vo Leningr. Un-ta," 1961, 456 pages.

P. K. Anokhin, "Biologiya i Neyrofiziologiya Uslovnogo Refleksa" [Biology
and the Neurophysiology of the Conditioned Reflex], Moscow, "Meditaina,"
1969, 567 pages.

308

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ye. A. Arkhangel'skiy, "Evaluation of the Efficiency of Complex Systess,"
IZV. MINOR. mm. IN-TA, 1968, Vyp 68, pp 185-189.

V. V. Arkhipov. and D. A. Smirnov, "Experinental Study of Operator Acti-
vity under Conditions of a Service Queue," VOPR. vom.-mzn. PSMOMGIIL
1969, Vyp 2. pp 62-74.

V. G. Aseyev, "Criteria of the anotonouaness of Bork," VOPE.
PSIKHOPIZIOLGII mum. 1971. Vyp 45, pp 26-32.

R. M. Dsyevskiy, "The Problem of Predicting the State of a Person under
Conditions of Space Flight." E12101. ZEDRN. SSSR, 1972, 58, No 6,
pp 819-827.

R. N. Esysvskiy, C. A. Eerezine, and V. I. Kudryavtsev. "Modeling the
Process of Processing Visual Information into Motor Acts," PEOEL. INZE.
PSIKEOLOCII, 1972, Vyp 3, ‘Part 2, pp 6-7.

R. Esrlou, end P. Proshsn, "Hetenaticheskeys Teoriys Nadezhnosti" [Nethe-
maticsl Theory of Reliability], Moscow, "Sov. Radio," 1969, 088 pages.

N. I. Esyendin, end N. S. Bubonin. "Some mdels of the Functioning of
the Human Operator as an Element of an Automatic Control System," In.
msx. mac. IN-‘l'A, 1972, _Vyp 117. pp 62-68.

L. A. Delobzhenskiy, end 6. D. Kurzenkov, "The Use of an Information
Criterion of Efficiency in Designing Certain 'Han-Nachine' Systems,"
TR. TAGANROG. RADIOTW. IN-TA, 1973, Vyp 8, pp 97-53.

N. P. Belyeyev, and A. l. Pslemsrchuk, "Study of Erroneous Actions by
Flight Personnel," VOYENnHED. ZHUENH 1972, No 10, pp 70-72.

C. 1:. Beregovoy, V. Yu. Krylov, N. V. Krylova, B. P. Lomov, I. B.
Solov'yeva, and G. N. Shibanov, "The Problem of the Efficiency of linen
Work in Stress Conditions.".PRODI.. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII I ERMOHIKA, 1974,‘
Vyp 3, pp 28-30.

I. s. Beritov. "Struktura i Funktsii Kory Bol'shogo Nozge" [Structure
and Functions of the Cortex of the Large Hemisphere], lbscov, "Neuka,"
1969, 532 pages.

3. Berns, "Neopredelennost' v Nervnoy Sisteme" [Indeterminecy in the Nerv-
ous System), Moscow. "Mir." 1969, 251 pages.

N. A. Bernehteyn, "Ocherki po Piziologii Dvizheniy i Pisiologii
Aktivnosti" [Essays on the Physiology of Movement and the Physiology of
Activity], Moscow, "Meditsina," 1966, 369 pages.

A. A. Bessonov, "Prognozirovaniye Khsrakteristik Nadezhnosti
Avtonsticheskikh Sistem" [Predicting the Reliability Characteristics of
Automatic Systems]. Leningrad, "Energiys," 1971, 152 pages.

A. H. Blank, V. N. Ryebokon', N. D. Stepanov, and A. S. Tsar'kov, "Pbdel
to Simulate Operator Loading with a Time Deficit," PROBE. INZH.
PSIKHOLOGII, 1971., Vyp 2, pp 1109-150.

309 '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
210.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

310.

35.

36.

37.

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

M. N. Eobnevs, "The Problem of Human Reliability (Predictable and Random
Failures in the Work of an 0perator)," PROBL. lNZB. PSIKBOLOGII, 1965,
Vyp 2, pp 7-14.

V. V. Bogdanov, "Evaluation of the Efficiency of Piloting by the Indica-
tor of Quality of Control and Criteria of Paychophysialogical Stress,"
PROBL. INZII. PSIKHOLOGII, 1974, Vyp 2, pp 74-76.

V. A. Eodner, "Avtomaticheskaya Proverka Oborudovaniya Samoletov i Raket"
[Automatic Checking of Airplane and Rocket Equipment], )bacow, "Izd-vo
Inostr. Lit.," 1962, 216 pages.

V. A. Eodrov, "Experimental Study of Emotional Tension in the Operator."
WMC-mo ZRMo. 1973, N0 1, pp 70-730

Ye. I. Boyko, "Vremya Reektsii Cheloveka" [Ewan Reaction Time], Moscow,
"leditaina," 19610, 640 pages.

E. V. Bondarev, B. A. Yegorov, and V. A. Hariahchuk, "The work Capability

of the Hanan Operator Affected by Extreme Factors," EKSPERIH. I PRIKL.
PSIKBOLOGIYA. 1971. Vyp 3, pp (06-51.

E. V. Bondarev. V. A. Yegorov, and V. A. Koloaov, ”The Functional State of
the Cardiovascular System of Flight Personnel during Extended Plights,"
VOYENmHBD. ZHURN., 1972, pp 65-67.

S. V. Borisov, "Mathematical Model of the Processes of Acquiring and Losing
suns," most. mzu. Psxmomcn. 197a, Vyp 2,. pp 82-81..

s. P. Bocharova, "The Effect of Valuable Information on the Speed of
Deciding Design Problems," in "0b Aktual'nykh Problemakh Ekaperimental'nogo

Isaledovaniya Vremeni Reag'irovsniya" [Timely Problem of Experimental
Study of Reaction Time], Tartu, 1969, pp 76-80.

V. I. Bravovitskiy, A. H. Dovgalo, and A. I. Nikitin, "ﬂmn Interaction

' with the Corputer in the Process of Solving Problems," PROBL. 11128.

psmmwcn. 1971. Vyp 2, pp 70-71..

Ye. Ye. Brodetskaya, and I. C. Nedekker, "Criterion of Stationariness in
Evaluating the Cardiac Rhythm," PROBL. INZII. PSIIOIOLOGII, 1971, Vyp 2,
pp 36-36.

R. I. Brusnichkina. "The Question of Evaluating the Complexity of Activity
by a Set of Physiological Parameters," PROBL. INZII. PSIKllOLOGII. 1976,
Vyp 1. pp 79-80.

N. P. Bualenko, V. V. Kalashnikov, and I. N. Kovalenlto, "Lektsii po Teorii
Slozhnykh Sistem" [Lectures on the Theory of Conlex Systems], )bscow,

"Sov. Radio," 1973, 439 pages.

K. N. Valuyeva, "Proisvol'naya Regulyatsiya Vegetativnykh Punktsiy Organizma"

[Random Regulation of the Vegetative Functions of the Organism], lbscov,
"huh." 1967, 95 pages.

310

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
39.

40.

61.

42.

63.

64.

45.

46.

67.

68.

b9.

50.

51.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. V. Vasil‘yev, "Prognozirovaniye Nadezhnoati i Effaktivnoati
Radioelektronnykh Ustroyst" [Predicting the Reliability and Efficiency
of Radio Electronic Devices], Moscow, "Sov. Radio," 1970, 335 pages.

N. Ye. Vvedenskiy, "O Sootnoshenii Mezhdu Vozbuzhdeniysm i Tornosheniyan
pri Tetanuse" [The Ratio of Stimulation and Inhibition in Tetanus],
Moscow, 1950, pp 36-47 (Selected Works).

L. M. Vekker, "The Relationship of the Structure and Localization of the
Sensory and Motor Fields in Control Operations," PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII,
1966, Vyp 6, pp 108-118.

V. P. Venda, and V. M. Gordon, "Experimental Study of the Process of
Solving Operational Problems," ERCONOMIKA, 1971, Vyp 3, pp 26-38.

A. M. Volkov, "Stages of Fatigue in Evaluating the Physical Difficulty and
Stress of Labor,"hl"Psikhofiziologicheskiye i Esteticheskiye Osnovy NOT"
[Psychophysiological and Esthetic Foundations of Scientific Organization
of Labor], Moscow, 1971, pp 56-62.

A. M. Volkov, A. G. Kalachev, and A. N. Kasstkin, "Model of the Human
Operator and Method of Determining the Numerical Values of Its Parameters,"
TR. HDSK. AVIATS. IN-TA, 1972, Vup 249, pp 22-29.

A. D. Voskreaenskiy, V. A. Elivsnova, and L. Ya. Andriyako, "Evaluating
Emotional Tension by a Set of Indicators of the Cardiovascular System,"
PROBL. INZE. psrxuonoczr. 197a, Vyp 3, pp 86-88.

U. Vudson, and D. Konover, "Spravochnik po Inzhernoy Psikhologii dlya
Inzhenerov i Khudozhnikov-Konstruktorov" [Handbook on Human Factors Engin-
eering for Engineers and Design Artists], Moscow, "Mir," 1968, 518 pages.

A. I. Galaktionov, "The Question of Quantitative Evaluation of Conplexly
Structured Events," PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII, 1965, Vyp 2, pp 100-120.

M. I. Gal'perin, and G. M. Zarakovskiy, "The Operational Psychaphysiological
Method of A Priori Evaluation of Operator Loading," PROBL. INZR.
PSIKHOLOGII, 1974, Vyp 2, pp 56-57.

D. V. Caskatov, T. A. Golinkevich. and A. V. Mozgalevskiy, "Prognozirovaniye
Tekhnicheskogo Sostoyaniya i Nadezhnosti Radioelektronnoy Apparatury"
[Predicting the Technical'State and Reliability of Radio Electronic Equip-
ment], Moscow, "Sov. Radio," 1976, 224 pages.

A. A. Genkin, "Identifying a Specific Local Brain Reaction in the EEG
During Complex Activity," VOPR. PSIKMOLOGII, 1961, No 6, pp 114-126.

A. A. Genkin, "The Average Level of Asaymetry in Length of EEG Phases and
Rate of Information Processing in the Visual-Motor System," BIOPIZIKA, 10,
No 5, pp 868-876.

A. A. Genkin, "Some Questions of Decoding EEG Signals in Connection with
Diagnosis of Psychophysiological States," in "Metody Shore 1 Analira
Informatsii v Piziologii i Meditsine" [Methods of Collecting and Analyzing
Information in Physiology and Medicine], Moscow, 1971, pp 33-62.

311
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(HVLY
52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. A. Genkin, and V. I. Medvedev, "Prognozirovaniye Psikhofiziologicheskikh
Sostoysniy" [Predicting Psychophysiological States]. Leningrad, "Nauka,"
1973, 143 pages.

V. 8. Genes, and Yu. M. Madnevakiy, "Increasing the Reliability of the
Labor of Railroad Engineers," in "Ocherki Psikhologii Truda Operators"
[Essays on the Labor Psychology of the Operator], Moscow, 197b, pp 173-186.

V. S. Genes, and V. A. Makotchenko. "The Effect of Selection of Indicators
of the State of a Function and the Method of Mathenatical Processing of
Then on the Efficiency of Identifying Transfers in a Biological System,"

in "Materialy Vtoroy Ukr. Konf. po Bionike" [Materials of the Second Ukrain-
ian Conference on Bionics], Kiev, 1968, pp 54-58.

s. c. Gellershteyn, "The Anticipatory Reaction in Pilot Activity," in
"Aviatsionnaya i Kosuicheakaya Meditsina" [Aviation and Space Medicine],
Moscow, 1963. pp 126-126.

B. M. Gerasinov, "Determining the Quantitative Characteristics of Operator
work by Graph Theory Methods," PROBL. 1N2“. PSIKHOLOGII, 1972, Vyp 4,
pp 125-130. .

V. D. Glezer, and I. I. Tsukkarnan, "Informatsiya i Zreniye" [Information
and Vision], Moscow, "Izd-vo AN SSSR," 1961, 183 pages.

K. K. Glukharev, D. A. Potenkin, Yu. G. Safronov, V. N. Sirenko, and K. V.
Frolov, "Eksperinental'nyy Analiz Punktsional'nogo Sostoyaniya Cheloveka-
Operators pri Dlitel'non Deystvii Vibratsiy" [Experimental Analysis of the
Functional State of the Human Operator Exposed to Prolonged Vibration],
MASHINOVBDENIYE, 1973, No 2, pp 56-62.

N. D. Gordeyev, A. I. Nazarov, and V. G. Ronanyuta, "Eye Movement and Con-
trol of Traces of Sensory Memory," ERGONOMIKA, 1972, Vyp 4, pp 38-64.

V. M. Gordon, P. V. Zinchenko, and V. P. Nevinonyskaya, "Experimental
Study of the Process of Information Preparation for Decision-Making,"
ERGONOMIKA, 1972, Vyp 6, pp 203-226.

V. G. Gotsulyak, "Psychological Analysis of the Speed of Inforaation Pro-
cessing in Women who Install Autonatic Equipment and Assemble Radio Parts,"
PROBL. 1N2“. PSIKHOLOGII, 1971, Vyp 2, pp 65-69.

Yu. L. Goahchitskiy, Yu. A. Perikov, A. V. Rulav, and N. G. Goahchitakaya,
“The Reliability of the Operator and the Efficiency of the System," In.
LENINGR. BLEKTROTEKHN IN-TA, 1966, Vyp 56, Part 2, pp 151-155.

R. S. Grayfer, and I. N. Kartsel', "The Law of Distribution of Operator
Errors," TR. TSENTR. N.-I.I PROYEKTNO-TEKHNOL. IN-TA UPR., 1972, Vyp 2,
pp 35-41.

M. A. Grinevskiy, O. A. Konopkin, and G. A. Stryukov, "Analysis of the

State of Eapectation in the work of an Operator in Chemical Production,"
in "Paikhologicheskiye Voprosy Regulyatsii Deyatel'nosti“ [Psychological

Questions of Regulating Activity], Moscow, 1973, pp 95-129.
312

FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(NNLY
65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. P. Grishanovich, and V. A. Ivanovich, "Method and Device for Measur-
ing the Activity of an Encephalogran of a Human Operator," in "Avto-
matizatsiya Hediko-Diologicheskikh Iss1edovaniy v Oblasti Diagnostiki,
Prognozirovaniye i Bioupravleniya" [Automation of Biomedical Research
in the Fields of Diagnosis, Prognosis, and Biocontrol], Minsk, 1972,

pp 123-129.

A. I. Gubinskiy, and A. B. Iatiyevskiy, "The Reliability of a 'Honitoring
System-Human Operator' Combination," STANDAR‘IY I KACHES‘NO, 1966, Ho 7,
pp 43-46.

A. I. Cubinskiy, and Yu. V. Sukhodol'skiy, "The Concept of Failure Dela-
tive to the Human Operator," in "Inzhenernaya Fsikhologiya v
Priborostroyenii" [Human Factors Engineering in Instrument ﬂaking],
Moscow, 1967, pp 124-131. '

A. I. Gubinskiy, "The Reliability and Efficiency of a 'Monitoring System-
Human Operator' Combination," in ibid., pp 131-139.

K. H. Curevich, and V. F. Matveyev, "Professional'naye Frigodnost' i
Osnovnyye Svoyatve Hervnoy Sistemy" [Professional Suitability and the
Primary Characteristics of the Nervous System], Moscow, "Hanks," 1970.
272 pages.

V. V. Davydov, V. Ye. Ovcharov, and V. A. Ponomarenko, "The Dependence of
the Structure of the Pilot's Gathering of Instrument Information in a
Semiautomatic Control Regime on the Statistical Characteristics of the
Director's Signal," in "Koamicheakaya Biologiye i Aviokoemicheskaya
Heditaina" [Space Biology and Aerospace Medicine], Hoecow-Kaluga, 1972,
pp 153-156.

R. S. Dadaahev, "Evaluation of the Functional State of the Human Operator
n th Automtic Diagnosis," in "Froblemy Inzhernoy Faikhologii" [Problem
of Human Factors Engineering]. Leningrad, 1964, pp 60-61.

Yu. P. Darymov, "The Carrying Capacity of the Controller Engaged in Air.
Traffic Control." PRDDL. INZH. PSIKHOLOCII, 1971, Vyp 2, pp 82-84.

V. C. Deniaov, and V. F. Onishchenko, "Inzhenernaya Feikhologiya v
Aviataii i Koamonavtike" [Human Factors Engineering in Aviation and Space
Sciences], Moscow, "Hashinoatroyeniye," 1972, 313 pages.

V. C. Denisov, A. A. Tereahkin, A. V. Skrypets, et al., "One Hethod of
Evaluating the Quality of Functioning of the 'Filot-Aircraft" System,"
vora. AVIATS. Encommn, 1972. Vyp 1, pp 24-26.

B. A. Derevyanko, and H. D. Zavalova, "Psychophysiological Characteristics
of the Pilot during Instrument Flight," in "Aviatsionnaya"... op. cit.,
fn. 55, pp 157-159.

H. A. Dmitriyeva, "Some Ways to Study the Dependence of the Carrying Capa-
city of the Human Operator on the Structure of the Operator's Activity,"

in "Problemy Obshchey Sotsial'noy i Inzhenernoy Psikhologii" [Problem of
Social Psychology and Human Factors Engineering]. Leningrad, 1966, pp 84-91.

313
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. S. Dorogobed, "Psychophysiological Characteristics of the Emotional
Reactions of Cadet Pilots in Extreme Situations," author'. abstract of
dissertation for the degree of candidate of medical sciences, Moscow,
1974, 21 pages.

B. A. Dushkov, Ye. N. Radchenko, and N. A. Zdebakaya. "Investigation of
Competing Types of Activity and Hental Tension in the Work of the Operator,"
PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII I ERGONOHIKI, 1974, Vyp 3, pp 63-65.

A. S. Yegorov, and V. P. Zagryadskiy, "Psikhofiziologiya Umstvennogo Truda“
[The Psychophysiology of Mental Labor], Leningrad, "Hanks," 1973, 272 pages.

V. A. Yegorov, "Change in the Carrying Capacity of the Central Nervous Sys-
tea in the Process of Forming the Skills of Controlling a Pilot Trainer,"
in "Aviatsiunnaya"... op. cit., to 55, pp 176-178.

V. A. Yegorov, "Change in the Rate of Information Processing in the Process
of a Pilot's Forming the Skill of Controlling a Trainer," VOYEN.-HED.
ZHURN., 1964, No 9, pp 53-62.

V. A. Yegorov, “The Carrying Capacity of an Operator as an Indicator of
Level of Training and Complexity of the Activity Being Performed." VOPR.
PSIKHOLOGII, 1965, No 1, pp 3-9.

V. A. Yekinov, V. H. Hironov, and 0. V. Rychnikov, "Probability-Information
Criteria for Evaluating Operator Activity," TR. LENINGR. IN-TA AVIATS.
PRIBOROSTROYENIYA, 1971, Vyp 69, pp 200-208.

H. K. Yefimchik, V. A. lvkovich, and V. I. Kudryavtsev, "The Question_of
Automatic Monitoring of the State of the Human Operator," in "Upravleniye

i Informatsionnyye Proteessy v Zhivoy Prirode" [Control and Information Pro-
cesses in Living Nature], Moscow, 1971, pp 36-45.

A. I. Zhevzhik, and V. G. Kuznetsov, "Methods of Evaluating the Psycho-
physiological Capabilities of a Pilot," PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII I
ERGONOHIKI, 1974, Vul 2, pp 59-60.

V. P. Zhernavkov, V. I. Katkov, E. A. Kozlovskiy, and V. G. Kuznetsov,
"Rays to Refine the Objective Evaluation of Operator Activity in Complex
Control Systems," PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII I ERGONOHIKI, 1974, Vyp 3,

pp 64-66.

D. N. Zavalishina, “Analysis of the Process of Solving Discrete Spatial
Combinatory Problems Using Motion Pictures of Eye Movement," in "Problsmy
Inzhenernoy Psikhologii" [Problems of Human Factors Engineering], Lenin-
grad, 1964. pp 149-151.

A. V. Zav'yalov, "The Relationship of the Sensitivity of the Aural and
the Visual Analyzers," in "Piziologicheskiye Korrelyaty Psikhicheakoy
Deyatel'nosti" [Physiological Correlates of Mental Activity], Kursk,
1970, pp 42-46.

V. P. Zaryadakiy. "Norms of Psychophysiological Indicators of the Human
Being and Their Significance in Designing 'Han-Hachine' Systems," PROBL.
INZH. PSIKHOLOGII, 1971, Vyp 2, pp 156-157.

314

FOR<OFFKJAL.USE(HWLY
90.

91.

92.

93.

96.

95.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. P. Zagryadskiy, A. S. Yegorov, and B. N. Yakovets. "The Significance of
Indicators of the Functional State of the Organism in Bvaluat‘ng Mental
Work Capability," VOYEN.-MED. ZHURN., 1971, No 9, pp 59-62.

A. N. Zaydel'. "Elementarnyye Otsenki Oshibok Izmereniy" [Elementary Sval-
uations of Measurement Errors], Leningrad, "Nauka," 1967, 89 pages.

G. M. Zarakovskiy, "Psikhofiziologicheakiy Analiz Trudovoy Dsyatel'nosti"
[Psychophysiological Analysis of Labor Activity]. Moscow, "Nauka," 1966.
115 pages.

6. M. Zarakovskiy, B. A. Korolev, V. I. Medvedev, and M. N. Shlayen,
"Vvedeniye v Ergonomiku" [Introduction to Ergonomics], Moscow, "Sov.
Radio," 1974. 350 pages.

A. Zigel', and Dzh. Vol'f,‘"Modeli Gruppovogo Povedeniya v Sisteme
Chelovek-Mashina" [Models of GrOup Behavior in a Man-Machine System],
Moscow, "Mir," 1973, 261 pages.

P. B. Zil'berman, "The Emotional Stability of the Operator," in "Ochsrki
Psikhologii Iruda Operators" [Essays on the Labor Psychology of the Opera-
tor], Moscow, 1974, pp 138-173.

V. P. Zinchenko. N. I. Mayzel'. and L. V. Patkin. "Operator Activity in
the Information Search Mode," VOPR. PSIKEOLOGII, 1965, No 2, pp 3-17.

V. P. Zinchenko, and G. L. Slolyan, "Chelovek i Tekhnika" (Man and Machin-
ery], Moscow, "Znaniye," 1965, 43 pages.

2. M. Zolina, "Metody Issledovaniys Piziologicheskikh Protasssov" [Methods
of Investigating Physiological Processes], Moscow, "Meditsina," 1966,
312 pages.

2. M. Zolina, 3. M. Gambalidze, and Ye. G. Yampol'skiy, "Comparative Phy-
siological Evaluation of Two Types of Monotonous Activity (Conference and
Control Console)," in "Fiziologiya Trude: Tez. Dckl. 6 Vsesoyuz. Konf. po
Piziologii Trude" [Labor Physiology: Abstracts of Reports at the 6th All-
Union Conference on Labor PhysioloSY]. Moscow, 1973, pp 34-37.

A. N. Zolotukhin, and S. Ye. Koshmalyuk, "Psychophyaiological Changes in
Extreme Conditions," in "Aviatsionnaya i Kosmicheskaya Msditaina" [Axia-
tion and Space Medicine], Moscow, 1969, Vol 1, pp 261-2A6.

A. N. Zolotukhin, S. Ye. Koshmalyuk, and B. A. Dushkov, "The Problem of
Operator Reliability in a 'Man-Machine' System," PROBL. INZH. PSIKBOLDGII,
1971, Vyp 2, pp 17-19.

A. N. Zolotukhin, and M. T. Nesterenko, "The Frequency of Bysblinks as an
Indicator of the Reliability of the Visual Analyzer of Military Special-
ists," VOYEN.-MED. ZHURN., 1972, No 2, pp 59-60.

Yu. Ya. Zubarev, and L. G. Filippov, "Analysis of Operator Reliability on
the Basis of Sensitivity Theory," PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII, 1971, Vyp 2,
pp 20-25.

315

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

112.

113.

116.

115.

116.

117.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. I. Zubov. "Matematicheskaya Teoriya Nadezhnosti Sistem Massovogo
Obsluzhivaniya" [Mathematical Theory of the Reliability of Mass Service
Systems], Moscow-Leningrad, "Energiya," 1966, 176 pages.

K. A. Ivanov-Muromskiy, "Samoregulyatsiya Golovnogo Mozga" [Self-
Regulation of the Cerebral Cortex]. Kiev, "Nauk. Dumka," 1971, 246 pages.

K. A. Ivanov-Muromskiy, and Yu. V. Paramonov, "Ways to Realize Complex
Biotechnical Systems." VISN. AN USSR, 1972, No 11, pp 64-70.

A. G. IvanOVbSmolenskiy, "Study of the Combined Work of the First and
Second Signaling Systems," ZHURH. VYSSH. NERV. DEYATBL'HOSII, 1951, 1,
Vyp 1, pp 86-92.

Ye. P. Il'in, "'Operational Rest' and Optimal Regulation of a Person's
Work Capability," in "Ocherki"... op. cit., fn 95, pp 186-207.

K. K. Ioseliani, "The Influence of the Stress Factor on the Mental Acti-
vity of the Operator-Pilot," in "Materialy Seminars 'Kontrol' Cheloveka-
Operatora'" [Materials of the Seminar on "Monitoring the Human Operator'],
Moscow, 1970. pp 40-43.

K. K. Ioseliani, "The Time Deficit as a Stress Factor in the Mental
Activity of an Operator in a 'Man-Aircraft' System." KOSM. BIOLOGIYA I
MEDITSINA, 1971, No 5, pp 40-“.

K. K. Ioseliani, L. D. Chaynova, and M. Ye. Beletskiy, "The Information
Parameters of the Psychophysiological State of Flight Personnel during
work on a Display Unit, " KOSM. BIOLOGIYA I MBDITSIMA, 1973. Ho 3,

pp 62-68.

P. K. Isakov, "Psychophysiologicai Characteristics of Lou-Altitude
Flights." VOYEM.-MED. zaunu., 1972. Ho 3, pp 63-65.

K.H. Kamkaradze, and A. D. Korotkov, ”The Problem of Stochastic Evaluation
of the Adaptation of the Human Operator Controlling Dynamic Objects." TR.
cauz. POLITBKHN. IH-TA, 1970, Vyp 4, pp 71-76.

V. T. Karpenko. "Approximate Evaluation of the Reliability of a 'Man-
Machine System' in the Design Stage," in "Materialy 2 Vsesoyuz. Simpoz.

po Nadezhnosti Kompleks. Sistem 'Chelovek—Tekhnika'" [Materials of the 2nd
All-Union Symposium on the Reliability of Complex "Man-Machine" Systems].
Leningrad, 1969. Part 1, pp 41-47.

A. I. Kikolov, "Umstvenno-Emotsional'noye Hapryazheniye za Pul'tom
Upravleniya" [Mental-Emotional Tension at the Control Console], Moscow,
"Meditsina," 1967, 176 pages.

L. A. Kitayev-Smyk, I. P. Neunyvakin, and V. A. Ponomarenko, "The Question

of Methods of Evaluating the Psychophysiological State of the Pilot during

an Emergency Situation in the Air," in "Problemy Inzhenernoy Psikhologii"
[Problems of Human Factors Engineering], Leningrad, 1964, pp 61-62.

316

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USB(NVLY
118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. I. Kogan, "Investigation of Criteria for Evaluating Visual work Cap-
ability," anconoumxA. 1971, No 2, pp 5-23.

V. T. Kozlova, "The Dependence of Changes in the Variation of Selection
Time on the Strength of Nerve Processes," PROBL. INZE. PSIUOLOGII. 1972.
Vyp 3, Part 1, pp 21-24.

R. V. Komotskiy, 1‘. V. Sszhina, L. P. Sslmanov, V. P. Sel'nitakiy, M. M.
Skvortaov, and A. Ye. Chebyshev, "Comprehensive Evaluation of the Activity
of a Human Being in a Control System," PROBL. INZH. PSIKEOLOGII, 1971.
Vyp 2, pp 103-106.

0. A. Konopkin, and Yu. s. Nazhivin, "The Functional Structure of Self-
Regulation of Senaomotor Regulation," in "Materialy Vsesoyuz. Nauch.
Sessii N10 im. A. S. Popova" [Materials of the All-Union Scientific Ses-
sion of the Scientific-Technical Society imeni A. S. Popov], Moscow, 1973,
pp 27-32.

0. A. Konopkin, and Yu. S. Zhuykov, "The Ability of a Person to Estiaate
the Probabilistic Characteristics of Alternative Stimuli," in
"Psikhologicheskiye Voprosy Regulystsii Dayatel'nosti" [Psychological
Questions of Regulating Activity], Moscow, 1973, pp 154-198.

V. V. Kopayev, G. V. Kirillov, and A. A. Alekhina, "Analysis of the Punc-
tional State of Operators on the Basis of a Physiological Index," PROBL.
INZH. PSIKHOLOGII I BRGONOMIKI, 1974, Vyp 3, pp 132-134.

A. D. Korotkov, "The Question of Quantitative Evaluation of Sensomotor
Adaption of the Human Operator during Tracking," PROBL. INZE. PSIKBOIDGII,
1972, Vyp 3, Part 1, pp 25-28. _

M. A. Kotik, "Kratkiy Kurs Inzhenernoy Psikhologii" [Short Course in
Human Factors Engineering], Tallinn, "Valgus," 1971. 308 pages.

M. A. Kotik, "Compensatory Capabilities and the Reliability of Operator
Work," PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII I ERGONOMIKI, 1974, Vy‘p 1, pp 42-44.

S. V. Krevkov, "Glaz i Yego Rabota" [The Eye and Its Work], Moscow,
"Nauke," 1950, 176 pages.

M. Ye. Kramnik, L. F. Solov'yev, and D. M. El'bert, "The Problem of Diag-
nosing the Level of Alertness of the Human Operator during Monotonoua
Work,“ in "Materisly Konf. 'Biol. 1 Med. Kibernetika'" [Materials of the
Conference “Biological and Medical Cyberneticd'], Moscow, 1974, Part 5,
pp 134-136.

M. A. Kremen' , "Criteria of Operator Efficiency in a Tracking System,"
PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII, 1972, Vyp 3, Part 1. PP 29-31.

A. A. Krylov, and A. P. Pakhotov, "The Question of Operator 'Carrying
Capacity,'" PROBL. PSIKHOLOGII, 1966, Vyp 4, pp 7-18.

317

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
131.

132.

133.

13k.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

1‘0.

141.

162.

163.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. A. Krylov, "Chelovek v Avtomatizirovannykh Sistemakh Upravleniya"
[The Human Being in Automated Control Systems], Leningrad, "Izd-vo
Leningr. Un—ta," 1972, 191 pages.

A. A. Krylov, "Information Processing in Operator Activity," author's
abstract of dissertation for the degree of doctor of psychological sci-
ences, Leningrad, 1972, 33 pages.

V. Yu. Krylov, N. V. Krylovs, and L. S. Khachaturyants, "Generalized
Evaluation of the Quality of Human Activity in Modeling Space Flight,"

in "Ergaticheskiye Sistemy Upravleniya" [Brgatic Control Systems],
Kiev, 1974, pp 28-36. .

R. Kubo, "Termodinamika" [Ihermodynamics],lbscow, "Mir," 1970, 340 pages.

V. I. Kudryavtsev, "The Problem of Predicting Mental Fatigue." in
"Problemy Upravleniya Punktsiyami Cheloveka i Zhivotnykh" [The Problems
of Controlling Human and Animal Functions], Moscow, 1973, pp 47-53.

A. N. Lebedev, and V. A. Lutskiy, "Periodicity of Neuronal Activity and
Some Hypotheses on Its Functional Significance," in "Statisticheskaya
Elektrofiziologiya: Haterialy Simpoz." [Statistical Electrophyaiology:
Symposium Materials]. Vilnius, 1968, Part 1, pp 339-358.

A. N. Lebedev, and V. A. Lutskiy. "The Rhythms of the Electroencephalo-
gram as a Result of Spontaneous Activity of Neurons with Drifting Thresh-
olds," in "Problemy Biologicheakoy Kibernetiki: Upr. 1 Inform. Protsessy
v Zhivoy Prirode" [Problems of Biological Cybernetics: Control and Infor-
mation Processes in Living Nature], Moscow, 1971, pp 136-138.

A. N. Lebedev, and V. A. Lutskiy. "Calculating the Patterns of Visual Per-
ception by the Frequency Characteristics of the EEG," ERGONOHIKA, 1972,
No 4, pp 95-133.

V. V. Lebedev, and V. A. Krutov, "Indicators of the Quality of Hork of the
Human Operator Controlling a Spacecraft." KOSH. BIOLOGIYA I AVIAKOSH.
MBDITSINA, 1976, No 6, pp 62-65.

Zh. V. Levshinova, "Activation of Psychophysiological Functions Depending
on the Changing Rate of Sensomotor Activity," PROBL. INZH. PSIKROLOGII I
ERGNOMIKI, 197a, Vyp 2. pp 250-253.

A. N. Leont'yev, "The Formation of Abilities," VOPR. PSIKHOLOCII. 1960.
No 1, pp 7-17.

A. N. Leont'yev, and D. Yu. Panov, “Psikhologiya i Tekhnicheakiy Progress"
[Psychology and Technical Progress], Moscow, "Znaniye," 1962, 60 pages.

M. N. Livanov, A. N. Lebedev, and V. A. Krasavin, "The Significance of

the 'Spontaneous' Activity of Neurons for Valuable Reactive Processes,"
ZHURN. VYSSH. NERV. DEYATEL'NOSTI, 1966, 16, No 2, pp 292-297.

318

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
164.

145.

146.

167.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

153.

15k.

155.

156.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. P. Lisenkova, "Some Individual Characteristics of Human Reflection
of Time," in "Problemy Obshchey, Sotsial'noy i Inzhenernoy Psikhologii"
[Problems of General and Social Psychology and Human Factors Engineer-
ing], Leningrad, 1966, pp 52-57.

B. F. Lomov, "Chelovek i Tekhnika" [Man and Machinery], Leningrad,
"Izd-vo Leningr. Un-ta." 1963, 266 pages.

V. G. Loos, "Promyshlennaya Psikhologiya" [Industrial Psychology], Kiev,
"Tekhnika," 197b, 229 pages.

A. N. Luk'yanov, "The Question of the Possibility of Automatic Monitor-
ing of Operator Attention in a Control System," in "Materialy Konf.
'Inzh. Psikhologiya v Priborostroyenii'" [Materials of the Conference
"Human Factors Engineering in Instrument Making”, Leningrad, 1965,

pp 32-33.

A. N. Luk'yanov. and M. V. Frolov, "Signaly Sostoyaniya Cheloveka-
Operatora" [Signals of the State of the Human Operator], Moscow,
"Nauka," 1969, 247 pages.

I. N. Maydel'man, V. N. Revenko, and B. G. Sarkisyan, "Otobrazheniye
Informatsii v Avtomatizirovannykh Sistemakh Upravleniya" [Representation
of Information in Automated Control Systems], Moscow. "Sov. Radio,"
1972, 296 pages.

I. M. Malikov, "Nadezhnost' Sudovoy Elektronnoy Apparatury i Sistem
Avtomaticheskogo Upravleniya" [The Reliability of Ship Electronic Equi-
ment and Automatic Control Systems], Leningrad, "Sudostroyeniye,"

1967, 315 pages.

A. V. Malishevskiy, "The Concept of the 'State' of a Dynamic System,"
AVTOMATIKA I TELEMEKHANIKA, 1970, No 3, pp 102-107.

V. L. Marishchuk, K. K. Platonov. and Ye. A. Aletnitskiy, "Napryazhennost'
v Polete" [Stress in Flight], Moscow, "Voyenizdat," 1969, 117 pages.

M. A. Matova, "The State of Prostration with Abrupt Change in a Person's
Working Conditions," 911031.. mzu. Psncuowcn. 1971, Vyp 2, pp 173-177.

D. Meyster, and Dzh. Rabido, "Inzhenerno-Psikho1ogicheskaya Otsenka pri
Razrabotke Sistem Upravleniya" [Human Factors Engineering Evaluation
during Development of Control Systems], Moscow, "Sov. Radio," 1970,

363 pages.

A. I. Men'shov, D. M. Nikitln, and C. M. Ronina, "The Efficiency of the
Work of a Human Operator with a Full Workload of Different Functions,"
PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII, 1971, Vyp 2, pp 31-36.

M. Mesarovich, "Systems Theory and Biology: the Viewpoint of a Theore-
tician." in "Teoriya Sistem i Biologiya" [Systems Theory and Biology],
Moscow, "Mir," 1971, pp 23-31.

319

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. I. Gubinskiy (editor), "Metodicheskiye Rekomendatsii po Otsenke
Nadezhnosti i Effektlvnosti Konpleksnykh Sistem 'Chelovek-Tekhnika'"
[Methodological Recommendations on Evaluating the Reliability and Effi-
ciency of Complex "Man-Machine" Systems]. Leningrad, 1971, 138 pages.

Ye. A. Mileryan, "Method of Psychological Study of Operator Activity."
911031.. mzu. Psnmowcu. 1965. Vyp 2, pp 51-58.

Ye. A. Mileryan, "Operator Reliability in Different Work Regimes,"
VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII, 1971. No 4, pp 60-69.

Ye. A. Mileryan, "Emotional-Volitional Components of Operator Reliability,"
in "Ocherki Psikhologii Operatorskogo Trude" [Essays on the Psychology of
Operator Labor]. Moscow, "Nauka," 197A, pp 5-83.

Dzh. Miller, Ye. Galsnter. and K. Pribram, "Plsny i Struktura Povedeniya"
[Plans and the Structure of Behavior], Moscow, "Progress," 1964,
238 pages.

V. 1. Myasnikov, and I. P. Lebedeva, "Electrographic Study of the Effi-
ciency of Receiving Signals in a Competitive Situation," in "Problemy
Inzhenernoy Psikhologii" [Problems of Human Factors Engineering],
Leningrad, 1964, pp 45-46.

V. D. Nebylitsyn. "Study of the Reliability of Work of the Human Opera-
tor in Automated Systems," VOPR. PSIKMOLOCII, 1961, No 6. pp 9-18.

M. S. Neymark, "Psychological Analysis of Emotional Reactions to Diffi-
culties in Work," in "Voprosy Psikhologii Lichnosti Shkol'nika"
[Questions of the Psychology of the Schoolchild's Personality], Moscow,
1961, pp 31-35.

A. V. Netushil, V. V. Burlayev, V. I. Glazkov, et a1., "Experimental
Statistical Method of Constructing a Model of the Human Operator," 12V.
VUZOV. SER. ELEKTROHEKHANIKA. 1970. No 4, pp 406-411.

V. I. Nikolayev. "Kontrol' Raboty Sudovykh Energeticheskikh Ustsnovok"
[Monitoring the Work of Ship Power Plants], Leningrad, "Sudostroyeniye."
1965, 239 pages.

A. Ye. Ol’shannikova, "Some Physiological Correlates of Emotional States,"
PROBL. DIFFERENTS. PSIKHOFIZIOLOGII. 1969, Vyp 6, pp 45-5‘.

V. F. Onishchenko. A. A. Volkov. and S. G. Mel'nik, "The Use of the Poly-

Effector Method to Evaluate the Psychophysiological Cabailities of an

Operator in a 'Man-Automaton' System," in "Probleny"... op. cit.. fn 162,
p 61.

A. S. Osenniy, and V. D. Romanov, "One Technique of Monitoring the Human
Operator." KIBERNETIKA I VYCHISL. TEKHNIKA, 1970. Vyp 7, pp 50-53.

V. V. Pavlov, "Invariantnost' i Avtonomnost' Nelineynykh Sistem
Uprsvleniya" [Invariance and Self-Sufficiency of Nonlinear Control Sys-
tems]. Kiev, "Nauk. Dunks," 1971. 271 pages.

320

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. V. Pavlov, "The Ergatic Organism," AVTOMATIKA. 1972, No 6, pp 62-68.

V. V. Pavlov. “Some Principles of Brgatic Control Systems and Ways to
Realize Them." AVTOMAIIKA, 1972, No 3, pp 77-83.

I. P. Pavlov, "Physiological Theory of Types of Nervous Systems and
Temperamenta of IOZh [expansion unknown]," in "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Com-
plete Works], Moscow, "Medgiz," 1951, Vol 3, Book 2. pp 65-53.

D. I. Paleychuk, and V. S. Khominich, "Mathematical Description of the
Rumen Operator in Ergatic Control Systems," KIBBRNETIKA I VYCHISL.

V. V. Parin, R. M. Bayevskiy, Yu. N. Volkov. and O. G. Gazenko.
"Kasmicheskaya Kardiologiya“ [Space Cardiology]. Leningrad. "Moditsina,"
1967, 206 pages.

V. V. Parin, and R. M. Bayevskiy. "Vvedeniye v Meditsinskuyu Kibernetikd'

[Introduction to Medical Cybernetics], Moscow, "Meditsina." 1968.
298 pages.

Ye. V. Petrukhin. "The Possibility of Evaluating Operator Stability by
the Operator's Tactics of Mark," PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII, 1976, Vyp 3,
pp 89-91.

K. K. Platonov, "Voproay.Paikhologii Trude" [Questions of Labor Psy-
chology], Moscow, "Medgiz," 1962, 219 pages.

G. A. Platonov, "Chelovek 2a Pul'tom" [Human Being at the Console],
Moscow, "Transport," 1969. 167 pages.

v. A. Popov. and L. S. Khachatur'yants, "Reaction of the Organism to
the Information Characteristics of a Stimulus." in "Avistsionnaya i
Kosmicheskaya Meditsina” [Aviation and Space Medicine], Moscow. 1963,
pp 411-416.

A. I. Prokhorov. A. A. Ramyalis. and M. V. Freydina, "Monitoring State
as a Method of Evaluating the Influence of Different Factors on the
Efficiency of Operator Activity," in "Materialy Seminara 'Kontrol'
Sostoyaniya Cheloveka-Operatora'" [Materials from the Seminar "Monitor-
ing the State of the Human Operatofﬂ, Moscow-Vilnius, 1971, pp 13-22.

A. N. Rayevskiy. and A. V. Antonov. "The Problem of Classifying 'Man-
Machine' Systems." PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII, 1968, Vyp 1, pp 56-58.

s. A. Razumov. "Utomleniye i Bor'ba s Nim" [Fatigue and Combating It],
Leningrad, "Medgiz," 1954, 72 pages.

N. v. Revenko, "Psychological Analysis of the State of the Human Opera-

tor in an Experimental Model with Action by an Unexpected Signal,"
PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII, 1971, Vyp 2, pp 178-180.

V. I. Rozhdestvenskaya, and I. A. Levochkina, "Functional State during
Monotonous work and Strength of the Nervous System,” PROBL. DIFFERENTS.
Psxmonzmnocn. 1972. Vyp 7, pp 194-223.

321
FIHICIIN(1AI.USEIDNLY
186.

187.

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

196.

195.

196.

196a.

197.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

R. Royg, "Comparison of the Activity of a Human Operator and an Optimal
Linear Regulator by the Criterion of Mean Quadratic Error," in
"Inzhenernaya Psikhologiya 2a Rubezhom" [Human Factors Engineering
Abraod], Moscow, 1967, pp 386-393.

V. P. Ruhakhin, "Paikhologicheskiye Osnovy Obrabotki Pervichnoy
Informatsii" [Psychological Foundations of Processing Initial Informa-
tion], Leningrad, "Nauka," 197A, 296 pages.

S. L. Rubinshteyn, "Bytiye i Soznaniye" [Existence and Consciousness],
Moscow, "Izd-vo AN SSSR," 1957, 328 pages.

G. I. Ryl'skiy, ”Nekotoryye Metody Optimizatsii Sistemy 'Chelovek-
Tekhnika': Preprint Dokl? [A Few Hays to Optimize a "Man-Machine" System:
Preprint of Report], Moscow-Leningrad. 1975. 31 pages.

I. A. Ryabinin. "Osnovy Teorii i Rascheta Nadezhnosti Sudovykh Elektro-
energeticheskikh Sistem" [Fundamentals of the Theory and Calculation of
the Reliability of Ship Electric Power Plants], Leningrad.
"Sudostroyeniye." 1971, 655 pages.

A. I. Sidzhel, and Dzh. Vol'f, "Method of Evaluating Variations of Con-
struction of a 'Man-Machine' System," ZARUBBZH. RADIOELEKIRONIKA, 1962.
No 8, pp 45-53.

U. M. Siymann. "Multidimensional Analysis of the Dynamics of Several
Parameters of the Psychophysiological Acitivity of the Operator," PROBL.
INZH. PSIKHOLOGII I BRGONOMIKI, 1974, Vyp 1, pp 123-125.

P. V. Simonov, "The Role of Emotions in the Adaptive Behavior of Living
Sys'ers," VOPR. PSIKHOLOCII. 1956, No a. pp 75-84.

P. V. Simonov, "The Basic (Alpha) Rhythm of the EEG as an Electrographic
Expression of Preventive Inhibition of Brain Structures," in "Refleksy
Golovnogo Mozga" [Reflexes of the Cerebral Cortex], Moscow. "ﬂanks,"
1965. OP 76-82.

P. V. Simonov, "The Dependence of Measurements of Cardiac Rhythm on the
Level of Motivation and Pragmatic Indeterminacy of the Environment," in
"Nervnoye ﬂapryazheniye i Deyatel'nost' Serdtsa“ [Nervous Tension and
Cardiac Activity], Moscow, 1969. pp 25-34.

B. A. Smirnov. "Investigation of the Sensomotor Reactions of the Opera-
tor," in "0b Aktual'nykh Problemakh Eksperimental'nogo Issledovaniya
Vremeni Reagirovaniya" [Timely Problems of Experimental Investigation of
Reaction Time], Tartu, 1969. pp 94—98.

B. A. Smirnov, "Evaluating the Degree of Stress of Operator Hork," VbPR.
vows-mm. Ps1mowcn, 1970, Vyp 3, pp 112-122.

S. D. Smirnov. "Description of Tracking Movements as an Indicator of the
Functional States of the Operator," PROBL. INZE. PSIKHOLOCII, 1972,
Vyp 3. Part 1. pp 176-177.

322
INJR‘OFIICJAI.IEHE(HQLY
198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

206.

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

K. M. Snirnova. and T. Ye. Sazonova. "Evaluating the Degree of Intensity
of Labor on a Conveyor Line," PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII I ERGONOMIKI,
1974, Vyp 2. pp 78-79.

G. A. Smolyan, "Human Factors Engineering Study of Man-Machine Systems."
VOPR. PSIKHOLOGII, 1972. No 5, pp 150-156.

Ye. M. Sokolov, "The Orientation Reflex as an Information Regulator,"
in "Oriyentirovochnyy Refleks v Norms i Pstologii" [The Orientation Reflex
in the Norm and Pathology], Moscow. 1966, pp 92-98.

V. P. Solov'yev. "The Possibility of Using Indicators of the Bioelectric
Activity of the Brain and Cardiodynasics for Occupational Selection for
Types of Jobs Involving Stress," in "Tez. Dokl. I Vsesoyuz. Simpot.
'Psikhofiziol. Osnovy Professional. Otbora"'[Abstracts of keports at the
let All-Union Symposium on "The Psychophysiological Foundations of Occu-
pational Selectiod'].Kiev. 1973. pp 17-18.

A. V. Solodkova, "The Effect of Emotional States on Operator Thinking."
in "Ocherki"... op. cit., fn 160. pp 119-138.

B. A. Sosnovskiy, and M. V. Gomezo, "Components of a Sensomotor Skill and
Their Statistical Norms," PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII, 1976, Vyp 1,
pp 138-140.

S. T. Sosnovskaya, "Psychophysiologicsl Evaluation of Operator Activity
in Different Time Regimes." PROBL. 1N2“. PSIKHOLOGII I ERGONOMIKI, 1976.
Vyp 2, pp 284-285.

B. Ye. Berdicheskiy (editor), "Spravochnik po Nadezhnosti" [Handbook on
Reliability]. Moscow, "Mir," 1970. Vol 3. 376 pages (translated fron
English).

T. s. Stepanova, K. V. Grachev. and N. A. Snezhko. "Adaptive Regulatory
Functions of the Human Brain in the Process of Intensive Learning," in
"Materialy Konf. 'Biol. 1 Med. Kibernetika'" [Materials of the Conference
"Biological and Medical Cybernetics"], Moscow, 1976. Part 2, pp 46-50.

I. P. Strukov, and V. N. Budko, "The Question of Designing Instruents and
Developing Methodologies for Objective Evaluation of Fatigue of the
Visual Analyzer,“ TR. VORONEZH. IN-TA, 1971, Vyp 77, pp 71-80

6. A. Stryukov, and M. A. Gritsevskiy. "Human Work Capability." GIGIYENA
TRUDA I PROF. ZABOLEVANIYA, 1973, N0 10, pp 61-63.

P. M. Suvorov. "Monitoring the Activity of the Pilot-Operator Exposed

to Prolonged Accelerations," in "Materialy"... op. cit., fn 181. Moscow,
1970, pp 18-21.

V. V. Suvorova,“1he Relationship Between Indicators of the Electroenceph-
alogram and Individual Vegetative Reaction Characteristics," in "Problemy

Differentaial'noy Psikhofiziologii" [Problems of Differential Psycho-
physiology]. Moscow. 1974, pp 2&3-263.

323
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
211.

212.

213.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ye. M. Surkov, "The Question of Certain Characteristics of Performing
Operational Tasks in Extreme Conditions," PROBL. OESHCH., SOTS. I IHZH.
PSIKHOLOGII, 1968, Vyp 2, pp 84-96.

6. V. Sukhodol'skiy, "The Problem of the Reliability and Efficiency of
Human Work,” in "Voprosy lnzhenernoy Psikhologii v Avtomatizirovannykh
Sistemakh Upravlaniya" [Questions of Human Factors Engineering in Auto-
mated Control Systems], Leningrad, 1972, pp 14-21.

U. M. Siymann, op. cit., fn 192.

213/214. 8. M. Tamarchenko, "The Question of the Relationship Between Certain

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

222.

223.

EEG Indicators of Brain Work and Efficiency of Information Processing by
the Human Operator," NERV. SISTEMA, 1971, vyp 2, pp 56-62.

V. A. Taran, and A. A. Belov, "Evaluation of the Influence of Certain
Emotional Factors on Time of Performance of Operations in an Ergatic
Process," PROBL. IHZH. PSIKHOLOCII, 1971, Vyp 2, pp 52-57.

V. A. Taran, A. D. Korotkov, Yu. N. Kafanov, A. A. Eelov, and I. G.
Shramkov, "The Possibilities of Quantitative Evaluations of the Function-
ing of Closed Control Systems with Human Operators," MEKHANIKA MASHIN,
1971. Vyp 27/28, pp 148-161.

0. K. Tikhomirov, Ya. Ya. Eelik, E. D. Poznyanskaya, and H. Kh.
Turchenkov, "Experiment with the Application of Information Theory to
Analysis of the Process of Human Deciding of Mental Problens," VOPR.
PSIKHOLDGII, 1964, No 4, pp 21-39.

V. N. Trofinov, "The Information Method of Evaluating the Efficiency of
Ergatic Systems," in "Ergaticheskiye Sistemy" [Ergatic Systems], Kiev,
1974, pp 91-97.

L. H. Uznadze, "Psikhologicheskiye Issledovaniya" [Psychological
Research]. Moscow, "Nauka," 1966, 452 pages.

L. V. Fatkin, "Application of the Theory of Mass Service in Human Factors
Engineering Problems," in "Materialy Pervoy Leningr. Konf. po Inzh.
Psikhologii" [Materials of the First Leningrad Conference on Human Factors
Engineering], Leningrad, 1964, pp 24-27.

A. L. Farberov, “Investigation and Correlation of the Static-Dynamic Char-
acteristics of 'Operator-Technical Device' Systems," author's abstract of
dissertation for the degree of candidate of technical sciences, Moscow,
1973, 18 pages.

P. Pitts, and Dzh. Petterson, "Carrying Capacity of Discrete Motor Reac-
tions," in "Inzhenernaya Psikhologiya" op. cit., fn 186, pp 408-425.

L. Fogel', "Intellectual Levels of Decisions," in "Inzhenernaya
Psikhologiya" [Human Factors Engineering], Moscow, 1964, pp 54-63 (trans-
lated from English).

324

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
224.

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

236.

235.

236.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yu. G. Pokin, "Medezhnost' pri Ekspluatatsii Tekhnicheskikh Sredatv"
[Reliability in the Operation of Technical Equipment], Moscow,
"Oborongiz." 1970, 22k pages.

P. Fraisse, and J. Piaget."3ksperimenta1'naya Psikhologiya" [Experimen-
tal Psychology]. Moscow, "Progress," 1970, 197 pages.

V. M. Prolov, "Urovni Funktsionirovaniya Piziologichesikh Siatem i Mhtody
Ikh Opredeleniye" [Levels of Functioning of Physiological Systems and
Ways to Determine Them], Leningrad, "Meditsina," 1972, 173 pages.

V. M. Prolov, "Automatic Monitoring of Changes in the Emotional State of
the Operator in a 'Man-Machine' System, in ”Materialy Rout. 'Insh.
Psikhologiya v Priborostroyenii'" [Materials of the Conference "Human
Factors Engineering in Instrument Making"). Leningrad, 1965, pp 33-34.

Ye. V. Khrunov, L. S. Khachatur'yants. V. A. Popov, and Ye. A. Ivanov,
"Chelovek-Operator v Kosmicheskom Polete" [The Human Operator in Space
Flight], Moscow. "Mashinostroyeniye." 1974, 399 pages.

L. D. Chaynova. "The Influence of the Functional State of the Sensitivity
of the Visual Analyzer." in "Materialy" op. cit., in 181, pp 33-38.

L. D. Chaynovs, "The Character of Change in Certain Psychophysiological
Functions of the Human Being Related to Visual Activity in a Situation
of Acute Time Shortage," PROBL. IMZH. PSIKMOLOGII, 1971, Vyp 2,

. pp 197-201 .

A. V. Chubarov, and V. V. Petelina, "Evaluating the Quality of Work by
a Human Operator According to the EEG," FIZIOL. ZMURM. SSSR, 1971, 27,
No 3, pp 45-53.

D. Shadrinov, and T. A. Korneyeva, "Classification of Types of Correcting
Information from the Standpoint of Energy-Information Relations," PROBL.
INZB. PSIKHOLOCII I ERGONOMIKI, 1976. Vyp 1, pp 68-70.

P. G. Shamrov, "The Question of Evaluating the Psychophysiological Capa-
bilities of the Operator in a 'Man-Machine' System," PRODL. INZM.
PSIKHOLOGII, 1966, Vyp 4, pp 171-186.

V. I. Ekazeli, "Some Aspects of Optimal Interaction of the Human Being
and the Machine in Complex Control Systems," in "Automatizataiya
Proizvodstvennykh Protsessov v Promyshlennosti" [Automation of Production
Processes in Industry], Rustavi. 1972, pp 56-62.

D. G. El'kin, "Counting Time Through a Skin Analyzer," PRODL. IMZH.
PSIKHOLOGII, 1972, Vyp 3. Part 1, pp 183-184.

M. A. Epler, and P. Kh. Kingisepp, "The Corre1ation between Amplitude
of an Electrocardiogram Have and the Length of the Cardiac Cycle," in

"Statisticheakaya Elektrofiziologiya" [Statistical Electrophysiology],
Vilnius, 1968, Part 2, pp 35-39.

325

FOI.OI11CLALlﬁ§E(NVLY
237.

238.

239.

240.

241.

242.

243.

244.

245.

246.

247.

248.

249.

250.

251.

252.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

H. R. Ashby, "Vvedeniye v Kibernetiku" [Introduction to Cybernetics],
Moscow, "Izd-vo Inostr. Lit.," 1959, 432 pages.

N. R. Ashby, "Konstruktsiya Mozga. Proiskhozhdeniye Adaptivnogo
Povedeniya" [The Structure of the Brain. The Origin of Adaptive Behav-
ior], Moscow, "Mir," 1964, 411 pages.

V. S. Yurkevich, "Self-Regulation as a Factor in Overall Giftedness,"
in "Problemy Obshchey i Differentsial'noy Psikhologii" [Problems of
General and Differential Psychology], 1972, pp 233-250.

6. A. Bekey, "The Human Operator as a Sampled Data System," INST. RADIO.
ENG. TRANS. HUMAN FACTORS IN ELECTRON., 1962, No 3, pp 60-71.

G. E. Cooper, "Understanding and Interpreting Pilot Opening," AURON. ENG.
REV., 1957, No 3, pp 47-51.

I. E. Crave, "Pilot's Fatigue and Emotional Probiems," FLIGHT MAG., 1972,
61, No 2, pp 161-170.

P. M. Pitts, and R. E. Tones, "Analysis of Factors Contributing to the
460 ‘Pilot Error' Experiences in Operating Aircraft Controls," in "Selec-
ted Papers on 'Human Factors.'" New York, 1961, pp 332-334.

I. I. Elkind, "A Survey of the Development of Models for the Human Con-
troller," in "Progress in Astronautics and Acronautics," London, 1964,
Vol 13, pp 34-42.

P. Fraisse, "Correlations between Electroencephalographic Patterns and
Speed of Visual Perception," EEG AND CLIN. NEUROPHYSIOL., 1960. 12, No 1,
pp 634-670.

L. Fravis, and E. Onanian, "The Effect of Memoring [sic, possibly should
by "Memory"] upon the a-Rhythm," EEG AND CLIN. NEUROPHYSIOL., 1954, 6,
No 2, pp 407-412.

S. Criew, D. R. Davis, and A. C. Treacher, "Heart Rate During Augilance
[sic] Performance," NATURE, 1963, 200, No 4910, pp 132-141.

H. Gastaut, and I. Bert, "EEG Changes during Cinematographic Presenta-
tion (Moving Picture Activation of the 336)," EEG AND CLIN. NEUROPHYSIOL.,
1954, 6, No 3, pp 68-72.

M. A. Grodsky, "Rick [sic, possibly "Risk"], AEROSPACE ENG., 1962: 21,
No 1, pp 28-32.

N. V. Hale, B. 0. Hartman, and D. A. Harris, "Physiologic Stress during
50-Nour Doublrew [sic, possibly "Double-Crev"] Missions in C-141 Air-
craft." AEROSPACE “30., 1972, 43, No 3, pp 138-148.

V. Hammerton, "Violent Exercise and Cognitive Tasks," ERGONOMICS, 1971,
14, No 2, pp 241-250.

F. 0. Hemning, "Aircraft Accidents and Human Factors," AEROSPACE MED.,
1973, 44, No 6, pp 682-684.

326
FOR 0I11CIAI.USE!NNLY
253.

256.

255.

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

w. E. Rick, "On the Rate of Gain in Information Quart [sic]," J. EXP.
PHYSIOL., 1952, 6, pp 76-83.

P. McNemar, "Twin Recembences [sic] in Motor Skills and the Effect of
Practice Thereon," J. GENETIC PSYCHOL., 1933, 17, No 1, pp 627-636.

R. K. Mehre, and I. S. Tyles, "Modeling the Human Operator under Stress

Conditions Using Systems Idrntification," in "13th Joint Automat. Control
Conf. Prepr. Techn. Pap..” New York, 1972, pp 137-166.

M. D. Mesarovic, R. Prlandson, D. Macho, and D. Fleming, "Satisfaction
Principle in Modelivg Biological Function. Do Biological Systems Opti-
mize or Satisfy?" 2IBBRNATBS, 1973, 2, No 2, pp 76-80.

A. N. Nicholson, L. E. Hill, R. D. Berland, and N. I. Zanowski, "Influence
of Workload on the Neurological State of a Pilot during the Approach and
Landing," AEROSPACE MBD., 1973, 66, No 2, pp 631-662.

L. Orloci, "Ranking Characters by Dispersion Criterion," NATURE, 1973,
266, No 5615, pp 35-67.

I. w. Senders, "The Human Operator as a Monitor and Controller of Mu1ti-
Degree-of-Preedom Systems," in "6th Nat. Sump. on Human Factors in Elec-
tron.," 1963, pp 76-86.

D. O. Wolter, I. M. Rhodes, and H. R. Adey, "Discriminating among States
of Consciousness by EECT Measurement," AEROSPACE MED., 1967, No 6,
pp 167-160.

To Chapter 6, Section 3

1.

5.

A. G. 2dravomyslov, V. P. Rozhin, and V. A. Yadov (editors), "Chelovek
i Yego Rabota" [The Human Being and Work], Moscow, "Mysl'," 1965,
250 pages.

V. E. Shlyapentokh, "Sotsiologiya dlya Vsekh" [Sociology for Everyone],
Moscow, "Sov. Rossiya," 1970, 250 pages.

V. N. Shubkin, "Sotsiologicheskiye Opyty" [Sociological Experiments],
Moscow, "Mysl'," 1970, 287 pages.

V. A. Yadov, "Sotsiologicheskiye Issledovaniya (Metodologiya, Program,
Metody)"[Sociological Research (Methodology, Program and Techniques)],
Moscow, "Nauka," 1972, 239 pages.

6. M. Andreyev (editor), "Lektsii po Metodike Konkretnykh
Sotsiologicheskikh Issledovaniy" [Lectures on the Methodology of Concrete
Sociological Research], Moscow, "Izd-vo Mosk. Un-ta," 1972, 200 pages.

S. I. Ozhegov, "Slovar' Russkogo Yazyka" [Dictionary of the Russian Lan-
guage], Moscow, "Sov. Entsiklopediya," 1973, 867 pages.

To Chapter 5

1.

V. N. Sadovskiy, "System," in "BSE" [Great Soviet Encyclopedia], 3rd ed,

Moscow, "Soy. Entsiklopediys," 1976,27Vol 23, pp 1376-1380.
3

INJR OITHCJAI.USEICNNLY
3'

4.

5.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. P. Zinchenko, "Vvedeniye v Ergonomiku" [Introduction to Ergonomics],
Moscow, "Sov. Radio." 1974, 351 pages.

8. V. Sukhodol'skiy. "Strukturno-Algoritnicheskiy Analiz 1 Since:
Deyatel'nosti" [Structural-Algorithmic Analysis and Synthesis of Activity],

Leningrad, "Izd-vo Leningr. Un-ta." 1976, 120 pages.

G. M. Zarakovskiy, "Psikhofiziologicheskiy Analiz Trudovoy Deyatel'noati"
[Psychophysiological Analysis of Labor Activity], Moscow, "Nauka," 1966,
116 pages.

K. V. Lyudvichek, and V. Ye. Alekseyev, "Using Mnltifactor Mathelatical
Models of Operator Activity to Analyze and Evaluate the Processes of Operat-
ing Complex Brgatic Systems." in "Ergonomika na Sluzhbe Proizvodstva"
[Ergonomics in the Service of Production], Kiev, "O-vo 'Znaniye' USSR,"
1978, pp 5-6.

V. M. Akhutin, and A. I. Naftul'yev, "Mathematical Modeling of the Acti-
vity of the Human Operator in Development of Ergatic Systena," CHELOVEK
1 OBSHCMESTVO. 1973. Vyp 11, pp 265-254.

B. F. Lonov, V. V. Rubakhin, and V. F. Venda (editors), "Inzhenernaya
Psikhologiya. Teoriya. Metodologiya, Prakticheskoye Prineneniye" [Human
Factors Engineering. Theory, Methodology, and Practical Application].
Moscow, "Nauka." 1977, 306 pages.

A. Zigel', and Dzh. Vol'f, "Model' Gruppovogo Povedeniya v Sistene
'Chelovek-Mashina' a Ucheton Psikhosotsial'nykh i Proizvodstvennykh
Faktorov" [Model of Group Behavior in a "Man-Machine" System Considering
Psychosocial and Production Factors]. Moscow, "Mir," 1973. 261 pages.

V. A. Myasnikov. and V. P. Petrov (editors), "Aviatsionnyye Tsifrovyye
Siatemy Kontrolya i Upravleniya" [Aviation Digital Monitoring and Control
Systems], Leningrad, "Mashinostroyeniye," 1976. 607 pages.

3. Ye. Derdichevskiy (editor). "Spravochnik po Nadezhnoati" [Handbook on
Reliability]. Moscow, "Mir," 1971, Vol 3, 376 pages (translated from
English).

D. Louli, and A. Makswell, "Faktornyy Analiz kak Statisticheskiy Metod"
[Factor Analysis as a Statistical Method], Moscow, "Mir," 1968. 101 pages.

“Shornik Nauchnykh Progranm na FORTRANE. Statistika" [collection of Sci-
entific Prograne in FORTRAN. Statistics]. Moscow, "Statistika," 1976,
Vyp 1, 316 pages (translated from English, USA).

V. Ye. Alekseyev. V. I. Garkin, I. A. Lyudvichek, et a., "Device for Using
the Psychophysiological Capabilities of the Operator." author's certificate
No 643957, published in 3.1., 1979, No 3.

Yu. A. Abranov, V. Ye. Alekseyev, K. V. Kyudvichek, et a1.. "Control System
Operator Trainer," author's certificate No 590805 (USSR), published in
3.1., 1978, No a.

Ibid.
328

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

To

7.

9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Expert Evaluation," in 382 [Great Soviet Encyclopedia], 2nd ed., 1957,
Vol 48, p 1012.

"Technical Expert Evaluation," in ibid., pp 1013-1011;.

V. Ya. Dubrovskiy, and L. P. Shchedrovitskiy, "Problamy Sistemnogo
Inzheneruo-Psikhologicheskogo Proyektirovaniya" [Problems of Systems Humam
Factors Engineering Design], Moscow, "Izd-vo Mos. Un-ta." 1971. 910 pages.

I). Heyster, and Dzh. Rabido, "Inzhenerno-Psikhologicheskaya Otsenko pri
Razrabotke Sistem Upravleniya" [Ilmn Factors Engineering Evaluation in
Development of Control Systems], lbscou, "Sov. Radio," 1970, 3103 pages.

A. A. Ayvazov, 2. I. Bashayeva, and 0. V. Staroverov, "Klsssifikatsiya
Hnogomernykh Nablyudeniy" [Classification of Multidimensional Observa-
tions], Moscow. "Statistika." 19710, 260 pages.

Chapter 6

V. S. Gaydenko, "Osnovy Postroyeniya Avtomatizirovannykh Sistem Kontrolya
Slozhnykh 0b"yektov" [Fundamentals of Constructing Automated Systems to
Monitor Complex Objects], Moscow, "Energiya," 1969, 230 pages.

N. I. Chuprikova, "Study of Evoked Potentials in the Human Being,"
vorn. PSIKBOLOGII, 1967, No 1, pp 54-61.

N. I. Bekhtereva, 'meyrofiziologicheskiye Aspekty Psikhicheskoy
Deyatel'nosti Cheloveka" [Neurophysiological Aspects of Human Hental Ac-
tivity], Leningrad, "Meditsina," 1971. 117 pages.

A. N. Luk'yanov, and H. V. Prolov, "Signaly Sostoyaniya Operators" [signals
of Operator State], Moscow, "Nauka." 1969, 266 pages.

Ye. N. Boyko. "Vremya Reaktsii Cheloveka" [Hanan Reaction Time],
Moscow, "Heditsina," 1962, (.40 pages.

A. A. Sergeycv. "Vliyaniye Peregruzok na Organizm Letchika" [The Effect
of Overloada on the Pilot's Organism], Moscow. "Voyenizdat," 1956.
343 pages.

I.P. Popov, V. V. Borahchenko. and P. A. Vasinich, "Investigation of the
State of Human Skin with Prolonged Restriction on Its Hygienic Treatment."
PROBL. KOSHICH. BIOLOGII, 1967, vyp 7, pp 413-520.

L. A. Kazaryan. "Instrment for Automatic Measurement of Arterial Pres-
sure," in "Sovremennyye Pribory i 'rekhnika Piziologicheskogo Bksperimenta"
[Contemporary Instruments and Equipment for Physiological Experiments],
Moscow, "Nauka." 1969, 137 pages.

"Small Sensor for Measuring the Per-Minute Volume of Respiration under
Plight Conditions." RZH BIOLOGIYA. PIZIOLOGIYA CTELOVEKA I ZHIVOTNYKE,

1971. 3N840.

329

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L. Kharmon (editor), "Paspoznavaniye Obrazov pri Pomoshchi TsVM" [Image
Recognition Using Digital Computers], Moscow, "Mir." 1974, 276 pages.

R. S. Dadashev, and S. P. Khlebnikov, "Automatic Device for Determining
the Functional State of the Human Operator," in "Sistema 'Chelovek i
Avtomat'" [The "Human-Automaton" System], Moscow, 1965, pp 86-93.

A. A. Genkin, and G. M. Zarakovskiy, "Automation of Diagnosis of the Func-
tional States of the Organism by EEG Data," PROBL. INZH. PSIKHOLOGII,
1966, Vyp 6, pp 190-206.

Yu. I. Neymark (editor), "Raspoznavaniye Obrazov i Meditsinskaya
Diagnostika" [Image Recognition and Medical Diagnosis], Moscow, "Nauka,"
1972, 386 pages.

M. B. Tarmakovskiy, A. G. Frantsuz, B. V. Kozlovskiy, et al., "Statistical
Methods of Evaluating the Usefulness of Signs in Solving the Problems of
Classifying Electrograms," in "Statisticheskaya Elektrofiziologiya:
Materialy Simpoz.. Palanga, Avgust 1968" [Statistical Electrophyaiology:
Materials of the Symposium in Palanga in August, 1968], Palanga, 1968.

pp 86-92.

V. N. Pomin, "Matematicheskaya Teoriya Obuchayemykh Opoznayushchikh Sistem"
[Mathematical Theory of Instructable Recognition Systems], Leningrad.
"Izd-vo Leningr. Un-ta," 1976, 234 pages.

K. K. Valuzhis, i. 0. Levitman, and E. A. Ernitskite. "Compact Represen-
tation of a Set of Electrograms," DAN SSSR, 1967, No 3, Vol 177,
pp 186-189.

Kh. V. Pinberger, "Analysis of Electrograms on the Computer," in
"Vychislitel'nyye Ustroystva v Biologii i Meditsine" [Computers in Biology
and Medicine], Moscow, "Mir," 1967, pp 113-145.

R. I. Utyamyshev, "Radioelektronnaya Apparatura dlya Issledovaniya
Fiziologicheskikh Protsessov" [Radioeiectronic Equipment for Studying
Physiological Processes], Moscow, "Energiya," 1969, 186 pages.

N. V. Pozin, "Modelirovaniye Neyronnykh Struktur" [Modeling Neuron Struc-
tures], Moscow, "Nauka," 1971, 281 pages.

3. Uidrou, Dzh. R. Glover, D. M. Makkul, et a1.. "Adaptive Compensators
of Noise. Principles of Construction and Application, TI ER, 1975,
No 12. pp 69-98.

V. A. Likharev. and V. P. Tebyakikh, "Methods of Instructing Systems That
Solve Problems of Image Recognition and Detecting Signals against a Noise
Background," ZARUBEZH. RADIOELBTRONIKA, 1967, No 11, pp 59-72.

"The Application of Field Transistors in Hybrid Integrated Circuits Based

on Them in Radioelectronic Equipment," POLUPROVODNIKOVYYE PRIBORY, Ser. 2,
1975, Vyp l. p 38.

330

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L. S. Gutkin, "Teoriya Optimal'nykh Metodov Padiopriema pri
Flyuktuatsionnykh Pomekhakh" [Theory of Optimal Methods of Radio Receiv-
ing with Fluctuating Noise], Moscow, "Sov. Radio," 1972, 466 pages.

M. I. Msklyukov, "Inzhenernyy Sintez Aktivnykh Rc-Fil'trov Nirkikh i
Infrakrasnykh Chastot" [Engineering Synthesis of Active RC-Filters for
Low and Infrared Frequencies]. Moscow, "Energiya," 1971, 186 pages.

V. P. Loginov, "Walsh Functions and Their Area of Application," ZARUBEZH.
RADIOELEKTRONIKA, 1973, No 8, pp 73-101.

A. N. Kolmogorov, and s. F. Fonin, "Elementy Teorii Funktsiy i
Funktsional'nogo Analiu" [Elements of the Theory of Functions and Func-
tional Analysis], lbscow. "Nauka," 1971, 436 pages.

Luks and Dreyk, "A Simple Adaptive Machine for Detecting Failures,"
zasussza. nanxostxraoule, 1968, No 6, pp 65-74.

V. M. Loginov, G. V. Tsepkov, and P. I. Chinayev, "Bkonomicheskoye
Kodirovaniye" [Economic Coding]. Kiev, "Tekhnika," 1976, 173 pages.

P. I. Sochivko, "Elektricheskiye Modeli Neyronov" [Electrical Models of
Neurons], Moscow-Leningrad, "Energiya," 1965, 87 pages.

V. I. Kiy, and G. F. Kolesnikov, "Funktsional'noye Modelirovaniye Nervnoy
Sistemy" [Functional.Mode1 of the Nervous System], Moscow, "Meditsina,"
1969, 236 pages.

Ya. V. Tsypkin, "Osnovy Teorii Obuchayushchikhsya Sistem" [Fundamentals
of the Theory of Learning Systems], Moscow, "Nauka," 1970, 251 pages.

3. Katts, "Nerv, Myshtsa, Sinaps" [Nerve, Muscle, Synapse], Moscow, "Mir,"
1971, 166 pages.

N. I. Chinayev, K. A. Ivanov-Muromskiy, A. D. Ryabinin, et a1., "Trans-
formation of Continuous Functions Using Artifical Neuron Nets," KIBBRNBTIKA
I VYCHISL. TEKHNIKA, 1970, Vyp 4, pp 131-139.

A. M. Shkvar, A. I. Shevchenko, D. l. Chus', and A. A. 511an, "Complete
Monitoring of Dynamic Systems Using Neuron Structures," in "Neyrobionika"
[Neurobionics], Kiev, ”In-t Kibernetiki AN USSR," 1974, pp 77-81..

A. D. Ryabinin, 0. A. Nezhivov, A. M. Shkvar, et a1., "Oomarison Devices

of Automted Monitoring Systems Based on Neuron Elements," in ibid. ,
pp 72-77.

c. R. Paul, and R. H. Koch, "0n Piecewise-Linear Basis Functions and
Piecewise-Linear Signal Expansions," IBEE TRANS. ACOUST. SPEECH AND SIGNAL
PROCESS, 1976, 22, No la, pp 263-268.

To Chapter 7.

1.

N. P. Bekhtereva, P. V. Bundzen, and Yu. L. Gogolitsyn, "Mozgovyye Kody
Psikhicheakoy Deyatel'nosti" [Brain Codes of Meantal Activity], Leningrad,
"Nauka," 168 pages.

331
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

10.

11.

12.

13.

lb.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.. N. Pitaner. "Biologicheakiye Sisteay" [Biological Systems], Moscow,
"Nauka," 1977, 135 pages.

1’. S. Grodings, "Control Theory and Biological Systems," New York-London,
1963, 253 pages.

P. V. Bundzen, and B. H. Shishkin, "Study of the Organization of Auto-
regulatory Processes in the Activity of the Cerebral Cortex," in
'Nekotoryye Problemy Biologicheskoy Kibernetiki" [Some Problems of Biologi-
cal Cybernetics], Leningrad, "Nauka," pp 38—43.

K.A. lvanov-Muromskiy, "Samoregulyatsiya Colovnogo lbzga" [Self-Regulation
of the Cerebral Cortex], Kiev, "Nauk. Dunks," 1971, 248 pages.

F-Grodings, "'l‘eoriya Regulirovani'ya i Biologicheskiye Sistemy" [Regulation
Theory and Biological Systems], Moscow. "Hir," 1966, 25!. pages.

K.K. Anokhin, "Biologiya i Neyrofiziologiya Uslovnogo Refleksa" [Biology
and Neurophysiology of the Conditioned Reflex], Roscow, "Heditaina,"
1968, 5107 pages.

V.V. Trubachev, and P. B. Suvorov, "Study of the Neurogenic Mechanisms
of Self-Regulation of the Functional State of the Brain Using External
Feedback," in "Nekotoryye Problemy" op. cit., in lo, pp 63-510.

L.Hilsum, "Analiz Biologicheskikh Sistcm Upravleniya" [Analysis of Biologi-
cal Control Systems], Hoscou, "Mir," 1968, 501 pages.

N.N- Peysakhov, "Samregulyatsiya i Tipologicheskiye Svoystva Nervnoy
Sisteny" [Self-Regulation and Typological Characteristics of the Nervous
System], Kazan', "Izd-vo Kaz. Un—ta," 1971;, 252 pages.

0.11. Henitskiy (editor). "Ocherki Prikladnoy Neyrokibernetiki" [Essays
on Applied Neurocybernetics], Leningrad, "Heditsina," 1973, 232 pages.

N.N. Savilevskiy, "Theoretical and Physiological Methods of Controlled
Experimentation as a Method of Systems Analysis," VOPR. KIBERNBTIKI, 1975,
Vyp 26, pp 113-119.

N.K. Haslov, V. 0. Ostrovskiy, and V. B. Slezin, "Short Survey of the
Basic Characteristics and Properties of Biological Control Systems,"
in "Nekotoryye Problenry" op. cit., fn 1., pp 13-21.

K. A. Ivanov-Muromskiy. "Self—Regulatory Processes of the Cerebral Cortex
in Different Functional States," PROBL. NEYROKIBBRNETIKI. 1974, 5,
Part 2, pp 66-78.

0. lager, "Self-Regulation mechanisms in Cortical—Subcortical Relations,"
in "Refleksy Golovnogo Hozga" [Reflexes of the Cerebral Cortex], Moscow,
1965, pp 218-226.

P. V. Bundzen, "Self-Regulation of the Information Control Functions of
the Human Cerebral Cortex," author's abstract of dissertation for the
degree of doctor of nedical sciences, Leningrad, 1976, 27 pages.

332
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
16.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ye. A. Voytinskiy, and V. A. Pryanishnikov. "Study of the Brain as a
Self-Regulatory System to Record the 386 during Afferent Stimulation,"

in "Tez. Dokl. 22 Nauch.-Tekh. Kon£., Posvyshchen. SO-letiyu Sov. Vlssti
i Dnyu Radio" [Abstracts of Reports at the 22nd Scientific-Technical Con-
ference, Dedicated to the 50th Anniversary of Soviet Power and Radio
nay]. Leningrad, 1967, p 1.2.

A. A. Genkin, D. P. Danilin, and L. P. Latash, "The Level of Assymetry
of the Phase Length of Oscillations in the EEG of a Narcolepsy Victim,"
ZHURN. VYSSH.NERV. DEYATBL'NOSTI, 1968, 18. No 1, pp 87-103.

P. Flory, B. Steresky-Holanki, and U. Hofy, ”Observatii Asupra Homeo-
stazici Neuro-Psihice," ST. CERC. PIZIOL., 1966, 11, No 6, pp 335-348.

6. I. Polyakov, "0 Printsipskh Neyronnoy Organizatsii Mozga" [Principles
of Neuron Organization of the Brain], Moscow, "Izd-vo Mosh. Un-ta,"
1965, 166 pages.

"Teoriya i Praktika Avtomaticheskikh Sisten" [Theory and Practice of Auto-
mated Systems], Moscow, "Nauka," 1964, 243 pages.

V. M. Khayutin, "Development of Ideas of the Function of the Cardio-
Phthalic Zones and the Synocarotid Zones," PIZIOL. ZHURN. SSSR, 1967.
No 12, pp 1669-1475.

A. A. Ukhtomskiy, "Sobr. Sochineniy" [Collected Works], 6 Vol, Leningrad,
1954, Vol 5, 262 pages.

N. M. Amosov, V. A. Lishchuk, S. A. Patskina, et al., "Samoregulyatsiys
Serdtss" [Self-Regulation of the Heart], Kiev, "Nauk. Dunks," 1969,
160 pages.

K. A. Ivanov-Muromskiy, and Yu. V. Parsmonov, "Shlyakhi Realizataii
Sklsdnikh Biotekhnichnikh Sistsm" [in Ukrainian], VISN. AN USSR, 1972,
Mo 11, pp 33-40.

6. I. Sidorenko,’Kibernetika i Terapiya" [Cybernetics and Therapy],
Moscow, "Hanks," 1970, 191 pages.

P. V. Bundzen, and A. S. Tsukerman, "Use of the Principle of Biocontrol
in Neurophysiological Research," in "Metody Klinicheskoy Neyrofiziologii"
[Methods of Clinical Neurophysiology], Leningrad, "Nauka," 1977,

pp 317-340.

V. M. Akhutin, "The Principles of Construction of Complexes for Continuous
Monitoring of the Human Organism and Automatic Normalization of Its
States," in "Bioeletricheskoye Upravleniye. Chelovek i Avtomaticheskiye
Sistemy: Tr. Mezhdunar. Simpoz. po Tekhn. 1 Biol. Probl. Upr. (Yerevan,
24-28 Sent. 1968)" [Bioelectric Control. Human Beings and Automatic Sys-
tems. Proceedings of the Symposium on Technical and Biological Control
Problems (Yerevan, 24-28 September 1968)], Moscow, "Nauka," 1970,

pp 519-533.

333

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

29. P. V. Bundzen, and A. V. Chubsrov, "Theoretical Prenises and Ways to Use
Functional Modeling in Neurophysiology,“ in "Modelirovaniye v 31010311 1
Heditsine" [Modeling in Biology and Medicine]. Leningrad, "Heditsins,
1969, pp 97-106.

30. A. H. Zingernan, D. H. Henitskiy, and L. S. Khachstur'yants, "Self-
Orgsnization of the Sensonotor Functional System under Conditions of

Feedback Delay (Visual Afferentation from Results of Activity)," USPBKBI
FIZIOL. NAUK, 1976, No 3, pp 59-81.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Naukova dulka", 1980

11 , 176
C50: 8156/1636

-END-

334

FOR 0510“. USE ONLY