APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100030012-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8309

6 March 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 13/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items us as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
ciea, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGH‘ MRS AND RBGUIATIONS consume 0“!!th OP
lWl‘ERlALS ”PRODUCED “£33m REQUIRE 11W! DISSEHDMTION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED POROFPICIAL USE ONLY.
-. I. Dir-u 0 MI.
l. 6.1."... on

TRANSLlii'lUNS 0N ussu Si: li-iNCI-i AND TECHNOLOGY - PHYSICAL . .

SCIENChS AND TFCIINUUXW, (POUO 13/79) —
_ " "”'°'"" “""w‘" ""

No.
'- I'I'llculilr, (hp-wanna Nam- aIJ AJdn-u 1.. _oktl "rook/'0“ “III No.
Joint Fublications Research Service

moo north cub. “.d

Arlington. Virginia 22201
H. woman: (Manhattan New and Wu“ u, gym“ “’7'" . Pelied
ov

     
    
   
   
   

As above

lo. \I- 'l I- I‘

hc report contains information on aeronautics; astronomy and astrophysics;
atmospheric sciences: chemistry: earth sciences and oceanography; electronics
and electrical engineering; energy conversion: materials; asthenatical
sciences: cybernetics. computers; nechanical. industrial, civil, and asrine
engineering; methods and equipaent; nissile technOIOBY: navigation.
communications. detection.and countersesaures. nuclear science and technology:
ordnance; physics; propulsion and fuels: space technology; and scientists

and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

   
      
  
    
   
  
  
   
 
    
      
   

. k- \ I-nh .ml Ihu eon-u Muir». 0. Il- uni-nun
USSR Electronics Missile Technology
Aeronautics Electrical Engineering Navigation and
Astronomy Energy Conversion Communications
Astrophysics Materials Detection and
Atmospheric Sciences Mathematics Counter-assures
Chemistry Mechanical Engineering Nuclear Science and
Computers Civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetics Industrial Engineering Ordnance
Mnrth Sciences Marine Engineering Physics
Oceanography Methods Propulsion and Fuels
In. M. unh- I . Hp. :14 ml“. 1.1-: .

Equip-ant Space Technology

  

'h "h|llir“ﬁw~r 01.03.04,07,08.09,[0.11.12.13.14,16,17.18.19.20.21.22

_.
IO. M ul a-Iluy 'inle m M

For official Use Only. Limited
Number of Copies Available Frau JPRS

. "nee-.1...“ son 1 sun

 

 
  
 
      

    

runs was my at ntnooucw "“°"‘°‘ ""‘""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPM L/E
6 March

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(rouo 13/79)

Coursu‘rs
CBOPHYSICS. ASTRONM AND SPACE

New Method of Hsve Front Restoration
($.13. Andrenko, st 01.; DOKIADY AKADEHII NAUK $88!!

18 Jul 78) oeossoseseooeoeooossseoooeeooooosssoooseooso

PHYSICS

Status. Prospects of Holography with nurse-Dinensionsl
Recording

(Yu. N. Denisyuk: VES‘I'NIK AKADMII NAUK 8888. No 12,

1978) coo.oooeeocsoooeooooooooooooooooooossoooosoosoooe

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

List of Csndidste lie-here. Corresponding Hes-hers of USSR
Academy of Sciences
(VBSTNIK Ammu NAUK SSSR. Feb 79)

P081. [CAT IONS

Methods of lnveetigst ins Stability of Nuclear. Reactors
(V .D. Goryachenko; H2100? ISSLEDOVANIYA US‘I‘OYCIIIVOSTI
YADBRNYIO! REAK‘I‘OROV, I977) ............................

Electronic Characteristics end Electron-Phonon Interaction
of Superconducting Hotels and Alloys
(11.6. Besov; TRUDY ORDENA LENINA PIZICHESKOOO
INSTITUTA IHENI P.N. LBBBDEVA AKADBIII NAUK SSSR,
V0182. 197s) .00.....0OOOOOOOOOOIOOQCOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

Kinotic Effects in Bloctron-Photon Systems in a Laser
Enisaion Field
(Elerlansh Pstrovich Sinyavskiy: KINETICRESKIYB
1mm V nmnon-muomm 8131mm! V POLE
“2W IzwcﬂmnA. 1976) O...OOOOOIIIOOOO'OOOIOOOIO

Kinetics of Sinple Oscillation Theory Models
(N.G. Basov; mum ORDENA LBNINA FIZICHBSKOGO
INSTITUTA m. P.N. LBBBDBV AN 888R: KINBTIKA nosmm
MODEL“ moan KOLBMNIY. 1976)

Thsml Physics of Put-Neutron Reactors and lleat-Kxchange
Equiplent
(v.3. Nesterenko. et al. ; BYSTRYYB RBAK‘IORY I
TBPLOOUHZNNYYB APPARATY ABS 8 DISSO‘I‘SIRUYUSIICHIH
anmstan’ 1978) O....00...OOOOCOOOIOOUOOCCOOOOOOO

Aerodynamic Acoustic Research

(AN. Rinskiy-Korsskov; WSTINO-ABRDDINANICNBSKIYB
IssLvaNIYA' 197s) 0...0IOOOOCOCICOOCCCOOOOOOOO0.0...

'Kivtaat‘ Finely Granular Couple: Sulfide-Ore Processing
System Described

(TSVE‘I'NYYB NETALLY, No 12, 1978) ......................

List of Soviet Articles Dealing with prosits Materials
(cosuonswm KMTB‘I‘ sowm mmsnov sssn P0
mm 1: 1mm. mam mun sssa. SIGNAL'NAYA
Imamrsru, xomoznsxoma mmum, No 20. 1978).

Theory and Application of Suiconductor Laser
(Ole; Vlndhirovich Bogdanksvich. at al. ; POLUPROVOD-
"Imme mm...1976) 0.00.!0..IOOOOOOOOOIOOODOIOOOOOO

- b -
FOR ontcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS. ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

’ UDC 621.385:530.165.6:77
NEH METHOD OF HAVE FRONT RBSTORAIION

Hoacou DUKLADY AKADEHII NA“! 8833 in Ruaaian Ianuacript received 18 Jul 78
Vol 244 No 1,1979 pp 83-35

[Article by 8. D. Andrenko. acadenician of the Ukrainian SSR Acadeny of
Sciencaa: A. Ya. Uaikov. and V. P. Sheatopalov, Institute of Radio Phyaice
and Blectronica of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciencea. Khar'kovl

[Text] It ia known [1.2] that obtaining a hologram ia eaaentially the cane

aa recording an interference pattern formed aa a reault of the aupcrpoaition
of two uavea: the reference and auhject coherent with it. ecattered on the
inveatigated object. The photographic plate located in the region of in-
teraction of the vavea ia a diffraction grating after expoaure and proceaaing.
For reproduction (reatoration) of the auhject wave. the photographic plate
(hologran) ia located at the acne place and in the aane orientation aa for

expoaure. and a trananittad wave identical to the reference wave ia directed
at it.

The holograaa exiating at the preaent tine are diatinguiehed anong each other
by the aethod of proceaaing the photoaenaitivo layer (phaae, amplitude). the
depth of the fixed interference pattern (plane. volumetric). the combination
of phaae fronta (plane, apherical) aubject and reference vavaa (ehadov,
Preanel, Praunhofer and Fourier holograna) and the holography angle (axial
and extra-axial). In the reatoration phaae of an image contained in dif- ~
ferent holograna, the aane phyaical effect ia need. For there purpoaee.

the phenonanon of diffraction of the volunetric (plane or apherical) vavea

of the reproducing field on the hologram aa a diffraction grating ie uaed.

Let the tranenitted. uniforn plane wave be incident at an angle 0 on a dif-
fraction grating (hologram) vith period i. Aa in known [3], the field
acattered by the grating ia a auperpoaition of the departing plane wave,

the propagation directiona of on in free apace are defined by the expreaaion

1
san.-alnp+u-‘—. (1)

where n - 0. I). :2. ... ia the nunber of the harnonic of the diffracted
wave apectrum. A ia the wavelength in free apace.

1
P03 OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the cue of holographing two plane wavee interfering at an angle of
29. the relation between the period of the holograa. the wavelength and
the angle 0 ha the for-

K
sz' (2)

1...

 

which lakee it poeeible to obtain the formla
lln o.- (i+2n)sln 9- (3)

The analyeie of (3) indicatea that in the apectrua of the plane wavee acet-
tered by the hologren there are diffraction haraonica with author n - 0.

1:1. 12. (in optica they are celled the diffraction order). The harnenic
with the index n . 0 correeponda to the propagation of the incident wave.
For n - -1. 0-1 - -0. Thin neane that the given wave is propagated in pre-
cieely the ease direction ea the eubject wave with the for-ation of an
interference pattern. The raaeining valuea of n - l, 12, correepond

to the additional wavee which were aheent along the initial wavea. Bach
nulber of the diffraction harlonic correaponda to ite image. here nuleroua
ilegea occur. the euperpoaition of which on each other uaually ie undeaireble
and even hateful.

Thia aituation ie characterietic for hologrule with any dependence of the
diffracted field near the grating on the coordinate, except einuaoidal.

If the ecettered field (in particular. paaeing through the grating) is aub-
Ject to a einuaoidal law. the wavee are forned only with indexee n - 0.
11 (the Rayleigh grating). It is neceeaary to note that in epite of the
einueoidal diatrihution of the illuaination of the photographic plate. the
iaage of the hologran obtained etill ie not of a coapletely einuaoidal
nature. Therefore when reetoring real hologram by the voluuatric wave
lethod, the auxiliary wavea and. conaequently, the inagee Iuet unavoidably
exiat although their intanaity decreaaea with an increeae in the harmonic
nuaber. The auxiliary ilaga in the wave with the nuaber n - l hae the
one intenaity an the basic iaege obeerved in the wave field with n - -l.

Pru (3) it followa that for eaall holography anglee the harnonica of the
diffracted reatored epectrun are not eepareted (the axial hologrn). Notice-
able apatial aeparation of the reatored iaegea can be obtained only when
working with the extra-axial hologram (e 9‘ 0).

Thus, the nature of the phyaicel phenoIenon itaelf uaed when reatoring the
holographic ileum-the diffraction of the voluaetric wavea on the periodic
atructureanleade to the fact that along with the restoration of the axial
and inaginary images on irradiation of the hologr- by light fro. the
reatoring aource. a background light flux occura. Thia fact hae a aignificant
negative effect on the quality of the iaagea reatored by the indicated

nethod and lowere the efficiency of the reetoration iteelf. In order to

2
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

improve the diffraction efficiency of the hologram and decrease the number
of additional images when restoring the hologram it is necessary to use

the phenomenon of diffraction of the surface (nonuniform) waves on the
periodic structureuinterferogrn. Let us note that the effect of the
conversion of surface waves to volumetric waves has already been used in

the instruments of diffraction electronics [6]. for the creation of eleasnta
of integrated circuits and metrologic measurement unite of dielectric wave
guides. antenna areas in the Iilimeter and suhmilimeter wave bands [5]. in
integral optics for energy input (output) to the light guides [6. 7] and
also in the development of the logical elements of optical computers.

Formally. the solution of the problem of diffraction of a surface wave on

a grating is analogous to the case of incidence of a uniform plane wave on
this structure. It reduces to the boundary problem of diffraction of a plane
wave incident on the grating at the imaginary angle 6 - arcrin c/v . where

v. is the phase velocity of the surface wave, c is the speed of light in

a vacuum. The spectrum of the scattered waves occurring during surface

wave diffraction on a periodic obstacle differs theoretically from that in
the case of transmission of a plane uniform wave through the grating. Actual-
ly. on diffraction of the surface waves on the grating. superposition of the
nonuniform (surface) and uniform (volumetric) plane waves leaving the grating
and departing from it occurs. The directions of propagation of the harmonics
in free space are defined by the expression

ain0.--c—+n-,-'-. (1.)
U. I

In as much as for surface waves v. < c and c/v. > 1, the harmonics propagated
in the form of plane , unifora waves leave the array at the real angles only
if n is negative. This means that .ong the waves leaving the wave grating
there will be no waves with positive indexes and with n - 0 (the zero har-
monic corresponds to the incident wave), and the spectrum of the scattered
waves will be significantly more narrow than occurred in the case of dif-
fraction of uniform plane waves.

It is this fact that is defining when using the phenomenon of the diffraction
of surface waves on gratings for restoration of holograms.

Let us note that in the development of holography. the process of improve-
ment of the quality of the restored image is one of the nest inortsnt.

and it was realized by various methods. The transition from axial (D.
Cabor) to extra-axial holograms (3. Leyt and Yu. Upatnieks) made it possible
to achieve spatial separation of the real. imaginary and auxiliary images.
The volumetric hologram method (Yu. N. Denisyuk) was used to obtain a unique
restored image. Consequently, the use of the conversion of surface wave'

to volumetric waves for restoration of holograms is another version of
solving this problem.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l‘he problen of inage restoration in this case consists in the fact that

the restoring wave is introduced into the plane wave guide which is con-
nected with the hologram. The surface wave of the light guide diffracts

on the hologran eleaente (grating elaents) and in the spectrum of the
scattered waves defined by (6) the restored inage occurs. It is significant
that by selecting the deceleration characteristics of the light guide in
the case of ainple holograe it is possible to obtain a restored iaage in
the haruonic of the diffracted apectrun, the direction of propagation of
which coincides exactly with the subject wave during exposure.

The schematic of the realization of the phenomenon of diffraction of surface
waves on periodic structures is distinguished by sinplicity, reliability and
high efficiency. This fact has been established experinentally in the
ailineter (5) and optical bands (6, 7) for realization of devices for electro-
nagnetic energy output from planar wave guides.

31 BLIOGRAPRY

1. Kol'ydv. R: Berkkhart, K; and Lin, L. OPTICHESKAYA GOMGRAIYA
(Optical Holography), hoacow, Mir. 1973.

2. Strouk, Deh. WEDBNIYE V KNEW" OPTIICU I COLOGPAFIYU (introduction
to Coherent Optics and Holography), Moscow, Hir. 1967.

3. Shestopalov. V. P., et al. DIFRAKTSIYA VOLN NA RESRBTKAKB (Have Diffrac-
tion on Gradual). Khar'kov. Vishche ahkola. 1973.

6. Shestopalov, V. P. DIMSIMAYA 2mm (Diffraction Electronics).
Khar'kov, Vishcha shkola, 1976.

5. Sheatopalov. V. P.. Andrenko. s. 0.. et a1. Vian. AN URSR (Vestnik of
the Ukrainian SSR Acadeay of Sciences). No 1. 1977, p B.

6. Zolotov. Ye. BL; Kiselsv, V. A.; and Sychugov. V. A. UPN (Progress in
the Physical Sciences). Vol 112. No 2. 1976.!) 231.

7. Kogel'nik. c. UPN. vol 121, no 6. 1977. p 695.

COPYRIGET: lsdatal‘stvo "Nauka". "Doklsdy Akadenii nauk SSSR”. 1979

10865
050 : 8166/0806

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSICS

UDC 535 317.1
STATUS. PROSPECTS OF HOLOGRAPEY "II“ TREE-DWIONAL RECORDING

Moscow VESTNIK AKADEMII MUK 888R in Russian Ho 12. 1978 pp 50-51:
[Article by Corresponding Member, 08811 Acadew of Sciences Yu. N. Denisyuk]

[Text] The basic principle of holography. the recording of a proportional
wave field by its mixing with a predetermined reference wave. was proposed.
as is well known. by the English physicist D. Gator in l9h91. In essence.
Gabor discovered the ability of a photographic recording of a two-dimensional
interference pattern to reproduce the wave fields whose interference produced
the pattern.

It is known. however, that the interference phenomenon is not limited to a
plane: light waves interfere with each other in three-dimensional space
wherever they are superimposed, forming a so-called' 'standing wave." Essen-
tially. the ordinary interference pattern is a plane section of such a wave.
In 1962, the author of the present article showed that the imaging ability

of such a section is only a part of the complex of imaging abi ities possessed
by a spatial material model of the whole standing wave pattern . A general
diagram of this primary phenomenon of holography is given in Fig. 2.

d

 

Fig. l. Mechanism of the Three-Dimensional Hologram.

a. During recording. the antinodal surfaces d1. d2. d3... are formed where
the phases of the reference wave from source 8 and2 the wave from the object
0 coincide. h. during reconstruction, the photographic deposit which was
formed at the locations of the antinodal surfaces (d1, d2, d3...) reverses

5 0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the direction of mavement of the reconstructing wave where its phases coin-

cide with those of the.wave from the obJect. transforming it into the obJect
wave.

In the recording process, radiation from a lonochromatic source B (Fig. l-a)
falls upon an arbitrary object. The radiation scattered by the obJect (waves
H1, H2. . .). interfering with the radiation propagating from the source 8

(wave H.). for-s a stationary standing wave pattern (the antinodal surfaces
of these waves are designated d1, d2, d3...). A solid V. filled with a trans-
parent light-sensitive emulsion. is pieced in the standing-wave field. After
exposure and development. a structure whose density reproduced the distribu-
tion of light in the standing wave is formed in the solid.

We now turn to reconstruction (Fig. 1-1)). Suppose that the three-dimensional
model of the standing wave which we have obtained is illuminated with light
from a point source located in the same place as the reference source S dur-
ing the recording process. He note that in this case, in contrast to two-
dimensional holography. the reconstruction source need not be monochromatic:
an ordinary white light source m be used in reconstruction of three-dimen-
sional alogrsms.

we will begin by considering the interaction with the three-dinensional holo-
gram by the monochromatic component of the source radiation whose wavelength
is the some as that of the source which was used to make the hologram. It

is evident from the very concept of interference that at all the standing
wave antinodes. the phase values of the reference wave, and accordingly of the
monochromatic component of the reconstructing wave, will correspond with the
phase values of the light wave scattered by the obJect. Only the directions
of propagation will differ: while the object wave propagated from right to
left. the reconstructing wave propagates from left to right.

The effect of the three-dimensional hologram is precisely the fact that the
photographic deposit (metallic silver. transparent dielectric and so on)
formed at the antinodes reflects the radiation incident on it and accordingly
reverses the direction of propagation of the reconstructing wave. The re-
versal takes place where the phase of the reconstructing wave coincides with
the phase of the object wave. so that the hologram transforms the source wave
into a radiation wave reflected from obJect O. -The properties of the object
wove are reproduced through the entire cross section of the three-dimensional
hologram, and accordingly no false images are present.

Thus. each individual antinodal surface recorded in the hologram reconstructs
the wave function of the radiation scattered by the obJect. The effect of
the depth of the hologram is simply that because of light interference in
layers at different depths the hologram selects from the continuous spectrum
and reflects in the reverse direction only the monochroaatic component which
was used in the recording.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'he nt‘chunism of reproduction or the spectral content of the radiation by
means or a three-dimensional hologram is analogous to the mechanism of re-

production of the spectral composition by Lippcnann photography. and in its
general features amounts to the following (Pig. 2):

during recording of the hologram, a number of parallel reflecting layers do,
(11. d2... are for-ed at the intersections of antinodes; these are spaced at
a distance equal to half the wavelength X, of the light recorded in the holo-
gram. If the hologram is reconstructed by radiation of the same wavelength,
the light reflected by the different layers has path differences which dif-
fer by multiples of twice the distance between layers. i.e. A. , and by in-
phase addition forms a single reflected wave H. The process of wave addition
in this case is expressed by vector diagram a.

 

Pig. 2. Reconstruction of Spectral Composition by a Three-Dimensional Hologram.
If the wavelength of the reconstructing light corresponds with the wavelength
N of the light recorded.in_.the hologram, then the light reflected by layers
do, d . d (rays t. .l, ,1, ) is added synphasally and forms a reflected
wave a Siagram a expresses the addition process in vector form. If the
wavelength of the reconstructing light differs from x. , than the light re-
flected from layers do. d1, d2. .. is added nonsynphasslly and is canceled out
(diagram 1)).

If the hologram is reconstructed by light of some different wavelength A , the
path difference between layers will remain a multiple of A, but not of A .
Accordingly the light reflected from the different layers will undergo out-
of-phase addition and will cancel itself. The vector diagram of this process
is shown in Pig. 2-!»

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He determine the breadth of the spectral line produced from a continuous
spectrum by a hologram of thickness d. Let light with a wavelength man
fall on the hologram. It follows from diagram b that to bring the intensity
of the total reflected wave to zero requires that the phase difference be-
tween waves reflected by the first and subsequent layers should be equal to
2- and the path difference to X . Since each layer produces a an additional
path difference ah . and since the total number of layers on 2d/ A. , neglect-
ing the difference between A. and )c . the condition can be written as fol-
lows: Ah2d/ A. I A .

The total breadth of the line produced (from minimum to minimum) can be found
by multiplying AA by 2:
uni-m (I)

If a number of spectral components are recorded simultaneously in the three-
dimensional hologram. then during reconstruction each harmonic will react only
with "its own" monochromatic component. Thus it turns out that a three-dimen-
sional hologram can also reproduce a complex spectral composition of light.

In essence. the three-dimensional hologram is the most perfect type of image
known to us. In fact. it may be considered as a unique optical equivalent of
the object,-which behaves toward radiation incident on it in the same way as
the original obJect does. The basis of this circumstance is evidently the
fact that the structure of the three-dimensional hologram repeats certain
critical elements of the structure of the object. Quantitatively. it has
been possible to confirm such assumptions only for the simplest phase ogJects
with a vector distribution of the reflective index over the coordinates .

In general terms. the discussion which identifies the connection between the
structure of the simplest phase object with .‘ae structure of its three-dimen-
sional hologram is as follows (Fig. 3):

we express the function for the distribution of the dielectric constant of the
phase object as an expansion into three-dimensional harmonics whose orienta-
tion is specified by the wave vectors . A plane wave incident on an object
with a wave vector 1?. and a wavelength will interact only with the harmon-
ics whose spatial wavelength A and angle of orientation relative to the in-
cident wave 9 /2 are subJect to the Bragg condition:

i-zms en. ' . (2)
We consider the interaction of the incident wave with one such harmonic 7“.

The wave in reflected by the harmonic propagates at a specular reflection

angle 6/2 with respect to the wave vector of the harmonic In. It is easy
to show that the spatial wavelength A of the standing wave produced by ad-
dition of the incident and reflected waves is also subject to relation (2).

Thus it appears that the intensity distribution function for the standing
wave produced by reflection of light from the three-dimensional harmonic is
identical to the distribution function of the dielectric constant of this

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

haraonic. If we sum the radiation reflected by all harmonics. it is easy to
conclude that the structure of the standing wave produced by reflection from
the object. and accordingly the structure of the hologram iaitates the spatial
harmonics of the object with which the wave incident on the obJect interacts.

Thus in essence it turns out that in the hologram is inscribed the structure
of the object, with its space-frequency spectrum subJected to filtering. As a
result of this filtering. the structure of the object in coordinate space is
diffused and enters the solid in which the hologram is recorded.

 

Pig. 3. Relation of the Structure of the Phase ObJect to the Structure of its
Hologram.

A plane wave with a wave vector “8 and a wavelength It falls on one of the
spatial haraonics of the fourier expansion of the refractive index Motion of
the object. By coincidence of the conditions for reflection from the object
with those for interference of the incident light and that reflected by the
harmonic. the intensity distribution Nnction of the resultant standing wge
reproduces the distribution function of the refractive index of haraonic kn.

Subsequent investigations have shown that the phenomenon of representation of
wave fields by a solid interference pattern is of an even more general nature
than was previously supposed. It turns out that not only standing waves but
the traveling intensity waves produced during interference of light with vari-
ous wavelenghts are capable of correctly reproducing wave fields.

Fig. I: shows two plane waves V1 and V2 of light with wave vectors (1 and r2,
having different values. As a result of interference of these waves. an in-
tensity haraonic with antinodal surfaces designated H1. ‘62... is produced.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 1:. Ianging Properties of Traveling Intensity Haves.

A traveling intensity harmonic with characteristic vector} is formed by the
interference of two plane waves with wave vectors 11 and K2 and wavelengths
A 1 and A2. The antinodal surfaces of this harmonic are designated H1 and
$172. If on a travelinyaterial model of this harmonic is incident one of the
waves that formed it. 1 for example. it is transformed into the second wave
of the pair. e.g. Y2 The apparent violations of the law of specular reflec-
tion in the process are compensated by relativistic effects.

The orientation and wavelength of this harmonic is determined by t e wave
vector 1?. equal to the difference between the wave vectors K1 and . The
direction of movement corresponds to the direction of movement of t e inter-
fering wave with the larger vector value 1?.

Suppose that the intensity harmonic has been recorded in the solid medium so
that a moving system of reflectors H1. we... corresponds to the antinodal sur-
faces. It seems at first glance that such a system would not have imaging
ability if only because the difference in the absolute values of the vectors
46 and #2 would mean that the surface of the moving reflector would not be a
bisectrix of the angle formed by fronts v and V2. and accordingly would not
make possible the reflective transformation of these waves.

liovever. it turns out that the laws and geometry with respect to the distribu-
tion of waves V1 and V2 and surfaces 91 and H2... whichare characteristic of
the optics of moving media result in a mutual transformation of waves V1 and

Vi (with allowance for relativistic deviations from the law of specular reflec-
t on .

in fact. it becomes apparent on more detailed consideration of the process of
reflection of wave V2 from surface H1 that while wave V2 is propagating from

point u to point a located on the biaectrix of the angle formed by the inter-
fering waves. foint f of the reflective surface ‘01 reaches the same point In.

In other words. the wavefront V2 still meets reflector ill in such a way that

the mirror transformation of wave V2 into wave V1 is effected.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is not only the direction of propagation of the waves which is correctly
transformed by the system of reflectors ill. H It turns out that as a
result of the Doppler shift produced by movement of reflector "1' the frequency
of wave V2 is transformed into the frequency of wava V1. resulting in a com-
plete mutual transformation of waves V1 and V2.

Since any wave of complex form can be represented as a superposition of plane
waves. it appears that the law which we have been discussing is applicable to
the general case of waves of any configuration.

The ability of traveling intensity waves to represent wave fields is one of
the phenomena located at the interface of nonlinear optics and holography and
may have important applications in so-called "dynamic holography" for correc-

tion of the shape of wavefronts. This question will be discussed in detail
somewhat later.

An important stimulus to the development of three-dimensional recording holo-
graphv came from the work of the Americal investigator P. van heerden . The
basis of this work is the hypothesis of R. I. Berl'. according to which each
element of information in hmn memory is stored not in the form of a single
spatially localized cell. but in the form of a single excitation harmonic
filling the entire cortex of the brain.

'his method of information storage has a masher of advantages. For example.

damage to one or several parts of the brain would thus not result in the com-
plete disappearance of any part of the information. Van Heerden pointed out

that a possible analog of such an information recording process in optics is

the three-dimensional hologram and proposed to use it as a basis for the de-

velopment of optical memory.

Considering the three-dimensional hologram for the purpose of developing mem-
ory units. its unquestioned advantage over the two-dimensional hologram is

the fact that it can record a number of images simultaneously in the same
volume of photographic material (without mutual interference). Such an opera-
tion may be carried out by recording images at various wavelengths or with
different tilts of the reference wave. In both cases. the intensity harmonies
recorded in the hologram interact during readout only with the reference wave
with the direction and frequency which were used for the recording.

Van ﬂeerden's work also uncovered a property of the three-dimensional holo-
gram which is extremely interesting for computer engineering. that of carry-
ing out operations peculiar to so-called "associative memory." i.e. the pos-
sibility of extracting from masory the whole of a certain element of infor-
mation stored in it by presentation of a part of it. In general terms the
mechanism' of this phenomenon is as follows:

suppose that during recording the light from a complex object consisting of
the arrow 0 and the cross 02 (Fig. 5) falls on the holoy-am. The light from
each pair 0} points in such an obJect creates within the hologram V its own
specific spatial harmonic (harmonics p . 1, I in Fig. 5) which differs from

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the other harmonics by its wavelength and spatial orientation.

Suppose that during reconstruction, monochromatic light from only one part

of the complex object recorded in a hologram of this sort falls on the holo-
gram: for example. light from the cross 02. Since all the harmonics recorded
in the hologram di "or from each other. each or them can interact only with
light from the pair or points that formed it, thus transforming the light from
the first point or the pair into light from the second and vice versa. Thus
the light from each point or the cross also interacted during recording with
light from all the other points or the cross and with light from all points
of the arrow. so that the hologram on which light from the cross falls will
reconstruct the image or the entire cross 02 and the image or the arrow 01.
Thus the hologram. to which only a part of the situationuthe crosso-was pre-
sented. "remembers" that the situation as a whole included both the cross and
the arrow. This method oi‘ recording. which is distinguished by the lack of

a point reference source. subsequently received the name of ”nonrei‘erence

holography . "

 

Pig. 5. Creation of Optical Memory by Means of Three-Dimensional holography.
The record in the three-dimensional hologram has the properties of associative
memory. If a hologram with a record of some situation (e.g. the arrow 01 and
the cross 02) is reconstructed by part of this situation (e.g. by cross 02).
the entire situation is reconstructed. i.e. the images oi‘ both the cross and
the arrow. As regards the stored information. the hologram behaves as it the
intonation were located in spatially localized cells whose size is equal to
the wavelength A or the light used to read it and each or which contains a)
light-sensitive centers.

Van Heerden suggested the use of alkali halide crystals with colored centers.
which lose their color under the influence of light. as a medium for recording
three-dimensional holograms. he obtained an estimated value of 1013 bits/a3

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0)! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as a possible density of information recording in holograms recorded in such
crystals. which immediately attracted the attention of many companies develop-
ing computers to this subJect.

The calculations were based on the following considerations:

if the information is recorded in the usual manner in spatially localized
cells. using light of wavelength A . the smallest cell in which such record-
ing can be done is a cube whose edge is equal to the limit of resolution. i.e.
A . The size of the signal which can be reproduced by such a cell will be
proportional to the number 1 of light-sensitive centers included within it.
while the noise value will be proportional to the square root of the number
of centers. On the other hand, it is well known that the number of bits of
information which can be recorded in a memory system consisting of n cells

is equal to the nuber of cells multiplied by the base-2 logaritb of the
signal-to-noise ratio in a single cell:

C-s new? (a)

It can easily be estimated that when A 21 micron and the concentration of
dyed centers is 1015 per cm3. formula (3) gives a value of 1013 bits/cm3.

But in practice it is impossible to implement such a memory with recording

of information in localized cells: it is not known by what method the small
cells could be imprinted in the substance or what optical device could be used
to read out the signals recorded in them.

Van ﬂeerden pointed out in his paper that the number of phase cells character-
istic of holographic recording and the signal-to-noise value coincide with
the corresponding parameters for recording in spatial cells.

Actually. the number of phase cells is determined by the number of independ-
ent plane waves which can be recorded in the hologram. In angular terms.

these waves fill the entire half-space around the hologram. i.e. a solid angle
ABCD whose size is in the radian range (Fig. 5). while spectrally they fill

a range of wavelengths comparable to that used in recording wavelength A .
Each independent plane wave. corresponding to a single phase cell. is charac-
terized by an angular divergence equal to the angular resolution of the holo~
gram due Ma (see Fig. 5) and a spectral line width 3% equal to the spectral
resolution of the hologram (see formula (1)). Dividing the solid angle (on
the order of a few radians) by drab" and multiplying the result by the number
of spectral lines resolvable by the hologram Na- d/A . we find that the
number of phase cells in a three-dimensional hologram is equal to its volume
V divided by )3 . coinciding with the number of independent spatial cells which
could fit into the volume. A similar coincidence applies to the signal-to-
noise ratio.

The idea of using three-dimensions} holography for a large-capacity optical
memory was taken up by many scientists. but work in this area has still not
given the desired result. At the same time. it has stimulated the developent
of photographic materials for volume recording and has served as the basis for
development of a new field. so-cslled "dynamic holography."

13
NR OHIO!“ USE 03LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First. van Heerden's proposal to record three-dimensional holograms in alkali
halide crystals was tested experimentally. It turned out. however. that such
holograms had extremely low diffraction efficiency.since the recording was of
an amplitude character. Much more extensive possibilities were opened up by
the proposal to record three-dimensional holograms in electrooptic crystals.
especially lithim niobate. In this case the recording is particularly of a
phase character. there is not absorption. and the diffraction efficiency of
the hologram may reach 100$.

The mechanism for recording holograms in lithium niobate crystals is as fol-
lows: photoelectrons produced in the crystal under the influence of light
are redistributed both by the' effect of drift on the internal field of the
crystal and as a result of diffusion of electrons from illuminated areas of
the crystal to nonilluminated ones.

The nonuniform charge distribution in the crystal results in electrostatic
fields which in turn produce an uneven modulation of the refractive index.

In this process. because of the anisotropic nature of the median, the refract-
ive index modulation function can. generally speaking. be shifted relative to
the iinht distribution mnction in the interference pattern produced by the
modulation. This property leads to an extremely interesting effect. the
directed transfer of energy from one of the waves interacting within the hole-
gram to the other .

In general tense. the effect of this energy transfer between the object and
reference waves is as follows (Fig. 6):

suppose that two plane waves R and s interfere in the volume V of the hologram.
The graph of light intensity distribution in the interference pattern which is
formed is shown by a dotted line in the figure (left).

Under the influence of light. a harmonic of the distribution of the refractive
index n(x). shifted along the crystal axis c by an mount A x (solid line) is
induced in the crystal. If this shift corresponds to a change in path length
for the interfering waves equal to AIM. the interaction of the waves with the
structure of the hologram can lead to a significant increase in the energy of
one of the waves at the expense of the other.

Limiting ourselves to a first-order approximation. we can explain the essence
of the transfer of energy by means of the shifted three-dimensional grating as
follows:

we replace the harmonic of the refractive index by a system of semitransparent
reflecting surfaces zl. 22. 23. located at the maxims of the refractive index.
The process of interaction of waves with each element of this structure, for
example with reflector 23. may be considered as a complete analog of the
mixing of two interfering waves in the semitranspsrent mirror of an interfero-
meter. Each wave propagating away from such a mirror is the sum of two com—
ponents. For example, the wave s' is the result of addition of light from

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wave 5. which has passed through mirror 23. and light from wove R. which has
been rcflected by the mirror. Depending on the phase reintionship of waves

:: nncl R. these con'mnentu may he added or nubtrnctcd; one possibility is that
one of the waves. for example R'. is completely extinguished. and all the
energy passes to the other wave i this case 8'). Since the phase relation-
ship of waves R and s at the reflecting surface 2 depends on the size of the
shift along the x axis. the ratio of intensities of waves R' and 8' propagat-
ing away from the grating depends on the position of the grating relatiVe to
the interference pattern of the waves R and 8 incident on it.

 

Fig. 6. Transfer of Energy Between the Object and Reference Have by Means of
a Shift in the Grating Produced in Lithimn Riobate.

The interference pattern of two plane waves R and 8 (the dotted curve J(x))

is recorded in the crystal as a harnonic of the refractive index which is

shifted relative to it (the solid curve n(x)). When waves R and s interact

with this shifted grating the energy of one of the waves is transferred to the

other. At the right is a graph of the time change in intensity of one of the

waves. 8'. for shifts in two directions corresponding to changes in the direc-

tion of the optical axis C of the crystal.

The dynamics of the process of redistribution of the energy between two waves
as they interact with the lithium niobatc crystal is shown in the graph on the
right of Pig. 6.

The solid line corresponds to the case in which the intensity of s' is in-
creased during reconding of the hologram, while the dotted line represents
the case in which the direction of the optical axis c of the crystal. and ac-
cordingly the direction of shift of the reflective index grating. changes in
the opposite direction and the energy passes from wave 5 to wave R.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

This effect is by no means the only one observed during experimental record-
ing of holograms in lithium niobate crystals. but it became the point of de-
parture for development of a new direction of three-dimensional holography.
so-called "dynamic holography." Interest in investigation of th.s subJect
arose as a result of M. 8. Soakin's proposal to use the energy redistribution

effect of diffraction in a shifted grating for correction of the shape of
laser light wavefronts.

It can in fact be shown that if an irregularly-shaped intensity wave from a
tunable laser is introduced into a light-sensitive medium V at the same time
as a weak-intensity, correctly-shaped wave 8. by producing a shift in the
structure of the hologram relative to the structure of the interference pat-
tern amounting to a quarter wave all the energy of wave R can he transferred
to wave S (Fig. 7). The final result of this process will be the transforma-
tion of the wave with the irregularly-shaped wavefront into the regular wave.

 

———I

Fig. 7. Correction of the Shape of a Laser wavefront Using a Dynamic Shifted
Three-Dimensional Hologram.

a weak wave of correct shape 8 and a strong irregular laser wave R fall on a

three-dimensional light-sensitive material V with real-time reaction to light.

In the crystal is formed a hologram which is shifted a quarter wavelength

relative to the interference pattern corresponding to it. This hologram

transforms the irregularly-shaped wave R into the correct reguler wave 8'.

It is essential that such an operation narrow the spectral composition of the
radiation while it corrects the wavefront. As was explained previously. the
imaging abilities of the hologram extend to the case of traveling intensity
waves when the frequencies of the interfering waves are different. Accord-
in81Y. if wave s is monochromatic and wave R has a complex spectral composi-
tion. a number of traveling gratings are formed in the hologram. and these

transform the spectral components of wave R into the narrow monochromatic com-
ponent of wave 8.

A theoretical analysis of these possibilities conducted by D. I. Stasel'ko
and V. G. Sidorovich using as an example the case of mutual transformation

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of two plane waves rith allowance for the dynamic character of interaction of
light with the hologram showed that one of the plane waves can indeed be con-
verted into the other with high efficiency. Later. howeVer. it was found
that this process had been treated previously in other terms in nonlinear op-
tics.

Thus the development of holograpmr and nonlinear optics is leading to their
conJunction and the resulting formation of the new method of dynamic holo-
graphy. The contribution of holography to this process is that it gives the
possibility of converting light not only in terms of spectral composition but
also in terms of the spatial configuration of the wavefront.

He shall consider further the problems in development of a theory of three-
dimensional holograms. Thus far we have not made explicit use of so-called
"kinematic theory." which neglects extinguishsent of the reconstructing wave
as it passes through the thickness of the hologram and secondary interaction
of the reconstructed wave with the structure of the hologram. Hhile it cor-
rectly describes the basic mechanism of the three-dimensional hologram. this
theory does not offer any quantitative relationships. In particular. it can-
not be used to calculate the so-cslled "diffraction efficiency” of the holo-
gram. i.e. the relationship between the light flux incident on the hologram
and the light flux which forms the image reconstructh by it.

A knowledge of the laws governing diffraction efficiency and the parameters on
which it depends is extremely important in the selection of photographic mater-
ials to be used for the making of the hologram and in the development of pro-
ceases for preparing the materials. For this purpose. a certain arbitrary
quantity. the diffraction efficiency of the simplest spatial grating produced
by recording the interference pattern of two plane waves. is used as the char-
scteristic of the photographic material. To solve this extremely important
problem. 1!. Kogelnik proposed the so-called "coupled-wave theory." which made
it possible to determine rather accurately both the diffractéon efficiency

and some other parameters of the simplest types of holograms .

We consider the process of recording and reconstruction of the simplest type
of holographic grating.

Suppose that two plane waves 3 and g have been recorded in the hologram. As
a result. a haaonic phase grating. a system of plane layers d1. d . d3....
with a variable refractive index. have been formed in the media (ﬂig. 8).

If one of the plane waves which formed the structure. 3- for example. falls on
the structure. according to the assusptiona of the kinematic theory this wave,
passing through the hologram without attenuation. will be transformed inside
it into the wave 3. The reconstructed wave will leave the hologram without
interacting with its structure.

The coupled-wave theory introduced some extremely tural refinements into
these assumptions. Clearly the reconstructed wave reacts with the structure
until it leaves the holggram and accordingly is partial egnverted into wave
K' (Fig. 8).while wave B in turn is converted into wave (3') and so on.

17
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB 62".?

 

Fig. 8. Coupled-Have Theory.

The holographic grating formed by waves R and S is reconstructed by wave R.
According to kinematic theory, this reconstructs wave 8. which leaves the
hologram. Coupled-wave theory allows for the fact that wave 5 in turn re-
constructs wave R (wave R'). wave R' again reconstructs wave 8 (wave 8') and
so on. Above is a graph of change of diffraction effectiveness with thick-
ness of the hologram.

Thus. on the initial incident and reconstructed waves are superimposed second-
ary waves which coincide with them directionally but differ in phase. The
result of addition of these waves is nontrivial.

For example, in the case considered. with a hologram thickness 2 all the
energy is transferred to the 8' wave. i.e. the diffraction effic ency becomes
equal to 1003. When the thickness of the hologram is further increased to
22. all of the enery passes to wave Wand the diffraction efficiency of the
hologram is equal to zero. and so on.

Using coupled-wave theory. Kogelnik showed that the diffraction efficiency of
a phase reflection grating approaches 100$ with sufficient thickness. with
an amplitude grating of the same kind. the efficiency cannot exceed 7.25.

We must bear in mind the fact that coupled-wave theory cannot be considered a
second-order theory of three-dimensional holograms. In fact. by its very con-
cept the hologram is an instrument for recording information about a complex
wave field which can be represented as a sum of a number of plane waves. From
this point of view. it is only for convenience that we can use the name of
"hologram” for a grating fonsed by the recording of an interference pattern
of two plane waves whose properties are treated by Kogelnik's theory.

Kogelnih's theory cannot be considered a theory of the elementary mechanism
of the hologram, the process of recording and reconstruction of two plane
waves. on the basis of which a general theory accounting for the laws of re-
cording and reconstruction of an arbitrary wavefront composed of a number of
plane waves might be constructed.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the first approximation this approach has. indeed, been mlly borne out:
since it does not take account of secondary scattering. the resultant field
may be represented as the sun of the fields of radiation scattered by the
individual gratings.

The purpose of the second-order theory is to account for the manner in which
radiation scattered by one grating reacts with all the other gratings recorded
in the hologram. In this case. the light field reconstructed by the hologram
can no longer be represented as a simple sum of fields corresponding to the
individual gratings.

One of the most fruitful paths of further development of the theory of three-
dimensional holograms is based on the so-called "dynamic theory" of X-ray dif-
fraction proposed by f'. Mid. This theory was first applied to analysis of
spatial holographic gratings by Ye. 2h. Sakkotsio. It was further developed
(for the recording of many gratings) in the works of V. V. Aristov and V. I.
Shekhtnan. The mechanism of interaction of light with the three-dimensional
hologram with allowance for the effects of the dynamic theory appear most
fully in the so-called "modal theory" of three-dimensional holograms pro-
posed by V. 0. Sidorovich.

In essence. the modal theory is based on the concept of a wave matched to
a periodic nonuniform structure. introduced by P. held. ﬁeld's theory suc-
ceeded in applying this concept only to the case of the simplest phase grating.

In Fig. 9. two pairs of plane waves. 8131 and 8232, are the matched waves of
the phase grating 0. Pair 51!! forms a standing wave pattern whose maxima
(solid arrows) coincide with t e refractive-index maxima of grating 6.

Pair 82R? forms a standing-wave pattern whose maxims (dotted arrows) coincide
with the distribution minima of the refractive index in the grating. Thus
the first matched wave propagates as if in a medium with a refractive index
nu, without alteration, while the second propagates as if in a meditim with
index of refraction “min' The effect of the grating is only that it changes
the phase difference of these pairs of waves. since the pairs are propagating
through a medium with differing refractive indices.

V. c. Sidorovich showed that matched wavefronts can be correlated not only
with periodic structures but also with structures formed through recording of
wave fields.

It follows that each three-dimensional hologram has a characteristic system
of wave modes matched to it. into which any wave which effectively interacts
with a threeodimensional hologram may be broken down. Each node passes through
the three-dimensional hologram as if through a medium with a specific refract-
ive index. The effect of the hologram is that it shifts the relative phase
difference between modes.

This approach. developed for the case of hologram recording in uplifying
media. made it possible in particular to give a quantitative interpretation

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the formation of a self-conJugate wave during reflection of light from a
so—called "Brillouin mirror."

 

Fig. 9. The Mode Theory of a Three-Dimensional Hologram

According to P. hald's dynamic theory of x-ray diffraction, it is possible
to correlate with a periodic phase grating 6 two pairs of waves matched to
it: the pair 8 R1, the maxima of whose interference pattern (solid arrows)
coincide with the refractive-index maxima of grating G and which behave as
if propagating unchanges through a medium with a constant refractive index
nu," and the pair 82112, the naxima of whose interference pattern (dotted
arrows) correspond to the refractive-index minima of the grating. An ana-
logous mode system may be correlated with a three-dimensional hologram.

let us briefly discuss the applications of three-dimensional holography which
have been implemented thus far. He should note first so—called "imaging holo-
grapw," whose aim is to produce spatial representations which reproduce the
complete illusion of reality in the objects represented.

The author was the first to state the possibility of using holograpw to pro-
duce such images in 1962. The first two-dimensional hologram, a three-dimen-
sional representation of chess pieces, reconstructed by laser light, was pro-
duced by Leith and Upatnieks in 196’s.

Subsequently it was found that imaging holography could be extremely conven-
iently developed by the use of recordings in three-dimensional media, using
for this purpose an arrangement in which the obJect beam was aimed in an op-
posite direction to the reference beam. These holograms make it possible to
carry out the reconstruction with an ordinary incandescent lamp. which is
extremely convenient in practice.

The "single-beam“ arrangement. the simplest system for recording a three-dimen-
sional imaging hologram. is shown in Fig. 10.

The light from the coherent source 8 illuminates the object 0 through a photo-
graphic plate 1’ to which a transparent emulsion layer e has been applied. The

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

light reflected by the obJect (wave H) is superimposed on the incident radia-
tion and forms in the emulsion layer of the photographic plate a standing-
vsve pattern which is fixed in the layer by developing.

 

Fig. 10. Single-Beam System for Fig. 11. Use of Three-Dimensional
Recording Three-Dimensional Imaging Holographic Copies of a Concave Mirror
Holograms. to ProJect Information into Driver’s

Field of Vision .

The hologram obtained in this way can be reconstructed by illumination with
an ordinary incandescent lamp located at the site of source S. The recon-
structed image is observed in reflected light and is in the same position
as the object during recording.

The quality of the reconstructed image in this case depends to a particularly
great degree on the characteristics of the photographic plate and the methods
of processing it. The clearest. images are given by holograms recorded on
improved Lippmann photographic plates. At present such holograms are fre-
quantly on display at various exhibitions.

Another important direction of practical application of three-dimensional
holography is the development of photographic optical elements.

The first three-dimensional holographic optical elements. duplications of
concave mirrors. showed that the hologram is capable of copuing the optical
properties of an object. Subsequently, as techniques for manufacture of
photographic materials improved, the reflectivity of such photographic mir-
rors was increased to 10%. and they found practical. application in various
areas of science and technology.

One of the most inportant applications of holographic mirrors is for project-
ing information into the observer's field of vision. A general diagram of
such a device is given in Fig. ll.

On glass 6, through vhich the observation is made, layer R with a stored holo-
gram of a concave mirror is applied. This hologram does not hinder observation.

2].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

since it reflects light in a comparatively narrow spectral range and is trans-
parent in other ranges. In the focal plane of the mirror is placed a tele-
vision tube '1‘. on which various types of information are displayed. for ex-
ample speedometer readings. The hologram-Iirror projects the marks corres-
ponding to this information directly into the field of vision of the ob-
server ii. who does not need to shift his gaze free the surroundings to the
instrument panel in order to know his speed.

Three-dimensional holograms as optical elements have begun to be successmlly

applied as the dispersing eleaents of optical resonators. for visual projec-
tion of three-dimensional images and so on.

It should be noted that the processes which occur during recording and recon-
struction of three-dimensional holograms depend to a particularly great degree
on the properties of the medium in which the recording is done. Accordingly
it is not surprising that the applications which have been successmlly de-
veloped have been those using photographic materials developed in the pre-
ceding years (Lippmann photographic plates. bichroaated gelatin and so on).

The development of a large-capacity optical menory and of devices for dynalic
wavefront correction require the development of new aedia: light-sensitive
crystals. photopolymers and various nonlinear aedia. work in this area began
relatively recently. but it is proceeding at a rapid pace and enables us to
hope for rapid progress in these applications of holography.

BIBLIOOMPRY

1. See D. Gabor. "Microscopy by Reconstructed Have Fronts.” PROC. ROY.
soc. (London). Vol. 1191 (193:9). p 1.52..

2. See Yu. N. Denisyuk. "On Representation of the Optical Properties of
an Object in the Have Field of Light Scattered by it." DOKL. All 888R.
Vol. 1M». No. 6 (1962). P 1275; and idem. "On Representation of the
Optical Properties of an Object in the Have Field of Light Scattered
by is." 01mm I srmosxorm. Vol. 15 (1963). p 522. Vol. 16 (1965).
p 27 .

3. 'I. I. Suhhanov; and Yu. N. Denisyuk. "0n the Connection Between the
Space-Frequency Spectra of a Three-Dimensional Phase Object and its Three-
Dimensional Hologram." OPTIKA I SPEK'I'ROSKOPIYA. Vol. 28 (1910). P 126.

h. P. J. van Heerden. "Theory of Optical Storage in Solids." APPLIED
omcs. Vol. 2. no. I: (1963). p 393.

5. F. 3. Chen; J. 1‘. LaMacchia; and D. 8. Fraser. "Holographic Storage in
Lithium Niobate.” APPL. PHYS. mats, Vol. 13. No. 7 (1968). p. 223.

6. 6. )i. Kogelnik. "Coupled Have Theory of Thick Hologram Gratings."
TliE BELL SYSTDi TECH”. JOURIML. Vol. ’18. No. 9 (1969). P 2909.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "ﬂanks". ”Vestnik Akadail ﬂank 8888". 1W8

83:80 . 22
C80: 1870 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

LIST OF CANDIDA‘TB m3”. WMDING MI!” 01’ USSR MIAMI? OP SCIKI'CBS
Hoacw VESTNIK WII NAUK $88!! In Mun No 2, Tab 79 pp 127-153

l‘l‘axt] Tho USSR Acacia-y of Sciatica. in accordance
with Saction 23 ot tha Chart", raporta the nun of
candidata Indian (acadaucima) an! cottaaponding
“an AS USSR pnuutod at the baaia of a notica
in tha now-pap" IZVSSTIYA of 5(6) Dania" 1918 by
tha cmciIa of scientific inatitntiona and higher
aducationai inatitutim. atata and public organi-
tationa. “an and cornapndin; new". of acad-
uiaa of aciaacu.

Cndidata Maia" (Acadnicina) AS USSR

apart-ant of Sauna-atica

Sit-«u. Anny Vaaii'yavich—comapmding “at A3 USSR
Guaynov. Altai Iahndarovicho-aeadnicim AS Autbaydthn SSR
Kuttikin. Aiahay Ivanovich-ocomapondiou Iaﬁar AS USSR
Iaont'yav. Alabay 'adomichueotuapondins “Ct AS USSR
lian'ahov, mtriy Yavuu'yavidt-cotnapondin; uﬁar AS USSR
Hiahchanko. Vanni, Iroiovicho-cornapndins “0! AS USSR
uovikov. Sanay Patmichucoruapoudina Iaﬁat AS USSR
Platonov. Viadi-ir Pactovich-oacaduicin AS laioruaaiao SSR
Siraahdiuov. Sudy Ithaanovich—acualician AS Uzbek SSR
Yabloaahiy. Sunny Vaavolodovich—cornapwdin; taint AS USSR

Dayan-ant of moral Phyaiu ad Altman;

Abduilayav. Gun “and Suit Ugly-coﬂaapondin; taint AS USSR
Abrikoaov. AIahaay Alauayavich—cornapondiu “01’ AS USSR
Alfam, Thom Ivnwich—cotmpondin; taint AS USSR
logo-010v. Aiahaay “annual—compounding “Ct AS USSR
Soriuvich. Nikolay Mahadmich—cormpmding nabar B USSR
Brandt. Sana Yakovuvich—uadadciaa AS Ukrainiu SSR

Vania. loria Iyanuiyavidb-acaduieim AS Ukrainian SSR
Gor'kov. lav Patmich—comapondiu; “01’ AS USS

23
TOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Davydov. Mahaandt Satgayavichnacadaaician AS Ukrainian SSR
Uaniayuk, Yuriy Uikolayavichuconaaponding lama: LS USSR
Rum. Yuriy Hoiaayavich-ocottaaponding nabar AS USSR

Krat, Vladiair Makuyavichucorraaponding “0! AS USSR
Liiahita. Yavganiy .‘iikhayiovicho-cornapmdin; aadaar AS USSR
insulin. Vladiair Vuil'yavichucornaponding aaﬁar AS USSR
Huaal'. 8va1'd Rudoi'fovidi—corruponding lama: AS USSR
mip'yu. Yuriy manyavich-écorraapondina aadaar AS USSR
Suianakiy. anrsiy Matol’yavidw-corraapomiing lam: AS USSR
SoboIav. Vino: Vikcorovichucorraapondins aadaar AS USSR
Troicakiy. Vaavoiud Saraayavich-ocorraapoadias saint AS USSR
Shal'nikov. mum: Ioaiiovich—conaapoodiu; aainr AS USSR
Shot. Yakov Shabaalavich-corraapondin; aaabar AS USSR

Dante-ant of Rachniu md Control Procaaaaa

Avduyavakiy, Vaavolod Sargayavichuconaapondins lawn AS USSR
Mtonov. 01a; Ronatmcinovidt-oacadaaician LS Ukrainian SSR
labanko, Ronatmtin vamich—conaaponding aadpar As USSR
Salotaatkovakiy. 01a; Nikhaylovich—conaaponding min-r AS USSR
lolotin. Vladiair Vaail'yavidn—corraapondins lain: AS USSR
Uyuahaana. Saoniy Sanayavich—conaapondin; aadur AS USSR
Satin, lav Alakamdrovicho-corraapondins uaﬁat RS USSR
Orisolyuk. Eduard Ivmovidt—conaapondiu; Iadaar AS USSR
Kraaovakiy. nab-1dr Arkad'yavich—cormpoodiu; lad" AS USSR
layinovich. Caoruy Vladiairovichuacadaaicim AS Ukrainim SSR
Ital-aunt. mum: Kriaupovich-oconaapoudioa Iain: AS USSR
Hal'nikov. Nikola, Pukof‘yavich—comapondia; aadpar AS USSR
Hoiaayav, Nikita Nikoiayavich—cornapoadina aadar AS USSR
Rania. Andra, Sanayavidt-corraapoadina aadpar AS USSR

Ruin. Yavganiy Atkad'yavich—conaapondin; mint AS USSR
Ukhocainakiy. Mtriy Yavgaa'yavidt-conaapondin; mm: as USSR
Piaatanko. Caouiy SumovidI-acadalicin AS Ukrainin SSR
Popov, Yavsauiy PavlovidI—cormpoadia; aaﬂpar AS USSR
Napalm, Canaan Samyavich—comapondiog “it IS USSR
Puaachav, Vladinit Saaaaovichncanaapcadin; ndat AS USSR
Rahaiuyn. mkaay Rufovidt-doctor of tadmical adaneaa. ptofaaaor
Manta", Valentin Vital'yavich—comapoadin; taint LS USSR
Guam”. Cori-it Cori-irovieh-comamdius lad" AS USSR

[Japan-ant of Canaral ad Tachnical Dalian-y

Kodsatkov. Rikolay Kmtntinovich—conaapoodiag “01’ AS USSR
ninachav. mm» Rinachavidw-cotraaponding lam: RS USSR
mkhaylov. Doria Hikhaylovich-ccormpondina “Or as USSR
Rankin. Nikolay Sanayavich—cotmpondina Iain: RS USSR
Rovikov, Sargay Sargayavich—comapoudin; at" A5 USSR
Patrov. Anatoliy Alabadmich-conaapondin; mm: as USSR
Puma. Randi, Nikolayavidb-comapondin; “at A5 USSR
Nikon. Saaid lautovich—cornapoudin; tam: AS USSR

26
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

noon-non: of Physical Chantry and Technology o! Inorganic Mauricio

Romanov, Petr lvonovichudoctor of cochnicol ocioncu. proton-or
Sui-y“. Yutiy mhmdtwicho-cornopoudiu ad»: AS USSR
Vocolin. Nikoloy Moeoi'yovichucornoponding “or AS USSR
Vohhonokiy. mum: Vuil'yovich-odoctor o! admin]. ocioocu. profuoor
zolotov. Yuriy nobndmieh-comoponding Inim- AS USSR
Ivanov. Viktor Yovun'yovichucotnoponding Into: AS USSR
Rounovokiy. ind Abruovich-«comopondios um: AS USSR
hum. Viktor Vyodnoolavovicho-cornupoodin. aim AS USSR
Kmayov. Mk0: Rioiiokh-odovich—corroopoodin; um: AS USSR
hiya-w. Vladilir mbmdrovich—comopoodin; "do: AS USSR
Nﬁiyov. Honk Nobiyovich—ocodolicim AS Uzbek SSR

Nikoluov. Gooniy Moumdtovich, cornopoudins ado: AS USSR
Pavlov. isor' Hikhaylovidincornopouding um: LS USSR
Polukhin. Poet Ivuovichuuoduicim AS Knuth SSR

Ruhotnikov. redo: Grigor’yovich—cormponding um: AS USSR
Rounkov. Put Origor'yovich—cornopondiuc nub" AS USSR
Soviukiy. Yovconiy Hikhoylovidu~cornoponoing mint AS USSR
Slin'ko. Hikhoil Govtilovidt-ocoruopondin; um: AS USSR
Tntiiov. Viktor Ivmovich-oocnduicim B Utralnim SSR

Shul'u, Nikhoil Hikhlylovich—cornoponding hint AS USSR

Donn-on: of Iiocho-iury. liophyoia no anti-try of Phyoiologicmy
Active (to-pound-

Skryobin. Cooniy Konotntinovich—cornopoodio; Inn-bu AS USSR
Tonkov. ivnn Mokomdrovich-ocotnoponding and" AS USSR
(in-INN, maul “crouch-«o‘er MS USSR

Donn-on: of Phyoiolosy

Mun-I. lun- uncovlclI—cornopondin; min: B USSR
llokhin. Nikoloy Nikolayovich—ndnr NS USSR
Pimym. lav Atmidzncornomdin; Iowa: AS USSR

Ugolov, Rick-and: HintoyXovidw-couuponom; “or A5 USSR
annov. Yovgoniy Ivmovich—udaor N8 USSR

Donn-n: of (zoology. Goophyoico no Gooehoninry

Madonna, Ufa mobqovich—ocoadcim AS mam SSR
logo-01w. Conni- Vuil’yovidI—Icodo-icin AS Bolomoiln SSR
Kopiukiy. Vladinir mundmich—comomaiog Indul- AS USSR
Hoi'nikov. Pml lvnavich—cornopondin; undo: AS USSR
Sonny", Yovmiy Hikhoylovich—eornopmdin; loin: AS USSR
Solmoko. Vino: Prokop'yovich—comopoodias “or AS USSR

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

Input-ant ot lliatory

Saalsuvnyy. Lyuboll: Girgor'yavich-docto: of hiato:ical acianua. p:ofaaao:
Yanayan. Saran nuanovicho-acadaaleian AS Ami-1 SSR

Zhilin, Paval Andnyavich—conaaponding Iain: AS USSR

Kin. Mahala Pavlovich—conaaponding Iain: AS USSR

loval'chaako. lvm Daitriyavieh-conaaponding Iadaa: AS USSR

Kmahuov. Andtay lvmovich-«omapoodins aadaa: AS USSR

Milouadov. Pat: Vladiliuvich—docto: of hiatorlcal aciancaa, putaaao:
Paahuco. Vladili: Tarant'yavich-coﬂaaponding maﬁa: AS USSR

Polyakov. Yu:iy Alakaandmich-«comapondin; Iain: AS USSR

Sa-cnov. Alan-Id: Hikhaylwichuconaapmdlng lam: AS USSR
Suﬁauada. Aliaoyha: Sadatovich—acadaaician AS Asubaydahm SSR
Tcharav. Sanay Alahaanamicho-docto: of hiaco:ical aciancaa. proiaaao:
napamihov. Sauay Pavlovichnconaapoudius min: AS USSR

Vain, Valancin Lavunt'yavich—comaponding Iain: A3 USSR

apart-ant of miloaophy and Lu

Atmaa‘yav. Vino: c:igo:'yavich-co::aapondiu3 Iain: AS USSR
Oviahiui. Dahanan Hikhaylovich—comapondinn Iain: AS USSR
lovchuk. Mikhail Tdfonovich-«conaapondins uﬁa: AS USSR
Oyaann, Taodo: ll'lchucornapondins min: AS USSR
Oaal'ynovakiy. Mikhail humich—corraapondin; and»: AS USSR
Spithln, Aloha-id: Gaoniyavich—comapondin; “a: AS USSR
Stapmyu. ‘l‘aolak Alabandmvich—co:mpondin3 Iain: AS USSR
Quin. Soda Alakamdmich—comamiin; uda: AS USSR

Dayan-n: of Reno-la

Mich. Paval Guaor'yavich-comapoudin; Iain: AS USSR

vacuum, Vladi-i: Alakaayavldr—conaaponding cada: AS USSR
Catmkiy. Lav Nadwim-ocouaamdin; uﬂa: AS USSR

Guaakov. Alahaand: Mtriyavich—docto: of acme-1c aciancaa, protauo:
Zaalavakaya. tat'yua Ivamr-comapoudins nda: AS USSR
Kudryavtaav. Avmaaiy Stapanovich—docto: of aconoaic aciancaa. profane:
uilaykovakiy, Abra- ca:aaiaovich-co::aapondin3 Ilia: AS USSR

Noam. Alaband: ll'icb—conaapoudia; Iain: AS USSR

Popov, Sav:il Kharitooovich-odocto: of «comic octane“. profaaao:
Rink”. Yavgniy ﬂakaiuovich—couaapandinx “a: AS USSR

Ryabuahkin. rim Vaail'yavlch-co::aapondiug “a: AS USSR

Sia'kov. Vladili: lvnovidP-docto: o! «anode aciancaa. pmfaaao:
Sladlwvakiy, Nihhall loaifovlch—eonaapcndin; Iata: AS USSR

Sunkist, Gamadiy Kikhaylovlch—comaponding um: AS USSR

risotayav. Tim: 'ri-oi’ayavieh—comapondin; uta: AS USSR

nun-av, Paval Alakaayavidtwconaapondin; Iain: AS Ukrainian SSR
‘l‘aagolov. Uikolay Madman-doctor a! acme-Sc aciancaa. profane:

26
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Uepert-ent of Litereture md Lmsuese

huh-in. Aiekeey Sergeyevicho-correepondin; newer AS USSR
zekhidov, Vekhid Yuiduhevich-oecede-icien AS Uzbek SSR
Lonidre. Georgiy Ioeitoviduucorreeponding neuter AS USSR
Merkov. Mrriy Pedomichucorreepondin; newer AS USSR
Pedounko, Nikoley Trotimicho-cornepondins “er AS USSR
Sheherbine. Viedilir Rodimovich—correepondin; Inter LS USSR

Siberia Drench

Borovkov. Aiekeudr Alekeeyevichncorreepmdin; neuter AS USSR
Voraciov. Hikheil Grigor'yevich—correeponding neeber AS USSR
Yerehov, Yuriy honidovidlucorreeponding ne‘er AS USSR
Ropryug, Veienrin Mnu'yevichucornoponding newer AS USSR
Rureteledu. Season Seunovicho-correeponding tuber AS USSR
Levrenc‘yev. Hikheii Hikheylovichncorreepondins uﬁer AS USSR
Oveynnikov. Lev Veeii'yevich-ocorreeponding ne‘er AS USSR
Shinhov. Inetoiiy liierionovich—correeponding Iednr AS USSR

endidere Correepondins Hetero AS USSR

Devon-en: of Rerheutiu

Adyen. Sergey Ivenovich--doctor of phyeico-Iecheneticel eciencee, profeeeor
Merton-ya. Ruben Vikrorovichudoctor of phyeico-urheuticel eciencee
Mdrienov. Anetoliy Nikoleyevich-cdocror of phytico-utheleticel science.
Anol'd, Viedi-ir Irouvich—doctor of phyeico-Ietheuricei eciencee. proleeeor
lekl‘nniov, Rikoiey “("70V1dI—IIOOSOI of phyeico-urhelericei eciencee.

pro eeeor

lelyeyev, Yuriy Kcuetutiuovich—doctor oi physico-uthenticei ecieaoee.
profeuor

Sogolyubov. Rikoley Nikoleyevich—doctor of phyeico-nerhenricel ecieucee.
profeuor

min. Alekeey Alekeeyevicho-doczor of phyeieo-urheuricel ecieneee, pmfeeeor
Yeti-av, Nikoley Viedinirovich—docror of phyeico-urheuticel eciencee.
profeeeor

Zhukov, Yevgeniy Peruvian—doctor of phyeico-nerheuticei eciencee. profeeeor
Zhurevlev, Yuriy Ivenovidt—doctor of phyeico-eetheuericel ecieacu, proiueor

Ibregi-ov. Ii'der Abduuovich—doctor of phyeico-eetheucicel eciencee.
profeeeor

n'u. Vledilir Alekendrovidv-docror of phyeico-Ierhenticei eciencee,
profeuor

Kereeeuhe. Anetoliy Alekuyevich-docror of phyeico-uthe-eticel ecieocu.
profeuor

Rreeaoeel'ekiy. Kerk Alekendmidw-docror of phyeico-ntheuticel eciencoe
proteeeor

Rudryevceev. lav Dmitriyevich-doctor of phyeico-Ierhe-ericel ecieaeee.
proteeeor

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIM. "Sf: ONLY

Hulov. Vlktor Pevlovfchndoctor of physfco-eetheeecfcel sciences. professor
Minionshchfkov. Vlsdfefr kahsylovfchndoceor of physfeo-Istheeeucsl
sciences, professor

mmeylov, Velenun Petrovfcho-doctor of physlco-setheeeucsl sciences.
professor

Ntkfshfn. Yevgenfy mkheylwfcM-doccor of physfco-eetheesucel sciences,
professor

Oleynfk. 01'3s Arsen'yevne-odoctor of physfoo-estheescfeel sofenoes. professor
Petrov. Vslenttn Vledflfrovfch—doctor of physfco-eethesetfcel sciences.
professor

mu. kator Alsksmdrovfchudoetor of physfoo-esrheestfcsl sciences.
professor

Popov, kator Ntholeyevfchudoccor of physfco-estheeettcel sciences

Prflepko. Aleksey Ivmovfch-doctor of physfco-Istheeeucel sciences. professor

nesheenyek. Yurfy Grfgor'yevfch—doetor of phyefeo-eethessucel sciences.
professor

Rosuov. Yurfy Anetol'yevfehudoctor of phystco-Ietheestfesl scfences.
professor

Sveehnfkov. Aleksey Georgfyevfchudoctor of physfco-uthesetteel scfenees.
profesor

Sevest'ynov. sorts Aleksmdrovfchudoctor of physfco-eetheestfcsl sctenees.
professor

aney. Yekov Grfgor'yeuchudoctor of physfco-estheeetfcsl scfenoes
Shorokhod. Aneeolfy Vlsdtefrovfch-«orrespondfng newer A8 Ikretnfen SSR
Solonntkov. Vsevolod Mekssyevfch—doctor of physfco-estheestfcel sciences
Sofronov. lvn Dentsovtch-odoctor of physfco-estheestfcsl sciences

Ul'ynov. Petr Levrent'yevlch-odoccor of physfco-estheesueel scfenees,
professor

OMIICIW. Ntkolsy Nikolsyevfch—doctor of physfco-Ietheestfcel scfenoes

Shfryeyev. Al'bert kaoleyevfchudoetor of physfoo-eetheestfcel scfenoes.
professor

Brdfnev. Perye Huchkeyevtch~doctor of pedegogfe sciences. professor

Deporteeot of Generel Physics ad Astrono-y

Avrorfn. Yevgenfy Nikolsyevfch-doczor of physfco-Ietheesclcsl sciences
Asrmovfch. Vledfefr Hofseyevfch—doctor of phystco-estheesucel sciences.
professor

Aksenov. Yevgenfy Petrovfeh—doctor of physfco-Ietheesttcel sclences, professor
Aleksmdrov. Yevsenfy lodeovfch-«doctor of physfco-estheeotfcel scfencee
Andreyev, Aleksmdr Fedorovfch—doczor of physfco-uthelstfcsl scfenoes
Mfsfsov, Sergey Ivmovfch—doctor of phyefco-Isthelstfcel sciences. professor
Afunes'yov. Alekssndr kaheylovfch—doctor of physfco-estheestiesl sciences
Afllss'yev, Vlsdfefr Aleksendrovfohudoctor of tedmfcel sciences. professor
Afrosfeov. Vedfe Vesfl'yevfch-odoctor of physfco-estheesucel sciences,
professor

AkhI-Iov, Sergey Alekeendrovfch-doctor of physfeo-Istheeetfcel sciences.
professor

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nsgduerev, Khschik Sukovichu-decto: of physice-Isehesecicsl sciences
Brsainskiy, Vledini: nerieovichndoccer of physice-uchensticsl sciences.
professor

Vevilev. Vikce: Serseyevichndoctor of physice-urheesricsl sciences. professe:
Vel’dner, Ole; Metel‘yevichudector of ceclmicel sciences. professor
Vsndik. Ores: Genrikhevichndocte: ef technicsl sciences. professor
Viktorov. lger' Alekssndrovicho-doctor of physico-nechsnericsl sciences
Veskruenskiy. Dmitriy lvenevichudecce: of cechnicel sciences. professor
Gent-oldie: Vsevolod I‘sliksovich-u-deccer of physice-sschenericel sciences
Oetrntsev. Ger-m Grigor'yevich-docte: ef physice-ssthenscicel sciences.
pro essor

Grebenikov, stgeniy Aleksmdrovichudecter of physice—uthenecicel sciences.
profuse.

6min. Psvel Lukichwdocce: of physico-nnthenecicsl sciences. professor
Gulysyev. Yuriy Vuil'yevichudoccer of physice-uchesscicsl sciences. professor
Gurevich. Aleksmdr Vikcerevich-c-docrer of physice—nerhessticsl sciences
nelsov. Yuriy Nikeleerichu-decter of physice-nethenecicel sciences. professor
Zhsbeunskiy. Hsrk Yefrenevichm-docro: of technicsl sciences. professor
aislesnyskov. Vledisi: Vuil‘yevich--dector of physice-Ischelsticel sciences.
professor

ateludev, Iven Scepmevichndoccer of physico-ssthenecicel sciences, professor
leveritskiy, Nikeley Vlsdisirevich-wdocror of physico-esrheueticsl sciences
Zsycssv. Geersiy Alskssndrevichudecce: of physico-seehe-eticsl sciences.
professor

Zekhsrev. Vlsdinir Yevgen'yevich-docter ef physice-Ietheleclcsl sciences.
professor

averev, Viceliy Mstel'yevichudecter of physice-sschesecicsl sciences,
professor

lvmev, Vikcer lvmevichndocte: of physico-Isrhesecicsl sciences. professor
lnshennik. Vlsdiuir Sergeyevich—docter of physico-nschelecicsl sciences
lndenbes. Vlsdilir L'vevichudecco: of physice-Ierlleleticsl sciences, professor
Kspitss. Sergey Pecrotichudoccor of physice-Ischessticel sciences, professor
Keplyenskiy. Aleksudr Aleksendrevich—doccer of physice-Ietheleticel sciences
Ksrlov. Hikelsy Vssil'yevich-doctor of physice-netheseticsl sciences. professor
Kielik. Hikhsil micriyevichudecce: of cechnicel sciences. professor

Kepylev, lvm Hikheyevich—docce: of physico—nrhesscicsl sciences

Kerniyenke. uenid Sergeyevich-decto: of physico-nschenscicsl sciences,
professor

Ker-er, Semil Borisovich—deccer of physice-Iethenecicel sciences. professor
Koduerov. Grant Yegorevichudocter of physico-Iethenecicel sciences. professor
Ku'nin. Arkediy DsicriyevicIr—docrer of physice-sschenscicsl sciences.
professor

Lerkin, Ansceliy lvmovich-n-dector of physico-necheleticel sciences, professor
um“. uikheil L'vevich—decter of physice-eechensticel sciences. professor
levinsen. leshue Ben‘yeninevich—decre: of physico-Ietheneticsl sciences

Letekhov. Vledilen Stepsnovich—decto: ef physice-sschenscicsl sciences.
professor

Lye-shev. Leonid Hikheylovichndocter of physice-utheucicel sciences,
professor

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hehorov. Glob ivanovich—doccor of physico-sechesnricel sciences. professor
Nuyrin. llorio Aleksandrovichndoccor of physico-nethesecical sciences.
professor

Hendel'shton. Sersey boonidovichu-doctor of physico-nerhesscicel sciences.
professor

Harov. Mikhail Yekwlevichndocror of physico-nechesaticel sciences. professor
Hssevich. Alla 6enrikhovne--doctor of physico-setheneticsl sciences. professor
Herveyov, Viktor Vesil'yevich--doctor of technical sciences. professor
Nikeclyen. Andrey honovichudoccor of technical sciences. profcoeor
Hiroshnikov. Hihhail hikheylovichwdoctor of technical sciences. professor
Horor. Vnsiliy ivmoviehudoctor of physico-sethesecicel sciences. professor
Nesiro. Andrey Antonovicho-doctor of physico-netheseticel sciences. professor
Nikol'skiy. Vyecheslev Vledisirovich-odoccor of technical scisncee.professor
Novikov. Igor“ Dnirriyevich~doccor of physico-netheneticel sciences

Periyskiy. Yuriy Nikoleyevicho-doccor of physico-secheneticel eciences

Ponin. Nikoley Alekseysvich-odoccor of physico-netheneticel sciences. professor
Persl‘. Vledisir idelsvichndoccor of physico-secheneticel sciencee. professor
Pecrun'kin. Vsevolod Yur‘yevich—doccor of technical sciences. professor
Pokrovskiy. Veleriy laonidovicho-doctor of physico-nechesecicel sciences.
profeesor

Pokrovskly. Yeroslsv Yevgen'yevichudoctor of physico-sethesericel sciences
Ponysrovskiy. Yevgeniy Genrikhovich—doctor of physico-secheseticel sciencee
Rabinovich. Mecvay Sensonovich-odoctor of physico-Iethesericel eciences,
professor ..

Rayeer. Yuriy Pctrovich—doccor of physico-secheseticel sciences, professor
Reshbe. Mail iosifovich-doctor of physico-Iethesecicel sciences. professor
Redakov. leonid Ivenovicho-doctor of physico-sethesecicel sciences, professor
Mhedu, Anri Alvroe'yevich-odoctor of physico-sachcsecicel sciences. professor
Savin. Anecoliy Ivenovich-odoctor of cechnicel sciences

Sobei'sen. Igor' il'ich—doccor of physico-secheseticel sciences. professor
Sobolev. Nikoley Nikoleyevichndoccor of physico-sechelecicsl sciences, profeseor
Stefeyev, Viceliy Ivsnovich-doctor of physico-setheleticel sciences. professor
Stel'sdth. liltrofen Pedoroﬁich-odoctor of technicel eciencss

Scepenenko, Igor' Psvlovich-doccor of tschnicel sciences. professor

Sceshenko. Nikoley Vledinirovicho-ooccor of physico-nethesecicel sciences
Srishov. Sency Nikhsylovich—doccor of physico-sethssecicel sciences
Sushchinskiy. Hikheil Hikheylovich—doctor of physico-sschesscicel sciences.
professor

Syrovecskiy. Semey Ivanovich-odoctor of physico-serhesstical sciences
Syunyeyev. Rashid Aliyevich-odoctor of physico-ssthelecicel sciences

Talenov. Viedinir Il'ich-odoctor of physico—ssthssscicel sciences. professor
“Rik”. 30d! Arksd'yevich-odoccor of physico-nsthesecicel sciences. professor
Tel-Hikeyelyn. Hikheil uonovich—correspondin; ssdaer AS Arsenien 38R
risofeyev. Viedislev Borisovich—doccor of physico-sethensticel sciences

Uckin. Ger-nan Hikhsylovich-odoccor of tedtnecel sciences. professor
Pebelinskiy. innuil Lszsrevichudoctor of physico-nethesecicel sciences.
professor '

laueykin. Hoieey Sensnovich-odoctor of physico-necheneticel sciences

Klusredzs. Yevseniy Kiriliovich—eceoenicisn AS Georgisn SSR

tsycovich. Vedis Nikoleyevichwdoccor of physico-sechesecical sciences

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dismoplekov, Nikoisy Alekseyeviclw-doctor of physico-nsﬂ‘eneeicel sciences
Shsfrin, Kusiel' Soloeonovich (Shlesovich)--doctor of physico-nstheneticsl
sciences. professor

Shocov, Aleksey Perrovichudoccor of physico-eechenecicsl sciences. professor
Shaynshleuer. Voi'f Benrsionovich—doccor of technicel sciences. professor

Dspsrtnens of Nuciesr Physics

Naov. Yuri, Georgiyevichudoctor of physico-sschesscicsl eciencss

Arousov. Boris Andreyevichudoctor of physico-nethensticol sciences

Beyer. Visdinir Nikolsyevich—doctor of physico-nscheneticsl sciences. professor
Vesil'yev. Arlen: Mstoi'yevich—docror of technicel eciences

Voroo'yev. Aleksey Alekseyevichndoctor of physico-serhensticsl sciences
Gershreyn. Senen Solononovich—docror of physico-sethonecicel sciences.
professor

hicriyevekiy, Vitsliy Pctrovichudoctor of physico-eechenecicsl sciences.
professor

Dolaoshein. Boris Mstol'yevich--doctor of physico-ssthensticsl sciences.
professor

loffe, Dorie Lezerevichudoctor of physico-netheneticsl sciences

Kedyshevskiy. Vlsdinir Georgiyevich—docror of physico-serhelsticel sciences.
professor

Kirshnifs, Devid Abruovichudoctor of physico-nsthessticsl sciences
Kirillov-Ugryunov, Vikcor Orisor'yevich-doctor of physico-nstheseticel sciences.
professor

Kolonenekiy. Andrey Aleksendrovich—doctor of physico-nsthcnecicsl sciences.
professor

Lepidus. Lev losifovich—docfcr of physico-Istheneticel sciences, professor
Liperov. Lev Nikolsyevichndoctor of physico-nschenericsI sciences

Nikol'skiy. 'Sergsy Ivuovichudoctor of physico-nstheeezicel sciences. professor
Novoehilov, Yuriy ViktorovidIo-doctor of physico-nsthensticsl sciences.
professor

Ogmesyen. aniy Tsolekovich—doctor of physico-nsthenericsl sciences

Ogloblin, Aleksey Alekseyevich—docror of physico-netheesticsl sciences.
professor

Psvlovskiy. Alekeendr Ivenovich—doctor of physico-secheescicei sciences
Polivenov, Hikhsii Konscnrinovich—docror of physico-nschessticel sciences.
professor

Polyekov, Aleksandr Herkovichndoctor of physico-nsthessticsl sciences

um. Vledinir Ivmovichu-doctor of physico-nechensticsl sciences

Ito-aw. Yuriy Aleksendrovich—docror of physico-nschsnsricel sciences, professor
Serenreev, Visdislsv Peviovich—doccor of physico-eethesecicel sciences

slsvnov. Andrey moneyevich—doctor of physico-nsthenecicel sciences

Solov'yev, Vedis Georgiyevich-doctor of physico-nethensticel sciences. professor
Solov'yev. Lev neitriyevich-odoccor of physico-Iechenecicsl sciences. professor
Solov'yev. mum Iosifovich—doccor of physico-esthensricsl sciences.
professor

31
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘l'lCIM. USE ONLY

Sudahyev, 01s; Igorovichudoctor of physico-ssthessricsi sciences. professor
Ternov. Isor' Mikhsylovich—doctor of physico-Istheseticel sciences, professor
Ter-Hsrciroeyu. Koren Avetikovich—doccor of physico-oetheseticel sciences.
professor

Minov. Mscoiiy Pilippovichndoeror of physico-ssrhesseicsi sciences. professor
Tyspkin, Aleksey Aislueyeivch—doctor of physico-sscneucicsi sciences. professor
'l'svkhsiidss. M'bert Nikiforovich—scsdeniciu AS Georgisn 85R

l'eynberg. Viedi-ir Yskovievicho-doctor of physico-sethelsticel sciences.
professor

Khriplovich. Iosif Benrsionovichudoctor of physico-sschesscicei sciences
Gluvilo. Ivsn Vesii'yevich-docror of physieo-ssrhessticei sciences. professor
Shspiro, loeif Solomovidl—docsor of physico-setheosricsl sciences. professor
Shussyev. Hikhsil Petrovich—doctor of physico-sethensticsl sciences

Depsrtsen: of Physico-‘l'schoicsi Probless of Energetics

Beiyekov. Viktor Pecrovichmdoctor of tedmicsl. sciences, professor
Bibsrssn. Leon Hikhsyiovich—doctor of technicel sciences, professor
Bogoeiovskiy. Vyecheelsv Nikoisyevich—doctor of rechnicel sciences, professor
Borovoy. Aleksmdr Aleksendrovich

lurgsdorf, Vledinir Visdilirovich—doctor of teunicel sciences. professor
Vinokurov, Visdisir Alekseyevich—doctor of technicsl sciences. professor
Voronin. Grigoriy lvnovich—doccor of cechnicel sciences. professor
Overdtsiceii, Irekii Grisor'yevich—correspondins sorter AS Georgien SSR
Goiovin. Igor' Scefmovich—doccor of reclmicsl sciences

Grigor'yev, Velentin Aleksendrovich—doccor of technicsl sciences. professor
Mrovskiy, Vitsliy Borieovich—doctor of rechnicei sciences. professor
Zel'dovich. Aleksandr Grisor'yevich—docror of technicsi sciences. professor
lvmovskiy, Gennediy Poeicho-doctor of technicel sciences, professor
Isotov, Serge, Petrovicho-doctor of cechnicsl sciences

Kopyloev, Igor' Permian-doctor of tedunicel sciences. professor
Koryskin, Yuriy Ivuovich-doctor of econonic sciences, professor
Kruglov, Hikhsil Georgiyevich—doctor of technical sciences. professor
Lebmtsov. Dsieriy Aleksmdrovieh—doctor of technicsl sciences, professor
Leonr'yev. Alekssndr Ivmovich-doctor of tecboicel sciences. professor
Merkov, Nikolsy Mikheylovich—docror of tednnicsl sciences. professor
Hikinsyiov. Andrey Vseil'yevichudoctor of technicel sciences, professor
Nedoepeeov. Artur Viedi-irovich—doetor of physico-Iethcooricel sciences.
professor

Neporozlnniy, Petr Stepsnovich-‘doctor of redtnicel sciences. professor
Ssrkisov. Ashe: Arekelovicho-doctor of tsdnnicel sciences. professor
Selesnev. Konstantin Pevlovich—doctor of technicel sciences, professor
Sivolodskiy. Yevgeniy Andreyevich—doctor of :echoicel sciences. professor
Sidorenko, Vikcor Alekseyevich-doctor of technical sciences. professor
Soiov'yev, Psvel Alekssndrovich—doctor of technicsl sciences. professor
Sychev, Vyschesisv Viedisirovich—doctor of technicsl sciences. professor
Tissshev, Sergey Vlediuirovich—doctor of technicsi sciences. professor
'l'ikhodeyev. Nikoisy Nikolsyevich—docror of technicsl sciences, professor

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

Pcvorekiy. Ole; Nikoleyevichndoctor ot technical tciencec. protector

Pradkov. Abram Borieovichudoctor of technical eciencee, protector

axelnokov, Valentin Yevgcn'yevich~doctor ot techniccl tcicncec. protector
Shikhov. Scraty Boritovichudoctor or phyeico-acthecatical tciencet. protector

Departunt of Htchanicc and Control Proceecct

Absarym, Karlen Arc-ovich-u-doctor of technical tcicnoee, protector

Abra-w. Alekeey Sergcyevichu-doctor ot technicel eciencee. protector

Avon. Ole; lvenovich—doctor of technical ccienccc, protector

Altktandrov, Avrtcl Yakovlevich-cdoctor of technical cciencet. protector
Alaktmdrov. Gleb Vlcdinirovicho-doctor of technical tciencee, proteetor
Antinov. Nikolcy Apollonovich—doctor of technical cciencae. protector
Artcnonov. Ger-an Tinotayevichudoctor of technical ecicncec. protector

Ahhutin. Vladinir Hikhaylovich-doctor of tedmicel tcienoee. protector

Behich, Vctiliy hikhaylovich-odoctor ot phyeico-nathcnetictl eciencec. protector
Bermov, Vledinir lorieovicho-doctor ot phytico-ncthetaticel eciencec, protector
Barcntcev, lice Georsiyevich-odoctor of phycico-nathecetical ecienctc. protector
atrenblatt. Origoriy lcaakovicho-doctor ot phyeico-nctheatticel tciencee.
protector

lelenya. Yevstniy Ivanovicho-doctor of technical tciencct, protector

Belctckiy, Vladinir Vceil'ycvichndoctor ot phyeico-nothenaticcl eciencee.
protector

Belotccrkovekiy. Sergey Hikhaylovichudoctor ot technical tciencct. protector
Belyakov. lvcn Tinoteyevich-odoctor ot technical tciencat. protector

Belynin. Petr Nikolaycvich~doctor ot technical eciencet. protector

lierechnoy. lgor' Alenandrovichudoctor ot phyeico-nathetaticcl tcienctt.
protector

Bettkerehiy, Viktor Antonovichudoctor of technical tciencet. protector
Blckhm. Il'yt [trailevich-doctor ot phytico—Itthelatical tciencct. protector
notenin, Nikolay Vatil'yevich—doctor ot phytico-Iathetctical eciencet, protector
Butkovtkiy, Anatoliy Grigor'yevidw-doctor of technical cciencet, protector
Varthanov. no. McnovidI—corretponding timer AS Arltnir. SSR

Vahhra-tyev, Yuriy Sergeyevich-doctor ot phytico-nathelatical tciencec

Volkov. Daitriy Pavlovich-doctor ot technical eciencee. protector

Vyttavkin. Alchemdr Nikolcyevich—doctor ot technical ecienoee. protector
Govrilov. Anatoliy Nikolayevidn—doctor of technical tcienoet. protector
Genuin, Hikhail Dnitriyevich—odoctor ot techniccl cciencet, protector
Grigorycn. Salvel StIVelovich—doctor ot phycico-natheneticcl tciencee. protector
Grodzovckiy. Certh beyhovich—doctor ot phycico-cathenttictl cciencec. protector
Dcnil‘chenko. lgor' Mtonovichudoctor of technical tcienotc, protector
nevymin, Yevgeniy Andreyevich—doctor ot phytico-ntthenatictl tciencet. protector
Derkach, Vitcliy Pcvlovicho-doctor of technical tcienoee, protector

Druhinin. Georgiy Voil'yevich—doctor ot technical eciencte. protector
Yevtikhiyev, Nikolay Nikoleyevich—doctor ot tedtnical tciencet, protector
Yerchov, uonid Viktorovich—doctor of technical tciencec, protector

Zhigulcv, Vadin Nikoltyevich-odoctor of technical tciencet, protector
Ze-ychlycyev. Iarrikad Vytchetlavovich-doctor of technical tcitnctt, protector
Zaripov. Nadiytr takhritdinovich—doctor of technical tciencet, protector

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zubov, Vlsdilir Ivmovichndoctor of physico-methensticsl sciences, professor
Ivsnov, Georsiy Nikolsycvichwdoctor of technical sciences

Ivlov, Dyuis Dmiloviclundoctor of physico-nsthensticsl sciences, professor
Iordm, Georgiy Gsnrikhovich-doctor of technicsl sciences, professor

lsskov, fevel Psvloviclnudoctor of technicsl sciences, professor

stelerov, Geniy lvnovich-odoctor of technicsl sciences

tesm, Boris Hoiseyevichudoctor of tschnicsl sciences, professor

Kelsyev, Anstoliy Vseil'yevichudoctor of technical sciences, professor
Ksrtsev, Hikhsil Aleksndrovich—doctor of technical sciences, professor
Klinov, Dlitriy Hikhsylovich—doctor of physicow-nstheseticsl sciences, professor
Klyuyev, Vlsdisir Vledinirovichv-doctor of technicel sciences, professor
llyushnikov, Vlsdisir Mtriyevich—doctor of physico-estheesticsl sciences,

rofessor
ovslsv, Ssrsey Nikitidxudoctor of technical sciences

Rovtunenko, Vyscheslsv Hikhsylovichncorresponding nesbor AS Ukrsinisn SSR

Ko en Hikl sil Nsunovichudoctor of sico-netheneticsl c encs fessor
KogheGnikor, Seraex‘Nikolsyevich—comzspondins newer AS'U rein h’gll

Kozlov Dnitriy ll cit—doctor of technicsl sciences, rofsssor
Kolesnikov, Konstentin Sergeyevich-n-doctor of tschnico sciences, professor

Koltunov, Hikhsil Andreyevich—doctor of physico-nstheesricsl sciences, professor
Korenev, Boris Grigor‘yevich—doctor of technicsl sciences, professor
Kostrov, ﬂoris Viktorovichwdoctor of physico-Isthensticel sciences
Kodlsrymts, Ssnvel Crigor’yevich-doctor of technicsl scionces, professor
Koehkin, Lev Nikolsyevich-doctor of technical sciences, professor
Kregel'skiy, Igor' Viktorovich—doctor of technicsl sciences, professor
Kresnoshchekov, Pevel Sergeyevichudoceor of physico-netheneticel sciences,
professor

Krug, Ger-en Ksrlovich—eoctor of technicsl sciences, professor

mausnev, Il'ys Dnitriyevichudoctor of technicel sciences, professor
Kain, Lev Tinofeyevichndoctor of technicsl sciences, professor
Kuliltovskiy, Andrey Gennsd'yevich—doctor of physico-nsthensticsl sciences,
professor

lebedsv, Alekssndr Aleksndrovichndoctor of technicsl sciences, professor
leont'yev, Nikolsy Nikolsyevichndoctor of technicsl sciences, professor
Librovich, Vsdin Bronislsvovichndoctor of physico-Issthensticel sciences,
professor

Lidov, Hihhsil L'voviclv—doctor of physicou-eethelsticsl sciences, professor
Litvinov, Boris Vesil'yevich—alsdidete of technicel sciences

Loeekin, Viktor Alekssndrovich—doctor of physics-nethensticsl sciences,
professor

Lopeto, Georgiy Pevlovich—doctor of technicsl sciences

Lushin, Ol'asrd Vlsdinirovich—doctor of technical sciences, professor
Lukechev, Viktor Psvlovich—doctor of technical sciences, professor
ustveyev, Gsvriil Alekseyeivch—doctor of tedmicsl sciences, professor
Hstyukhin, Nikoley Yekovlevich—doctor of technicsl sciences, professor
usl'nikov, Gennsdiy Psvlovich-doctor of technicel sciences, professor
Mileyko, Sergey Tikhonovich—doctor of technical sciences

Hitenkov, Peder Hikhsylovid\-doctor of tedfnicel sciences, professor
Hikhsylov, Alekesndr Ivenovichudoctor of technicel sciences, professor
ﬂishin, Gennediy lvsnovich—doctor of physics-nethensticsl sciences, professor

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nouhorin, Yuriy Aleksandrovich-u-doctor of technical sciences, professor
Hoskvitin, Viktor Vssil'yevich—doctor of physico-nathenatical sciences,
professor

Nye-lin. Anotoliy Nikolayavichudoctor of technical sciences

Hyunikov, Veninsin Pstroviclh-doctor of physico-nethenatical sciences
Nedirsdse, Aloha-1dr Davidovich-wdoctor of technical sciences, professor
Niguatulin, Robert Iskandrovich—doctor of physics-nethensticsl sciences,
professor

Nikitin, Lev Vasil'yevichm-doctor of physico-sntheneticsl sciences, professor
Nikoleyev, Vladinir Ivsnovich—doctor of technical sciences. professor
Novoshilov, Genrikh Vasil'yevich—doctor of technical sciences

Pavlenko, Vladisir Antonovichndoctor of technical sciences. professor
Pal'nov, Vladisir Alskssndrovich—doctor of physico-Isathenstical sciences.
professor

Perton. Vladimir ZellsnOVith--doctor of physics-nathenaticel sciences. professor
Petropavlovskiy. Andrey Aleksandrovich—doctor of technical sciences. professor
Pozdeyev, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich-u-doctor of technical sciences, professor
Ponorsarev, Valentin Hikhsylovich-ndoctor of technical sciences. professor
Pospelov. mitriy Aleksandrovich—doctor of technical sciences, professor

Pupkov. Konstantin Aleksandrovich~doctor of technical sciences, professor
Roshdestvenskiy, Boris bsonidovich—doctor of physico-nsthesstical sciences,
professor

Rntkovskiy, Vladislav Yul'yevich—doctor of technical sciences. professor
Ryzhov, Ole; Seruyevich-«octor of physico-uathcnatical sciences, professor
Ryzhov. Eduard Vyacheslavovichndoctor of technical sciencu, professor

Ryzhov, Yuriy Alekseyevich—doctor of technical sciences, professor

Ryebinin Igor' Alekseysvich~doctor of technical sciences, professor

Sadovskiy, lgor' Nikolayevich—doctor of technical sciences

Sarychev, Vasiliy Andreyevich—doctor of physics-uthenaticsl sciences, professor
Sirazetdinov, 'ralset Kssinovich—doctor of technical sciences, professor
Snirnov. Anetoliy filippovich—doctor of technical sciences, professor

Suolov, Vladi-ir Borisovich-doctor of technical sciences, professor

Sokolov, Aleksandr Georgiyevich—doctor of technical sciences, professor
Solodovnikov, Vladimir Viktorivich—doctor of technical sciences. professor
Solo-enko. Nikolay Stepsnovichudoctor of technical sciences, professor

Staros, l-‘ilipp Georgiyevichudoctor of technical sciences, professor

Stepanov, Boris Mikhaylovich—doctor of physico-nethelssticsl sciences, professor
Stomiy, Anatoliy Aleksandrovichucorresponding Iesber AS Ukrainian SSR
Strel'chuk, Nikolsy Antonovich-doctor of technical sciences, professor
Sunerkov. Leonid Nikolayevich-cdoctor of technical sciences. professor

Sychev, Vladisir Vail'yevichudoctor of physico-nethenetical sciences, professor
Tenn, Boris Georgiyevichnscedenicien AS Estonian SSR

Troitskiy. Vladimir Alskssndrovich—doctor of physics-mathematical sciences.
professor

Tupolev, Alsksey Andreysvich—doctor of technical sciences, professor
Ugodchikov. Mdrey Grigor'yevich—doctor of technical sciences, professor
Ulnov. Georsiy Hikhsylovich-doctor of technical sciences. professor

Utlrin, Viktor Vesil'yevich—doctor of technical sciences

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ushskov. lgor' Alekseycvichudoctor of technical sciences. professor
l-‘edosov. Yevgeniy Aleksandroviclv-doctor of technical sciences. professor
Podotov, Aleksey lvnnovichudoctor of technical sciences, professor
feodos'yev, Vsevolod lvanovichn-doctor of technical sciences. professor
Khesin. Gsnnadiy L'vovich-«doctor of technical sciences, professor
Khetssurov, Yaroslsv Afanas'yevichudoctor of technical sciences, professor
Khorol. David holseyevich-odoctor of technical sciences. professor
Ousodsnov, Boris Konstantinovichudoctor of technical sciences, professor
marl-um, aniy Hikhsylovichudoctor of technical sciences. professor
Otsrnous'ko. Peliks Lsonidovich-odoctor of physico-ssthesotical sciences.
professor

Chsmykh. Klinentiy Psodos'yevichudoctor of physico-satheseticsl sciences.
professor

Shevyakov. Alcheey Andreyevicho-doctor of technical sciences. professor
Shereset'yevskiy, Nikolsy hikolayevichndoctor of technical sciences. professor
Shikhayev, Kirill Nikolayevichudoctor of technical sciences. professor
Shkadov. Leonid Hikhsylovich—doctor of technical sciences. professor
Shlyakhtonko. Sergey Hikhsylovichudoctor of technical sciences. professor
Shnyrev, Gennsdiy Dnitriyevichndoctor of technical sciences

Shukshunov, Valentin Yefinovichndoctor of technical sciences. professor
Yurevich, Yevncniy lvsnovich-odoctor of technical sciences. professor
Yusupov. Rafael‘ Hidkhatovich-odoctor of technical sciences. professor
Yakisov, aniy L'vovich—doctor of physico-ssthenatical sciences

Yakovlev. Yuriy Sergeyevich—doctor of technical sciences. professor
Yakubaytis. some Aleksandrovichuacadelicisn AS Latvian SSR

Yakubovich, Vladisir Andreyevich-odoctor of physico-sathesatical sciences.
professor

Yastrebov, Vyacheslsv Sesenovich—doctor of technical sciences

Department of General and Technical (hesistry

Aleksmdrov, Yuriy Arsent'yevlclw-doctor of chesical sciences, professor
Alfinov. Mikhail Vladisirovich-doctor of physico-ssthesatical sciences
professor

Atowyon, lav Oganovichudoctor of chemical sciences, professor
Bnraboshkin. Aleksey Nikolayevichudoctor of chesical sciences, professor
Belikov, Vasiliy Nenmdrovichv-doctor of chemical sciences. professor
Buchachenko. Instoliy leonidovich—doctor of chemical sciences. professor
Vol'pin. Merl: Yefisovichndoctor of chesical sciences. professor
Voekresenskiy, Vlsdislr Aleksadrovich—doctor of chesical sciences. professor
Galkin. Nikoley Petrovich--doctor of technicsl sciences. professor
Gel'hshteyn, Anatoliy losifovidI—doctor of chesical sciences. professor
Geranisov, Valentin Vladinirovich—doctor of technical sciences. professor
Gidaspov. Boris Venia-inovich-odoctor of chesicsl sciences. professor
cryaznov. Vledisir Hikhaylovidt—doctor of chesical sciences. professor
Dresin. Anatoliy Nikoleycvicho-doctor of physico-sathesetical sciences,
professor

Movitskiy, Pedor lvanovichndoctor of chesical sciences. professor

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

muuyav. Kirill Mikhaylovich-decre: of chalice! eciancaa. prefeaeo:
Yaraaenko. Leonid Tiaefayavichudector of chaaical acicncaa. profeeao:
Yanakev. Anatoliy Nikolayavicho-docter of chemical aciencce. profane:
Yanheva. Zinaida Vaail'yavnaudocco: of technical eciencae. profaeao:
lahharkin. laonid Ivmevich—docro: of chaaical acienon. profane:
lvanchev, Saraay Scapmovich-decto: of chalical acienon, p:ofanor
lonely-ice. Georgiy Vaclseyavichudocte: of chancel aciencaa

Kaaarinev. Vladiair Yevgee'yavichndoctor of chalical aciencaa

Kalachire. Igor' Vadiaovich—decro: ef cheaical aciancee. profeeao:
Riparian. Savaliy L'vovich—docto: of aha-teal aciancaa

Klabunovakiy, Yevgaoiy lvmovich—decce: of chaaical eciencaa. profane:
Keaarev. Yavgauiy Vnil'yevich-odocce: of chancel aciaocn. profane:
Keller. Vicaliy Abrmvichudocce: of cheaical acieucea. profanor
Kriveahayav. Nikolay Alauayevichudecter of :achnical acianoaa. profaaao:
K:ol°. Vladiai: Makeudmic‘h—decte: of chancel aciancca. profaaeer
Krylev. Ola; Valancinovich-cdecaor of chaaical aciancaa. profane:
Kuliyev. Ali ﬂuaa Ugly-«cadmium AS Anrbaydrhan 88R

uypmekiy. Oveay ll'ich-odocror of phyaico-nachaaecical aciencaa. profane:
Hakaiaov. Vladiai: Paderovich-odeccer of technical aclanoeo. profane:

Malia. Georgiy ﬂorieoviclw-decre: of chalical aciancea. profano:

Herahanov. Alohaand: Girgor'yavicho-docto: of phyaico—nathcaacical aciaeon.
profane:

Hukhlanov. ivan retrovichudecro: of uchnlcal eciancea. profaaao:
leafadov, ole; Marvayavich-odeezor of clueaical aciaecea. profane:

Niklrin, Yavganiy Yavgau'yeviclt-docter of phyaico-aathaaarical acianoaa.
profane:

llikiforov. luck-me: Sarsayavchp-decter of technical aciancaa
Wduinnikov, Alakamd: Anacol'yavidto-docro: of phyaico-aadnaaatical aclancaa.
profane:

Orayavakiy, Anatoliy ﬂikolayavicln—decto: of phyaico—aachcaatlcal aciancn,
profane:

Pikaycv. Manny Kmountlnovich~doctor of chancel eciencaa, profane:
Polak. lav Seleaonovichudocto: of phyaico-aachalatical aciancaa. profaaae:
Pelukarov, Yuriy Hikhayloviclb-decte: of chanical aciencaa

Penoaarav, Ardal‘on ﬂikolayavich-decte: of chanical acianeaa, profaaao:
Roaanfal'd. loaif L'vovich—dector of chaucal acianon. profane:

Ruaanov, Anacoliy Ivmovlch~doctor of cheaical acianoaa. profane:
sdtovich. Comediy Vikcerovich-odocto: of technical acianoaa. profane:
Sanonev. Gaorsiy Vnil'yavich-odecte: of chaaical acianoaa. profane:
Saniu. Pafnutiy lvmovicIu—decte: of cheaical acianoaa, prefano:
Sokol’akiy. Moriy Vladinirevich-oacadaaician AS Kauklu 58R

Spiridonov. Vikcor Pavlovian—doctor of aha-teal aciancaa. profane:

‘l'aakin. Hananiy leaakovich-docto: of chemical aciancn. profane:
Toluikov. Georikh Alakauulmvich-odecto: of danical aciancea. profane:
Toaaahavekiy, Vladialav ‘rrofiaovich—docto: of tadmical aciancaa, prefaaao:
‘l'opchiyava, Klavdiya Vnil'yavnao-docto: of chalical eciencae, prefeno:
Mrayayav, Ivan Yakovlavich—dector of technical aciencea. profane:
Frankel', Sarsay Yakovlevich—docto: of phyaico-Iatheaatical aciancaa. profane:
Onamyahav. Yavaaniy Mdnyavich-odocto: of chaliaal aciencaa. profane:

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chamyahev. Yavgeniy Mdreyevichndecter of chanical eciencea. :1.2..aer
Shekhparonov. Mikhail lvenevicho-docter of chemical eciancee. prefaeeer
Shilov, Aleksandr Yavgan'yavicho-decter of chalical eciencee. prefeeaer
Shlidt. Vladinir Sarseyavich-odector of chemical aciencee

Showgin. Petr Pavlovichudecter of cheeicel eciancaa. prefeeeer

Shukin. Yavganiy Deitriyevich—docter of phyaico-natheletical eciancae.
prefauer

Entalie, Sergey Ganrikhevich—decter of chenical eciencee. profaeaer

Depart-ant of Phyeical Owe-iatry no Technology of Inorgmic Materiel:

Anton”. Sergay Pavlovich—decter of technical aciencae

legoyevlanehiy, Konecutin Nikeleyavich—docter of technical aciancea. profeaeer
Bechkerev. Bllin Patrovichndecter of technical eciencee. prefaeeer
meukev. Andrey Vlediairevich—dector of technicel eciancee. prefeaeor
Venevteev. Yuriy Nikeleyevichudecter of phyeico-Iathautical aciancee. proteeeor
Vorob'yav. Kharlenpiy Sargeyevich—dector of technical eciencee. prefaaner
Corlev. Yuri} Pavlovian-doctor of technical aciancae. profeaeor
Cerenkov. Vladimir lvanevich-odocter of chenicel eciencee. profeaeor
Gemin, lger' Veail'yevich—decter of technical eciancea. prefaaaer
Gurvich. Lev Vania-inevich—decter of chemical ecicncee. prefaeeer
Mechin. Vledilir lvuovich-odecter e! technical eciencee. prefeeeer
Dyatleve. Nine liikheylowue-decter of chenicel aciancaa, prefaeeer
lhreni-ev. Shevket Shisebucdinovichuacadaaician A3 Kazakh SSR

llyukhin. Vladieir Valentineviclw-docter ei phyeico-eathaleticel aciencea
Kipariaev. Sargey Sargeyavich-odecter of tedtnical aciancee, prefaeaer
Keelovehiy, lav Veeil'yevich-odecter of technical eciancee. prefaeeor
lie-er, Alekeey Georgiyevicho-dector of technical eciencae. prefeeaor
Kopcykin. Vladimir Alakaayevich-odector of technical eciencee

Kopetekiy. Ouaalev Veail'yavich-odecter of technical aciencee. prefeaaor
Kunin, Lev Laserevich-doctor of technical eciancea, prefaeaer

Leurev. Vladialev Ierieovich—qlector of chanicel eciancea, profeaeer
Liechevakiy. lerie Vadieovich—doctor of technical eciencea, preteeaer
Hmoklzin. Maceliy lvnevich-c-decter of technicel aciancae. profaeeor
Harov. lsor' Nikoleyavich—docter of chaeicel eciancee

Healtvin, Vladinir Hihhaylevich—docter of technical eciencea. prefeaaor
Ndiedlowl'acroeyen. Oter Patrevich-ocerreependins altar AS Cannien SSR
uyeeeyedov. Dorie Padorevichudecter of chalical eciancaa. profaeaor
Oganv, Alexandr Nikmorevich—decter of technical ecicncca. prefeaaor

preteeaer

Pavlov, Pavel Veeil'yevich—deccor of physico-Iethalatical ecicncee. profaaaor
Palate-0v. Yaroalav Dnitriyavich—doctor of technical aciencea

l'caypayke, Vikter ioaifevich—deccor of die-icel aciencee, prefeaaer
Midin. Niheley Gaoraiyavidh-decter of chenical eciancaa. prefaaaer
5min, Sergey Boriaevich-decter of chemical aciencaa. profeeeor

Sadov, Vyachaalav Hikhaylovich—docter of tedunical eciancea, profeaeer
Saunaako. Xirill Nikolayevich~doctor of chalical eciencee. prefaaaer

38
P01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Saunanko. Kirlll Nikolnycvich—doctor of chuiccl ncianoaa. profuaor
Shorourov, Dallon lvanovichndoctor of technical acioncaa

Sokolovakaya. chdokiyn Hikhcylovna—doctot of chanical ocionooa. protoaaor
Sychov, Malai- anainovich—doctor of technical sciences. profouor
‘l'iuahov. Vladimir Vacil'yavich-doctor of tachniccl ociancoa. profaaoor
Us”, Yokov. Makomdrovichudoctor chanlcal aciaocaa. profaaaor
Fadotov. Nikolay Padotovich-odoctor of chulcal ocioncca, profoooor
)‘adorcluonko. lvm Nikhaylovichuacodonlclon B Uktainim 88R

unntuclya. Valantin Alakaayovlch-c-doctor of tachnical acicnooa
Shavokin. Yuriy Podorovich—doctoc of tcchnical acianoca, profaaaor
Shchalohov, Robart ﬂikolayavich-odoctor of chalical aciancca. profoaaor
Yavoyakiy. Vladimir Xvanovich—doctor of tochnical acioncu. profaaaor

Dapartlont of Mocha-iota. liophyaica and Che-iota of Phyaiologically
Activa Conpwndo

Androyava. Natal'ya Sarsayavna-odoctot of phyaico-uthautical ociancaa.
protaaoor

lllxnyuk. Nikolay Kitillovich-odocto: of cho-ical ocianoco. profaaaor
Dual". Solon Yatilovich—doctot of chanical acionou. profcaaor

Byattov. Vladinir Padotovich—doctor of chalical aciancu. profuaot
Godovikov. Nikolay Nikolayavich—doctor of chanical ociancaa. profaaaot
Kayuahin. lav Patrovlchudoctor of phyoico-nathautical scioncoa. profauor
Kiaalov. Nikolay Andnayovich—doctor of biological aciancao

Kitaygorodokiy. Alckaand: lanakovich—doctor of phyaico-nathalatical aciancoo.
profaaaor

Konov, Sonny Vanil'yavich—doctor of biological acicncoa, ptofauor
Luann. Yuriy Sounovich—doctor of physico-Iaaaa-aticol acicncoo. profoaaor
Mol‘nikov. Nikolay Nikolayovichndoctor of chaliccl ociancca. ptotoaoor

Hokul’akiy. Hark Alohandmich—doctor of phyaico-Iathcutical aciancoa,
protaaoot

Pogluov. Doria Padorovidt-doctor of biological acionou. profaaaor
Ptitayn, 01a; lorioovich-odoctor of phyaico—nthautical adoncoa. profuaor

Onanavokiy, Daltriy Sanoyavich—doctor of phyaico-nathontical ociancoa.
ptofoaoor

Dapart-ant of Phyaiology

Batuyav. Alakoamlt Sorsoyavich—doctor of biological aciancu, profaaaot
Gorodinokiy, So-n Mikhaylovich—doctor of Iodical aciancoa. profuoor
Yofmi. Sorgay Nan-ovich-odoctor of Iodical aciancoa. protuaor

lvaov, Kirlll Povlovich—doctor of Iodiccl acionooo. profuaor

Runotoov. Alakaay Kirillovicho-doctor of votorinu-y acicnooa. ptotcaaor
Lupidicv, uv Nikolayavich-doctor of toclmiccl ocicncca. profoaaor
cottovakiy, Mikhail Arkad'yavlch—doctor of biological acicncoo, ptofoaaor
Sinonov. Paval Vuil'yovlch—doctor of udical ociancca. profoaaor
Ouyldnhyan. Lovon MaylovidI-odoctor of biological ocienoco

Shopovalov. Aloha-id: lvmovich—doctor of .diccl acioncca. profaaaot

39
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI OVFICIAL USE ONLY

napartnont of Gonoral Biology

Alikhanyan. Soa iaoakovicllndoctor of biological acicnccn, profaaoor
butorin. Nikolay Vanil'yovichudoctor of geographical ociancco

Vavilov. Parr Patrovichuacubar All-Union Acadauy of Agricultural Sciancaa
inani unin

Gogolialwili Mariya Alokaoyavich—doctor of agricultural acianoca. profaaaor
Grodziuokiy, Andny Hikhaylovich—corrcoponding unbar AS Ukrainian SSR
Zhuchanko. Alakaandr Alekamdrovidw-acadc-ician AS uoldavian 88R

Zufarov, Kanildzhan Akluudrbanovich-acadclician AS Uzbek SSR

Kafiani, Konuanrin Alokamdrovich~doctor of biological sciences

Nuayov, Stmialav Alokamdrovicho-doctor of biological acioncoo, profauor
Huatafayov. IIOI thdanir Ogly-u-acadoaician as narbaydzhan ssn

Ply-Iokiy Yuriy (Caorgiy) lvanoviclu—doctor of biological ocianua, profcaaor
Rapoport. loaif Abramvichudoctor of biological acioncaa, profauor
Skarlato. Onat Alakaandrovicln-doctor of biological aciancao

Sorokin, Yuriy lvanovicho-doctor of biological ocioncao. profooaor
Suahchonya. Leonid Hikhoylovich—corraoponding Iowa: AS Boloruaaian SSR
Fadorov, Vadi- naitriycvich—doctor of biological acicncaa. profaaaor
Fadorov. :Jikolay Pcdorovichndoctor of tcdmical aciancoo. profaaaor
Kbruahchov, Nikolay Grigor'yavicbndoctor of biological acicncoa, profaaaor
Shibalova. rat'yana “tame—doctor of biological ociancao

Dopartacnt of Geology. Gaophyaica and Gooehcnistry

Bogdanov. Nikita Alabayavicb-«octor of geological-ulnaralogical acicocca
Boriaov, Alakaay Alakacycvicho-doctor of tachnical ocicncaa. profaaaor
Brmikov, Mtriy Hikbaylovich—doctor of technical ocianooa. profaaaor
Mrinakiy, Viktor AleksandrovidI—doctor of tachnical acicnoco, proicuor
Burcbdrov. Matoliy Schmidt—doctor of technical acicnoca, profaaaor
Vakhra-cycv, Vaavolod Andrayavidtv-doctor of goological-Iinaralogical acicncu,
profaaaor

Vyanaairakiy, Vladialav Stmialavovich—doctor of goological-ainoralogical
acicncu. protauor

Galiaov. Erik Hikhaylovich—doctor of gcological-ninaralogical aciaocaa
Gaodokym. Art“ Aranovichndoctor of geological-nincralogical aciancu,
profcaaor

Gradcrg. lgor' Sargaycvichndoctor of goological-nincralogical aciancu.
profcaaor

Grit-Ito, Gennadiy luat'ycvich-doctor of raldmical ociancca, profauor
Donnitakaya. Raina Hikbaylovna-odoctor of gaological-ninaralogical acicncu.
profcaaor

Dnitriycv, uonid Vladinirovich—doctor of gcological-Iinoralogical aciancea
Druahcbito, Vladimir Vuil'yavicbo-doctor of goological-ninaralogical acionoca,
profuaor

Dyad'kin. Yuriy Dmitriyavich—doctor of tacbnical aciancaa, profcaaor
Yagiazarov, Doria Kbriacoforovicho-doctor or gaological-nineralogical ociancaa.
profaaaor

Yon-nuke, Nikola, MdrcyaviclP-doctor of goological-aincralogical aciancca,
profaaaor

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zhenoyde. Aleksandr Ivsnovicluudoctor of ssologicsl-ninsrslosicsl sciences.
professor

lofin. Stnislev lunidovich—doctor of technicsl sciences. professor
Ksleletdinov. Hurst Abmllduekovichndoctor of geological-linerelogicel
sciences

Keller. Boris Hsksieovich—doctor of peoloplcel-ninereloglcel sciences,
professor

Konrorovich. Aleksey Enil'ysvich-doctor of geologicel-einere-lopicsl sciences.
professor

Kresheninnikov, Velsriy Arked'ysvich-doctor of geologicsl-einerelogicel
sciences

Krylov, Nikoley Alekseyevichr-docror of seologicel-ninerelogicel sciences.
professor

Kurlenys. Hikhsil Vledinirovich—doccor of technicsl sciences

Kutuzov. Boris Nikolsysvlclw-docrorof technicel sciences. professor

sterov, Nikolsy Psvlovich—docsor of geologicsl-einerslosicsl sciences.
professor

Heksinov, Stepen Psvlovichudoctor of ecologicel-ninerslogicsl sciences.
professor

Helovirskiy. Yenkif Penkhusovich—doctor of geologicel-einerslopicel sciences
Hoksiners, Vlsdilir Nikoleyevich—doccor of technicel sciences, professor
NONdIIV, Sergey Gerunovich—doctor of geologicsl-ninerslosicel sciences.
professor

Oboe. Aleksndr Mikhsylovich-odoctor of geologicsl-ninerslopicsl sciences,
professor

Roz-1w, Aleksey Yur'yevich—doctor of psolosicel-ninerslogicsl sciences

Step-row, Dmitriy uonidovich-odoccor of geologicel-ninerelosicsl sciences.
professor

Turchsninov, Igor' Aleksandrovich-doctor of technical sciences. professor
Udintsev, cleb Borisovich-doctor of geogrephicsl sciences. professor

agaihrﬂikoley Grisor'yevicb—doccor of geologicsl-ninerslogicsl sciences.

Depertnnt of Ocemolocy. Atlospheric Physics and Geogrephy

Hellenishov. Konstmtin Vlsdinirovichndocror of biological sciences, professor
Vinogrsdov, Hikhell Yevzen'yevich—doctor of biologicel sciences. professor
Voyr, Sersey Sergeyevicho-doctor of physico-nethsnsticsl sciences. professor
Golitsyn, Georgiy Sergeyevicho-doctor of physico-Isthenericel sciences

Gusev, Aleksmdr Hikhsylovidro-doctor of physico-Isthelseticel sciences.
professor

Zhivsao. Aleksmdr Vesil'yevich—doctor of geogrsphicsl sciences

ll'in. Aleksmdr Vssil'yevich—doccor of geogrephicsl sciences

Kort, Vlsdilir Grigor'yevich—doctor of geogrsphicsl sciences, professor
Hensyev, Ole; lvenovich—doctor of geogrsphicsl sciences

Hikhel'tsev. lgor’ Yevasn'yevich—doctor of technicsl sciences, professor
Ornidov. Rostislsv Vsevolodovich—doctor of physico-Ischeleticnl sciences.
professor

Ssrkisyen. Artee Ssrkisovich-doceor of physico-eetheneeicsl sciences. professor

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

Simev. Matoliy ll‘ich-odoctor of geographical sciences. profane:

Serokih. Alskamdr lvahovicho-decte: of technical acishcn. profane:
Trokhm. Aleksmdr Narkovich-odoctor of tachnical ocisncn. profaaaor
Yakovlsv, Sargay Vnil'yavicho-doctor of technical acisncss. professor

napartsaut of Ilia tory

Agyan. 'faatur Pavlovichnacadssician AS Arlanian 88R

Msksmdrev. Vadil Alsksandrovichudoctor of historical acicncn
Alskaayav. Vania-in Vasil'ysvichndocter of historical aciahcn
Apakidn. Andrey mliteeovicho-corrsapondins saaba: AS Georgian SSR
Aliyav. Envar Hokhtiyovicho-profanor

Arakalyn. “men Nikolayavich—acadnician AS Arsenic: ssn

Arts-eke. lvm lvmovich-odocto: of historical sciences

Iisrkhin. ll'ya Boriaevich-odecter of historical aciaeon. professor
Bohykyan. Valsriy lvmevich-doctor of historical sciences. professor
lug-\ov. Viktor lvmovich-odecter of historical acisncsa. profane:
limiyatov. ziya ﬂusaysvicho-acaduician AS Anrbaydzhm SSR

Varlnev. Konstmtin lvanovich—doctor of historical acisncaa. professor
Vaail’ysvakiy. Ruslm Ssrasyavich—dector of historical sciences
Vinesradev, Vladilsn Nikelayavich—docto: of hiatorical scisecn
Volkov. Fade: mitriycvicho-dector of historical scianon, profnao:
Galkin. Mound: Abrnovich—dector of historical acioncco

Capononke. mka Stopanovichudoctor of historical ocicnccs, profcaaer
Ceryushkin. uooid hikhaylovich—doctor of historical sciences. profsner
Crokov. lser' lerisovich-odector of historical aciancsa

Grigulsvich. leaif nosual'dovich—docter of historical sciences

Gunv. Kirill Vladiuirovich-odocter of historical sciences. profcnor
Drizul. Aloha-1dr Arvldovich—acaesnician AS Latvian SSR

Yazlnov. Vikter Anatol'ysvicho-doctor of historical sciaecsa. profsner
lvnov. Robart Faderevich—odecter of historical sciences. profane:
lakandsrov. Nth-ad Akhssdevich—docto: of historical sciences. professor
lsaagilova. Rosa Nursalsyovna-docte: of historical acioocn

Its, lufol'f Pardinandovich—dector of historical sciences. profane:
Kapitoa. Hikhail Stop-levich-odocter of historical ocioncoa. profane:
Karanv. Vikter Georgiysvich-odector of historical ocioncsa. professor
Knoroxov. Yuriy Valoniinovich—decto: of historical sciences

Koval'. Boris lesifovichudector of historical sciences. profsner
Kolchin. Boris Aleksandrovich~doctor of historical sciences, profane:
Kodov. Gonnadiy DanilovidI—doctor of historical sciences. professor
Kesegortacv, lvn lvanevichueoctor of historical sciences. professor
Korablcv, Yuriy lvanovich-odector of historical sciences. professor
Kestyushko. Iva lvmevich—doctor of historical sciences

Kryvalov. loaif Aronovich—doctor of philoeophical sciences

Kuiahchin, Vasiliy Ivanevich—docter of historical scisnccs. professor
Kukuahkin, Yuriy Stopmevich-oeecter of historical sciences. prefoner
Kulichenke, Mikhail lvanovich~doctor of historical sciences. professor
Kunmcv. Vikter Alcksandrovich-odoctor of historical sciences. professor

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lueanev. Georgiy Meksnndrovichudoctor of historical sciences. professor
Lurbntov. Georaiy L'vovichndoctor of historical sciences. professor
iotekov. wonid :Iikolaycvichwdoctor of historical sciences. professor
iyslasov. Leonid manovichudoctor of historical sciences. professor
Lebedav. Niholey lvanovichndoctor of historical sciences. professor
lsvkovekiy. Alakaey lvenovichudoctor of econosic sciences. professor
Lisovskiy. Nikoley Kur'eich-wdoctor of historical sciences. professor
Litavrin. Gonnsdiy Grigor'yevichudoctor of historical sciences

Hegesedov. Raoul liasoesdovich—adoctor of historical sciences. professor
Herkarym. Eduard Sarkisovichv-doctor of phi Loeophicel sciences

Markov. Gennsdiy Yevgen‘yevicho-doctor of historical sciences. professor
Haeeon. Vadie Hikhaylovicho-correspondins eeebsr AS Turkucn SSR

Nikhaein. Vladieir Petrovicho-doctor of historical sciences. professor
Noeov. Nikolay Yevgen'yevichudoctor of historical sciences

Ostoya-Oveysnyy. lgor' Daitriyevich—adoctor of historical scienos's. professor
Pavlenko. Nikolay lvmovicho-doctor of historical sciences. professor
Pisarev. Yuriy Alehseyevichﬁdoctor of historical sciences. professor
Pletneve. Svstlane Aleksandrovnao-doctor of historical sciences

Popova. Yeneniya lvanovnandoctor of historical sciences. professor
Preohrashenskiy. Aleksandr Aleksandrovich-ndoctor of historical sciencoa
Protopopov. Matoliy Serseyevlch—doctor of historical sciences. professor
Sanakoyev. Shelvs Parsadmovichudoctor of historical sciences. professor
Sevost'yanov. Griaoriy Nikolsyevich—doctor of historical sciences. professor
Skrynnihov. melon Grieor'yevich—doctor of historical sciences. professor
Tnlepbsyev. Iaydabek akheedovichuacadeaician AS Kazakh SSll

Tyukavkin. Viktor crigor'yevichndoctor of historical sciences. professor
Ul'yenovskiy. hostislav Aleksmdrovich-«doctor of econoeic sciences. professor
fedora-Dewdov. Ger-an Alekseyevich-odoctor of historical sciences. professor
fedoeov. lvm Mtonovich-ocorreepoodine sedaer of the Acadeey of Pedagogical
Sciences USSR

Fedyukin. Sergey hleheeyevich—doctor of historical sciences

rosin. Vasiliy Tieofeyevicho-doctor of historical sciences. professor
Pursenho. Aleksmdr hlehsmdrovich—doctor of historical sciences

Khalikov. Al'fred Khesanovich—doctor of historical sciences. professor
Kheyfete. Aleksandr Nan-ovichndoctor of historical sciences. professor
ChebokseroV. Niholay Niholayevich-doctor of historical sciences. professor
(histov. Kirill Vasil'yevichudoctor of historical sciences. professor
Chobar'yn. Aleksndr Oganovichvdoctor of historical sciences

Sharapov. Ger-en Vladimirovich-ocorrespondins aedaer heads-y of Pedagogical
Sciences USSR

Sheretobitov. Viktor Pavlovicho-doctor of historical sciences. professor
Shlepekov. Arnol'd Siholayevich—correspondins sewer AS Ukrainian SSR
Shnidt. Sigurd Ottovich—doctor of historical sciences. professor

Shchepov. Yaroslav Nikolayevich—doctor of historical sciences

Departeent of Philosophy end Lev

Avakov. hires liosesovich-u-doctor of juridical sciences. professor
aitov. Nari-en Abdrakhamovich—doctor of philosophical sciences. professor

(.3
FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aleksoysv. Hirrofan Nikolsyeviclw-doccor of philosophical sciences. professor
Malay. Hare: Vikrorovich-odocror of juridical sciences. professor

Basra-ov. Eduard Alaksmdrovich-odocror of philosophical sciences. professor
Iiryukov. Boris Vladisirovich-mdoctor of philosophical sciences

logacov. Virsliy Vasil'ysvicho-doccor of philosophical sciences. professor
Borodin. Semislav Vladiairovich-odocror of juridical sciences. professor
Burletskiy, Fador Hikhsylovich-doccor of philosophical sciences. professor
Iurenko. Anatoliy Pavlovich-«docror of philosophical sciences. professor
Voyshvillo, Yavsaniy Kasai-irovich—docror of philosophical sciences,
professor

Cort. Vladisir Spiridonovich-docror of philosophical sciences. professor
Yereolenko, Daitriy Vladiairovich-odocror of philosophical sciences. professor
Zedoroshnyy, (moraiy Parrovich—docror of juridical sciences, professor
ZVirhul‘. Vladimir Karlovich—docror of juridical sciences. professor
lvanov. Seasn Aleksmdrovichrodocror of juridical sciences, professor
ll'inskiy. lgor' Pavlovich-u-doctor of juridical sciences, professor

Ksrpors, lgor' ivanovicho-docror of juridical sciences. professor
Koshevnikov, Fedor ivanovich-odoctor of juridical sciences, professor
Kosyr'. hihhail lvanovichudocror of juridical sciences, professor
Konstantinov, Pedor Trofilovich-u-doctor of philosophical sciences, professor
Kosirsyn. Aleksandr Psvlovich—doctor of juridical sciences. professor
Koeichev. Anacoliy Danilovich-udoctor of philosophical sciences. professor
Lsptev, Vladieir Viktorovich—docror of juridical sciences, professor
haslov. Vssiliy Filippovich—docror of juridical sciences. professor
Helyukhin. Sarafie 'fisofeyevich-odoctor of philosophical sciences. professor
Miller, Visvaris Orrovichm-corrsspondins letter as Latvian SSR
hin'kovskiyﬁenrikh Hikhsylovicho-doctor of juridical sciences, professor
Hodrzhinsheya. Yelena Dnirriyevna—docror of philosophical sciences. professor
Osipov. Gennadiy Vssil‘yevich—doctor of philosophical sciences, professor
Psahkov. Aleksey Srepanovich-odoctor of juridical sciences. professor
Piskocin, Nildusil ivanovich—doctor of juridical sciences

Ratinov. Make-1dr RufiIoVich-odoctor of juridical sciences, professor
Sedikov, ole; Nikolsyevich-doctor of juridical sciences, professor
Selivanov, Nikolsy Alekseyevich—doctor of juridical sciences, professor
Seunov, Vsdia Sergeyevichudoctor of philosophical sciences. professor
Stsrushenko, Gleh Borisovich-doccor of juridical sciences

Tikhoairov, Yuriy Alaksmdrovich-odoctor of juridical sciences, professor
Tumov. Vladilir Aleksmdrovich. doctor of juridical sciences. professor
Ukraintsev, Boris Sargayevich—docror of philosophical sciences. professor
Ursul, Arkediy Deitriyavich—doctor of philosophical sciences. professor
Kherchev. Maroliy Georuiyevich—doccor of philosophical sciences. professor
Shakhnesarov. Georgi, Khosroyevich—docror of juridical sciences

Shelysg. Vasiliy Vasil'yevich—docror of philosophical sciences. professor
Shepsulin. Aleksandr Perrovich—doctor of philosophical sciences. professor

Mo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ONICIAL USE ONLY

Dapartnanc of Econonica

Bocharov. Yuriy Pecrovichudoctor of archicacmra. profaaaor

Il'in. Valentin Hikhaylovich-doctor of economic aciencea

Koalova. Olimpiada Vaail'yevnaudoccor oi econonic aciencea. profaaaor
Kraaovnkiy. Viktor Petrovich—doctor of acononic aciencaa. profeaaor
Lyuaov, Matoliy Nikolayavichndoctor of economic aciancea. protaaaor
nitrofmov. Arkadiy Ivmovictw-doctor of aconomic aciencea. profaamor
rhreyoar. Mdray Konatanrinovich—docror of technical aciencaa. protaaeor

naparzmant of Liceracura and Language

Iarabaah, Yuriy Yekovlovichudoccor o! philolosical acicncaa. protaaaor
Vipper. aniy noriaovich-odoctor of philological aciencea

Caduclidxo. Tame: Valerianovichuacadonicim AS Georgian 88R

Daahoriyav, Yunua Daaheriyevich—doctor of philolosicnl aciancaa, protoaaor
Zaaurakiy. Yuan Nikolayevich—doctor of philolosical acicncaa, profamaor
lvanov, Sergey Nikolayavicho-doctor of philologicnl aciencos. profeaaor
Kovalcv, Valentin Arkhipovichndoctor of philolosicml aciancea. profaaaor
Krutikova, Nina Yevsen'yavnaucorreaponding maﬁer AS Ukrainian SSR
Nikol'akiy, Sergay Vaail'yovich—doccor of philolosical ocicncea, profeoaor
Novikov. Veailiy Vaail'ycvich—doctor of philoloaical acioncea. profeaaor
Klurnekhmovn. A813. :lurnakhcnovnc—doctor of philologiccl acicncaa, profeaaor
0vcharonko. Aleksandr Ivanovich—doctor of philolosical cciencea. profaaaor
Pmtilov. Vladimir Zinov'yaviclnadoctor of philolosical aciencaa
Rucorguyeva. Vera Serseyevnaudoctor of philolonical aciencaa. profaaaor
Serabrynkov. chgeniy Alckaandrovich-n-doctor of philological aciancaa. profeaaor
Solntacv, Vadin Mikhaylovicho-doctor of philological acicncaa, profoamor
Teniahev. Edkhyan Mimich-wdocror of philolosical aciencea, profcaaor
Xhayitncrov. Abdukadyr Khadzhinetovich‘doccor of philological aciencea.
profeuor

Onlyahev. Yevsoniy Potrovich—doctor of philological acicncaa. profaaaor

Siberian Dapartmnnt

Dominov. Scrgay Vaail'yevich-doctor of phyaico-nathenatical aciencaa,
profeaaor

Bosolapov. Konacantin Vladinirovicn-odoctor of geological-mineralogical aci-
cncaa. proteaaor

Boldyrov, Vladimir VymchemlavovidP-doctor of chemical acicncca, profeuor
Val‘tukh, Konotancin Knrtovich—doctor of cconodc aciancaa. profeaaor
Votincoov. Konatmtin Konatmtinovich—doctor of geographical acicncaa
Gitel'aon. loaif laayavich—doctor of madical aciencea. profeoaor
Godwikov. Alabandr Mohamdrovichu-doctor oi zoological-mineralogical
aciencea. profeaaor

Gol'dahtik. uikhai: Alckamdrovich—doctor of phyaico-nathanntical aciancaa,
profaaaor

Gorbmov. Valariy l'cdorovichudoctor of technical aciencca. profeaaor
Creators, Alexandr Grigor’yavichudoctor of economic aciencaa. profeaaor

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Deribss. Andrey Androyevichndoccor of physico-esrhonsricsl sciences.
professor

Disov. Cennsdiy lvmovidwdoctor of physico-nrhsosricsl sciences. professor
Dobrersov. Nikolsy uont'yevich—docror of seolosicsl-ninerslogicsl sciences.
professor

Dolgov. Yuriy Alsksmdrovichndocror of geologicsl-einsrslosicsl sciences.
professor

Dulov. Vikror Georginvichndoctor of physico-esthonstiosl sciences. professor
Zhukov, Hikhsil Abrssovichudocror of geologicsl-sinerslogicsl soeincss
lpsrchenko, Vsl'csr Alskssyevich—docror of physico-esthensticsl sciences.
professor

trout. Blil‘ Perrovich—docror of geologicsl-ninorslogicol sciences. professor
Kovol'skiy, Virsliy Vlsdisirovichndoctor of soologicsl-ninerslosicsl sciences
Korlov. Yuriy Psvlovich~doctor of biologicsl sciences. professor

Kostylev. Alekssndr Duirriysvich—doccor of cochnicsl scienoes, professor
Krsvdusnko. Aleksmdr Filippovioh-udocror of physico-serhesscicsl sciences,
professor

Krsndslev. Psdor Psrrovichudocror of seologicsl-sinerslogicsl sciences.
professor

Krylov. Sergey Vuil‘yevich—docror of geologicsl-ninerslogicsl sciences
Kusnersov. rodor Andreyevich—docror of cheeicsl sciences, professor

Kuz'lin. Arlen Il'ichudoczor of physico-esrhensticsl sciences. professor
Kuslnev, Vsdin Georgiyevichndcotor of geologicsl-einerslogicsl sciences
Lisovskiy, Genrikh Nikhsylovich—docror of biologicel sciences, professor
mechev, Nikolsy Alskseysvich—doctor of geological-linerslosicsl sciences
Nsrslov. Lev Nikolsysvichndoctor of physico-Isrhelssticsl sciences. professor
Hsksrov. Vsleriy Leonidovichudoctor of physico-esthessricsl sciences, professor
Hesyets. Gennsdiy Mdreyevich—doctor of reﬂmicsl sciences. professor
Hikhsylov, Vlsdieir Andreyevich—docror of dislicsl sciences. professor
Honskhov, Vslenrin Nikolsyevich—docror of physico-nschensricsl sciences.
professor

Mokhosoyev, Merits Vseil'yevich—doctor of chenicsl sciences, professor
Nskoryskov. Vledinir Yel .ro'.‘yevich-doctor of technicsl sciences. professor
Peshchevitskiy. Boris Ivmovich—docror of due-icsl sciences. professor

Pious. Georaiy Vlsdinirovich—doctor of geologicsl-ninerslogicsl sciences,
professor

Polyskov, Glob Vlsdinirovich—docror of geologicsl-ninsrslosicsl sciences
Reykhbsun. Yokov nsvydovidI—docror of physico-nsrheesricsl sciences. professor
Rsurim. Sergey clebovich—docror of physico-nsrheesticsl sciences, professor
Rebrov. Aleksey Kux'lichudocror of physico-sstheesticsl sciences, professor
Rysshonceev. Nikolsy Psvlovich—doctor of technicsl sciences, professor
Sslysyev. Ryurik Konstsntioovich—doctor of biological sciences

Serebryekov. Vssiliy Vssil'yevich—docror of physico-ssrhessricsl sciences
Snirnov. laonid Srepsnovich-odocror of physico-esthensricsl sciences.
professor

Sobolev, Nikoley Vledieirovich—doctor of geologicsl-ninerslogicsl sciences
Solo-cow, Nikite Gsvrilovich—docror of biologicsl sciences. professor
Suvsrnev, Vitsliy Orisor'yevich—docror of technicsl sciences, professor

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

Sax-kw. Viktor Sou-novich-odoctor of goological-Iinoralogical ocioocu,
proton-or

Taraoauko. Nikolay mitriyoviclw-doccor of biological aciancu

'l'itov, Vlodinit Mikhoylovich—doccor o! phyoico-uchalatical ocioncoo.
profouor

l'tiahin, Yuriy Ahkooyavich-doccor of physico-nathalatical acioncoa
radulov. Auk-and: Innokout'yovich—doctor of technical ocionooo. profouor
Motayov. Vania-in Pavlovich~doctor of physico-uthauticol ocionooo
Ohafor. Yuriy Gooniyovidt—doctor of phyoico-aathuatical ocionooo
Shun”, Vladinir Konuantinovidlndoctor of biological acionooa
8hd|orbakov. lsor' Pottovich-odoctor of biological ociaoooo, protouor

Utal Sciantitic Count

Bol’ohakov. Vladimir Nikolayuich—doctor of biological ocioncu. profauor
Hikhoyov, Mikhail Nikolayovich—doctor of todmical aciancca. profouor
mtov, Yovgoniy Akimich—doctor of phyaico-Iathoaatical acioocoa. proton-or

Par-Bantam Scientific Canto;

Vlaoov. Georgiy Mikhaylovich—doctor of zoological-moralogicd. acioucoa
Govot. lvm Nikolayovichwdoctor of pological-uinoralogical acioncoo.
protouo:

Danvyanko. Anacoliy Pantoloyovich—doctor of hiatorical ocianooo. profauor
Dikov. ﬂuolay Nikolayovidtudoctor of hiacorical ocionooo

lppolitov. Yovsooiy Goorgiyovich-doctor of cho-ical ocioncaa

Kulioh. Yovgooiy Alakoayovich—doctor of pologicaldninoralogical ocioncoa
ﬂouoyonko. Valontin Grigor'yovidt-doctor of geologicd-ninoralosical ocioucu
Sam-y“, Kouotantin Podomich-ﬁoctor of uologicaloninoralogical ocioacco
Sidorov, Anatoliy nonunion—doctor of pological-niooralosical aducu
‘ril'm. Solo-on Hatkovich-doccor of uolosical-ninoralogical ociooou.
profuaor

had, Grigoriy Hakoimidi—doctor of soolaical-ninoralogical ocionooa.
profouor

Sludaoglov, Alokaoy Dnitriyavicho-doctor of goological-niuoralosical ocicncu.
profuaor

comments: ladatol'otvo "Nauka", ”Vootnik Ahab-ii Rank 88511", 1979

769 7
C30: 1870

67
10% OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (JULY

PUBLICATIONS

METHODS OF IWIOATINO STABILITY OF NUCLEAR REACTORS

ibscow Imam IBSLEDOVANIYA US‘IOYCHIVOSTI YADBRNYIO! REAK'I’OROV in Russian
1971 signed to press 9 Nov 77. pp 1-3:. 293-296

(Annotation. table of contents and foreword from book by V. D. Ooryachenko.
Atonisdat. 1.600 copies. 296 pp]

[Text] This book deals with-one or the central questions or the dynamics of
nuclear facilities. the stability or stationary operating regises or nuclear
power reactors. The Iain-results of analysis or the stability of nonlinear
dynusic system of various types are discussed: with concentrated parameters.
with delayed and with distributed paraseters. These results are applied to
derivation of stability criteria and to particular analyses of the stability
of stationary regimes in nuclear reactors or various types. Considerable
attention is devoted to analysis of large-scale and overall stability through
nonlinear aatheaatical models of reactor dynamics. The analysis is based on
Lyspunov's second method and frequency criteria of absolute stability.

The book is intended for specialists engaged in calculation of the dynamics
of nuclear power facilities and will also be useml for persons interested
in applications or the theory of stability of action.

Figures, 58. Bibliograph)’. 279 items.
Contents Page
Foreword 3

Chapter 1. Characteristics of Mathematical Hodels of Nuclear Reactor
Dynamics.......
l.l The nuclear reactor as a systea with teedback....................
1.2 Models otreactor kinetics
1.3 Types offeedback................................................
Blbliography..........................................................

pas-
VIWGVI‘JI

‘8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Stability of Systems with Concentrated Parameters. . . . . . . . . . .
2.1 iynpunov stability. Basic definitions.......
2.2 Definition of stability under constant perturbation. Connection
with hyapunov stability........................................

hyapunov's direct method..

Some applications of Lyapunov's direct method to the analysis of
reactor stability..............................................

10.1 The homogeneous reactor with linear temperature feedback...”

.h.2 Popov's theorem on the stabilizing effect of delayed

h

noutronﬂ...................-...............................

MID
o.

3 Concluding observations..................................,...
int-approximation stability....................................
5.l Linearization. Lyapunov'a main theorems
5.2 The Gurvits criterion........................................
5.3 The D—decomposition method...................................
6

6

'ljo

N N
. o
MNQMNMWM MN PW

Examples of first-approximation investigation or stability.......
1 The simplest model orahomogeneous reactor..................
.2 II‘he discrete analog of self-excitation of longitudinal

fuel element vibrations....................................
2.7 Conclusion.......................................................
Bibliography..........................................................

Chapter 3. Stability of Systems with Delay
3.l Statement of the problem. Definition of stability. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Lyapunov' a direct method for equations with aftererrects. . . . . . . . .

3.2.1 Basic definitions....................... ...
3.2.2 Krasovskiy' s theorem on asymptotic stability or systems with
arterei'fects...............................................
3.2.3 Hale's theorem for autonomous systems........................
3.2.“ The Lyapunov function method for systems with delay..........

3.3 Investigation of a simplified model of coupled nuclear reactors
by Lyapunov's direct method.
3.3.1 Construction of a Lyapunov-Krasovskiy ninetion...............
3.3.2 Analysis of a special case of the problan using the Lyapunov
function method....
3.1: Lyapunov's direct method for mum-differential systems........
3.10.1 Statement or the problu. Definition of stability...........
3.h.2 Lyapunov's direct method.
3.5 int-approximationstability....................................
3.5.1 Basic theorems. The characteristic quasipolynomial..........
3.5.2 Some characteristics or quasipolynomials.....................
3.5.3 The unimportance or null delays.............................
3.5.10 The admissibility of an approximate description of the delay
in stability analysis............ ...

3.5.5 0n methods of studying the distribution of the zeroes of

quasipolynomials...........................................
3.6 Stability with random and large delays
3.6.1 Random delays................................................

3.6.2 Large delays
3.? A reactor with convection delays.................................
Bibliography..

' 109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter h. Stability of systems with Distributed Parameters............ '12
h.1 Definition of stability. Lyapunov's direct method............... 72
h.2 Model of a homogeneous reactor vithoud delayed neutrons.......... 75
h.3 Methods of studying the stability of linearized distributed

.yo‘m.‘ODOIOCOOOCOOCQODOIQOO...'00...IOOICOOIIO0.00.0.0.0...00 77
The characteristic equations of linearized systema........... 78
The pctt“rb°ti°n ”gmdDOIOOOOO‘DIIDOO0.000.000.0l00005l00000 80
The Guerk£n .e‘m...I.D0..II0.0.00....OOOOOOOIOOOOIOOODODOI 82
Derivation of an approximate characteristic; equation by

transformation of the initial system by the straight-line
ue‘hod.‘OI.0.0.0.CO0.0I...OOIOCDOOOCCIOOJOOOOI.‘I'OCOOOOQOO 8h
h.3.5 Analysi: of stability according to type of transition
processes in a linearized system........................... 85
5.3.6 Numerical construction by computer of the boundaries of
a D-decomposition for linearised distributed systems....... 86
".33! An example of construction of a D-curve...................... 89
BibliograpWCQOiotODOQDOIIOOUIIOO‘0.IOOQOOOOUIOIOOODOOOOOO.1.00.5.0... 92

fl???
0 s o o
wuww
8’90”“

a

Chapter 5. Frequency Methods of Investigating Stability of Nonlinear
Dynamic Systems. The Popov Criterion..................... 9h

5.1 Definitions and statement of the problem....¢.................... 9h
5'2 The Popov criterionOOOODOCDOOOOOO.(I.QOIOIOOOIOO'OOIOOOOIOOOI.00. 96
5.3 Stability conditions in special (critical) cases. Transformation

of shift of poles.............................................. 97
5.h An example of the application of the Popov criterion: a

reactor with convection time delay............................. 101
5'5 The YaubOVICh thssesssesasssensesseesseeeeeassseessseesseses 105
5 6 Some generalizations of the Popov criterion...................... 108

5 6 1 The Popov criterion for systems vith several nonlinear
mtion.‘IOOIOCOOOO§OOOOOQOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOIOIOODDO0.0000. 1”
5.6.2 Frequency conditions for stability of systems with nonlinear
functions of several variables............................. 110
5.6.3 Generalization of frequency conditions in (5.5).............. 111
5.6.h Yakubovich's matrix inequality............................... 111
5.7 Frequency criteria for stability of nonlinear nuclear reactor

”91.000.000.00000000IOOOOODOOOOOOCOOOOODOOOIOOOOOOIOOOOOIOOOO 11”

1.1 The application of the Popov criterion....................... llh
7.2 Melton's criterion........................................... 115
7
i

5.
5.
5 .3 Other frequency criteria..................................... 11?
Bibi ography.......................................................... 122

Chapter 6. Stability of heterogeneous nuclear Resctors................. 125

6.1 A two-temperature point model of a heterogeneous reactor......... 125

6.1.1 Statement of the problem and the mathematical model.......... 125

6.1.2 Investigation of overall stability in relation to slov

processes.................................................. 128

6.1.3 The Lur'ye method. Overall stability for fast processes..... 133
6.1.h Stability analysis of two-temperature point model vithout
division into fast and slov processes. Allowance for a

nonlinear regulator........................................ 151

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

2
6.2.1
6.2.2
6.3
6I381
6.3.2

FOR OFPXCIAL USE ONLY

The Inltiﬁcﬂpel‘ature mln‘ melsssssssssssssossecesssssssssoesss

concen‘rnted reedblcklseessosssssesssssosssssssslssssessssoso
leed feedback-tosssssesosossssessssosseesssesssssseoseseso

The diffusion model of a heterogeneous reactor...................

Concentrated feedback........................................
DiStrlbuted fecdhlck......nn......................u.......

Bihl‘osr‘pMsssssssesone.soaesasssososessssseosetsseeesoassessssssssse

Chapter 1.

Stability of Coupled Nuclear Reactors.......................

701 In‘roduc‘ion.‘.0IO..6850...to.U...l0.000IOOODOODIODIDIOOOOOIUU...
7.2 Investigation of small-scale stability of two coupled reactors...

MID” N”

VIEW-n) ”H

e s

Linearized dynamical equations. The characteristic equation.
Stability in the limiting cases of infinitely large and
infinitely small coupling coefficients.....................
Coupling of identical subsystems.............................
Application of the results to coupling of two resctors.......
Conclusion. Formulation of the problem of "decomposition"
of reactor coupling....... ................................

nulber of coupled reactors.....................................

.3.1
.3.2
70
.h.1
h

. .2

.h.3 Algorithm for detersdning necessary and sufficient conditions

1.5.h

Stability of different reactors..............................
Stability of identical reactors..............................

Assumptions and lathe-stical model...........................
Derivation of the characteristic equation....................

7
1
1
1
1
1.3 Sufficient conditions for saall-scale stability in an arbitrary
1
1
h
1
1
1

for stability of coupling of identical reactors............
Special cases................................................

1.5 Sufficient conditions for overall stability in terms of slow
proce..°.00O...COC0.0‘COOOIOO00.0.00I.00.0COCICOIOOOOCOOOOOCOOC

1.6 Sufficient conditions for overall stability in the general case..
1.1 Frequency conditions for overall stability.......................
Bibliography..........................................................

Chapter 8.

Stability of Reactors with circulating Puel (RTsG)..........

8.1 Introduction.....................................................

8.2 Investigation of kinetic equations. Stability of RTsG vith
pover coefficient of reactivity................................

8.3 Small-scale stability neglecting delayed neutrons................

8.3.1
8.3.2

Noncompressible nuclear fuel.................................
Nuclear fuel of variable density.............................

8.h Investigation of overall stability by Lyapunov's direct method...
8.5 The frequency criterion of overall stability.....................
Bibliography..........................................................

Chapter 9.

Acoustical Instability of Nuclear Reactors..................

9.1 Introduction.....................................................
9.2 Qualitative study of conditions for stimulation of acoustic
vibrations in nuclear reactors using discrete models...........

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1&3
119
1M9
15!.
15k
156
165

167
167
171
171

112

173
116

111
118

118
182

tability of coupled'reactors with hydraulic and neutron coupling 181

181
181

190
192

193
191
201
208

211
211

212
219
219
223
233
237
239

2b1
2h1

2hh
FOR OFFICIAL U33 ONLY

9.2.1 The gaseous-fuel reactor. Approximation of the core by a

'1n81e r°.°n‘wr0000II000000lbsone!ODDOOOSDOUOOOOIOOIOOIOIO 2"“
9.2.2 The gaseous-fuel reactor. Approximation of the core by two

recon.t°r..ll0.0060000000000000...IlOOODOIO0.00.00.00.00... 252
9.2.3 A heterogeneous reactor with gaseous heat carrier............ 259

9.3 Simplified analysis of self-stimulation of acoustic vibrations
‘n “11"!sz reactorﬂn........................”unnunu. 263
9.3.1 Basic assumptions. Mathematical model....................... 26h
9.3.2 A reactor with gaseous circulating fuel...................... 265
9.3.3 A reactor with gaseous heat carrier.......................... 212
9.1: Acoustic instabilities of large-scale R‘l‘sO's..................... 27?
9.b.l Statement of the problem. Dynamic equations................. 27'!
9.h.2 Derivation of camputational formulas......................... 278
9.h.3 Calculation results and conclusions.......................... 281
B‘bllo‘r‘pw.‘blI.0I.06OIOb.0.000IOOOOOODIIOOOUIOOIOIOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 28'.

Supplement. Investigation of the stability of diffusion models of
reactors using a finite-difference approximation with
33‘1“ coordinates....o................................. 287
81b1£°u.pmlto00.IIOCO0.0000000.0.0.00.0.0000000000UOOIOOQOOOOOOOOCOO 292

Foreword

The development of contemporary nuclear power engineering is characterised by
a tendency to develop complex nuclear power units (YeEU) with a large specific
energy output. These conditions result in increasing demands on the operating
characteristics of nuclear power facilities and their performance qualities.
Not surprisingly. the same requirements apply to reactor dynamics calculations.
One of the central points of these calculations is the analysis of the stabil-
ity of stationary operating regimes for nuclear units. for the stability of
stationary regimes is the characteristic which to a considerable degree de-
termines the viability of the unit and the possibility of normal operation.

It is no coincidence that more than 1,000 works', mostly published in various
periodicals. have been devoted to the stability of nuclear reactors, even
though it might seen a very narrow question in the study of nuclear power
facilities. The need for a systematic exposition of the results of stability
studies of nuclear power units has become pressing. but it has seemed impos-
sible to encompass all the material in a relatively small book. The main aim
of the present book, as well as of the author's earlier book produced in
1971", is to describe methods of theoretical study of nuclear reactor stabil-

ity and several of their applications to the analysis of stability in reactors
of particular types.

' For confirmation see Bibliograficheshiy ukazatel' rabot po ustoychivosti
statsionarnykh rezhimov yadernykh energeticheskikh ustanovok (1991-1913 gg.)
[Bibliography of Works on Stability of Stationary Regimes of Nuclear Power
Units (1951:4913). Moscow. TsNII'i‘Iatominfox-m. 1971:. Although clearly incom-
plete and covering only the period to 1913. it still lists more than 800 works
on various aspects of nuclear power unit stability.

" V. D. Goryaehenko. Hetody teorii ustoychivosti v dinsnike yadernykh reak-
torov [Stability Theory Methods in Nuclear Reactor Dynamics]. Atomizdat. 1971.

mi nun-#3 "QB nanv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Chapters 2-5. the results of the theory of stability of dynamic systems
are described. generally without proof. Pacts which are of interest for
applied problems. in particular the problems of nuclear power plant stability,

are included. The discussion is accompanied by analysis of simplified models
of reactor dynamics.

From a physical point of view. the most interesting material is concentrated
in Chapters 6-9 (serving at the same time as a rather extensive illustration
of the mathematical methods which can be applied). Much attention has been
devoted to the poet difficult problem. that of large-scale and overall stabil-
ity of reactors. i.e. analysis of stability with indication of the range of
allowable initial perturbations of the stationary regime. The sole exception
is Chapter 9. in which thermoacoustic instability in reactors with gaseous
heat carriers or fuel is studied by linearized models. This question is so

complex that even with linear treatment it is not yet adequately handled in
the literature.

The author considers it his pleasant duty to express his warm thanks to Ya.
V. Shevelev for his interest and his critical remarks. to F. M. Mitenkov.

B. I. Motorov and V. V. Plechin for moral support and assistance. and to his
coworkers Yu. r. Trunin. V. A. Denisov and R. A. Babkin for their assistnace
in writing individual chapters.

COPYRIGliT: Atomi zdat . 1977.

81:80
080: 1870

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WM?!”

W1C CHARACTERISTICS AND momma-Puma W01! 0 WIN
mm AND we

Moecov TRIO? 0mm mm nucmxoco IWA mm P. N. we
mu W 8881! in Meien Vol 82, 1975 aimed to preee 31 ﬂat 15 p 2. 103

[Annotation and Table of Contents tro- book edited by Acadeoician N. 0. snow
Irdatel'etvo ﬂauha, 1,500 copiee. 104 paoee)

[hxtl The lethode of preparing apecilene of ewerconducting utale and
alloya euiteble (or inveetiqaticne of optical and tunnel characterietice
are outlined in the collection. the optical propertiee ot a nuer of pure
Iaetala and alloye in the intrared and vieible regione of the epectru are
etudied. The electron characterietice are found.

me publication ia intended for ecientitic vortere. poetgraduate etMente

and atudente involved in problau of ewerconductivity. Ietal optica and
electron propertiee ot netale.

Contente Page

I. 0. llaeh. lnveetiqatiog the Optical Propertiee and Blectm
ataraoterietice of Soee Traneition lIetale . . . . . . . . . 3

“W‘MOeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeeoeeeee 3

chine: 1. Survey of Bxperiacntal work on Inveetiqation of the Optical
Propertieao!1‘raneitionuetale.............. 5

chapter 2. Relationehip Between Optical constant- and electron
Characterieticeoiuetele................. 16
1. General pattern of the optical properties of letale . . . . 16
2. neletionehip of £1. and 6'. to characterietice of
mutt” .103“ 0 I O O O 0 O O o O O 0 O 0 e O O 0 O 17
3. Dependence of t n, and 6", 0n diaracterietice of “Bragg“
.1.m O 0 0 e O 0 O C O O O O o O O O O I O O O O 0 o 0 19

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Gupta: 3.

1.
3.

3.

Gupta: 4.

Gupta: 6.

POR MICIAL US: ONLY

Intanona Trmttlon Banda Ralatad to unaa of tntauactton
Otqupl‘n..aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaoaa
blatanca from tha cantar of tha m. point a. to ﬂu um
Olintomcuonofarnqulmt. a a a a a a a a a a a a.0
uqan valuaa and upon tmctioua of alactrou vhoaa pulua
ara daplctad by point. on tha una of tntaraaotton at an”

91m.alto...toaaooaaoooooatooao

Margy gapa of intaaona txanattsona ralatad to Lntauactlon
of. Bragg planet for A1, A2. A3 and A15 latttcaa . . . . . .

Math“ of Mountaunta and export-ant“ Installation . . .

wd‘nm ".qu I I I I I I 0 O O I O I I I
wac‘l mm" of I‘m- I O l I I I I I I I
Opticaleonatantaotvanaum. . . . . . . . . .
Optical countanta of niobtu-vanauu alloya . .

Procautng Mari-null Data and Mama-atom of malt.
nqorttha for pxooaaatng axpauaantal data . . . . . .
det‘. ”d ntw“. O I I I I I I O I I I I I I I I I
WV ‘11”. o 0 O I I O I I O I I O I O I I I a I I I I
,‘mlh I I I I I I I I I O I I I I I O I I I I I I 0
m3“ .11” I O I I O O I O I I O O I I O O I O I I I I

Datamtning tha conatanta of datum-phonon inta:
Agpandthaanacttvamulo-bpotanttal p' . . . . . . .

aaa-ao
oaaaoo

mltoquphy.....................o.......

A. I. Golovaahktn, I. s. lavchanm and G. P. Notnlavtch. Charactaruttca

of

Supareonducting Alloya with ”pa us Lattica (ballad by

Vacum-Bvaporatlonnathod ..................

1.
2.

3.
‘I
s.

mmwuw I I O I I I O O I I I I O I I O I I I I I O I
Manufactura of auparccndncttnq alloya by tha vacuu-
avaponttcnaathod ................
Hathodaotlaaamnanta..............
Proporttaa of £11- 02 tha anaatigatad alloya . .
wanton. I O I I I I I I O I I I I I I O O I I I

Buliw'MYOaaaaaoaaaaaaoaalaaaaaaaaaaa!

comm :

6521
C80:

1870

Imul'ntvo ”Nam“. 1975

55
mi ormm. us: ONLY

31

22
27
33

3‘
3‘
37

43
43
45
52
60
65

68
70

72
72

72
79
BS
97

101
POI! OPPICIM. 083 MY

ﬁlamentous

KINETIC ms 110 lbw-PW SYSTEMS 11‘ A M8811 MISSION FIELD

“China! KINETICﬂBSKIYE mam V tum-70mm 813mm V POLE
unmoco :mcumnu 1n Imoohn 1976 otgnod to pron 1S Sop 76 p 2. 169-170

[mutton ond m1. of Contonto txoo book by 31o21ond1 Potrovtch stay-moldy.
radotd'otvo 8ht11ntoo. 610 ooptoo. 172 pogoo)

[Rte] 11!. ught oboorptton cootuciont in natural oonLccnductoro 1o 11:-
voottgotod in tho nonoqnph \dth mogord to cryotol 1ott1co v1brot1ono. An
uglonotion o! Uzhoch‘o oopiztcol 1m in noturo1 oodcohdnotoro o! typo

A1 13", oboorvod «pod-among! 1n thooo coqoundo, 1o qlvon for tho “at
tho. Spoctuoony. tho procooooo of o1octrooognot1c xod1ot1on ohoorpt1on
1n o1octron-phohon oyotooo 1n oxtornol “old: on oono1doxod. A groot doo1
of ottont1oa 1o dovotod to may 0! tho k1not1o procouoo 1n oomtcooductoro
11: o pontortvn hoot ontooion nold. Tho phonouohon of ugnoto-mfrorod
rooomnoo whon tho mo: odooton (may 1- clooo to cyclotron froquoocy.
1o 1nvoot19otod 1n dotou to tho popor ohd tho oond1t1ono of oxportnontol
oburvot1on of th1o otfoct oro d1ocuuod.

Tho book 1- intoMod for oc1ont1£1c workoro. pootgtoduoto otulonto one
otuohto o! odvohcoo courooo opoc1oua1hg in tho (sold of colic-onto
phyoico ond thoorotlcol phyo1co.

Oontonto Pogo

Inuoduct1m.....o....o.....a........co.o 3

Chopto: 1. mama: Opticol run-tum 1n Noturol Soucmdoctoto .
1.?ootu1ot1onofthoproh1ol... ............
2. Option tnnoitlono hotvoon mo hoving oxttonc volmo

In tho contor of tho Stillman mo. much v1th
“pod-out....................... 16

0G

Gupta: 2. magma. Opucol non-um in Roma Sodowductoro
1nthoPtooonooothoorh1oo1on............. 28
3. Pootuutton of tho promos. Gonoro1 rolottono . . . . . 29

56
PM MIC!” 088 MY
d.
S.
6.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Light absorption coefficient near the edge of natural
absorption ins laser enission field . . . . . . . . .
Behavior of the light absorption coefficient in the

long-wave region in the presence of laser liwting . .
Indirect optiosl transitions in a power laser emission
field. control of Gann instability by using a laser .

dasptsr 3. night Absorption in natural Semiconductors in a Quantising
Wuo P‘.1d I O O O I O O I 0 O I O O O C O O O O 6 0

'I.
8.

9.
10.

“ﬁt absorption coefficient in a ugnetio field with
regard to crystal lattioe vibrations . . . . . . . . .
Behavior of the li¢tt absorption coefficient in a
nagnetio field in the long-wave region . . . . . . . .
Bffeot of acoustic phonons on the Johnson-Larsen effect
:ntersone light absorption in a magnetic field with
regard to carrier scattering ispurities . . . . . . .

Chapter d. Light Absorption in Natural Seniconductors in a musing
Magnetic Field in the Presence of Laser hission .0 . . .
ll. affect of optical resonances on light absorption and

12.
13.
ll.
15.
16.

luninescenoe.....................
Theory of Iagnetio absorption in the presence of loner
.l‘..1m.eeesssooeos_oeeeeseoooe
Behavior of the light absorption coefficient in the
emetic-infraredresonancenods. . . . . . . . . . .
Characteristics of behavior of the second nagnetic
absorption peak in a rosonanoo laser snission field .
Indirect optical transitions in a unifors asgnetic
field in the presence of resonant» laser emission . .
shape of intersone light absorption line in crossed
electric and Iagnetic fields in the presence of reso-
nancelosereeission.................

Clip“! 5. Investigating lunatic Effects in more Seniconductors in
. m.’ N..1m ".1d 0 O I O I O O O O O O 0 O 0 O O O

17.
18.

19.

Probability of e-issionless trans-issions in a powerful
electricvavefield .................
hissionless recombination in seniconductors to deep
levels in a strong electronagnetic wave field . . . .
Iquity light absorption in a Iagnetic field in the
presence of resonance laser emission . . . . . . . . .

Appendix l. Calculating the Electron Distribution Motions in an
Electron-Phononswtsn.................

Appendix 2. Expression for the Mass Operator in an Blectron-Phonon
mminauserhissionrield. . . . . . . . . . . .

57
FOR OFFICXAI. USE ONLY

‘0
46
51

57

65
69

74

33

95
105

111

120

m
125
132
139

146

152
Appoint: 3. ammo Proportion of Operator. 5191" we in + 1 tin) 158
“ultwrmy ‘ . . . . . C . D . . . U . . O O . O . O I . . . . . . . ‘62
mm! Imul'ntvo “chutneu‘, 1976

6521
C80: 1870

$8
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

KIRITICS 0? SIMPLE NCILMTION THEORY MODELS

Hoetov TRUDY mm LENIIM PIZIOBBSKOGO INSTITUTA I'M. P.N. LBIBOEV M 8861!:
KINB‘I'IKA mm MODELS? T30R11 KOLBMNI‘! (“notice of Maple Oscillation
Theory liodele) in hueeien 1976 Vol 90 pp 1-6. 208

[Annotetiom Teble of Contente end Introduction froe eonosreph edited by
N. G. Beeov. Izdetel'etvo "Mute." 1.350 copiee. 208 pages]

[Text] The plece of the kinetice of einple nodele in
senerel oecilletion theory is diecueeed. The deecrip-
tion of einple nodele (with e coeperetively eeell

degree of (reedon) in reduced to ordinery differentiel
equetione. ee e rule. including wide-bend noieee. Along
vith direct eolutione the euthore diecuee eethode of
inveetieeting inveree prohlene. Applicetione to verioue
fielde of the neturel eciencee ere exelined. Several
erticlee ere devoted to en enelyeie of epecific problem
ouch ee the kinetice of reconbinin; phone. the necheniel
of eoler cyclicel ectivity. end new proceduree in eedicel
diecnoeie. The collection in intended for epecieliete in
oecilletion theory.

comm-rs Pepe

Foreword 3
Introduction 5
SECTION 1. 5m QUESTION 0“ TB! maunwmn RELAXATION 0P

DENSB PLASMA
Chepter l. Pleene Leeere on Treneitione of Ate-e end Atoeic tone 1‘)
Chepter 2. Kethode o! Shepine end Anelyzins the Kinetice of

Super-cooled Plene 38
Chepter 3. Pleeee Leeere on Treneitione of Dietolic Diepereed

Holeculee 61

59
POI OFFICIAL 088 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Chapter lo. Chemical Cleansing of the Fundanental State of an
Atom in the Active Medium of a Plaana Laser 90
Chapter 5. Problems of Atonic Reactor-Lasers 99

SECTION 2. INVERSE ”031.95 01’ OSCILLA‘IION THEORY

Chapter 6. Schoee for Measuring Kinetic Coefficients 124

Chapter 7. Correlation Methods of Hedical Diagnosis 163

Chapter 8. liodal of Solar Cyclical Activity 15!.

Chapter 9. Phase Self-Stabilisation 198
remake

This book is concerned with nodaling concepts in oscillation theory and
the possibilities of using related nethods of theoretical analysis in a
broad range of problems involving the natural sciences. The purpose of
the book is first of all a nethodological one. Therefore. in discussing
specific problens vhich illustrate end clarify the general concepts of
oscillation theory. the discussion here concerns the concept of the
siaplcst models of the phenomena introduced at the initial stage and their
evolution during the course of the investigation. He aphasite rather
than conceal the incompleteness of the results obtained here, and exanine
the difficulties encountered enroute. noting the mediate goals of research
involved with than vithout losing sight of the prospects of the entire
investigation.

It is not only the nethodologicsl aspects of the problea discussed here

but also the specific conclusions reached in the book that are in theraselves,
in our opinion. of definite value and nay even be of interest to specialists
in the respective branches of the natural sciences. Each chapter has been
written in such a way that it nay read independently of the others. All
nine chapters can be considered a coaplete set of research carried out by
their authors in the past several years. He have not sttenpted here to
connect then by topical or logical "bridges." seaming such work at this
stage to be of little interest. and have thus linited ourselves for the
present only to the "Introduction" written by l.. I. Cudzenko. Chapter 1

was written by 1.. I. Cudsenko with V. V. Yevatigneyev and s. I. Yakovlenko;
Chapter 2 by L. I. Cudaenloo. Yu. I. Syts'ko and s. I. Yakovlenko;

Chapter 3 by L. I. Gudsenko with I. S. Lakoba and S. I. Yakovlenho;

Chapter I: by L. l. Cudtenko and V. S. Harchenko; Chapter 5 by L. I. Cudsenko
and S. l. Yehovlenko; chapters 6. 8 and 9 by L. l. Gudsenko and

V. Ye. Chertoprud; Chapter 7 by L. I. Cudsenko and A. Ye. Sortina.

The book consists of two sections. The introduction discusses the place of
oscillation theory in contenporary natural sciences. A table of contents
is given. The principle of separating the dynanic bonds is formulated and
is then used to develop a correlation nethod for analyzing the inverse
problem.

60
res ORIGIN. US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section 1 uses an example of several contiguous problems of applied physics
to discuss the simplest version of traditional direct problems in oscilla-

tion theory when the movement of a dynamic system about a stable stationary
point is being investigated.

The purpose of this section is to seek active media for powerful sources
of coherent radiation (plasma lasers in various frequency bands) and to
analyse the prospects of designing power-producing reactor-lasers. The
first chapter examines the conditions in a dense supercooled (for free
electrons) plasma leading to inversion of the population of atomic states.
Chapter 2 makes a theoretical study of several methods of preparing super-
cooled plasms. Chapter 3 discusses the character of recombination relaxa-
tion of plasma of inert gases and their mixture with other chemical elements.
Chapter I: formulates the requirements for the chemical composition and the
parameters of the plasma. upon satisfaction of which it is possible to
produce an active medium amplifying the resonance emission of atoms. And
finally Chapter 5 investigates the theoretical possibility of extracting

a substantial amount of energy in the form of laser emission from power
devices such as atomic reactors.

In Section 2. vhich is more unusual in the methodological sense. the specific
problems are rather different. Chapters are included here which illustrate
the results of the correlation method of inverse problems in oscillation
theory. In this sense Chapter 9. which does not directly develop such a
method. is unique; it essentially supplements Chapter 8 on the analysis

of solar cyclical activity which is generated in the course of this

analysis and has independent value as well. Chapter 6 is devoted to a
scheme for measuring the probabilities of nonradiational transitions of
atoms (molecules. ions) in low-temperature plasma based on the correlation
functions of counting. Chapter 7 discusses the principles of the correla-

tion method of medical diagnosis based on the pulsations of major blood
vessels.

COPYRIGHT: Itdatel'stvo ”Nauha." 1976

11736
050: 1870

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATION

THERMAL WYSICS OF FAST-W]! REAC'I'ORS AND EAT-EXCHANGE EQUIPMENT

Minsk BYSTRYYE RBAK'I'ORY I WWB APPARATY A13 8 DISSOTBIRUYUSHCHIM
TBPLONOSITKLBI in Russian 1978 signed to press 2 Feb 78 pp 1-6. 239-2’00

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents from book by V. B. Nesterenko.
A. A. Mikhaylevich and B. Ye. Tverkovkin. Izdatel'stvo "llauka i Tekhnika".
1.000 copies. 2’40 pp]

[Text] This book discusses methods and algorithms for thermophyaical cal-
culations {or fast-neutron reactors and the heat-exchange equipment of nuclear
power stations with dissociating heat carriers. The methods presented by the
authors are oriented toward computer utilisation and make it possible to cal-
culate the local characteristics of heat and mass transfer and the flow re-
sistance or dissociating heat carriers in the reactor circuits and the heat-
exchange equipent. The results of calculation of the parameters of reactors
and heat-exchange equipaent for nuclear power stations with dissociating heat
carriers currently in the design stage are presented. and experimental sub-
stantiation or these results is given.

The book is intended for scientific and engineering-technical personnel in the
nuclear power field. and may be used as a textbook by university students.

Tables. 2". Illustrations, 30. Bibliography, 238 items.
Foreword

Most of the developed nations of the world are planning to develop nuclear
power engineering 4 constructing nuclear electric power stations. which will
play an increasing role in satisfying electrical requirements. In 1975-1976.
10 percent or the total electric energy produced in the European Economic
(Jo-unity and the USA came from nuclear power stations. and by 2000 it is
planned to increase the share to “0-50 percent.

Fast-neutron reactors are the basis of present-day nuclear power engineering.
and they will determine its structure and the consumption of natural uranium
in the next decade. But in view of the limited supplies of cheap natural

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uranium, considerable expansion of nuclear power production is possible only
through fast-neutron reactors in which it will be possible to produce extens-
ive quantities of fissionable nuclear fuel. increasing the efficiency of util-
ization of natural uranium 30-100 times. The period during which it is econ-
omically necessary to double the production of electrical energy is 8-10
years in most countries of the world, whereas the period during which it is
expected to be necessary to double nuclear power production capacities is 5
years. Nuclear power engineering can fulfill the hopes that are reposed in
it and become the critical factor in energy supply if fast-neutron reactors
which can double the quantity of secondary fissionable fuel in h-6 years are
developed. In this case the decisive role in the nuclear fuel balance will
shift to plutonium produced in fast-neutron reactors, and the system of
nuclear power stations with thermal and fast-neutron reactors will be able

to assure its own development with limited use of natural uranium sources

in the initial stage, with subsequent operation of the system of nuclear power

stations on waste uranium and secondary plutonium produced by fast-neutron
reactors.

In the USSR, the 08A, France, England. West Germany, Japan and other countries,
the main efforts are being concentrated on the development, construction and
comissioning of fast-neutron reactors using sodium. The recent develoment
of cosssercial large-capacity nuclear power stations (1200-1500 We) and the
experience of putting demonstration stations into operation have shown that
it is realistic and economically advantageous to continue the development of
electric power production with fast-neutron reactors, and that these reactors
are fully practicable, although the planned period for doubling of capacity
will be 10-15 years. longer than required, while the unreliable operation of
sodium-water-steam generators still makes it impossible to consider that the
Na-lIa-Hao heat conversion system has been mastered, to expect a high percent-
age of utilization of capacity, or to recomend extensive construction of
this type of nuclear power station.

Accordingly, in recent years the study of alternative types of breeders, gas-
cooled fast-neutron reactors using helium and N20)" has expanded consider-
ably.

In foreign gas~cooled breeder development projects it is not proposed to make
extensive use of the experience in helium reactor technology accumulated in
thermal reactors. although a pressure of 25-h0 bars was mastered in the de-
velopment of high-temperature gas-graphite reactors, and it is planned to
use helium at 120-170 bars to obtain significant physical advantages (large
conversion ratios) in gas fast-neutron reactors as compared with sodium-
cooled breeders. In the development of nuclear power stations with helium
breeder reactors. considerable hopes are pinned to simplification of the heat-
convcrsior. system by changing from the three-circuit system of the sodium re-
actor to the two-circuit lie-lie) system, and in the long run it is hoped to
implement a single-circuit gas turbine cycle based on helim.

However, in gas-cooled fast-neutron reactors using helium we are faced with
the difficult problems of sealing of circuits in large-capacity power stations

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as a result of the great fluidity of helium. and of assuring emergency cool-

tngkof a helium breeder reactor when the sealing of the cooling circuit is
ro en.

Since 1965. the Institute of Nuclear Power Engineering, Belorussian 88R Aca-
demy of Sciences. has been conducting comprehensive experiments on dissociat-

ing nitrogen tetroxide as a promising heat carrier and working substance for
nuclear power stations.

Nitrogen tetroxide has a number of thermophysical properties as a heat carrier
and working substance for power stations which make it possible to attain
calorific intensities as high as 800-1200 kH/liter in the core of a fast-
neutron reactor at 120-160 bars and zoo-500° c. along with good physical
characteristics. a simple single-circuit heat-conversion system. improved
weight and size characteristics of turbines and heat exchangers and so on.

The main properties of 11201, as a heat carrier and working substance are as
follows:

the large thermal effect from the chemical reactions of dissociation during
heating and recombination during cooling ("203,3 21(02. 623.9 kJ/kg :2 2'00
02. 1226.8 kJ/kg) increases the heat exchange coefficient by a factor of 2-3
through a new mechanism of heat transfer by concentration difmsion. making
it possible to organise intensive heat collection in the core of the fast-
neutron reactor (800-1200 kill/liter at 120-500° c and 120-160bars) and in
heat-exchange apparatus;

the saturation-curve physical and chemical properties of H201. and the low heat
of evaporation (“l9 kJ/kg) make it possible to implement an Haw-based gas-
liquid cycle at temperatures 30-500° c and pressures of 2-110 bars with a
high-efficiency. simple heat regeneration system;

the high thermophysical properties in a broad range of temperatures and pres-
sures (c -2.93-3.3§ kJ/kg-deg at 150 bars in a temperature range of zoo-hsc‘
C. 1 I 130-200 kg/m ) make it possible to increase heat extraction by a fac-
tor of 2-2.5 in comparison with sodium;

the low specific volume and residual gas pressure after the turbine make it
possible to develop a compact gas turbine.

In nuclear power stations using gas-cooled N205 fast-neutron reactors, the
main difficulty is that of developing and testing fuel compositions which
are compatible with a dissociating gas and which contain minimum quantities
of construction materials. along with reliable location and neutralization of
breakdown emissions of the toxic heat carrier. and implementation of effect-
ive systems for removal of corrosion products from the heat carrier.

The foreword. introduction and Chapters 1 and 2 were written by V. 3. Heater-
enko. Chapter 3 by B. Ye. Twerkovkin. and Chapters 5 and S by A. A. Mikhale-
wich.

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Participantn in the writing or individual sections of the book were: 1.3,

I. B. llestersnko; 2.10. Ye. P. chaleva. 1.. A. Bida, M. A. Kharitonyuk and

1.. '1'. bcaako; 2.2, V. P. Gol'tsev. Section 15.2 was written by A. A. Andri-
zhiyevskiy. The results descriwed in Chapter 5 were obtained in company with
M. Ye. Salukvadse. A. N. Ioseliani and R. O. Bobclewskiy.

The authors have to express their deep gratitude to Academician of the Belo-
russian Acadew of Sciences A. K. Krasin for his constant attention to their

work .

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Symbols 7
Introduction 9

Chapter 1. Prospects for Development or nuclear Power Stations Using

1.1
1.2
1.3
1.1.

Gas-Cooled Fast-neutron Reactors..... 15

Analysis of foreign and domestic power station projects including

gas-cooled fast-neutron reactors.... .................. ......... l6
Prospects for use of a dissociating heat carrier in nuclear

power stations with fast-neutron reactors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2‘.
Characteristics of the 1‘20); heat conversion system for nuclear

power stations................................................. 29
Safety problems in nuclear power stations with fast-neutron

reactors cooled by R20]. 36

Chapter 2. The Status of Research on Thermophysical and Operating

2.1
2.2

2.3

2.):

Characteristics of Dissociating ﬂeat Carriers. . . . . . . . . . . . . ho
Thermophysical and physical-chemical properties of N20”. . . . . . . . . . 1.2
Design materials for nuclear power stations using lacy-cooled

fast-neutron reactors ’16
The heat-carrier process and the experience or operating bench

models and loop units with I20... Sh
Radioactive contamination of I 05 in stations with fast-neutron

reactors and problems or pur fication.......................... 59

Chapter 3. Thermophysical Calculations for a Gas-Cooled nuclear

3.1
2

3.
3-3
30"

Reactor................................................... 68
A method of thermohydraulic calculation for mel cells........... 68
A method of determining temperature fields in the fuel element... 77
The effect or variable heat production along the channel on
heat output.................................................... 85-
Experiaental substantiation of the methods of reactor
calculations................................................... 93

Chapter 5. Calculations for heat-Euchange Apparatus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120

5.1
L2

EVaporation regenerator.......................................... 120
Hydrodynamic stability of two-phase flow in a system of parallel
steal generation channels 11:1

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
h.3

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

Air-cool“ condenaorOOOI‘l.000$IO!lllntlllttooolDOOUIOUIDOOOODOOO
h.h Hater-cooled condcnoor and water supply system...................
h.5 Experiaental verification of calculation nethods.................

Chapter 5.

Methods of Optimization of heat-Exchange Equipaont
mmteratOOOOOOIOUOOIOIOIOOOOOIOOO.IOOOODOOOOIOOCOOODOI.

5.1 Mathematical fornulation or problems of optimization of heat-

exchansc apparatus paraneters..................................
Methods of search for optimal parameters.........................

5.3 Results of calculations with optimization programs...............

502

Bibliography

Index

COPYRIGHT:

8&80
CSO:

1870

Izdatel'atvo ”Nauka i Tekhnika", 1918

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

157
16h

171

171
197

236
NR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

AERODYMMIC ACOUSTIC RREARCH

MOSCOW AKUSTIKO-AERODIWICHRKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA in Russian 1975 signed to
press 31 Mar 75. pp 1-2. 93

[Annotation and table of contanta from book edited by Dr 01‘ Phyaical and Math-
ematical Sciences A. V. Rinshiy-Korsakow. Izdatel'stvo "ﬂauka". 1.850 copies.
1 pp

[Text] This collection contains both theoretical and experimental studies
dealing with the problems of turbulent noise formation and interaction of
turbulent flows with elastic bodies. The studies reflect the progress or

physical research dealing with noise in rotodynnic machines. aircraft i‘usel-
ages and propellers.

The book is intended for scientific personnel and engineers working on aero-
dynamic acoustic problena.

Contents Page
A. D. Lapin. Sound Radiation Pro. a Vibrating Strip in a Moving Medium. 3
A. D. Lapin. Plow Stability in a Circular Duct with Impedance-Type Halls 7

Yu. K. Konenkov, I. Sh. Raklnatulin and A. I. Stankevich. Sound-Insul-
ating Shells in Randell Pields.......................................... 10

P. G. Kolev. Discrete Components in Jet Noise and Means of Suppressing

mmOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOIOO'OOOO..0..0.0.0.IOOOOOIOIOOOOO00.00.0000... 18

P. c. Kolev. The Effect of Mechanical Properties of the housing on
Acoustic Characteristics of a Jet 26

L. A. Bazhenova. The Acoustic Pressure Field of Vortical Sound Near
RotatingVanes 29

D. V. Bazhenov. L. A. Bazhenova and A. V. Rinskiy-Korsakov. The Street
of Turbulence of a View Incident on a Body on the Intensity of Vertical
SoundRadiation. 35

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

D. V. Bazhenov and A. V. Rilskiy-Koraakov. 0n Vortical Sound in Roto-
”mic mmneatshl0|I000.IO..0OI.OQOQQIOIIOOOIOOIOOOOIO[IOIIOOIOIOOO

II. R. Kolotilov and V. R. Yarov. Use of Amplitude-Frequency Transforma-
tion of Haves in Combattins Aerodynamic noise...“....................

A. D. Lapin. 0n Radiation and Propagation of Sound in a Circular Duct
in ‘he m..nce or ’10"...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO..OOOOOIOIIODO‘IOOIIIOAIOI.

A. D. Lapin. Sound Insulation in a Circular Duct.......................

A. V. Rinskiy-Korsakov. Noise Pro- an Impeller Wheel Resulting Pro-
Randon Inhcnogeneities in the Incident Flow...........................

A. V. Rinskiy-Korsakov. Excitation of Plane Battles by Random Forces
Produced by an Incident Turbulent Flam...............................

Ya. Ya. Borisov. I. M. Oynkina, B. A. Vinogradov, L. 8. Pykhov and

B. I. Pedorov. Study of the Acoustical Characteristics of a Super-
sonic Strean Flowing into a Circular Duct.............................

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Rauka". 1975

83480
680: 1870

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

72

17

91
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

'KIV'ISBT' PINE? mm W SWIM-ORB PROCESSING SYSTEM DESCRIB-

Moscow 'rsvrrmt METAL“ in Russian No 12, 1978 p 128. inside back cover
and back cover

[Text] Hsthod and Equip-sot for Processing Pinely Granular Complex Sulfide
Ore'

In the ”883 for the first the in the world a fundamentally new method and
equipnent have been developed for processing finely granular conplex sulfide
ore, which have been given the uses "Kivtset."

At the present tine the production of heavy non-ferrous sstals--copper. zinc.
lead. nickel and cobalt-is being carried out chiefly by pyronetsllurgical
nethods. including several independent conversion processes perforeed with
separate equip-ant. The melting process is sultistaged and is carried out
in low-efficiency cunbersone furnaces with a low level of desulfuritation.

which nskes it necessary to prerosst concentrates.

The disadvantages of the faniliar processes are: the poorly effective utili-
zation of the heating capacity of sulfide concentrates, as the result of which
eelting is perforned with added coneueption of carbon fuel; the low level of
utilization of precious cosponents of the ore. evidenced in the loss of zinc.
lead. cadniun and other netsls along with the slag; the low level of desulfur-
iution: end the couple: equipnsnt design for the process.

For the purpose of iaproving the effectiveness of utilization of precious
components of the ore. additional operations have been introduced in the
system of existing technological processes. for crawls. for the purpose of
extracting sinc froa slag, the latter nust be subjected to the fusing or Heels
process. The sublimatee thereby obtained require additional processing for
the purpose of extracting zinc and lead fro. then in the for: of Ietals.

Types of ore such as lead-zinc and copper-sinc-lead-conteining do not have

a technology which has been developed and is industrially fusible.

”the editorial staff is repeating publication (of. No 9. 1978. p 128) because
of inaccuracy in the use of data characterizing the technical and econonic

indicators of the process.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By the new “Kivtset” method it is possible to process copper. copper-zinc.
copper-nickel. copper-pyrite, copper-tin. lead. zinc and lead-zinc ore and
concentrates.

"Kivtset" is based on codaining the processes of roasting and melting the
burden in the pulverized state while using oxygen. and of electroemelting
and condensing zinc into molten metal. performed in a single unit. The new
equipment consists of a cyclone chamber. a separating chamber. an electric
furnace end a condenser.

Carried out simultaneously in the cyclone chamber are roasting and melting
of the burden and slag end matte formation.

The autogenous occurrence of the roasting-melting process is made possible

on account of the heat of the reaction for oxidation of sulfides with a sulfur
content of 25 percent in the burden. with a sulfur content below this limit
it is possible to use a slight amount of carbon fuel.

The melt produced in the cyclone chamber continuously enters the separating
chamber. from which it flows into the electric furnace, where the following
processes take place simultaneously (in the case of processing a copper-zinc-
containing ore):

Settling of the slag from the matte
Sublimation of zinc from the slag
Dezincing of the matte

Stripping the slag of copper

The sublimation of zinc in electrosmelting of the melt takes place according
to the following reactions:

Reaction between zinc oxide and carbon monoxide
Reaction between zinc oxide and metallic iron

The above processes for the sublimation of zinc, which include both homogeneous
and heterogeneous reactions. whose velocity depends on the composition of the
melt and the temperature. govern the selection of quite specific relationships
between the surface of contact between the slag and gas phase and the depth

of the slag cell. The gas phase in the electrothermsl cell consists mainly

of carbon monoxide. which protects zinc vapors from subsequent oxidation when
the zinc is condensed into molten metal.

Stripping the slag of copper during electrosmelting is governed chiefly by
electrothermal losses. which vary with different compositions of the melt.

In the case of processing zinc-lead sulfide concentrates and ore or a mixture
of zinc and lead concentrates containing 10 to 70 percent lead. 7 to do per-
cent zinc. a maximum of 6 percent copper. and not less than 16 percent sulfur.
instead of a cyclone chamber a burner of special design is installed. The

70
P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electric furnace and condenser have the sane design as the cyclone chanber.
but different dimensions. And the technological process is carried out with
different parameters.

how the "Kivtset" Process is Carried Out

The burden for nelting. with a size not greater than S n. which is first
dried to one percent eoisturs. enters the cyclone through an ejection unit.
nixed with oxygen. at a rate of 100 Ila aaxinun. As a result of this a
cyclone effect is created: Under the influence of vortex flows centrifugal
forces thrust the particles of ore or concentrate against the walls of the
furnace. end the oxygen at high velocity flows around then. This results in
very high speeds at which reactions take place. end in the creation of high
heat release rates. and. consequently. high intensity of the process.

The aixture of the nslt end gases for-ed in the cyclone is let out from a
port in the lower end of the cyclone and drops into the separating chamber.
onto a cooled baffle plate. The kinetic energy heed of the nelt end gases is
thereby reduced. The nelt flows off into a pit which comnicates with the
electric furnace. end the gases. after cooling end purification. leave the
separating cheeber end enter a unit for the recovery of sulfur. The separating
chader. if sulfide concentrates are processed. is separated froe the electric
furnace section of the unit by a water-cooled partition. The nelt settles

in the electric furnace. The slag is subjected to an electrothernal effect
with the addition of coke. as the result of which the zinc end partly the lead
ere sublieeted and are directed in the fore of e vspor-end-gas mixture into
the condenser. fro- which the zinc end lead are released in the fern of raw
netal.

when lead end zinc concentrates are melted. in place of the cyclone. above

the separating chelber can be installed a special burner from which the nixture
of oxygen end the burden is renoved and is eslted in the suspended state in
the burner's flane.

The eejor technical and econoeic advantages of the new technology are:

1. The process is carried out in a single netallurgicsl unit autogenously.
utilizing the heat from the oxidation of sulfides. with thorough extraction
of precious coeponenta. such as copper (up to 98 percent) and noble netals

(up to 97 percent). in the latte; zinc (up to 65 percent) in the nolten netsl.
with a content of it in the original raw asterisl of 7 to 9 percent. whereby
7 percent of the zinc changes into latte; lead. cedniun. rare netela and other

volatile coeponents. in subliestee; and sulfur. in gases rich in sulfur dioxide
(up to 80 percent).

2. The imputed energy costs for the entire conversion process of treating
the original raw nsterial are 25 percent lower as cenpered with reverbetory

snelting.

3. Codining several technological operations in a single unit nekes it possible
to lower operating costs as euch as 30 percent. to eechanize and auto-ate the
process totally. and to iaprove working conditions.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

Lebor productivity is improved by e (actor of 1.3 to 1.5 as compared with
reverbatory enslting of copper-zinc concentrates.

As an example cen be given "Kivteet" smelting of a mixture of copper sulfide
and combined copper-zinc concentrates. using a unit with an output of 1000 tons
of burden per 26-hour period.

The composition of major components of the concentrate mixture. in percentages.
is: copper 14.26. zinc 8.75. lead 2.4.6. iron 27.6. sulfur 36. silica 3.16.
and calcium oxide 1.6.

Hinerelogical characteristics of the concentrate mixture: The copper is
chiefly in the form of chelcopyrite. the lead and zinc are in the form of
gelena and ephelerite. respectively. and the iron is in the form of chelco-
pyrite and pyrite.

Below are given the technical and economic indicators for processing one ton
of burden.

Processed:

Burden. tons 1.0

Including. in tons:

Mixture of combined and copper 0.833
concentrates

Quartz flux (80 percent silice) 0.167

Consumed:
Oxygen. IIIII3 210
Pine coke. kg 16.7 (for recovering zinc from eleg)
Electric power, th 339.0
Electrodes. kg 3 2.5 -
Heter for cooling. m 2.6
Produced:
Platte. tons 0.32
Copper. percent 65.0
Lead, percent 1.36
Zinc. percent 2.0
Rev zinc. tons 0.05
Zinc. percent 97.5
Smelting duet. tone 0.062
Lead. percent 29.6
Zinc. percent 35.0
Duep slag. tons 0.46
Copper. percent 0.35
Lead. percent 0.20

72

1’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 07?"; KM. 083 ONLY

Zinc. percent 2.50

Iron. percent 36.00

Silice. percent 36.00

Seslting geses. conteining 80 to

85 percent 802. ne3 213 (efter electric sepnretors)

Extrected . in percent:

Copper in nette 97.5
Lesd in nette 60.20
Leed in snelting dust 59.80
Zinc in rev zinc 65.00 minus
Zinc in lette 7.00
Zinc in smelting dust 20.00
Sulfur in geses rich in 802 80.00 nexisus

Workers required per shift to
run the "Kivtset" coeplex 36 (listed number)

Workers required per shift to
run only the "Kivteet" unit 12 (listed nueber)

Exssple of "Kivtset" Smelting of Leed Sulfide Concentretes

The following dete cen be given es en exesple of "Kivtset" sulting of leed
sulfide concentrstes with e unit with s cspscity of 100 tons of concentrete
per 26-hour period.

Composition of Issjor couponents of concentrate in percent: lesd 60.6, zinc
6.5. copper 0.30, iron 7.2, sulfur 20.0, silice 3.5, cslciul oxide 0.92.

Hinerelogicel cherecteristics of concentrete: The predoeinsnt one is gelens,
whose content reeches 70 percent. Zinc is represented in the for- of spheler-
ice. of the ferruginous ninerele in the concentrate heve been observed pyrrho-
tite. Pyrite end chelcopyrite. Copper is represented by chelcopyrite end
covellite in the fore of single greins.

Below ere given the technicel end econolic indicetore for processing one ton
of leed concentrete.

Processed:
Burden, tons 1.162
Including. in tons:
Leed concentrete 1.0
Quert: flux contsining 90 percent
silice 0.115
Lies flux conteining 60 percent
Geo 0.067

73
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
POI OHICIAL US! ONLY

Coneuned:

Oxygen. nm3 265
Pine coke, k; 90 (tor recovery of leed. zinc end copper)
Electric power. kWh 1000
Electrodee. kg 3 3.0
Heter for cooling. n 8.0
Produced. tone:

Rev leed 0.595
Rev zinc 0.053
Duep ole; 0.31.2
Composition of Sleg. Percent:

Leed 1.38
Zinc 3.20
Copper 0.03
Iron 22.0
Silica 38.1
Celciu- oxide 14.8
Snelting sue conteinin; 50 per-

cent $02, 250
Extracted. percent:

Lead in rev Intel 96.5
Zinc in rev Ietel 80.0
Copper in row motel 85.0
Sulfur in wee rich in 80 98.0

2

Upon conclueion of e licensing egreenent. the licenou can he 3rented the right
to use the potent, the neceeeery technicel doculentetion end techicel eeeiot-
ence in enabling. edjueting end oterting up the "Kivteet" unit.

This new lethod end unit for processing finely grenuler coupler sulfide ore
heve been petented in anglend. the USA, the no end Prence.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo Hetellurgiye, TSVBTN!!! METAL“, 1978

8831
080: 1870

76
POP. OFFICIAL US! 081.!
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

PUDLICATIMS

LIST OI" SOVIET ARTICLES DEALING WITH CMOSIIE MATERIALS

Hoecov GOSUDARS‘NEIINYY xmm SOVBTA HINIS'I'ROV SSSR P0 MI!!! I murmurs.
AWMYA MOI! SSSR. SIGNAL'NAYA INFORHAI‘SIYA, KMOZITSIW
MATERIALY, Vol 3, No 20. 1970 p 3-6

Fonovins ie e lining of the Soviet entriee fro- SIGNAL'NAYA WORMTSIYA.
MOZITSIW MATERIALY (SIGNAL MOMTION. WIT! MATERIALS), e

biblio rephic publicetion'of VINITI. Thie lieting ie from Vol 3. No 20,
I978

[Excerpts]

2. 0n the themdyneuice of the interrelationehip in fibroue composition
uteriele. Portnoy. x. 1.. Bogdenov. v. 1.. Hikheylov, A. V. Puke, D. 1..
"bold. AN SSSR." 1978, 260, No S. 1154-1156.

11. P. Method for manufacturing binetellic peckete. Neenechnyy. A. 11.,
Bykov. A. A.. Krylovekiy,'A. P.. Belokon'. Yu. 1.. Uetinenko, V. A.
Golovenenko. s. A.. lihoroehilov. u. 14., chewyekov, V. V.. Mynevitch. s. s.
Authore certificete 0881. (V 23 ll 3/02). No 585033, epplicetion 12.07. 76.
ho 2388023. publiehed 23.12.77.

12. Specie1 futuree of cryeteniution creche for-ed when welding elloye
with sitconiuu end the poeeibility for eli-ineting then by edding trace
netele to the elloy. Zenkove. B. K.. Polyenekiy, v. 11.. cult-en, Ye. 3..
Popov. 0. P. "Sveroch, pr-vo," 1978, No 7, 9-10.

16. On nonlineer defonetion of lenineted composite uteriele. Zinov'yev.
P. A . ‘rerekenov, A. 1. "Sb. tr. W11! ineni N. B. Ben-en," 1978, 16,
72-80e

22. Anelyeie of entifriction propertiee of conpoeite uteriele of the
untrue-filled type. Zebolotnyy, 1.. V., Klinenov, A. 8.. "Prob. treniye
i izmhiveniye. Peep. nezhved. neuch-tekhn. eh.." 1978, No 13. 31-36.

26. Neturel vibretione end etehility of three-ply shone nede of coupoeite

netcriele. Bebich. D. V.. Koehevoy. I. x., ”pun. nekhenike.” 1978. 16,
No 7. 69-51..

75
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

27. Phase transformations of pyrocsrbide coatings on graphite fibers.
Stopanova. A. N., Kirovins. T. 9.. Kilin. V. 8.. Kuteynikov. A. P.
Vgatkina. H. N.. Shnakov. Ya. s.. "Konstrukta. uterialy na osnove
ugleroda," 1978. No 13. 114-117.

37. Electrochemical precipitation of iron in conbination with campounds
containing alkaline and alkaline-earth metals. Yakinenlto. N. 6.,

Vasyurenko. N. 6., Zosinovich, D. P.. "Elektrodn. npotsesey pri alektro-
oaazhdenii i rastvorenii natsllov." Kiev. 1978, 77-79.

63. Raising corrosion resistance of concrete by impregnating it with
polymers. nazhenov. Yu. H. "Proa.atr-vo," 1978, No 8, 37-38.

68. On appearsnce of obliteration in penetrsble fibrous materials.

Kostornov, A. 6.. "Poroahk. netallurgiya." 1978. No 6, 35-38 (English
abstract).

COPYRIGHT: VINITI, 1978

2291
(:80: 1870

76
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

MUG?!”

TRBORY AND APPLICATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASER

Moscow WNW my ("Semiconductor Lasers") in Russian 1976
signed to press 6 Dec 76 pp 2-14

[hnnotatiom Table of Contents, Porevord and Introduction fro- the book by
oleg Vladi-irovich aoqdankevich. Seroey Mdreyevich Darrnek and Petr
Georgiyevich Yelieeyev, Irdatel'etvo ﬂauka, 8,000 copies, 416 pages]

[mext] The book is devoted to semiconductor lasers -- efficient and cospact
sources of cotwrent radiation having prospects of wide practical application.
The resin point in the book is devoted to injection lasers and test electron-
excited lasers. A brief survey of the characteristics and a emery of seni-
conductor tutorials used in lasers is given in the Introduction. be first
part of the boo): contains an analysis of the radiative recosbination leche-
his: in seniccnductor coepound crystals and sons problem of the dynanics
and Iain characteristics of semiconductor injection lasers. Inae physical
processes which accospany laser operation and also the problem and: arise
during practical application of then are considered.

The theoretical problem and practical applications ct electron-excited
lasers are considered in the second part of the book; the processes of fast
electron-crystal interaction. formation or excess current carriers. pro-
cesses of coherent radiation interaction with the active nediul in lasers
of this type with different configuration of the cavity and been. therael
nodes, generation dynanics and practical application or electron-excited
lasers are described.

Contents Page
mm“ o e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e 7
mm: m . 0 U . O U . I O D . O . O . . O U Q . O O . O C O O O 9

Partl.8eniconductor1njectionbasers............... 15

chapter 1. Main Properties of Seniconductor Lasers . . . . . . . . . 15
1.1. Operating principle and types of seaioonductor lasers 15
1.2. working principle and Iain dlaracteristics . . . . . 32
1.3. Materials for semiconductor lasers . . . . . . . . . ‘2
1.4. Regions of application of seaiconductor lasers . . . 49
77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chaptor 2.

Chaptor 3.

Gupta: 4.

chaptor 5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Introduction to 'Ihoory of Semiconductor usors . . . . . .
2.1. Radiation and optical amlitication in diroct-rono
.mmmumf.ssaoooaoooosoooosao
2.2. wpos of vibrations and throshold condition . . . . .
2.3. Soon problssls ct tho Mania 0! oooiconductor 1osors
andoutputcharactoristics . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4. Proportios o! cohoront radiation of sonioonductor
I...” O I D O O I O O O O I C O O O O O O O O O O 5

lnjootionnasors...................
3.1. missionotp-njunctions . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2. Lasors basod on p-n junctions and hotorojunctions
3.3. Sous oloctron proportios or hotorojunctions . . .
3.4. Spoctral proportioo o2 injoction lasor onission .
3.5. Kinotics of injootion luor oaiosion . . . . . .
3.6. enact of tho shapo of tho onsrqy spoctru on tho

tsmraturo dopondonos o! throshold curront . . . . .
3.7. Dong-wow rstmod injoction lasoro . . . . . . . . .

oooooo
oooooo

Optical Structuro of Injoction Laooro . . . . . . . . . .
4.1. Havoguido ottoct in injoction 1asoro . . . . . . . .
4.2. “fact of thicknass of tho activo layor on tho lasor
gonoration throshold and optiniution of its wavoquido
.wtm O I O O O O O O O O O O O I 0 O O O O O O O
4.3. oiftraction divsrgonco of injection lasor omission in
thovorticalplano .................
4.4. Polarization of injoction lasor olission . . . . . .
4.5. Injoction 1asoro with band structuro . . . . . . . .

sons Problou of Practica1 Application of lnjoction Lasoro
5.1. missivity and roasons for its limitation . . . . . .
5.2. Problsas of injoction lasor dopsndsbility . . . . . .
5.3. Physical procossos of gradual degradation of lasors .
5.4. Application of injootion lasoro for data tranoniooion
pom...ooooooooooooooooooooso
5.5. Application-o! injoction lasors in spoctroocopy and
oth.’ '1‘“. O O O O O O O O C O O t O O O O O O 0 0

Part 2. Soniconductor eloctron-Boan-Pupod Laura . . . . . . . . . .

chapter 1 .

Chaptor 2.

Spatial Distribution of Excitation Donsity . . . . . . . .
1.1.‘moionizstioncurvs ................
1.2. Rats of o1octron-ho1o pair gonoration in tho orcitod
rogion and tho maxim otticioncy of 1aooro . . . . .
1.3. Prooosoos of thornsliution and diffusion “. ”hot"
currontcarriors .

Transvoroo-Pupodusors..............
2.1. Diagram of tranavorso-puwod lasors . . . . . . . . .
2.2. Dorivation c! Iain oqustions . . . . . . . . .

78
P0! OPPICIAL USE ONLY

56
56

70
79
84
104
109
119

126
136

139
139
149
154
157
160
167
167
175
178
185
193
196

198
199

205
210
217

217
222
1'0” OPPICIM. USE ONLY

2.3.1hresholdoonditions................ 227
2.4. Dependence of generetion threshold on electron energy

.M c.v1ty I'm 0 O 0 4 O O I I O O O O O O O 0 O O 23‘
2.5. Lasero with waveguide structure of the cavity . . . . 239
2.6. Spatial distribution of generated radiation inteneity 246

chapter 3. longitudinal-Pup“ users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256
301. nmhold ma‘t‘m O I O O O 5 O O O O O O O I O D 257
3.2. Spontaneous noise and transverse dinensione of the

°.v1ty 0 e O O O O O D O O 6 e O O O O O O 0 O 0 O O 262
3.3.Hultielelsntlasers................. 276
3.4. Synchronization of nultielensnt lesere . . . . . . . 260
3.5. Radiation pattern and spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . 293

Mu: ‘0 mm“ of 6.“.t.tim 0 O 0 O O O O O O O O O 9 O O O O O 301
4.l.lrregularpulsationnode ......... . 302

4. 2. Conditions for colt-synchronization of longitudinal
nodes and generation of ultreohort light pulses. . . 309

Chepter 5. Dependence of Generation 'lhroehold on Morature and die
moraleonditionsotthenaeor............. 315
5.1. Mature dependence of laeer genoretion threshold 315
5.2. thorn“ conditions of electron-Downed lasere . . 322

asapter 6. Designe and Sonelhpplicationo of Bleotron-neaI-zxcited

m.“ I O 0 0 0 O O O O O O 0 O O O O O O O O O O O O O O 333
6.1. Hultieloaont puleod lesers . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
602. my 1”“. O O 0 O O O O O O O 0 O 0 O 0 O O O 0 3‘1
6.3.Laserspt-ped2ronsal'sonrcss ........... 362
cmclmim I O 0 0 I I D 0’. O O I 0 O O O 0 D O O O O I O I O I O I 370

Bibliothphy..........c.....oo..o....... 37‘

m“ C O O 0 O O O 0 C I I O O O O O O O O O O C O O O O O O O O O O ‘12

Foreword

The needs or ecientitic and technical progress dictate the need to genersliao
nuleroue reeults of. experimental and theoretical investigations concerning
the proportion of seniconductor lasere. mess investigation one .riee a
vast and branched direction - soniconductor quantu- electronics. which in
closely related to such new engineering disciplines of optoelectronics.
lidar. optical Meadow and so on.

Became of a nwer of practical edvantageo. senicondnctor laeore find brood
application in engineering. By analogy with ordinary electronics where
senicondnctor devices have node it possible to sharply reduce energy con-
nation and the dinmsions of devices. seniconductors have aleo nsds it

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possible to inrove the efficiency of lasers and to develop niniaturized
circuits in quantul electronics. At the same time the rich scientific
material on the properties of soniconductor lasers. scattered in thousands
of original articles. is only partially reflected in surveys and textbooks.
his creates specific difficulties in expanding the sphere of applications
of seniconduotor lasers. since a lac): of infatuation of generalized nature

frequently generates an unjustified fear of introducing new solutions of
practical problems.

The authors of the book offered to the reader have attempted to cover the
existing gap in scientific literature, recognizing however that an exhaustive
outline of most of the problems touched on is still not possible. The
material of investigations carried out at the Physics Institute iaeni P. N.
nobodev of the USSR Academy of Sciences is aainly used in tho book, but the
results of a large master of other papers to which tho corresponding re-
ferences are node in the text were also used. Host attention is devoted to
two typos of semiconductor lasers -- injection and electron-named. 'rhese
versions of lasers apparently now have the best prospects for further deve-
lopment.

the Introduction and Part 1 of the book were written by P. G. Yeliseyev and
Part 2 was written by O. V. Bogdankevich .end 8. A. Daranok. The authors
hope that the monograph will be useful both for specialists and for a wider
range of readers interested in semiconductor lasers and their application.

Introduction:

Physicists of the present generation are witnesses to the developasnt of a
new scientific-technical trend -- quantua electronics. Its aost effective
achieveamnt was development of the laser -- a powerful radiation generator
in the optical band. This event, which occurred at the beginning of the
1960‘s, denoted the renarkabls success of the theoretical thought of
physicists -- derivation of the possibility of controlling the light anis-
sion process on the basis of the stimulated emission effect.

A. Einstein (1917) predicted the stimlated enission effect in "pre-laser“
tines. lie introduced this phenoaenon into his calculations. observed by

no one. on the theraal radiation balance in order to create a noncontradic-
tory theory of this process. His result was regarded for more than 30 years
as a formal amthod of avoiding theoretical difficulties or as an effect
accosplished under 'erotic," inaccessible conditions. The phenomenon of
stimulated emission emerged to the forefront only with development of

radio spectroscopy. It was discovered experimentally and was used benefi-

cially in masers ~- the first quantum electronics devices operating in the
radioweve band.

It is now well known that the effect of stimulated emission consists in
emission by an emitter having sufficient energy reserve of exactly the
wavelength as that which this emission stimulates. ‘l‘he emitted waves fuse
into a cannon flux, retaining identical frequencies, directions. phases and

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPKHM. USE ONLY

polarizations. An inportant aepeot nay be considered in this fact -- we are
talking about the principle of asplification applied to any electronagnstic
radiation. Nany initially did not believe that nost stone or noleculss sm-
jeoted to the lost diverse disturbances -- collisions. vibrations and so on

-- can so easily latch their radiative processes as now occurs in various
lasers and users.

The honor of being the father of quantum electronics belongs to Soviet
scientists N. G. Basov and A. H. Prokhorov (Lenin Prize of 1962) and to the
Anerican scientist c. 'Downes (all three were awarded the Nobel Prize in
physics in 1964).

In the nost popular version, a seniconductor laser is a crystalline diode
several thousandths of a cubic centimeter in volume which consumes the
energy of a flashlight battery. we will further see what forces in the
field of physics and technology stand behind this sinlicity and what
further developnsnt semiconductor lasers achieved. But we would like to
emphasise the following fact here: seniconductor lasers for- an isolated
group among other guantun electronics devices, being distinguished by con-
pactness and a nmnber of other ilportent properties which will be discussed
um.

1‘he idea of using seniconduotors to generate radiation was formulated in
1958-1959 by N. G. Basov, B. N. Vul and Yu. H. Popov [1] at e tine when
lasers did not yet exist. In 1961 N. G. Basov. O. N. Krokhin and Yu. N.
Popov [2] suggested that injection in degenerated p-n junctions be used

to achieve the laser effect. A laser of this WP. (an injection laser) was
accouplished in 1962 in a webs: of laboratories in the United States and
the USSR on the basis of a degenerated p-n junction in the galliu arsenide
(Cans) internetellic mound [3-7]. 1!. Hall and colleagues (United States)
gave the first report of this.

Investigations of various netsrisls, including Gen. preceded successful
development of a seniconductor laser. A group of Soviet physicists (D. N.
Nasledov et el.) discovered the effect of spectral constriction in the
eniesion of diodes manufactured fro. galliue arsenide [8). This constric-
tion is a precursor of the coherent enission generation node. The funda-
mental research of Soviet physicists. which led to development of seni-
oonductor lasers, was awarded the Lenin Prize in 1964. New types of
seniconductor lasers appeared during the sans year. N. G. Besov, o. v.
Bogdankevich and A. G. Devyetkov [9] reported on achieving the laser effect
upon bodardnent of a eds crystal with high-energy electrons. 'lhis paper
served as the beginning of development of ssniconductor electron-pumed
lasers. N. c. Basov, A. z. Grasyuk and v. A. Natulin [10) also achieved
the laser effect during optical pming.

In 1968 an. I. hlferov and his associates were successful in developing
heterolasers -- semiconductor leeeru based on heterojmctions [11]. his
Iads it possible to achieve so nuch higher radiative characteristics at
roo- teqaeraturs that heterolasers have now .'orced out former versions from
the sphere of practical applications of uncooled seniconductor lasers [12].

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the development of semiconductor heterojunctione and devices based on them
was awarded the Lenin Prise in 1972 (Zh. I. Alferov, V. H. Andreyev. O. z.
Carburov, V. l. Korol'kov, D. N. het'yakov and v. I. shveykin).

The nusber of semiconductor natarisls successfully tested in lasers now
exceeded ‘0 -- these are most semiconductors for which methods of controlled
manufacture or perfect crystals have been developed. In order to bring the
charaoteristics of lasers to a level suitable for practical applications.
rather high requirements must be fulfilled. In addition to the conditions
of purity and monoorystalline nature usual for semiconductor materials,
laser technology requires hidi internal quantum yield of emission and opti-
cal honogeneity. he a result, only some of the semiconductor lasers. among
which gallium ersenide lasers operating at wavelengths of 0.85-0.91 micron
doninate. have been brought up to industrial production.

Nevertheless. practical applications of semiconductor lasers were hardly
unique in thenaelves among the nuserous designations of quanta electronics
devices. may rely on the rollouing advantages of semiconductor lasers.
isportant from the practical viewpoint:

1. Economy provided by high efficiency of converting the delivered energy
to coherent emission energy.

2. now inertia camed by short characteristic times of establishing the
generation node (10‘1"o to 10‘9 s): the bandwidth of direct radiation modula-
tion (through the pmsping circuit) reaches 1010 Hz.

3. Convectness determined by the property of semiconductors to develop
enormus optical arplification and. therefore. not to require a long length
of the active medium to maintain the generation mode: with respect to injec-

tion lasers one can talk about miniaturization and even or nicrominiaturisa-
tion.

4. simplicity of the device provided by a humor of factors: the absence
of precision optics, rigid installation, the possibility of low-voltage
power swply and compatibility with the integrated circuits of samicmductor
electronics (these properties are inherent to injection lasers).

5. Readjustability of the generation wavelength, determined by the dependence
or the optical characteristics or the semiconductor on such physical values
as tuspereture. pressure and magnetic field intensity. Along with a wide
selection of suitable materials. this capability of retuning of a seaicon-

ductor laser permits continuous overlapping of the spectral range from 0.32
to 32 microns.

A sumary of semiconductor lasers based various materials with different

pusping methods is presented in Table 1- one or several typical papers for
each type of lasers are indicated in it.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

chock-Gun .h 0369332... on... 05'...— uo _ .
8300“...“ .w 00AM» sound» and...) ad in .n . . .8. _ no
30300.... on age! .332. no 09.! .n :2
13»? .v and»... .u .8 3......
u 8.78...
as. a Rona...
.Enﬁfubnﬂ4 can we 5.8.58.5. .35.... w 8.. o
.3508! out! Bani vandal—nun no gauche $88. “HUM.“
r18. .8. 8.786
ssisavaiigauwsﬁaiz. .H. m... E «a.
. 2...... o o
a... a... a... r. s. ,_ N. .3
.1... a... $.68 .. o. 8 «Halo.»
.. a: «8... £63. uww— B “73....
J .3. .8. «a...
v: r. E . 5.. £63 5.8. a... o. .SIE 8...?” «nova...
_ _ TL _ _ R... _ .268 ._ .
MUEQ=< vQ-=<
.u... .2. .3 .3. Balsa
_ _ _......._ 2." _ .56 .8. 9 am. e
.3... .. . _9 ﬁg»
. . .o... . .H. q. . on... .ﬂhwunu.» 5.9. P 86
:u... . .. Is .85. as: o
_ _ n2..— _ _ 36 one. .8... . 3. .3. o
8. .2... Salsa «.3 .8 NW;
=95. Mala“
I in
"8. 3|... 9...... a...
3. _8_ .8: 81..» a... .54....
8. a ﬁlo 61% .9.
.8. .8: :2. 34.. ‘as»...
.8. no .5.
a m 2 .2
. 3 a...
:3»? Avgcuucoov

anon-.— uouosvnoo«loa we :92. 2.3.33.

 

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The vein scientific problem which arise with regard to development end

investigetion of semiconductor lesers sre presented snd discussed in this
book. Sous edditionel dete cen be found in the survey articles end nono-
qrephs [13-21]. Iie recosIIend references (22-24] for tenilieriution with

the more generel problem of seniconductor physics and quantum electronics.
related to se-iconductor leeere.

common-n Glevnsye redekteiye tiziko-uteutidteskoy literetury
isdstel‘stvo "Muha', 1976

6521
080! 1870

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY