APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP02-00880R000100030052-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NILY

JPRS L/8349
22 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(FOUO 10/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliteretad are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriata in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOEFICIAL USE ONLY.
1. Retipleat's Accessnoa No.

"'“°°"""°°“‘
JPRS L/ z --

c
TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TBCNNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES, (F000 10/79)

  
  

spec! I to
22 arch 1979

 
   
 
 

        

O. Perla-Ea. ugsolsssloa lcu.
m

      

'- Petunia. (kg-miseries as sad A sa
Joint Publications Research Service

[000 North Glcbc Road
Arlington, Virginie 22201

‘0. Hoistr/Tsskl'oul Uni No.

      
  

       

I a . .RINI '!-'.I s. ‘16" u.-|

    

you...

As above

If. Wltﬂllly Noses

lo. Abunels

The roport contains intonation on aerospace medicine, egrotcchnology. bionics
and bioncoustics. biochemistry. biophysics. environmental and ecological
problems. food technology. microbiology. epidemiology and immunology.

marine biology. military aedicins. physiology. public health, toxicology.
rudiobioiogy, veterinary medicine. behavioral science, huaan engineering.

psychology, psychiatry and related fields. and scientists and scientific
organizations in biomedical fields.
FOR 03PICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 121/83
22 March I

TRNISLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE MD TECHNOLOGY

onnemcm. AND BEHAVIORAL Seleuces
(P000 10/79)

CONTENTS
AGROTECHNOLOGY

Hones: "Automated Pig Breeding Fame and Complexes"
which appeared in .ms 1/780], 2 June 1978,
(mo 16/78) or m. series pp 11-70 has
been decontrolled and no longer FOR OFFICIAL
USE ONLY. The new plhlication number is
JPRS 73021, 16 lurch 1979.

mm MD BCOWICAL mm

Conserving me). and Power
(In. P. norm; mmmrsmrcmm mm,

no 1, 1979) on...toooeocooeoooooooDeooooooolooooeoole

PBXSIOINY

A Comparative Investigation of the Lymph Organs of Rats
Subdected to Heishtleuneu and Artificial Gravitation
m: Space Flight
0. N. mrnava; ARKEIV MIAMI, own I
momlr, "O n, 1978) 0000.000ooaoooooenoooeeooeo

SCIEM'ISI'S AND SCIRI'I‘IFIC WIG‘S

B. N. hvlovekiy Gold Medal Awarded to ll. 0. Olsur'yev
(mm mm max 5851, lo 7, 1978)

M Members or the Academies of Sciences of the Iatvian,
Moldavian, When, Ukrainian and Estonian 88!!
(WWI NAUK 8888, lo 7, 1978) ............

Academician v. a. Sokolov Celebrates sou: Birthday
(vmm mm mm sssa, lo 5, 1978)
FOR OPI’ICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Continued)

1.. A. 01-well Prize Md to D. A. Sakhu‘ov
(mm WI NAUK 8883, No 3, 1.978) ..........

Sechenov Prize Awarded to P. G. Koatyuk
(mum max 3583, No 2, 1978)

PUBLICATIMS

negative, thaccmntable motions Affect Perception
(B. A. Koetandmn vosmmrm 1: man, 1977)....

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WW”: AND BCOIDGICAL PHI-338

UDC 661.12.004.183

WSERVING FUEL AND MR
Moscow KRIHIKO-FARMATSBVTICIBSXIY HUM”. in Msian No 1. 1979 pp 3-7

[Article by Yu. P. Borkov. Deputy Chief, administration of the Senior
Mechanic and Senior Power Rngineer, ninistry of Medical Industry]

[Text] One of the most isportant tasks having the goal of heightening
production effectiveness is sensible use ob raw materials, materials, fuel,
and electric power. and greater economy.

According to the “Basic Directions for Development of the USSR National
Economy in 1976-1980" approved by the 25th CPS!) Congress, consusption norms
must be reduced by 3-4 percent for boiler and furnace fuel and by 5 percent
for electric and thermal power in the 10th Five-Year Plan.

Actively participating in the All-Union Public Review of the Effectiveness of
Resource Utilization, many labor collectives of the Ministry of nedicsl
Industry are competently utilizing inteer reserves for reducing specific
fuel and power cmsusption norms with high results.

In 3 years of the current five-year plan all of the ministry's enterprises
saved the following amounts in relation to the set norms: Pueluover 60
thousand tons (corrected to comparison fuel), electric power-about 210
million kwhr. and thermal power-about 800.000 Gcal.

Socialist pledges adopted by the ministry for 1978 were surpassed-42y more
than 15 million kwohr in relation to eoonomisstion of electric power, and
by more than 50.000 Gcal in relation to thermal power.

Growth in the production value of medicines, Iedicsl equip-ent, and other

of the sector's products means enlargement of ‘the demand for energy re-
sources, but as a result of implementing organisational and technical measures
and, on this basis, reducing specific consumption norms, we are enjoying a
relative savings of fuel and power.

The content of the organisational and technical measures is defined mainly
by the particular features of the production processes. In antibiotic

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production, for exasple, the largest consumers of electric power are the
air comressors, while fermentation and end product isolation and purifi-
cation processes are the greatest consumers of thermal energy.

A large quantity of fuel, especially liquid, is consumed in glass cooking,
and so on.

Almost two-thirds of the total demand for fuel in the sector as a whole comes
from boiler facilities used in the production of thermal energy. This is

why fuel economy depends to a significant extent on the technical level
and quality of operation of boiler units. on maintenance of the most econom-
ical working conditions, on the time and quality of equipment repairs, and

on proper organization of records on and standards of fuel consumption.
Sensible use of the produced thermal energy as wall as thermal energy obtained
as a byproduct by a nuber of enterprises, mainly thermoelectric power plants,
is another very important factor of fuel economy.

Special emphasis should be laid on the fact that the best results in economi-
zation of energy resources are enjoyed as a rule by those labor collectives
in which coepetently organized socialist coepetition encourages the
collective's workers and specialists to fight for economical use of fuel and
power at every workplace and in every section, shop, and production operation.

An efficient system for accounting and monitoring ccspliance by shops, sec-
tions, and the combine as a whole with the specific consumption norms for
electric and thermal pover, and for monitoring compliance with established
consuwtion limits has been organized at the [Isol'ye-Sibirskoye chemical-
Pharmaceutical Combine (director-N. A. Stetsenko, senior power engineer--
v. P. Paramonov). 'me problems of economical and sensible expenditure of
energy resources are regularly examined by the cod>ine's board of directors,
and they are reflected in the plant press and in visual agitation. The
enterprises hold competitions for the best proposal pertaining to economi-
zation of electric and thermal power. m"- ' 1977-1978 the combine's
efficiency experts submitted and introducr prop -13 to reconstruct the water
heating system, alter the lighting con .0“ system. alter the system for
heating reagents in the alcohol regeneration process, and so on, which made
it possible to economize on hot water and electric and thermal poster, and
enjoy an annual economic ispact over 10,000 rubles. L'-’lizing the exper-
ience of the Kurgan Sintez Medics . Preparations and Articles contains, the
Usol'ye-sibirskoye Cosbine is co .tralizing control of power facilities and
thermal. electric, and water supply units, which will make it possible to
improve control over these facrlities and reduce the number of maintenance
personnel. In 3 years of the 10th Five-Year Plan the combine has saved over
1.5 million kw-hr of electric power and 12,000 Gcal of thermal power.

1110 collective of the Ufa Vitamin Plant (director-uh. s. uhader, senior

power engineer-«'3. I. Samofeyev) has been active in economizetion of energy
resources. The plant has introduced a number of proposals that have earned
prizes at all-union cometitions for the best proposal for economization of

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electric and thermal power: Alterations in the fuel all heating system,
automation of condensate collection, purification, and removal, and so on.
The plant collective is a perpetual participant of competitions for the
best proposal for economiration of power sponsored by the (bashkirenorgo).
The plant's proposals have won prizes many times. Over a period of a nuaber
of years this enterprise had been holding intraplant competitive reviews for
the best measure for economisatien of fuel and energy resources; each shop
has a power economization assignment for the year, quarter, and month: the
coupetition for economization of energy resources has assuned broad scope.
In 3 years of the 10th Five-Year Plan the enterprise has saved over 1.4
million kwohr of electric power and 12.000 Goal of thermal energy.

Coupressor stations producing compressed air consue 50 percent and more of
all electric power in some of the sector's enterprises. This is why re-
ducing specific consumtion of electric power for compressed air production
has such great significance. Such a reduction can be achieved by ensuring
optimum working conditions for both individual cospressors and the compressor
unit as a whole, by reducing losses of compressed air in pipelines, by making
optimal use of compressed air and reducing losses at the points of consumption.
and by improving the quality of comressor operation and repair.

Thus special tests were conducted at the Pants Medical Preparations Plant
(director-n. N. Polunin, senior power engineer-A. G. Puntikov) to deter-
mine efficient working conditions for compressors. Schedules indicating the
sequence for starting up machine units depending upon load and productivity
were written on the basis of the obtained data: these schedules also consider
the minim number of start-ups and shut-downs. when the cmlative load of
jointly operating compressors is relatively stable, the optimum variant of
the working conditions can be coapcsed by sensible coebination of the
machine units with the goal of achieving the lowest specific consmtion

of electric power.

An additional air compressor of lower productivity than that of the existing
compressors has been installed at the Kiev Medical Preparations Plant
(director-«I. 1‘. Butsenko, senior power engineer-o. A. Parfenov), which has
made it possible to use a more flexible system for regulating production of
compressed air depending upon the demand for it in the process shops, and
thus to economize on electric power.

Significant economization of electric power can be achieved by automating
compressor units using piston-type mressors: this makes it possible to
regulate the productivity of the machinery when consmption of compressed
air fluctuates, and to turn off some of the compressors in the event of a
sharp decline in consuntion. Thus following installation of an automatic
system for regulating the working conditions of the compressor station, the
Leningrad Medical Polymers Plant (director-0. P. Nikitin, senior power
engineer-A. Ya. Saygin) enjoys an annual savings of electric power of about
32,000 kwvhr.

3
FOR OFFICIAL use om!
FOR O?PICIAL USE ONLY

Many other enterprises in the sector are also actively economiting on fuel

and electric and thermal power. The plant boards of directors, the party and
trade union organizations, and the power supply services of the Novosibirsk
(musical-Pharmaceutical Plant, the man' Vitamin Plant, the Mozhaysk Medical
Instruments Plant imeni P. V. Quenkov, and other enterprises are focusing
their attention on the problems of improving accounting and control of
energy resources consumption, intraplant standardization and limitation,
isprovement of equipment operating conditions, publicity on the results of
economisation efforts, visual agitation, and so on.

At the same time some of the sector's enterprises are not cowleting the
planned assignments pertaining to energy resources economy.

In 1976-1978 the fuel economy assignments were failed by the Krasnodar
Biochemical and Vitamin Preparations Cosbine imsni K. Marks (director-uh. I.
Solodukhin, senior power engineer-W. A. zinov'yev) , the Anzhero-Sudzhensk
mammal-Pharmaceutical Plant (director--V. I. Redekop, senior power engi-
neer-- h. K. Panasenko) . and some others.

A nunber of enterprises are still responsible for cases of inefficient
consumption and losses of fuel and energy resources due to inconplete loading
of boilers and electrothermic furnaces, violations of operating schedules
and production processes, errors in production organization, unsatisfactory
work of condensate removal equipment and of condensate collection and
recycling systems. inadequate insulation of heat pipelines and equipment,
leakage of steam and hot water due to faulty seals, and so on.

A significant share of the electric power is consumed inefficiently in
lighting networks. Electric lighting in the shops, sections, and other
rooms of a nunber of the sector's plants is not turned off during the day.
Thus an inspection made by the power marketing inspection agency at the
Olaynfarm Chemical-Pharmaceutical Production Association (general director--
I. 101. Penke, senior power engineer-4!. a" =) revealed that the association
was losing about 44,000 kw-hr of -‘ .tric :er per year due to dirty
windows and light fixtures and ineffi...e .t lighting control. In order to
eliminate inefficient consumption of electric power in lighting systems,
steps must be taken to replace uneconomical light fixtures by improved

ones characterized by a higher 1 ',ht production coefficient, to clean and
replace dirty windows and fixtu- :5, to paint rooms, and to reconstruct
lighting circuits to permit Imus efficient automatic control of lighting
systems, and so on.

One of the most isportant elements in the use of internal reserves is the
secondary fuel and power resources, such as spent steam, condensate, hot
gases and other energy carriers. Spent steam, condensate, and hot water
are used at the Minsk Mimedpzepanty Production Association (general
director--G. P. Andreyevskiy, senior power engineer-A. L. Gladkiy) to heat
warehouses, the nursery, shower rooms, and shops, and for other purposes,
producing a significant economic impact.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the as yet unused forms of secondary energy resources in enterprises
producing medical glass is hot gases from glass cooking furnaces, which have
a temperature of 300-500'C. This heat can be used to produce steam by means
of heat exchange units. Another source of secondary energy resources is heat
lost through furnace drainage basin linings. He must utilize the experience
of enterprises in other industrial sectors, which are introducing a system of
evaporative cooling of the drainage basins of glass cooking furnaces, making
it possible to utilize this heat to produce steam.

Adequate attention is still not being devoted everywhere to the use of
secondary fuel and power resources, unfortunately. not water with a
temperature of about 80‘c in the alcohol distillation section of the Saransk
Medical Preparations Plant (director-4.. ll. Krupnov, senior power engineer--
V. I. Holev) is dumped into the city sewer. bosses of heat together with
spent condensate and steam are more than 5,000 Gcal per year in the Organika
Chemical-Pharmaceutical Production Association (general director--l. Ye.
Polozkov).

The ministry is devoting a great deal of attention to improving standardization,
accounting, and control of consumtion of fuel and power resources. These
problems are having a significant influence on careful, economical expen-
diture of energy. Although in the last 3-4 years a certain amount of work

has been done in this direction, a nuber of enterprises still have serious
shortcomings requiring imediate measures for their correction.

The main criterion of the effectiveness with which energy resources are
used is the technically grounded specific consumption norms for fuel and
electric and thermal power.

Most of the sector's enterprises have developed technically substantiated
norms and are presently working with these norms. But specific norms are
not constant; they must be improved and made more precise as organizational-
technical measures are implemented in production.

Neil organized accounting of fuel and power resource consumption combined
with standardization and control is_one of the main tools of their economical
consumption. Intraplant standardization in relation to particular shops and
sections consuming considerable quantities of power is still absent from

some of the sector's enterprises. Nor do these enterprises establish limits
for consumption or electric and thermal power, or set assignments for their
economization. Shop and section accounting instruments are absent at a
number of enterprises. All of this creates conditions for lack of control in
expenditure of resources in individual sections. Such facts of a poor
attitude towards these problems were revealed in an inspection of. the
Hedical Instruments Plant imeni V. l. Lenin (director-Wu. N. Tarasov, senior
power engineer—:4. A. Krutikov), the Novosibirsk Medical Preparations Plant
(director--I. '1‘. Lazarev, senior power engineer--V. P. Kuznetsov), and some
other plants.

5
FOR OFFICIAL us: can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hess organizational work aimed at aconomising on fuel and power resources

is being conducted poorly at enterprises such as the Poltava nedical Glass
Plant (director--K. A. Puchikhin, senior power engineer-Ya. h. Kiss), and the
Kursk diemical-Phamceutical Plant (director-4’. P. wshkvatkin. senior
power engineer--V. K. Yarmolyuk). Cemissions to promote sensible use of
power are not working satisfactorily: a socialist competition for economi-
sation of energy resources has not been organised between shops and sections.
The collectives of these enterprises are not participating in oblast and
all-union cospetitions for the best proposal for energy economisation.

lbst enterprises have made tests of the settings of their boiler machine
units with the purpose of determining the optimum conditions for their

work and their efficiency. This has made it possible to improve the
working conditions of boiler facilities and reduce specific fuel consumption
to produce thermal energy. But operation of boiler facilities is not every-
where at the level corresponding to optimum working conditions, as a result
of which fuel losses exist. Conversion from steam heating to water heating
at a umber of enterprises is also promoting more-economical use of available
energy resources. these projects are still to be cespleted in some enter-
prises. and they will be completed in accordance with the plan for 1979-
1980.

Until recently the scientific organisations and enterprises have turned in-
sufficient attention to improving production processes in terms of reducing
energy outlays and developing new processes which as a rule have not been
foreseen by the plans of organizational and technical measures aimed at
energy resource economizatien. In compliance with an order of the Ministry
of Medical Industry, the all-union industrial associations are obligated
to organise development of new production processes aimed at reducing
energy consuaption and decreasing specific consumption of energy resources:
and at introducing them into production. The order also foresees measures
for reconstructing the power systems of emu-«rises, to include replacing
obsolete equipment. increasing the relief is, 5 Lower supply, centralizing
control of power supply facilities, at .nuzirc, . uipment, and other
measures insuring sensible use of hr 1 and power.

We of the inortant measures for increasing the effectiveness with which fuel
and power resources are used is ' ) train the personnel, to upgrade their
qualifications. Advanced train. ..g courses will be organised in 1979 for
enterprise senior power engi meets and their assistants; the training of the
chiefs of heat and power shop-. will continue.

The plan for economic and social development of medical industry in 1979 has
established assignments for additional economisation of fuel and electric and
thermal power totaling not less than 3 percent of the existing standards.

Correspondingly the ministry has made differentiated assignments to each all-
union industrial association, production (scientific-production) association,
and enterprise. It is the duty of every labor collective to join the widely

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gupported socialist competition {or predeadline cenpletion of. the 1979 plan
and the 10th rive-Year Plan as a whole with the goal of. persistently

fighting for sensible and economic use of tuel and power resources, decisively
correcting the existing shortcomings in this importan'. matter, and insuring
unconditional completion of the fuel and energy econonization assignments

of 1979.

The boards of directors of the associations and enterprises and their power
supply services must work jointly with party, trade union, and Konsonol
organisations to implement the organizational and technical seasures in
support 0! these goals, active}? disseminate the experience of the best
collectives, and develop the creativity of the collective as much as possible
under the slogan "Save Peel and Power!"

COPYRIalT: "IGAniuo-tarnatsevticheskiy shurnal". 1979

11004
(ISO: 1870

7
FOR OFFICE}. USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSIOIDGY

A COMPARATIVE INVESTIGATION OF THE LYWH ORGANS 0F RATS smmm T0
HEIGHTIESEIESS AND ARTIFICIAL GRAVITATION MING SPACE FLIGHT

Leningrad ARKHIV ANATOKII, OISTOIDOII I MRIOLOGII in Russian No 11,
1978 pp hl-lo6.

[Article by G. N. Durnove, Institute for Biomedial Problems of the USSR
Ministry of health, ibscov, submitted 19 Jun 78]

[Text] In previous investigations it was shmn that one of the causes of
accidental involution of the lymph organs in rats killed several hours
after termination of prolonged space flights is the chelopment of acute
stress. Morphological signs of the latter in the form of massive degen-
eration of lymphocytes in the thymus and lymph nodes and neutrophilic
infiltration of the spleen were demonstrated in a study of the lymph organs
of rats union had been exposed on the hiosetellite memos-782. Meanwhile
the etiology of acute stress in rate which have flovn on hioaetellites
remains unclear, and it can only be conjectured that the cause of its emer-
gence is the action on the rat of a complex of factors accompanying the
landing of the hiosetcllite or the transition of the aninals from the
veightlessness conditions to the conditions of terrestrial gravitation or
both together (Durnova, O. 8., Kaplanskiy, A. 8. and Portugalov, V. V.,

1977) .

The present report presents the results of a comparative study of the thymus,
spleen and inguinal lymph nodes 0‘ rats which had flown on the biosatellite
Cosmos-936, part of the animals flying under veightlessness conditions while
the other part were subjected to artificial gravitation imitating terrestrial

gravitation.
Materials and nethods

The material of the investigation was the thymus, spleen and inguinal lymph
nodes c" 2|: Hietar rats of the SP? line vhich had been exposed for 16.5 days
on the biosatellite Cosmos-936. Fifteen of these rats were kept under
weightlessnees conditions the whole time, and nine were rotated for the
entire flight on a centrimge (acceleration l g, orientation done-ventral),
which imitated terrestrial gravitation. me terrestrial control vas the same

8
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organs of 20 rats from the mdel experiment, in which all the conditions
of space flight were reproduced with the exception of weightlesshess, and
15 intact rats which were kept during the experiment in a Vivarium (a
detailed distribution of rats by group is presented in the table).

hterial for the investigation was taken Ins-l3 hours and 25 days after
termination of the space and terrestrial experiments. The lymph organs
were weighed, fixed in Carnoy's Fluid, and embedded in paraffin. Sections
of the thymus, spleen and lmh nodes were stained with hemotoxylineosin,
methyl green-pyronine and picroiuchsin, and, in addition, iron was demon-
strated in the spleen sections by Perls' method. 'lhe figures were statin-
tically analyzed, and the differences in the results obtained were consid-
ered reliable at in (0.05.

Results and Discussion

The data presented in the table indicate that in the rats' which were sub-
Jected to weightlessnesa during the space flight we observed a statistio
cally reliable decrease in the relative mass of the thymus and a distinct
tendency to decrease in the relative mass of the spleen and lymph nodes in
comparison with animals which were subaected during the space flight to
artificial gravitation. An analogous pattern was noted when comparing the
mass of the lymph organs of the rats subjected to weightlessness with that
of the animals from the terrestrial model experiment. Reliable differences
were not demonstrated between the weight: of the lymph organs of the rate
subjected to artificial gravitation during the space flight and those of
the rats from the terrestrial model experiment.

In comparison with the intact animals, the mass of the lymph organs in rate
from the terrestrial model experiment did not change. At the same time, a
reliable decrease in the relative weight of the thymus was observed in rats
from the terrestrial model experiment which had revolved in the centrifuge
(acceleration 1.11 g). '

Histological investigation of the tr. all: , spleen and lymph nodes of rats
subJected to weightlessness and aim: Ins-l3 hours offer termination of

the space flight demonstrated free-lying nuclear detritus and macrophages
with phagocytized remains of the nuclei of lymphocytes in the cortical
substance of the thymus, the pa- efoliicular zone of the lymph nodes and the
thickness of the splenic lyr-ph follicles (fig la, 3a). The massive degen-
eration of lvmphocytes was a. 5: strongly pronounced in the cortical substancv
of the thymus. In the lymph nodes, macrophages with phagocytized nuclear
detritus were found not only in the parafollicular region of the cortical
substance but also in the lumen of the sinuses.

9
son erstcm. use 01m
FOR OHIO!“ 088 ONLY
Height oi‘ the Lymph Organs in Ins/n Body Height

“Mum-without.“

 

(6) u-a a)“ elm-e W

(7) ml noun-mun hag... P1463 um." emu; my.“ pug”

    

   

    
       
  
  

'gMJ
P.4dd

my." 9,..«3 mum :h-aﬂ-O mm. ~
”.40.“ Pk“...

 

      
 

(9) e. Nee-moon» mm
mull)

  

 

   
    
    
  
  

 
  

um
(I I)

(11) ‘~ “00M «mm Lin-gm

(12 a m mum-n new

   
   

   
 

(7) n. mg.» "do” mg... p.44: 0.1mm rue»
Pb“... 'H<i.0 ﬂ. W
P...<lﬁ ha“! ha“.

 

 

    
 
  

54...: Ma mum. out.”
5-6” 'a-K”

hummus my... ma ”630ml 5.50..

0 menu P on. not M an» man-am: "1.
mug-5:3”. can: 34:33:17,. 0 «can :peenu‘ne menu menu- a ‘0.

Key:
1. Humber or group 7. weightlesnnesa (0 s)
2. Experiment 8. weightlesaneas plus centrifuge (l g)
3. Thymus 9. Terrestrial model experiment (1 g)
1». Spleen 10. Terrestrial model experiment plus
5. Lymph nodes centrimee (1.1a 3)
6. 105-13 hours after ll. Vivariun control (1 3)

end of experiment 12. 25 days after termination of experian

note: The subscripts off designate the ordinal numbers of the groups of

animals compared; in the "Merinent" column the rate of acceleration in 3':
is stated in parentheses.

10
FOR OHICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

while in the thymus, despite the massive degeneration of lymphocytes, a
discernible narrowing of the cortical substance was not observed, in the
spleen and lymph nodes pronounced hypopleaia of the lymph tissues was noted
in the presence of a comparatively small number of degenerating lymphocytes.
The lwpoplasia was manifested in a decrease in the number and sizes of the
Lymph follicles and their light centers in the spleen and the Lymph nodes
and also in the narrowing of the parafollicular zone of the cortical sub-
stance of the lymph nodes. The degree of hypoplasia of splenic lymph tissue
increased progressiVely with increase in the time elapsed from the moment of
the animals' landing to the moment of their sacrifice. The last cirounstance
permits us to conjecture that the hypoplasia of ‘the white pulp of the spleen
is caused not so much by the degeneration of lymphocytes in it as by their
migration into the bone marrow, since it is known that such a redistribution
of lymphocytes takes place under extreme conditions (Zimin, Yu. 1., 1971;
Zimin, Yu. I. and Khaitov R. N., 1975; Gerisentov, P. D., 1975; Ernstroa,
u. and Sandberg, 0., 19695.

Along with the hypoplasia of the white pulp and degeneration of Whocytee
in it, a diffuse neutrophilic infiltration was observed in the red pulp of
the spleen (fig 2a). The number of foci of erythropoiesis in the red pulp
of the spleen decreased, and the quantity of extra- and intra-cellular
hemosiderin increased significantly.

In distinction from the lymph organs of rats subjected to weightlessness,
in animals subjected during space flight to artificial gravitation (accel-

eration l g) morphological signs of pronounced hypoplasia of he lymph
tissues and mass degeneration of lymphocytes were not present zfig b, 3b),

and neutrophilic infiltration of the red pulp of the spleen was not observed
(fig 2b). The number of erythropoietic foci in the spleen decreased insig-
nificently (in 2 rate out of lo). As a whole, the histological picture of
the lymph organs of the rats subjected during flight to artificial gravita-
tion was closer to that in the rats of the terrestrial model experiment,
regardless of whether the animals had revolved in the centrifuge or not.
The structure of the lymph organ: of the rats from the terrestrial model
experiment differed little from that of the intact animals, and only in
the spleen was it possible to observe a certain decrease in the number of
accumulations of imature red blood cells, a finding which indicated a
decrease in the erythropoietic activity of the spleen.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig l Cortical substance of the thymust of rats subJected to veightlessness
(a) and artificial gravitation (h) during space flight. a - massive
degeneration of lymphocytes; b - lymphocytic mitoses, absence of
Earphological signs of cell degeneration. Hematoxylin-eosin. 0b.

0, oc. .3.

Twenty-five days after tcnmination of the flight and terrestrial experiments,
the mass of the lymph organs and the histological picture of thymus, spleen
and lymph nodes had nonmalized, and the intensity of crythropoiesis in a
number of cases even exceeded that in intact animals.

The results of the present experiment confinn previous observations (Durnova,
c. N., Kaplanskiy, A. s., and Portugalov, v. v., 197!) and indicate that in
the lymph organs of rats subjected during space flight to veightlessness,
changes characteristic of acute stress develop soon after their return to
earth (degeneration of lymphocytes in the cortical substance of the thymus,
the lymph follicles of the spleen, and the parafollicular zone of the lymph
nodes; neutrophilic infiltration of the red pulp of the spleen. Since elim-
ination of nuclear detritus from the lymph organs occurs relatively quickly
(within 2h hours), its presence in the thymus, lymph nodes and spleen indi-
cates that the degeneration of lymphocyte: occurred recently, apparently
several hours before sacrifice of the animals. The absence of morphological
signs of acute stress in tne lymph organs of the rats subjected during space

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig 2 Red pulp of spleens of rats subjected to veightlesnness (a) and
artificial gravitation (b).

a - neutrophilic infiltration; b - absence of neutrophils; mitosis.
Hemtoxylin-eosin. 0b 60, cs. 6.3.

flight to artificial gravitation corresponding to terrestrial gravitation
gives us reason to believe that one of the basic causes of the occurrence
of stress in animals which have been subjected to weightlessness is the
transition from veightlessness to terrestrial gravitation ("gravitational
stress"). Since the develoment of stress depends not only on the strength
of the acting stimulus but also on the condition of the macro-organism
(Gorizontov, P. 1)., 1975), the possibility has not been excluded that a pro-
longed stay in veightlessness lovers the resistance of the animals to the
action of such stimuli as terrestrial gravitation.

The question of whether veightlessness is an etiological factor of stress
remains open, and at present it is clear only that weightlessness is not a
strong and long-acting stress agent, since in rats killed soon after termi-
nation oi‘ space flight there is no significant atrophy of the thymicolymph-
atic apparatus, which is observed in stress provoked by prolonged stay in
conditions of severe hypokinesia (Portugalov, V. V., Kaplanskiy, A. s., and
Durnova, c. n., 1971).

13
son orncuu. uss ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig 3 Parafollicular zone of the lymph nodes of rats subjected to weight-
lessness (a) and artificial gravitation (b).

a - macrophages with nuclear detritus; b ~ absence of any morpholog-
:CAl signs of degeneration of lymphocytes. Hematoxylin-eosin. 0b.
0, oc. 6.3.

As previously mentioned, in the spleen of rats subjected to weightlessness
during space flight, a decrease in the intensity of erythropoiesis was
observed together with hypoplasia of the white pulp. An analogous inhibition
of erythropoiesis in the spleen and bone marrow was demostrated in after-
flight investigation of rats exposed on biosatellites Kosmos-605 and Kosmos-
782 (Durnova, G. N, Kaplanskiy, A. 8., and Portugalov, V. V., 1976; Shvets,
V. N. and Portugalov, V. V., 1977). In distinction from the rats subjected
to weightlessness, in animals subjected to artificial gravitation during
space flight, inhibition of erythropoiesis in the spleen was expressed to a
significantly lesser degree and was not observed in all animals. In analyz-
ing the causes of depression of erythropoiesis during weightlessness, it may
be supposed that it is most likely connected with the sharp decrease in energy
expenditures on muscle activity, since in rats as animals with horizontal
orientation of the body material redistribution of the blood is not observed,

and consequently the inhibition of erythropoiesis cannot be explained by the
Henry-(Gauer) effect.

1%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the creation of an artificial gravitational force iaitating terrestrial
gravitation on the biosatellitc Roms-936 prevents the develoment in the
lymph organs of the rats of the morphological changes characteristic of acute
"gravitational" stress which were discovered after termination of the space
flight in the animals sthected to weightlessness. In this case, inhibition
of erythropoiesis in the spleen of rats subjected to artificial gravitation
during space flight was insignificantly expressed in comparison with animals
which had been subjected to veightlessnest.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Gorizontov, P. D. "General Description and Significance of the Stress
Reaction," vnsmx MN 8333, 1975, No 8, pp 81-89.

2. Durnova, 0. N.; Kaplanskiy A. 8.; and Portugalov, V. V. "Changes in the
Lumps Grams of Rats in Space Flight," mm. ANAL, Vol 72, No 5, 1977.
pp 1 -20.

3. 21min, Yu. I. "migration of Cells true the Spleen Normally and in Stress
Reaction," HULL. EKSP. 3101.. NHL, Vol 71, No 6, 1971, pp 21-22.

1:. Zimin, Yu. 1., and Khaitov, R. )4. ”Migration of T-Whocytes into the
Bone Marrow During the Initial Period of the Stress Reaction," BIULL.
amp. 3101.. NEIL, Vol 80, No 12, 1975, pp 68-70.

5. Portugalov, V. V.; Kaplsnskiy, A. 8.; and Durnova, G. N. "The Condition
of the Imnocompetent Organs in Hypokinesia," VESTNIK Am SSSR, Vol 10,

1971., pp 29-31; .

6. Shvets, V. IL, and Portugalov, V. V. "The Influence of the Factors of
We Flight on Erythropoiesis," BIULL. EKSP. BIOL. NEIL, Vol &, No 2,
1977, pp 238.2%.

7. Demon, G. N.; Kaplanskiy, A. 8.; and Portugalov, V. V. Effect of a
22-day Space Flight on the Lymphoid Organs of Rats. AVIAT. SPACE 8:
minnow. HELL, Vol '07, No 6, 1976, pp 586-591.

8. Ernstrom, 0., and Sandberg, 6. Regulation of Output of Lymphocytes During
Steroid-Induced Involution and Regeneration, ACTA PATROL. MICKJBIOL.

m., Vol 76, 1969, pp 52-60.
COPYRIGHT: "WV MANHII, GImIDGII I WMOWII," 1978

9380
cso: 1870

15
son orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGARIZATIONS

B. N. PAVDOVSKIY GOLD HZDAI. AWE!) TO N. G. OLSUF'YBV
Moscow VBSTNIK AKADDiII NAUK 88811 in Russian No 7. 1978 p 132

M

 

The presidiun of the Academy of Sciences 0833 has awarded the 1978

E. n. Pavlovskiy gold medal to lather-correspondent of the Acadeay of
Medical Sciences USSR Nikolay Crigor'yevich OLSUP'YBV for his total work
on the natural source of tularenia. N. c. Olauf'yev is a Iajor Soviet
parasitologist. one of the first students and long-ter- collaborator of

8. N. Pavlovskix The gold-nodal-winning works of the scientist are the re-
sult of research on the natural source of tularenia and gadflies of various
regions of the country.

Detailed soologo—parasitological and epidemiological study of the natural
sources of tularenia allowed N. C. Olsuf'yev to establish the geography of
their dissemination and to work out classification on a regional basis.
Ile devoted great attention to elucidation of the biological futures of
the stimulus in natural sources of various species; as a result he has
succeeded in describing intraspecific taxa of the aicrobe of tularaaia and
showing differences in their geographic diasanination. In the works of

16
FOR orncm. use on?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N. G. Olsuf'yev on the model of tularenia the problem of the biological
interrelationa of the pathogenic microorganise and its bearere-vertebrate
animals and aleo cerrieru-bloodeucking arthropode-vas tiret raieed and
subjected to experimental elaboration. This research led to establishment
of the neat ieportant paths of circulation of infection.

lxodid ticks have been studied in detail by N. G. Olauf'yev ae specific

carriers and long-term keepers of tularenic infection in nature. end the
method of revealing the natural sources of tularenia by leans of collec-
tion and bacteriological research on ticka has been elaborated and intro-

duced into practice. He also corroborated in experieent epidaaiologicel
observations on the ability of bloodeucking dipterous insects, especially

gadfliea and Iosquitoea, to transmit the etilulus of tulereeia in the
process of bloodeuckins.

Study of the natural eource of tularenie in the USSR, uhich has served as
the theoretical basis for carrying out purposeful prophylactic eeaeuree,

has had great significance for public health care and for elimination of

human infectionudth telareeie in °“r country.

oopvucm: Izdatel'etvo "Neuka", "Vestnik Madelii nault sssa." 1978

9072
C80: 1870

1?
ma orncm. use only
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

NEH MEMBERS OF TEE ACADHIES OF SCIERCBS 01’ THE LATVIA", HOLDAVIAN, roams,
UKRAINIAN AND BSTONIAN SSR

Moscow VESTNIK AKADDHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 7, 1978 pp 133-135

[Text] At the general neetings of the academies of sciences of the

Latvian, Moldavian, Turknen, Ukrainian and Estonian SSR elections of new
members took place.

To the ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE LATVIA]! 88!! were elected:

as ecadenicisnso-B. Yo. Gudriniyetse (che-istry), M. E. Beker (technical

microbiology), A. P. slyuger (medicine). V. A. Shteynberg (philosophy),
A. P. Grigulis (Lettish literature);

as neeber-corrsspondentsnP. T. Prokof'yev (nuclear spectroscopy), H. Yu.
Lids]: (chesistry of nstursl compounds), R. Ye. Ksrklin' (technical licro-
biology), A. A. Kslnyn'sh (economics of agriculture), 1. K. Aline (history
of the CPS“), A. Ya. Blinkens (Lettish language).

To the ACADEHY OF SCIENCES 0? m WLDAVIAN 581! were elected:

as acaduiciens—H. F. Lupsshku (botany), D. ‘1‘. "real (philosophy);

es nesher-correspondents-d. H. Andriyesh (physics of semiconductors and
dielectrics), H. K. Bologs (hsst physics). S. I. Toes (sgrochelistry),

H. Ya. Moldovan (virology), V. D. Sieinel (genetics end selection), 1'. s.
Chelyk (genetics and selection), 5. S. Chibotaru (litersry criticiel).

To the ACADEHY OF SCID‘CBS 01’ m mm SSR were elected:

as acadenicisne—O. O. Ovssgel'dyyev (rediophysics), Sh. T. Tuhliysv
(history of the CPSU);

ss senher-correspondents--Ye. A. Ageyev (physics of seliconductors end
soniconductor energy trensducers), H. A. Anmnepeeov (118811 history), V. H.

Hasson (archaeolos!) .

18
FOR OFFICIAL use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To the ACADM OF SCIENCES OF THE UKRAINIAN SSR were elected:

as academiciansnl. N. Kovalenlto (netheaeticsl theory of reliability),

V. I. Skurikhin (system-engineering. systems theory), D. B. Timofsyev
(systems-engineering, systems theory), A. N. Guz' (mechanics), V. L. Rvachev
(mechanics), V. G. Der'yskhtar (solid-state physics), V. V. Yereeenho
(solid—state physics), 0. P. Ncmets (experimental nuclear physics), 3. A.
Nelepo (marine physics), D. A. Dudko (matcriology, strength of materials),
3. A. Novchan (meteriology, strength of materials), V. V. Penesyuk
(materiology, strength of materials), A. V. Gorodyskiy (slectrochcmistry),
P. G. Bogach (physiology, medicine). F. N. Serkov (physiology, medicine),

A. A. Shalimov 'physiology, medicine), A. A. Sorinov (genetics), P. 'r.

Tron'ko (USSR .istory), V. I. Shinharuh (philosophy), A. T. Conchsr
(literary criticism), H. A. Stel'malth (literary criticism);

ss member-correspondenteul. V. Ostrovskiy (matheeatics), A. N. Samoylenko
(mathematics), A. N. Sharkovekiy (mathematics), Ye. M. Grigorenko (mechanics),
1. I. Ivenov (mechanics), V. N. Koshlyakov (mechanics). A. A. Lebedev
(sechenics), I. V. Sergiyenko (computer mathematics), I. o. Kulik (physics),
3. A. Zevadskiy (solid-state physics), Yu. G. Ptushinskiy (electronics
physics), H. A. Krivoglaz (theoretical physics), 8. V. Peletminsltiy
(theoretical physics), 3. F. Shnyukov (geology), B. I. Bereenev (materiol-
ogy, strength of eateriels), G. G. Naksimovich (meteriology, strength of
materials), V. l. Nakhnenko (eateriology, strength of materials), Yu. V.
Neydich (materiology, strength of materials), V. I. Beptizmanskiy (metal-
lurgy, metals technology), 3. F. Zelenekiy (metallurgy, metals technology),
5. I. Kuchuk-‘tatsenko (metallurgy, metals technology), V. Ya. Oetrenko
(metallurgy, metals technology). K. D. Tovstyuk (eateriology of semi-
conductors). A. A. Dolinskiy (heat and power engineering), A. K. Shidlovekiy
(electrical engineering), V. P. Kukhar' (organic chemistry), L. N. Markov-
sltiy (organic chemistry), 3. V. Volkov (inorganic chemistry), V. V.
Skopenko (inorganic chemistry), V. s. Sezhin (chemical engineering), V. V.
Klimov (physioochemistry and technology of inorganic materials), V. V.
Prol'kis (Physiology, medicine), N. s. Puahkar' (cryobiology), z. A.
Butenko (experimental oncology). H. A. Golubets (botany), Yu. R. Shelyeg-
Sosonko (botany), V. A. Topschevskiy (zoology), V. E. Zaika (hydrohiology),
V. D. Romanenko (hydrobiology), A. A. Bekayev (economics), V. I. Klokov
(history), 6. D. Verves (literary criticism).

To the ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE BSTONIAN 883 were elected:

as academicians-4.. K. Yurgenaon (structural mechanics and structural
physics), K. L. Peaver (biology), Yu. Yu. Kathi: (0853 history);

as member-correspondentnv. A. Psl's (chemistry).

COPYRIGNT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnilt Akedemii neuk SSSR", 1978

8072
080: 1870

19
son OFFICIAL use ow:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

ACADEMICIAN V. B. SOKOLOV CELEBRATES 50TH BIRTHDAY

Moscow VESTNIK AKADBHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 5. 1978 pp 160-151

ﬁexg

 

Academician Vladimir Ievgen'yewich'SOKOLOV, one of the leading
theriologiata of Our country, is 50 years old.

V. E. Sokolov is the author of many major scientific works, including in-
depth research in the field of ecologic morphology of animals,and one of
the founders in the USSR of a new trend of zoology-hydrobionics. V. E.
Sokolov is successfully working out the problen of cheaical colnunicstion
in aniasls. which plays a nost important role in their ecology and beha-
vior. Studying the orientation of mammals, he was along the first to
begin to apply biotelenetric methods in order to observe the movement of
animals and obtain at a distance data on their physiologic condition.

V. B. Sokolov devotes such attention to problems of biogeocenology and the
biosphere. representing our country's interests in international organiza-
tions occupied with these problems. He is one of the initiators of cres-
tion in our country of a network of biosphere preserves-~this new form

of conservation and study of unique ecosystems.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. B. Sokolov is conducting greet sciontific-orgenizstional end pedagogic
work. He is the director of the Institute of Evolutionary Morphology and
Ecology of Animals in. A. N. Severtsov, president of the All-Union Therio-
logical Society. chairman of the Scientific Council of the Acadesy of
Sciences USSR on the problem "Biological Foundstions of Mastering. Recon-
struction and Protection of the Animal world," editorbin-chief of
ZOOLOGICﬂBSKlY ZHURNAL. chairman of the scientific-method council on
biology of the All-Union Society"2neniyeﬂ'n member of the editorial
boards of several journals. including VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. scion-
tlfic leader of the Soviet-Mongolian expedition end professor of the
departsent of zoology and comperntive anatomy of vertebrates of Moscow
University.

The prosidiun of the Academy of Sciences USSR sent the men of the hour s
selutatory address, in which it noted the scientist's services in the

development of science and wished his good health and successes in all
cross of his activity.

COPYRIGHT: lzdetel'etve "Nauks", "Vestnik Aksdsmii nsuk SSSR". 1978

9072
CSO: 1870

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OWICIAI. USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

L. A. ORHBLL PRIZE MMRDED T0 D. A. SMOMROV
Hoscow VESTNIK AKADEMII NAUK 888R in Russian No 3. 1978 pp 116-117

[5er

 

The msidium or the Academy of Sciences 1553 has awarded the 1977

L. A. Orwell prize in the anount of 1,000 rubles to doctor of biological
sciences Daitriy Antonovich Sskharov(tnstituta of Biology of Devalopasnt
in. N. K. Kol'tsov. Acadeay of Sciences USSR) for the nonograph
"Genealogy of Neurons."

In the prize-winning aonograph D. A. Sskhsrov developed the original idea
based on the results of his experimental research of the origin of nerve

cells. Studying the long-obscure causes of the fact that in various
species of animals the neurons which secrete the same mediator have

various localization and fulfill various functions. D. A. Sskhsrov can
to the conclusion of the unsoundness of the supposition that qualitatively
different neurons descended from a canon ancestral neuron which secreted
u aixture of «Motors and neurohornones. In the author's opinion, the
mediator chemise of nerve cells is conservative and does not change even
with substantial change of the functions of neurons in the process of
evolution of the nerve systen; however the primary chemical specificity
of neurons does not seen the absence of cheaicsl evolution. The diversity

9.2
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPQICIAL USE ONLY

of neurons of high-r organialo. D. A. Sakharov chinks. van for-ed not in
tho procnoa of avolurion from low-organizod Iataron to highly organized,
but at early stages of dovoloplen: of Iulticollularity. This Icahn-ant
in bound on dotailod electron-Iicroonopic rooonrch, identification and
classification of nauronn conductod by tho author vith involve-ant of tho

rnnara of evolutionary theory. neurophysiology and nourochoaiotry.

Tho idea of tho polygononio (plural origin) of nerve calla advanced by
D. A. Sakhnrov has uon the recognition of nativa and foreign phyaiolosiotn.

COPYRIGHT: lxdaeel'ntvo "Nauko". ”Voacnik Akadonii nnuksusnﬁ, l978

9072
cso: 1870

23
Ion omen; use om:
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

SECHBNOV PRIZE ANARDBD T0 F. C. KOSTYUK
Hoocov VESTNIK AxADBMlI NAUK 8883 in Russian No 2 1978 p 162

[50:27

 

Academician Platon arisor'yevich RDSTYUK has been awarded the 1977 I. M,

Sachenov prize in the amount or 2.000 rubles for the nonograph "Structure
and Functions of Descending Systeae of the Spinal Cord."

In the Ionograph which won the price data on the neutron organization of
the descending systems which connect the structures of the cephalic brain
with the spinal-cord centera are cited. The author's original ideas,
expounded in the hook. allow hil to create a single picture of the struc-
tural-functional organization of the descending control of the activity of
the spinal cord.

Revealing the cerebro-apinal interrelations and their role in the uechanisu
of forming coordination of activities of the actor apparatus of the higher
vertebrates and non in one of the lost complex proble-a of neurophysiology.

2%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL 088 ONLX

The author. on the basis of the data of his own works. proposes an in-

principle new classification of the descending systens of the spinal cord.
based on coepetison of the structural organisation end functional features
of the spinal links of these systole. As a result of careful neuroeorph-

olosicsl end electroph eiolosical research ieportant features of the struc-
tu: and function of tze spinal descending systole. their eynsptic

connections uith the sesnantary neuron epparatus and neurons of the
spinal afferent systole have been revealed.

The idea of the presence of descending influences of verious sections of
the cephalic brain on the functionel activities of the spinal cord use
first expressed by l. h. Sschenov. The research of P. 0. Kostyuk is e

esjor contribution to the developeent end deepening of this idea end its
experisental elaboration.

COPYRIGHT: ledatel'stvo ”hanks". "Vestnik Ahadseii neuk sssn". 1978

9072
C80: 1870

25
ron ontcw. use on!
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

PISLICA‘HONB

NBQM‘IVB, WAN-B moss MC? prncrmon

Moecov wanna-nu I mu (Perception end botione) in main l977
eigned to preee 1 Apr 77 pp 2-10, 221-233, 248

[Annotetiom ‘i'eblo of contents. foreword, Introduction, end Siblioqrephy
fro- book by B. A. mtendov. uasn ninietry of Public neelth,xedetel'etvo
Mediteine, 2.000 copiee, 2‘8 peqee)

[hut] Neoetive enotione cen eiqnificently voreen perception of eiqnele
fro. the outeide. fhie wee noted in the preeence of e nuiaer of petholo-

gicel etetee of the centrel nervoue eyetee by proninent doeeetic cliniciete.
P. v. cennuehkin end a. u. Devidenkov. nut this phenomenon cen eleo be
obeerved enonq precticelly heelthy people. Deepite the inortenco end
urgency of the problee, there hee cleerly not been enough reeeerch on the
neurophyeiologicel lechenieu reeponeible for perception dieturbencee
rueulting fro- the influence of negotive entione. 1he reeulte of peycho-
phyeiologicel. phenecodyne-ic, end bioeleotric reeeerch on heelthy people
end on pereone eufferinq peychoneurel dieeeeee per-itted the euthor to
preeent hie own point of view in thie Ionogreph on the nervom Iecheniele
behind chenqee in reelieetion of outeide pheno-ene under the influence of
negetive enotione. end on the neurophyeiologicel euhetrete for the ection
of unreelired etinuli.

Another eepect of the “perception end enotione“ problen exenined in thie
aonogreph ie the role of unreelieed, eaotionelly Ieeningful ee-entic etio-
uli in huen behevior, perticulerly in the geneeie of eo-cellod uneccounteble
eeotione. n hypotheeie ie euggoeted in thie sonogreph on the neurophyeio-
logicel beeie of the 'unooneioue,’ eccording to which the ection of
unrealized eti-uli ie the product of e difference in excitebility threeholde
of temorery eeeocietione et different functionel levele of the dynenic
eyetel reflecting en unpleeeent or threatening eituetion. ‘Ihie hypotheeie
ie confined by e nmer of experinentel fecte ecquired by the euthor end
hie colleequee. ee well no by publiehed dete.

All of thie per-ite the euthor to euqqeet en explenetion for e lerqe mﬂer
of 'unconecioue' phenonene from the poeitione of deter-iniea.

26
m onxcm. use our
FOR OPPICIM. 088 MY

The book is intended for physiologists, psychologists, and psychiatrists.
The book contains 35 figures. 6 tablee, and 422 bibliographic references.

Contents
Page
Foreword 3
Introduction 3
Effect of negative ﬁctions on Perception of single Stimuli ll
Indicators of Perception ll
Reactions of the Body to Unrealized sisple Stimuli 23
Conditions for Arisal of Reactions to Unrealised Stimuli 31
Effect of notional Arousal on Perception 35
Effect of Neuropharnacologieal Substances on Perception 52
auctions to Unrealized sci-ell in the Presence of
Pathological States of the Central Nervous Systen 69
me Cortical Mechanian of Reactions to Unrealisad stieuli 75
venetian of a Puporary Association with the help of
an mrealiced Stimulus 92
Effect of negative notions cn Perception of Seaantic Stiauli 99
So-Called Perception Defense Hechaniaas 99
Subthresheld Effect of Unrealired horde on Sees Physiologi-
cal functions 11!:
Cortical Potentials Evoked by ﬁnalised and mrealitod notion-
al verbal Stimli 136
Potentials melted by Realized sci-uli 144
Cholinergic Mechanics: of cortical Potentials xvohed by
”national" Words l6:
Potentials Evoked by Unrealized Words 185
The fine of Visual Perception of Semantic Stimli 202
Conclusion 22l
Bibliography 22‘

foreword. by USSR Acadeay of Medical Sciences Acadenician G. v. hororev

The effect negative actions being experienced by a subject have on the
way he perceivee outaida phenomena has long attracted the attention of
psychologists and psychiatrists. ‘iha role of auctions in the occurring
changes in realization of the surrounding world by psychopathic person-
alities was brilliantly described by the proninent dosestic psychiatrist
P. B. Gannushkin in his remarkable work “Clinical Pattern of Psychopathic:

21
FOR entcm. us: omx
'rhoir station, Dynooioa, and ayotonatico." no oxprooood ocniidonoo that
with tiuo. oortain 'ocutophyoiologioal tactoro' at tho booio o: diotur-
bonooo in conooiouo procoooing oi inooling intonotion by hing nontal
oontoro will bo found. Thou dioturboncoo uy occur oopocioily iroquontly
among onotionally labilo poroono ot tilt. of ottootivo otrooo.

Unzcrtunotoly nourophyoiologioto havo dovotod littlo ottontion to porcop-
tion and onctiono until rocontly. Abroad. thio problon woo ooinly tho

ronlo o: poychologioto odhoring to poychoanolytioal pooitiono. oinoo it

it oloooly aooociotod with roooorch on tho “unconscious.” ho o rulo thooo
works do not ovon roioo tho ioouo or to tho phyoiologicol noohoniono
rooponoiblo tor tho phonooono o! 'oootionol" porooption and tho 'unconociouo."

Poychophyoiological rooooroh on tho otiocto or oubthroohold otinuli on

tho body woo otortod in our country in tho man by c. v. Gorohuni and

hio colloaguoo, but it soon can to a halt, ond it hoo not boon oonductod
oyotoooticolly to doto. homhiio work oi this oort io doubtloooly noodod.
oinco wo oro still unoloor about tho phyoiologicol oubotrato o: onotiono for
which tho diroct couooo aro concoalod tro- tho oubjoct. Such "unprovokod'
oootiono oro oboorvod oopocially otton ouong poychopothic poroonolitioo,
oopociolly oootionolly labilo onoo, onong poroono who had outforod oorobro-
croniol injury. and in tho prooonco o! oooo torn o! doproooion. Such
oootiono con aloo orioo along practically hoolthy pooplo in cortoin conditiono
(tatiguo, pootiniluonu oothonia, ond work in oxtrono conditions).

‘ \
In Iy opinion o outcoooiul ottomt ia undo in thio book by a. h. rootandov
ot phyoiological otudy ond oxplanation o: chongoo in porcoption o! outoido
oignolo in rooponoo to nogativo orotiono. ao uoll no of voriouo roactiono
o! tho huan body to unroolirod otiouli. This work ohowo that a largo
nuobor o: "uncomdouo' phone-om do yiold in thoir ontiroly to objoctivo
onolyoio in tho laboratory, and that thoy con bo oxploinod iro- tho pooitiono
o! dotorniniol.

Introduction

In addition to nking tho physical conditiono of man's labor and liro oaoior,
tho tochnlcal rovolution in inpcoing highor roquizononto on hio Iontal
functiono. ho tho roto of production procuooo accolorotro and oguipoont
boco-oo ooro cooplox, tho nunbor o! pooplo onloyod in jobs uquiring tho
procoooing of a continuous flow of oxtroaoly noaningtul information within
vory ohort intorvolo o: tioo io incroooing ooro Ind Ioro. 'mio io guito
ovidont in tho mic of tronoport drivoro. mo growing opood of airplanoo,
oloctric locoaotivoo, and othor vohicloo it doubtloooly nking thoir control
nor-o coaplox. Tho nunbor of inotrunonto and gaugoo tho individual not
nonitor with tho oi: oi Inning roquirod docioiono doponding on thoir road-
ingo io incroaoing. Considoring today'o high opoodo. thoro in no tino to
oparo in tho porcoption and procoooing c! a flow or incontion, which

undor cortain conditiono can cauoo poychonourol tonoion in tho individual.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accorpanied by a negative section. This pertains or course not only to
transport drivers but also operators working at the control consoles or
electric power systsas, automatic plant production lines, and coqmters.
air and rail traffic controllers. and so on.

clinical observations and numerous experimental studies have demonstrated
that negative emotions can significantly worsen perception 0: outside
signals. Proalnent domestic psychoneurological clinioistenP. s. Gannushhin
and s. h. Davidsnkovnnoted this in the presence of sons pathological devia-
tions in the activity or the central nervous system. In his classical
nonograph on psychopathies P. a. Gannushkin (3) asphasired nany tines the
role or sections in disturbances oi perception or the environment. Accord-
ing to Gannushkin's observations “paling or perceptions” or. on the other
hand. a decline in their threshold often lies at the basis or the inability
or these people to correctly evaluate their surroundings. 'l‘he tesporary
disturbance in perception arising in response to eeotions in such cases can
be one or the causes or conflicts between the psychopath and surrounding
individuals, of his subsequent incorrect interpretation or the given event,
and of his "deceittulness" and “emancipation iron the facts.”

Davidenkov (4,5) described unique ”short.“ "paroxysaal' neurotic states and
"short reactive states“ along persons with a weakened nervous syste-
(postinrluenu asthenia overtiring, exhaustion. high arterial pressure, and
so on). nose states, which last several seconds, and ainutes lore rarely.
are described by persons experiencing the. as ”inhibition,“ 'eolipeing,"
“plugging of the ears," “contusion,“ “loss of all understanding,“ “suppres-
sion of brain activity,“ 'stupeiaction,“ “suppression of thoughts,” and

”a state of remoteness.” A m characteristic of all of these short-
1lim-Munusual states is a worsening of perception, of realisation of
surrounding phenomena. a dramatic rise in the perception threshold or
stiauli acting at the given moment, without visible clinical signs or
beclouding o! the consciousness. then in such a state. the subject can
proceed with whatever he is doing, especially actions associated with his
routine work, but he is not fully conscious oi‘ why he performs these actions.
As a rule all or these states arise in response'to a suddenly appearing
negative emotion. or in connection with the need for swiftly switching the
attention to an unexpectedly new direction while concentrating on sonsthing
iaportant. In Davidenkov's opinion (5) the principal mechanis- boils down
to a physiological task that is more than the given nervous systea can
handle. Davidenkov believed it highly probable that the association between
the short-term nervous breakdown he described and a difficult situation can
subsequently be reinforced as a condition reflex Ischanise. li‘his
interesting clinical observation requires axperiaental testing. It aay
possibly be the basis for (oration of a pathological teaporary association
involving subthreshold, unrealized stimuli.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR ORIGIN. use M!

the pathological etatee deacribed here are not aeeentially anything all that
exceptional. Davidenkov u) vaa correct in auggeating that theae patho-
logical atatea are nothing more than extranee of etatae that are nore or

leee typical of the nornal personality. here and eore emlea of varioue
aorta of eaerganoy eituationa or eeargenciee arieing ea a reeult of eeotional
atreea experienced by the operator have been publiehed in recent yeere (2) .
There caaee demnatrate that very ehort dieturbanoee in perception. laeting
for juat a few eeconda. in which the operator oeeeee to realise infer-nation
coming from without or reelirea it poorly. and in coneequently unable to
evaluate it adequately and nake an adequate daoieion. are the rain cauae of
dieturbancee in the activity of an operator in a nan-eachine ayatea. Deapi'e
preaenca of auch "traneitory dieturbancee in oonacioueneea.’ the operator
often continuea to control hie vehicle. obviouely on the baeia of unrealized
perception of atiaaili.

Daapite the ieportance and urgency of the problem not enough reeearoh haa
been conducted on the neurophyeiological mechanic-e behind dieturbancee in
perception oeuaed by negative eeotione in an. this book preeanta the
raeulte of experimental reaearch on thia problaa at the laboratory of higher
nervoua activity of the Inetitute of loruneic Paychiatry ineni V. P.
sorbehiy; theae reaulte are diacueeed in light of today'e ideas about the
etructural and functional nervore organiration of emotional behavior. 1he
reeulta of peychophyeiological. pharucodynanic, and bioelectric obeerva-
tione per-it the authorto atata hie own opinion about the nervoua nechanieee
behind changea in realization of outaide eignale under the influence of
negative emotiona. about the poeeible functional baeie for the differencea
in the directione thaae changee can take. and about the neurophyeiological
aubetretee for the action of unrealized eti-uli upon the human body.

Another important aapect of the “perception and auction" proble- ia reeearch
on the role of unrealized enotionally nemingful eenantic etinuli in huan
behavior. particularly in the geneeie of eo-called unaccountable or unprovoked
auctione. That verbal atiuuli which have negative notional leaning and
which are not realized by the individual have an effect on the individual
had been eetabliahed erperieentally back in 1949. Thie vae confined in
nunaroue laboratoriee. mainly abroad, and the phyaiological and peychological
functicne upon which euch unrealized eti-uli may act have been revealed.

But alnoet no atte-pte have been made to clarify precieely which nervoue
mechaniena lie at the baeia of euch 'unoonecioua" phenoalene.

The work done at our laboratory hae de-onatrated that the proble- of the
'uazconacioue" or. to put it more accurately. the effect outeide eignale.
including verbal onee, that are not realized by the individual have upon

the individual at a given accent doae yield to phyeiological interpretation.
It ie not our intention to euggeet that this phenomenon now has a conclu-
eive naurophyeiological explanation. That is a matter for the future.

30
NR omcm. (53 MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The author's own observations and published data available today make it
possible to suggest. for the reader‘s consideration. a physiologically

grounded hypothesis in line with modern ideas about the cerebral mechanisms
of animal and human behavior.

The problem of the neurophysiological basis of the “unconscious" is inti-
mately associated with research on the influence of negative emotions

on perception. It is precisely in the conditions of emotional stress or

at the time of action of emotional stimuli that the threshold for realizing
outside signals can rise significantly, and that the effect of unrealized
stimuli manifests itself. According to the hypothesis suggested here. this
happens owing to a difference in the arousal thresholds of temporary

associations making up a functional system reflecting an unpleasant or
threatening situation.

The successes neurophysiology has enjoyed in research on the isle of the
reticular and liable systems in emotional behavior. particularly their
influence on sensory functions. made it possible to suggest that reactions
to unrealited emotional stimuli are the product of activation of cortical-
liubic-cortical associations or arcs without the participation of higher
cortical levels responsible for realization of surrounding phenomena. '
Pharmacodynamic analysis and comparison of cortical potentials evoked by
neutral and emotional words confirmed the author's hypothesis concerning
the role supplementary ascending activation originating in the limbic sys-
tem plays in the nervous mechanisms responsible for threshhold changes and
reactions to unrealized signals.

Physiological research on human reactions to unrealized outside signals is
important and necessary first of all because it provides a basis for reaching
an understanding. from the positions of determinism. of the real brain
mechanisms behind a large number of “unconscious“ phenomena, ones which

have often recein a speculative and mystical interpretation, mainly from

a psychoanalytical standpoint (”displacement,“ the role of the "superego.’
and so on). Second, this research shows the so-called unprovoked emotions
may be elicited by quite real environmental stimuli which are not realizod
by the subject at the given moment owing to a umber of external and internal
conditions. unaccountable emotions, which are elicited by unrealired
stimuli, are a rather canon phenomenon in the presence of numerous neurotic
states and psychoneural diseases. In emotionally labile individual may

be influenced by ”such a great mass of entirely unaccountable subtle stimuli
that sometimes even the patient himself is unable to understand why he

had been melancholy and what unpleasantness had smelled him to estrange
himself from the gay society in which he had just been enjoying himself

with such carefree abandon“ (3). unaccountable emotions can also arise in
practically healthy people in extreme conditions. while doing stressful

work. especially that requiring rapid switching of attention, in the presence
of mental fatigue. and so on. some conditions promoting the action of
unrealized outside signals upon the individual were modeled in our laboratory.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

The so-“called perception timenthat is, the time required for transmission
of sensory intonation to the central nervous system and for comparison of
the signal with its image stored in the memory-~is extrensly iwortant to
peychophysiology and engineering psychology. The author's research, based
on the method of reverse masking, desonstratas that perception time depends
not so much on the emotional neaningtulness of the signal as on the
:unctional state of the subject's central nervous system (mental ratigue,
the action or alcohol, posttrausatic asthenia, and so on).

Naturally, this monograph does not examine all aspects of the ”perception
and emotion" problea, and far from all of the questions are answered. In
particular, the psychological aspect of the problem is not discussed.

Il‘his book describes an atteqpt at physiological analysis and interpretation
of problem associated with the mutual relationships existing between
perception functions and negative emotions. huch attention is devoted to
the physiological substrates of human reactions to unrealized outside signals.
me explanation {or this can be round in the fact that physiologists have
done little work on the problea of. the “unconscious,“ so important to

our understanding of some aspects 0: huan behavior, and that, as the work
of our laboratory has shown, it does yield to physiological analysis and

explanation from the deterministic positions of the modern teaching on
the brain.

Bibliography
1. Marks, K. and angel's, P., “Soch.' (Works), 2:! edition, Vol 3, pp 15-78.

2. Abuladte, G. V., Gilinskiy, H. A., and Il'yuchenok, R. 0., "ms Role of
cholinergic Mechanisms in the Genesis of some Cortical Responses,"
NBYMPIZIOL..Vol 2. 1970, pp 406-411.

3. Allikmets, 1.. 1th., "Neurophysiological Analysis of the Action 0!
Psychotropic Substances in Lisbic structures and Contiguous Brain
Structures,” Doctorate dissertation abstract, Vil'nyus, 1970.

4. Allikmets, L. 101., "Is the Hypothelamic Triggering Mechanism of
Aggression Cholinergic?" in "Strukturnaya, tunktsional'naya i neyro-
khimicheskaya organizatsiya enotsiy" (Structural, Functional, and
Neurochemical Organization of motions). Leningrad, ltd-yo Nauka,
1971. pp 144-147.

S. Anokhin, P. Koo “The Role of the Orientational-Bxploratory Reaction
in Formation of a Conditioned Reflex," in "Oriyentirovochnyy “ﬂak.

i oriyentirovochno-issledovatel'skaya (ieyatel'nost"I (The Orientational

Reflex and Orientational-Bxploratory Activity) , Moscow, Isd-vo APR RSPSR.
1958, pp 9-20.

6. Anokhin, P. K., “Elektroentsetalograticheskiy analiz uslovnogo refleksa "
(Electroencephalographic Analysis of Conditioned Reflexes), Hoscov,

Hedgiz, 1958. 32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7.

6.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anokhin. P. K. , "New Data on Functional Heterogeneity of the Brain
Stem Neticuiar Formation." mum. W88“. NBRVN. DBYA‘P” Vol 9,
1959. PP 489-499.

Anokhin, P. K” “Sons Debatable Issues Concerning the closing of
Conditioned Associations,“ in "Nekotoryye voprosy sovre-ennoy

fisiologii" (some Problems of Modern Physiology). ﬂoscov, Medgiz.
1959, pp 23-29.

Anokhin, P. It, ”The Specific Action of the Reticular retention on the
Cerebral Cortex,” in "Elektroontsefalograficheskoye issledovaniye
vysehey nervnoy deyatol‘nosti" (Blectroencephalographic Research on
higher Nervous Activity) . Nescov. lad-v0 AN $883. 1962, pp 241-254.

Anokhin, P. It. ”Electroencephalographic Analysis of Cortical-Subcorticai
Relationships in the Presence of Positive and Negative Conditioned
Reactions." in 'Vysshaya nervnaya deyatel'nost'. 'l‘mdy konferenteii.
posvyashchennoy I. P. Pavlovav ssnn.‘ (Higher Nervous Activity. Works

of a Conference Dedicated to I. P. Pavlov in the USA). Moscow, Hedgis.
1963. pp 86—121.

Arapova, A. A., and Orlova, Ye. M. , "Interaction of 68!! Thresholds
and Sensation Thresholds in the Presence of Disturbed Cutaneous and
Auditory Sensitivity," in "la-ye Soveshchaniye po fiziologicheskie
problem. posvyashchennoye panyati l. P. Pavlova" (13th conference on
Physiological Problem Dedicated to the theory of I. P. Pavlov).
Moscow-Leningrad, lad-vs AN sssn. 1948. pp 8-10.

Arbuzov, 3. Ya. , I'Eiffect of Some New Sti-ulants (Phenatina and its
Derivativos, Pyridoxiphen) on the Cardiovascular and Nervous systems."
in “Sevrenennyye probleny fanakologii" (Modern Problems of Phat-sa-
coiogy), Moscow. Hedgiz, 1963, pp 206-211.

Arzumanov. Yu. I... “Development of Temporary Associations in Man with
the Help of Unrealized Visual Stimli,” 28m. W853. NERVN. mm”
Vol 24, 1974, pp 917-923.

Asafov, B. D. , ”Change in Dynamics of the Autonomic Conponents of the
Orientational Reflex with the Use of Acoustic Stimuli of Growing
Intensity.” in "Oriyentirovochnyy refleks i oriyentirovochno-issledov-
atel'skaya deyatel'nost" (The Orientational Reflex and Orientational-
Exploratory Activity). Noscou, ltd-vo APN PSPSR, 1958, pp 123-128.

Asafov. s. D., ”Mctional Structure of the Orientational Reflex to
Subthreshold, Threshold.. and Suprathreslbld Acoustic Sthuli."

in ”Trudy Leningradskogo N11 ekspertizy trudosposobmsti i organiztsii
truda invalidov" (Works of the Leningrad Scientific Research Institute
of Labor Certification and Organization of Labor for the Disabled).
loningrad. Issue 7, 1961, pp 30-54.

33
son orncm. use (my
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aeatov, B. D., I'l’unctional Organization or the Orientational Reﬂex
in the Presence of naaions of Profound Structures of the Nunan Brain.”
in “Materialy k ainpoaiunm 10-12 iyunya 1965 g. 'Nol' glubokikh
struktur golovnogo nozga cheloveka v nekhaniznskh patologicheakikh
reaktsiy" (Contributions to the 10-12 June 1961 Sy-posiul "The Role
of Proiound lit-an Brain Structures in the Mechanisms o: Pathological
Reactions“). Leningrad. Izd-vo Noditaina, 1965. pp 18-20.

Merov. s. 0.. ziskina, A. it, and Makkaveyskiy, P. A” ”Threshold
Reactions as Indicators of Nervous System Functional Statn,‘ in
“Trudy 9-90 s'yuuda Vauuoyuznogo obshchostva iiziologov. biokhinikov
i tamkologov" (works of the 9th Congress or the All-(him Society
or Physiologists. Biochemists, and Pharmacologists), Vol 1. Moscow-
Minsk, Isd-vo AN 888R. 1359. pp 44-45.

Mretyan. s. A., “The Mechanism and localization of Conditioned
Inhibition,“ ZNURN. WSSH. NBRVN. DEYATH Vol 19, 1969, pp 195-211.

Asratyan, 8. A. , '"rhe Nechenien Responsible for formation of a
Conditioned Reﬂex." ZHURN. WSSH. NBRVN. DEATH Vol 19, 1969,
pp 741-752.

Astvataaturov. N. I. , "Modern Neurological Data on the Nature of.
motions,” in "Sovetskaya nevropsikhiatriya' (Soviet Neuropsychiatry) .
Vol 1. neningrad, 1936, pp 33-41.

Baklavaﬂzhyan, O. 6., ”The Hechanisn of Action of n- and n—Cholino-
lytic Substances on Brain Bioelectric Activity,” m. AN AM. 833,
Vol 39. 1964. pp 187-192.

Baklavandshyan, 0. 6., 'Vegetativnaya regulyatsiya eiektricheskoy
aktivnosti nozga" (Autonomic Regulation of Brain Electric Activity) ,
Leningrad. lad-v0 Nauka, 1967.

naklavandshyan. o. 6., and Kipriyan, '1‘. x., “Analysis or the affect
of the hypothalamus on Mono- and Polysynaptic Potentials of the Spinal
Cord and on the Bleetricorticogran." PIZIOL. ZIIUIIN. SSSR. Vol 53,
1967. pp 507-513.

Bardin, K. V., “A Subject's Choice of His Odn Criteria for lrhreslublel
Heasurenonta,“ VOPR. 95110101... No 6, 1965. pp 90-99.

Darn, A. V., Gershuni. G. V., and Donkonogiy, I. 14., "The Significance
of Detecting Acoustic signals of Different Durations to Diagnosis of
Lesions in the 'neuporal Divisions of the Brain,” ZHURN. NBVMPA‘BOL.

I PSIKHIATR” Vol 64, 1964. pp 481-485.

saritov, I. 8., 'Obshchaya risiologiya Iyshechnoy i nervnoy slate-y"
(General Physiology of the muscle and Nervous System) , riflis. 1922,
parts 1-2.

31.
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Boritashvili, I. s. , "Morphological and Physiological Substrates of
Temporary Associations in the Cerebral Cortex,“ in “Trudy Inetituta
liziologii in. I. s. Beritashvili“ (works of the Institute or Physio-

logy ineni I. s. Beritashvili). Tbilisi, Izd-vo Hetsniyereba, 1956,
pp 3-72.

Beritov, I. s. , "Nervnyye nekhanizmy povedsniya vysshikh pozvono—
chnykh shivotnykh" (Nervous Hechanisms Governing the Behavior 0!
Higher Vertebrates), Moscow, Izd-vo AN ssss, 1961.

Beritov, I. s. , "Nervnyye nekhaniny povedeniya vysshikh posvonochnykh
rhivotnykh" V01 2. Moscow, Izd-vo Heditsina, 1966.

seritashvili, I. s. , ”Pawat' pozvonochnykh zhivotnykh. yeye kharakteri-
stika i proiskhozhdeniye" (Vertebrate Meson, Its Characteristics and
Origin), Tbilisi, Isdevo Metsniyereba, 1968.

Beritov, I. S., "Struktury i funktsii kory bol'ehogo nozga' (structures
and Functions of the Cerebral Cortex), Moscow, Ind-v0 Nauks, 1969.

Beritashvili. I. S. , "Characteristics and Origin of the Vertebrate
Memory," in "Gagrskiye besedy (preniya)" (Gagrskiye Discussions
(Debatosn, Vol 6, 'Ibiliei, Izd-vo Hetsniyereba, 1972, pp 163-166.

Borukayev, R. K. , "Evoked Potentials Acoonpanying Poznation and reple-
nentation of a Conditioned Reﬂex," mum. W883. NERVN. Dem”
V01 23, 1973. PP 468-475.

Borukayev, R. K. , "maracteristics of Cortical Responses to Electro-
stisulation of the Internal Geniculate Body During Formation of an
Avoidance Conditioned Reflex,” 280m. WSSH. NBRVN. Dam” Vol 25,
1975. PP 916-923.

aurakova, N. 5., and Khananashvili, M. H., ”Comparative Characteristics
of the Influence of Minazin and Caffeine on Electric Activity of the
Neuron-Isolated Cerebral Cortex,“ PAWOL. I mum... Vol 28,

1965, pp 387-389.

Vel'd-an, A. V., Ivanova, z. N., Kovalev, G. V., et al., “The Bitect
of Aninazin on Ascending and Descending Functions of the Reticular
Pomtion," PIZIOL. zuum. 8381!, Vol 47, 1961, pp 852-862.

Vanetsian. G. I... and Casanov, u. 6., “Dependence of the Threshrnde or
the Initial Responses of the Cortical Projection Zone and Internal
Geniculate Body on the Meaningtulness of an Acoustic stiIIulus as a
Signal,” 2110“. WSSR. NERVN. DEYAT., Vol 16, 1966, pp 619-624.

35
ms onrcm. use omx
38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

‘3.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

1'01! ORIGIN. 083 ONLY

Van."'ray-nn'. and Recline. N. 3., "among“ in sloctric Activity of
tho Oorebral Cortex Mcoopanying tonation o! a conditioned Reflex
1n Mk.y.'. 280M. W88“. “Mo MAT” Vol 13' 1963. ” 235'2‘2e

Vinoqradovo. O. 8., "Oriyontirovoohnyy renoko i ego noyrofitioio-
giohookiye Iekhaniuly" (The Orientationai Reflex and ito Neurophyoio-
logical Hochaniooo). Moocow, Itd-vo on man. 1961.

Vinoqradovo, O. 8., and sokolov, Yo. I... “thinction oi the Vaaoulor
Component of the Oriontationol Reaction,“ mum. was“. mm. mm...
V01 5, 1955' w 3“'Js°o .

Vikhlyayov. Yu. 1.. Klyqul'. 1‘. h.. Prohudin. v. N., and Mdronati.
s. 3., I't:o|aporioon of tho Particular Featureo of Tronquiliror notion
in Exporioentol and Clinical Condition," rnmn. 1 mm.

Vol 34. No l. 1971. pp 30-35.

Vikhlyayov, Yu. 1., and Klyqul', 1'. A” “unique Peatureo o! the "foot
of II'ranquilirorn on Variouo tom of ‘Oporont‘ Animal Behavior.“ in
“as-yo Soveohchoniye po problem. woohoy norvnoy deyatol'nooti.
Toriey i rot. com." (236 Conference on Problem of higher Nervouo
Activity. Report Abotracto). Vol 2. Gor'kiy, 1972. p 94.

Gannuohkin. P. 8., "ubrannyyo truly" (Solocted Horn). noooov. Iod-vo
Moditoina. 1964. pp 116-252.

Gaoanov, 0. 6.. "Invootigation o! Conditionod you...“ in Minna,"
2am. W888. 118M. MAT” V01 9. 1959. pp 149-157.

Gaoanov, u. 6., I'Invaotiqation of the thresholds of mokad Potontiolo
in tho Cortical Projection of o Conditioned StiIuluo,’ mm. W89".
“Mo MATH Vol 15' 1965: w 295-302.

Casanov, U. 6.. 'Vnutrcnnoyo tornozheniye" (Internal Inhibition).
Hoocov, ltd-vo Nouko. 1972. 144 pp.

Garahuni, G. V.. ”wtuol Relationship Betwaon Sonootion and the
Conditioned Rona." PIZIOL. mum. 8888, Vol 32. No l, 1946, pp 43-47.

Gerohuni, G. v., 'Analyoio of smoamry Reaction-u Accoqanying the
Activity 0! Sena. Organs," PIZIOL. 2mm. 838R. Vol 33, NO 4, 1947,
p, 593-412.

Gerohuni, c. v.. "nonox Reactiono Mconponying tho Influence of
thornol Stimuli upon uulan Senoo Organs in hair Mlationohip to
sanoationo.‘ P1230!" 2am. sssn. Vol 35. No 5, pp 541-560.

36
ton orncm us: cum
51.

52.

53.

5"

55.

56.

S7.

58.

$9.

60.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gerehuni. o. v.. "Quantitative Analysis of the Limits of Action of

Unsonsed Acoustic Stimuli,“ PM!" PIZIOL. AXUSTIKI. Moscow-uningrod,
Vol 2, 1950. pp 29-36.

Gerehuni, G. V., ”Physiological Bases of Objective Audioaetry.”
PM!» "2101.. ”(081110. Vol 2. 1950; PP 3-7.

Gershuni, G. v., "Analysis at the Activity of the am Acoustic
Analyze: Based on the Use of Different auctions," pm. PIZIOL.
Amount. Vol 3,.1955, pp 45-52.

Gershuni, c. v., “Unique Features of Conditioned Galvanic Skin
Responses and Alpha-Rhythm Inhibition Reactions Arising in Response
to Subthteehoid end suptnthreshoid Acoustic Stimuli in Man,"
mm. WSSH. NERVN. DB‘M'L. Vol 5, 1965. pp 665-676.

Gershuni. G. V., "Introduction to the Debate,” in "niekttoentsets-
lograficheskoyo iss1¢dovoniye vyeshey nervnoy deystel'noeti'

(Bioctrooncephsloqraphic Investigation of Higher nervous Activity) .

Gershuni. G. v., "Electrophyeioloqicol Indicators 0! Functions of the
Auditory System," in ”Sowenennyyo pzoblssly elektrotizioloqicheskikh
issiedovaniy nervnoy sisteny" (Modern Problem of Blectrophysiological
Research on the Nervous System). ﬂoscov. Izd-vo Nauka. 1964. pp 361-316.

Gershuni. G. V., "Organization of the Afferent Plow end Disctilination
of Signals of Different mrstionsf' mum. W388. REM. MAT. In.
I. P. PAVIDVA. Vol 15, 2, 1965, pp 260-273.

Gershuni. G. V., Alekseyenko, N. Yu., Atspovs, A. A., et a]... "Dis-
turbance of the Activity of Sense Organs and Sons Other: Nervous
motions by 'Aerial Oontusion'." VOW-mo. $3., Moscow-Leningrad.
Vol 2, 1945, pp 98-192.

Getshuni. G. V., and Korotkin, I. 1., "Subssnsory Conditioned Reflexes
in Response to Acoustic Stimuli." 0010.. AN SSSR, Vol 57, 1947. pp 417-
420.

Gershuni, G. V., Koshevnikov, V. A., Hamsova, A. 14., and Chistovich,
L. A. , "Unique Features of formation of Mporary Associations
Involving Unsensed Acoustic Stimuli in Men,“ HULL. BILSPBR. 8101.. l
"30., V01 26, 1948. PP 205-209.

Glaser. V. 0.. ”Hekhaniuy opoznnniya zritei'nykh obrezov" (Mechanisms
Responsible for Identification of Visual ranges). Moscow-Innings“,
Iad-vo Hanks. 1966.

37
m orncm. use GM
61.

62.

63'

6‘.

65.

67.

69.

70.

71.

72.

NR ORIGIN. 083 MY

aol'dburt. s. N” “myrodineeike siukhcvoy sisteey oheloveke"
(Neurodynenios of the linen Auditory Systen) , Leningrad, 1964.

Gorbov. l‘. 0.. end Lebedsv. v. 1.. “Men in 'nschnioel 8yetees.“

mohok, H. n. . “affect of Phenetine end Methylphenetine on the Activity
of higher Central. Nervous Syste- Divisions of white nets,” PM.
I MIKOL” V01 31' N0 1' 196°, " 3-5s

Devidenkov. a. nu 'xlinicheskiye lektsii po nervnye bolssnyee"

(Clinioel lectures on Nervous Diseeeee). Leningred. Hedgis, 1952.
256 pp.

nevidenhov, o. n. . ”miniohoekiye lektsii po nervyye holeenyel"
I..u. 2) “HM“, “91" 1956s

neurove, t. x" end Geeenov. U. 6., “Blectrophysiologicel Investigation
of the Arousebility of Acoustic Stimlue Projections in 'ﬂeshed'
Condition.“ m. W88". "BM. MAT” Vol 19. 1969. pp 500-586.

Denisenko. P. P” ”So-e Punctionel Chengss in the Centrel Nervcue
system Arising in Response to atolmolytic limos," in “rerukologiye
novykh eedetiwzykh sredstv i ikh klinichoskoye prinsneniye" (mem-
coloqy of New Sedetives end Their clinicel Use). Leningred, 1962.

pp 16-28.

Durinyen. R. A.. “so-e Mochenises of Corticel-Subcorticel lnterection
of Specific end Nonspecific Systems of the Brein.’ in “sistmeye
orgenieetsiye fiziologicheskikh fmkteiy" (Systeeic Orgeniution of
Physiological Function”, Moeoov. ltd-v0 uediteine, 1969. pp 24-31.

Durinyen, R. A., “Korkovyy kontrol' nespeteificheskikh listens-owe"
(Corticel Control of Nonspecific Brain System) . Moscow, ltd-yo
Mediteine. 1975.

Zekusov, v. V., ”effect of Tranquilizers end Antidepressente on
ametion of mises in the Control Nervoue Syeten." M. x
mm»... Vol 34, No l, 1911. pp 7-9.

wherove. u. N. . “Effect of motionel Strees on Perception of leek
Acoustic Signele.” mum. W838. REM. MAT” Vol 20, No 1. 1970,
pp 207-209.

Zekherove. u. u. . "Effect of Sons Adrenotropic Subetences on Perception.
end the Subthreshold Action of Sound in the Presence of hotionel
Stun." mm. W888. IBM. MAL, Vol 21, No 5, 1971. pp moo-1046.

38
FOR orucm use can
73.

70.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

8‘.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unhorova. N. N. ”Effect of The Motion“ Stat. of tho annual
Oortox on mikatotion of mtionoi Stun,“ in '23-ye aovuhchoniyo

po promo-n vyuhoy nnmoy doyatol’nooti. uni-y 1 tot. don.“
Vol 1, Gor'kiy, .1972. p 66.

2.1mm", N. N” ”Particular rooturu o! Perception o! sensory
Stiuuii in the nuance o: Emotional Stun Moo-pumping tho Pont-

tnmtic nychopothoid Syndrome.” mum. MP“. 1 51:11an
Vol 73. 1973. pp ‘01-407.

animate“. N. N.. ”Participation o! Cholinorgic nochmim in ﬂunn
Negative hotiau." mum. WSSIIJIBRVN. “YA?” Vol 23, No 3. 1973,
pp 532-537.

Moron. N. a” “ﬂu Bifoct o! Psychotropic Sabotancoo in tho Presence
of anotiomi Sttou," 23. WP“. 1 991mm!!!” vol 74. 1974.
pp 277-282.

sinkina, A. 71., ”Changoo in Motion“ Structuro of nooponcoo in tho
Prounco oi biota-woos in tho Activity of tho ato- and Dioncophaiic

Roqiono of tho Bum.” 912101.. mum. 3333. Vol 45, No 7. 1959,
pp 739-800.

Zinchonko. V. 9., "Productive Perception," V093. psmtomcn. Vol 17.
No 6, 1971, pp 27-42.

Ivonitokiy, A. It” "my-ioloqicoi M-Dinonoionolity o: Intonation
to tho min for Sou Individual Difuuncoo," ma. psmsoumu,
Voi is. 1972, pp 3-14.

Ivmitokiy. n. 8., "Cortical Synthooin and M Drain Intonation
Syctm,” 21mm. W85“. DIEM. DIVA?” Vol 23, No 2. 1973. pp 375-383.

ti'yuchcnok. R. You "Noyto-guonl‘nyyo ukhaniuy :otikulynmoy
tomtsit stvolo nozga' (Nourohuonl Mechanism of the Brain Stcn‘o
anticulor l‘omtion), Moscow. Ind-v0 Hanks. 1965.

n'yuchonok. R. Yu. and Yoliuyovo. A. 6., "The Cholinorgic Mechanism
of the Emotional auction of not,“ mum. WSSﬂ. mm. mm"
Vol 17. No 2, 1967, pp 330-337.

n'yuchonok, R. Yu., and Putnkhov. Yu. 7., “Presence of marine-
Sonaitivo Nourono in tho Hippocmﬂ' ”3101.. 21mm. 5338. Vol 54,
No 2, 1960. pp 133-137.

ii’yuchonok. R. Yu.. zinovich. V. 3.. and lookucovo, 1.. v.,
”emoticon or the “coca of Mtichoiincrgic and Anticholincstcrou
Summon on Cortical Evoked Potontinio," um. I mum...
Vol 32. No 1. 1969. pp 3-7.

39
mn onxcm. use out!
B6.

87.

90.

9)..

92.

93.

94.

95.

FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY'

ll'yuchenok. A. Yu., and Chaplygina. s. A., “Participation o:
Cholinergic Drain Structuree in the Nechenien o! hotional Menory."
230m- W88“. “Me MAT” Vol 20. m 1' 1970, pp 176‘I030

:l'yuchenok, A. Yu. and Ahuledee. c. v.. 'Neurocheeical Aepecte o!

Fortntion o: Blectrographic and Behavioral Aeacticne.“ mum. W88".
"We WAT” V01 2:, ”O 6' 1972) pp 1133.11.15

Kate. A. 11.. ”Cc-parative Characterietice or the Central Cholinolytic
Action of Amlrll and no ﬁlo-Analog," in ‘ramkologiya novyhh
eedativnykh eredetv A 11th klinicheekoye prieeneniye,‘ uningrad.
Hedqla. 1962. pp 20-32.

xeeha'keehvili, A. 9.. and Martin. a. 0.. “Action or Broeine and Caffeine
on Prinz-y Aeeponeee or the Cerebral Cortex." in “Bovreeennyye

probleey deyatel'noeti i etroyeniya teentral'ncy nervnoy eieteey“
(Modern Probleee of the Activity and Structure of the Central Nervoue
Syetee) , niliei, heteniyeroM. 1972, pp 63-91.

Nogan. A. 3.. "Ccntributione to the Queetion Concerning the Structural
suntratee and Nature of Wrary Aeeociatione o! a Conditioned Aetlex.‘
in “Cagrekiye beeccly.‘I Vol 3. 'i'biliei, Isa-vo AN Cruxinek. an.

1960. pp 191-212.

Kogan. A. 3.. 'Bxpreeeion of Higher Nervoue Activity by Cortical
Electric Potentiale Recorded tron an Anieel Penitted Unconetrained
nehavior,’ in "zlektroenteetalograficheekoye ieeledovaniye vyeehey
nervnoy deyatel'noeti" (Electroencephalographic Aeeearch on Higher
Nervous Activity) . Hoeoov. ltd-v0 AN 8881!. 1962, pp 42-53.

Kozhevnlkov. V. A.. and lurueeva, A. 14.. "electroencephalographic
Study of Pornticn o: honorary Aeeociaticne Involving Unceneed
stimuli in Han.“ 12V. AN 888R. 83R. 8101... Vol 5. 1949, p 560.

Korotkin. 1. 1., "acne affecte Promoting Naniteetatlon o: Subuneory
Conditioned Reflexes to Acouetic Stimuli,” 0010.. AN sssn, Vol 57,
No S. 190, p 529.

Koatendov. B. A.. "the Role of Dieturbancee in Cortioofugel lntluencee
in the Petrology of the Crientetlonal Aetlex.“ alum. W88“. mm.
”37., V01 13' N0 6’ 1963’ pp 995-1009.

Kootandov. E. A.. 'Btfect of Guangee in Mctional State of the
Cerebral Cortex and the Activating syeten of the Brain Stet- on
Detection of weak Acouetic signale." aim WSSII. Ram. MAT”
Vol 17. No 4. 1967, pp 634-642.

Kootendov. r. A., “Effect of Notional Aroueal on Acoustic signal
Detection Threehholde and Subeeneory Reactions.” mum. WSSN. ham.
mm” Vol 19, No 3, 1969, pp ‘62-‘70.

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
97.

9B.

100a

101 .

102 .

103 .

104.

105 .

106 .

107.

108.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kostandov, 8. A., “The Orientational Reflex,“ in "Pisiologiya

vyashey nervnoy deyatel'nosti" (Physiology of higher Nervous Activity) ,
Part 1, Moscow, lad-vo Nauka, 1970. pp 206-237.

“standov, a. 5., and 8hostakovich, 6. 8., “Measurement oi the Time
of Identification or Verbal Stimuli by the Method of Reverse hashing,”
zllURN. W88". arm. 0mm, Vo1 20, so 5, 1970, pp 1010-1015.

Kostandov, 3. A., and Aramanov, Yu. I... ”averaged cortical Evoked
Potentials in Response to notional Visual Stimuli in Man,” mm.
was“. mm. mm” Vol 21, No 4, 1971, pp 811-819.

Koatandov, 8. A., and Aramanov, Yu. I... "Huan Cortical Potentials
Evoked in Response to Emotional Visual Stinuli,’ m. AN 8888,
Vol 199, 1971, pp 246-249.

Kostendov, 3. A” and Arsunanov, Yu. 1... “Changes in Cortical Potentials
Evoked by notional Visual Stimuli Under the Influence of Anisii in
Man,“ 2am. W88“. "BM. DBYATH V01 21, No 6, 1971, pp 1247-1255.

Koatandov, 8. 5., and hrsuaanov, Yu. I... "the pole of Associations
in Pomtion or "man Cortical Evoked Potentials,“ 2am. W88".
NBRVN. mam, Vol 23, No 3, 1973, pp 523-531.

Kostandov. 3. A., and Reshchikova, ‘i'. 11., “Changes in Visual Perception
in Response to Mchohol," mom. WPM‘OL. I PSIIOIIATRH Vol 73,
No 2, 1973, pp 230-235.

Kravkov, s. v.. 'Vzaiieodeystviye orqanov chuvstv" (Interaction of.
sense Organs), Moscow-minor“, ltd-yo an 8551!, 1948, 128 pp.

Kullanda, K. 14., ”Secondary Bioelectric Reactions of the Cerebral
Cortex," in ”Sovrelaennyye probleay elektrotiziologicheskikh
issledovaniy nervnoy sisteny,“ Moscow, Ird-vo heditaina, 1964,
pp 220-254.

Leontovich, r. A., “The Problem of motions,” 08981011 V SOVR. 8105.,
Vol 65, No l, 1968. PP 34-65.

Livanov, H. N., "Inhibition in Neuron System of the Cerebral Cortex,“
in “neflcksy goiovnogo Iaozga" (Brain Reflexes), Moscow, ltd-v0 Nauka,
1963, pp 14-15.

Hakarov, P. 0., "Detenination o! the Duration of Processes in Human
Receptors,‘ OWL. BKSPER. 8101.. I NED” Vol 2, No 2, 1936, pp 127-129.

Hakarov, P. 0., "mrther Research on Direct and Reverse Basking in
the Activity of sense Organs. The Biophysics or the Relationship
Between Stimulation, Arousability, and Sensation,‘ in "Nervnaya
sisteua" (The Nervous System). Vol 4, Leningrad, 1963, pp 71-75.

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
109.

110.

111.
m.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Makarov. P. 0.. ”Differentiated Arousability, Adequacy. and Interaction

of sense Organs in Hicrointervals oi rise," Non. 981N901... Vol 11.
No 4, 1965, pp 111-118.

Nekarov. P. 0., “The Role of the Adequacy of the Dosinant Stilulus
in Niorointerval Analysis or Nervous Activity (The Douinant and the

Mequate).' in 'Nekhanissy douinanty" (Nechanim of the Doainant),
Leningrad, Isa-yo Nauka, 1967, pp 52-73.

Neruseve. A. N.. nI‘leaeuxeanent o: Discrimination units Ior Acoustic
Signals in Men,” Pm. PIzIOL. mm, Vol 3, 1955, pp 60-66.

Mashkovskiy. N. 0.. ”ukarstvennyye sredstva" medicinal Agents),
Part 1, Moscow Izd-vo Heditsina. 1972. pp 137-139.

Nosidre. v. 11.. niahinaehvili, R. 8.. motibadse, N. In, et al..

"mehcheplennyy nose? ('l'he Split Brain) . Tbilisi, Isd-vo Netsniyereba.
1972.

Nyasishchev. V. N., “The So-Celled Psychogalvanic annex and Its
significance to Personality neearch." in "Novoye v retleksologii

i tisiologii nervnoy eistesy“ (advances in Reflexology and Physiology
of the Nervous systes). uningrad. Nedgiz, 1929, pp 233-255.

Hyasishchev, V. 8.. “Sosa Autonomic Mental Dependencies as Determined
tron Electrocutaneous Readings from Nervous and Hental Patients,”
1800? 8338“ IN-‘IA 2026A, Leningrad. Nedgiz. V01 11, 1939, pp 124-137.

Narikashvili, s. 9.. “Cortical Regulation of Functions of the Brain's
mticu1ar Porntions,‘ WWI SOVR. BIOI... Vol 52, No 3 (6). 1961.
pp 257-273.

Narikashvili, s. 9.. "the Mechanism of conditioned Reflex Activity,”
280M. WSSH. NERVN. MAT” Vol 12, 1962, pp 613-622.

Narikashvili, s. 9., "Sose General Questions Concerning the Physio-
logy or Analysers in Light or New Data on the Structure and Function
of the Brain," VOPR. 93110101... Vol 3. 1962, pp 56-72.

Narikashvili, s. 9., “Nespetsiticheskiye struktury golovnoqo serge i
vosprinineyushchaya funktsiya Rory bol'shikh polushariy" (Nonspecific
Brain Structures and the Perceptual Punction of the Cerebral Cortex) .
Tbilisi. Isd-vo Heteniyereba, 1962.

Nerikashvili. s. 9., “Interaction Between the Cerebral Cortex and
Sons Subcortical Pomtions.‘ in "sovre-ennyye problesy deyatel'nosti
i stroyeniya tsentral'noy nervnoy siste-y' (Modern Problem of the
Activity and Structure of the Central Nervous systen). Il‘bilisi.
Isd-vo Netsniyereba. 1968, pp 126-162.

'02
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
121.

1220

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mrs-RashVilip 8. p0' ArutymV. Vs Se) Mp 3., Gnd 811“th 6..
"Effect of Stisuleting the Mosencephelio Reticuiar tormetion on
Neuron Activity of the Dorsal Outer Geniculete Body.“ in “Sovrenennyye
probleny deyatel'nosti i stroyeniye tsentrel‘noy nervnoy sistew."
Tbilisi, led-vo Metsniyereba. l972. pp 133-142.

Drbeli. L. A., “Voprosy vysehey nervnoy deyatel'nosti" (Problems of
Higher Nervous Activity) , Moscow-Leningrad, zed-vo AM 888R. 19‘9.

Ostrovsksye. a. u., “electrophysiologioal Data on Cortical Btteote

or Neuroleptics and Tranquiliters.“ ammo. 1 monitor... Vol 35.
No 1, 1972, pp 7-11.

Pavlov. I. P., 'Lekteii o rabote bol'ehikh polusheriy golovnogo
norge" (Lectures on the work of. the Cerebral Cortex) , Moscow-Deningrsd.
Izd-vo AN SSSR, 1927.

Pavlov. l. P. , “Psychological Mechanisa of the So-Called Voluntary
Movements." in 'Polnoye sobraniye trudov" (Caplets Collected Works),
Mosoow-Deningred. Ind-v0 AM 8881!. Vol 3, 1949. pp 553-556.

Panov. A. 6.. "Experinentel Analysis or hearing Disturbances
Acconpanying Different Diseases of the Nervous System" in "Psikhoti-
ziologicheskiy eksporinent v klinixe nervnykh i duehevnykh bolesney“
(Psychophysiological Experimentation in the Nervous and Mental
Disease Clinic), Moscow. 1933. pp 5-23.

Peyner. I. A., "'Denporal and Spatial Distribution of the Evoked
Potential fields and Intonation Processing in the linen Brain,“
in ”Mokhaniuy vyzvannykh potentsialov sozga" (The Mechanism of
Brain Evoked Potentials), Leningard, 1971, pp 21-28.

Reshchikove, ‘r. M., "So-e Mechanism Behind Arisel of Poettrausatic
notional Disturbances," in 'Probleuy sudebnoy psikhietrii"

(Problems of Forensic Psychiatry), Issue 16, Moscow. Isd-vo Meditsina.
1965. pp 165-169.

lbshchikovs, ‘i‘. N., "Investigation of Subsensory Reactions in Patients
Suffering Denote Consequences of Unexposed Cerebrocraniel Injury.“
Candidate Dissertation. Moscow. 1'569.

Roytbax. A. 1., 'Blectric Phenonena in the Focus of a Conditioned
Sthulu,‘ TRODY 185111011 P12101003 AN GMINSK. 33R, Tbilisi,
Vol 11. 1958. pp 121-154.

Roytbak. A. 1., ”Analysis or electric Pheno-ena Occurring in the
Cerebral Cortex upon Extinction of Orientational and Conditioned
Reﬂexes," in " Elektroentsetalograficheskoye issledovaniye vysshey
nervnoy deyatel'noeti' (Bleetroencephalographic nesearch on Higher
Nervous Activity). Moscow, lzd-vo AM 5553, 1962, pp 87-95.

ha
ron omcm. use omx
132-

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

noytbek. A. 1.. “cortical Evoked Potentiala,‘ in "sovreaennyye
prohleay aleotrotieiolpgicheekikh iealedoveniy nervnoy eietew'
(Modern Problem of Electrophyeiologicel heeeerch on the llervoue
ayeten). hoeoom ltd-v0 liediteina, 1964, pp 164-219.

Mytbek. A. 1., and Xaehekaehvili, R. 9., “Effect of Catteine on
Dendritic Cortical Potentials in the Cat,” nzron. mum. 8888.
Vol 56. No 6. l970, pp 825-831.

Sanoylova, l. K.. ”line or Mot-ulation o! Intonation end Acouatic
Signal Proceeeing,” in 'Materiely 6-y Veeaoyutnoy ekueticheekoy
konterenteii" (Proceedinga o! the 6th All-Union Acouetica Conference).
Moscow, 1968.

Sluchevaxiy, F. 1., ”Contribution to the Dee of the Preparation
Mote-inn (Methyldiezil, Inn-27S) in the Psychiatric Clinic.” in
“Pemkologiya novykh eedetivnykh eredetv i ikh klinicheekoye
princneniye" (Pharmacology of Nev.80dativee end their Clinical nee) .
Leningrad, Hedgiz. 1962, pp 56-60.

s-irnov, c. 0.. 'Pmctional Organization of Nervous Centere.”
vests. an 8888. No l. 1968, pp 48-59.

Snirnov, G. 0., and ll'yuchenok. R. Yu., "the cholinergic hecheniee
o: Cortical Activation,‘ HZIOL. mm. 8851!, V01 48. No 10, 1962,
pp 1141-1145.

Sokolov, Ye. Nu 'Voepriyatiye i uslovnyy refleke" (Perception and
the Conditioned Reflex). Moscow. ltd-v0 ”N RSI'SR, 1958, 333 pp.

Sokolov. Ye. N., "the Orientational Reflex.“ in 'miyentirovochnyy
retleke i voproey vyeehey nervnoy deyatel'noeti" (nae Orientetionel
Reﬂex and Problem of higher Nervous Activity) . Hoecou, ltd-v0
AMI $281!, 1959, pp 5-51.

Sokolov, Ye. Nu modeling Proceeeee in the Central Nervous System
of Anilale and Man.“ in I'Gaqrekiye beeedy,‘ miliei, lad-v0
An Gruzinek ssn, Vol 4, 1963, pp 183-202.

Sokolov. Ye. N., "l'he Orientational Reflex es en Intonation Regulator,”
in 'Oriyentirovochnyy reflex: i probleny reteepteii v norne i
petologii" (The Orientetional neflex and Problem 0! Reception in
Normal Oonditone and in Pathology). Moscow, ltd-v0 m RSYSR, 1964,

pp 3-20.

memdze, V. 6.. “Reactions Blicited by Direct stiIuletion of the
67m singuli and Their Influence on Some Reﬂexes," 800881101. AN cm-
nasx. 5511, Vol 43, No 2, 1966, pp 487-494.

Mb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
143.

1“ .

145 .

146.

147.

148 .

149.

150.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pedyeyove. L. P.. “stfect of Heavy Pheneninee on the 'Aroueel‘ end
.atcr‘ctim' 8y.m,' Who 1 MIKE)!" V01 28' NO 5' m 515-517e

Khochepuridse. e. 3.. “The Aeﬂective mnction of Set in Connection

with the Action of mperceived Stimuli,“ TR. nzusax. cos. Int-TA”
Vol 124, 1966. pp 25-53.

Chistovich. L. A. , “Develop-em: of Conditioned Gelvenic skin Responses
to munsed Acoustic Stimuli." 12V. AN 8881!, 838. 3101..., Vol 5, 1949.
pp 570-583.

Testurov, v. 1.... end Durinyen, A. A., “ﬁts Duel Mechenisn of Activation
of Aeticuler Neurons in the Brain in Response to Electric Stimulation
of Sometic Nerves." 0010.. AN 8881!. 83A. 3101... Vol 178, so 3. 1968,

pp 748-751,.

shoemovich. G. s. . ”Particular Features of the Perception rise of
Verbel Stimli by Psychopeﬂiic Personalities and Schizophrenia,”
211W. NBVMPA‘IOL. I PSMIA‘L‘R” V01 72. No 11, 1972, pp 1695-1699.

shoeukovioh. G. s. . “Investigation of Visuel Perception by the Method
o! Reverse linking in Healthy Individuals. Psychopathic Personalities,
and Schizophrenia." Cs'ndidete Dissertation. noecow, 1912.

snunilins, A. I. , "Experimental Analysis of tor-nation of systolic
Continetione in the Cortex end Subcorticel Formations wring Develop-
ment of Conditioned Aesotione,‘ in "Bovrensnnyye problem lizioloqii
i pstologii nervnoy sietuy' (Modern Problems of Nervous Systen
Physiology end Pathology). Moscow ltd-v0 Hediteine, 1965, pp 240-255.

Shuniliner A. I. . 'Coepsretive Analysis or the Electric Activity of
the Cerebral Cortex end Suboortical rotations During Alteration
of Conditioned Reactions.“ um. WSSH. mm. MAT” Vol 23.

No l. 1973, pp 6-14.

mPYRIGﬂ'a Izdotel'stvo "Heditsine', 1977

11004
C50:

1870 m

'45
ran onrcm. use om: