FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10549

28 May 1982

Translation

FOREST RESERVES IN THE SOVIET UNION:

CONCISE HANDBOOK
BY

A.G. Bannikov. at al

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1013

ms publications contain infatuation priurily froa foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also free news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics rztained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by soarce.

me contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHIP 0F
MTBRIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
Introduction
Brief Intonation About Forest Reserves of the 085R

Azerbaijan SSR
Basutchayskiy State Forest Reserve
Gek-Gel' State Forest Reserve with eldar pine branch
Girkan State Forest Reserve
Zakatalfskiy State Forest Reserve
Kyrylaqachskiy State Forest Reserve
Pirkuli State Forest Reserve
‘mrianchay State Forest Reserve
Shirvan State Forest Reserve

Armenian SR
Dilizhanskiy State Forest Reserve
Khosrovskiy State Forest Reserve

Belorussian SSR
Belovczhskeya pushcha State Hunting and Game Preserve

Berezino State Forest Reserve
Prlpyatskiy Landscape-Hydrological State Forest Reserve
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Georgian SSR -
Adshsnety State Forest Reserve
Riqetskiy State Forest Reserve
Satsara-Sabanaurskiy State Forest Reserve
Borshoni State Forest Reserve
Vashlovvanskiy State Forest Reserve
xintrishskiy State Forest Reserve
Colchis State Forest Reserve
Lagodekhskiy Order or nine:- of Ronor State Forest Reserve
Harinndshvarskiy State Forest Reserve '
Fitamdo-nyuseerskiy State Forest Reserve
Ritsinskiy State Forest Reserve
Saguranekiy State Forest Reserve
Satapiiyskiy State Forest Reserve

Kazakh SSR
Aksu-Dshdngly State Forest Reserve
Alma-Ate State Forest Reserve
Barsakel'nes State Forest Reserve
mrgal'drhinskiy State Forest Reserve
Naurzuln State Forest Reserve

Rirqiz SSR
Issyk-Kul' State Forest Reserve
Saryechelekskiy State Forest Reserve

Latvian SSR
Grini State Forest Reserve
Horitssala State Forest Reserve
Shiitere State Forest Reserve
angerskoye Hunting and Game Preserve

Lithuanian SSR
Zhuvintas State Forest Reserve

Moldavian SSR
Roda-y State Forest Reserve

RSPSR
Altay State Forest Reserve '
Aetrakhan Order of Red Banner of Labor State Forest Reserve
iueni V. I. Lenin
Baikal State Forest Reserve

Barguzin State Forest Reserve

Bashkir State Forest Reserve
Bol'shekhekhtsirskiy State Forest Reserve
Visiu State Forest Reserve

Volga-Kane State Forest Reserve

Voronesh State Forest Reserve

Darwin State Forest Reserve

miguev State Forest Reserve

-b-
Zavidovo Scientific Expert-rental Forest Reserve

Zeysk State Forest Reserve

Il'nen State Forest Reserve heal V. I. unin

Caucasian State Forest Reserve

Kandalaksha State Forest Reserve

Kedrovaya pad' Forest Reserve

Rivach State Forest Reserve

Ronsouol'sk State Forest Reserve

xronotskiy State Forest Reserve

Lazovskiy State Forest Reserve mm L. G. Kalplanov

Lapland State Forest Reserve

Hordovian State Forest Reserve intent F. G. Snidovich

Oka State Forest Reserve

Pechoro-nych State Forest Reserve

Pinega State Forest Reserve

Frioksko-Terrasnyy State Forest Reserve

Severo-Oseti State Forest Reserve

Sikhote-Rlin' State Forest Reserve

Sokkhondinsky State Forest Reserve

Stolby State Forest Reserve

'reberda tats Forest Reserve

Ussurysk State Forest Reserve

mmgan State Forest Reserve

Khoperskiy State Forest Reserve

Central State Forest Reserve

Central Chernozem State Forest Reserve men: Professor
v. v. Alekhin

Tadshik SSR
Remit State Forest Reserve
Tigrovaya balka State Forest Reserve

'Nrknen SSR
Bad‘hyzskiy State Forest Reserve
Krasnovodsk State Forest Reserve
Repetek State Forest Reserve

Uzbek SSR
Aral-Fayganbar State Forest Reserve
Raday-‘rugay State Forest Reserve
Vardanzin Desert-Sand Forest Reserve
Zaamlnskiy State Forest Reserve
Zeravshan Forest Reserve

Kara-Kul' State Forest Reserve

Kyzyl-Kusy State Forest Reserve
Kyzyuuyskiy nountun-Savin Forest Reserve
Nurata Mountain-Walnut Forest Reserve
Chatkal'skiy State Forest Reserve
Ukrainian SSR

Rsov-Sivasn Ranting and Game Preserve

Askantye-Rova State Forest Reserve

Dnepr‘l'eterev State Forest and Hunting Preserve

Valess'ye State Forest md Bunting Preserve

Kanevsk State Forest Reserve

Carpathian State Forest Reserve

Crimean State Renting and Gale Preserve

Lugansk State Forest Reserve with strel'tsovskaya steppe
_ and Kendruhevskoye forestry branches

Mys llart'yan State Forest Reserve

Poless'ye State Forest Reserve

Ukrainian State Steppe Forest Reserve

Black m State Forest Reserve

Yalta State Mountain-Forest Reserve

Estonian SSR
Viydu-Nyae State Forest Reserve
Vil'sandiyskiy State Forest Reserve
Hatsaluskiy State Forest Reserve
Niqolaskiy State Forest Reserve

Forest Reserves Organized in 1976
Kabardino-Balkarskly State Forest Reserve
Malaya Sos'va State Forest Reserve
Vrangel' Island State Forest Reserve
Sayen-ﬁmshen State Forest Reserve
FOR OFFICIAL USE GﬁiY

energy is provided) end reproducible ecosystems, but incapable of self-reproduction
end self-reguletion due to the null dimensions of the territory end the powerful
anthropogenic effect on the pert of surrounding territories. Study of the princi-
ples of processes in complex neturel systess eey yield results only if the stete of
these processes are recorded st individual moments of their developnsnt. which re-
quires continuous scientific reseerch work. According to this, forest reserves
ere regional scientific reseerch institutions with e staff of scientific workers
end the corresponding equipmnt thst supports conducting of stetionery multiple
reseerch over e period of yeers. Scientific investiqetions in forest reserves are
directed towerd study of objects of neture end neturel complexes to suhstentinte
methods of efficient use of neture.

Any kind of production activity is prohibited on forest reserve territories. Hess
excursions to forest reserves by nonspecielists ere not authorized. A protection
zone within which economic activity is limited (only those forms of it are per-
nitted which do not inflict horn on the neturel complexes of the forest reservo)
is established eround the forest reserve territory.

There are now 108 forest reserves (including gene-hunting reserves) with e total

eree of 7.8 million hecteres in the USSR. During the lest 10 yeers 26 forest re-
serves on en eroe of more then three million hecteres have been newly orqenired

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I70! OFFIOAL USE ONLY

The activity of forest reserves is frequently and validly linked to protection of
rare animals, birds or plants.

Only several pairs of nutrias remained in the Vorcnerh' Forest Reserve at the ties
it was organized. During the 50 years that this forest reserve has been in exist-
snce, lore than 3,000 nutrias have been taken from it and resettled in 73 regions
of our country. He now count approximately 70,000 of these aniaals.

At the ecnent the Bargusin Forest Reserve on Lake Baykal was organised, it was in-
habited by no more than 20-30 sables that sheltered in inaccessible rocky placer
deposits. within 15 years the sables populated the entire prohibited taiga and
began to spread rapidly through the Transbaykal region.

Great white herons and pelicans were almst coupletely destroyed in the Volga delta
during the years preceding organization of the Astrakhan' Gene Reserve. There is
now an abundance of life there, an unceasing hubbub of birds and thousands of birds
now nest in trees, countless green islands and on sandbars.

Kola Peninsula at the assent the Lapland Cue Reserve was created and there are now
nore than 20,000 of then. '

The Anur tiger is considerably obligated for its existence to the sikhote-Alin'end
other forest reserves in the Far Bast, the Asiatic vild ass owes its existence to
the Badkhysy Gale Reserve in Turk-eniya and the Bukhara deer owes its existence to
the gene reserves in 'l'adrhikistan. Made of thousands of wintering swans, geese.
ducks and other aquatic fowl have found quiet refuges in the gas reserves on the
Caspian Sea. This list could be continued not only for aninals but for plants as
well, recalling the preserved groves of yews, foxtree, the unique nut forests

of the Tyanf-Shan' and the pistachio forests of ‘Nrkneniya.

Gare reserves are of great significance as scientific centers for study of nature.
Methods of conservation, restoration and efficient use of valuable coal-ercial ani-
eels (sable. nutria, reindeer and elk) and many species of birds are developed
successfully in'them such has been done to restore oak, beec", cedar and nut for-
ests; extensive work has been done to study the change of natural resources with
regard to construction of hydroenginsering facilities and reclamation measures and
other forms of econo-ic activity.

Hora than 600 scientists and specialists work in gazes reserves and just as many
scientists of other scientific institutions participate sctivoly in the scientific
research of gene reserves.

historically establist natural ecosystems retained the capability of self-regu-
lation and self-reproduction in such gens reserves as the Caucasus, ICronotskiy and
Sikhote-Alin'. its territories of these reserves are sufficiently vast and eye-
toes of surrounding territories related to than ecologically contribute to the
noraal function of the ecosystems and the protected zones perforu buffer functions.
The regine in these gees reserves is directed prinarily toward maintenance of
quiet and the natural course of natural processes.

.1. US ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reproducible systems, but incapable of autonomous self-regulation due to the lim-
ited composition of ecosystem, the small dimensions of the territory and the pow-
ert’ul anthropogenic pressure on the part of the transformd surrounding territories
are conserved in many game reserves. For exauple, changing hydrological cmditions
can in sole cases alter the water regime of an entire region, including the terri-
tory of the gene reserve located in this region. The active interference in the
fate of natural complexes by artificial regulation of natural phenomena inherent to
these couplenes in mdisturbed conditions (restoration of the hydrological regime
disturbed by reclamation, restoration of basic types of forest on areas titered in
the past and so on) arises in this regard.

Ecosystems of anthropogenic landscapes formed on the location of destroyed natural
landscapes are conserved in some game reserves. The regime in this group of pro-
tected territories is directed toward providing optimal conditions for restoration
of natural amplexes.

Creation of new forest reserves in Arctic tones, the tundra, northern taiga, in the
steppes, deserts and waters of the seas and oceans is planned during the next 10-
15 years. The primary problem should be creation of 40-45 game reserves on an area
of 4.5-5 million hectares in these zones so that the total number of gene reserves
in the country comprises 145-150 and the territory of these reserves cosprises no
less than 12-13 million hectares.

The project to form a global network of biosphere game reserves as standard systems
of the basic biomes of earth. storehouses of the entire variety of the planet‘s
genetic material. background stations for observation of the global state of the
environment and the biological ccsponents of the corresponding section of the bio-
sphere occupies a prominent position in the program of international cooperation
'Han and the Biosphere" now being inplelented. The principles of Soviet game re-
serves are the basis of the criteria for selection, the structure and functions of
biosphere game reserves.

Besides the game reserves in our country, there are several gens-hinting reserves
created to protect the main natural complex. Along with them. work is being in-
plenented to propagate and improve the habitation conditions of predatory animals.
including diverse bioengineering. forest management and other neasures. Strictly
regulated hmting is authorized in these reserves with the increasing population
of wild gave.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“WISEONLY

BWMMA‘HWONMMRBSIRVBSWMOSSR

[Text] The Azerbaijan ssn
The nastuchay State Gate Reserve (Azerbaijan 883, zanqelanskiy Rayon)

It was organized in 1974 with an area of 117 hectares. It is swordinats to the
state Committee of the Council of Ministers. Azerbaijan 551: for lnvironnental Pro-
tection (scientific investigations have only begun there with regard to the fact
that the rosarvo was recently established).

The Gsk-Gel' State Gan Mom with al'dar Pine Branch (Azerbaijan 583, Kirovohad,
ulitsa mistichsskaya. 294)

It was organised in 1925, has existed since 1965 in its current boundaries, its
area is 7,131 hectares of whid: 3,896 hectares are ﬁorsst area and 109 hectares
are reservoirs. It is located in the northeastern part or the Minor Caucasian
Ridge at an altitude of LOGO-3,600 asters above sea level.

It is subordinate to the State .oonittee of the Azerbaijan 381! Oomcil of Ministers
tor mvironusntal Protection.

Deciduous ﬁorests and subalpine meadows. mique coq'alsres of lake Gek-Gel' , a
unique grove of Bl'dar pins (in lhenlarskiy Rayon) and you groves are typical for
the ﬂorest reserve. The fauna is typical for the northeastern part of the lesser
Caucasus. The wild goat is found anong rare species.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is study of the natural landscapes of
the lesser Caucasus. reacclilatisation of the Caucasian red deer, develop-ant of
Iothods or conservation and study of the miqus stand of zl'dar pine and also the
biogeocanoses of lakes Gek-Gel' and Horal-Gel'.

The Girkan State Eorost nesem (Azerbaijan 883. Lsnkoran'. Tea Sovkhos Astor's.
ulitsa Lenina. 2)

It was organized in 1936, has existed since 1969 within current boundaries and its
area is 2,900 hectares. It is located on the subtropical Lenkorsn'lovland and in
the lower nmtain belt of the Talysh.

It is subordinate to the State Col-ittee of. the Aseﬂaaijan 83R Oomcil of Hinisters
for Environ-Intel Protection.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The territory of the forest reserve can be divided into three landscape belts:
lowland (up to 200 ueters above sea level), foothills (up to 500'ueters) and low-
mountain (1;) to 1,000 meters above sea level). The vegetation of the lowland
section is net abundant and diverse.

The flora of the forest reserve masters 1,900 species, of which 162 are endemic,

95 are rare and 38 are endangered species. The Iain varieties of relic forests
are of the girkan type--Persian ironwood, silk tree, wing nut, ell, chestnut-leaved
oak, Caspian honey-locust, girkan fig, snooth-leaved ele and bearhd alder: the
silk tree predominates in the lowland belt: fern, deer tongue and sedges doninate
in the ground cover. ﬂornbean, beech and walnut are the prevalent varieties in
the foothills belt: groves of Persian ironwood have been Iaintained.

Endemic and relic species of animls, especially smug sollusks and insects, are
nuserous. The green-bellied lizard and the girkan subspecies of birds are inter-
esting. The appearance of the leopard in the forest reserve, which was recently a
pereanent inhabitant here, is possible.

The scientific profile of the reserve is study of problems of restoring ancient
endangered varieties: Persian ironwood, chestnut-leaved oak, silk tree and also
the ecology of individual species of animals.

The Zakataly State Forest laserve (Azerbaijan 883, Zakataly, Plate, 2)

It was organised in 1929 with an area of 25,218 hectares, of. which 15,772 hectares
is forest area and 48 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on the southern
slopes of the Great Caucasian Ridge at an altitude of 650-3,“6 esters above sea
level.

It is subordinate to the State Oomittee of the Azerbaijan 8831 Council of ministers
for anvironsental Protection.

A contain-forest landscape of deciduous trees, high-altitude thin forest with em)-
alpine high-altitude grasses and subalpine and alpine meadows is typical for the
forest reserve.

More than 75 percent of the forests of the reserve consist of beech forests. ’lhe
min forest-forming varieties are oak, beech, hornbeam, linden, maples, ash,
snooth-leaved elm, chestnut, walnut and so on in the lower part of the forest belt;
dogwood, filbert, cornel, medlar, wild myrobalan, dewberry and rhododendron
predominate in the shrub belt. The central-altitude belt is represented mainly by
beech plantations. The flora of the forest preserve nutter: more than 1,000 spe-
cies. The commn yew is found among rare plants; gean, apple, pear, nountain ash,
aspen, birch, alder and so on are found in the forest belt.

The fauna of the forest reserve is typical for the eastern part of the Greater
Caucasus. arch species as Caucasian tur, Chamois, the naral, roe deer, wild boar,
brown bear, otter, badger, fox, weasel, stone and pine nartens, cannon raccoon,
lynx, European wildcat, squirrel, European hare, fat dorwuse, voles and so on are
typical. The bearded vulture, white-headed vulture, black vulture, Caucasian black-
cock, chough, alpine chough, great and lesser spotted woodpeckers, the shore lark,
nuthatch, cuckoo and so on are found among birds.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scientific profile of the forest preserve is the study of the flora and fauna
of the southern slopes of the'creat Caucasus and also high-altitude meadow and
mountain forest biogeocenoses.

The Kyzyl-Iegach State Forest mserve (Merbaijan 88R, Port Il'ich Station,
neriaan-Abad village, 2)

It was organized in 1929 with an area of 88,000 hectares, of which 62,000 hectares
is a water basin. It is located on the southwestern coast of the Caspian Sea. It
includes Kirov Bay and part of the Ienkoran lowland.

It is subordinate to the min Administration of nature Conservation, Gene
Reserves and manting, USSR ninistry of Agriculture

The relief of the greater part of the territory of the reserve is flatland and a
small area is occupied by narrow ridges up to lO teeters high consisting of crags.
The area of the shallow sea area is significant.

The following plant cosmunities are typical for the forest reserve: a strip of
halophytes consisting of glasswort, knotted shvedka, sea asters (beyond the coastal
strip along the Great Bay), salt marsh meadows with prevalence of alkali grass,
reed beds and rushes, thickets of rushes with dewberry and caselthorn, ephuaeral
cereal grass wasteland and worlavood, thickets of devberry pouegranates (Sara Penin-
sula) and read thickets frequently with scirpus and tansrisk. Aquatic vegetation
is abundant: pond weed, nilfoil, hornwort, wild celery, water chestnut, grass-
wrack, spiral widgeon grass and so on. The flora of the forest reserve nusbers
approximately 250 species of flowering plants.

The fauna of the forest reserve is abundant. The reservoirs contain more than 30
species of fish--herring, carp, pike-perch, mullet and more rarely the saloon and
sturgeon families: the asphibians include the tree frog, lake frog, green toad and
so on. The reptiles include the Caspian and swap tortoises, the cannon shelto-
purik, grass snakes, lizard snake, bunt-nosed viper and so on. The cannon animals
include the hedgehog, bats, jackal, fox, wolf, badger, Caspian seal. Transcaucasian
hare, rats, voles, nutria and wild boar. The forest reserve is inhabited by 248
species of birds, including the Indian gallinule, francolin, little bastard, the
great bustard, glossy ibis, spoonbill, buff-backed and squacco herons, night
herons, great white heron and little egret, comrant, bald coot, widgeon, mallard,

pintail, gadnll, swan, flamingo, gray-lag and white-fronted geese, red-breasted
goose, peregrine falcon,steppe eagle and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is coupler study of the nature of the
shallow waters in 'naritine reservoirs and adjacent sections of the coastline of the
southwestern Caspian Sea and also study of the wintering of birds, primarily of the

goose family. bald coots, flaningoes, francolin, little bustard and the great
bustard.

Pirkuli state Forest Reserve (Azerbaijan SSR, Sheaakhinskiy Rayon, Yuriy Manate-
daliyev Village, Pirkuli Post Office)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was organized in 1969 with an area of 1,521 hectares, including 1,362 hectares
of forest area. It is located on the southeastern slopes of the Great Caucasian

ridge.

It is subordinate to the state Committee of the Azerbaijan 851! Council of Ministers
for Enviromental Protection.

Steppe foothills, high-altitude deciduous forests and subalpine thin forest and yew
groves are typical for the forest reserve. The flora include 45 rare and endemic
species. me Persian gazelle among the manals inhabits the foothills.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is developing methods of protection
and restoration of the yew, study of the hydrological role of the forest and devel-
oping methods of protection and sultiplication of the Persian gazelle population.

The Turianchay state Forest Reserve (Azerbaijan 88R, Agdash, 80-18)

It was organized in 1958 with an area of 12,246 hectares, of which 5,031 hectares
are forest area. It is located in the steppe foothills of the Great Caucasus and
on the forest slopes of the Bozdag ridge.

It is subordinate to the State Comittee of the Azerbaijan SSR Comcil of Ministers
for Environmental Protection.

Terebrinth-juniper thin forest, terebrinths, juniper, meadow-steppe groupings,
beard grass steppe and tugai are typical for the forest reserve. The main varie-
ties forming the thin forest are terebrinth and junipers (polycarpic, Phoenician,
heavy-scented and more rarely the oblate). The Iberian oak, Georgian maple,
smo'oth-leaved elm and poplar grow in the forest reserve; the pomegranate, Christ's
thorn, eastern honeysuckle, small-fruited cherry, Dahurian mudthorn, colon smoke
tree. fir, smec, jasmine and so on grow in the underbrush. The tugai is formed
of southern willow, poplar, bearded alder, olive, dogwood, puckthorn, devberry,
clom'atis and so on.

The most widespread types of thin forest are terebrinth-juniper with jasmine with
moss-lichen cover and terebrinth-juniper with rerofil cover of friganoid type.
Thick groves of pomegranate and dewberry are cotmnon along the beds of ravines and
the Turanchay River valley.

The forest reserve is inhabited by 15 species of manuals, 108 species of birds and
11 species of reptiles. The reptiles include tortoises (Caspian terrapin and
Grecian tortoise), cannon zheltopuzik, Caucasian lizard, yellow-bellied rat snake,
the collared Oontia and blunt-nosed viper. Among the birds found are the rock
partridge, rock-dove, turtle-dove, falcon, griffon vulture, black vulture, green-
finch, rock bunting, black cap, thrush and so on. There are many bats-mn bats
and horseshoe bats: there are wild boar, bear, badger, stone nrtsn, jackal, lynx,
European hare and so on.

The branches of the forest reserve are the El'dar pine grove with an area of 300
hectares, located in the Bl'dar steppe on the Bl'yarougi ridge (the world's only
natural growth of Bl'dar pine--a relic of the Tertiary Period) and also a grove

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of tersbrinth thin forest with an area of 100 hectares located in the am
steppe in ngdanskiy Rayon in the vicinity of Sul'tanbud Hills.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is developing methods of protection
and restoration of the biogeocenoses of juniper thin forest and study of the ecol-
ogy of xerophytic trees and shrubs.

shirvan State Porest Reserve (Azerbaijan 883, Sal'yanskiy Rayon, Yeni-Kend Village
Soviet, Khalach village)

It was organised in 1969 with an area of 17,745 hectares, of which 3,500 hectares
ooc‘py reservoirs. It is loated in the southeastern part of the Shirven lovland.

It is subordinate to the State Oo-ittee of the Azerbaijan ssn Council of Ministers
for Elvironlental Protection.

. Biocenoses of woruwood-solonchak of suiarid land with ephemerals are typical for
the forest reserve. The Persian gazelle among the manuals and the Indian galli-
nule, francolin, great bustard and little bustard among rare species of birds are
found here.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop nsthods of protection
ad reproduction of the Persian gazelle. - -

The Armenian 38R
The Dilizhan state Forest Reserve (Armenian SSR, Dilizhan, Tbilisshoye cheese, 4)

It was organised in 1958 with an area of 23,071 hectares, of which 19,836 hectares
areforestarea. Itislocatedinuorthernhreeniaontluslopesofspursofthe
Pabak, Badmi, nurguz and Aruguni ridges (the Lesser Caucasianridge).

It is subordinate to the State Conittee of Forestry, Arsenian SSR Council of
Ministers.

Natural caplenss of the northern slopes of the Lesser Caucasian ridge are typical
'for the forest reserve. Approximately 87 percent of the territory is occupied by
forests. The prevailing varieties are Iberian and eastern oak (45 percmt), east-
ern beech, hornbeaa, maples (Georgian, redwood and Norway maples), eln, sharp-
leaved ash, hackberry, lindens (snall-leaved lyre and Caucasian linden), aspen
and great sallow willow uelnut, apple, cherry, oriental hornbeen, juniper and so
on are found: devberry, raspberry, blackthorn, black hat, plum, cor-nel and so on
are cosmos: among shrubs. There are also small tracts of pine and a natural grove
of yaw in the forest reserve.

The animal world is typical for mountain forests of the Lesser Camasus. The

fauna contains such animals as the mural, roe deer, brown bear, Persian squirrel,
lynx, wildcat, otter and so on: birds include the snow partridge, Caucasian black-
cock, keklik, con-on partridge, quail, bullfinch, grosbeak, black vulture, golden
eagle, griffon vulture, goshawk, booted eagle and so on: the axis dear has been
established.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLUSEONLV

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop aethods of restoring the
eastern oak and to study its natural restoration, to study ecosystem of the high-

altituds vegetation belt and yew grove, to preserve in the natural state the natur-
al coupler typical for the lesser Caucasus and to study the ecology of the badger,

bear, marten, roe deer and snow: partridge.

'rhe Ihosrovy state Forest Reserve (Arsenian SSR, hrsratskiy Rayon, Bedu Village,
Kal‘yana ulitsa, 79)

It was organised in 1958 with an area of 23,267 hectares, including 10,000 hectares
of forest area. It is located on the southern horns of the Gagam ridge in the
Garni and Vedy River basins.

It is subordinate to the State Conittee of forestry, Arnenian 58!! Council of
Ministers.

landscapes of three vertical belts of Southern Arseniauseniarid land, muntain
steppes and forests-ware typical for the forest reserve. Plantations of oaks
(eastern and Iberian). juniper, ash, maple, lee, peer. birch and mountain ash_prs-
dominate in the forest belt: honeysuckle, warfaring tree, rose, hawthorne, wild
nyrobale and so on predoainate in the underbrush. Large areas are occupied by
juniper forests with a mixture of alaond, hawthorne (black and silver), pear, wild
nyrobaln, walnut, poplar, bar-berry, cottoneaster and so on: pure plantations of
ash, maple, walnut and poplar are found.

Hora than 1,500 species of plants, including the Armenian hawthorne (We):
volvalov rye (endangered species) and some other rare and endemic species grow in
the forest reserve. The fauna is represented by such species as the wild goat:
muflon (rare), bear, leopard (rare), Transcaucasian mole-vole, Persian jird, the
snow vole and so on; the axis deer has becone established. The forest reserve is
inhabited by 120 species of birds, including the bearded vulture, black vulture,
booted eagle, wall creeper, rock nuthatch, canon partridge, keklik and alpine
chough: the long-legged skink, neutral and rock lizards, trauch's yeshchurka.
cannon zheltopusik, slmm, blind snake, yellow-bellied snake, olive snake,
variegated snake and Transcaucasian snake, vipers (steppe and Araenian), blunt-
nosed viper and so on are found among reptiles: asphibians include the green toad,
frogs (lake and Transcaucasian), tree frog and so on. me brook trout, Kurinskiy
barbel, bystryanka, cannon loach, hhramlya and so on svin in the rivers of the
forest reserve. '

me scientific profile of the forest reserve it to study the ecosystems of typical
landscapes of southern hmnia, to develop methods of protection and to study the

nouflon and wild goat and to study the natural forests typical for the southern
part of Armenia.

Belorusskaya SSR

state Forest-Bunting Reserve Belowshskaya Pushcha (Belomskeya SSR, Bretskaya
Oblast, Post Office, Kanenyuki)

MOWLISEONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLV

_— —.

In 1957 the forest reserve, which has been in existence since 1940, was trans-
forned into a forest-hunting reserve with an area of 81,“? ha, of which 77,148 ha
areforest area and 293 ha are reservoirs. It is located in aretskaya and Grednin-
skaya (blasts along the state border with Poland.

It is subordinate to the ministration of Affairs, Belorussian sea Wil of
Ministers.

nlnost 90 percent of the territory of the reserve is occupied by forests: a variety
of forest plantations of different ccsposition and age is typical. 'l‘here are 12
types of forest in the reserve: pine forests, pine-fir forests, pine-oak forests,
horn bean-oak forests and swupy alder thickets with abundant undergrowth and so
on; it nwers 21 ancient varieties, including pine (it occupies approxilately 50
per cent of the territory), fir, alder, oak, ash, horn been, birch and so on.

Along herbaceous plants, heath, whortldaerry, bog whortleberry, cranberry. Korean
rhododendron, sphagnun noes, narsh narigold, reeds, bullrushes, horsetail, sedges,
nettles, asarabacca, herb robert and ferns predominate. Currant (black and red),
choke-cherry, filbert, spindle-tree, branble, wayfaring tree, willows and so on are
usually found in the undergrowth. A total of 836 species of higher plants has been
recorded in Beloverhkaya Pushcha. .

The fauna is typical for the forests of Eastern Europe. A total of 53 species of
nasaals, 212 species of birds, ll species of esphibians and 7 species of reptiles
is known; European bison, elk, European deer, roe deer,. wild boar, wolf, lyn).,
haresuco-Ion hare and mountain hare, nutria (moclinetired) , nuskrat, forest
dornouse, fat doruouse, canon dormuse, squirrel, yellow-neck field muse, cos-Ion
forest mouse, harvest nouse, nole, shrew and so on are encountered. There are
usually hazel hens, great grouse. grouse, canary, white and black storks, three-
toed woodpecker, Ural owl, barred warbler, peregrine falcon, hobby, bursard, lesser
spotted eagle and also black kites and count: kites, goshawks, booted eagle, har-
rier and so on are cannon. Frogs (tree frogs, pond frogs, comn frogs and sharp-
nosed), toads (gray, green and read), toad frogs, fire-bellied frogs, lizards
(sand and viviperous) , snakes, vipers, snooth snakes and aquatic turtles are found
anong amphibians and reptiles.

The scientific profile of the forest-hunting reserve is to develop ”Mof con-
servation and reproduction of the flora and fauna of coniferous-deciduous forests,
to study the consequences of econcnic activity in adjacent areas and to study and
to breed the European bison. '

seresino State forest Reserve (Belorusskaya 888, vitebskaya Galast, Lipei'skiy
moo, Kraytsy village)

It-was organised in 1925 and the area is 76,201 ha, of which 58,183 ha are forest
area and 1,836 ha are reservoirs. It is located in the northem part of the Belo-
russkaya 883, in Minskaya and vitebskaya mlasts.

It is sxbordinate to the min ministration of Nature Conservation, Cane Reserves
and limiting, 0881! Ministry of Agriculture.

than is a diverse combination of neadow and forest associations and an abundance
of rivers and lakes in the forest reserve. forests occupy 56,500 he or 77 percent

10
”WWW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the territory. The predominant variety is pine (42 percent). The most
widespread types of forest and spindle-shaped pine, green-leaved pine, pine-
birch forest with a mixture of fir, fir-pine and birch, oak forests with brushy
undergrowth, fir-whortleberry and fir-deciduous; black alder forests with
birch, fir, ash and oak are predominate on peat soils. There are many mush-
rooms, especially cep Boletus. maslyat, lisehek, gruzdey, those growing in pin.
forests and birch forests and berrier-strauberries. brambleberries, cranber-
ries, bog whortleberries, and currents (red and black).

The fauna includes 52 species of manuals, approximately 200 species of birds,
5 species of reptiles, 8 species of amphibians and 30 species of fish. There
are usually European bison, elk, roe deer, red deer (imported in 1956) in the
reserve; the brown bear, wolf, foot, raccoon-dog (introduced in 1963), badger,
pine marten. forest polecat, weasel, ermine, otter, mink and lynx are inhab-
itants among the predators.

Fifteen species of bats are found in the forest reserve and the common noctule
and hairy-armed bat. the great bat and long-cared bat are most cot-ion; the
hedgehog. shrew and mole are found among insectivores. One of the indigenous
populations of nutria has been preserved; the black star): and osprey have been
preserved among rare birds and grouse and great grouse are abundant.

The scientific profile of the reserve is to study coniferous and deciduous
forest, sphagnum swamps and other natural complexes of the Upper Beresiny low-
land and to determine the hydrological role of swamps in the headwaters of the
Bereziny River and to study the biology of the nutria, elk, great grouse, black
grouse, and other valuable species of animals.

Pripyatskiy Landscape-hydrological State Forest Reserve (Belorusskeya 38R,
Gomel'skaya oblast, Zhitkovichskiy Rayon, Turov, ulitsa Kirova, 32)

It was organized in 1969 as an area of 60,767 hectares. It is located in the
southern part of Gomel'skaya oblast on the territory of three administrative
rayons--Zhitkovichskiy, Petrikovskiy and Lel'chitskiy-won the south bank of
the Pripyati River in its middle course. It occupies the central part of the
Belorussian Poles'ye.

It is subordinate to the Ministry of For ~st Management, Belorussian SSR.

Approximately 78 percent of the territory of the forest reserve is covered
with forests and approximately 15 percent is occupied by swamps. Pine, oak
and birch predominate in the forests and linden, maple, elm and hornbeam are
found in smaller quantities: filbert, black haw, spindle-tree, buckthorn, dew-
berry and raspberry are found in the undergrowth. There is a total of approx-
imately 684 species of plants in the forest reserve, including 12 rare species.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 50 species of manuals, 256 species of
birds (including 7 rare species), of which 193 species are nesting birds, 8

species of reptiles, 13 species of amphibians and 34 species of fish. The
elk, roe deer, wild boar, fox, raccoon-dog, marten, lynx, wolf, ermine, weasel,
polecat, mink, otter, muskrst, nutria, squirrel and European hare are found

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-Z ONLY

among animals: the birds include the great grouse, grouse. mallard, gadwall,
pochards (red-crested and white-eyed duck), golden-eye, bald coot, conon
snipe. swan. canon redshank, eagle owl, tawny owl, kite and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to work out methods of pre-
serving the landscape-hydrological coupler of the central part of the Belo-
russian Poles'ye and to study the effect of reclalaation of the Poles‘ye low-
land on the hydrolocigal regime, climate. vegetation and animal world of the
Poles'ye.

Georgian SSR

Adzhametskiy State Forest Reserve (Georgian SSR. Hayakovskiy Rayon, Vartsikhe
Post Office)

It was organized in 1946 with an area of 4,848 hectares, of which 4,794 hec-
tares are forest area. It is located in Western Georgia in the Kolkhidskaya
lowland in the Rioni River valley.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Game Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Georgian 85!! Council of Ministers.

The forest reserve includes unique tracts of oak (ineretinskiy, Hartwis and
Iberian) and elm zelkova. Ash and Caucasian pear are found in the oak forests
and hawthorn, hornbean, nedlar. Pontian Ruscus, rose and so on are numerous
among shrubs.

Roe deer, the Persian squirrel, the jackal, badger and others inhabit the
forests.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the natural complexes
of oak forests and to work out forest-protective and forest-restoration nea-
sures to preserve and restore oaks (ineretinskiy, Georgian and ﬂartwis) and
also the relic grove of elm zelkova.

Algeti State Forest Reserve (Georgian SSR, Tetritskaroyskiy Rayon, Hanglisi
Post Office, ulitsa Kurortnaya, 21)

It was organised in 1965 with an area of 5,910 hectares, of which 5,055 hec-
tares is forest area. It is located in the Algeti River cut on the eastern
spurs of the Trialetskiy ridge.

It is subordinate to the Main natinistration of Gale Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Georgian 881! Council of Ministers.

The predominant plantations of the forest reserve are oriental spruce and
Nordnann fir in combination with oak, red naple, pears and other varieties.

The maral, roe deer, wild boar, brown bear. stone marten and others are pre-
served here uong the rare manuals of Georgia.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the population of
oriental spruce on the southern boundary of the distribution area and its re-
lationships to other forest varieties on the edge of the distribution area

and also to study the ecology of the roe deer, marten, bear, maral and other
species of animals.

Batsara-Babanaurskiy State Forest Reserve (Georgian 88R, masts, ulitsa
Rustaveli, 45)

It was organized in 1935 but until 1960 consisted of two forest reserves.-
the Batsarskiy and Babanaurskiy. It has existed in its current boundaries
since 1960 with an area of 3,809 hectares. It is located in the southern
foothills of the eastern part of the Hain Caucasian Ridge in the region of
the Kakhetinskiy mountains.

It is subordinate to the Rain ministration of Game Preserves and Hunting
attach to the Georgian 853 Council of Ministers.

Mixed deciduous forest and the largest tract of elm selkova in Georgiana
relic of the Tertiary period, grow on the territory of the former Babanaurskiy
Forest Reserve. Elm selkova forns pure plantations or is found in a mixture
with other varieties: oak, hornbean and maple: oriental hombean, hawthorn,
cannon privet, rose and dogwood are found in the undergrowth. There is a
unique tract of yew 400-700 years old in the belt of beech forests on the
territory of the former Batsarskiy forest reserve; yew plantations mixed with
beech, maple, ash, linden and other varieties. with abundant and varied under-
growth formed mainly by cherry laurel and holly, are found.

The fauna of the forest reserve is typical for the mixed forest belt of the
eastern part of the Kain Caucasian Ridge. It also includes such animals as
the stone marten, Caucasian brown bear, roe deer and chanois.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of protec-
tion and study of the eln zelkova and its relationships to other varieties and
also of the yew tract and of the animals inhabiting it.

Borzhoui State Forest Reserve (Georgian SSR, Borshomi, Lixani village)

It was organized in 1935 with an area of 18,048 hectares, of which 15,863 hec-
tares are forest area and 18 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on the
southeastern slopes of the Heskhetskiy Ridge.

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Game Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Georgian ssn Council of Ministers.

Colchis type forests of the Tertiary period consisting of chestnut, oak, beech,
hornbeam with elm, ash, staple, yew, apple, pear and others are preserved in
the forest reserve; there are many lianas--ivy, dewberry, cleuatis, old man's
beard and grapevine. Along the shrubs should be noted holly, docks, Pontian
rhododendron, cherry laurel, Ruscus and so on. Oriental spruce and fit grow
on the shaded slopes; pine forests of hackly pine and pine with a mixture of

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

birch occupy a considerable area: there are alpine and subalpine meadow
groupings.

The fauna of the forest reserve is typical for the foothills of the Western
Caucasus. Rare animals for Georgia such as the Caucasian brown bear. lynx.
European wildcat. badger. naral. roe deer. chanois. Persian squirrel and the
Caucasian salamander. endemic to the western Transcaucasus. are found here.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop nethods of proter
tion of the vegetation and animal world of the ueskhetskiy Ridge. to study
their relationships and also to develop biological methods of insect control
"forest pests.

Vashlovanskiy State Forest Research (Georgian SSR. Tsitelitskaro. ulitsa
Rustaveli. 25)

It was organised in 1935 with an area of 4,868 hectares. of “$4.069 hec-
tares is forest area. It is located on the Shirkoneskoye Plateau at the end
of the Tsivi-Ganborskiy Ridge in the eastern part of Georgia.

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Gal-e Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Georgian 883 Council of Ministers.

The forest reserve contains pistachio. juniper and pomegranate forests with
Christ's-thorn. barberry. willow-leaved pear. gean. jasmine. suall-fruited
cherry. Iberian honeysuckle. ephedra and other varieties.

Thin pistachio forests are distributed at a height of 300-400 meters above
sea level on level contours of the relief; thin aris pistachio and juniper
forests are found on the slopes at a height of 150-800 meters above sea level
and pure stands of savin are found on slopes with northern exposure. The pis-
tachio. three species of juniper. hackberry. long-steamed oak. Sosnovskiy pop-
lar. smooth-leaved eln. olive. Christ's-thorn. Pallas buckthorn. jasmine and
so on should be noted anong ancient shrubs.

There are approximately 550 species of higher plants in the forest reserve.
of which there are 41 species of trees and shrubs; there are 40 species of
plants enduic to Georgia.

The fauna includes 17 species of manuals. 60 species of birds and 18 species
of asphibians and reptiles. The manuals include the striped hyena--a rare
animal in our country; the Caucasian brown bear. lynx and wild boar are cas-
non. The bird fauna is represented by both forest and steppe species. The
blunt-nosed viper. cat snake'and lizard snake. four species of racers. the
Grecian tortoise and others are numerous among reptiles.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of pre-
servation and to study the relic vegetation of “light forests'npistachio.
juniper. hackberry. turanga. pomegranate and others and also to develop
methods of preservation and to study the striped hyena and a number of reptile
species.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Itintrishskiy state Forest Reserve
(Georgian 38R. Kohleti Post Office. ulitsa Leselidxe. 4)

It was organised in 1960 with an area of 6.983 hectares. It is located in
mulletskiy Rayon. Adsharskaya ASSR. on the northwestern and western slopes
of the Heskhetskiy Ridge in Western Georgia.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Gene Preserves and Bunting
attached to the Georgian 858 Council of Ministers.

The forest reserve includes relic forests of the 'nertiary period: chestnut
and beech with evergreen undergrowth, endemic ferns. Medvedev's birch. Pontian
oak. sweet hay. cannon yew. Ungern's rhododendron and others. The main tree
species is eastern beech, which forms different types of forest with cherry
laurel. hilberry and rhododendron: more than 1,000 species of flowering plants

are known.

The mountain fauna of Colchis type includes the Caucasian brown bear, badger.
jackal, Persian squirrel, chanois. roe deer. snow partridge and other animals.

the scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop nethods of protec-
tion and to study the Oolchis relic forests and the aninal world of this nat-

ural complex.
Colchis State forest Reserve
(Georgian 888. Xhohskiy Rayon)

It was organised in 1935 and has existed since 1959 in its current boundaries
with an area of 500 hectares. of which 342.5 hectares are forest area. It is
located in Potiyskiy Rayon in the swampy part of the Coichis lowland on the
banks of the Pichori River and Lake Paleostoni.

It is subordinate to the Rain Ministration of Game Preserves and hunting
attached to the Georgian 888 Council of Ministers.

Wampy forests of Colchis type and stands of relic bearded alder are typical
for the forest reserve. The roe deer and wild boar are found among large
animals.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is casplex study of the flora and
fauna of the Colchis lowland with regard to reclamation and agricultural de-
velopment of the territory.

Lagodekhi Order of Badge of Honor state Forest Reserve

(Georgian SSR. Lagodekhi)

It was organised in 1912 with an area of 17.668 hectares. of which 12.648 hec-
tares are forest and 9 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on the southern

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

slopes of the eastern part of the Rain Caucasian Ridge in the Alazani River
basin.

It is subordinate to the “sin ministration of cue Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Georgian ssn Council of Ministers.

There are several waterfalls in the forest reserve and there is a lake of
glacier origin and sulphur springs.

The main vegetation formations are oak-hornbean (with a mixture of beech.
diestnut. ash, eln and other varieties) and beech forests with subalpine

and alpine vegetation. The main forest-forning varieties are Caucasian horn-
beaa. redwood maple. eastern oak, birch and eastern beech.

Approximately 1,400 species of flowering plants have been recorded on the
territory of the forest reserve; there are 12 endeaic species (Julia's prin-
rose. Mlokosevicb's peony, Lagodekhi gentian and so on). A total of 15 rare
and disappearing species of plants: Shovits's lily. Lagodekhi peony, Turkish
filbert, cos-on elder. alpine violet and others are noted in the beech forest
belt.

Among the fauna are 38 species of annuals, including the Caucasian tur, cham-
ois, naral, roe deer. wild boar, brown bear. pine and stone nartens, lynx,
forest cat and others; there are approximately 50 species of birds (snow
partridge. Caucasian blackcock and so on).

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is complex study of the ecological
series of associations from the subtropics to the subniveal belt and study of
endanic species of plants and animals.

Mariandzhvarskiy State Forest Reserve
(Georgian 888. Sagaredsho Post office, Korukhskoye muting Industry)

It was organised in 1935 with an area of 1,040 hectares, of which 949 hectares
are forest area. It is locaud in Sagsredshoyskiy Rayon on the southern
slopes of the Tsivi-Guborskiy Ridge.

It is subordinate to the Rain Adlinistration of Game Preserves and hunting
attached to the Georgian 553 Council of Ministers.

Conifer and conifer-deciduous forests with hornbean. oak and birch and with
abundant undergrowth are typical for the forest reserve; natural pine planta-
tions are found in rock placers. The deciduous forests are formed of Iberian
oak. hornbeam, oriental hornbeam. beech and other varieties.

The low-altitude ,fauna of the southern slope of the main Caucasian ridge in-
cludes Iranian-Afghan and Indian elements. Among the large animals are found

the roe deer. saral, badger and others and along rare species to Georgia are
the Caucasian brown bear and Persian squirrel.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the ecosystems of
ancient vegetation under conditions of periodic mud-laden torrents and ava-
lanches and also to study the biology and ecology of Sosnovskiy's pine.

Pitsundo-Hyusserskiy state Forest Reserve
(Abkhasskaya 5883, Pitsunda Post Office, ulitsa Gochua, 45)

It was organised in 1966 and until that tine there were two forest reserves-
the llyusserskiy (since 1946) and the Pitsunda (since 1935). It has an area
of 3,771 hectares, of which 3,680 hectares are forest area. It is located on
the Black Sea coa'st on the territory of Gudautskiy Rayon, nbkhesskaya ABSR
(nyusserskiye mountains, Cape Pitsunda).

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Game Preserves and hunting
attached to the Georgian 88R Council of Ministers.

Limestone terraces that break off into the sea, groves with a predominance of
Iberian oak, beech and Caucasian hornbeam and also such varieties as Pitsunda
pine, chestnut, strawberry tree, Caucasian wing nut, alder and birch are typ-
ical for the forner Hyusserskiy Porest Reserve. The undergrowth includes
Pontian rhododendron, rock-rose, dewberry, hawthorne, Caucasian ivy, dogwood,
medlar, barberry and holly.

a grove of relic endemic pine and box, a mixed-deciduous forest and pea-sophyte
vegetation have been preserved on Cape Pitsunda.

The average height of Pitsunda pine is up to 27 meters, while individual trees
reach a height of 40 meters or more; the average diameter is 0.5 seter, but
there are pines with diameter of approximately 2 meters. 'lhe plantation is of
the same agenllO-l3o years. One of the interesting biological features of
the Pitsunda pine is that this tree produces several verticils during a single
vegetation season. Pontian Ruscus, uoke tree, rock-rose, privet, Colchis
box, hornbeam, dogwood, serviceberry, mountain ash. rose and hornbean-leaved
honeysuckle dominate in Pitsunda pine groves. There is abundant undergrowth
and many lianas in the nixed-deciduous forest. ‘lhe nain ancient varieties
are linden, ash and hornbeam. The flora of the forest reserve includes 480
species of plants, of which 9 are enduic, 28 are rare and ll are disappearing.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 51 species of birds, among which are
the Colchis pheasant, the coal tit and others. The roe deer, wild boar, bad-
ger. marten and Persian squirrel are found among the manuals.

The scientific profile of ﬁne forest reserve is to develop nethods of protec-
tion and restoration of plantations of Pitsunda pine, starberry tree, heath.
chestnut and Iberian oak and also to study the Black Sea flora and fauna.
Ritsa State Forest Reserve

(Abkhazskaya ASSR, Gagrinskiy Rayon, Pitsunda village, Ripariscvaya alleys, 8)

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was organized in 1946 with an area of 16,167 hectares, of which 13,219
hectares are forest area and 209.7 hectares are reservoirs. It is located
on the southern horn of the main Caucasian ridge near lake Ritsa.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Game Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Georgian 553 Council of Ministers

The relief of the forest reserve is characterised by severe broken terrain and
large drops. The forests are hornbeam, linden and Oolchis box: there are
groves of pine and eastern beech and subalpine forests of Nordmann fir, eas-
tern beech. Sosnovskiy's pine and oriental spruce. Pontian rdeodendron.
filbert, laurel, cherry. holly, Caucasian bilberry and others predominate in
the undergrowth. Lake Ritsa is surrounded by beautiful alpine meadows: there
are many mineral springs, trout inhabit the lake and whitefish have become
acclimatised.

The forest reserve fauna is typical for the mountain forests of the Caucasus.
Among the large animals are found the maral, roe deer, chamois and wild boar:
rare and valuable species of fauna include the Caucasian brown bear, the Cau-
casian tur, the Persian squirrel, Caucasian snowcock and the Caucasian
blackcock.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of protec-
tion and to study the mountain landscapes of the Black Sea coast and the rich
mountain lake abundant with relic flora and fauna.

Saguramo State Forest Reserve
(Georgian SSR, Hikhetskiy Rayon, Saguramo village)

It was organised in 1948 with an area of 5,247 hectares, of which 5,191 hec-
tares is forest area. It is located on the Saguramo ridge on the horns of
the southern slopes of the main Caucasian ridge.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Game Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Georgian SSR Council of Ministers.

There are any relic Colchis varieties in the belt of oak forests of the re-
serve: Colchis box, bladder-nut, azaleas (rare species), Golchis ivy, yew and
also beech, hornbeam, wych elm, pear, holly, sumac and others. The rain types
of forest are hornbeaa. beech, beech-hornbeam. oak-hornbeam and oak-oriental
hornbeam. All the forests are distinguist by abundant species composition.

The fauna of the deciduous forests is typical for the southern slope of the
Main Caucasian ridge. It includes the maral, roe deer, Caucasian bear, forest
cat, lynx. beech marten, badger, jackal and Persian squirrel: approximately
200 species of birds have been noted.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of protec-
tion and to study the relics of Colchis flora of the Tertiary period and also
to study the ecology of the red deer, roe deer, marten and bear.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Satapliyskiy State Forest Reserve
(Georgian SSR, Tskhaltubo)

It was organized in 1935 and has existed in its current boundaries since 1958,
with an area of 354 hectares, of which 352 hectares is forest.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Case Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Georgian ssn Council of Ministers.

It is located on the southern slopes of the Main Caucasian Ridge in its south-
western part. Karst caverns. wells, dinosaur fossils, an anagram of pre-
historic man and a crater of an extinct volcano are preserved in the forest
reserve.

The reserve forests are Colchis type with yew, Oolchis box, Oolchis holly,
laurel cherry, Colchis bladder-nut, beech and so on. There are 20 species of
enduic and rare plants in the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the forest vegetation
of Oelchis type, flora of the Tertiary period (holly, box, yew and so on) and
fauna, to develop methods of protection and to study karat caverns. the vol-
canic crater and other geological and historical nonuents.

Kazakh SSR
Aksu-Dzhabagly State Forest Reserve

(Kazakh SSR, Chinkentskaya Oblast, Tyul'kubassiy Rayon, Novonikolaevka
village)

It was organized in 1926 with an area of 74,316 hectares, of which 10,377
hectares are occupied by reservoirs. It is located in the northwestern part
of the Talasskiy Alatau.

It is subordinate to the main Administration of Game Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Kazakh SSR Council of ministers

There are 10 types of vegetation in the forest reserve: mountainous ephemeral
semiarid land, mountainous seni-savannahs, mountain steppes, foothill xero-
phytes (frigany). mountain deciduous forests, mountain coniferous forests,
shiblyak (xerophilic trees and shrubs), meadow-swamp vegetation, cliff and
talus Vegetation, niveal vegetation and high and creeping juniper. The high-
altitude vegetation belts of the Western Tyan'-shan' are well marked: from
the tall-grass semi-savannahs and savins to high-altitude meadows and steppes.
The flora, which includes sore 1,300 species, is abundant. Such plants as
cotoneaster (large-berried and black—berried) , oblong quince, Regel's pear.
apples (Nedzvetskiy and sivers), Persian mountain ash, hawthornh W, roses
(10 species), wild nyrobalan, almond (three species), cherry (three species),
choke-cherry, apricot, oblong barberry, Meier's current, sea buckthorn, buck-
thorn and so on are cannon: there are many decorative plants, including tulips

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(creig's and Kaufmann's) . alatavy crocus. altay globeflower and golden
saffron.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 238 species of birds. 42 species of
manuals. 9 species of reptiles and 2 species each of amphibians and fishes.
Among the animals. the Fair argali. Siberian mountain goat, roe deer. marel.
wild boar, snow leopard, African wildcat; stone marten. eraine, badger. fox.
white-clawed bear. long-tailed mareot. Henrbier's marmot and others are of
special interest.

Cliff representations of the Saxian period and imprints of animals and plants
of the Jurassic period are also known on the territory of the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the reserve is to study the natural conpleaaes of the
western Tyan'-shan'. paleontological investiations and to study the migrations
and nesting ecology of birds. the ecology and population dynamics of mouse-
like rodents and the ecology and ethology of the long-tailed marmot.

Alma-Ata State Forest Reserve

(Kazakh SSR. Alma-Atinskaya Oblast. ’ralgar. Lebedinka village, Dorors Post
Office)

It was organized in 1931 with an area of 89,524 hectares. It is located in
the Zailiyskiy Alatu in the m River floodplain.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Game Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Kazakh 588 Council of Ministers.

The zone nature of vegetation is well-marked in the forest reserve. Apple—
aspen, apple-hawthorne and apricot-apple groves located primarily along the
river valleys and ravines predominate in the lower forest-madaw-steppe zone.
Sea buckthorne. Russian wild olive. barberry prickly rose. raspberry. spiraea
and honeysuckle are abundant here. sections of steppe vegetation are found
on the slopes of southern exposure. Spruce groves grow at an altitude of
1.450 to 2,600 meters above sea level. primarily on slopes of northern ex-
posure. These are thin. park-type forests; the undergrowth includes willows,
honeysuckle. mountain ash, prickly rose and others. Subalpine and alpine
meadows and meadow-steppes are well-represented in the forest reserve; rocky
deserts, rock placers and talus, bare cliffs. morain deposits and tugai are
found frequently: there is a unique “singing sand dune."

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 117 species of birds and 39 species
of mamalsuthe Siberian roe deer. maral. Siberian ibex. Pamir argali. wild
boar, snow leopard. white-clawed bear and also the stone marten. sable (im-
ported). ermine, weasel. otter, badger, lynx, wolf. fox. Tolai hare, porcu-
pine, red squirrel. altay marmot and others.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of protec-
tion and complex study of the nature of the mountain landscapes of the Zailiyv-
skiy Alatau. to study the ecological systems of the vegetation zones—forest—
meadow-steppe. subalpine and alpine. and to study and protect the "singing
sand dune."

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Barsakel'mes State Forest Reserve
(Kazakh SSR, Ksyl-Ordinskaya Oblast, Aral'sk)

It was organized in 1939 with an area of 18,300 hectares. It is located on
Lake aarsakel'nes in the Aral Sea in the northern desert zone.

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Cane Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Kazakh SSR Council of Ministers.

The landscape of the forest reserve is clay voruvood-biyurgumvaya desert
with sparse shrubs of saxaul, leaveless globe thistle, biyurgunon, meadow-
grass, mortuk and others. Approximately 200 species of higher plants are
known.

The green toad, Horsfield's terrapin, squeaking gecko, takyr lizard, fast
lizard, the ornamented racer, the dart-snake and Pallas's aanushi are found
along amphibians and reptiles. The fauna includes 12 species of manuals: the
white-bellied white-toothed shrew, long-eared hedgehog, late noctule, grey
hamster, snail five-toed jerboa, large-toothed suslik, wolf, fox. corsac fox,
saiga, Persian gazelle and Asiatic wild ass; there are 202 species of birds,
including wheatears. stone curlew, plovers (Rentish and Asiatic), Houbara
bustard, black-bellied sand grouse, Pallas's sand grouse, uifts, sand nar-
ten, bee-eater, black-headed bunting, bearded tit, warblers, sheldrake and
others.

The' scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of protec-
tion and complex study of the nature of northern deserts and to study the
ecology and restoration of saiga, wild ass and Persian gazelle livestock.

Kurgal'dzhino State Forest Reserve

(Kazakh SSR, Tselinogradskaya oblast, Kurgal'dzhino, ulitsa 40 let Oktyabrya,
22)

It was organized in 1968 with an area of 185,200 hectares, of which reservoirs
occupy 145,000 hectares. It is located in the lower reaches of the Nury and
Kulan-Utpesa Rivers. It occupies lakes Kurgal'dshin and Tengiz and the zone
adjacent to them with sections of uorswood-fiscu-feather grass steppes.

It is subordinate to the Main Adninistration of Game Preserves and Hunting
attached to the Kazakh sss Cauncil of Ministers. '

The Tengiz—Kurgal'dzhin depression is a flight habitat of aquatic birds
wintering over in India, Pakistan, on the Caspian Sea and also in northern
Africa and in southern Buope. Birds of central and northern Kazakhstan and
of western and eastern Siberia gather here for Insulting.

Lake Kurgal'dzhin with an area of 39,600 hectares is a system of reaches and
there are approximately 40 islands on it. The lake vegetation is represented
by such species as comon reed, bulrush, lesser reedmece, arrowhead, water
plantain. fennel pondweed and duckweed. Phytoplankton and zooplankton are
abundant.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lake Tengiz is an enormous sor and there are approximately 60 islands, many
sandbars and peninsulas on it. Saltwods are located along the shores and
barilla grass and vorsnvoods predalinate; spyrea, niter bush, dwarf almond and
dog rose are found among the shrubs.

There are 30 species of manuals in the forest reserve. including the korsak
fox, wild boar, saiga, hares (mountain and European), Himalayan namot,
striped hairy-footed hamster, nuskrat and others and there are approximately
223 species of birds: flamingos, black-headed laughing gull, sea dove, danci-
selle crane, bastard, scaup, ruff, write stork, sooter, black-throated diver,
red-breasted goose, spoonbill, oyster catcher, white-headed duck, sheldrake,
crane, bittern, mute swan and so on; there are approxi-ately 27 species of
web-footed birds and more than 30 species of sandpipere.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study and develop methods
of protecting nesting places, nass noulting and migration of birds and canplex
study of desert steppes.

Naurzua State Forest Reserve
(Kazakh SSR, Kustanayskaya Oblast, Naursunskiy Rayon, Nauru-t Post Office)

It was organised in 1931 with an area of 85,642 hectares. It is located in a
vast depression that connects the vest Siberian plane and the Turanskaya
lowland.

It is subordinate to the state Cannittee of Porest Management, Kazakh 5811
Council of Ministers.

The largest lakes of the forest reserve Aksuat, zharkol', xarashar, Sary-
Hoin and Shushkaly are an aquatic fowl reserve. The source for filling the
lakes are so-called crucian rivulets and minute channels of the spring runoff
of fall water. The relic Nauru. steppe pine forest and the terse): ribbon
pine forest are preserved in the forest reserve. The absence of forest spe-
cies in the grass cover and in the animal world is typical for the Naursm
pine forest. Joanna's feather grass. sand wormed, lyne grass and others
are typical among grass plants. Many aquatic birds-«vans (steeper and mute),
geese, ducks and black-throated diver-appear in the forest reserve during
migration; such rare birds as the great and little bastards have also been
preserved here.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of protec-

ting the migration routes, to create a rest sons for migrating birds and to
restore the relic Naurzm pine forest.

Kirgis SSR

Issyk-Kul' State Forest Reserve

Kirgiz ssn, lssyk-xul'skaya Oblast, Anan'yevo village, ulitsa Pushkina, 68)

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

It was organised in 1948 with an area of 702,000 hectares of which 612,000
hectares are occupied by water basins and 90.000 hectares are dry land. It
is located in the Iseyk-ml' trough in the eastern part of the 'l‘yan'-8han'.

It is subordinate to the State Cauittee of Forest Management. Kirgis 881!
Council of Ministers.

The lowland section of the forest reserve is occupied by wormed-fem steppe.
reed thickets. buckthorn thickets. barberry. dogrose and pea shrub. The moun-
tain section is covered with seven and Schrenk spruce.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes approuinately 40 species of manuals:
the snow leopard (a rare species). roe deer. naral. Siberian ibu. Panir M-
gali. Persian gazelle. wild boar and also the red squirrel. Tolai hare. nus-
krat and others, approximately 20 species of birds. including pheasant. grouse.
red-crested pochard. bald coot, swan. white stork and so on, three species of

amphibians and approximately 20 species of fish. of which six are endemic and
five are introduced.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study and develop methods
of protecting the wintering locations of aquatic birds, pheasants and con-er-
cial fishes and in the mountain section of the forest reserve to study the
ecology of the roe deer and ibex (Siberian ibes).

Sary-Chelekskiy State Forest Reserve
(Kirgiz 88R, Oshskaya Oblast. Dshangi-Dshol'skiy Rayon. Arkit settlesent)

It was organised in 1960 with an area of 23,868 hectares. of which 8.748 hec-
tares are forest area and 611 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in the
southwestern part of the mam-31mm

It is subordinate to the Main ministration Nature Conservation.
Gene Preserves and Hunting. USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

A total of 981 species of higher plants. including 52 endemic species to the
Tyan'-Shan'. has been noted in the forest reserve.

The vegetation is unusually complex and diverse. The following types of vege-
tation have been determined in the forest reserve: deciduous forests. repre-
sented by formations of walnut. apple (xirgis and sievers). sogdian nyrobalan.
hawthorn (Turkistan. Songor and Alta!) . Turkistan maple, feather-limbed eln.
poplars (balm-of-Gilead and laurel); the most widely distributed is the four
tion of walnut forests. spruce forests of Schrenk spruce (pure spruce. shrub-
spruce. birch-spruce. juniper-spruce and fir-spruce). savin graves (pure savin.
spruce-savin. maple-savin. prangos-savin and so on). deciduous shrubs repre-
sented by associations with predominance of pearl bush. willow. dogrose. hon-
eysuckle and so on, mountain mi-savannahs or savannah-like steppes repre-
sented by hard grass. desert-candle. lyne grass and prangos foruations.
meadows formed of small-reed. eastern fescue. neadov grass. crane's-bill.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

irises. willow-grass and so on and swap vegetation represented by bulrush.
reed. small-reed and sedge swamps.

The forms of walnut. apple. pea. juniper. apricot. cherry. alnond. grape and
so on are of great value. '

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 41 species of annals (including
five acclimatised). 157 species of birds. five species of reptiles and two
species of aphibians. Rare animals—the Panir Argali. white-clawed bear and
snow leopard--are of greatest interest.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is ooeplex study of the nature
of mountain forests and meadows of the southern 'ryan'-Shan'. study of the con-
ditions for restoration and preservation of the ecological systaes of nountain
forests on reserve and nonreserve territories and development of neth of
protection and restoration of walnut-fruit forests.

Latvian 88R
Grini State Forest Reserve (Latvian SSR. Liyepayskiy Rayon. Sakskoye forestry)

It was organised in 1936 and has existed in its modern boundaries since 1957
with an area of 799 hectares. of which 689 hectares are forest area. It is
located in the nsritine lowland of western Latvia along the Baltic Sea coast.

It is subordinate to the Ministry of Forestry and Timber Industry. Latvian 88R.

Juniper pine forests and pine forests with birch are typical for the forest
reserve. The coastal strip overgrown with pine or birch with solid juniper

or grass cover is called 'grinis." hence the nae of the forest reserve. has
Iain types of grinisnsphagnlm-juniper that occupies elevated sections of the
relief and sedge-noorgrass on the low sections-are distinguished. The ancient
vegetation is very sparse. the pines are low-growing with stunted trunks and
the bitches are also low-growing. heath. noorgrass. bog myrtle. red whortle-
berry. bog whortleberry. sedges. loosestrife. devil's bit and so on are found
in the soil cover.

The typical aninals of the Baltic area are the European deer. roe deer, pond
tortoise and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the ecosystees of the
unique location of growing cross-leaved heath and to develop lethods of pro-
tecting and restoring it.

Horitssala state Forest Reserve
(Latvian 58R. Ventspilsskiy Rayon. Ugal'skiy Luster Management Industry)

It was organized in 1912 and has existed in its current boundaries since 1954.
with an area of 859 hectares.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is subordinate to the Ministry of Forestry and the Timber Industry. Latvian
SSR.

The territory of the forest reserve includes the western part of Lake Osma-
Luzikerte-Luzikerte Bay (776 hectares) and horitsa Island on this lake (83
hectares). Luzikerte is separated frat the remaining part of the lake by
three islands.

The greater part of the island (79 hectares) is covered with virgin forest of
deciduous varieties with a mixture of birch. aspen, pine. Buropean alder.
spruce and other varieties. Forest associations of oak. linden and saple
with thick undergrowth of filbert and choke-cherry and the biocenoses of the
maritime coast have been well preserved.

There are approximately 38 species of trees and shrubs on the island. more
than 350 species of grass plants. approximately 300 species of lichens. 123
species of moss. 297 species of mushrooms and 321 species of algae. Yellow
archangel. goutweed. woodruff. dog's mercury. may-lily. lily-of-thedvalley.
stitchworts (wood and greater). con-on Solomon's seal. trientale. herb-paris.
beefsteak mushroom. bracken and so on predominate in the grass cover. Coral
root. ramsons (long-rooted onion). marsh violet. hollow birthwort, red-leaved
willow herb and so on should be noted among the species rare to the republic.
There are many birds in the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to inventory the natural com-
ponents and to study the ecosystems of the island and bay.

shlitere State Forest Reserve

(Latvian 88R. Talsinskiy Rayon. Dundaga settlement. Dundaga luster Management
Industry)

It was organized in 1921 and has existed in its current boundaries since 1957.
with an area of 9,409.7 hectares. of which 5,646.6 hectares occupy forests and
15 hectares occupy reservoirs. It is located in the northwestern part of the
Kurzen Peninsula on the Baltic Sea coast.

It is subordinate to the Ministry of Forestry and the Timber Industry. Latvian
$58.

It is an escarpment of the ancient coast of the Litorinoye Sea and the Baltic
glacial lake and coastal terraces: the swamp and dune sections of the forest
reserve are covered with deciduous forests of ash, maple. oak. elm. mmpean
alder and spruce with abundant undergrowth of filbertnnountain ash. buckthorn
(black alder and cosmon buckthorn), honeysuckle, spurge olive and so on. hale
fern, ostrich fern, goutweed, long-rooted onion and so on predominate in the
grass cover. Such species as canton yew and ivy also grow here. Almost all
types of forest typical to the republic are represented in the forest reserve.
There are many escarments and ravines and there are caves. The wild boar.
roe deer. nutria. sink, weasel, colleen domuse. hedgehog, bats and so on and
many birds are found mong the animals.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is geological, flora and fauna
investigations of the ecosystems typical for the maritime lowland.

angurskoye Porest-Runting Reserve
(Latvian $83, mkuakiy Rayon, Selya village Soviet of Worker's Deputies)

It was organised in 1957 with an area of L400 hectares, including 3,230
hectares of reservoirs, 1,100 hectares of meadows and 70 hectares of forests.
It is located on the western coast of the Gulf of Riga.

It is subordinate to the Hinistry of Forestry and the Tiaber Industry, Latvian
58R.

The Greb'i Peninsula and part of the thickly overgrown shallow Lake angure

are included in the territory of the forest-hunting reserve. The shores of
the lake are covered with pine and nixed forests. There are wet sedge meadows
overgrom in places with reeds and shrubs. on Greb'i peninsula.

Approximately 114 species of birds, including the nuts swan and such rare
species of birds to the republic as the white-tailed eagle, eagle owl and

’ canon crane, has been noted in the forest reserve fauna. The lake is abun-
dant with fish (pike, perch, carp, ids, eel and so on) .-

The scientific profile is to study and develop methods of protecting aquatic
birds and to study the population ecology of a mambo: of species of ducks by
mass taggingof nestlings. '

Lithuanian 888
zhuvintas State Forest Reserve
(Lithuanian SSR, Alitusskiy Rayon, simnas Post Office)

It was-organised in 1937 and has existed in its current boundaries since 1951.
It has an area of 5,420 hectares, of which 1,211 hectares are forest area and
1,039 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in the southwestern part of the
republic in the bovine River basin.

It is subordinate to the omittee for Bwiromental Protection attached to
the Lithuanian 55!! Council of Ministers.

The territory of the forest reserve includes Lake Zhuvintas, the surrounding
lowland and upstream swaps and the maall. mainly marshy forest tract.

The fauna includes the following types of manuals: the canon hedgehog, des-
man, cos-on mole, common shrew, water-shrew, pond and bearded bats, forest
bat, wolf, fox, raccoon-dog, badger, pine marten, weasel, European polecat,
otter, wild boar, me dear, elk, Buropean hare, nutria, connon squirrel, har-
vest mouse, water vole and voles and leanings. The ornithological fauna is
abundant: 245 species have been recorded, including the nallard, pintail,

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

teal, gadwall, shoveller, tufted duck, scaup, golden-eye, long-tailed duck,
scoter, anew, grey-lag goose, white-fronted goose, bean goose, mute swan,
terns, seagulls, gribs (great-crested and red-necked), bald coots, sandpipers,
grouse, hazel hen. cannon crane, storks (white and black), great white heron
and so on. '

The vegetation of the forest reserve is represented by forsations of lesser
reedmace, comm reed, pure white waterlily, yellow waterlilies, broad-leaved
pondweed and common water-soldier and there are algae beds. A total of 473
species of plants, including 368 species of higher plants, has been found in
the forest reserve territory. Water-loving and aquatic vegetation is abundant
and diverse and there are many invertebrate ant-ale.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study aquatic birds, to
develop methods of protection and reproduction of relic and rare species of ’
plants and to study the hydrological regime of the lake.

Holdavian SSR
Kodry State Forest Reserve
(Moldavian SSR, Nisporenskiy Rayon, nozovo village)

It was organized in 1971 with an area of 2,737 hectares, of which 2,695 hec-
tares are forest area. It is located in the central part of Moldavia.

It is subordinate to the State Ccnmittee of Forestry, Moldavian 88!! Council
of Ministers.

The territory of the forest reserve consists of one tract and is a typical
forest landscape of the central part of Moldavia. The main forest-fouling
varieties of the reserve are oaks (pedunculate and sessile), beech, con-on
ash, hornbeam, lindens (silver and small-leaved lyne), maples (Norway, coenon
and sicamore). gean, birch, pear and others; the undergrowth contains filbert,
dogwood, warty-barked spindle-tree, hawthorn, cornel, European coer and

so on; goutweed, wild ginger, long-rooted onion, sedges (hairy and parvian).
woodruff, violets (wonder and dwarf) and so on predminate in the grass cover.
There is a total of 615 species in the flora of the forest reserve.

The fauna includes 70 species of manuals: roe deer, maral (acclimated), wild
boar, badger, fox, European hare, squirrel, aaropean wildcat, marten, weasel,
polecat, coumn red-backed vole, hedgehog, mole, several species of bats and
others. There are 51 species of birds in the forest reserve, including the
stock-dove, wood-pigeon, wood-lark, jay, woodpecker, nuthatch, tree creeper,
owl, golden eagles, imperial eagle, hawks (goshawk and sparrowhawk), spotted
eagles (greater and lesser) and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of protec-
tion and to study the natural complex of landscapes typical to central'

Moldavia .

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RSPSR

Altay state Forest Reserve

Altay State Forest Reserve

(Altayskiy my, Turochakskiy Rayon, Yaylyu settlement)

It was organized in 1932 and has existed in its current boundaries since 1968.
It has an area of 863,861 hectares, of which 292,919 hectares are forest area
and 15,588 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in the high-altitude part
of the Northeastern and Central hltay within 'rurochakskiy and ulganaskiy Ray-
ons of the Gorno-Altayskaya Autonomous Oblast.

It is subordinate to the Main Adainistration of hunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers. _

Steppe, forest and alpine zones and a rocky tundra zone can be distinguished
in the forest reserve. The forests are fir, cedar-fir, cedar, cedar-deciduous
and deciduous. Themain forest-forming variety is Siberian cedar. There are
many decorative species of plants: peonies, delphiniuns, orchids, gentians,
violets and so on. There are rhododendron thickets on the slopes of ’relets-
koye Os'ero. There is a total of 1,003 species in the flora of the forest
reserve. .

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 64 species of manuals, 303 species of
birds and 10 species of amphibians and reptiles. Animals typical for the
mountain taiga of Southern Siberia are found: elk, maral, reindeer, Pamir
Argali, snow leopard and also sable, great grouse, hazel hen, willow grouse,
Altay snow-partridge and black Stork.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the natural complex
of mountain-taiga forests of the Altay and the Priteletskaya tai'ga and the
vertical distribution of vegetation and the animal world. ‘

Astrakhan' Order of Red Banner of Labor State Porest Reserve imeni V. I. Ionin

(Astrakhan' , Nabereshnaya reka Tsareva, 119)

It was organised in 1919 with an area of 62,423 hectares, of which 4,715 hec-
tares is forest area. It is located in the maritime part of the Volga River
delta and consists of three sections: Damchikskiy, Trekhizbinskiy and

obshorovskiy .

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Nature Conservation, Game
Preserves and Hunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

The territory of the forest reserve consists of nmnerous islands divided by
tributaries that flow into shallow bays (kultuks). The islands are covered
with reed thickets and willow forests; there are sections of solonchak meadows
in the upper part of the delta. Vast sections occupied by water vegetation:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

celery--a root plant for many valuable species of birds, and also lotus, water
chestnut and water fern, are found.

Many species of birds nest in the forest reserve: the mute swan, pelican,
herons (great white, little egret and squacco), grey-lag goose, bald coot,
spoonbill, glossy ibis and night heron; there are many cormorants and pheas-
ants and the Siberian crane is found during migration. Approximately 240
species of birds are counted in the forest reserve. Canon carp and bull-
heads are numerous in the reservoirs: valuable comercial species (sturgeon,
Caspian sturgeon and roach) appear during spawning.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is complex study of the nature
of the lower reaches of the Volga River delta under conditions of fluctuations
of the Caspian Sea level, determination of the general principles of processes
in the ecological systems of river deltas, the specifics of life under condi-
tions of a combination of reservoirs and lands, determination of ways and
methods of conservation, efficient use and enriclment of nature of the lower
reaches of the Volga River delta, maritime forests, reed thickets, fish re-
serves and aquatic and other birds. The Caspian Ornithological Station has
been organized within the forest reserve.

Baikal State Forest Reserve
(Buryatskaya 855R, Kabanskiy Rayon, Tankhoy settlement)

It was organized in 1969 with an area of 165,724 hectares, of which 121,766
hectares is forest area and 1,552 hectares is reservoirs. It is located on
the coastal terrace in the southern part of Lake Baikal and mailer-Dab“
ridge.

It is subordinate to the Hain Administration of hunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

The uniqueness of the climatic conditions of the forest reserve is explained
by the close proximity of Lake Baikal on the one hand and the Mongolian steppes
on the other. The climate of the southern slope of Khamar-Daban is more severe
and drier than the northern climate, with regard to which the vegetation of
the slopes is also different. A dark-coniferous complex--aiternation of birch
groves, sphagnum swamps, spruce-cedar and fir-spruce forests-~predasinates in
the northern half of the Imamar-Daban, park type fir groves in the subalpine
zone are replaced by rhododendron thickets and subalpine meadows and lichen
tundra are located higher up. Cedar-deciduous forests with steppe groupings
are located in the lower part of the southern slopes.

The flora of the forest reserve numbers 845 species; the fauna includes 37
species of manuals and 260 species of birds. The forest reserve is inhabited
by the maral, reindeer, musk deer, wild boar, roe deer, elk, lynx, sable,
brown bear and also the Siberian weasel, ermine, otter, wolverine, wolf, fox,
common hare, pike, squirrel, high-mountain vole and so on. The hazel hen,
great grouse (cannon and stone), grouse, partridges (alpine ptarmigan and
white), hawks (sparrowhawk and goshawk), hen-harrier. kite, kestrel, osprey,

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bearded owl, woodpeckers, thrushes, Siberian ruby-throat and so on; endemic
and rare species of birds include the swan goose, Namann's thrush, Siberian
tit and blue nightingale.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the natural complex
of the coastal terrace of Lake Baikal and the shamar-Daba; investigations are
also being conducted in theriology, Ornithology and geobotany. '

Barguzinskiy State Forest Reserve
(Buryatskaya ASSR, Severo-Baykal'skiy Rayon, Davshe settlement)

It was organized in 1916 with an area of 263,176 hectares, of which 248,176
hectares is forest area and 17,083 hectares is reservoirs. It is located on
the northeastern coast of Lake Baykal and the western slopes of the Bargusin-
skiy Ridge.

It is subordinate to the Hain Administration of Hunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

The high-altitude zone nature of vegetation is well marked in the forest
reserve due to the large drop of altitudes and brokenness of the relief. The
uppermost zone is occupied by bald peaks (more than half of the territory);
sections are found here that are covered with lichens, green meadows of '
capresia and sedges and rocky tundra. Thickets of Japanese stone pine begin
lower down and spots of lichens and stone birch are sometimes found. The
taiga zone, which extends to the shore of Lake Baykal, is located even lower
down. The upper part of this zone is formed of fir and cedar with a eixture
of stone birch and on the slopes of southern exposure there are pure ”cedar
thickets“ of Siberian stone pine. The central taiga zone is formed of cedar-
fir forests with a mixture of larch and pine. Chosenia, bitches, aspens and
firs are found in the river valleys; thickets of choke-cherry, black and red
currants. honeysuckle, mountain ash, dogrose and other shrubs are also common
here. Larch (Dahurian and Siberian) grow in the narrow coastal strip. More
than 600 species, including 10 endemic species, are known in the flora of the
forest reserve. '

The forest reserve territory includes 39 species of ”331818, 233 species of

birds, 4 species of reptiles and 2 species 'of amphibians. Among the animals
are the well-known Bargusinskiy sable, brown bear, elk, maral, reindeer, musk
deer, Kamchatka, marmet and animals endemic to the Baykal include the Baykal
seal and there are many endemic and rare species and forms of birds, for ex-
ample, the black stork, Siberian redstart, whooper swan, eagle owl and so on.

The forest reserve also has hot springs caning to the surfaceuhabitat of
relic species of plants and animals.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the processes that
determine the natural productivity of the main elements of the natural complex

of western slopes of the Bargusinskiy Ridge; special attention is being de-
voted to study of the population of the Bargurinskiy sable.

30

. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bashkir State Forest Reserve
(Bashkirskaya ASSR, Burzyanskiy Rayon, Baynasarovo Post Office)

It was organised in 1930 with an area of 72,140 hectares, of which 64,396 hec-
tares is forest area and 131 hectares is reservoirs. It is located on the
western slopes of the Southcn Urals.

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Hunting. and Gale Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers

The territory of the forest reserve consists of three individual sections-
the Ural-‘rau, Southern Knit and Pribel'skiy, which differ considerably in
natural conditions. The Ural-Tau is a flat-upper aountain range consisting
of quartsites, the Southern xrak is a mountain massif formed of volcanic rock
and the Pribel'skiy section is a level plateau ,consisting of linestones. The
well-known Kapov's cave with wall drawings from' the paleolithic period is lo-
cated in the reserve.

The forest reserve is located in the southernmost part of the forest subsone.
for which European pine-deciduous forests and Urals-Siberian pine-birch for-
ests and larch are typical. The flora of the reserve includes 750 species.
including one endemic and 10 rare species.

Among the large manuals in the forest reserve are found the elk. natal, roe
deer, brown bear and forest marten. The bird fauna includes 155 species.
unong which there are rare species-~the imperial eagle and eagle owl.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the natural dynamics
of the forest, meadow and steppe biogeocenoses of the Southern Urals. the
changes of their boundaries, reasons for these changes and also to study the
apiary bee.

Bol'shekhekhtsir State Forest Reserve
(Khabarovsk, ulitsa Kim Yu Chen' , 65)

It was organized in 1964 with an area of 44,7203 hectares, of which 40,174
hectares are forest area and 250 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in
the western part of Khekhtsir Ridge.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration for Nature Conservation, Game
Preserves and Hunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

Coniferous-deciduous forests, which include Yeddo spruce, Khingan fir, Anur
oak, Manchurian walnut, lemon tree, aralia. prickly eleuterococcus, A-ur
grape, tars vine. Manchurian ash, Anur lilac, red whortleberry, bog whortle-
berry. cranberry, thin-leaved jasmine, currents (four species), Ussurian pear,
apples (Siberian and Pallas's), Anur mountain ash, hawthorns, eastern straw-
berry and so on are typical for the forest reserve. Trees, shrubs and lianas

mnber up to 150 species, among which are many endenic and relic species.
There are approximately 706 species of plants in the forest reserve.

31

MOFF'ICIALUSEONLY
POI! OMCIAL USE ONLY

The animal world of the reserve consists of representatives Of Siberian-

taiga and Chinese-Himalayan fauna. ﬂirty-six species of manuals, 135 species
of birds and 11 species of reptiles and alphibians are found here. The Man-
churian wapiti, roe deer, musk deer, wild boar, brown bear, Asiatic black
bear, lynx, sable. kharza marten, chipmunk, Hanchurian bare. northern pika.
squirrel. voles, shrevs and also chickensnakes end mushis (two species each).
the far eastern terrapin and others.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the natural complexes
of the Amur area; methods of conservation and reproduction of ginseng are also
being developed and plants-«carriers of biologically active substances-ware
being studied.

Visin State Forest Reserve
(Sverdlovskaya oblast, Prigorodnyy Rayon, Visin settlement)

It was organized in 1971 with an area of 13,319 hectares. of which 12,734 hec-
tares are forest area and 52 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on the
Urals ridge along the line of the waterst of its eastern andvestern slopes.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Hunting and Gane'Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

Specific types of mountain landscapes of the depression strip of the central
Urals (southern taiga subtone) have been preserved in the forest reserve.
virgin mountain taiga of spruce, fir and cedar with grass cover of green nos-
ses, bush grass and wood sorrel is the most typical landscape; fir groves are
less widely distributed and cedar groves are rarely encountered. Snell areas
are occupied by pine forests. birch groves, aspen groves. forest meadows

and pest bogs: bald mountain vegetation is distributed on the peaks of the
highest uplifts. -

The vertical zone nature is well marked in the forest reserve; there are rel-
ics of the glacial and pre-glacial periods. The flora of the reserve has been
little studied. Among grass plants are found alpine willow-grass, sosyureya,
here's-ear and valerian: European oak forest elesents are represented: asara-
bacca. crowberry, male fern, sudetskiy ssall bladder. ox-eye daisy, willow-
herb, ragwort and also linden, maple, Siberian elm, elm, choke-cherry. alder
and willows. '

The fauna of the forest reserve also includes species such as the bear, lynx,
Siberian weasel, ermine, forest marten. polecat, mink, otter, fox, hare.
chipmunk. squirrel, elk, roe deer, nole, great grouse, black grouse, hazel
hen. goshawk and nutcracker.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the eoosyste-s of
the mountain range on the slopes of different exposure.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Volga-Kama State Forest Reserve
(Tatarskaya ASSR. Zelenodol'skiy Rayon, Raifa settlement)
It was organised in 1960 with an area of 8,040 hectares.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Hunting and Gene Preserves
attached to the RSI-‘SR Council of Hinisters.

The forest reserve consists of two sections: the Raifa and Saralovskiy (the
boundary of two geographic sonar-forest and steppe--passee through here).

The Raifa section is located 25 kilometers northwest of Rasan' on the boundary
of the southern taiga. Forests of all the main types typical for the central
zone of the European USSR grow here on a s-all area. The preduinant species
is pine and spruce, fir, larch. Anur oak tree, birch and linden are less
widely distributed. An arboretua founded in 1921 is of ilportant scientific
value in the Raifa section of the forest reserve. “ore than 400 species of
trees and shrubs from America. Asia and Europe grow here.

The Saralovskiy section of the reserve is located at the mouth of the Rana
River on the shore of the Keybyshevskoye Reservoir. The area of the section
is covered with mixed deciduous forests with prevalence of linden and pine;
oak. birch and aspen are also found. There are many bays. islands and shal-
lows with well-developed aquatic vegetation—favorable conditions for. aquatic
birds and spawning of fish--on this section.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes forest and steppe species such as the
brow: bear, lynx, raccoon-dog. forest polecat, amine, weasel, forest marten,
American mink, elk, hares (Buropean and canon), squirrel, red-backed souslik,
nuskrat. garden dormuse and so on; among the birds are found the great grouse,
hazel hen, black grouse, hoopoe, roller, three-teed woodpecker, mute cuckoo,
wax-wing, siskin, goldfinch. lesser redpoll and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the relationships of
the southern taiga and forest-steppe and the effect of the Inuybyshev reser-
voir and other anthropogenic factors on natural complexes.

Voronezh State Forest Reserve

(Voroneshskaya Oblast, Grafekaya Station)

It was organized in 1923 with an area of 31,029 hectares. It is located on
the boundary of Voronezhskaya and Lipetskaya Oblasts in the northern part of

the Usnan' pine forest.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Nature Conservation, Forest
Preserves and Hunting, USSR Hinistry of Agriculture.

The vegetation of the forest reserve is represented by pine forests, oak for-
ests and floodplain alder groves. Lichen pine forests and green moss covers
are located on poor soils; there are oak groves and also pine-oak and pine

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

forests with oak in the second level on richer soils. The abundant under-
growth of complex pine and oak forests consists of spindle-tree, filbert, lyme
tree and mountain ash. Approximately 1,000 species have been described in the
flora of the forest reserve.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 54 species of mammals (elk, European
deer, wild boar, roe deer and so on), 187 species of birds and 8 species each
of reptiles and amphibians. The nutria is of most important significance
among the species related to aquatic habitats. One of the few populations

of nutrias was preserved in the forest reserve, which subsequently became a
source of scattering these animals throughout the country. work is being
conducted at an experimental nursery on open-air breeding of nutrias. The
desman is sometimes found in the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is complex study of the nature of
complex island pine and oak forests of the forest-steppe zone, the character-
istic features of their.'ecological systems to find ways of restoring the na-
tive types of forest and their biocenoses, study of methods of restoration,
distribution and efficient use of the European beaver and European deer in the
USSR. The forest reserve is a scientific center for study of the European
beaver and experimental cage breeding of beavers.

Darwin state forest Reserve

(Kalininskaya Oblast. Ves'yegonskiy Rayon, Nikola-Vysokoye Post Office, Borok
settlement) '

It was organized in 1945 with an area of 112,611 hectares. of which 47,684 hec-
tares are forest area and 46,348 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on
the northwestern bank and adjacent shallows of the Rybinskoye Reservoir within
Vologodskaye and Yaroelavsksya Oblasts.

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Hunting and Gene Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

The territory of the forest reserve is a section of southern taiga located on
the lowland lying between Molozhski and sheksninskiy Bays of the reservoir.
Approximately 50 percent of the territory is occupied by forests, primarily
pine forests. There are many peat bogs- and in places barrier-cranberry,
cloudberry and bog whortleberryngrow abundantly. Floating peat bogs formed
as a result of sinking of vast swampy spaces, are found near the shores. The
flora of the forest reserve includes 540 species.

The fauna of' theforest reserve includes 40 species of manuals, among which
are the elk. roe deer, brown bear. badger. lynx. common hare, squirrel and
so on.

The forest reserve has become a reservation for pine forest and aquatic wild-
life due to the diversity of natural conditions and protection. A total of

230 species of birds is nunbered here. There are especially many aquatic
birds during migration (grey-lag goose, bean goose, white-fronted goose,

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whooper swan and so on. The great grouse, black grouse, willow grouse and
others inhabit the forests of the reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the effect of the
Rybinskaya Reservoir on the nature of the southern taiga and to determine and
develop methods of protecting it, efficient use and enrich-ent under condi-
tions created by an artificial reservoir with fluctuating level.

zhigulevsk State Forest Reserve
(Kuybyshevskaya Oblast, zhigulevsk, Bakhilova Polyana Post Office)

It was organized in 1927 and has existed since 1966 in its current boundaries.
It has an area of 19,130 hectares. of which 18,011 hectares are forest area
and 194 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in the northern part of
Samarskaya Luka within Kuybyshevskaya Oblast.

It is subordinate to the Main Achinistration of hunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSFSR Council of Ministers.

Mixed coniferous-deciduous forests of the central Volga area with relics of
the tertiary and glacial periods and endemic species of the Zhiguli area pre-
dominate in the forest reserve. Approximately 800 species of plants has been
recorded in the reserve. The grass cover is formed mainly of plants typical
for the forest-steppe zone, but there are also representatives of the southern
arid steppee, semidesert and desert (saltwort, smer cypress and so on) and
also northern species (barberry, wintergreen and May lily).

The fauna of the reserve includes 40 species of manuals (elk, roe deer, bad-
ger, European hate and so on) and 178 species of birds, of which 141 species
are nesting types.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the natural complex
of mixed coniferous-deciduous forests of the Central Volga region, the native
types of forest and individual representatives of flora of the zhiguli area
(relics and endemic species).

Zavidovskiy Scientific imperimental Hunting Preserve

(Kalininskaya Oblast, Zavidovskiy Rayon)

It was organized in 1972 on the basis of a hunting preserve. It has an area
of 84,000 hectares, of which 44,000 hectares are forest area. It is located
in Kalininskaya and Hoskovskaya Oblasts.

It is subordinate to the USSR Ministry of Defense.

A large number of swamps and marshy sections is typical to the game preserve.
The most widely distributed are mixed forests of birch, aspen, pine and
spruce. The undergrowth includes willow, buckthorn, mountain ash, raspberry,
juniper and so on; there are pine forests (arid and wet), spruce forests
(mainly green moss and marshy-grass type) and alder forests.

35

' FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL bSl-I ONLY

The elk, maral, roe deer, wild boar, hares (cannon and European), cannon par-
tridge, great grouse, black grouse, hazel hen and so on are common among the
animals in the reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of increas-
ing the productivity of forest hunting lands and to introduce hunting animals
(deer, wild boar, nutria and so on).

Zeya State Forest Reserve
(Murskaya Oblast, Zeya, ulitsa Lev Tolstbgo. 2 '3') _

It was organized in 1963 with an area of 82,300 hectares, of which 78,036
hectares are forest area. It is located in the mountain regions of Amurskaya
Oblast on the Tukuringra range, at the junction of subsones of the middle and
southern taiga, light coniferous-deciduous and light coniferousforests with
elementary nanchurian flora.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration for Nature Conservation. Gene
Preserves and Hunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

The wooded nature of the reserve is 95 percent, of which 85 percent occupy
light coniferous forests of Dahurian larch. Bitches (Asian white birch and
Erman's birch), aspen, Yeddo spruce are found among tree varieties and Dahur-
ien rhododendron, Japanese stone pine. Manchurian alder and so on are found
mug shrws. The forests are abundant with berries (edible honeysuckle, cur-
rants, red whortleberries and so on) and with musluoons.

The Manchurian wapiti, elk, roe deer, musk deer, brown bear, lynx, sable,
Siberian weasel and European hare are coanon among the animals in the forest
reserve and the wolverine and ernine are more rarely found. The three-toad
woodpecker, black woodpecker. hazel hen, rock partridge and black grouse are
found among the birds and the Siberian spruce grouse is sometimes found. sigh-
teen species of fish are counted.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the natural resources

of mountain regions of hmurskaya oblast, to protect methods of complex use of
them, and to predict changes of the natural enviroment due to the effect of
human activity. especially with regard to construction of the Zeyskaya Ges.

Il'men State Forest Reserve imeni V. I. Lenin
(Chelyabinskaya Oblast, Hiass-l)

It was organised in 1920 with an area of 30,380 hectares, of which 25,864
hectares are forest area and 2,791 hectares are reservoirs. It is located
in the eastern foothills of the Southern Urals on the boundary of the forest
and steppe zone in Miasskiy. Chebarkul'skiy and Argayashskiy Rayons, Chelya-
binskaya oblast.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is subordinate to the Urals Scientific Center, USSR Academy of Sciences.

A natural complex of mountain regions of the subrone of coniferous-birch for-
ests of the Trans-Urals area and western Siberia and also the unique Il'meno-
gorsk geological-minerological complex (approximately 200 different minerals)
are represented in the forest reserve.

The forests. primarily pine and birch, cover 85 percent of the territory.
The flora is abundant, unique and it includes more than 1,000 species of
flowering plants. mosses and lichens. There are many relic species of the
Pleistocene forest-steppe and the Quarternary period of glaciation.

There are 50 species of manuals, 217 species of birds, 6 species of reptiles,
2 species of amphibians and 14 species of fish in the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the relationships
'between soils, vegetation and the animal world for complex knowledge of the
processes of migration of matter and energy in the earth's biosphere and also
to study the hydrological regime of the Il'men mountains and the dynamics of
surface and ground waters.

Caucasian State Forest Reserve
(Krasnodarskiy Kray, Sochi, Sukhumskoye shosse, 7a)

It was organized in 1924 with an area of 263 .485 hectares, of which 163,130
hectares are forest area and 1,985 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in
the western part of the Main Caucasian Range and in the Peredovyy Range.

It is subordinate to the Main Adninistration for Nature Conservation, Game
Preserves and hunting, USSR Hinistry of Agriculture.

The territory of the forest reserve encompasses all high-altitude zones (from
deciduous forests to alpine meadows and permanent glaciers) and is distin-
guished by abundant and unique flora and fauna. There are 1,600 species of
higher plants in the forest reserve, of which 327 species are endemic and 21
are rare species: there are many relic species. The greater part of the
forest-forming varieties are relics of the Tertiary period: Eastern beech,
Norchann fir, chestnut. oriental spruce, Iberian oak, sycamore, Caucasian lin-
den and so on. Fruit and nut plants, extremely valuable for selection and
also medicinal, honey, food. tanning and decorative plants occupy a signifi-
cant position.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 59 species of animals, including the
chamois, maral, kuban' tor, Caucasian bear, lynx, forest and stone martens,
long-clawed vole and Caucasian mole. The ornithological fauna numbers 192
species. The mmpean bison has been successfully reacclimatised in the

forest reserve .

A branch of the forest reserveu-the Khostinskaya yew-box grove with an area
of 300 hectares--is located on the southeastern slope of the Bol'shoy Akhun

mountain .

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is couple): study of the ecologi-
cal systems of mountain forests and ueadows of the northwestern part of the
Caucasus, methods of conservation, restoration and propagation of representa-
tives of Caucasian enduic flora, development of methods of increasing the
population, settlenent and efficient use of such male as the amopean bi-
son, deer, tur, chuois and roe (her and study of the interaction of forest
reserve and contiguous (econcmically used) ecological systems.

Kandalaksha State Forest Reserve
(Humanskaya Oblast, Kandalaksha-2, ulitsa Rechmya. 18)

‘It was organized in 1932 with an area of 35,027 hectares, of which 12,122
hectares are forest area and 15,380 hectares are reservoirs and narine water
basin. It is located on islands at the vertex of Kandalaksha Bay of the “hits
Sea and along the Murmansk coast of the Barents Sea.

It is subordinate to the Rain Administration of Bunting and Gale Preserves
attached to the RSE'SR Council of Ministers.

The main landscapes of the reserve are nainland Arctic taiga, naritine tundra,
forest-tundra and forest and tundra islands. The conserved objects are "bird
markets“ (cider, murres and puffin) and also individual species of birds.

The forest reserve consists of three sections of Iainland coast and five
groups of islands.

The Aynovy Islands, covered with a layer of peat, are populated by puffins
and seagulls (great and herring-gull); the cider and also the Arctic tern
and ruffs have also settled here. The islands are inhabitated by approxi-
mately 40 species of birds and another 90 species are found during migration.
The islands are covered'during the spring-sun” season with various types of
grasses (catchfly, pink, cane-tile, angelica and so on).

The bird markets are located on the "seven islands," Murresand kittywakes
and also razorbills, seagulls. eiders. puffins, Arctic terns and so on are
numerous. Gray seals give birth to their pups on the shores of the islands.
A total of 109 species of birds, of which 43 species are nesting. is found on
the territory of the "seven islands.”

Yet another group of islands of the reserve occupies the greater part of the
Kandalaksha cliffs of the White Sea. These islands are covered with spruce-
pine forests with a mixture of birch, aspen, mountain ash, willow and other
varieties.

A total of 23 species of land annuals, 10 species of marine manuals and 208
species of birds have been recorded on the territory of the Kandalaksha Re-
serve; 539 species of higher plants are nuﬂaered.

The scientific profile of the reserve is to study the natural complex of the
archipelagos of the White and Barents Seas. The main objects of study are the
cannon elder, the birds of the "bird markets" and puffin colonies.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kedrovaya Pad' Forest Reserve
(Primorskiy Kray, meanskiy Rayon, Primorskaya Station, Far Eastern Railroad)

It was organised in 1916 with an area of 17,897 hectares, of vhich 13,094 hec-
tares are forest area. It is located on the western shore of Anur Bay in the
foothills of the Chernyye Mountains in the Redrovaya River Basin at the junc-
tion of the North Korean and South Ussurian flora provinces.

It is subordinate to the Far Eastern Scientific Center, USSR Acadny of
Sciences.

Southern coniferous-deciduous boreal and oak forests and also forests with a
predominance of linden (Amur and Manchurian) are typical for the forest re-

serve. Broad-leaved and leafy forests occupy 85 percent of the area of the

reserve.

The flora of the reserve numbers 817 species. The ancient nemoral formations
and the related relic species of plants are of great value. Woody plants
(118 species. among which are 51 species of trees, 58 species of shrubs and
9 species of lianas) and rose plants (26 species) are numerous. There are
also many rare and valuable medicinal plants, relics and endemic species in
the forest reserve: shmidt's birch, old-fashioned weigela, Rose's violet,
toothed oak, mainland aralia, Hanchurian fir, ginkgo, tara vine, Anur grape,
Chinese magnolia vine. ginseng, tea-plant, eleutherococcus, Chinese valerian,
Hanchurian walnut, thin-leaved jasmine, Sakhalin cherry and so on. There are
more than 200 species of mosses and lichens and 150 species of mushrooms in
the forest reserve. ‘

A combination of southern and northern species is typical for the animal
world. There are the world's rarest species--the Ussurian tube-nosed bat and
the giant shrew, a relic cockroach and others. The leopard, Amur cat, spot-
ted deer, kharza, Asiatic black bear, otter, raccoon-dog and so on are found.
The mandarin duck, mute cuckoo, small sparrovhawk, brown and narcissus fly-
catchers, black stork, white-banded swift, black-headed oriole, Chinese green
finch, Chinese grosbeak, striped shrike, rock thrush and so on are found among
birds. A total of 224 species of birds and 57 species of mammals has been

recorded in the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the biocenoses of the
- southernmost (within the USSR) versions of Manchurian mixed forests.

Kivach State Forest Reserve
(Karel'skaya ASSR, Kondoposhskiy Rayon, Sopokha Post Office)
It was organized in 1931 with an area of 10,460 hectares of which 8,673.2

hectares are forest area and 1,057.2 hectares are reservoirs. It is located
in the Trans-Onega area at the junction of two sonssutaiga and broad-leaved

forests .

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is subordinate to the Main Adninistration of hunting and Game Preserves
attached to the Rsrsn Council of Ministers.

Almost all the main geographic coaplexes of the central taiga landscape are
represented on the territory of the forest reserve. The greater part of the
territory (82 percent) is covered with forests. Green-noes spruce and pine
forests with elements of broad-leaved trees are typical.

The well-known livach Waterfall with a height of 10.7 meters is located on
the Sune River. The xivach waterfall is recognized as one of mmpe's high-
est waterfalls. The unique Sopokhskiy pine forest, where the heightof pines
reaches 30 meters and the trunk diameter reaches 100 on, has been preserved
in the reserve; there are trees approximately 350 years old.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 44 species of manuals, 185 species
of birds, four species each of reptiles and uphibians and 17 species of
fishes. There are both niddle-taiga species of aninals (wood lming, squir-
rel, cannon hare. bear, elk, hazel hen, black grouse, willow grouse and three-
toed woodpecker) and southern forest and forest-steppe species (harVest
mouse, quail, coumon partridge. torncrake, oriole, grosbeak and so on).

There are a nature museum, dendrological section and nursery in the forest
reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the dyna-ics of
processes that determine the natural productivity of the main elements of the
natural complex of Central xarelia.

Kansanol'sk State Forest Reserve

(Khabarovskiy Kray, mml'skiy Rayon, Pivan' settlement, Sovgavan'skoye
shosse, 36)

It was organised in 1963 with an area of 31,958 hectares. It is located on
the right bank of the Man: River in the Bel'go River Basin: a branch of the
forest reserve is located on the left bank of the mungari River and its ~
tributary the Chernal River.

It is subordinate to the Main Adninistration of Nature Conservation, Gene
Preserves and hunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

The junction of three forest fornations--cedar-broad-leaved (pre-Anur), dark-
coniferous (Sikhote-Alin') and light-coniferous (Bast Siberian)-is typical
for the forest reserve, which also explains the uniqueness of the flora and
fauna. Sections of cedar-spruce forests with undergrowth of pointed yew are
interesting. Relic species of plants and whale are found and there are
spawning grounds of the chum and hunpback salmon.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the biogeocenoses
of the transition zone from cedar-broad-leaved to taiga spruce-fir forests
and also natural complexes of the Anur flora and fauna.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kronotskiy State Forest Reserve

(mohatskaya Oblast, Yelizovskiy Rayon, Zhupanovo settle-sent, ulitsa Oktyabr'-
skaya, 24)

It was organized in 1934 and has existed since 1967 in its current boundaries.
It has an area of 964,000 hectares, of which 534,825 hectares are forest area
and 26,835 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in the system of nountain
ranges that descend from west to east toward Kamchatka and Kronotskiy Bays.

It is subordinate to the main ministration of hunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers

The forest reserve is distinguished by unusual beauty and uniqueness of
nature: a chain of extinct and dormant volcanos. unusual forms of relief and
waterfalls. The thermal lakes and calders of the Uson volcano, the Kikhpinych
geysers and numerous hot springs are of special interest. The landscapes of
mountain tundra and thickets of cedar and Japanese stone pine, forests of
Ethan's birch with high grass and saritime complexes are widely distributed.
The flora of the forest reserve includes approximately 800 species, including
the graceful fir.

The vertebrate fauna nunbers 33 species of annals and more than 130 species

of birds. The most valuable inhabitant of the forest reserve is the Ranchatka
sable; reindeer, bighorn sheep, brown bear and other animals are cot-Ion. Breeding
grounds of sea lions. ringed seal, coanon seal and akiba are found in the
coastal waters of the forest reserve. A total of 179 species of birds, includ-
ing the stone partridge, whooper swan. been goose, Pacific Ocean eagle and
others. are known.

The scientific profile of the forestreserve is to study the natural couplex
of the Pacific Ocean highlands of the central part of Kamchatka, relic vege-
tation. valuable representatives of the animal world and also of current

volcanism. geysers and warn springs.
taro State Forest Reserve imeni L. G. Kaplanov
(Primorskiy Kray, Lazovskiy Rayon, Lazo Village)

It was organized in 1935 as a branch of the Sikhote-hlin' forest reserve.

It became the independent Sudzukhinskiy Forest Reserve in 1940. It was re-
named the Lazo Forest Reserve in 1970. It has an area of 116,520 hectares,
of which 115,344 hectares are forest area and 231 hectares are reservoirs.
It is located in the southern part of the Sikhote-Alin' in the interfluve of
the Kiyevka and Chernaya Rivers. The forest reserve includes two ssall is-
lands in the Sea of Japan--Petrov and Bel'tsov.

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Nature Conservation, Game
Preserves and Hunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The forest reserve is located in the Manchurian flora region, which also
determines the abundance of species and forms of ancient, shrub and grassy
plants in it. The main ancient varieties are the Mongolian oak and cedar;
lindens (Amur and Manchurian) dominate in the mixed forests; the nut oak
tree grows everywhere and cedar-broad-leaved forests predminate. A large
number of lianasugrape, tara vine, magnolia vine and so on and also large
thickets of a valuable medicinal plantueleutheroooccusv-are typical for the
forests of the reserve. A total of 1,271 species of plants, including 57
endemic and 9 rare species, grow in the reserve.

The vertebrate fauna numbers 48 species of manuals, many of which are endanic
to the Primor'ye: the long-tailed goral, axis deer. Manchuria wapiti, Asiatic
black bear, Manchurian hare, moger mole, kharea, hmur wildcat, Amur tiger,
leopard and so on. a total of 282 species of birds. including the' Ossurian
pheasant, Mandarin duck, squamous merganser and so on, has been mted.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is complex study of the ecolog-
ical systems of the mountain forests of the southern part of the sikhote-Alin',
development of methods of conserving primary ecological systems of the moun-
tain forests of the Far East under conditions of economic activity in sur-
rounding territories, study of the forests of the' Southern Primor'ye and
finding ways of restoration and conservation of especially valuable represen-
tatives of flora and fauna--pointed yew, ginseng, aralia and also the goral,
axis deer, tiger, leopard, pheasant and so on.

Lapland State Forest Reserve
(Murmanskaya Oblast, Monchegorsk)

It was founded in l930 with an area of 161,254 hectares, of which 85,763 hec-
tares are forest area and 8,546 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on the
western Kola peninsula, west of Imandra and Monga Lakes, 160 kilometers north
of the Arctic circle. The season of white nights continues here for more than
three months. The annual total precipitation is 400 m, but the climate is
moist due to weak evaporation and low tesperatures. There is no real perma-
frost but a frozen nucleus remains on huamocky swamps.

It is subordinate to the Main hdninistration of Bunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

The territory of the reserve is mountainous and diverse in landscapes. Almost
half of it is occupied by reindeer moss pine forests and northern thin forest
and a third is occupied by forestless mountain tundra. Birch forests and
forest-tundra occupy 12 percent of the territory and marshes occupy 6 percent.
Complexes of mountain tundra and northern taiga are. well represented in the
forest reserve: forests with predominance of pine. spruce and birch, marshes
and lakes and reindeer moss covers. There are many alpine and arctic species
of plants: dwarf rhododendron, partridge grass and dwarf willows. The flora
of the forest reserve includes 928 species. The lakes and rivers are dis-
tinguished by very sparse aquatic vegetation.

(02

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The vertebrate fauna numbers 29 species of uamals. The wild reindeer, elk,
marten, fox, ermine. wolverine, otter, bear and Norwegian leaning are comm
the beaver has beoone reacclinatised. A total of 176 species of birds, in-
cluding the great grouse, willow grouse, black grouse and hazel hen and the
uhooper swan and the golden eagle among rare species has been noted.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the natural complex
of the northern taiga, mountain tundra and lakes ofthe kola peninsula and to
develop methods of conservation ofthe reindeer IO“ pine forests: special at-
tention is being devoted to study of the reindeer and to development of
aethods of efficient use of its reserves.

Mordovian State Forest Reserve ineni P. G. Snidovich
(Mordovskaya ASSR, Temnikov, Pushta eettleuent)

It was organised in 1936 with an area of 32,300 hectares, of which 31,059
hectares are forest are and 20.1-hectares are reservoirs. It is latated in
the eastern part of the Oksko-Klyaz'ninskaya plane between the Hoksha River
and its right tributary the Satis River on the boundary of the forest and
forest-steppe zones.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Hunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSE‘SR Council of Ministers.

The flora of the forest reserve is abundant: 947 species of plants. includ-
ing 619 species of vascular plants. A total of 96.6 percent of the territory
is covered with forests; pine forests predoeinate and significant areas are
also occupied by birch, aspen and linden forests: oak forests are found in
the Hoksha River floodplain. The pine forests are very diverse-from white
moss to sphagnum nose pine forests.

The fauna of the forest reserve is typical for a transition forest-steppe
zone. sixty species of manuals and 196 species of birds are known. The des-
nan, elk. hares (common and European). lynx and so on are found among ani-
mals; the birds include the great grouse, hazel hen, black grouse, willow
grouse. black stork and eagle owl. The roe deer and nutria have been reac-
cliaatized and the axis deer, earal, European bison. raccoon-dog and muskrat
have been acclimatized.

Karst phenomena are typical for the forest reserve; there are lakes of karat
origin.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of con-
servation and to study the southern wooded plains on the boundary of the
forest and forest-steppe zone, to study the natural complex of pine and pine-
broad-leaved forests of the Oksko-Klyaz'minskaya Poles'ye and also the ecology

of the deman.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Okskiy State Forest Reserve
(Ryazanskaya Oblast. wasskiy Rayon. Lakash Post Office)

It was organised in 1935 with an area of 22.896 hectares. of which 18.492 hec-
tares are forest area and 410 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in the
southeastern part of the Heshcherskaya lowland.

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Nature Conservation. Gale Pre-
serves and hunting. USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

The forest vegetation of the reserve is represented by pine forests with a
mixture of birch and broad-leaved varieties and also by sections of oak for-
ests. including floodplain forests: there are sany swamps and lakes. The
flora of the reserve includes more than 400 species of plants. including two
endemic. 69 rare and five disappearing species.

The fauna of the reserve is abundant: 49 species of mentals and 227 species
of birds. including rare species: the desman. otter. black stork. white-
tailed eagle and so on; the mropean beaver has been reacclimatized. The
central ornithological station has been in operation since 1956 and a beaver
nursery and biological survey group have been operating since 1959.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is complex study of the nature of
the southeastern part of the Heshcherskaya lowland. the ecological systems of
the floodplain and areas outside the floodplain. development of methods of
conservation, restoration and efficient use of the natural complexes of the
southeastern part of the Heshcherskaya lowland and also rare. disappearing
and valuable species of animals and plants (desman. beaver. elk. bear. lynx.
badger. great grouse. swan. black stork. white-tailed eagle. osprey. aquatic
birds. water chestnuts. water ferns and so on).

Pechora-Ilych state Forest Reserve
(Komi A588. ‘l‘roitsko-Pechorskiy Rayon. Yaksha Post off-ce)
It was organised in 1930 with an area of 721.322 hectares. of' which 612.214

hectares are forest area and 2.297 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in
the western foothills of the lbrthern Urals in the interfluve of the Pechora

and Ilych Rivers .

It is subordinate to the hain Administration of Hunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

The forest reserve is represented by three landscape regions: the Pechora
lowland overgrown with pine forests. undulating foothills with spruce. fir

and spruce-fir forests and with a mixture of cedar in places and the moun-
tains of the Northern Urals.

The upper boundary of the forest is located at an altitude of 500-600 meters
above sea level and pure birch forests are found here. but the trees are

1010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
usually stunted, low-growing and with goblet shape of the crown. The stone
fir grows in this high-altitude zone. A zone of subalpine meadows with var-
ious types of grasses bright during the blooming period—anemones, bare fis-
tula, Urals peony, cranesbills, buttercupe and forget-me-nots, begins beyond
the forest zone. The high-altitude zone is represented by tundra and rocky
placers. The shrub tundra is formed of willows, dwarf birch and Siberian
juniper and the grass tundra is formed of sedges and cereal grasses. The
bushy tundra is located above the shrub zone. The“ are primarily berries:
bilberries, bog whortleberries, crowberries, ptarmigan-berries and red mor-
tleberries. me highest is the arcticoalpine zone: a thin cover of alpine
azaleas, cushion pinks, sedges, lagotis, filodose and so on.

The flora of the forest reserve numbers more than 700 species, including 6
endemic, 7 rare and ll disappearing species.

The animal world is represented both by Asiatic and European species. A total
of 40 species of animals and 204 species of birds has been recorded. Among
the animals are the elk, the forest reindeeh wolf, brown bear and wolverine;

otters, ermine and mink are numerous: the weasel, fox, chipmunk, flying squir-
rel and mountain hare are cannon: the white fox and lynx (rare) are found.

he forest reserve is the only place where the sable, marten and their hybrid
--kidusy--are found together; the beaver, which was well accustomed to this
area, has been reacclimatized.

Among the birds are found the great grouse, black grouse, hazel hen and
grouse (the willow and alpine ptarmigan), cuckoos (European and Asian) and so
on. The rivers are inhabited by salmon, grayling, whitefish, ids, tench,
perch, pike and so on.

There is an experimental nursery to study the possibility of breeding elk in
captivity and of using domesticated elk under taiga conditions is available
in the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the mountain-taiga
natural complex of the western slopes of the Northern Urals and of the upper
course of the Pechora River. The main objects of study are the silt. forest
reindeer, squirrel, sable, marten, beaver, grouse-type birds, salmon and
cedar.

Pinezhskiy State Forest Reserve

(Arkhangel ' skaya Oblast)

It was organized in 1974 with an area of 41,244 hectares.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Hunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSFSR Council of hinisters.

195

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ola-Terrace State Forest Reserve
(noshovskaya Oblast. Serpukhovskiy Rayon, Danki Post Office)

It was organized in1945 with an area of 4,945 hectares, of which 4,704
hectares are forest and 16 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in Southern
Hoskovskaya Oblast on the left bank terraces of the Oka River.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Nature Conservation, Gale Pre-
. serves and mnting. USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

The forest reserve contains pine, brosd-leaved and snail-leaved forests. sec-
tions of relic steppe vegetation (with feather grass, sheep fescue.‘ ground
cherry. European mountain ash and so on): the flora contains approximately
900 species.

The fauna of the forest reserve nulbers 47 species of eaunals and 127 species
of birds. The elk. wild boar. roe deer and deer are cos-Ion: the aaropean nus-
krat has been reacclimatired. There is a central European bison nursery in

the forest reserve and purebred bison are delivered annually for resettle-ent

throughout the country; a breeding log of mropean bison in the USSR is
maintained.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is couples study of the ecologi-
cal systems of the Oka River vallye with unique sections of steppe vegetation
study of the individual components of the forest and floodplain to restore
and preserve them, study and breeding of purebred European bison and develop-
sent and planning of measures to restore and resettle these animals in the

USSR.
Severe-Outina State Forest Reserve
(Severo-Osetinskaya Assn, hlagir, ulitsa Chabakhana Basiyeva, 17)

It was organized in 1967 with an area of 26,133 hectares, of which 7,933 hec-
tares are forest area and 50 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on the
northern slopes of the Main Caucasian Ridge at an altitude of l,350-4,646

meters above sea level.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Bunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSFSR Council of Ministers.

The forest reserve is distinguist by an abundance of flora: of 6,000
species of plants growing in the Caucasus. 2,000 are found in the forest
reserve, including so species of trees and shrubs. The high-altitude acne is
well-earked. Large tracts of pine forest exist in the upper reaches of the

Tseya and Arden Rivers.

The forest sone consists mainly of pine. birch and nixed forests and rises to
an altitude of LOGO-2,200 esters above sea level. Oak, maple, ash, hornbeam,
eastern beech, canon filbert, Iberian honeysuckle and yellow rhododendron

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

grow in the mixed forests; the thick grass cover consists primarily of serial
grasses and legumes: small areas are occupied by berries: strawberry, red
whortleberry and bilberry.

Cereal grassesncocksfoot, reed-grass, timothy and so onnreach especially _
strong development in the subalpine some: brilliant diverse grasses are dis-
tinguished by an abundance of species. Endemic species are Caucasian snowdrop,
golden hare's ear and brilliant larkspur; five rare species of plants are
known.

The fauna is typical for the high mounds of the northern slope of the main
Caucasian ridge. The forest reserve is inhabited by chamois, the eastern
Caucasian tur, snow vole, brown bear, fox, sartens (stone and forest), badger,
lynx, mropean wildcat and so on (a total of 50 species of manuals) and ap-
proximately 200 species of birds, including the Caucasian blackcock, rock
partridge, Caucasian snowcock. chough, alpine chough and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the mountain-forest
and cliff-meadow landscapes of the Central Caucasus, vegetation groupings and
fauna typical for this geographic region.

Sikhote-Alin' State Forest Reserve
(Primorskiy Kray, Terneyskiy Rayon, Mney settlement)

It was organized in 1935 with an area of 340,200 hectares. of which 339,670
hectares are forest area and 270 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on
the eastern and western slopes of the central part of the sikhote-hlin' ridge.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Nature Conservation, Game Pre-
serves and bunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture

Coniferous-broad-leaved forest with numerous relic and endemic species pre-
doeinates in the forest reserve. Cedar and broad-leaved forests. IPNCO-fir
taiga, forests of Erman's birch, groves of Japanese stone pine and rocky tun-
dra are found. More than 200 species of trees, shrubs and lianas are known:
the grass cover is multilevel and there are many decorative species of plants.
The flora of the forest reserve mnbers 797 species, including more than 100

endemic, two rare and one disappearing species.

A total of 61 species of manuals, approximately 320 species of birds, nine
species of reptiles, six species of amphibians and 16 species of fish are
kmwn in the forest reserve. Among the manuals are found the tiger, sable,
kharza, bears (Asiatic black and brow), musk deer, nanchurian wapiti, goral
and among the birds are found the squamous nerganser, mandarin duck, Siberian
spruce grouse, fish owl and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is complex study of the ecologi-
cal systens of the forests and meadows of the central part of the Sikhote-

Alin' , study of the conditions of conservation of primary ecological systems
of the mountain forests of the Far East under conditions of econoeic activity

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the surrounding territory and also ways of restoration and conservation of
valuable representatives of the fauna (tiger, Asiatic black bear, goral, Hen-
churian wapiti and Siberian spruce grouse) and valuable relic plants (Japanese
stone pine, luon tree, eleutherocoocus and so on).

Sokhondo state Forest Reserve
(Chitinshaya Oblast. Kyrinskiy Rayon. Kyra settlement)

It was organized in 1974 with an area of 210,500 hectares. It is located in
the region of the Sokhondo mountain tract (2,500 meters above sea level) and
several adjacent bare mountains (up to 2,000 meters above sea level).

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of wanting and Gale Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

Sokhondo is a section of typical Siberian taiga extending far to the south to
the region of the Dahurian-Hongolian steppes in the type of vegetation. The
vertical zones of vegetation are well marked.

me most typical of the steppe formations are tansies and various grasses
anong steppe formations and mountain-meadow associations with shrub thickets
are also common. Steppe vegetation foruations penetrate rather deeply into
the taiga from the south and meadow vegetation is well marked.

Three-fourths of the forest reserve is occupied by taiga, represented by zones
of light-coniferous (pine and larch) and dark-coniferous (cedar) forests.

The most widespread types of forests are mixed-cereal grasses. whortleberries
and dwarf Arctic birch stands. Bog-red whortleberry, Siberian tea and rhodo-
dendron predominate among the cedar groves. Krasodnev, spreading pasque-
flower, steppe edelweis. Siberian tea, Japanese stone pine, shrubby cinquefoil
spiraea, cotoneaster and so on are found in the flora of the forest reserve.

The forest reserve is represented by complexes of Siberian. Dahurian-ﬂongolian
and high-altitude fauna. Elk. Manchurian wapiti, roe deer. musk deer, wild
.boar, brown bear, lynx. sable. long-tailed souslik, Dahurian zokor and also
the Siberian capercailly, hazel hen, Daurian partridge, sheldrake and so on
are found here: a special race of greenlings is found in Bukukunskoye Lake.

Stolby State Forest Reserve

(Krasnoyarskiy Kray, Krasnoyarsk. ulitsa Kar'yernaya, 26a)

1: was organized in 1925 with an 'm. of 47,154 hectares. of which 46,308
hectares are forest area. It is located on the right bank of the Yenisey
River on the northwestern horns of the Eastern Cayan.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of Bunting and Gale Preserves
attached to the RSE'SR Council of Ministers.

108

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The attraction of the forest reserve are unique granite-syenite cliffs--
”columns" up to 100 neters high, consisting of Lower Devonian nose-Red
Syenites, which acquire different shapes as a result of weathering.

The forest reserve lies in the zone of the typical mountain taige of the
eastern Sayan. The vegetation is represented by forest and steppe associa-
tions of the Krasnoyarsk trough: pine-larch mixed-grass and mountain dark-
coniferous (fir) taiga; spruce-fir forests grown in the river valleys and
streams. Berries--bilberry. red whortleberry, raspberry, currents (red and
black), Altay honeysuckle and so on--are typical for the mountain taiga.
here are many decorative plants--Siberian globeflowers, irises, lilies,
lady's slippers and so on--in the forests of the foothills. Typical sections
of steppes and meadows are found in the foothills region.

Fir forests predominate in the mountain-taiga some. Above them (at an alti-
tude of 800 meters above sea level) lie cedar forests formed of Siberian
stone pine--the most valuable variety of the Siberian taiga. An interesting
plant of the forest reserve is Siberian linden—a relic of the Oligocene-
Miocene period. A total of 551 species of plants has been recorded in the
forest reserve.

The fauna of the forest reserve is typical for the Central Siberian mountain
taiga and is represented by 49 species of manuals, 145 species of birds and
22 species of fish. The rivers of the forest reserve are inhabited by white-
fish, tugun, grayling, dace, ide, perch, trout, lenoks and so on. The

hen, great grouse, black grouse, three-teed woodpecker, nuthatch, crossbill,
thrush, nightingales (Far Eastern and blue), sparrowhawk, red-eared bunting,
dipper, bean goose, eagle owl, golden eagle and so on are numerous among the
birds: the mammals include the sable, bear, lynx, otter, wolverine, Siberian
weasel, ermine, weasel, saral, musk deer, roe deer, elk and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of protec-
tion and natural restoration of the Siberian stone pine and also restoration
of the pine-deciduous plantation and study of the bird and manual fauna.

Teberda State Forest Reserve
(Stavropol'skiy Kray, Teberda)

It was organised in 1936 with an area of 83,122 hectares, of which 29,448 hec-
tares are forest area and 263 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on the
northern slopes of the Western Caucasus. It consists of two eections--the
main section located in the upper part of the ‘reberda River Basin, and the
Arkhyz part located 150 kilometers west of the main part in the ltisgich River
valley. There are more than 100 glaciers in the forest reserve and approx-
imately as many high-altitude glacial lakes and many waterfalls.

It is subordinate to the Main Administration of hunting and Game Reserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

Mountain forests and also subalpine and alpine meadows with typical flora and
fauna complexes are represented in the forest reserve. The forests are

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distinguished by abundant species composition (up to 100 species of trees and
shrubs): hooked pine, Caucasian fir, oriental spruce, maples, hornbean, beech
and common yew (a relic of the Tertiary period): wild fruit trees and shrubs
valuable for selection include apple, pear, savin, cherry, blackthorn, rasp-
berry, currant, gooseberry, barberry and also serviceberry. choke-cherry,
filbert, honeysuckle, spindle-tree and rhododendrons (Caucasian and Pontian).
Cow parsnip, angelica, monkshood, campanula, variegated feecue, globe flower,
spreading pasque-flower and so on are typical among grassy plants. A total
of 1,180 species of plants, including 186 endemic to the Caucasus, three en-
demic to the forest reserve and four rare species, has been described in the
forest reserve.

The fauna includes 36 species of mammals, 160 species of birds, seven species
of reptiles, four species of amphibians and three species of fish. The en-
demic and rare species include the Kuban' tur, chanois, leopard, Caucasian
birch mouse, Caucasian snowcock, Caucasian blackcock, eagle owl and so on.
The maral, wild board, brown bear, lynx, European wildcat, fox, wolf, stone
marten, Caucasian weasel, ermine, otter, mountain hare, squirrel, forest
mouse, shrub vole, common noctule and so on are found. The bearded vulture,
Ural owl, kestrel, goshawk, sparrowhawk, rock partridge, corncrake, shore
lark, warblers, whitethroats, tits, jays, nuthatch, wrens, woodpeckers (black,
green and great spotted), dipper, finch, siskin, greenfinch, bullfinch, night-
jar and so on are common among the birds. The sand lizard, slow-worm, grass
and Renard's viper are found in the forest. reserve among the reptiles and
amphibians include the tree frog and green toad.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of con-
servation, restoration and efficient use of mountain meadows and forests of
water-protection, soil~protection and resort-climatological significance and
also valuable species of hunting animals (tur, chassis, snowcock and so on)
in different altitude zones of the eastern part of the Northwestern Caucasus.

Uesuriysk State Forest Reserve
('Primorskiy Kray, Ussuriyskiy Rayon, Kamenushka Post Office)

It was organized in 1935 with an area of 40,432 hectares, of which 40,375
hectares are forest area and 40 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on
the southwestern horns of the Sikhote-Alin' range.

It is subordinate to the Far Eastern Scientific Center, USSR Academy of
Sciences.

Natural complexes of southern Ussurian taiga, cedar and broad-leaved, dark-
coniferous, elm and ash forests are represented in the reserve. has ancient
dark-coniferous and broad-leaved forests that have retained their initial
phytocenotic structure are interesting. Yew, Japanese stone pine, Manchurian
fir, Anur oak tree, Manchurian walnut, Manchurian aralia, eleutherococcus,
tea-plant and ginseng grow in the forest reserve: there are many lianas--
Chinese magnolia vine, Amur grape, three species of tara vine and so on. The
flora of spore plants-mosses, lichens and mushrooesuis diverse. The forests

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the reserve have never been cut and there are many gigantic trees here:
pines up to 42 meters high, with diameter of more than 200 a. There are
standing liana forests with hornbeam and approximately 30 species of ferns.
Approximately 700 species of higher plants have been described among the
flora of the forest reserve.

There are nany valuable and rare species of animals--the tiger, leopard,
Manchurian wapiti, giant mole, lungless newt, giant longhorn beetle, relic
cockroach and so on--in the forest reserve. The grey starling, thrush,
hoopoe, white wagtail, eastern blue magpie, kite, warblers, bunting, pheasant,
hazel hen, mandarin duck, kingfisher, dipper and so on are found among the
birds.

A total of 36 of 77 species of usuals that inhabit the Soviet l’ar East are
found on the forest reserve. These are the axis deer, natal, musk deer,
wild boar, bears (brown and Asiatic black) , European wildcat, lynx, badger,
sable, otter, Siberian weasel, kharsa, raccoon-dog, fox, wolf, Manchurian
hare, squirrel, flying squirrel, chipmunk, carrion rat, Hikhno's vole, hedge-
hog, three species of shrevs including the giant mole and the moger mole and
several species of bats.

Chickensnakes (patterned and hmur), mottled grass snake, mamushki (Ussurian
and Pallas's) and the lizard--Amur long-tailed--are found among reptiles.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the natural complex
of ancient nemoral formations and to develop methods of protecting them.

Khingan State Forest Reserve
(Murskaya Oblast, Arkharinskiy Rayon, Kundur settlement)

It was organised in 1964 with an area of 59,300 hectares, of which 34,312
hectares are forest area and 178 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in
southeastern Murskaya Oblast in the transition zone from the Ann: flatlands
covered with small-reed meadows, to the foothills of the Less Khingan with
mountain cedar and broad-leaved forests.

It is subordinate to the Hain hdsdnistration of Nature Conservation, Game
Reserves and hunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

The fauna and flora of the reserve are Amur and tisga types. The main ancient
variety is the Mongolian oak; the Japanese stone pine, Veda) spruce, Khingan
fir, Dahurian larch, Amur linden, Manchurian ash, Dahurian birch and other
varieties also grow there.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes both typically taiga species and
representatives of the Amur fauna: brown bear, black bear, lynx, Siberian
weasel, sable, kharsa, raccoonedog, Manchurian hare, chipmunk, Manchurian
wapiti and also the hazel hen, eastern blue magpie, black-headed oriole and
so on.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the biotenoees of
the Central hmur region.

Khopra State Forest Reserve
(Veronezhskaya Oblast, Novokhoperskiy Rayon, Varvarino Post office)

It was organised in 1935 with an area of 16,178 hectares, of which 13,811 hec-
tares are forest area and 1,065 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in
the Khopra River floodplain.

It is subordinate to the Main Aaainistration of Nature Conservation, Game he-
serves and Hunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

The protected ecosystems in the forest reserve are the forest-steppe flootblain
with oak forests, European alder and white poplar forests, floodplain and high-
land oak forests with ash, lakes with daundant aquatic vegetation, flooded
meadows and steppe vegetation with feathergrass-fescue mixed grass cover. Ap-
proximately 1,000 species of plants, including tegular gladiolas, irises (see-
shore, Siberian and yellow flag), lily-leaved gland flower, fragrant toadflax,
wood vetch, Bieberstein’s tulip, cos-son solomon's seal, dune violet and even-
ing primrose are found in the forest reserve; plantains (lanceolate, canon
water and Leselle's), water dragon, sweet-grasses (reed and floating), cut-
grass, buckbean, naiads (small and holly-leaved), water lillies (white, pure
white and tetrahedral), pondweeds (12 species), burreeds. small yellow water-
lilly and so on are found in reservoirs.

The steppe vegetation is represented by feathergrass-fescue-sined grass, fes-
cue-mined grass and median couch grass associations (with bedstraw, Blsass' s
fennel and ray smort) and also shrub association of snow spiraea and labur
num and fennel-feathergrass associations on alkaline soils.

There are approximately 160 species of birds and 43 species of manuals in the
fauna of the forest reserve, song which is one endemic to our country-the
dessan. The roe deer, wild boar, badger and other animals inhabit the for-
est reserve; the nutria has been reacclimatised, axis deer have been acclima-
tized and European bisons have been imported. An experimental Vivarium has
been created to study the biology of the desman and an experimental nursery
has also been created when axis deer are maintained.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is coeplerstudy of the ecologi-
cal systems of floodplt ns and non-floodplain territories, development of
methods of conservation, restoration and efficient use of the natural coqlex-
es of Khopra Valley, study of all: and oak forests with ash, unique alder
floodplain forests, finding ways of conserving then with regard to changes of
the hydrological regime and study of the biology of the desuan and developaent
of methods of conservation, restoration and resettlement of it throughout the
USSR.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. USE ONLY

Central Forest State Reserve
(Kalininskaya Oblast, Nelidovskiy Rayon, Vysokoye Post Office)

It was organised in 1934 with an area of 21.3“ hectares, of which 20,158
hectares are forest area and 26 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in the
northwestern part of the Central Russian Upland near the sources of the Volga
and Zapadnaya Dvina Rivers.

It is subordinate to the Rain ministration of Nature Conservation, Game
Preserves and Hunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

The territory of the reserve is covered with spruce and mixed spruce and
broad-leaved forests and peat bogs. The main tree-forming variety is spruce:
there is a small inclusion of maple, linden, el- and so on. me well pre-
served complex spruce forests with thick undergrowth and abundant grass cover
are most interesting; there are many berry plants (cranberry, bilberry, red
whortleberry, raspberry, cloudberry and so on).

The fauna of the reserve is typical for the southern taiga of Buropean type.
It includes such animals as the brow: bear, lynx, wolf, marten, elk, wild
boar, flying squirrel, Em'opean here and also the great grouse, black grouse
and hazel hen.

Complex biocenological investigations are being conducted in the reserve in
the spruce forests and a station of the Botanical Institute, USSR Academy of
Sciences, has been organized.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is complex study of the ecologi-
cal systens of spruce and spruce and broad-leaved forests of the Central Rus-
sian Upland, study of the reasons for destruction of spruce forests and nethods
of increasing their biological productivity, study of the factors that regulate
formation of biogeocenoses of different composition and structure and develop-
ment of methods of increasing the population and efficient of valuable fauna
representatives .

Central Chernozem State Forest Reserve iseni Professor V. v. Alekhin
(Kurskaya Oblast, Kursk, Zapovednoye Post Office)

It was organised in 1935 with an area of 4,795 hectares, of which 2,186 hec-
tares are forest area. It is located on the boundary of mrskaya and Belgor-
odskaya Oblasts and consists of five sections: Streletskiy, Kasatskiy, Bar-
kalovka and Bukreyevy Barmy in Kurskaya Oblast and Yamskiy in Belgorodskaya
Oblast.

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Hunting and Game Preserves
attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

The main vegetation formations of the reserve are virgin meadow steppes and
sections of island type broad-leaved forests. A total of 843 species of

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flowering plants grows on the forest reserve territory. The most widely dis-
tributed are shore bra-e, sheep's fescue, Hungarian sainfoin, bristly yarrou,
Ukrainian sandwort, lady's bedstrav, Popov's forget-u-not, leadov sage,
thyme, Marshall's thylae and so on. The aspect of the steppe changes many
tines during the vegetation period.

The fauna of the forest reserve consists mainly of steppe species and includes
approximately 40 species of annals and 50 species of birds: the South Rus-
sian mole, spotted souslik, great jerboa, southern birch mouse, European hare,
bussard, hoopoe, turtle-dove and quail; the elk, roe deer and great bustard
are found.

A station of the Institute of Geography, USSR Acadeuy of Sciences. has been
organized in the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the nature of the
meadow-steppe virgin land, forest-steppe oak forests, their contact zone and
the processes occurring in thick chernosens to work out the scientific funda-
mentals of conservation and reproduction of the Central Chernosen forest-
steppe complex.

‘radzhik SSR
Ranit State Forest Reserve
(redshik SSR, Ordzhonikidseabadskiy Rayon, Remit settle-ant)

It was organized in 1959 with an area of 16,179 hectares, including 3,779 hec-
tares of forest area. It is located on the southern slopes of the horn of
the Gissari range at the interfluve of the Sarday-Mioni and Sarbo Rivers.

It is subordinate to the State Cosnittee of Forestry, ‘radrhik 551! Council of
Ministers.

The forest reserve is represented by walnut-fruit trees and savin groves.
The ancient shrub vegetation includes walnut, Bukhara almond, apple, honey-
suckle, barberry, serviceberry. chelon, Turkistan maple, Regel's staple, wild
nirobelan, Turkistan hawthorn, Hahaleb cherry, long-leaved buckthorn, pis-
tachio, hackberry, willow, poplar, allow-thorn, birch, saving, kokanda rose
and so on: there are many decorative plants--tulips, irises, fritillary, des-
ert-candles and so on. .

The complex of mountain aniuals of Northern ‘radshikistan is typical for the
forest reserve: Siberian ibex, porcipine, long-tailed narnet, stone marten,
white-clawed bear, snow leopard, lynx, wolf, fox, forest dornouse, ‘rurkistan
rat, Carruther's vole, mole-vole and Tolai hare; the Bukhara deer has becoete
acclimatired: birds include the rock dove, Indian paradise flycatcher, Hima-
layan whistling thrush, rock thrush, griffon vulture, oriole, ring-dove, Hin-
alayan snow partridge, Himalayan accentor, Siberian rubythroat, Tibetan raven,
dippers (white-breasted and brown) , grey wagtail, sickle-claw and so on: the
reptiles include chickensnakes (red-banded and mottled) , Turkestan viper.

56

roe omcm use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Asiatic snake-eyed lizard, water snake, blunt-nosed viper. sushi and so on.

The rivers of the forest reserve are inhabited by trout, Schisothorax fish,
'rurkestan catfish and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of conser-

vation and to study the nut-fruit forests and also the natural couples of the
forest reserve.

Tigrovaya Balka State forest Reserve
(Tadzhik sss, Kuuangirskiy Rayon, Dusti settlealent)

It was organized in 1938 with an area of 52,212 hectares, of which 25,461 hw
tares are forest area and 4,329 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in
Southern Tadshikistan in the Vakhsh and Pyandzh River floodplains.

It is subordinate to the State Conittee of Forestry, ‘i‘adzhik 888 Council of
Ministers.

The forest reserve is represented by a twai natural maple: and a sandy des-
ert coupler, oxbou lakes with reed and plus grass thickets, turanga forests
with grass cover of ephemeral grasses: meadow-grass, sedges, poppies and so
on and dune sands alternating with bulky saltwort.

Poplar, tansrisk, olive, licorice, Bernuda grass, Mluropus grass, saltwort,
desert sedge, reed-ace, bush grass and various types of saltwarts.

There are 28 species of manuals in the forest reserve, including the Bukhara
deer, rersian gazelle and spotted hyenay the jackal, desert suitor, stink,
cobra. blunt-nosed viper, saw-scaled viper and so on are canon. A total of
143 species of birds, including the pheasant, pin-tailed sand grouse, goosan-
der, gadwall, whooper swan, golden-eye, tufted duck, great bustard, stone
curlew, desert owl, little owl and so on has been noted. Carp, barbels (Aral
Sea and Turkestan) , Bukhara roach, Turkestan gudgeon, Aspiolucius fish and so
on inhabit the reservoirs of the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of protec-
tion and to increase the population of the Bukhara deer, Persian gazelle.
pheasant and also migratory birds which winter on the reservoirs of the forest
reserve and to study the tugay vegetation.

‘i‘urkmen SSR

Badkhyry State Forest Reserve

(Turin-en SSR, Kushka, Morgunovka settle-ant)

It was organized in 1941 with an area of 87,640 hectares. It is located on

the territory of Takhta-Bazarskiy and Serakhskiy Rayons, Naryyskaya Oblast in
the interfluve of the Tedzhen and Hurgab Rivets.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is subordinate to the State Canittee of Forestry, ‘rurknen 88!! Council of
Ministers.

a natural desert ooeplex, subtropical seni-savannahs, pistachio forests, re-
sidual bald mountains and cliffs are typical for the forest reserve.

There are approxinately 430 species of higher plants in the forest reserve,

10 percent of which are endemic: the Kushkino tulip, Badkhys kuriniya and

so on; Linchevskiy's kusiniya and linguiforn feathergrass are“ found along rare
species. The pistachio, which occipies considerable areas, Afghan fig tree,
rurgana poplar, prickly alnond and so on are canon along ancient plants;
bulbous meadowgrass, various species of sedges, poppies, naloonia, horned
poppy, tulips, irises, honeysuckle, Gages, Russian sea kale, carpion, tansy,
kuriniya, desert lyne grass, ferula, saltwort, nil): vetch, scurf-pea, cuel
thorn, onions (Caspian and giant) and so on dominate among grassy plants.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 37 species of aninals, including
rare animals: wild boar (aboriginal population), Persian gazelle, mountain
goat, leopard, spotted hyena, Indian honey-badger, karakal lynx and so on;
the Afghan vole, great gerbil, steppe cat, porcupine, Siberian ibex and so on
are also found: there are 37 species of reptiles: the monitor, aganas (Xhor
seen and steppe), geckoes, snake-eyed lizards, yashchurki, long-legged stink,
blunt-nosed viper, saw-scaled viper, cobra, sand snakes, arrow snake, chicken-
snakes (variegated and red-banded) , steppe tortoise and so on: there are ap-
proximately 200 .species of birds, including the bay-backed shrike, Indian
tinted laying, counter. Home bussard, griffon vulture, black kite, ant-
eater, Egyptian vulture, black vulture, snake eater, faloon, booted eagle,
)ceklik, desert grouse, sheldrake and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of conser-
vation and restoration of the wild ass, Persian gazelle and nountain goat
population and to study and restore pistachios. '

Krasnovodsk State Forest Reserve

(Turkmen SSR, Krasnovodsk, ulitsa Chapayeva, 15)

It was organized in 1932 as the Gasan-Kuliysk Porest Reserve: it was renaned
the Krasnovodsk Porest Reserve in 1968. It has an area of 262,037 hectares,
of which 192,129 hectares occupy reservoirs. It is located in the Turk-en 35:
along the Caspian Sea coast and the sections of desert adjacent to it.

It is subordinate to the Main ministration of Nature Conservation, Gale
Preserves and Hunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes nine species of manuals and 140 spe-
cies of birds, including rare speciesnthe Indian honey-badger, flamingo and
so on: the franoolin nests here.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is complex study of the nature
of shallow bays of the eastern and southeastern regions of the Caspian Sea and

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the desert adjacent to then, study of the wintering areas of flamingos, divers
and river ducks, bald coats and other birds and observation: of the perennial
changes of the bird populations in the wintering areas and study of the ecol-
ogy of wintering birds.

Repetek State Pox-est Reserve
(Turk-en SSR, Chardzhouskaya (blast, Repetek Station)

It was organised in 1928 and has exited since 1952 in its current boundaries
with an area of 34,274 hectares. It is located in the southeastern part of
the Karakuly.

It is subordinate to the Institute of Deserts, 'mrlmsn 883 Academy of Sciences.

The territory of the forest reserve is a tract of consolidated sand dunes with
shrub thickets and barkhan-stratified sands of the Mu-Dar'ya bar-khan strip
w.th rarefied psaneophytic vegetation. A total of 134 species of aboriginal
plants, 18 species of cultivated trees and shrubs and 59 species not inherent
to the forest reserve territory inported free other locations has been re-
corded in the reserve area. Black saksaul vegetation, where more than 100
species of plants grow, is most abundant. the flora of ephemerals and spher-
eroids (peacock poppy, cal-mile, delphiniuns, nelcolnia. nortuk. drooping
brone, ilak and so on) is abundant.

The predominant vegetation grouping of the forest reserve is white saksaul
thickets where saltwort, ephedra, dog's-tooth violet, Anodendron and so on
are con-on. The vegetation of the transition zone frol aoving barkhan sends
to dune sands is widely distributed. Selinun (Karelin's and feathered),
Litvinov's ferula, small-leaved nil): vetch and so on are typical here.

The vegetation of moving barkhan sands is also distinguished in the forest
reserve. Badcground species of barkhan sands are Anodendron and also ereno-
sparton, smirnovia, selins, heliotropes, dog's-tooth violets (white and
black), ephedra and so on. '

There are 23 species of reptiles in the forest reserve. of which the more con-
non are the Phrynocephalus lizards, yashchurki, skink, grey monitor, saw-
scaled viper, arrowsnake and so on. Nenty-nine species of annals are found:
rodents predatinate and the great gerbil, tolai hare, long-clawed ground
squirrel, long-sored hedgehog and jerboas (northern three-teed, desert and
cab-toed) are cos-on; the nottled polecat, weasel, wolf, jackal, horsac for,
African wildcat, sand cat, caracal lynx, fox, Persian gazelle, porcupine,
dwarf bat and so on are found. Approximately 140 species of birds has been
recorded (there are 229 species in the Karakay), of which 30 species are
nesting birds. An ench species is the saksaul jay; the white-winged wood-
pecker, desert raven, pin-tailed sand grouse, desert nightjar, desert warbler,
yellow wagtail, red-spotted bluethroat, spotted flycatcher, long-eased owl
and so on are abundant. There are many endeaic form of insects; nocturnal
ground beetles, scarabs, tree-borers, tiger and ground beetles, ants and so on
are abundant.

S7-

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of conser-
vation and to study the sakseul thin forest, to study the natural coupler of
the sand desert, the evolution of the barkhan-stratified relief and to devel-
op sethods of asintenance and strengtlnning of sands and methods of adapta-
tion of living organism to arid conditions.

Uzbek SSR
Arel-Paygasbar State Forest Reserve
(Uzbek SSR, Surkhandar'inskaya (blast, 'l'erles, nlits Leningradskaya, 1)

It was organized in 1960 and has existed since 1971 in its current boundaries.
It has an area of 3,850 hectares, of which 2,975 hectares are forest area. It
located on an island of the mu-nar'ya River.

It is subordinate to the State Committee of Forestry, Uzbek 383 Council of
Ministers.

'rugai forests of turange and olive, tanarisk thickets, drhingil, reed thick-
ets, licorice thickets and sand desert sections are typical for the forest
reserve.

There are three species of tugais on the island: poplar that forns a closed
cover with undergrowth of olive and depressed grass cover (the closeness of
the tree stand is up to 80 percent), Russian wild olive or olive frequently
with tanarisk and poplar, thickets of licorice. plume grass, reed, reeaace,
intertwined swallow-wart and dogbane and tamerisk with poplar thickets and
halophyte plants: saltwort, bean caper, camel thorn, halostachys and so on.

Saksaul, Nitraria, Calligonu aphyllua, bean caper and erienthus grow in the
desert part of the forest reserve; there are any ephenerals.

The Bakhara deer, wild boar, wolf, jackal, karagana fox, jungle cat and short-
tailed bandicoot rat inhabit the tugei: 79 species of birdr-the mkesten
rock-dove, stock-dove, canon crane, gray-lag goose, sheldrake, herons (great
white and canon), night heron, kestrel, noor bursard, white-tailed eagle,
black bursard, Turkestan eagle owl, desert owl, little desert owl, Turkestan
.roller, green bee-eater and so on; the pheasant is omen.

There are nany reptiles--desert monitor, steppe agena, blunt-nosed viper and
so on--in'the desert part of the island.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the vegetation and
animal world of tugais, to develop netth of conservation and restoration. of
the natural complex and to study the ecology of the Bukhara deer.

Badey-‘l‘ugay State forest Reserve

(Karakalpakskaya ASSR, Nukus, ulitsa Engel'sa, 102a)

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCML USE ONLY

It was organized in 1971 with an area of 6,497 hectares. of which 5,987 hec-
tares are forest area and 105 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in the
Mu-Dar‘ya River floodplain in Bimiyskiy Rayon.

It is smordinate to the State Cmittee of Forestry, Uzbek 881! Council of
hinisters.

The territory of the forest reserve is covered with tugai vegetation. Persian
asparagus is found uong rare species of plants.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of conser-
vation and restoration of the tugai forest couples and the desert adjacent to
it and to study the ecosystens of islands and peninsulas in the Asu-Dar'ya
River floodplain.

Vardansi Desert-Sand Game Preserve

It was organized in 1975 with an area of 324 hectares. It is located in
Shafrikanskiy Rayon, Bukharskaya Galast.

The territory of the forest reserve is a section of valley-desert forests of
the most widely distributed type of vegetation in Uzbekistan. The predoeinate
tree variety is saksaul (plantations of sdcsaul of artificial origin are bet-
ter represented here): thickets of ferula, ephedra, camel thorn and other
desert plants are also typical.

The main value of the forest reserve is the ancient city of Vardansi buried
under the sand.

Zaaninsk State Forest Reserve
(Uzbek SSR, Syr'dar'inskaya (blast, Dzhizak, ulitsa “nine, 19)

It was organized in_1960 with an area of 10,560 hectares, of which 10.514
hectares are forest area. It is located in the Panir-Alay in the Guralash-
Saya River valley in Zaaninskiy and Bakhnal'skiy Rayons.

It is stbordinate to the State Committee of Forestry, Uzbek 888 Council of
Ministers.

Thin woody vegetation, fescue and wheat-grass associations are found in the
steppe zone of the forest reserve: desert-candle. skullcap, bulbous neadow
grass and other species are found in the steppe zone of the forest reserve.
The vegetation of the timber zone is occupied by juniper thickets (three spe-
cies): barberry, service-berry, ephedra, rose, mountain ash and so on are
typical. Mountain xerophytesuacanthus lemon, kusiniya, oxytropis, speearell
and so on--predoninate in the subalpine zone.

The fauna of the forest reserve is typical for the steppe and forest zones of
the Central Asian mountains. The white-clawed bear, lynx, mountain goat.
bighorn sheep, long-tailed max-net. porcupine and also the Hinslayan snow par-
tridge, rock partridge, rose-colored sterling. Indian nynah and so on are
found here.

59

FOR OFFICIAL [BB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the ecosystems of
high-altitude vegetation zones (steppe. forest and subalpine).

zeravshan Forest Reserve

It was organized in 1915 with an area of 2,518 hectares. It is located in
Bulungurskiy and Dzhambayskiy Rayons. Camarkandskaya (blast.

The main type of vegetation of the forest reserve is budzthorn thickets. 'l‘he
Zeravshan pheasant is canon.

Karakul’ State Forest Reserve
(Uzbek SSR. Mharskaya Oblast, Karakul'skiy Rayon, Alat settlement)

It was organized in 1971 with an area of 21,021 hectares, of which 18,673 hec-
tares are forest are and 333 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in Bu-
khsrskaya (blast between the Anu-Bukhara and Anu-hrakul' irrigation canals
in the lower reaches of the Zeravshan River.

It is swordinate to the State Oo-Iittee of forestry. Uzbek 883 council of
Ministers.

The forest reserve is located on the boundary of an oasis and sand desert and
therefore it can be called a desert-oasis type. The greater part of the ter-
ritory is occupied by aeolian sand tracts in combination with depressiOns,
bulky solonehaks, takyr and dry and flooded lakes. he most cannon mug the
plants are the black saksaul, tamarisk, calligonun. Selinun grass. camel thorn.
saltwort and reeds: there are many halophytes and an abundance of ephemerals

in spring.

The animal world of the forest reserve is abundant. The lakes and channels
are inhabited by sore than 20 species of fish: canon carp, Zeravshan dace,
barbel, Aspius, sichel. silver carp, Amur and so on; there are approximately
40 species of reptiles--Phrynocephalus lizards (sand and cared). desert non.
itor. geckoes (skink and comb-toed). steppe age-a, steppe tortoise, sand
snake, chickensnakes, saw-scaled viper and so on.

A total of 278 species of birds has been recorded in the forest reserve, in-
cluding the stone curlew, saksaul jay,,tugai nightingale. cowbird, little owl,
eagle owl. long-legged bursard, ﬂower-a bursard. Zeravshan pheasant, geese,
ducks and so on. The wild boar. Persian gazelle. jackal. fox. desert cat.
tclai hare. jerboas, great and red-tailed gerbils. long-cared hedgehog. bats
and so on are found among the manuals.

‘me scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the changes of vege-
tation and the animal world of the desert cone with regard to construction -
of irrigation canals.

Kyryl-Imny State Forest Reserve

(Uzbek 883. chardrhouskaya Oblast, Dargan-Ata Post Office)

60

POROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was organised in 1971 with an area of 4,000 hectares, of which 3,100 her
tares are forest area and 820 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in the
Anu-Dar'ya River floodplain.

It is subordinate to the State emittee of forestry, Uzbek 881! Council of
Ministers.

Tugai-sand natural coupleer are typical for the forest reserve. The Bukhara
deer, Persian gazelle and pheasant are especially interesting anatg animals.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the tugai-ssnd coa-
plexes and also to study and develop methods of conservation of the numbers
deer, Persian gazelle, pheasant and other aniaals.

Xyryl-Suy Maintain-Juniper Forest Reserve

(Uzbek SSR, Kashkandar'inskaya Oblast, Yakkabagskiy Rayon, Yakkabag
settlement)

It was organized in 1975 with an area of 17,800 hectares. It is located in
Yakkabagskiy Rayon, Kashkardar'inskaya (blast.

'1‘» species of juniper-Zeravshan and senispherical, staples (Senenov's and
Turkestan), barberries (elongated and round-leaved), peers (co-Ion, Bukhara
and Regel's), gissarian apple, cherries (almond-colored and warty) , hawthorns
(Songorsk, Pontian and Turkestan), Persian mountain ash, round-leaved honey-
suckle, roses (Sasarkand and Pedchenko's) and so on are of special interest
asong woody-shrubby plants.

me fauna of the forest reserve is abundant and diverse. Such species as the
snow leopard, Central Asian ibex, wild boar, 'l'urkestan subspecies of lynx,
‘ryan'-Shan' subspecies of brown bear, ll'urkestan ubspecies of otter, marten,
weasel, tolai hare, wolf, fox, badger, porcupine, long-tailed aunt and so
on are found. me snow partridge, keklik, rock dove, ring-dove, bearded
vulture, Egyptian vulture and so on are cal-on among the birds.

The unique karst Tuerlane‘s cave, framed with stalactites and stalaguites,
is in the forest reserve: the cave is 10-15 meters high, 8-10 meters wide and
625 eaters long.

Nurata Mountain-Nut Forest Reserve

It was organized in 1975 with an area of 22,531 hectares. It is located in
Parshinskiy Rayon, Syrdar'inskaya (blast.

woody-shnbby vegetation grows primarily in the sayakh area. The nut forests
are usually confined to well-hoistened rich soils and are located on northern
slopes well protected frost cold winds. Under favorable conditions a walnut
tree reaches 36 meters in height with diameter up to 2.3 esters and develops
a thick crown. Several types of nut trees--ponaceom, plum. nixed, nixed-
grass and so on—are found in the forest reserve. Pouceous nut trees are

61

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

most frequently found. These are rather thin plantations with walnut and
Sievers apple trees in the first level and wild mirobelsn and hawthorn in the
second level; the grass cover is well developed.

Plum nut trees are also found, where the first level is formed of walnut and
the second is formed of wild mirwobelan, sievers apple, maple and so on. Such
varieties as mulberry, ash, Rahaleb cherry and so on also grow in the nut
forests.

The animal world of the forest reserve is abmdant--the wild boar, fox, wolf,
porcupine and hare are numerous: the bear and badger are found, there are

many species of birds and tn-re are snakes. A rare species—Severtsov's sheep,
recorded in the “Red Book'--is found.

Chatkal'skiy State Forest Reserve
(Uzbek SSR, Tashkentskaya Ohlast, Verkhnechirchikskiy Rayon, Parkent Village)

It was organized in 1947 with an area of 35,255.23 hectares, of which 10,450
hectares are forest area and 13,839 hectares are meadows and pastures. It is
located in the western part of the '1'yan'-Shan'.

It is subordinate to the Main Aduinistration of Nature Conservation, Game
Preserves and hunting, USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

Ecosystem of mixed grass dry steppe of the Turan type and woody-shrwby vege-
tation (nut-fruit trees and juniper thickets), high-mountainous steppe. pis-
tachios, alpine meadows and cliffs are typical for the forest reserve. A total
of 712 species of higher plants, approximately 40 species of trees and shrubs
and 72 rare and endemic species is known; there are many wild fruit plants-
pear, apple, wild mirobelans, cherries, barberry and so on.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes 31 species of mar-ale: motmtain
goat, wild boar, roe deer, bear, snow leopard, porcupine, Hensbier‘s marmet,
snow partridge, keklik, griffin vulture and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is complex study of the ecologi-
cal systems of mountain forests and meadows of the western horns of the Chat-
kal'skiy Range, development of methods of restoration and conservation of
mountain forests on reserve and non-reserve territories, study of savin, wild
fruit and other trees of the Western 'i‘yan'-Shan' and methods of conservation,
restoration and efficient use of then and the search for methods of restora-
tion and increase of the population of the mountain goat, snow leopard, keklik,
snow partridge and so on.

Ukrainian SSR
Azov-sivash Game-Bunting Preserve

(Ukrainian SSR, xhersonskaya (blast, Genichesk)

62

FOROFFICIALLSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was organized in 1957 on the basis of the Asovo-sivash Forest Reserve
(1927). It has an area of 33,697 hectares (including water basin) and 8,497

hectares are located on land. It is located on the coastal islands of the
Sea of Azov and the Sivash. '

It is subordinate to the Ministry of Forestry, mtrainian $83.

The game and hunting preserve includes Biryuchiy Island in the Sea of Asov and
four islands on the sivash: Kuyuktuk, churyuk, Hartyniy and Kitay. The dunes,
salt lakes and sand and solonchak vegetation are of interest in the preserve
territory. Tall reed thickets, plantings of olive, false acacia, tamarisk and
so on are located in the coastal parts of the islands. The nature of the is-

lands of the "netting Sea” (as the Sivash is frequently called) is typical for
the alkaline steppe and solonchaks of the pre-sivash era.

Colonies of herring gulls ('martyny"), sea doves, terns and other birds are
similar to the bird bazaars of the Transarctic region. The bustard, demiselle
crane and other. nest on the territory of the preserve. Deer, fallow deer and
pheasant have become acclimatised on Biryuchiy Island.

The scientific profile is to develop methods of conservation and reproduction
of valuable species of local fauna and acclimatired species.

Askaniya-Nova State Forest Reserve

(Ukrainian SSR, Khersonskaya (blast, Chaplinskiy Rayon, Askaniya-Nova
settlement)

It was organized in 1921 and has existed since 1956 in its modern boundaries,
with an area of 11,000 hectares. It is located in Rhersonskaya Galast in the
South Ukrainian arid sheep's fescue-feathergrass virgin steppe.

It is subordinate to the Southern Division, All-Union Academy of Agricultural
Sciences imeni V. I. Lenin.

The Askaniya steppe numbers 417 species of plants; cereal grasses predominate--
feathergrasses, fescue and hare-grass. Tulips, irises, mullein, pinks, sand-
wort, goat's-beard and so on are abundant among the mixed grass. There are
more than 150 species and forms of trees and shrubs in the arboretum. Approx-
imately 40 species of plants of the forest reserves are endemic to the southern
Ukrainian SSR; there are 56 rare and lo disappearing species.

Among the birds larks, quail, tawny pipit, cannon partridge, steppe eagle,
pale harrier and the kestrel are nunerous; the demoiselle crane, stone curlew,
bustard and little bustsrd are rare. The souslik, great gerbil and others are
comn in the forest reserve: the Himalayan marmet has been reacclinatised.

The Askaniya-Nova contains such species of animals as Prrewalski's horse, ante-
lopes (eland, gnu and nilgai), zebra, ostriches (rhea and emu), pheasants,
whooper swan, black swan and so on.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is acclinatisation and develop-
ment of methods of conservation of rare species of animals, conservation of

a section of virgin fescue-feathergrass steppe of the stbzone of arid feather-
grass steppes, to study the dynsnics of the vegetation cover and the biology
of promising wild-growing fodder grasses and to develop methods of conserva-
tion and restoration of the vegetation cover of the forest reserve steppe.

Dnepr'reterev State Forest and aunting Preserve

(Ukrainian ssa. Kievskaya Oblast. Kievo-Svyatoshinskiy Rayon, Sukhosuch'ye
Village)

' It was organized in 1968 with an area of 30,265 hectares, of which 17,210
hectares are forest area and 9,332 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in
the northern part of Kievskaya Oblast (the southern part of the eastern Poles'-
ye) in the mixed forest zone.

It is subordinate to the Ministry of Forestry. Ukrainian 8811.

There are many swamps and lakes in the forest reserve. The manuals include
the wild boar, roe deer and beaver: the red deer has been acclimatised and the
black grouse and cosmon partridge (rare) are found: there is an abundance of
aquatic and marsh wildlife.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of conser-
vation and reproduction of the natural couple: of the eastern Poles'ye.

Zalesslroye State Forest and Hunting Preserve

(Ukrainian SSR, Kievskaya Oblast, 3rovarskiy Rayon. Bogdanovka Post Office)

It was organised in 1965 on the basis of a hunting preserve (1957). It has an
area of 35,089 hectares, of which 11,908 hectares are forest area and 150 hec-

tares are reservoirs. It is located in Brovarskiy Rayon, Kievskaya Oblast,
on the left bank of the Desna River.

It is subordinate to the Hinistry of Forestry. Ukrainian $83.

The main forest-forming variety is pine. Broad-leaved forests with thick un-
dergrowth are found in the Ovrut natural boundary. Ancient earthworks that
served to shelter the residents of Kievskaya Rus' during the onslaught of ag-
gressors are located in the natural boundary.

Kanevskiy State Forest Reserve

(Ukrainian SSR, Cherkasskaya Oblast, Kanevskiy Rayon)

It was organized in 1931 and has existed since 1968 in its current boundaries.
It has an area of 1,042 hectares, of which 952 hectares are forest area and 1

hectare is reservoir. It is located in Cherkasskaya oblast on the right bank
of the Dnepr River.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is subordinate to the Ministry of Higher and Secondary Specialized Educa-
tion, Ukrainian $88.

The territory of the forest reserve is represented by typical Central Dnepr
landscapes. The Kanevskiye Mountains are an interesting geological forma-
tion: there are outcrops of deposits of the Triassic and Jurassic periods
and the fossils of ancient animals are mnerous; a settlement of ancient Isn-
moth hunters has been found.

Intensive erosion processes are found in the forest reserve.

The meadow vegetation on Kruglik Island, the hornbeam oabroods of the Kanev-
skiye nountains, the hornbean forest and steppe sections are interesting. The
flora of the forest reserve nubers approximately 800 species of flowering
plants, approximately 150 species of mosses and lichens and 500 species of
mushrr one. There are many relic and endemic species of plants.

Amng the animals the lynx, roe deer, wild boar, badger, marten and squirrel
are com-on; there is a colony of beavers on Kruglik Island and the otter is
found.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of conser-
vation and to study the unique natural couple): of the Kanevskiye nountains and
also the biocsnoses of the forest reserve (their composition and productivity)
and sections of the relic hornbean forest and to study erosion processes.

Carpathian State Forest Reserve
(Ukrainian SSR, Ivano-Prankovskaya oblast)

It was organized in 1968 with an area of 12,672 hectares, of which 11, 913
hectares are forest area and 691 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in
Ivano-Prankovskwa and Zakarpatskaye Cblasts.

It is stbordinate to the Ministry of the Timber and Woodworking Industry,
Ukrainian SSR.

The zone distribution of vegetation is well marked in the Chernogorsk tract of
the Carpathian Mountains. Yew, swiss stone pine, savin, European green alder,
rhododendron, larch, Hungarian lilac, nonkshood, aster, colusbine and so on
are common in the forest reserve. A total of 4 endemic, l7 rare and 4 disap-
pearing species of plants has been recorded.

The animals include the deer, roe deer, wild boar, marten, ermine, lynx,
bear, wildcat, squirrel, snow vole and also the great grouse, black grouse,
hazel hen, black stork, eagle owl and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of re-
storing the natural compleaoes of the high-mountain landscape of the Carpathian
Mountains and also of the rare and disappearing species of plants and animals.

65

FOR OII‘l-1CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Crimean State Forest and Hunting Preserve
(Ukrainian SSR, Krymskaya Oblast, Alushta, ulitsa Putsatova, 29)

It was organized in 1957 on the basis of a forest reserve. It has an area of
30,741 hectares, of which 28,010 hectares are forest area and 61 hectares ere
reservoirs. It is located in the mountain part of the Crimea.

It is subordinate to the Ministry of Forestry, Ukrainian ssa.

Beech, oak and pine forests are located on the slopes of the mountains and
they cover approximately 90 percent of the territory. The main forest-forming
varieties are oaks (pedunculate, sessile and pubescent) and pines (col-on and
Scots): oriental hornbeam, maples, lindens, European alder and elm are found
in the form of an adnixture and the shnbs include hawthorns, oriental horn-
beam, smoketree, cornel, filbert, spindle-trees, dogwood, barberry, mountain
ash. roses and so on. There are relic and endemic species: cos-Ion yew, ar-
boresoent juniper, coral root and so on. The total flora of the forest and
hunting preserve nubers approximately 1,030 species of plants, including
approximately 100 species of trees and shrubs.

The Crimean red deer, roe deer, mouflon, wild boar, stone marten, badger and
fox are typical for the preserve fauna. six species of freshwater fish, 4
species of amphibians, 10 species of reptiles and 39 species of manals have
been noted; there are 162 species of birds in the mountain-forest part. a
branch of the preserve is swan island near the northwestern coast of the penin-
sula where large accumulations of birds for- during migration, moulting and
wintering, including several thousand mute swans. A total of 192 species of
birds has been recorded on swan islands.

The scientific profile of the forest and hunting preserve is to develop methods
of conservation and reproduction of the natural complex of the maintain-forest
Crimea.

Lugansk State Forest Reserve with Strel'tsovskaya Steppe and Kondrashsv
Forestry Branches

(Ukrainian SSR, Voroshilovgradskaya Oblast, Imganskoye-‘Z station, ulitsa
Rubeshnaya, 95)

It was organized in 1968 with an area of 992 hectares, of which 448 hectares
are forest area and 12 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on the left bank
of the Northern Donets River floodplain.

It is subordinate to the Institute of Zoology. Ukrainian 888 Academy of
Sciences.

Ploleain tree plantations and northern versions of mixed grass-feecue-
feathergrass steppes are typical for the forest reserve.

66

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sheep's fescue, feathergrass, fescues. Syreyshchikov's bent, snail-reed.
ground cherry, epiraea. tartar saple, spindle-tree and so on are typical pong
the plants. A total of 500 species of plants, of which 8 are rare, is known
in the forest reserve.

The fauna include 24 species of Ian-sale (including the European bobak-sarnst)
and 90 species of birds.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the natural land-
scapes of floodplane forests. neadows and steppes and to develop eethods of
conservation and reproduction of the bobak-narnet and deesan.

Hys Mart'yan State torest Reserve
(Ukrainian 58R, Crimea, Yalta, Nikitskiy Botanical Garden)

It wu organised in 1973 with an area of 240 hectares, of which 100 hectares
are forest area and 120 hectares are reservoirs. It is contained in the Ni-
kitskiy Botanical Garden on the plains of the section.

It is subordinate to the Southern Division of vasnuan. [All-Onion Academy of
Agricultural Sciences ineni V. I. basin].

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study and preserve in the
natural state the natural coupler typical for the oak-juniper forests and
shnb thickets of the southern coast of the Crimea with the adjacent Black Sea
basin.

Poles'ye State Forest Reserve
(Ukrainian SSR, Zhitonirekaya (blast, Olevskiy Rayon)

It was organized in 1968 with an area of 20,097 hectares, of which 17,088
hectares are forest area and 8 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in the
upper reaches of the tbort' River.

It is subordinate to the Ministry of Forestry, Ukrainian 85R.

Forest and marsh biocenosee of the Volynskoye Poles'yeupine forests, subpine
forests, peat bogs with cranberries, relic thickets of cannon rhododendron and
plantations of sesille oak-mare typical for the forest reserve.

The elk. lynx. nutria, nuskrat, roe deer, wild boar, forest narten and so on
are cosubn along the animals: the birds include the black grouse, great grome,
hazel hen, cannon partridge, black stor): and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of conser
vation and to stud] the typical pine forests and srbpine forests and peat bogs

of the Volynskoye Poles'ye and to study the nutria colonies.

67‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ukrainian State Steppe Forest Reserve
(Ukrainian 88R. Donetskaya (blast, Novoezovskiy Rayon, monitovo Post Office)

It was organized in 1961 on the basis of four forest reservesnliikhaylovskaya
tselina, Strel' ovskaya steppe. nuonutovskaya steppe and Kamennyye sogily.
It has an area of 1,634 hectares, of which 3 hectares is occupied by reser-
voirs. It is located on meterritory of Donetskaya. Luganskaya and Su-skaya
Oblasts.

It is subordinate to the Institute of Botany, Ukrainian 883 Acadeuy of
Sciences.

me forest reserve is represented by virgin meadow steppes (Hikhaylovskaya
tselina) . nixed grass-fescue-feathergrass virgin steppe on pre-Aaov chernozens
(lawmutovskaya steppe) , a rocky steppe and also vegetation of granite cliffs
(Kanennyye mogily) with narrow endemic species. A total of 540 species of
plants, including 8 rare species, is known in the forest reserve.

The typical species of Khonutovskaya steppe are cereal grasses: fescus.
feathergrass, wheat-grass, brone and so on; there is an daundance of Russian
sea kale: endemic and relic plants--tall gypsophila, Asov snakeweed, Scythian
greenweed. Chernyayev's flax and so on--are found on limestone deposits: buck-
thorn and blackthorn are common among the shrubs.

Kamennyye mogily is distinguished by an abundance and diversity of ephelaerals
and ephesIervoids. Hyacinths, granite tulips, star of Bethlehem goose onions,
chickweed, alyssum, prominents, pea. screw and so on grow here.

Mikhaylovskaya tselina is a nesophyllous version of mixed grass-cereal grass-
seadow steppe with predominance of tyrsov and nixed grass-fescue-tyrsov group-
ings. typical plants are spring adonis, anwdrop anemone, Hungarian iris,
meadow sage and feathergrasses; species endemic to the European 0881! are found
--Yevgeniy's carnation, cuneate delphiniun, rose iris and so on.

The mar-net. fox. weasel, modelled polecat, European hare, mole rat, hamster,
great gerbil, iong-eared hedgehog, Renard's viper, yellow-bellied rat snake,
water snake, consaon partridge and so on inhabit the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study steppe ecosystems,

to develop methods of conservation of steppe sections in the forest-steppe and
steppe zone and to study the ecology of rare and endemic species.

Black See State Forest Reserve

(Ukrainian SSR, Rhersonskaya (blast. Golaya pristan', ulitsa Dneprovskaya, '1)

It was organized in 1927 with an area of 63,806 hectares. of which 417 hec'.~
tares are forest area and 51,200 hectares are reservoirs. It is located in
Khersonskaya and Nikolayevskaya Oblasts along the Black Sea coast from the
DneprBug estuary to Dsharylgach Bay.

68

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is subordinate to the Institute of Zoology, Ukrainian 688 Academy of
Sciences.

Marked fescue-wormood steppcs, solonchaks, birch, oak, pine grave and alder
forest, sand dunes, salt lakes and coastal (including island) ecosystem and
Scythian sounds are typical for the forest reserve. A total of 605 species
of plants is knovm, including jurinea, grain-leaved sea—lavender, Dnepr broom,
downy-flowered wheat grass, field vorswood, sand centaury, canon whitlow
grass, alyssun, dead-nettle, violets, forget-ms-nots, canpenula, squill,
buttercup, feathergrasses, solonchak aster, hairy vetch, iris, Dnepr mother-
of-thyme and Seguer's spurge; woody varieties include oaks. elm, Dnepr birch
and so on.

The forest reserve is inhabited by 43 species of manuals, 280 species of birds,
8 species of reptiles, 5 species of amphibians and ‘0 species of fish. The
main value of the forest reserve is as nesting locations, wintering areas and
migratory routes of birds, among which are my valuable and rare species.
Seagulls and terns are numerous and there are ducks in large quantities. The
forest reserve serves as a resting spot in the migration of geese, swans,
stints and sparrows and its bays are the most important wintering location of
swans and ducks. The pheasant, cannon partridge, herons, storhs and so on
nest in the forest-steppe sections. Among the rare species are found the bus-
tard, little bustard, red-breasted goose, denoiselle crane and white-tailed
eagle.

Among the reptiles in the forest reserve, the four-banded snake, Renard's
viper, variegated lizard, sand lizard and moth snakes (water and grass) are
comon; the mammals include the spotted seal, great jerboa, thick tailed
three-teed jerboa, sole rat, hedgehog, muskrat, steppe polecat and so on.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the ecology of the
black-headed gull, ducks and other birds and also to study the coastal ecosys-
tems and ecosystems of steppe sections.

Yalta State Mountain-Forest Reserve

(Ukrainian SSR, Yalta)

It was organised in 1973 with an area of 14,180 hectares, of which 10,872
hectares are forest area and 1 hectare is reservoirs.

It is subordinate to the Ministry of Forestry, Ukrainian SSR.

The forest reserve includes 1,800 species of plants and nany rare and endemic
species.

Estonian SSR
Viydu-Myae State Forest Reserve

(Estonian SSR, Kingiseppskiy Rayon, Lyumands Post Office, Viydu Village)

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

It was organized in 1958 with an area of 593 hectares, of which 461 hectares
are forest areas. It is located on Lake SeareIaa and along the Baltic Sea
coast.

It is subordinate to the ninistry of Forestry and Nature Conservation. Botani-
an 883.

The forest reserve is divided into three parts by relief: a plateau section
adjacent to the western Saaremaa lowland. steep terrace and level earshy sec
tion. Mixed and in places sarshy forests predo-inatex there are alpine and
oak forest and heath forests.

he nain value of the forest reserve is rare relic and endsnic species of
plants and vegetation associations. Such species as esel rattlebox, podurlo-
vatyy rush. uhitebean, rough-toothed horsetail, forest apple. con-on yew.
hairy oxytropis, kashubskiy vetch, spurge olive, ivy, alpine buttervort.
eountain St. John's wort, Siberian iris, lady's slipper, narrow helleborine.
fragrant orchid and pyramidal orchid are found among the plants preserved in
the Estonian $511 in the forest reserve.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study rare and relic species
of plants and plant associations.

vil'sandiskiy State Porest Reserve
(Estonian 883. Kingiseppskiy Rayon)

It was organised in 158 as the Vaykaskiy Forest Reserve and has existed since
1971 in its current boundaries, with an area of 10,689 hectares. It is lo-
cated on more than 100 narine rocky islands.

It is subordinate to the ninistry of Forestry and Nature Conservation. Eston-
ian $811.

the preserved islands theuelves, which are dolomite coral reefs of the wars
Silurian Sea, are interesting.

The vegetation is rather sparse and halophytes predominate. This is the only
habitation of Danish scurvy grass in Estonia. The most important object of
protection is the eider colony (approxinately 200 birds). Besides the eider,
pochards and reel ducks, eergansere (goosander and red-breasted) and grey-lag
geese nest in the forest reserve; the mute even is included among the rare
species. Not only the population but the species composition of the ornitho-
logical fauna has been increased as a result of protection. The Atlantic

surre, model-beaked tern, purple sandpiper and bee-eater have appeared here
during the past few years.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to develop methods of protec-
tion and to study the species composition. population and ecology of birds of
the marine islands (eiders. red-bnasted eerganser, terns, sheldrakes, grey-
1ag goose and so on) and also of animals.

70

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hatsaluskiy State Forest Reserve
(Estonian SSR, Ehaapsaluskiy Rayon, Likhula Post Office)

It was organized in 1958 with an area of 13,500 hectares, of which 2,066.3
hectares are forest area and 2,500 hectares are reservoirs. It is located on
a plain in the western part of Estonia at the muth of the Kasari River: the
water basin of the Hatssluskiy Bay and the archipelago of the Vyeynaneri Is-
lands are included in the forest reserve.

It is subordinate to the hinistry of Forestry and nature Conservation, Estonian
88R.

Wet and flooded meadows. forest-meadows, reednace thickets, bullrush and reed
are typical for the forest reserve and misture-loving and aquatic vegetation
are col-on: there are many orchids in the forest-Isadore. this is a region of
ease nesting, insulting and resting during nigration of aquatic birds: there is
a grey-lag goose colony in the forest reserve.

11w scientific profile of the reserve is to develop "anode of protection and
to study migratory and nesting birds.

Nigulaskiy State Forest Reserve
(Estonian SSR, Kilingi-Nyme, ulitnPyarnu, 2)

It was organised in 1958 with an area of 2,730 hectares, of which 699 hectares
are forest area. It is located in the northeast of the East mropean Plain.

It is encompassed by the tract of the Nigulaskiy upstreae marsh and the forests
surrounding this tract.

It is subordinate to the Ministry of Forestry and nature Conservation, Estonian
SSR.

Ecosystems of upstream marshes and the surrounding forests for-ed primarily
of birch are protected in the forest reserve. Peat bogs that form deposits
several meters thick predominate in the marsh. Scotch heather, black Vhortle-
berry, ddsrf birch, Korean rhododendron. cranberry, butterbur. sundew, cloud-
berry, cottongrass and so on are widely distributed among marsh plants. There
are my rare species of plants in firbroad-leaved forests.

The fauna of the forest reserve includes animals typical for European forests:
elk, roe deer, wild boar, badger, fox and so on: approximately 97 species
of birds are known.

The scientific profile of the forest reserve is to study the process of bog-
ging up and to study the succession of plant associations and also the dynas-
ice of the populations and ecology of individual species of animals and plants.

71

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Forest Reserves Organised in 1976
ltabardino-Belkarskaya State Forest Reserve

It has an area of 53,300 hectares and is located on the northern slopes of
Kain Caucasian Ridge in Sovetskiy and Chagaskiy Rayons of the Kabardino-
Balkarskays A8811 in the Chereka Balkarshiy and Bisengiyskiy and Chegeln River
basins.

It is stbordinate to the Main ministration of Hunting and Cane Preserves at-
taohed to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

The territory of the forest reserve includes the main mass of mountainous .000
taster peaks with special climate and geomorphological structure. The tur,
dzssois, snow leopard, snow partridge and so on are found along the animals.

The forest reserve was organised to study the natural cmpleaoes of high noun-

tain northern slopes of the Caucasus and rare and endemic species of plants
and anisals.

Malaya Sos'va Stats l’orest Reserve

It has an area of 92,900 hectares and is located in Sovetskiy Rayon of Khanty-
Hansiysk National Okrug, Wunsnskaya Oblast.

It is srbordinate to the Main Administration of hunting and Cass Preserves '
attadued to the RSPSR Council of ninisters.

Pine forests, larch and birch forests, floodplains with lakes and marshes and
so on are typical for the landscape of the forest reserve.

The wild reindeer is common among the animals: elk, sable, lynx, mink, otter
and suskrat are numerous: the great grouse population is high. There is a
protected sone around the forest reserve within which beaver colonies have
been located.

The forest reserve was organized to conserve and study the taiga natural cal-
plea of Western Siberia and the aboriginal population of the Oral beavers
and valuable species of commercial hunting anieals, birds and fish.

-Vrangel‘ Island State Porest Reserve

It has an area of 795,600 hectares and is located on Vrangel' and Geral'd
Islands.

It is subordinate to the vain ministration of Hurting and Game Presence at-
tached to the 3513!! Council of Ministers.

The islands on which the forest reserve is located are related to the Arctic
desert swrone. Despite the extreme conditions, one can encounter stall areas
of locked vegetation and the initial stages of the soil-forming process. The

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
vegetation is distinguished in nature by Arctic lichen, moss and grass
wilderness. The grass-shat, grass-moss and white dryas-nined grass-lichen
associations are of special interest. me flora of the forest reserve in-
cludes 312 species of plants.

The polar bear and snow goose—species included in the “Red book," are of
special value among the aniuals.

One of the main birthing locations of the polar bear is located on Vrangel'
Island. More than 250 female bears arrange their lsirs and bring up their
offspring here. he main ease of the lairs is concentrated along the northern.
western and eastern slopes of the Oren-med, Tundrovaya and Kitovaya Mountains.
me USSR's largest walm lair is located in the gene preserve. ‘me Pacific
and king cider nest here, the brent goose and snowy owl are rare and the Arr
tic fox is cannon.

The game preserve is organised to conserve and study the animal and plant
world of the island part of the Arctic.

Sayan-Shushen' State Forest Reserve

It has an area of 389,600 hectares. It is subordinate to the Kain ministra-
tion of Hunting and Game Preserves attached to the RSPSR Council of Ministers.

Mixed flora elements and fauna of the Altay, Sayen, Tuvy and makassii are
typical to the game preserve. Endemic, rare and disappearing species of
plants and animals are found. The vegetation represented by a number of
fornationsufrosl mountain-steppe to alpine and tundra--is diverse. The Siber-
ian ibex and reindeer of the nountain-taiga form are cos-non along the animals:
the Siberian red dog and Altay snow partridge, entered in the "Red book," are
found anong rare species.

The game preserve was created to protect the aountain-taiga natural complexes.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "lesnaya prauyshlennoet'”, 1977

6521
cso: Slab/088
-5")-

73

FOIOI'IICIALUSIONLY