FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10178
10 December 1981

USSR Report

LIFE SCIENCES

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(FOUO 17/81).

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. . Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ”RS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itans are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the [1.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
LIFE SCIENCES
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(P000 17/81)

CourEnrs

HUMAN FACTORS

Substantiating Procedure for Investigating Individual Decision
Making Characteristics in Conflict Situations..................

Dependence of Strategy of Search for Decision on Type of

Thinking-seasssoosssossassess.so.oaoooaoeaaooa0.000000000000000

Psychophysiological Description of Patigua Based on
Activation Indicatorsa.to.D...OD..0.00000000000000000000000D0..

Cohesion as Factor of Group Efficiency...........................

Investigation of Situational Social Attitudes of Polar

Explorers......................................................
Fifth Management Psychology Selinar..............................
Scientific-Practical Conference on M60 School of Psychology......
Research Methodology in Engineering and Labor Psychology.........

PSYCHOLOGY

Emotional Regulation of Verbal Behavior..........................
Book on Urgent Problems of Psychology of Personality Rsvieued....
Monographs on Projective Methods in Personality Study Reviewed...

Fourth All-Union Coordinating Conference on Probleas of
socialist competitionoiltttOIDOOOOOOOOOIOOOIOOOOOOI...OOIOCOQOC

~ a - [III - USSR - 21a

FOR OFFICIAL "SF ONIN

10

19
32

41
50

55
58

93
105
108

112

5&T PI
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Seminar on Probleus of Social-Psychological Training. . . . . . . . . . . . .

Subjects of Dissertations for Degree of Candidate of
P.’Ch°1°81cll sciencesooooooooeooooooeoeeocoorooeooooovcccoooto

Infomtion on Authors of 'VOPROSY PSIIHOIDGII', July-August

1981.00cooeeooooooooutoooeeoeoooooaoonot.otootoovoooooeoooeoeoo
Young Psycmlosiats “01d R‘sulu “uetenceeeotoooooooooeoooeeoeo

Author List for 'VOPROSY PSIKEOLOGII', May-June 1981.............

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1114

117

119
122
126
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HUMAN FACTORS

SUBSTANTIATINC PROCEDURE FOR INVESTIGATING INDIVIDUAL DECISION MAKING
CHARACTERISTICS IN CONFLICT SITUATIWS

Moscow VOPROSY PSIKEOLOGII in Russian No 6. Jul-Aug 81 pp 127-131
LKrticle by A. N. Kovaleg]

_/_'rex_t_/ It is well known that at the present stage of the scientific and technical
revolution mankind's power and technical equi ment greatly exceeds its capacity for
making prompt and substantiated decisions E9. The use of mathematical methods and
modern computer hardware in the problems of man's decision making in various, in-
cluding conflict, situations is a promising way of eliminating this disproportion.
The. appearance of the mathematical game theory, which studies formal decision making
models under conflict conditions, was a natural stage in the development of inves-
tigations in this area.

The limiting possibilities of this theory are clearly outlined B. One of its
linitations is the fact that. when the real behavior of people carrying out their
activity in accordance with the infinite diversity of their needs is modeled within
the framework of the game theory. the psychological rules of this activity are ei-
ther ignored completely. or are taken into account in a generalized manner. on the
average. whereas the "application of general psychological rul_e_s to life should al-
ways be mediated by the knowledge of individual differences" 1137. 0a the other
hand. psychology. which has long included decision making problems in the sphere of
its interests, cannot bypass the positive experience accumlated with the formal-
logical approach to the investigation of decision making processes in conflict sit-
uations, in particular with the use of computers for the solution of various prob-
lems pertaining to this area. At the same time. it is appropriate to note that an
active involvement of computers in the process of man's decision making. along with
expanding his intellectual capabilities, at times leads to certain changes in the
"style" of human thinking by including in its structure operations. the possibility
for the performance of which is offered to man by computers. because "not the de-
termining tendency. that is, goal (beginning and end), determines the entire course
and structure of the process. but the average moment. 'lhe properties of the tool
are the functional center and they determine the entire course of processes. their
change and so forth. The entire specificity of behavior is determined by the aver-
age member of the instrumental act" _/_27.

On the basis of the expressed view, turning directly to the problem of development

of a procedure for an experimental investigation of individual decision linking
characteristics in conflict situations and, at the same time. taking into account

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL USEiNVLY

the significant potentials of games in the modeling of such situations. as well as
the role and possible functions of computers in their resolution, we considered it
advisable to include a computer in the experiment, formulating it in the form of a
game between man and computer. The introduction of a computer into an experimental
situation makes it possible to solve a number of diverse problems, whose concreti-
zation depends on the goals and conditions of the experiment. By means of it it is
possible to create a "problem environment" imitating conflict conditions. It can
act in the role of man's assistant and Opponent and makes it possible directly in
the course of the experiment to immediately change its conditions depending on the
resultssnd navary thesethodsof training the tested individual (in "adviser" and
"instructor" modes) and the computer's"atrength of the game" (in the "opponent"
mode) and so forth.

The inclusion of a computer in the experiment also makes it possible to solve the
problem of an objective recording of the characteristics of behavior of the tested
individuals during the game for the purpose of detecting their individual charac-
teristics in the subsequent analysis. The package of applied computer programs
(the Alisa automated logical game system) designed for games between man and com-
puter. which was especially developed at the laboratory for mathematical modeling
of mental processes of the Scientific Research Institute of General and Pedagogical
Psychology of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences. includes a dossier system
for every tested individual, where objective data on the tested individual, the
moves and answers of the tested individual and the computer, the time spent on
thinking them out and the elements of the dialog between man and computer are re-
corded. At present work is done on the further expansion of the capabilities of
the Alisa system. Its organization envisages the extraction of information from
the computer memory in various combinations and print-out for a subsequent anal-
ysis of the data files unified according to the criteria of interest to the exper-
imenter--methods of the game. its time parameters. the type of thinking of tested
individuals. their age. sex and education and so forth.

Since a game always represents a conflict of personalities and antagonism between
characters_ the selection of a computer as man’s game partner also has the advan-
tage that it makes it possible to fix at a permanent level the characteristics of
one "personality" (computer) for the purpose of creating the same experimental con-
ditions for all tested individuals. at the same time. giving the experimenter wide
possibilities of varying these characteristics in accordance with the specific pur-
poses of the experiment.

The selection of a computer as a tool of investigation was only the first step in
the development of the procedure of interest to us. The next step consisted in the
solution of certain individual problems. that is:

1) selection of specific models of conflict situations (games) most suitable for
the investigation and recording of individual decision making characteristics;

2) performance of preliminary experiments for the purpose of determining the pos-

sibilities of the procedure for detecting the characteristic features manifested by
various tested individuals in the course of the game;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“WISEONLY

3) preliminary classification of individual characteristics according to the
stages of a conflict activity.

The results of the solution of the indicated problem are briefly presented below.

1) when selecting games. we tried to reflect the following characteristic features
in the model of a conflict situation:

a) its specific duration and the need to establish a sequence of specific opera-
tions (perhaps even one-type operations) for its resolution;

b) changeability of the situation in the process of its resolution and the need to
take into account the results of previously performd actions;

c) the need for decision making under conditions of uncertainty in codaination with
the possibility of applying logical actions for reducing it;

d) a sufficient diversity of final situations denoting a victory in this conflict;
e) a sufficient diversity of ways of attaining a victory and their nonequivalence.

f) the possibility of attaining a victory at any stage of the conflict, including
the initial stage.

Furthermore. the following condition was rude: The game should minimally affect
the specific habits or professional experience of the tested individuals.

As a result of an analysis of various games, three out of the set of variants of

the logical game "Symbols" representing modifications of the luster-mind game known
in our country by the name "Bulls and Cows" were selecteg_ as the first model of a
conflict situation meeting the enumerated requirements _/_3/. In general form the
"Sysbols" game can be described as follows. A set containing a various elements
(figures, letters. systole. concepts and so forth) is announced to both partici-
pants in the game ("opponents"). Each participant secretely from the other lust
make from them an ordered sequence containing m ale-ants (in general there are no
constraints on n and n). The task of the participants is to determine the sequence
thought of by the opponent in a minimum nutter of moves. The moves are nde in turns.
Each move consists of the "trial" of one participant and the "answer" that another
participant gives to this "trial." Any ordered sequence of m sydyols forming part
of the announced set of n elements selected by the participant in the game is a
"trial." No hunters are the "answer." The first (nutter of "bulls") is equal to
the number of elements of the "trial," which in the held place and type coincide
with the elements of the sequence thoughtof md the second (nusber of "cows") is equal
to the number of elements of the "trial" forming part of the sequence thought of, but
not coinciding with them in place. The participant who first got the answer--m
"bulls," zero "cows"--is considered the winner. The "Sysbols" game is finite. How-
evor, the nurber of personal moves (strategies) in it is Can", which offers the ex-
perimenter wide possibilities of varying the conditions of the game for the purpose
of disclosing the characteristics of behavior of the tested individual in the range
from the finite to infinite game. which the "Syd>ols" game seems to man with a
growth of m and n.

WWWONLY
FOP. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the first two selected variants of the game figures served as elements of the
announced set: for the first variant n1-5. for the second variant nzrlo and for
both variants m-S. A repetition of the same figures in the nuwer thought of was
prohibited and the use of zero in a high order was permitted. In such form the se-
lected variants of the "Symbols" game maximally approximated the "nulls and cows"
game. It can be easily seen that the probability P; of accidentally guessing the
nunber thought of during the first move for the first variant is inverse to the num-
ber of permtations of 5 elements. that is. Px-l/Sl-IIIZO. For the secmd variant
this probability is inverse to the mist of pert-nations of 10 elements taken 5

at a tine. that is. mansion/3021.0. There are rules making it possible to damp-
ly increase (up to a unit) the probability of accidentally guessing the nunber
thought ofwilh the subsequent move. However, as the experiment showed. no‘tested in-
dividual used these rules. even when they were explained to him by the experimen-
ter. The tested individuals tried to reduce the uncertainty of the situation in
another way. using various methods. in which logical steps and intuitive guesses
were combined.

The inclusion of a computer in the experiment also mde it possible to realize a
third variant of the "Sylbols" game. in which at the beginning of the game the com-
puter does not at all "think 0f" s specific sequence of sydvols. but gives the
tested individual. according to a program previously fixed by the experimenter in
the form of answers‘ instructions for specific subsets of the set of answers pos-
sible with the given trials of the tested individual. This means that for any
sequence of trials of various tested individuals the sequeme of answers 01 for
each of them will appear the same (for example: 01-02; 02-02; 03-02; 05-21; 05-21;
05-50. Here the first figure of the answer means the number of "bulls" and the
second. the nuuber of "cows"). which creates the same initial situation for all the
tested individuals and provides especially "pure" experimental cmditims for a
comparative study of the game strategies used by Inn. It is appropriate to note
that. in practice, the realization of such a game variant without the help of a
computer is impossible.

2. A total of 69 tested individuals aged 17 to 53 participated in the preliainary
experiments. A total of 145 records characterizing the game process of the tested
individuals in six experimental series devoted to various aspects of the investi-
gation were obtained. me detection of the netth and techniques of the game
used by the tested individuals was the Iain problenin the first series (25 experi-
ments with 12 tested individuals). which was preliminary and was ctnducted without
the participation of a computer. The sane problem (incidentally) was solved in
the remaining five series. but against the background of other goals. Three ser-
ies were devoted to a clarification of the characteristics of the process of the
game in its above—mentioned three variants, one series was a control series (two
tested individuals with different types of thinking, five sets with each) and the
sixth series was devoted to an sttenpt to correct in individual tested people the
errors characteristic of them and to form in then elements of the theoretical type
of thinking. In this section we will dwell only on a brief description of the
characteristic methods and techniques of the game used by the tested individuals.
which were disclosed in the experiment.

The nutter of moves in a set in all the series ranged from 2 to 25. Such a di-

versity of the "length" of s set was clearly dependent on the methods and tech-
niques of the game used by the tested individuals. The replacement of one

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

element (figure) in the next trials of the tested individual was the aimlest.
This is a reliable method of detecting the unknown set X (nutter thought of), but,
using it. the tested individual arrives at a solution comparatively slowl)’. The
method of replacing several figures in the next trials is "quicker." However,
here the tested individual runs the risk of encountering a multialternative hypoth-
esis. but the selection of one alternative without a sufficient basis often leads
to a prolongation of the game. The tested individuals using this method can be
divided into two groups depending on the time spent on considering a move. An in-
version of the figures left in a trial accompanying the replacement is a variant
of this technique. The method of constructing the unknown nud>er on the basis of
an analysis of as complete a set of hypotheses as possible is considerably differ-
ent from these techniques of substitution of elements (replacement of figures).
Furthermore, a single tested individual, who had extensive experience in the game
and was familiar with the machine algorithm of conducting it. demonstrated a meth-
od totally uncharacteristic of man and more suitable for realisation m a computer,
completing the game in 1 hour and 25 minutes with only six moves, making only 38
Support records and effectively reducing the sorting of the remaining 30,202 num-
bers orally on the basis of simple logical considerations.

A stable use of any one method mostly leads to a prolongation of the game, as
their alternation leads to its shortening. The use by the tested individuals of
some very simple rules of the game also contributes to this. However, not all the
tested individuals "discover" them for themselves and, having discovered them, do
not always use them.

In fact, the determination of characteristic methods and techniques and the de:ec-
tion of typical errors of the tested individuals represent the preliminary stage

in the analysis. The analysis proper begins with the advancement and check of
hypotheses on the causes of the observed phenomena, that is. change in methods,
appearance of logical errors. domination in the tested individuals of certain char-
acteristics in the process of the game and so forth. Here it is possible to make an
attempt to reconstruct the course of reasoning of the tested individual. However.
owing to the ambiguity of the causes of a certain action, the results of such at-
tempts are also distinguished by an asbiguity. Hence the need to analyse the ex-
perimental material at least at two qualitative levels. The described level of
analysis. giving the investigator only the initial material for a classification of
the characteristic features manifested by the tested individuals in the course of
the game. at the same time. suffers from a lack of principles for its substantia-
tion and explanation.

3. The next, qualitatively new level of analysis is connected with the superposi-
tion of distinctive psychological coordinates on a sufficiently variegated picture
of the methods and techniques of the game and their cowinations and alternation in
time. In order to do this, we will first examine some approaches to the solution
of the problem forming the basis for the "Syubols" game as illustrated by its mo-
dification "Bulls and Cows" with m-S and n-lo. which, basically. was used in our
experiment. Any sequence of 5 nonrecurrent figures in accordance with the condi-
tions of the game are in a certain relationship with each of the 30,260 waters.
which can be thought of inits examined variant (we will designate this initial set
by the symbol Mo). For example, the sequence 01236 with the number 103,210 is in
the relation one "bull." four "cows" (conventionally 14). in the relation 00 with

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

the nutter 56,789 and in the relation 50 with itself. These relations can be con-
sidered models of all the possible relations existing between other real objects.
Then the finding of the unknown number in this game, in fact, represents the sin-
gling out. from the set of objects similar to it. of a certain object. which. as it
is investigated. is revealed in ever newer, previously unknown relations. The sys-
tem of these relations represents an inortsnt criterion of the unknown object. To
reveal this system till the end means to determine this object. In fact. if the
answer 01-bxk; (we will designate this relation with the symbol A1) is received to
the first trial of the tested individual [h-a1b1c1d1e1, this will mean that the un-
known number enters a certain subset H1; . each element of which is in the rela-
tion A; with the trial n1. Similarly. if 2-bzkz (second relation A2) is the an-
swer to the second trial nz'azsz2dzez. this will mean that the unknown number en-
ters the subset “2,; Mo. each element of which is in the relation A2 with the trial
[12 and so forth. From this it is possible to determine the optimum way of finding
the system of relations A1. A2. .... representing the significance test of the
unknown number. Having received the answer 01 to the trial m, it is necessary to
determine the subset H1. after which the trial 11: should be selected not arbitrar-
ily. but only from the elements of the subset H1. having received the answer 02.
it is necessary to determine the corresponding subset Hzc H1 and the trial II: shmld
be selected only from its elements and so forth. Obviously. with such a method of
selection of next trials the power of the subsets H1. M2... will decrease. which
ultimately. will lead to the unknown number. to which the system of relations (sig-
nificance teat) A1, A2. .... will correspond. This method formed the basis for
the algorithm of operation of t e computer acting as man's opponent in the game.
The experiment showed that the computer most often determined the number thought of
by the person in five or six moves (whereas the person did this in 9 or 12 moves,
on the average). which, even if indirectly. confirm the optimlity of this algo-
rithm (of course. owing to fully understandable reasons. this algorithm is beyond
the power of man's "unequipped" intellect. However. its use by means of a comuter
can serve as one of the examples of the effect of a tool (computer) new for man on
the "style" and structure of his thinking activity. which was discussed above).

This is the essence of the first approach to this problem. In our opinion. it re-
flects the understanding of the totality of trials in a game as a single whole.
Viewing the next moves of a game as a series of unconnected problems is quite the
opposite to this method. The tested individuals' methods of conducting a game ac-
tually observed in the experiment in all their diversity lie between these extreme
approaches. With the exception of the above-mentioned single case of a "machine"
solution of a problem by a tested individual. we did not observe m "integral" approach
so it. At the same time. duringthe mostunsuccesful game by a tested individualhecon-
nected at least three or four moves into a single system (apparently. there is no
need to demonstrate that the unification of two moves as a minim in a system is

a necessary condition for a nonrandom solution of a problem).

It is easy to perceive a direct relationship between the singled out approaches and
the theoretical and empirical types of thinking described in the literature E7. It
is well known that theoretical thinking "is realised by means of a substantive ab-
straction (singling out by means of an analysis of cognizable phenomena of the re-
lation initial for them) and a substantive generalization (presentation of a num-
ber of phenomena as a system on the basis of the necessary connection)" [27 in con-
trast to empirical thinking. of which formal abstractions and generalization are

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
EOR¢0l15C1A1.U5EiDNlN

characteristic. In theoretical thinking a separate phenomenon appears as an ele-
ment of a certain system of phenomena. which makes it possible to single out the
general principle of solution of a problem. In case of the same types of prob-
lems this principle makes it possible to solve "on the spot" all similar problems.

For the empirical type of thinking even the same types of problems seem relatively
independent and new.

A comparison of the two extreme approaches to a problem with characteristic aspects
of theoretical and empirical types of thinking. which were described above. deter-
mined our selection of the principles of the theory of two types of thinking as the
principles of classification of the obtained experimental material and its substan-
tiation and explanation. The correctness of our selection is confirmed by the data
in the literature on various approaches to the solution of problems by representa-
tives of the indicated types of thinking in various age groups [57 and 1Q]. includ-
ing those pertaining to one of the versions of the "Bulls and Cows" game with H
and n-lo obtained as a result of experiments with senior schoolchildren 157.

Thus. the use ofthe experimentalrethnlproposed by us. whose basic characteristic
is the inclusion of a computer in a game as man's opponent with a subsequent anal-
ysis of the data obtained on the basis of the theory of substantive generalization.
makes it possible to hope for the detection of individual decision making charac-
teristics in conflict situations and for their explanation with the characteris-
tics of the type of thinking. At the same time. the further trend in research

can be determined on the basis of the following considerations.

The detection of the characteristics of thinking of two extreme types (empirical
and theoretical) in training and problem solution was the object of many investi-
gations in the area of typology of thinking. Numerous works stress the need for a
purposeful formation of the theoretical type of thinking 1E7. 1:17 and so forth.
At the same time. V. V. Davydov also talks about its spontaneous formation. point-
ing out that it_is not formed in everyone and. if it is formed. then with "consid-
erable flaws" 19/. Various thinking defects in adults with their s gaseously
formed types of thinking were investigated in a number of works 1§7ff2l§7 and so
forth. Our experiments have shown that only a negligible number of tested indi-
viduals from the beginning and end of a game follow methods characteristic of the
theoretical type of thinking. whereas many of them. along with the use of the ba-
sic components of theoretical thinking (analysis. reflection and an internal plan
of actions) during some moments of a game. manifest themselves as typical 'mmpiri-
cists." A reverse process was observed in some tested individuals. Beginning a
game as "empiricists," they gradually arrived at the elements of theoretical gene-
ralization. The totality of these data makes it possible to set the task of in-
vestigation of individual characteristics of the "intermediary" type of thinking
in conflict situations. in which, in our opinion. a significant number of the tea-
ted individuals participating in the experiment should be included. and. along
with a study of the conditions of formation of the theoretical type of thinking.
to make an attempt to detect the conditions under which its disintegration occurs.
Hypothetically. it can include a limitation of the time for a game as a whole and
for its every move separately. division of attention. increase in the volume of
the material that must be retained in memory at the same time. increase in the ob-
jective and subjective difficulty of a problem. subjectively evaluated degree of
the opponent's counteraction (his strength) and some other factors. In general

INJI10FFICLAL UEIiCHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

form the experimental research on this plane can be characterized as the task of
determining the level of the type of thinking on the scale "sapirica1"--"theoret—
ical" and the stability of this level depending on the effect of subjective and
objective factors.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Ventsel'. Ye. 8.. "Issledovaniye Operateiy. stachi. Printsipy. Hetodologiye"
_/_0perstions Research. Tasks. Principles and Hethodologl7. Hoacov. 1980. 208
pages.

2. Vygotskiy. L. 8.. "Prom Record Books." VBSTNIK HOSKOVSKOGO UNIVERSITETA. PSI-
KHOIDGIYA. Series 15. 1977. No 2. p 89.

3. (31k. Ye.. "Bulls and Cows (Game)." “AURA I ZRIZR'. 1978. No 2. pp 150-151.

lo. Concharov. V. 8.. "Investigation of the Decision Making Process Depending on
the Type of Thinking," in the collection "Paikhologiya Formirovaniya Lichnosti
i Problegy Obucheniya" ﬁsychology of Formation of Personality and Problems of

Training]. edited by I. V. Dubrovina and D. B. Bl'konin. Hoscow. 1980. PP 36-
41.

5. Gurova. L. l... "Psiltholggicheskiy Anali: Reaheniya Zadach" ﬁsychological Anal-
ysis of Problem Solving/. Voronezh. 1976. 327 pages.

6. Davydov, V. V.. "Vidy Obobshcheniya v Obuchenii" [limes of Generalization in
Training7. Moscow. 1972. 423 pages.

7. Davydov, V. V.. "Basic Problems of the Psychological Study of Management Proc-
esses." in the collection "Aktual'nyye Problemy Obshchey Sotsial'noy i Pedago-
gicbesko Psikhologii" largest Problems of 'General Social and Pedagogical Psy-
chology . Moscow. 1980. pp 5-15.

8. Davydov. V. V.. Pushkin. V. N. and Pushkina. A. 6.. "Dependence of the Devel-
opment of Thinking of Junior Schoolchildren on the ﬂature of Training." VOPROSY

E’SIKBOLOGII. 1972. No 6. PP 124-132.

9. Zak. A. 2.. "Structure of Methods for the Determination of the Level of Devel-
opment of Theoretical Thinking in Schoolchildren." in the collection "Isaledo-
vaniya po Problemsn Vorrastnoy i Pedagogicheskoy Psikhologii" ﬁnvestigations
of Problems of Age and Pedagogical Psychology. Moscow. 1978. pp 26-31.

10. Pgdgoretskaya. N. A.. "Izucheniye Priyemov Logicheskogo Hyshleniya u Vsroslykh"
£Study of the Hethode of Logical winking in Adults]. Moscow. 1980. 1‘9 pages.

11. “Psikhologiya Obugheniya i Vospitaniya 1Vop£osy Organizatsii Formiruyushchego
Eksperimenta). LObzornaya Inforlatsiygl" LPsychology of Training and Educa-
tion Problems of Organization of the Porning Experiment). [S'urvey Informa-
tion_/ . Issue 5. edited by V. V. Davydov and A. K. Harkova. Moscow. 1978. 43
pages.

FOIOWICIALUSEONLV
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. Teplov._3. it. "Foreword to the Collection "Probleuy Individual'nykh Ruli-
chiy" lProblens of Individual Differenceg7. Macaw. 1961. pp 3-5.

COPYRIGHT: "Voprosy psikhologii". "Pedagogika", 1981

11,439
cso: 1840/333

FOR OFFICIAL I)“ ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DEPENDENCE OF STRATEGY 0? SEARCH FOR DECISION 0N TYPE OF THINKING
Moscow VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII in Russian No «'0. Jul-Aug 81 pp 132-136
guide by v. s. conchazoﬂ

[text] The investigation of the process of a search for a decision is of practical
importance from two aspects. 0n the one hand. the study of the patterns and prin-
ciples of a search for a decision is generated by the need for optimization of mana-
gerial labor, whose proportion ‘in the total volume of occupational activity grows
constantly. From this point of view the search problem. which lies in the selec-
tion of acceptable or optimal decisions. forms the basis for decision making. In
this connection the problems of study of the process of a search for a decision are
included in the problems of investigations of decision making E7 and E.

On the other hand. the study of how men searches for a decision is generated by the
need for improvement of coaputer programs. As is well known, a cosputer search for
a decision. as conpared with a search made by man, is still less economical. It is
connected with the sorting of'a large nutter of variants and alternatives. A clar-
ification of effective principles of a search for a decision in man for the purpose
of their realisation in mohine programs is an ilportant research task.

The process of a search for a decision is characterised by a specific strategy.
The strategy represents the form of a search and the method of its organization.
Both the strategies of a machine search realized in colputer programs and the stra-
tegies characterizing-J search and decision making in man are now studied inten-

1

sively E], E and 17-

Clarification of the dependence of the strategy of a search for a decision on the
type of thinking is the object of our investigation. The establishment of such a
dependence can expand the ideas of the possibilities of the two methods of orienta-
tion in reality and demonstrate the advantage of one over the other.

The investigation was conducted in two stages. A diagnosis of the type of thinking
according to especially developed methods was rude at the first stage. The charac-
teristics of a search for a decision in tested individuals with a different type of
thinking were studied by means of the game method at the second stage.

Before turning to a description of the methods diagnosing the type of thinking. we
will dwell on some theoretical principles forming the basis for the division of
thinking into two types and for the construction of diagnostic methods.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The teaching of two types of thinking is developed in the works of V. V. Davy-
dov and his associates 27. V. V. Devydov singles out two types of thinking--
empirical and theoretical. Empirical thinking is characterised by the fact that
it reflects objects from the aspect of their enternal manifestations and connec-
tions. aspirical thinking represents a "method of obtaining and utilizing sen-
sory data by people possessing the faculty of speech... 1}; 269/ and its basic
function "lies in the classification of subjects and in the construction of a
firm scheme of definitions" L2; l7_9_7. In contrast to empirical. theoretical
thinking is considered thinking "reflecting the internal connections of objects
and the laws of their movement" 12; l7_6_7. Theoretical thinking has the area of
objectively interconnected phenomena forning an integral system as its special
content. Theoretical thinking is characterised primarily by a special type of
generalization. to which the process of analysis as a specific component of the-
oretical thinking leads. Theoretical analysis is an "analysis. which. being per-
formed on some one specific event or one problem, at the same time, discloses the
internal connection forming the basis for may particular manifestations of this
event or this problem. Owing to this; man seemingly "generalizes a certain range
of events and problems on the spot" 12; 1857. Generalization through a long com-
parison of similar facts and their gradual unification into a certain category is
characteristic of empirical thinking.

The characteristics of the described types of thinking are clearly revealed dur-
ring the solution of a number of the same types of problems. With the theoret-
ical method of solution an analysis of the conditions and requirements of one
problem of a certain category makes it possible to disclose the general principle
of solution of all the problems of this category and then right away to correctly
solve all the retaining problems. with the empirical method man solves each sub-
sequent problem through trials and errors as a relatively new and independent
problem.

Three basic components are differentiated in theoretical thinking: analysis.
reflection and internal plan of action. A theoretical analysis of the content
of a problem represents the process of singling out the principle of the general
method of its solution. which then seemingly is transferred to the whole cate-
gory of such problems "on the spot." Reflection lies in the subject's use of
his own method of action and in an examination of the basis for it. An internal
plan of action is man's ability to act "stentally." ensuring the planning and
performance of actions without the use of external supports.

To detect the presence or absence of an analysis, a series of the same types of
problems, from the nature of solution of which it is possible to judge the sin-
gling out by the tested individuals of its general principle. was used. The prob-
lems were made up according to the principle of increasing difficulty. Anagrams
(anagram is a word transformed through a rearrangement of the letters forming it)
were selected as problems. The following series of anagrams was offered to the
tested individuals:

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oil-10M, USE ONLY

1) 11510 4) EPA”! 7) W
2) PM“ 5) mm 8) mm
3) vmcc 6) mm 9) PM

The following problem was given: "According to these anagrams to find the words
from which they are formed.”

These anagrams were obtained from some words through a.place change of two neigh-
boring letters in pairs. If the tested individual solves each such problem as a
new one. not singling out the general principle of their structure. this indicates
an orientation to their external. uneasential criteria. however, if the tested
individual discovers this principle during the solution of one or two problems and
then imediately and correctly uses it during the solution of all the other prob-
lems, this means that he analyzed the first problems and during the solution of
the remaining ones leaned on the found initial relation of their condition.

Two methods were devised for the detection of reflection. The first was a modifi-
cation of the method used by A. 2. Zak L37. Each of the methods represents three
single-type problems, which the tested individual is asked to solve. The problems
’ are. made up so that the first and third have a canon method of solution. The sec-
ond problem differs from them in the method of solution. After a successful solu-
tion of all the problems the tested individual is asked to classify them. The
problems were selected so that they preeupposed a classification both according to
their external criteria and according to the method of solution. If the tested in-
dividual determined that the method of solution of the first and third problems
was cos-Ion and the second differed from it, he made the following classification
according to the method of problem solving. Such a classification points to the
presence of reflection. Otherwise the classification was made on the basis of the
external criteria of the problems. which were detected through a- comparison of
their conditions. Such a classification shows’the absence of reflection.

The first method of detecting reflection was made up from the following problems:

1) W (four moves)
2) smmw (four moves)

3) WW (fwr moves)

At first the tested individual must transform in four moves the initial arrange-
ment of the letters (group of letters arranged in the left part of the sheet) into
the final arrangement (group of letters arranged in the right part of the sheet).
A mutual rearrangement of two letters so that they change places is a move. Next
the tested individual is asked to select one of the following views and to sub-
stantiate his selection:

1) All the problems are similar.

2) All the problems are different.

3) The first and second problems are similar.
4) The second and third problems are similar.
5) The second and third problems are similar.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second method of disclosing reflection represents the following three problems:

1) Misha is heavier than Slave
Borya is heavier than Misha who 1‘ the h..V1°'t?

2) Katya is darker than Vera
Vera is darker than Nina who 1' th‘ darkest?

3) Nadya is more cheerful than Zine
Lyuda is more cheerful than Nadya Hho 1' th. '0': cheerful?

As in the first method. the tested individual at first is asked to solve these

problems, answering the questions raised in them. After that the tested individual

decides which of the next three views is correct:

1) .All the problems are similar.
2) All the problems are different.
3) One problem is different from the other two.

To reveal the level of development of the internal plan of action. a method made

up of three problems of increasing difficulty was used. A quick and correct solu-
tion of problems of the second and third degree of difficulty can indicate a high
level of development of the internal plan of action corresponding to the fourth and
fifth level (according to Ya. A. Ponomarev) Z§7. however. the solution of the
problem of the first degree of difficulty alone points to a low level of develop-
Ient of the internal plan of action corresponding to the third level (according to
Ya. A. Ponomsrev). In the offered assignments the tested individual is required

in a specific nunber of moves to arrange the letters in the same way as the figures
stand, that is, the same letters should be arranged in the squares where the same
figures are. A simultaneous mental shift of any two letters is taken as one move.

Students in lover courses of the Moscow Oblast Pedagogical Institute imeni N. K.
Krupskaya, students at the Smolensk Pedagogical School and seniors at the school

No 10 in the city of Mytishchi (a total of 73 people) participated in the testing
of the described methods. The test results showed the suitability of the developed
methods for a division of the group of tested individuals into groups depending on
the nature of solution of the given problems.

Seniors at Moscow schools and staff members and graduate students at one scientif-
ic research institute took part in the basic series. In all 60 people were ex-
amined in this series.

According to the results of the examination the tested individuals that partici-
pated in it were divided into three groups. Tested individuals who successfully
fulfilled the assignments in respect to all the methods and. thus. revealed the
presence of analysis. reflection and a developed internal plan of action. made up
the first group including 18 people. This group was conventionally called the
group of "theoreticians."

Tested individuals that did not fully perforn the assignments for analysis and
reflection and showed an unstable solution of the assignments for the internal
plan of action formed the second group consisting of 32 people. This group re-
ceived the conventional name of a group of "empiricists."

l3

F03¢MﬂﬂCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USEI)NLY

The third group of the tested individuals consisting of 10 people included tested
individuals who partially solved the given problems. The tested individuals of

this group did not reveal a stable analysis or reflection and showed a different
degree of formation of the internal plan of action.

For a clarification of the characteristics of the search for a decision in the
tested individuals of the three given groups the gems method was used. Games of a
varying content and Jane problems are widely used in the investigation of mn's
thinking activity 111/ and 119/. They create conditions for conducting a search in
maximally expanded forms and make it possible to fix its caplet time and space
dynamics.

The "Bulls and Cows" game was selected for the purpose of our investigation. The
game consists in a correct guess by one player of the nutter thought of by another
player with the smallest number of moves. A four-digit number is thought of in
such a way that all the figures in it are different. In every move the guessing
person names a certain number, which also has four digits and different figures.
The partner compares the nuuber he thought of with the one mentioned. and reports
the number of "bulls" and “cows." A situation when the numbers thought of and
mentioned have common figures standing at the same places is called a "bull" in
this game. If common figures stand at different places. this is a "cow" _/7.

The experiment was conducted by means of a computer. The computer "thought of” a
nunber and advised the tested individual of the answer to his next move. Col-mi-
cation between the tested individual and the cosputer was carried out through a
special terminal device.

The unknown nuIﬁél’ in the "Bulls and Cows" game can be represented in the form of
an ordered set M-{a, b. c. d}. which is a subset of the set N-(l. 2. 3. lo, 5. 6,

7. 8, 9, 0), “9“-

For purposes of investigation we decided to confine ourselves to an examination of
games with the initial situations 0-1 and 0-2 (0 "bull," l "cow" and 0 "bull," 2
"cows"). These initial situations are the most indefinite in the game. The prob-
lem of a search for the elements of the set I! from these initial situations is
most difficult.

As an analysis of the obtained materials showed, substantial and most significant
differences in the strategies of a search for a decision in various groups of tea-
ted individuals are revealed during the opening of the games. Subsequently. only
the characteristics of a search for elements H during the opening. in the first
three moves. were examined. This nusber of moves is sufficient in this game in
order to obtain the first unambiguous conclusions on the belonging of specific
elements N to the set H. we will confine ourselves to an examination of the search
for the elements forming part of H, digressing from a search for the place of these
elements in H. The obtained experimental material makes it possible to single out
three types of search strategies during the opening of a game.

110

FOR OFF-10M. USE ONLY
FOI.OF1ﬂ(]Al.USEGJNLY

Strategy A. A search for elements H is conducted without the establish-cut of
their connection with each other. The relation 3-K. ﬁbere K is the total number
of "bulls" and "cows" in response to a given love and B is the number of figures
of this move transferred to the next move. is an expression of this strategy. 0::
the whole. the search according to this strategy from the examined initial situa-
tions (0-1. 0-2) can be presented in the torn of search trees (figures 1 and 2).
The values H-K are indicated in the tree nodes.

 

Figure l

 

Figure 2

The following excerpts from the records of the experiment with the tested individ-
ual T. K. are an example of this strategy:

9541-02 2354—01

1264-01 5610-01

3475-01 7589-02
15

FOR 0F11CLAL.USE|)NLY
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

Strategy 8. A search for the elements of the set M is nsds through the establish-
cent of a single connection anong then. The equality 8-3 is the expression of

this strategy. The replacement of one element of this nova. when the response to
the next move is changed, presupposes a clarification of the belonging of both the
replaced and replacing element to the unknown set. A strictly disjunctive connec-
tion established among these elenents is the basis for this strategy. Eagles of

the described strategy are given in the excerpts fron the records of the experiaent
with the tested individual K. N.

7890-01 9561-02 3656-01
7981-02 3561-02 3457-01

6718-02 19561-01 3458-00

Strategy C. A search for eleaents is made through the singling out of a system of
connections anong the elements of the gane situation. This strategy is realized
during the construction of a third nova. if Kl-Kz. The establishment of a conjunc-
tive connection between the replaced and replacing elenents and a weakly disjunc-
tive connection between these elements and three others forling part of the first
and second noves is the basis for this strategy.

The following are examples of this strategy:

Tested individual 3. A. Tested individual D. 8.

1236-02 10379-01
2346-11 10378-01
1346-01 6389-01

The search strategies during the opening used by various groups of tested individ-
uals are indicated in table 1.

Table 1.

Group of Tested Individuals Strategy
1 "theoreticians" 3. C

2 "ewiricists" ' A

3 A. B

As can be seen from the table. the search for a decision in tested individuals
who are "theoreticians" is characterized by strategies 3 and c and in "enpiricists'.’
by strategy A. Hence it can be concluded that the search according to strategies
3 and c requires an analysis and reflection and its perfornance presupposes a high
level of development of the internal plan of action. However, the search charac-
terized by strategy is made without an analysis or reflection and does not require
a high level of formation of the internal 'plan of action. Analysis ensures the
performance of a search according to the connections of the elenents of gane sit-
uations. At the sane tine. analysis nost explicit in its own theoretical form is
revealed in the realization of strategy C. here the search is nade on the basis
of a systee of connections constructed by the tested individual who is a "theore-
tician." Reflection. which is an aspect of theoretical analysis. sakes it possi-
ble to exanine the basis of the actions proper and to find the basis nost accept-
able under given conditions. Reflection is revealed nost clearly during a

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transition from strategy 3 to strategy c. This transition is characterized by a
destruction of the strictly disjunctive connection between the replaced and re-
placing elements and the construction of a new conjunctive connection between them.
The high level of development of the internal plan of action provides for the "the-
oreticians" the creation of a wide search zone including the entire combination of
connections among the elements of the game situation.

 

Key:
1. Move

Thus. as a result of the conducted investigation significant differences in the
strategies of the search for decisions in tested individuals who manifested a dif-
ferent type of thinking were established. The presence of the basic coeponents of
theoretical thinking (analysis. reflection and a high level of the internal plan
of action) significantly determines the nature and method of the search for a de-
cision and its strategy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Gik, Ye.. "Bulls and Cows." NAUKA I ZHIZN', 1978, No 2, pp 150-151.

2. Davydov..y. V.. "Vidy Obobshcheniya v Obuchenii" liypes of Generalization in
Training]. Moscow. 1972.

17

FOR OFTWCIAL USEZCMqLY
9.

10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zak, A. 2., "0n the Problem of the Development of Thinking in Schoolchildren."
in the book "Psikhologicheskiye Problely Uchebnoy Deyatel'noeti Shkol'nikov"
Esychological Problems in Educational Activity of Schoolchildreg7. Moscow.

1977. pp 253-260.

Zak, A. 2., "Construction of Methods for the Determination .of the Level of Do-
velopnent of Theoretical Thinking in Schoolchildren," in the book "Ieeledova-
niya po Problem“ Vozrastnoy i Pedagogichukoy Peikhologii" investigations of
Problem of Age and Pedagogical Psychology. Hoacow, 1979. PP 26-31.

Kozeletakiy,_Yu. . "Peikhologicheskaya Teoriya Reoheniy" ﬁgchological Theory
of Decisiongl. mason, 1979.

Pononrev. Ya. A., "Znaniyn. Hyghleniye i Unstvcnnoye Ranitiye" linouledge.
Thinking and Mental Development]. Moscow, 1967. .

"Problem Prinyatiya Resheniya" [ﬁecieion ﬂaking Noble-£7. Moscow, 1976.

Pushkin. V. IL. "Operativnoye Hyehleniye v Bol'ahikh Sietemkh" @perative
Thinking in Large Systengj. Moscow. 1965.

Rafael, 3., "Dunayuehchiy Ko-p'yuter" [The Thinking Cowutegj. Moscow. 1979.
.

Tikhonirov. 9. K., "Strukture Hyelitel'noy Deyatel'noeti" [Etructure of Think-
ing Activity. Moscow. 1969.

Khant. 2., "lekusstvemyy Intellekt" Ertiflcitl Intellec_t_7. Moscow, 1978.

COPYRIGHT: "Voprosy psikhologii". "Pedogo‘gika". 1981

11,439

CSO :

1840/ 333

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORWUSEONLY

PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL DESCRIPTION OF FATIGUE BASED ON ACTIVATIGI INDICATORS

Meow VOPMSY Psmonocn in Russian No 3, May-Jun 81 pp 38-48

[Article by G. A. Stryukov, 'r. N. Dolgolenko and 0. A. Konopkin]

"absance of an understanding
and of control over what we call fatigue is one of the meet contend problem of. our
life.“

Be also adds that ”the term fatigue may be likened to the word subconscious,
ent category by which to designate phenomena that are not

for this is the rather arbitrary interpretation made of recorded chan
implying ”decrement of function“ (inhibition. blodade.

weakening, deterioration and so on), which createe the appearance of an explanation
of the recorded changes.

experimental data have generated the
complicating and refining the data processing methods--that reliable
MWWONLY

'Ihe idea that it is iupossible to assess fatigue on the basis of some one function,
that itsdiagnosis requires an integrated systems approach, is now gaining increasingly
greater approval. However, the theoretical side of the question is often limited
to too-general, though valid, conclusions appealing for assessunt of the state of
the body 'as a whole,” while practical applications of the integrated approach are
reduced to attenpts at recording as many functions as possible and stbjecting them
to sumtional mathematical treatment without any clear, theoretically gromded
hypotheses concerning the principles of integrating different functional signs into
a single indicator of fatigue. Thus the main accent in the effort to impart psycho-
physiological objectivity to fatigue is laid on, building mathematical models which
would "nest adequately” synthesize data acquired by numrous measurements. Very
great significance is ilparted to the search for I'the right formula" by which to
process the aspirical material. .

While we do not reject the benefits of such research, we do not think that we can
totally ignore pure psychophysiological research in this area and still come up with
a satisfactory solution to the problem of assessing fatigue. It would be wrong to
assume that the field of labor psychophysiology already possesses dependable methods
by which to acquire raw data that simly need to be “correctly" processed in order
to reveal stable components within the extremely unstable functional pattern of
fatigue. 'lhere are few studies in the special literature devoted to the psycho-
metrics of fatigue in the strict sense of this term (4). Host methods used to diag-
nose fatigue require standardization and testing for reliability and validity (5).

Discussing the physiological mechanisms of fatigue, we should distinguish two groups
of phenomena. -

On one hand there is the "initial deficit,” which arises in the “weakest” link of
the functional system and which inparts a certain degree of dissonance to the work
of the system as a whole. line question of the functional essence of the initial
deficit is at the basis of classical theories of fatigue, and it was the subject of
acute debate during the time of initial development of labor psychophysiology (12,14).
Contemporary data in physiology and biology support A. A. Ukhtomskiy's conclusion
(14) that atteupts to formulate a general theory of fatigue based on some universal
mechanism of reversible disturbance of a chain of metabolic reactions are unfounded
and unpromising. Depending on the individual psychological qualities of the worker
and on the concrete working conditions, to include the entire set of occupational,
hygienic, social and psychological factors, the particular location of disturbances
will vary, and consequently the concrete physiological signs of the 'initial deficit'
will be different as well, or at least it would be difficult to reduce them to a
limited number of classes. Both the pressing theoretical and practical problem of
labor psychophysiology require a meticulous effort to compile a 'psychophysiological
catalog" of fatigue states.

0n the other side of the functional pattern of fatigue we observe, concurrently with
development of the initial deficit, adaptive alterations in the body aimed at cospon-
sating for the arising difficulties.

A typical example of a nonspecific comensatory reaction to the environment's cctmterb
homeostatic influence is Selye's general adaptation syndrome, or the stress reaction,
which expresses itself primarily in neuroenbcrine alterations in the hypophyseo-
adrenocortical system (11). Selye included fatigue along a hunter of factors

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regard: Can we not use the indicators of stress as a universal nonspecific physio-

logical pattern of fatigue may manifest itself within the limits of a broad range of
functional changes: from typical signs of a stressful state to the typical symptom:
of. reduced activation and development of inhibitory processeewthat is, fatigue

cannot be interpreted as a state which automatically and uniquely elicits the
general adaptation syndrome.

Nevertheless some authors (19) feel that ”true fatigue,” being a consequence of
highly motivated labor characterized by stringent effectiveness parameters, is always
a general stress reaction. According to this point of view signs of a decrease in

activation are more a sign of a reluctance to become tired, than an indication of
the depth and degree of fatigue.

However, this line of reasoning is far from undebatable, and it does not solve the

problem. After all, the "reluctance to become tired" and the decrease in activation
ascribed to this state are usually the consequence of work: they are usually a unique
protective response to a work load. And there are no gromds for rejecting presence

Clarifying the question as to when and under what conditions a nonspecific conpen-
satory reaction to fatigue acquires the nature of "negative inhibition'I and when it
becomes a form of stress (tension) is acquiring fundamentally iqaortant significance
to general theoretical conceptualization of the fatigue diagnosis problem. Here we
to achieve oomand over these conditions, and were we able to experimentally elicit
either the “inhibitory" or the “stressful“ manifestation of fatigue, we would have
made a significant step forward in our understanding of fatigue, and of the funda-
mental difficulties associated with diagnosing this state. ‘l‘he very fact that the
physiological symptoms of fatigue may be represented by the extreme poles of the
scale of activation (inhibition, stress (1)) demnstratively emphasizes these
difficulties.

'Ihe fact that despite the technological power of the modern physiological experth
these invariants cannot be revealed elicits fundamental doubt as to their
existence. 'lhe fact is that the general physiological pattern of fatigue, in the

way that it is represented by activation level indicators, depends not only and not
so much on the magnitude and nature of the initial functional deficit, as on how

the individual evaluates the situation in which he finds himself, how he interprets
his state and relates it to the objectives of his activity, how he perceives and
”overcomes“ the unpleasant subjective sensations of fatigue, and so on. Thus this
pattern reflects diverse, variable and whimsical processes associated with man's
self-regulation of his state and activity (6).

21

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
HM UI'I'ILIAL 051'. ONLY

It would hardly be possible to find a single, clearly delimited fatigue syndrome

bv using, for this purpose, diagnosis of nonspecific activation parameters. Fatigue
in the working individual is a state of ”bivalent experiences and mating motives:
On one hand we have the motives of recovery, self-preservation, reduction of activity,
and rest, while on the other hand we have the motives of social responsibility and
prestige. and maintenance of activity level, often at the cost of additional nobil-
isation. And depending on the relationship along these motives, on the nature of

the task and the subjective significance of the goals the worker pursues, and on

his individual features, a highly variable, "conjunctural" pattern of organisation

of his activity and functional state evolves.

'lhese considerations were the general theoretical backgromd for the experimental
study described below. The objective of the experiment was to test the hypothesis
that the dynamics of some physiological functions proceeding during tiring mental
work depend on factors associated with psychological self-regulation.

The tentative hypothesis was as follows: "Inhibitory” signs of fatigue (that is,
signs indicating a decrease in activation level) would reveal thenutlves when the
meaningfulness and objectives of activity are clearly delimited, and when they do
not come into conflict with the natural tendency to reduce activity or with the
dominant motives of economization of effort during development of fatigue. 01 the
other hand, the "stressful" signs of fatigue (growth in activation level) would
manifest uneaselves in situations where the content and meaning of the task facing
the subject encourage him to actively mobilize his resources as the work goes on.
in order to satisfy the requirements of his activity.

Methods

'lhe following assignment was chosen as ”tiring activity.” A series of nusbers 1.8
sec apart were played through a tape recorder loudspeaker to a subject in a sound-
proof room. The series of numbers was taken from a random numbers table. and it
contained digits from 0 to 9. Soeewhere in this series was the letter ”3". Its
diutribution in the series was also random. 'Ihe minimum interval between two
successive letters “3" was three nusbers, and the maximum was nine. On hearing the
letter '8' the subject had to write down the third number before ”8" on a special
response sheet (for example on hearing the sequence ...,7, 5, 2, 0, s, 6, 5, 9, 2,
4, 8, z, 3,..., the subject had to write down the mmhers 5 and 2). Thus the task
was intended to ispose a dynamic load on the working memry (this is a “ruining
uemory" nodel).

‘mc preliminary experisents showed that 4 hours of continuous work resulted in
intense rental tiring of the subject, who embited the typical symptoms of this
state (growth in the number of errors, difficulties in concentration, the desire to
stop working). Basing ourselves on these data, we interpreted a 4-hour load as a
volume of work which would "guarantee" development of rental fatigue.

The experiments in the main series were perforasd in two variants. In the first
variant the subject worked for a specific length of time. He was told beforehand
that the experiment would last 4 hours, and he was able to adapt himself to the
temporal dynamics of the experiment. In the second variant the subject worked until
"breakdown." The subject had to work diligently until he felt unable to continue the

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

work or to maintain the required effectiveness due to extrem fatigue. In this case
he had the power to stop the experiment. In reality. however, the experimenters

had no intention of working their subjects to the mnent of 'breakdown': The experi-
ment was halted after 4 hours of continuous work (at which time an "equith failure"
was faked). 131115 the actual volune of work done in both variants was the sane--

4 hours of continuous performance of the experimental assignment. A typical feature
of the psychological atmosphere in which the experiments of the second variant were
conducted was that the subjects were unable to accurately estimte the time since the
experiment started.

All subjects reported intense fatigue after the end of the experimnt in both the
first and second variant. '

An EEG was recorded continuously during the experiment with a Hungarian “Orion"
eight-channel encephalograph (with a time constant of 0.3 sec and an amplification

ratio of lo Inn/50 av). Bipolar recordings were made by L. P. Pavlova's technique
(10). iiin filters were used to isolate theta (4-7 Hz) and alpha-rhythms (8-13 Hz)

from the total 886. These rhythms were subjected to integration. The readings of the
integrator were recorded in parallel with the EEG recordings. The data of an EKG.
recorded concurrently with the EEG, were used to determine pulse rate.

When analyzing the EEG recordings we counted the hunter of marks ads by the inte-
grator's stylus each minute. The nulber of marks was then averaged over a 30-minute
interval. The material was subjected to statistical treatment with an "la-222‘ com-

puter, and it included calculation of the arithmetic mean, the standard deviation
and the error of the arithmetic mean. Confidence intervals were determined at the

95 percent level of significance (p<0.05).

Men 20-25 years old served as the subjects. Separate groups of subjects were formed
for the first and second series of experiments. Seven persons participated in the
first series of experiments (two of then were in an experiunt twice). 81:: persons
participated in the second series of experimnts (three of them partipated in two
experiments). ‘mus 18 experiments were conducted in all (nine experiments in each
series).

Results and Discussion

The nunber of wrong responses by met subjects increased somewhat toward the end of
the experiment in both variants; this may be interpreted as indirect evidence of
developing fatigue. In this case the recorded changes in work accuracy do not reach
the level of statistical significance, and in general the work quality of all sub-
jects remains high throughout the entire experiment (not there than 10 percent of the
possible quantity of errors). No significant differences were revealed between the
first and second variants of the experth in the dynamics of errors.

In terms of the objectives of this study, we are doubtlessly nest interested in

detailed analysis of the dynamics of physiological indicators. the latter were
evaluated from the standpoint of activation theory, which interprets these indicators

as ones of the general level of arousal in the central nervous system (1).

23

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the most universally accepted viewpoints on the nature and functional
role of the principal EEG rhythms, growth in the power of the alpha-rhythm is an
indicator of reduced activation. Although the special literature does contain reports
of intensification (exaltation) of the alpha-rhythm in situations of selective
attention and general stressing of the organism (22), lost researchers tend to view
synchronization of the dominant EEG rhythm and growth in its energy as evidence of
inhibitory processes, while changes occurring in the opposite direction have been
viewed, beginning with Magoun's works (7,21) as indicators of an activation reaction.
In our analysis and interpretation of experimental data associated with the alpha-
rhythm, we adhered to the comnly accepted conception that arousal of nonspecific
subcortical structures (the reticular formation) plays the decisive role in reactions
associated with blockade and desynchronisation of the alpha-rhythm.

mr present ideas about the genesis and functional significance of the theta-rhythm
are not as well defined. This is a rhythm of the profound structures of the brain,
being maximally expressed in the hippocaapus (2). he theta-rhythm is in the slow-
wave portion of the EEG spectrum, which is traditionally associated with inhibitory
processes in the central nervous system and with a low level of activation. At the
same time, in recent years some authors have interpretedit asan indicator of emotional
states. calling it the stress rhythm (3,13).

we interpreted cases of growth in energy of the theta-rhythm as a reflection of a
decrease in the general level of activation.

As far as pulse rate is concerned, nmnerous data argue that this indicator is a
sensitive and reliable indicator of the general tone of vital activities: in this

case, intensification of hemodynanics (growth in pulse rate) uniquely indicates growth
in the activation level.

The basic results of both experimental series are shown in tables 1 and 2. In them,
the ”plus" and "minus" symbols indicate cases of statistically significant changes
in physiological indicators between the 1st and 4th hours. of work, with the "ninm"
symbol standing for changes that may be interpreted as a decline in activation level,
and with the ”plus” symbol indicating an increase in this level. The "O" symbol
indicates statistical insignificance of the recorded dnanges.

The most typical examples of the dynamics of physiological functions are slmn in
figures 1 and 2 (examples of decreasing activation are shown in figures 1 and 2 by
continuous curves, growing activation is represented by dot-dash curves, and absence
of a clearly pronounced dynamic trend is represented by broken curves).

It would not be difficult to note that the overall pattern of functional dynamics
is more uniform in the first series than in the second. In the first series (“pre—
scribed duration") the data for all indicators suggest either a decrease in the
initial activation level in the course of the experinent (the usual case), or main-
tenance of that initial level. At the same time in the second series (work “until
breakdown”) we encounter cases of a distinct increase in activation level toward
the end of work.

'me couplexity and the Achilles heel of the activation conception lie in the fact
that the indicators of activation do not always exhibit mutual correlation. which

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Table 1. Change in Physiological Functions in the Dynamics of the Experiment
("Prescribed Duration“ Series)

133 012 43 159 512 86- 64: 611.16 14. 312 13
120 912 4213691261 - 3311! .79 55.81209
113. 41181 145112 82— I73. 813.3301. I114 04

76 4:0. 96 I” 6:6. 63 - 67.611661". 724 46

- I46. 0:2. 30 I54 53:2. 29- IOI. l12 29l72. 1:4. I3
BM 47. 620.79 66.635.73- 491:166 43..9:t4 41
11- I 76. 9tl. 20 63.912. 07— 72.612. 2| 76. 4:2 9

‘0
69 111 10 102 211 65— 109213. 01126 614. 02 Z
71

 

Notes: 1. ‘rables l and 2 show the arithmetic means of
the functions, with :- confidence intervals for evalu-
ation of the averages of the general set, at a proba-
bility p<0.05 for the null hypothesis. The confidence
intervals are equal to double the errors of the sauple
means. 2. Subscripts l and 2 beside the names of the
subjects stand for experiments 1 and 2.

Key:
1. Subjects 4. 4th hour of work
2. meta-rhythm (arbitrary units/min) S. Alpha-rhythm (arbitrary units/min)
3. let hour of work 6. Pulse rate (beats/Iain)

Table 2. Change in Physiological Functions in the Dynamics of the Experiment
("Until Breakdown” Series)

   
    

 
       

3-.. 92,312.11 66.215 6 0102 212.16 126 011-0 — 96 011.19 16.210.66—
31, 109,612.26 114,613.11 0 93. 612 01 134. 613. 9— 93311.14 16.010.66—
m. 63 611 :16 61. 611 02 o 42 110 61 44. 610 61— 69 610.66 90,110.66 -
14-6. 31 310 61 211 110.36 + 26' 610 16 23 610 49+ 66. 610.64 61,910.64-
6-1. 111. 113. 96 164 .21.: :16 +206. 916 60 111 013 66+ 66. 610.69 3211.2 +
63. 126,912.16 1116 911.14 +1106 312. 66 101 612 22 0 91 610.661 .610.66+
3-3 116111 141116 611.16 0 19210. 61 19110.16 069110.62 ﬂ.4:t°.60—
c. 16 61103 69.11132 -— -.90 613.34 42.411.54- 66. 210. 64 66.010.66—
5-11 66.91063 54,910.62 + 66.412416 60- 4612 .66 05310.64 61.61034

  

   
  

 

 

Note: See notes [and key] for Table l.

naturally creates difficulties when we try to evaluate the activation state of the

organism "as a whole". We encountered such difficulties in our experiaents as well
(see Table 1). Discussion of this problem is not within the purpose of our study.
He will only note that discoordination of activation indicators revealed itself

especially clearly in the second series of experiments.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l23‘3678 l234561l

. ‘ a-puw veal-0‘1 01mm 001.14 'V

r e

\

$$++**“

12348610

 

Figure l. 1ypical Variants of the Dynamics of Physiologin Functions in
the First Series of Experiments (“Prescribed Duration")

Key :
1 . Myths 3. Pulse rate
2 . Subject

Increases in activation in the second series of experimnts were not a surprise.

On the contrary they were programmed by the nature of the experimental assignment.
‘ihe aim of our experiments was to show: that given an identical quality and volume
of work, and given mental fatigue of conparable degree, the nature of changes
occurring in activation parameters (they are precisely what are used most frequently
in practical assessments of functional state) depends very strongly on factors
associated with man's psychological self-regulation of his activity. These changes
can in principle be diametrically opposite.

The psychological atuosphere of the experiments was planned in such a way that the

resulting physiological pattern of fatigue would be ”inhibitory“ in the first series
and "stressful" in the second. (The terms "inhibitory" and “stressful"

are conditionally applied to changes in activation in relation to the initial level.
irrespective of the absolute value of the physiological indicators. In general,
the accent in this study is consciously made on analysis of dynamic trends, and not
on the absolute values of the recorded indicators. 'l'his is explained by the fact
that we do not presently have strictly standardised ideas about activation levels,
and any discussions of them usually concern orders of magnitude.)

Our initial ideas can be sumnarized as follows. we hypothesized that the natural
monotonic) type of functional dynamics reveals itself in the course of tiring
mental activity as a decrease in activation level. '1‘» processes are the determinants
here.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

1234567.

»

Figure 2. iypical Variants of the Dynamics of I‘hysiological Motions in
the Second Series of Experiments (”work until Breakdown”)

Key:
1. Rhythm 3. Pulse rate
2. Subject

1. As the worker's potential is expended, the functional system responsible for
recovery, which has the effect of inhibiting the fmctional system responsible for
work, acquires increasing dominance (9) . At the highest psychological level of
self-regulation, this is manifested as a general decline in activity, a narrowing
of the field of monitored parameters, and concentration of attention exclusively on
the dominant, meaningful components of activity. It stands to reason that all of
this leads to a certain decline in the reliability of the work, in practice, however,
it does not usually manifest itself as obvious defects in activity (growth in the
nunber of errors. inadequate reactions, a decrease in pace, and so on). 'Ihe fact
is that the demands imosed on the working individual in daily, routine work are
far from the body's limits.

2. The second process is associated with a phenomenon referred to as “stabilizing
retroactiveness" in the work of Wilder and Lacy (see (8)).

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fact is that a fresh individual who is not tired begins work at a hypercompensa-
tory level of energetic mobilization as a rule (this may be associated with the
orientation reaction, with "warming up" for work), and a decrease in activation level
as work goes on is evidence of preventive hoseostatic actions by the body.

Although both of these processes are automatic to a certain degree, if they are to
proceed and if the "inhibitory" pattern of functional dynmics is to manifest itself,
the weakening of activity must "fit within“ the structure of psychological self-
regulation: It must be justified, in the eyes of the subject, as something not
contrary to the goals of his activity.

In experiments of the first series we tried to create precisely such conditions

(a clearly delimited goal of activity, work effectiveness parameters that yield
easily to conscious monitoring, and an average work intensity that is far from
maximum). The main goal of the subject was towork for a prescribed count of time
(4 hours). lbvement toward this goal is consciously monitored throughout the entire
time. In this situation initial mobilization--a manifestation of a set for lengthy,
tiring work--becomes unsuitable as the end result is reached. The set for recovery--
a desire to work at a minimum level of activity, one ensuring successful coupletion
of the work-«assmnes the upper hand. '

We believe that these factors of psychological self-regulation were decisive to
determining the dynamics of physiological indicators of activation in the first
series, in which, as was noted earlier, in Inst of the experiments the activation
level decreases noticeably—that is, we observe ”inhibitory" signs of mental fatigue.

A different situation is seen in the structure of psychological self-regulation in
the second series of experiments (work 'mtil breakdown”).

Here, despite the finiteness and unanbiguity of the assignment (the subjects were
instructed to work IIuntil couplete exhaustion"), the subjects did not possess the
appropriate objective criteria of success. The goal of activity is thus formlated
very generally, and it does not allow the stbject to regulate his functions in such
a way as to achieve an end result. A situation is created in which subjects are
encouraged to surmount their fatigue, they try to ignore their unpleasant subjective
sensations, and at the same tine they are forced to constantly heed these sensations,
concentrating their attention on them as the main reference points of their activity.
Absence of objective criteria for the successfulness of activity generates informa-
tional uncertainty and, as a consequence, an emotional overtone to the entire process
of self-regulation. The subjects begin to experience difficulties in relating
activity level to the demands of the activity, and they are oonpelled to assume a
hyperoompensatory reaction strategy.

We assumed that developing fatigue would manifest itself in the second series of
experiments (at least among some of the subjects) as a rise in activation level
and general stressing of function. The obtained results confirmed this hypothesis.

The following question arises: Why are the “stressful“ manifestations of functional
dynamics not revealed in all subjects, even though the psychological structure of
activity was in principle the sane in all experiments of the second series?

28

FOIl OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe org-1cm. us: ONLY

we believe that the set for activity which we tried to ”impose" upon the subjects

by our initial instructions and by the entire psychological atmsphere of the
experiment was not absorbed identically and in full volume by all subjects. line set
presupposed maximum exhaustion of work potential. Some subjects responded with a
readiness to innerse themselves into an extraordinary and rather uncertain state of
maximum exhaustion, while others oriented themselves at achieving a state with which
they were familiar, one which from their subjective scale of experience was known

to them as “intense tiring.” It may be expected that in the first case the unpleasant
subjective symptoms of fatigue generated anxiety and mbilized the subject's poten-
tials for work “beyond the limit," while in the second a typical “inhibitory" pattern

of fatigue developed. Intermediate states expressed themelves through uncertain
and unexpressive dynamics.

the line of reasoning here is based on the point of view that fatigue is a state
consisting of complex mental experiences of conflicting content, one in which the
individual is offered two variants of adaptive behavior: the path of self-preserva-
tion, economizaticn of effort and inhibition of work activity, and the path of Inabili-
zation of resources and a set for maintenance of the activity level at the price of
exhaustion. 'lhe choice of paths depends on the entire set of conditions of the
activity and on the individual psychological traits of the worker, and it is pre-
cisely this choice which operates as the decisive organising factor of activity,

and consequently of the dynamics of work effort. It may be said that man subjects
his functional state to psychological self-regulation in a situation calling for
tiring work.

'Ihis fact inescapably leads us to specific problems associated with physiological
diagnosis of fatigue. Fatigue doubtlessly has an influence on the body's activation
level, but this influence cannot be determined or described from the standpoint of
the conceptions of physiological autontism. It would be ”proper to interpret
changes in activation level in a situation requiring tiring mental activity as a
reflection of primary functional changes in those structures of the central nervous
system which are .---sponsible for realization of the given type of mental work. Such
an interpretation would presuppose that the recorded changes are unambiguous and
"mandatory," but this is precisely what we failed to observe in the experiment.

As Khomskaya points out, “activation processes...experience the influence...of
social factors. Here we to ignore this law, we would be unable to penetrate into
the specific features of the human methods of regulating activation processes” ((17).
p 6).

Changes in activation indicators occurring during tiring mainly reflect secondary
compensatory adaptive reactions associated with the psychological level of activity
self-regulation. Depending on the situation, coupensatory reactions may assume the
nature of "blockades" and ”inhibition“ or, on the other hand, “tension” and “stress,”
and all schemes for diagnosis of fatigue mist account for the fundamental anbiguity
of the functional expression of fatigue.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Blok, v., "levels of Hakefulnese and Attention.” in 'Bksperimental'naya
psikhologiya" [Experimental Psychology]. Moscow, 3d edition, 1970.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
S.

6.

7.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vinogradovs, O. 8., "Gippokamp i pal-yet" [the Hippocanpus and Mary], Moscow,

1975.

' Gofnan, s. s., and Heydin, Ya. v., “Human Multichannel male-arc Data in the

Presence of “euro-albumin]. Stress," BYULLBTSN' MPEW'WY BIOWII I
MEDITSINY, N0 11, 1970, pp 19-22.

zinchenko, .v. P., Leonova, A. B. and Strelkov, Yu. x., 'Psikhonetrika
utonleniya" [The Psychometrics 0! Fatigue), lbscov, 1977.

Zolina, 2. M., Gorshkov, S. 1., et al., 'Metodiki issledoveniy v 1121010911
trade" [Research Methods in Labor Physiology], Moscow, 1974.

Konopkin, _0. A., "nae Psychological Aspects of Self-kgulaticn of Labor Activity,“
in 'Sootnosheniya biologicheskogo i sotsial'nogo" [‘me Belatioosbip Between the
Biological and the Social], Moscow, 1975.

“‘80“. 3-. "Bodrstvuyushchiy 0029' [The Making Brain], mecca, 1965.

Payyar, 211., “Application of Physiological Indicators in Psychology," in
"moperimntnal'naya psikhologiya,“ Moscow, 36 edition, .1970.

Polezhayev, Ye. F., I'Mental Performance and Its 801i-Pecovery,‘ in 'Iskusstvennyy
intellekt i psikhologiya" [Artificial Intelligence and Psychology]: Moscow, 1976.

"Praktikun po fiziologii truda" [Handbook of Labor Physiology], uningrad, 1970.

Sel'ye, 11., 'Ocherki ob adaptatsionnom sindrone" [Ibtes on the Maptatim
Syndrome], Moscow, 1960.

simnson, 3., cited in Shatenehteyn, D. N., 'lbgulyatsiya fisiologicheskikh
protsessov pri rabote" [Regulation of Physiological Processes During Work],
Moscow, uningrad, 1939.

Ualter, G., 'zhivoy nozg" ['me Living Brain], lbscow, 1966.

Ukhtonskiy, A. A., ”Physiology of the mtor Apparatus: Patigue,‘ in "Solar. soch'."
(Collected Works], Vol 3, uningrad, 1952.

"Fiziologiya truda.

'nezisy dokladov VI Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii p0 fiziologii

truda“ [Labor Physiology. Abstracts of Reports of the Sixth All-mica Con-
ference of Labor Physiology], unihqrad, 1973.

"Piziologiya truda.

.Tezisy dokladov V11 Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii p0 2131010911

truda' [Labor Physiology. Abstracts of mports of the Seventh All-thion c0n-
ference of labor Physiology], Leningrad, 1973.

monkeys, Ye. D., "mac; 1 aktivatsiya" [Brain and Activation], Moscow, 1972.

Bartley, 5. EL, and Shute, E. 1’., “fatigue and Inpairnent in Man," New York,

1947.

30

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
19. Cameron, C., “A meaty of Patiguo. Man Undo: Stress." in "Proc. 9th Annual
Conf. Lhiv. Adelaide," 1974, pp 67-82.

20. McFarland, R. 5., ”Understanding of Fatigue in Modern Life,” lama, W1 14,
No 1, 1971. pp 1-10.

21. Horuzzi, 6., and Hagoun, 8., "Brain Stan Reticular Formation and Activation
of the EEG," BEG CLIN. NBUROPHYSIOL" V01 1, 1949, pp 455-473.

22. Mulhonand, 'r., and annuals. 5., “Increased Occurrence of EEG Alpha During
Increased Attention,” J. Psvcaonq V01 56. No 2, 1962, pp 317-330.

COPYRIGﬂ'r: "Voprosy psikhologii", "Pedagogika', 1981

11004
(280: 8144/1842

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COIIESION AS FACTOR OF GROUP EFFICIENCY

macaw VOPMSY PSIKHOIOGII in massian No 3, Hay-Jun 81 pp 113-118

[Article by R. s. Nemov and A. G. shestakov]

which affect motivation. They form the nucleus of the collective's social psychology.
they evolve in the course of joint activity, and they serve as the prerequisites for
formation of relationships in the two other strata, the second and third. 'ﬂm 3300116. 9.0231?
logical stratum of the collective includes interpersonal ties mediated by the content
of the collective's activity. Among them, we have been able to isolate and study
collectivistic self-determination. cohesion defined as unity in value orientations,
effective group emotional identification, the reference group and a nutter of other
phenomena. In contrast to the first stratum. which has to do with objective phenomena
and motivations. these phenomena have to do specifically with interpersonal ties--

ties of a special sort. what makes then unique is genetic and Emotional mediation
of the content of group activity. Interpersonal ties in the second stratum arise and

develop. as do attitudes in the first stratum, on the basis of joint activity, and

apart from and independently of the joint activity of the collective's participants
on the basis of known mohanisms of interpersonal perception: "the halo effect“, the
"inplicit theory of personality” and so on. Forming the surface. nonspecific stratum

of the collective, these relationships provide a way for revealing the origins of
the collective as a random, diffuse group. The relationships in this stratul, in

distinction from phenomena of the second stratum, may be revealed experimentally in
practically any group, including a random one.

of the stratometric conception and imparted to it the status of a special psychosocial
theory of groups and collectives. In recent years the premises of this theory have

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been used actively to develop a number of particular problems of psychosocial
science--the psychology of effective group activity for example (3, 6). Using the
stratonetric approach, R. s. Nemov formulated and experimtally confirmed the

hypothesis that groups at different levels of development exhibit differences in
their emotional mutual relationShiPB and in group effectiveness (1).

'lhe theory of mediation by activity was also the basis for a new approach to analyzing
some theoretical problems of group effectiveness, for example the question as to

which psychosocial phenomena within a collective are the most significant to the
successfulness of its work (6).

Our answer to this question is based on the following premises of the stratometric
conception: l. he collective is a group at the highest social and psychological
level of development. This presupposes that the collective must also be the most
effective group, and that its psychosocial phenomena are factors of grwp effective-
ness. 2. According to the stratometric conception the principal psychosocial
characteristics of the collective are represented by the mutual relationships
existing in the second stratum of intergroup activity. Consequently these relation-
ships must be important psychosocial conditions of the collective's successfulness.

3. Inasmuch as the second stratum of mutual relationships in the developed collective
dominate over relationships in the third stratus, the second stratum must have a

stronger influence on the successfulness of joint work than does the third stratum.

we formulated the following working hypotheses on the basis of these premises:

1. In groups at a high level of development, the correlation between the successful-
ness of activity and the level of development of relationships in the second stratum
must be positive and more expressive than the correlation between successfulness and
relationships at the third stratum. 2. In groups at a relatively low level of
development, for which the second stratum of mutual relationships is poorly developed,
correlations between the relationships at the second and third strata on one hand

and the successfulness of the group's work on the other must be insignificant and
about the same.

1his hypothesis was tested by research performed on the collectives of rayon internal
affairs divisions (ROVD's). Eighteen collectives containing a total of 186 persons
participated in all.

M forms of cohesion, defined as unity of value orientations, were experimentally
studied as representations of relationships mediated by the content of activity:
unity of group goals (066) and unity of group motivations (UGM). Elationships at
the third stratum were represented in this research by interpersonal ties evaluated
with the assistance of the traditional sociometric procedure, using the general
interpersonal choice test. The successfulness of the collectives' activity was
studied by the expert method using actual work indicators and a hunter of psycho-
social indicators of successfulness which we derived specially.

Ne thods

The procedure we used to draw up sociometric questionnaires and conduct the inter-
views was typical to research of this sort. Making their choices, the respondents

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were instructed that they were IIbeing appointed executives of a new subdivision.“ In
this connection they were asked to hale those friends in their collective when they
would wish to see in the new subdivision. The subjects had to rank the numbers of
their collective in order of preference. The cohesion indicator, which was based on
the sociometric date, was defined as the quotient of the quantity Of mutual C1101“.
divided by their maximal possible masher (CI). However, in view of the fact that
the traditional cohesion index does not always provide a true picture of mutual rela-
tionships existing in a group (there are groups in which there are no mtual choices,
even though all other choice variants are represented rather mletely), we decided
to introduce one more cohesion indicator, assessed on the basis of unity of choice
and based on H. Kendel's well known statistic-the concordance factor (2).

The 066 and UGH indicators were determined by calculating the frequency with which .
individuals showed preferences for particular goals (natives) , which were subsequently
ranked on the basis of frequency. Using Kendel's formula, we arrived at indices for
unity of goals and motives for each group.

Our procedure for studying 066 was based on the‘method of paired comarisons. Sub-
jecting normative documents regulating the activities of the W's to content analysis,
we first selected 10 of the most important goals of their work: - 1. wine and
criminal detection. 2. (rims prevention. 3. Interaction with the public in pre-
venting and solving crimes. 4. Improvenent of occupational proficiency. 5. Develop-
ment of high moral and official qualities, and others. He then made 45 different

pairs out of all 10 goals. Working with these pairs, which were written out on a
separate sheet, the subjects had to note which of two paired goals was more ilportant
to them. -

UGH was studied in similar fashion. Instead of goals, in this case we used the
possible motives of joint activity, for exaaple: l. Achieving good results in joint
work. 2. Maintaining good personal mtual relationships with each other. 3. Re-
ceiving job promotions, and so on.

'lhe actual work results of the collectives were evaluated on the basis of the
following nine indicators. 1. Crim solution. 2. Elimination of the causes and
conditions of crime. 3. Pursuit of hiding criminals. 4. Surveillance of persons
displaying antisocial behavior. 5. Work quality. 6. Legal education of the public.
7. Prompt examination of petitions by citizens. 8. lawfulness of actions.

9. Utilization of the achievements of science and technology.

The psychosocial indicators of successfulness were based on the oollective's degree

of organization, its performance. its aggressiveness, and awareness. 53°11 01 these
indicators was evaluated in turn by means of special questionnaires containing from -

9 to 13 judgments characterizing the activity of the collective from different sides.

Experts who evaluated the successfulness of the work of the collectives fell into two
categories: workers from a higher administrative level who, by the nature of their
activity, had to inspect the appropriate collective and render assistance to it. and
the leaders of the studied collectives. Each of these 18 collectives was evaluated
by five experts. the relationship between the successfulness indicators on one hand
and the different psychosocial characteristics of the group on the other was revealed
by ranking and then correlating the ranked series of groups in relation to the appro-
priate indicators.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Results

Table 1 shows the cohesion indicators for both unity of group goals and unity of group
activations as well as the socionetric cohesion indices of all of the collectives.
The respective collectives are designated on the left by capital letters. Occurrence

of the same letters indicates that the corresponding data are from the same now
subdivision.

Table l. Cohesion Indicators for the Sample

 

A; 0.02 0.075 0. 0| 0. 016
5, .0.l60 0.815 0. son 0.
B: 0.08 0.06 0. 80 0.
r 0.07' 0. 00 0. 0: OJ
‘0 0.311 a.” o m o.
B 0.80 0.80 0.8 8.0
if. a.” cam om mo.
3' 0.870 0.00 0.01 0.
. 0.00 0.00 .0 0.
A. 0.00 0.390 000.
' 5. - 0.04! 0.08
a. 0.00 0.1!
r 0.80 0.”
If. 0.217 0. son
0.00 0.7"
& 0.00 0.03 0
3. 0.20 0.089 0.0“ 0.I0.‘
“a 0.00 0.7." 0.00 0;“ .
cum: 0.07 0.00 [-0.900 up
wm . . . . '
m
Key:
1. Collectives S. USS
2. Indicators 6. CI
3. use _ . 7. Sample averages
4. UQI

We can see from Table 1 that the 066 coefficients vary from 0.150 to 0.630 while

the non coefficients vary from 0.340 to 0.721. 'lhe overall variants in the unity of
sociometric samples indicators (USS) are approximately within the same limits as

for the 066 and 06“ indicators--fron 0.208 to 0.806. (We will not compare (:1 indica-
tors with the 066, 06M and USS figures because they were calculated by means of
different statistical procedures.) .

Among the averages of the U66, van and USS indicators, the highest were for the 094
characteristics--0.583. 'mis indicates that of the three characteristics listed above.
cohesion defined as unity of motivation is the most developed psychosocial character-
istic of the sample, while cohesion defined as unity of socionetric choice is the

least developed.

We can hypothesize on the basis of these data that the collectives we analyzed are
not random. diffuse groups, but more or less developed commities. Particular evi-
dence of this can be found in the rather high indicators for unity of motivation and

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK urn-nun. USE ONLY

goals. Significant variations of these indicators along different collectives iaply

that the sample contains groups at differentuhighsr and lower-levels of psycho-
social development.

lb test the suggested hypotheses. we divided the sasple into two stbgroupsx collec-
tives at a higher level of development and collectives at a lower level of develop-
sent. his division was based prinarily on indicators characterising relationships
trediated by the content of activity, inasmuch as this characteristic is along the
principal ones used to evaluate a group's level of development (A. V. Petrevskiy).
There was no need to compare the studied grout» on the basis of the second of the
significant characteristics--the social value of joint activity, because there was
no doubt as to the usefulness of the activities of all mvo collectives.

For practical division of the sanple into two subgroups, we selected the median of
the sum of UGO and UGH indicators, equal to 0.920. Those collectives for which the
sum of 086 and OGM indicators was higher than the median were treated as groups at a
higher level of development, while those for which the corresponding sun was lower
than the median were treated as groups at a lower level of development.

Table 2 shows the cohesion indicators separately for groups at the higher and the
lower levels of psychosocial development.

Note that the average 066 and UGH indicators for the sanple containing groups at the
higher level of development surpass the corresponding indicators for the groups at

the lower level of development; in this case the statistical differences between the
average UGG and UGII indicators for the groups at different levels of development are

significant: t-3.978, p<0.005, and t-2.708, p<0.025 respectively.

Table 3 shows the activity successfulness indicators for the corresponding collectives
(the arithmetic means in a five-point system for each block of successfulness

characteristics and for all characteristics taken together).

Note that the data in Table 3 are based on an external criterion, independent of UGG
and 06“, for dividing the sample into two subgroups—level of developnsnt. and thus
they confirm the validity of the division made based on psychosocial indicators.

he mean of the actual activity successfulness indicator and all other means of the
psychosocial indicators (except for degree of organisation) and the overall integral
successfulness indicator are higher in those M which we categorized as groups
at a higher level of development on the basis of 066 and can.

me next table, Table 4, shows SpearIIsn's coefficients of rank correlation between
cohesion and efficiency indicators for collectives at different levels of developtsent.

no data in the upper part of Table 4 show that seven coefficients of correlation
between successfulness, 066 and UGMuthat is, actually more than half--are significant

(for n-9 and [240.05. Ber-0.583). The remaining five are also positive and suffi-
ciently close to the critical value.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Cohesion Indicators for Groups at Different levels of Development

1. Group

2. Level of development
. Cohesion indicators

3

4. U66
S. 0614
6. USS

 

9§§§
s22§

§§§§3.
3'

.3.
=§§§§

£3
00000
a.

0
0
0
.'o
0
0
0
0
0

L.
._

~

.
9999°°

asks;
§§§§2§§

Eiéﬁé

N
.8

090090099
099999999

3
3

7. CI

8. High

9. Averages for groups at higher level
of development

lo. Low

ll. Averages for groups at lower level of

development

Both coefficients of correlation between 006, UGH and the integral successfulness
indicators for collectives at the higher level of development are significant, while
both coefficients of correlation between USS and CI indicators and the integral
successfulness indicator are insignificant.

Not one of the twelve coefficients of correlation between successfulness and cohesion
indicators determined on the basis of sociometric choices achieved the level of
statistical significance. with half of these coefficients being negative.

Thus interpersonal mutual relationships mediated by the content of activity (unity of
group goals and unity of group activation in this case) in collectives at a higher

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'rubu- 3. Activity Successfulncss Indicators for Collectives at Different levels
of Psychouocial Developmnt

   

     
      
       
       
   

(1’ (2) 3 .
"m- itts: 2.133};

 

 

  

A ‘ maul 3.38 3.56 - 3.12 , .- 3.“ “3.75 '_ 3.09;"
of”) mm- 3.54 3.50 - 3.15 “3.30. 333-: ..3.0a -
a. mom 3.33 2.36 .- 4.11 : 3.": ~ 3.00 .. .-3.01-
5. «com 3.30 3.50 3.13 3.10 - mo, 3.11 .
3. eucoxuh 3.55 2.70_ - 3.56 2.0 3.15 ' 3J9
mom 4.00 . 3.31 - 4.11! 4.03 \ 0.55 -;_ 4,41
mom 3.04 3.03 4.55 3.30 4 4.43 4.00
H. mom 3.22 - 2.96 _ a.“ - 2.91 3.:3 - 3.13
a. mm 3.92 '-3.30- "-4.01 , 3.11 4.33 3.33._
cm n0 rpyn- 3.53 . ,3.3|. : 5.04; ,_ 3.05- -. 3.33 ,._ p 3.33 '-
I'III "com . - ' ' -' . '1 - , ' ‘ . ; ‘ '
mm was» 1 *2. ' _ . ., ..
s m 3.52 3.5 3.15 : 32.03 4.10 3.11
r' 91%... 3.10 3.21 3.30 . - 3.40 3.03 . 3.43
if mm 2.93 2.00 3.3 - .:.-.3.10 3.30 3.:3
3K. mm 2.11 3.90 3.03 .3 3.30 ;‘3.30 . 3.30 _
a. nun: 3.30 3.33 3.45. ‘-.3.03 - 3.31., 3.33
3. 30-3qu 3.21 3.40 3.40 3.0: 3.05 , 3.51
A. mm 3.31 3.30- 3.33 . 350 .- 3.35- 3.04
Ilaaul ' 3.66 3.50 8.75 4.“ ' .. LIB : 3.: 3.83 .-
R sum“ 2.96 3.03 3.” 2.” . - 8.W. - 2.96 ._

   

  

   

     

      
 

 

 

prme no rpyn- 3.23 .3.« 3:35 '_ 331‘ .331 ;" 3.«-
mamaoroypoa- -..' .. . .7
3a pan-urn - . .. . . .

____—_—.___—————————-U—-——

Key

1. Group 8. Overall, integral successfulness

2. Level of development indicator

3. Actual successfulness 9. High

4. Degree of organization 10. Averages for groups at higher level of

S . Awareness development

6. Performance 11. low

7. Aggressiveness 12. Averages for groups at lower level of
development

level of development--that is. in which the second stratum of mutual relationships
is already forlned--were found to be a significant factor of successfulness, being

note important than mutual relationships appraised by means of traditional socionetric
indices. This confirms the first of the suggested hypotheses.

let us now examine the data shown in the bottom part of Table 4. Out of 24 rank
correlation coefficients shown in it, not one achieved satisfactory statistical

significance. ’lhis means that in groups at a lower level of development. there is
generally no specific dependence between cohesion. evaluated on the basis of our

indicators, and efficiency, which confirms the second of the suggested hypotheses.

38

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY ‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 4. Correlations Between Cohesion and Effectiveness Indicators for collectives
at Different Levels of Development

up- $3.1. .
WW- ~-.-~- m' “a '
:33??- yeu. mason! _ one casein. cane; f-Lonn '
Opt-announcers (9) second 0.442 '0.” ‘ —0.%' 0.362
mmwmaig’m 8233’.- m -:-e .332:
m (12). mus-0.5a ..-.o.m —oZm' 02m

Mammal...” ‘70.“ -‘0.'.- . ’ . .
vsm-om.(14)._ - . ‘3‘ 42}? 70.19:

h - sum ' . . ‘ ’ .
"'78-’13 you —0lI6 0261_ 4.183 0.273

 

Cousins-Isms (9 mad —o.né o.u1 o.u1 ' 0.100
aponuuom ) was! 4354 0.413 0.3l3 4.221
nooooaoctd seam 0.346 0.35 0.330 0.030
Were (12) was! 4.4“ 0.37 .-0.24I '4.”
Odds! um team 4.39 0.334 4.0” 0.000
yeasmsoets l -
Key:
1. Successfulness indicators 9. Degree of organization
2. Level of develoth lo. Awareness
3. Cohesion indicators 11. Performance
4. 066 12. Aggressiveness
5. 06!! 13. High
5. USS 14. Overall integral successfulness
7. CI indicator
8. Actual successfulness 15. now

The obtained data indicate that in groups at a cooperatively lower level of develop-

ment, in which the stratum of relationships mediated by the content of the activity

is insufficiently developed, official relationships may be substituted by emotional
interpersonal relationships. As had been demonstrated (1). in groups at a low level
of development emotional interpersonal relationships may be neutral, or they may
generally hinder successful joint work. But if we consider that in our research the
groups at a lower level of development were represented by collectives actually in
existence--that is, by comunities exhibiting a level of development between a diffuse
group and a formed collective, the reason why a statistically significant dependence
between effectiveness and mutual relationships was not documented in this case becomes
understandable. In them, the second stratum of relationships was probably developed
only to an extent which would prevent negative manifestation of emotional interpersonal

ties.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On the whole. the results show that a collective's unity of goals and activation is

a condition of its successful work, and they demustrate that the paramters of the
second stratum of intragroup activity, isolated and described by the theory of media-
tion of interpersonal relationships in a collective by activity, are important factors
of a collective's efficiency. 'Ihis opens up new possibilities for considering practi-
cal ways for exerting an influence on the efficiency of collective 1abor, and it
encourages the researcher to seek those conditions which promote forution, within a
collective, of relationships mediated by the content of its activity.

1.

6.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Vaysnan, R. 5., “The Correlation Between interpersonal Relationships and Group
Effectiveness of Activity,” VOPKSY PSIKBOLOGII, No 4, 1977, pp 64-74.

Kendel, M., “Bangovyye korrelyatsii" [Rank correlations], Statistika, Moscow,
1975.

Nemv, R. 5.. ”The Psychological ‘meory of the mllective, and Problem of
Group Efficiency," VOPROSY PSIKHOIOGII, no 5, 1978, pp 53-63.

Pctrovskiy, A. v., "Some Phenomena of Interpersonal Relationships in a Collective,”
VOPROSY PSIlQ-IOIDGII, No 3, 1976, pp 16-26.

Petrovskiy, A. V., ”Experience in Deriving a Psychosocial Conception of Group
Activity." vomosv psmlomcn, No 5, 1973. pp 3-18.

Petrovskiy, A. V. (Editor). “Psikholoqicheskaya teoriya kollektiva“ [Psychologi-
cal Theory of the Collective], Moscow, 1979, 239 pp.

COPYRIGﬂT: "Voprosy psikhologii", 'Pedagogika", 1981

11004

CSO:

8144/1842

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INVESTIGATION OF SIMTIONAL SOCIAL ATTITUDE 0P POLAR WEBB
ibscow VOPMSY PSIKHOLOGII in mssian No 3. Hay-Jun Bl pp 132-136

[Article by N. V. Yadovl

next] As Sh. A. Nadirashvili (4) and V. A. Yadov (6) have shown, social attitudes
are contained within a more-general system of the sibject's value orientations and
attitudes--his personality dispositions. Analysis of the inﬂuence the conditions of
activity have upon formation of recorded social attitudes, which can be distinguished
into relatively general and concrete situational social attitudes. has inportant
significance to the study of the regulatory tunctions played by social attitudes.

'lhis article examines the influence of relative social isolation of a group upon
situational social attitudes (SSA's).' What is unique about this level of the dis-
positional hierarchy is that in distinction tron its highest levels (value orientations
and the overall orientation of the personality's interests). determined relative to
stable general social conditions and responsible for programing the individual's
activities over significant periods of life, the function of SSA's is basically

to support activity. 'me stability of the dispositional system is ensured by the
highest dispositional constructs. while adaptation to the particular conditions of
activity is supported by the lower levels of this hierarchy-~general and. especially,
situational social attitudes ((6). P 189).

Data in the Soviet and foreign literature indicate that the value orientations of.
people volunteering for lengthy polar expeditions have a specific structure (1.11).

We studied SSA's toward the work and personal qualities of workers having considerable
experience in winter work at polar stations in the Arctic and Antarctic. We assmed
that the relative social isolation of polar explorers (the unique features of such
isolation were described well by N. Yu. Khryashcheva; see (8)) should have an effect
on the nature of their situational social attitudes mainly because the latter promote
adaptation of the individual to the concrete circumstances of his life.

 

I'Jtt would be more correct to refer to a recorded situational social attitude. We will
drop the term "recorded” from the subsequent discussion because it will deal only with
recorded dispositions of the personality. in contrast to actual dispositions studied
in a laboratory experinent.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
conventional (not isolated) conditions.

stations (seven were distinguished in all. For example: taking instrunnnt readings.
processing the day's observations, free tile. crash program and so on). A high evalu-
ation given to a particular occupational or personal quality during a “liked' stage
and a low evaluation given during an "unliked" stage inpliee a high positive attitude
toward the given quality. while a lower evaluation of the quality during a 'liked"
ton: of work and a high evaluation during a “disliked“ form of work ilplies a strong
negative attitude toward the given quality. Bach quality was evaluated on the basis
of four bipolar seven-term scales: 'recognition'--that is, the wish that this
quality would be valued in the given stage: 'realisability'--that is, an assessmnt
as to the extent to which the given quality could be realized in the given stage:
"effectiveness”"an assessment of the successfulness of the guality's utilization,

the indicators derived in accordance with these scales assume values from 0.8 to 0.9:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The overall indicator of an attitude toward a particular quality was calculated as
the difference of the average evaluations, based on the four scales, between two of
the met ”liked” and two of the met “disliked" stages of work. 'lhe author of this
method calculated the stability of the overall indicator. He found 85 percent agree-
ment in evaluations based on the seven-tern scale, made by a sasple of so subjects
in a repeat test 2 weeks after the first trial.

Forty workers of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute (geodesiets,
oceanologists, meteorologists. aerologisu and so on) who had spent not less than
two winters at research stations were selected for the experimental group: the average
nunber of winters for the sample of 40 persons was 5.8. 'Ihe control group consisted
of 40 engineers working for planning organizations in neningrad, studied earlier by
Kissel' in accordance with the same procedure.‘

'Ihe point sampling technique was used to select the control grOup (40 persons out of
1.000 studied) --that is, subjects were selected on a "one-to-one" basis, as a result
of which a subject in the control group selected on the basis of four parameters
sinultaneously--sex, education, age and tin of work in his specialty--corresponded

to one subject in the main group. Consequently it could be expected that differences
obtained in a comparison of the main and control group were the product of different
working conditions. For the experimental group the working conditions were represented
by a situation of relative social isolation at a polar station, while the control

group experienced the typical psychosocial conditions of work and life in a large city.

Results and Discussion
1. Generalization of Situational Social Attitudes

'me weaning which a subject of activity injects into a certain integral set of SSA's
toward particular qualities of the worker was defined as the content of situational
social attitudes.

Table 1 shows the correlation matrices for 13 occupational and personal qualities for

the min and control samples; the acquired data permitted comparison of seven of these
qualities, while the rest were recorded only in the polar explorer sample.

We qualities of responsibility and creativity (”a creative approach to work“) can

be adopted in both samples as primary to interpretation of the general meanings within
the framework of which SSA's are generalized. For polar station workers, the same

can be said for the quality of coummicativeness. As far as the first two qualities
are concerned. the basis for treating them as primary categories lies in the fact that
as a property of the personality, responsibility expresses predominantly the social
orientation of the individual. his obligations to the collective: effective fulfillment
of work obligations is the object of responsibility (see (5) , pp 94-95). Creativity

___._._—-———-—-——-—-

“the author expresses his deep gratefulness to colleagues of the Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research Institute-~comrades R. N. Glinskiy, 0. K. Sedov, A. L. Matusov,

I. P. Ryabinin and A. P. Bizyuk-u-for their benevolent assistance to the research,
and to USSR Academy of Sciences ISBP [not further identified] colleague A. h. Kissel'

for providing the data used for selection of the control group of engineers.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is predominantly the preparedness and predisposition for manifesting one's individual-
ity, one's dissimilarity to others--that is. one's desire for self-assertion.‘

No complexes of qualities were obtained in the polar explorer sanple: responsibility
("responsibility," “punctuality," "attentiveness" and "conscientiousness") and con-mani-
cativeness ("commieativeness," 'reserve.‘ I'l'lenevolence,“ and "strong will“). ﬁle
attitudes of polar explorers toward all other qualities correlate positively with one
or several attitudes toward qualities in the responsibility oonplex. Statistically
significant negative correlations were discovered between sex: toward qualities in

the oouplex of responsibility and associated qualities on one hand and attitudes toward
qualities in the comunicativeness complex on the other.

“No complexes of qualities were also discovered in the control sample of engineers:
creativity ("a creative approach to work,‘. "independence," “experience and lmowledge")
and responsibility ('responsibility,” "organization,“ 'conscientiousness'). Signifi-
cant negative correlation exists between situational social attitudes toward a

creative approach to work and responsibility (the key qualities in these two complexes).

Thus all attitudes of polar explorers toward qualities having to do specifically with
work (all with the exception of those in the connunicativeness cosplex) are correlated
with each other to a greater or lesser degree of statistical significance: 'nley are
all perceived as a certain unity of personality traits prompting successful occupa-
tional activity. Among engineers. “awhile. we observe a clear contrast between
creativity and responsibility.

This result may be explained within the framsork of the suggested hypothesis by the
fact that relative isolation causes polar explorers to seek consistency between sub-
jective programs of activity and the external prescribed requirements upon the pro-
duction organization, while in the activity of engineers, subjective programs and
organizational requirements are in a unique sort of opposition.

does work in stable and customary conditions. 'Ihese results are consistent with our
ideas about responsibility relationships in collectives ((5). p 95). The? confirm
the dominant role played by the objective conditions of activity in formation of
social attitudes. .

his conclusion is also confirmed by an analysis of the emotional attitudes of polar
explorers and engineers toward different aspects of. their work. The negative correla-
tions between the responsibility and creativity colplexes in engineers and between
the responsibility and comicativeness complexes in polar explorers can be explained

“me diametrical opposition of the tendency to meld with the society and the tendency
to isolate (single out) one's ego as the source of needs is examined by G. G. Dili-

genskiy (2). and it is the methodological grounds for the division nude between
the corresponding personality qualities revealed in our data.

 

44

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

009308 you on»: n75 oz 00.33.26 933°» 30.530: 5.8930 ov 53:8 woman-an anon 3qu

                        
                    

 
  

 

   

 

2.6 .2... .3... .. .«86 ...«6I 63.6! .36l «3.... . .._..I 3... «2.7. 1.6!...“ ”6.3.48...“ 6.
I :«6 . .6 8.6I $36! .86I L... ._I :«6 .636I .26 .«..”.I :36! . Iota-8...: ..«.
I. .o .6 £2”! u«6l .636... 3.6!. 3.6 L .36.. .26. .8. ..I .8. .. .. .g. :

I h p. I Q OHOI ~OIHOI an“ .I n.0lu h ..”I 900.0 van. OI ‘na.°.l . ,. .0-
. . I a... "a... an .2”... . .. .H “an”- an as- g H“.

_ . J ”.86 a.” u .3» 3.6I . a... .2”. . in: .«

. 6.« o I. «. . 3 o :9.” 26 «3.. 0838.888 6

a «6 . u: . I .636 3... «2. 3— . 6

b ".0 .5... I .010 conn. .— .u . .P

. .«o. .I .26 .6 I ..«I. o «:6 6

a... O 0.1. ~90. .OI av... coo-4° v.—I.u in; I 1.ng .O

.3. .I 3.. o .8. o 6... o as. . .zol. . 9.2.88.5.—

.Illllllllll £3

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
by their membership to opposite emotional zones. In this case negative or positive

emtional zones are associated with negative or positive attitudes toward given forms
of work.

According to our data the possibility for displaying one's occupational qualities is
the principal criterion for awarding a positive eaotional assessment to a given form
of work by polar station workers. This conclusion agrees with the results of research

conducted at American stations in the Antarctic, according to which professionalism
is the main criterion by which an expedition miner is evaluated (10).

2. Intensity of Situational Social Attitude

The second hypothesis presupposed revelation of a correlation between the strength of
mmative pressure and the intensity of effort invested into a particular form of
activity on one hand and the intensity of situational social attitude on the other.
mic hypothesis was tested by comparing the average values for the situational atti-
tudes of polar explorers and engineers (Table 2).

Table 2. Intensity of situational Social Attitudes Expressed 'lbward Occupational

and Personal Qualities by Polar Explorers (1-40) and Planning Organization
Engineers (N -40)

Polar

(Inject of Activity mlorers mmeers A
Attentiveness 0.64 - -
Experience and knowledge 0.59 0.56 0.03*
Organisation 0.47 0.02 0.45
Independence 0. 36 0. 42 O . 06‘
Efficiency 0.34 - -
Punctuality 0.31 -0.45 0.96
Responsibility 0. 29 0. 28 0. 08*
Creative approach to work 0.20 1.42 1.62
Conscientiousness 0. 20 -O. 49 0. 69
Reserve 0.10 - -
Strong will 0.01 - -
Oomunicativeness -0. 56 - - -
Benevolence -0.67 - -

'Differences are insignificant at p60.05.

Among engineers, attitudes of maxim intensity and positiveness are recorded in
relation to creativity, weak attitudes are recorded in relation to organization, and
sufficiently intense and negative attitudes are recorded in relation to the "punctu-
ality“ and "conscientiousness' qualities. Amng polar researchers, the most intense
attitudes are associated with the qualities of commicaticm moreover they fall
within the zone of negative emotions (these attitudes were not masured for engineers).
may are also associated with most occupational qualities, including those having to

do with diligence. In contrast to the engineers, the latter qualities have an emo-
tionally positive character. low values were obtained for attitudes toward the

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'conscientiousneea' and “creative approach to work“ qualities. and the lowest were
for the ”reserve” and "strong will" qualities. ~

attitude on the strength of normative pressure.
volitional efﬁort. According to the first

I
ment or organization (the pressure at "externei' program of activity).
th . . .

are negatively
colored owing to the fact that they are associated with the emotionally negative zone

of activity, which requires significant volitional effort to surmun

' tivee of polar
anlorets (1,10).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consequently the-needs that serve as the basis for formation of the special attitudes

examined here are expressed rather clearly by both engineers and polar explorers.
and therefore the hypothesis that volitional effort is significant to an explanation
of the intensity of the described ssa's renains fully valid.

Conclusions

1. mlative social isolation has an influence on formation of social attitudes.
Coincidence Of collective and individual drives for activity that is more clearly

pronounced than in normal conditions and lore-active subjective involvement in joint
activity are typical of polar explorers.

It was discovered that the unusual conditions of relative social isolation noticeably
influence the means by which situational social attitudes, formed into comlexss
different from those typical of the control group of engineers, are generalized.

2. The intensity of a situational social attitude depends on the intensity of voli-
tional effort exmnded upon the activity associated with the object of the attitude.
'me more intense the corresponding volitional effort is, the were intense is the
situational social attitude toward the means of perfor-ing the given activity.

3. In the eyes of the specialized polar explorer, the attractiveness of his work is
mainly the product of the possibility allowed for utilizing his occupational knowledge,
while the zone of negative emotions is associated with jobs not specifically associated
with the individual's occupation, time off, and self-service.

4. It may be hypothesized from the practical aspect that more-successful adaptation
to working in isolation depends directly on the active occupational orientation of
the specialist. 0n the other hand a weakened occupational orientation may serve as a
destabilizing factor.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Volkov, I.IP., Matusov, A. L. and Ryabinin, I. P., "Psychosocial msearch on
Motives for Applying for Work with the Soviet Antarctic Expedition,“ raceway
ARKTIKI I MIAMTIXI, No 42, 1973, pp 66-71.

2. Diligenskiy, G. 6., ”'n'xe meory of Human Needs,“ VOW! HIDSOFII, No 2, 1976,
pp 30-43; No 2. 1977, pp 111-123.

3. Magun, v. 3., “me Mtual Blationship Between Significance of Different Personal
Needs and ‘meir Degree of Satisfaction,‘I VOP‘ROSY psmiowcn, No 6, 1978. pp 86-93.

4. Nadirashvili, Sh. 1L, "Ponyatiye ustanovki v obshchey i eotsial'noy psikhologii"
[The Concept of Attitude in General and Social Psychology], 'lbilisi, 1974, 170 pp.

5. Petrovskiy, A. v. (Editor). 'Psikhologicheskaya teoriye kollektiva" [Psychological
Theory of the Collective], ibscow, 1979, 240 pp.

6. Yadov, v. A. (Editor). “Samregulyatsiya i prognosirovaniye sotsial'nogo poveden-
iya lichnosti" [Self-Regulation and Prediction of the Social Behavior of the
Personality]. Moscow, 1979, 264 pp.

(08

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7.

9._

10.

11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yadov, V. A. (Editor), “Sotsial'no-pslkhologldmskly portret 1nzheneza' I'me
Psychosocial Portrait of the Engineer], Moscow, 1977, 232 pp.

Khtyashcheva, N. Yu., “A Psychological Description of Living and Working Condi-
tions at Antarctic Stations,” BKSPBRIHBN’ML'NAYA I PRIMYA PSIKBOIDGIYA,
No 8, 1977, pp 110-114.

lezner, H. G., “The Justice Native in Social Behavior," J. OF SOCIAL ISSUES,
Vol 31, 1975, pp 1-19.

Law, P., "Personality Problem in Antarctica," MEDICAL J. 01' AIBTRALIA, No 47,
1960. PP 273-282.

Natani, K. _ and Shuzles, J. '1'., "Sociopaychological Aspects of a Winter Vigil
at South Pole Station," ANTMCTIC mm 83313, Vol 22, 1974, pp 89-114.

Halster, 3., Beracheids, E. and walater, C., "New urectlons in mlty Research,”
J. FEES. AND PSYCHOL., Vol 25, No 2, 1973, pp 172-119.

COFYRIGHT: "Voprosy psikhologil", "Pedaqoqlka", 1981

11004

C50:

8144/1842

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm W PSYCHOLOGY 3mm
Hoscow VOPIDSY PSLKHOLOGII in hissian No 3. May-Jun 81 pp 179-182
(Article by 1. x. Valovaya. KhIr'IwV. and ‘1'. V- Whine. Moscow}

[Text] the Fifth Seminar on Management Psychology was conducted 29-30 January 1981

in Riga on the initiative of the Order of the Red Labor Banner Scientific Research
Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical
Sciences, and the Latvian Division of the Central Scientific msearch' Laboratory
(TsNIL) of the USSR Ministry of Internal Affairs. Its objectives included: discussing
the present status and trends of research in management psychology; developing a uni-
fied position in relation to the definition of its subjects, methods and principals:
exchanging experience in solving a number of theoretical, experimental and practical
problems of managenent psychology.

Seventeen reports and communications were heard in the seninar's sessions.

Organizing committee chairman V. V. Davydov (tbscow) emphasized in his introductory
remarks that research on control processes is a matter of great practical importance
aimed at producing an economic impact. the efforts of psychologists and specialists
in associated sciences must be unified for such research.

B. s. Vaynshteyn (Moscow) noted that the relationship between economic and social
ispact is a relationship between resources and goals, and that increasingly greater

significance should new be attached to the social ispact. 'lhe speaker emphasised
that management psychology is based not on ”the power of comand" but rather on sani-

festation of the will of the collective. and he proposed his own plan of further re-
search in this area of science. to include analysing the concept "psychosocial climate
of. the collective," developing the methods of forming and sustaining the psychosocial
climate, studying direct and reciprocal ties between production and the psychosocial

climate, and investigating the sychology of decision making.

In his report "Basic Problems of the Psychology of Managerial Labor," V. V. Davydov
emphasized that according to Karl Marx, managemt “creates consistency between indi-
vidual efforts, and it performs the general functions brought into being by the

notion of the entire production organism" (Marks, r.. and angel's, P., “Sochﬂ' [Works].
Vol 23, p 342) . He noted that psychology has long been studying human labor, and
mntal labor in particular. ‘lherefore the general laws of labor should also be
extended to managerial labor as one of the forms of mental labor, perforned in the
course ofan individual's activity. the study of the laws of the latter is within the
province of psychology. In the speaker's opinion the structure of activity (as defined
by a. N. Ieont'yev) is also at the basis of unagerial activity. The suggestion that

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a special need exists--the need for managing (the essence of which lies in the need
for coordinating individual actions)--was made. The general task of management
psychology is to plan the ways and means of producing the greatest impact. In general,
mental labor begins with the ability to make plans. Imagination, reflection and
analysis play a great role in this case. ‘me speaker noted the need for creating
role-playing methods of teaching managers.

A. I. Prokhorov (Moscow) and R. E. Bl'bur (Riga) described. in the report "Some
Methodological Problems of Management Psychology," management psychology as a sub-
division of applied psychology studying the psychological aspects of management with
the purpose of raising management effectiveness. 'lhe min issue, according to them,
is how and by what methods and resources the psychological factors are to be taken
into account. Offering a general description of the present status of the problem,
the speakers euphasized that Soviet management psychology had no right to take the
roads already traveled by foreign management psychology, repeating its rig-sags and
falling into the same dead-ends. The foundations of management psychology cannot be
reduced to a limited nunber of formal logical principles: they mmt be defined by
the principles of dialectical logic. with a consideration for the requirements of
material realities and practical activity.

In his report ”Problems of Managing Natural Resources“ I. v. Davidenko (Hoscow) turned
attention to the fact that when we draw up general management programs we forget the
most general and most important problem-«hat of managing natural resources. All .
power production is based, and will continue to be based, on the use of natural re-
sources, which are exhaustible. why, then, has the program for utilizing natural
resources (and the subprogram for managing natural reso 3) found itself on the
sidelines? The reasons have to do with psychology. d, the speaker believes,

is not philosophically prepared. This is why successful ‘solution of the important
problems of management psychology cannot rely only on mathematical support alone.
Psychological support is no less important. The problem basically boils down to regu-
lating the relationships between man and nature. And man must be taught to participate
in these relationships--that is, the problem of man‘s ecological education arises.

A report given by I. I. Goley (Moscow), “Using the Energy Approach in Integrated
Analysis of Organization Management System," discussed the fundamental possibility
of such an approach. Its basic premises are presented in works by P. G. Kuznetsov
analyzing the thermodynamic aspects of the phenomena of life. his approach ensures
completeness of integrated analysis by bringing together the economic, organizational
and psychosocial components of a system's expedient behavior. Practical application
of this approach to analysis of concrete organizations made it possible, for the
first time, to tie in the economic results of a system's activity with its morpho-
logical and functional structure, to reveal and estimate the internal reserves of the
organization and to develop the general principles of evaluating the activities of the
system's subdivisions and their directors.

1hc bulk of the report given by L. K. Karnozova (lbscow), “Integrated Research on Pro-
duction Control Systems," is devoted to the experience of integrated efforts to raise
the effectiveness of management by the Division of Applied Problems of the USSR

Academy of Pedagogical Sciences Scientific Research Institute of General and Pedagogical
Psychology. It is concluded that a transition must be made from an administrative-
managerial form of organization of integrated scientific projects to a methodological

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

form of organization. It is esphasized that despite the difficulty of achieving
practical application of this conclusion, this problem must be solved right now. at
the beginning of the new five-year plan when the plans for work extending into the
rather distant future are being drawn up.

A report by V. s. Lazarev (Moscow), ”Some Features of Psychological Analysis of the
Effectiveness of Organization mnagementﬂ' examined an approach to simulating decision
making processes based on interpretation of management as activity associated with
writing and implementing plans. (he inportant feature of problem solution in collective
activity is the cyclic nature of this process: A decision-concerning a means for re-
solving a problem situation may be changed many tins in the course of its implementa-
tion. Therefore those approaches to studying decision making which use, as their unit
of analysis, a single decision making act (irrespective of whether only a choice of

one out of many alternatives is examined or formation of alternatives is included in

the research) prevent a correct understanding of the mechanisms behind decision making
in control system.

A report by V. I. Chernenilov (Moscow), ”Pressing Problems of Manageunt Psychology,‘
examines a nunber of methodological problems in management psychology: the history of
the origin and the principles of isolating the starting unit of analysis of management.
the level of coordination in control systems, integration of the work of Emotionally
and organizationally isolated organizations, and the psychological postulates of
management conceptions and practices. the results of research on the influence of the
level of coordination of a control system's functions on the effectiveness of the
organization's work are presented. '

G. M. Breslav's report (Riga), “Correction of Emotional Deviations as a Problem of
Management Psychology.” discussed the fact that the lost imortant direction of psycho-
logical research on management processes is isolation of those dynamic and material
features of the development of activations which may cause distortions in formation of
the harmonic personality--that is, the report discussed pedagogical control. Methods
of indirect influence upon a child's socialization in different form of joint activity

were proposed. It was emphasized that inadequate or insufficient control of the edu- _
cation process is not revealed until the adolescent stage: moreover, correction is more
difficult than education.

It was asserted in a report by s. D. Neverkovich and G. P. Shchedrovitskiy (meow),
"Development of Psychological Methods for Studying Processes Preparatory to Making
Management Decisions.“ that the present level of development of science and technology
requires intensification of production, which must be based on broad cooperation.

The activities of the ”Biokhimreaktiv" ScientifichProduction Association in Olayne,
Latvian SSR, was used as an examle in an examination of fundamentally new forms and
methods of making management decisions. The difference between functions of the enter-
prise aimed at plan fulfillment and efforts aimed at progressive development of
collective thinking was emphasized. An assessment of broad cooperation must be based
on the degree of development of production, which must be capable of reacting quickly
and flexibly to new problem through new ways of collective thinking brought about by
role-playing training methods.

In his report "A Psychological Model of the Activity of the Director of an Internal
Affairs Agency," 3. B. Kossov (Ibscow) made it known that the personalities of

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

entering students, students and fully qualified directors are being studied with the
purpose of inproving the selection and training of management organizers at the
Academy of the USSR Ministry of Internal Affairs. The academy has developed the
conception of the practical structure of the director's personality. General abili-
ties determining the effectiveness and reliability of activity are the personality
variables considered in this conception. A multidimensional questionnaire method for
studying the personality and activity of a director (the HOMILD) has been used to
create a number of structural models describing the work style of directors. 'lhe
system-forming element of these mdels. which differ from one another, was the
effectiveness of managerial activity. The models are multidimensional (branched)
and multi-level (hierarchical).

8. Ya. Kuritskiy (Leningrad) noted that while the technical aspect of control systems
is developing with sufficient intensity, efforts to solve the problems of psychologi-
cal support to automated control system are weak. 'Ihe question of certifying
directors for work with automated control systems was raised. Mention was made of
the great amunt of work done under the guidance of A. I. Prokhorov at the USSR
Academy of Pedagogical Sciences Scientific Research Institute of General and Peda~
gogical Psychology to provide psychological support to automated control system.

A report by A. v. Hinayev (Moscow), “Use of Energy Models of Expanded Reproduction to
Improve Control Systems," turned attention to creating the conditions for coordinating
the actions of different subdivisions and services of a control system. The importance
of infatuation services and orientation functions in a control system operating on a
relatively independent basis was emphasized in this connection. A criterion by which
to assess the effectiveness of an organization's production activity was proposed.

1he formula for this criterion ties in indicators describing the activities of
different subdivisions. It was obtained by connining and refining the basic mathe-
matical models proposed by V. G. Afanas'yev and P. G. Kuznetsov as part of their energy
approach.

v. v. Poluyanskiy (Kiev) described the potentials of a team leader as a director, and

his influence upon the team. he distinguished blocks of traits important to a team's
work (stability. job satisfaction and so on ).

A report by V. l. Bashmakov (Moscow), "'me Need for Sociological Support to Control
Sysuems," emphasized that management of the society and its individual subsystems is
also social management, with people--individuals making up the social comity, groups,
and individual personalities together with all of their biological, social and mental
properties--b¢ing the basis of subjective relationships. Therefore no matter what levels
and stages are discussed, the study of the human aspects of management is an inseparable
part of efforts to make control systems and processes more efficient. however, the
behavior of an individual in certain social situations cannot be sensibly described

just by means of the categories of psychological science alone. Psychological analysis
of control systems must be preceded by a couples of sociological studies. We direc-
tions of this sort of studies are most important today: 1) development of the nethod-
ological principles of describing management system as social systems: 2) study of
social interaction in control system and of the relationships-and ties existing be-
tween the subject and the object of control, and within the subject and the object.
Research on the sociological and psychological aspects of planning, viewed as the
foundation of strategic management and as a continuous process characterized by
self-regulation, has special significance.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
we OH'ILML USE ONLY

Integrated Approach to and leprovement of a Control System," asserted that development
of technical resources today and growth in the requirements on the quality of manage-
ment have made it necessary to create different methods for raising the effectiveness

certify engineers. technicians, and office workers. The "listhod of Certifying Bite!-
prise Engineers, technicians and Office Workers“ developed by the authors under

A. I. Prokhorov's guidance satisfies the following requirements: It promotes correct
placement of management personnel, effective organization of management activity,

development of the enterprise and with the "Personnel“ automated control subsystem, and
it promotes improvement of the psychological climate. Experience in using this method
at a number of enterprises in Moscow and Moscow (blast was described.

Discussions centered mainly on what the object of management psychology is and on the
role and place of planning in managerial activity. Almost all speakers noted that the
accent mist be placed on the psychological aspects of management.

In his concluding remarks V. V. Davydov noted the significance of work done during
the year (after the fourth seminar) in management psychology. At the same time he
emphasized the shortcomings: at one hand few concrete studies were performed, while
on the other hand there are things still unclear in relation to a nunber of methodo-
logical problems.

Reconunendaticns to organizations and specialists engaged in research and development
in management psychology were developed and adopted at the seminar.

0n the whole the seminar was a demnstration of management psychology's confident
movement along the path of its development, of the growing interest of specialists of
different profiles toward this subdivision of psychological science and of its growing
significance to the national economy.

COPYRIGH‘: "Voprosy psikhologii", “Pedagogika', 1981

11004
(30: 8144/1842

5!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTIFIC-PRACTICAL commas OF "G" SCHOOL OF PSYCHOLOGY
Moscow VOPROSY PSIKJIOLOGII in Russian No 3, Hay-Jun 81 pp 182-183
[Article by v. S. Ageyev. Moscow]

Next] On 16-17 February 1981 the ecu [hoscow State University] school of psychology
conducted a scientific-practical conference attended by the department or social

psychology and by the sociological laboratory of the uraspol' Sewing Association
imeni 40-hotiye VLKSM, devoted to the activity of a psychologist at an industrial
enterprise. Other participants of its proceedings included representatives or
several Moscow industrial enterprises, colleagues of the departments of engineering
psychology and labor psychology, graduates of the school of psychology «played by
industry, and students of the school of psychology specialising in social psychology.

In his introductory remarks A. A. Bodalev, dean of the 860 school of psychology,
emphasized the urgent need for introducing the results of psychological research into
practice more and more broadly, and he gave the outlines of the basic directions of
applied research in light or the decisions or the 26th CPSU Congress. A. P. Pavlova,

Tiraspol' Sewing Association assistant director for management, social development and
personnel. described this enterprise's achievements in relation to both technical-
economic indicators and social development of the association's collective. under the
leadership of Hero of Socialist Labor V. S. Solov'yeva this association has now held
first place in this sector's all-union socialist coupetition for 110 quarters. 'me
speaker noted that the enterprise's successes were in many ways the product of applied
research and the practical recomIendations developed by colleagues or the enterprise's
sociological laboratory, which emloys four psychologists including three graduates of
the M60 school of psychology. A. E‘. Pavlova also emphaised that the effectiveness of
the enterprise's psychosocial service stems from the fact that the laboratory collective
not only conducts specific applied studies and develops practical reconendations on
their basis. but it also works actively together with the association's administration
to achieve practical introduction of these recommendations in various areas or the
life of the Tiraspol‘ Sewing Association's workers.

V. V. Chichilimov, chief of the association's sociological laboratory, described a
complex of specific-purpose laboratory programs starting with statement of socially
meaningful problems and ending with practical introduction or results obtained through
empirical research. Because the laboratory takes an integrated approach to the sub-
ject matter of this research, it does not limit itself to traditional studies on the
psychological climate in the enterprise collectives, optimization of the methods and
forms of management and so on. The speaker enphasized the need for investigating

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

more-universal psychosocial and social problems such as, for example, the relation-
ship of different aspects of the life of the association's workers to the general
infrastructure of Tiraspol', reconstruction of traditional forms of interpersonal
comnicatim and interaction, creation of general psychosocial comforts at the
enterprise, and the influence of family, personal, housing and other factors on work
effectiveness and satisfaction of workers in the association's collective. v. V.
amichilimov described some concrete instances of introducing the laboratory's
applied research; in particular he acquainud the audience with a method for actively
encouraging young people to participate in production management through temporary
appointment (for 1 day a month) of young workers to the most inportant posts at the
enterprise--as high as shop chiefs. The speaker persuasively demonstrated the tre-
mendous educational potential contained in such role playing.

Colleagues of the sociological laboratory provided greater detail on son particular
specific-purpose programs of the laboratory. V. H. Xashina presented the results of
many years of research on adaptation of young workers to the conditions of mdern
industrial production, and she suggested placing this process under scientific con-
trol. I. R. Rudkovskaya analyzed various factors promoting or hindering attainment
of psychosocial comfort at the enterprise. G. A. Mitrashko pointed out the practi-
cal inportance of studying interpersonal perception, the adequacy or inadequacy of
which may play a signifith role in the system of interpersonal relationships in
general and in the system of leadership and subordination in particular.

The floor was then given to colleagues of the department of social psychology of the
MGU school of psychology. 1. G. Kokurina emphasized the significance of psychosocial
research on the motivational structure of the personality in light of pressing
practical problems. K. Ye. Danilin touched upon the problem of determining the
functions of the practical psychologist . O. N. mernysheva turned attention to a
umber of practical problems fully or partially within the coupetency of labor
psychology and engineering psychology. 2. V. Haruga esphasized the need for en-
couraging social psychologists to participate in the training of middle-level
managers to the broadest extent possible.

A roundtable discussion was organized at the conference on a collective monograph
prepared by the sociological laboratory of the Tiraspol' Sewing Association (v. s.
Solov'yeva, v. n. Kashina, V. V. Chichilimov, ”Vse o nas i o nashen hollektive"
[Everything About Ourselves and Our Collective], ﬁshinev, 1980) and on the plan and
prospects of further cooperation. colleagues of the department of social psychology
gave a high assessment to the monograph, which generalized the experience of many '
years of research and practical introduction of obtained results, and they ventured

a hunter: of constructive critical remarks about the book.

In conclusion G. M. Andreyeva noted the ever-increasing need for highly qualified
practical psychologists. and she dwelled in detail on the pressing problems associ-
ated with preparing student psychologists for work at industrial enterprises and on
the difficulties met along the way. she proposed concrete ways to inprove the
quality of the training afforded to practical psychologists specialising in the
department of social psychology, to include: exposure to production practice earlier
in the school career, preliminary occupational orientation of students, participation
of leading practical psychologists in the development and presentation of individual

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lessons in a specialized practical course. and so on. G. M. Andreyeva noted the
undoubted usefulness of the conference to both practical psychologists and the
H60 school of psychology.

COPYRIGHT: ”Voprosy paikhologii". ”Pedagogika", 1981

11004
080: 8144/1842

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFFICIALISEONLY

UDC 158.14‘62.506.23+15‘.lo
838m WODOIDGY IN BMINEERING AND LABOR PSYCHOIDGI

Leningrad MENDOLOGIYAISLEMVANIY PO mummy PSIKBOIDGII I PSIKHOIDGII rm,
Chhs‘r' l in Russian 1974 (signed-to press 5 Jul 74) pp 2-11, 39-59, 111-121, 148

(Annotation, preface. table of contents, Chapter I and excerpts from chapters II and
111 from book “The Methodology of Research in Bxgineering and labor Psychology, Part I”,

edited by Doctor of Psychological Sciences A. A. Krylov, Irdatel'stvo Leningradskogo
universiteta. 8,310 copies, 148 pages]

'mis collective monograph deals with the basic problem connected with the methodology
and methods of researchin engineering and labor psychology. It examines the most
important ways of studying the activity of an operator receiving and processing in-
formation, the methods of evaluating the status of the individual in various conditions
of activity, and questions relating to training and to determining occupational fitness.

me book is intended for specialists in engineering psychology. labor psychology and
ergonomics.

Editor's Preface

'lhe need for simultaneous intensive development of all the fields of human knowledge
is a characteristic feature of the current period of revolutionary changes in science
and technology. Psychology icons of the sciences where the progress achieved in
recent years enables us to talk about a diaracteristic "psychological boom.‘ ‘lhe
”psychological boom" is not a chance phenomenon. ‘me most diverse knowledge concom-
ing men as a subject of labor. as a abject of cognition, and as a subject of consumi-
cation was found necessary in the planning of new technology, in social planning. in

_...______
*Ehgineering psychology. which formulates the principles of optimum hm activity

on the basis of a study of the brain's operation as an information system, is now
characterized by the profound and specific nature of the methods of experiment and the
theoretical concepts and approaches. mgineering psychology therefore actually repre-
sents an independent scientific discipline and is not a division of labor psychology
although historically it is linked with precisely this field of the science of
psychology.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is primarily due to the fact that the results of the research carried out in
the field of labor psychology and engineering psychology are used at the 'reification'
level in material production.

it date the fields of engineering psychology and labor psychology have carried out
an enormus nunber of research projects which, on the whole, have been directed at a

search for optimum solutions in the designing of technical devices and equipuent to be

controlling the status of the individual during his work, etc. mess research projects
vary as to level and direction. They are often based on a simplified perception of
man and his activity when they stem from direct analogies with the function of the
technical devices as. for exanple, automatic controlling machines. This sometimes

recommendations. If we bear in mind also that as things stand now the problem of prer-
viding qualified research psychologists is still a long way from a full solution, and
that research in psychology and engineering psychology is now being carried out by
specialists in various fields of knowledge, then we would have to recognise the special
urgency of developing the methodological aspects of engineering psychology and labor
psychology. There are now good resources for this purpose, engendered on the one hand
by the achievements of the science of psychology in the field of theory and methodology
and. on the other hand, by the wealth and diversity of the enpirical material and the
growing need for practical utilization of the results obtained.

The main purpose of the present collective labor is generalisation and systematisation
of the knowledge concerning the object of research in engineering psychology and

labor psychology. analysis of the basic methodologicalapproaches and some of the
methodological techniques, evaluation of the potentialities for utilization of the
results of the research, etc. The authors mks use of the results of their own
experimental and theoretical research as well as the domestic and foreign published
literature on the subject under study.

The nucleus of the author collective was couprised of associates of the ergonomics
and engineering psychology departments and the engineering psychology laboratory of
Leningrad University. In addition, for the writing of a number of the sections of

the psychology department of LGU [Leningrad State miversity). Part one of the author
collective's work--this boob-was written by the following: Chapter I (Introductory)--
. A. Krylov; Chapter II 51-41. A. unitriyeva. §2~-H. A. unitriyeva and G. v.
Sukhodol'skiy, §S--G. V. Sukhodol'skiy, §3~-V. A. Ganzen, 52--A. I. Nattul'yev.

§6--G. s. Nikiforov; Chapter III. 57 and 59--V. L. Marishchuk, Saw-G. N. Khilova,

noun. N. Obozov; Chapter IV, llua. A. Krylov and v. G. Naberezhnykh. 512 and 513--

I. D. mzhanskaya.

'me editor and the author collective feel obliged to express their gratitude for the
help given them in the preparation of this book by USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences
corresponding umber Professor 8. P. Lomv, who provided direct supervision in the
initial period of the creative activity of many of the associates of the ergonomics
and engineering psychology departments and the engineering psychology laboratory of
Ieningrad State university.

Doctor of Psychological Sciences

A. A. Krylov

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents Page
Editor's Preface 3
diapter I. Introduction. me systems approach as a basis for research
in engineering and labor psychology 5
Gmapter II. Methods of describing, analyzing and evaluating activity 12
51. The aims of professiography and the structure of the
professiograa -
52. Principles of classifying professiographic methods 18
$3. Intonation theory in evaluation of human activity 32
54. Analysis of an operator's tracking activity from
the standpoint of automatic control theory 39
55. Structural algorithmic aodels of activity 59
56. Reliability theory in research on hunan activity 70

Chapter III. Investigation of functional state with the purpose of
evaluating performance, occupational selection and group

compatibility

57. Functional states and perforaanoe 81
58. Some features of research on human activity in extreme _
environmental conditions 95
S9. 'Ihe criteria of occupational fitness in selection 100

510. Effectiveness of group work and the principal methods
of its evaluation 111
Chapter IV. Occupational training for operator activity 122

gm. The basic theoretical prerequisites for resolving
the problems of operator training -

512. Study of operator activity with the purpose of

resolving training problem 131

513. The principles of operator training and evaluation .

of occupational preparedness 133

Bibliographic Index 141

Qupter I. Introduction. The System Approach as a Basis for Research in
Engineering and Labor Psychology

me systems approach can be interpreted in modem science as “theoretical discussion
of the methods and principles of research on objects as system. he systems
approach is thus a special direction of methodological analysis oriented at re-
vealing the resources and prerequisites of system research" ((1), page 148)-

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On its academic side, the systems approach is associated with developing the '
principles of representing objects in the real world as system. Expressing the
aspiration of scientific thought to understand the real world, the system approach
forms a view of the world as a system. he act of representing an object as a system,
of building a systemic picture of the world, is a cognitive process entailing synthe-
sis 0n the basis of previous analysis. In this aspect the systems approach is a
manifestation of the analytical—synthetic method of dialectical logic. In term of
the relationships between the systems approach (as "a method) and the dialectical
mthod of scientific research, we should note the following.

Being a union of logical and historical methods. the dialectical method is aimed at

reflecting, without our system of knowledge, both the development of an object and
its external and internal ties and dependencies .(2.3, etc.). In this case the

historical method deals with the causal relationships reflecting development of an
object while the logical method presupposes investigation of functional relationships

reflecting the qualitative certainty of the state of an object in each concrete mment
in time.

In M. I. Setrov's opinion (3,4) the relationship between that which is logical and
that which is historical is a sore-general form of the relationship between the
systems approach and the historical sethod. 'lhus the systems approach is viewed as
a concrete form of just the logical method alone. But it would be difficult to

agree with this opinion without reducing the systems approach to just the methodo-
logical principle of being systematic.

An analysis of the basic premises of the systems approach would show that they are
based not only on the principle of being systematic, but also on the principle of
dynamism, of system genesis. "Ona philosophical plane,” V. N. Sadovskiy and Ye. G.
Yudin noted validly in our opinion ((5), page 10), ”application of the systems -
approach means viewing the world as a system, one based on the ideas of integrity,
a system in which the objectsof analysis are intricately organised, internally
active and dynamic. these ideas are essentially borrowed by the systems approach
from the dialectical-materialistic view of the world, and they are a particular
development of both our philosophical understanding of the real world, and of the
principles of its cognition." Consequently the systems approach is also an embodi-
ment of the historical method.‘ And although the systems approach is now being
used basically to reveal functional relationships allowing us to understand how an
object is organized, revelation of causal relationships is not outside the realm of
the systems approach. In this case the answer to the question as to why an object
is organized in a particular way is extremely important both to theoretical studies
and to solution of practical problems in different fields of science.

The dynamism principle, and the genesis principle in general, have very great signi-
ficance to the systems approach in engineering psychology, which is abundant with
various resources of formal analysis. 'lhis is associated first of all with the fact
that automated control systems that contain a human operator have enjoyed tremendous
development within a short period of time, typified by certain qualitatively new

"me binding link between that which is logical and that which is historical is,
H. I. Setrov notes, the comparative method, inasmuch as "...causal relationships may

be revealed if we know Emotional relationships. the genesis of a system may be un-
covered only through a comparison of its individual, qualitatively different states“

((4) .page 6).

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
organization of behavior control system, or the role of individual psychophysiological
mechanisms. A clear example in this respect would be the psychophysiological mechanism
of emotional reactions. of course, this does not mean that the principle of being
systematic is displaced to a secondary plane when the systems approach is applied to
engineering psychology. But it is entirely obvious that application of the systems
approach, and incidentally any other approach. mt not mean absolutisation of some
one method. some one principle. It is only on this condition that we can consider

the question of making the systems approach the foundation of the theory and method-
ology of engineering psychology.

For-nation of the fundamental positions of the systems approach is associated with

development of cybernetics and general system theory, viewed as certain generalizing
sciences.‘ Incidentally the fact itself that cybernetics was founded by a mathema—
tician. N. wiener, and that the fundamental principles of general system theory were

developed by a biologist, L. Bertalanffy. is itself a noteworthy phenomenon, typical
of modern science.

Cybernetics, defined as "all of the theory of control and Oommication in landlines
and living organisne‘ ((12, page 56), has its roots in the informational essence of
control. in the fact that control proceeds in systems capable of receiving, storing
and processing intonation. Inasmuch as we are referring, as Academician A.‘ I. Berg
emphasized (13), primarily to complex dynamic system, we view the feedback principle
as fundamental to organization, one promoting integrity, order and expediency in
systems.

me main objective of general system theory, the basic principles of which were
spelled out by Bertalanffy (14,15,16, etc.), is to clarify the principles of the
formation, development, and behavior of systems. Or, in other words, revelation of
laws permitting us to examine some set of elemnts existing in certain relationships
with one another as a system. "In contrast to cybernetics, which analyzes the
mechanisms of feedback," writes Bertalanffy ((17), page 41), “general system theory

is interested in the dynamics behind interaction within a system with many variables."
In this connection it deals with the open system-~a system which exchanges latter and
energy with the environment and which is capable, under certain conditions, of achiev-
ing a state of dynamic equilibrium typified by constancy of structure and continuous
exchange and movement of matter. From this aspect, all living systems are defined

as hierarchical open systems that sustain themelves or develop toward a state of

 

'In this aspect both cybernetics and general system theory have their prehistory

(see for example (25.6.7)). Along the many generalizing theories and conceptions

that had arisen in response to the needs of science and which had been indispensable
factors in the logic of its development, we should name, first of all, A. A. Bogdanov's
tectology (8.9.10) and L. Bertalanffy's "organismism' (11). And although Bogdanov's
tectology never did transform, as “organismism' did, into a more-sophisticated theory,
it does contain many of the ideas which are now being developed in cybernetics and

general system theory.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dynamic equilibrium. In Bertalanffy's opinion (17) the system approach is in princi-
ple more-general than the cybernetic approach.*

Investigation of the mutual relationships and the “spheres of influence' between
general systems theory and cybernetics, though it is doubtlessly interesting.

is beyond our objective-—that of analyzing the basic theoretical and methodological
conceptions of engineering psychology from the aspect of the system approach. We
will therefore limit ourselves to the general remarks expressed above, and we will
only note that a contribution is being made to development of the systems approach
by information theory, automatic control theory, bionics, game theory, decision
theory, etc. But as was noted earlier, research connected with the ideas spelled out
in the works cited above by wiener and Bertalanffy is playing the leading role in
development of the systems approach (see for exasple 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,

25, 26, 27, 28, etc.). Works by M. I. Setrov (3,4) are a major contribution to the
theory and methodology of the systems approach. In them, the author formulates the
basic premises of the theory (which he calls the organizational or functional theory
of organization), the concepts and principles of which are "stepping stones leading
from general philosophical knowledge to concrete knowledge, from philosophy to

the particular sciences" ((4)).qu 110).

In the opinion of V. N. Sadovskiy and B. G. Yudin (5), modern systems research has
at least three aspects: theoretical, formal and applied. the theoretical aspect is
associated with the sources, aims and tasks of systems analysis on the philosophical,
logical-methodological and the concrete-scientific planes.

The formal aspect is connected with development of the analysis machinery (mainly
conceptual and mathematical). In applic‘tion to systems analysis, the conceptual
machinery includes that couple): of concepts which are directly related to the "system”
concept; that complex of concepts reflecting the essence of system function: that
complex of concepts revealing development of system: that couple): of concepts having
to do with research on (and planning of) systems. Mathematical machinery is used in
one form or another to build formal models of systesu. Most indicative in this
respect is application of the machinery of probability theory, set theory, game
theory, etc.

lhe applied aspect of systems analysis has two directions. One is connected with
development of the specific machinery of system theory in support of systems analysis.
The second direction of the applied aspect is application of the general principles
of the systems approach to concrete scientific analyses performed in different areas
of knowledge. In Bertalanffy's opinion (17) the applied correlate of system theory
(in the broad interpretation) is systems science, which is divided into three basic

 

*In Bertalanffy's interpretation. a mater of the positions of general system
theory are so general that they are comparable more to philosophical than to
cybernetic principles. In their time, V. A. Iektorskiy and V. N. Sadovskiy (18)
expressed quite valid critical remarks in this aspect, though Bertalanffy himself
(17), responding to the criticism, writes that general syatems theory has never
claimed to play the role of the philosophy of modern science.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

areas: systems engineering, operations researdt and engineering psychology (human
engineering) .

It should be noted that engineering psychology has perhaps the greatest need for
application of the principles of the systems approach as a means for developing its
own theoretical and methodological fomdations. It is precisely in view of the
pronounced “systemic nature" of the objects of research in engineering psychology

that the general provisions of the systems approach are predetermined end reﬂected
in the very essence of the basic theoretical and methodological conceptions. It is
especially important that all systems are studied in engineering psychology as in-
formation systenm. Their physical nature, their structure (as things, as objects),
and their physical, chemical and biological properties are analyzed only from the
standpoint of supporting information relationships, from the standpoint of participa-
tion of these factors in information processing.‘ Consequently information processing
is a reflection of the entire set of properties of the information system, viewed as
a single whole. If we consider that information processing always occurs in a system,
that it always proceeds by way of change in the state of this system (one ordered in
space and in time), then we can reveal the content of one of the most important
specific features of the systems approach in engineering psychology. This feature is
that the information system is analysed as a process reflecting the min essmce of
the system (in terms of its purpose)--that is, as one of information processing.

It follows from an analysis of basic theoretical and methodological conceptions that
engineering psychology deals with information processing at two levels, the first
being the human operator and the second being the automated control system as a whole.
In correspondence with our general objective, we will devote our principal attention
to organization and optimization of information processing at the "human operator”
level.

In the broad sense, ”optimum” means most in keeping with certain reguiranents, most
in keeping with given criteria. within the framework of the system approach, the
“optimum” concept is always applied to a particular system, and this places signifi-
cant limitations upon the content of this concept, since what may be optimum for one
system may not be optimum for another, and so on. He can conclude from a mater of
studies (31,32, etc.) that in relation to control processes, we can arrive at an
optimum variant, by one way or another, with the assistance of a certain controlling
procedure--optimization. Optimization boils down to seeking those values of con-
trolling variables (within the bounds of the limitations imposed) which maximize

or minimize the value of the target function.

Problems associated with optimizing information processing by a human operator--in

terms of criterion selection and, all the more so, in terms of quantitative evalua-
tions--have still not been studied sufficiently yet. ‘l‘he most significant studies
in this direction were performed by Ye. P. Il'in. 'lhis author conducted interesting
studies, but because his systems approach to evaluating the peychophysical system

"me opinion is now being expressed that living matter possesses certain physical
properties that do not fit within the framework of our conventional ideas about the

physical and chemical forum of movement of matter. Consideration is now being
given to a “biological form“ of movement of matter in this connection (29,30, etc.).

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the human body as the highest expression of integrity and specific organization
was not strict enough, we cannot make full use of his results to answer the
questions associated with optimization of information processing.

Taking as our starting point the existing viewpoints on control optimization and
basing ourselves on the circuit conception, which in our opinion reflects the most
important positions of the systems approach in engineering psychology, we came to
the conclusion that optimization of information processing by a huan operator least
be examined with a consideration for time outlays, the quality of results, and energy
outlays. But when information is processed in the cerebral system, certain changes
occur in the state of this system (and in the entire body), existing as both a
material substrate and an organized physical environment. Therefore we would quite
naturally raise the question as to precisely what the definition of an optimum state
should be. Our assumption in regard to this question was that in general, an optimal:
state cannot exist apart from the objectives and conditions of activity, apart from
a relationship with the qualities of the concrete performer of this activity.

The Optimum working state of a system is that state which promotes performance of
given activity in such a way that the actual results are most in keeping with the
prescribed or required results. Thus we can express the integral characteristic of
the optimum state by indicators representing productivity, the quality of results
and energy outlays in the performance of the given activity. This definition is
valid without restrictions only in relation to an ideal case, in which it is presumed
that no readjustment within the system and no particular intensity of the system's
work would have an effect on the system's possibility for sustaining a working state.
Therefore in real conditions we always impose limitations predeteraining the dura-
tion of activity and its influence on the system. Hence it follows that it would
be best to define the optimum working state of an individual, existing as a unit in
a control system, as that state which best supports information processing over a
given time interval while meeting these mandatory conditions: a) performance of
the activity does not elicit development of latent forms of fatigue capable of
cumulative build-up; b) all undesirable functional changes in state arising in re-
sponse to the activity being performed are completely eliminated during the activity
itself or during prescribed breaks; c) the activity being performed does not elicit
a negative attitude toward it on the part of the subject of activity. When these
conditions are met, optimization of information processing is equivalent to attain-
ment of the system's optimum state. It is from these positions that problems asso-
ciated with research in engineering and labor psychology are examined in this work.

Chapter 11. Methods of Describing, ‘Analyzing and Evaluating Activity

54. Analysis of an Operator's Tracking Activity From the Standpoint of
Automatic Control Theory

Contemporary automatic control theory possesses a large arsenal of netth per-
mitting analysis and design of the most diverse conplex control systems. Many of
these methods may be applied to the synthesis and analysis of closed control systems
in which man performs all or some of the regulatory and monitoring functions. A
block diagram of such a system is shown in Figure 5 for the general case. The task
of the operator is to evaluate, on the basis of displayed information, deviation of
the system's output 2(t) from the required value id) and to decrease this deviation

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the appropriate controlling influence at). with a consideration for the require-
ments stemming from both the stability prerequisite and the dynamic characteristics
of elements of the ergatic system "0(9) external in relation go the human operator.
Tasks of this sort are'called tracking tasks. If only error at) -F(t)-§(t) is
displayed to the human operator and if the fmction of the latter is to reduce

5:) to zero. then the task is' referred to as cospensatory tracking. If ﬁt) and
Z(t) are displayed to the human operator. the task is called pursuit tracking. If
in addition to y(t) and 2(t) the operator is given yu), t<rst+T, the task is called
predictive tracking.

  

Figure 5. Block Diagram of a Tracking Loop for the General Case.

1. Optimum evaluation block
2. External elements of- the ergatic system

If we are to develop a control system such as that shown in Figure 5, it would be
desirable for us to possess a mathematical description of the human operator's
characteristics. In other words it would be desirable to build a mathematical model
of the operator‘s activity, one which would be cospatible with the experimental

data, which would be convenient to analysis and synthesis of a closed control system,
and which would at the same time promote solution of some problems associated with

planning the individual's activity in these system.

Creation of an adequate mathematical nodal is a diffith task. he characteristics
of activity depend significantly on many factors, amng which ve should note the
type-of tracking task (the form in which information is displayed, the dynamic
characteristics of external elements, etc.) ,. the environmental conditions (lighting,
temperature, humidity, etc.), the operator's training level, motivation. tiredness, etc..
Nunerous experimental studies have shown that factors typical of an individual per-
forming a tracking task include a time delay, the frequency cut-off for the high-
frequency components of the affecting function, the discreteness of perception of the
input signal. extrapolation or prediction, adaptiveness, nonlinearity, and randomness.

It would obviously be impossible to account for all of these factors and properties
by a single model. 'lhe various models cited in the literature represent atteapts to
include these properties in the mathematical description to some extent or another.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

In this case the most diverse nothods of automatic control theory have been used
(and are being used) as the basis for creating the mathematical models.

Inasmuch as the areas of application of concrete methods are extremely broad and

the nunber of problem arising is so great, it is inpcssible to treat them exhaustively
in a single work. Consequently the material presented here must be viewed as just an
introduction to the use of the methods of automatic control theory: Our main goals
are, first, to provide a statutory of the models most frequently employed and the”
methods of their acquisition, second, to examine the mthods for developing models

and to illustrate practical application of the models using a number or examples,

and third, to note the basic directions of research in this area.

A Summary of the that Popular Mathematical Models and the Methods of
Their Acquisition

The roots of contemporary research on control systems involving a human operator
from the positions of automatic control theory lie in the mid-1940's. The principal
models proposed in this period and the methods used in their creation are shown in
Table 3.

As we can see from the dated cited in this table, different nethods of automatic
control theory were used to develop models of a human operator's activity. However,
the method of spectral analysis and the parameter tuning method were used uost often.
Methods created to solve the problems of optimum control are enjoying increasingly

greater application today. Sous results obtained with these nethods are presented
below.

Synthesis of Models by the Spectral Analysis Method

In the general case, as was noted, the human operator is represented as a nonlinear
and nonstationary element of a control system. In many practical cases, however,

his characteristics may be represented by a quasi-linear nodel. 'mis nodal is the ‘
best suited to analysis of the compensatory tracking task. It was demonstrated

in a nunber of studies that for trained operators, behavioral variability that may
influence the general characteristics of this system is low. Part of the controlling
influence may be correlated linearly with the displayed error, and referred to as

the descriptive function (39). The remaining part is not linearly correlated with
the input, and it is referred to as the remainder ('remant").

 

Figure 6. Block Diagram of a Compensatory Tracking Loop

67

"VII? -'.)l-‘FI'.1,\'.';."§3:. INF!
.0:«xdm
.wmmH

.m .0
.couuds
n o” CU
. c333.
.vmaa

.A ~Hoamdx
:32
Mazda:
.cnuuoouu
.....oo£

.3 H'au

@509
Icwucoo

unocua
muovan
unomaoo
own>auna an:o«a

Hauuoomm chadcwna

uaoscau
Icoo
.HGOCHH
.uwsuudm
«AaGOAQ
Icaeﬂvucs

«so:
undusoo
~uaacdu
.huooau
Icumaoo

uuuaaaza «unscaa

oucoauaz chﬂauacﬁ

use:
Inducoo

.udocwa

.auouun

Icomsoo

wwu>uoca "HQGOAM
028.52.. 1.8.5015
ImNNMMMNMMMQ mcmxouha
mauve: yo no out.

nozuux

now 8.9:.“
Own mMH.OIP
mm 6.:

nououu «Anon

a . “3835-..?
oomx

33. m .358
now n.0lw .00»\
B3 an 466

oou\uau
3 Lam-69o
00m OMuOIF

uoa\vuu
9.. 6-56

uon on.OI~

00m m~.on&

n .nnx
muouuﬁuuom
NO n05aﬂ>
duouumssz

333..
.5 .5 «.5
gonna onu uo
:o«u9:5u
uonno
£3836
:OMuuH
nouuoooosd

ooﬂu uoz

caumkuo

¢>auauuaasa
m.awwaz
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.n .Hoamot
.m0@u

.3
.:0uouuon
s on. s;
.mooa

.0 ~ hog
.Nood

.K ~0m2
~oH fug
chaawot
.0 ~>oxon

.voma

.n
Saw—£02
~ on
4855.
~hmma

nauhduca
Hannaw

3553
couuuo

-3353
“Bahia

nau>uacu
aduuoomm

Amcwcauv
coauao

-3 3:03
uoooﬁdunm

Iaohalau
Hauuuomm

n98
Induaoo
.uaocna
.auouuu
Iconaou
unaccen
Iﬂlﬁdﬁﬁca

use:
nuaucoo
~Haoadd
.>uoaau
Icoaaoo
.nonouu
nauswoqig

ououoaﬂu
.Huocdn
.>uooau
chnaou
"danowa
Inuldcwns

moo:
Inducoo
.uaocuu
.>uouan
uaomﬁoo
"accoun
Icoaquaca

n50:
Inducoo
.uoocaa
.>uooan
Icvnaoo
”Hacouo
:0:«U«c5

03%!» males

con 306.5
02. nab?“

3» m .35.
our“

00a No.0IQa
08 $06.?
€an 5

 

. 1.5 + RE + 5:.
12:03.: 32.:

— . .“\|~¥ - A5 Sh

 

 

 

 

oouxuau olv whr.l . meL
muak i... . . ~ — M... 9.5:.“
0L2 , :85 4.
mad": x . 15+ t .
§ 3% ....£ .. .Alri fix“? + .V... i a nu...”
00¢ m n.“ .— ' A '3‘» Id— .
00¢ MMoOI .H 14......- . lama—O 0
.h. 36-2.93.“
.ﬁ. 8.936%.“
000 o.mn~.h . 3'):
non «3.9: .. 2 uh .I 3%:
53.9% .Etvwmr I. i... 5843 .m
h I
h
. i
ouﬂoéééuma . g _
no» Sane. a I u
ova OMA.OIP o 5 9| 5 I u unmnd
whoa-x. . . .2 58:3 .v

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080032-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

00 cm s>8
INOR—
. ¢omd

>598

32.0000
~000A

.m 38:05—
~ .5 ~M§£
.moau

.m 5:3
#39...

s to skég
.0“ schou
noumuum
.oomd

.652.

33!. auouan
anus £39.00
6.33.2.6 . gown

60.33.39. 1.2.348

269

I368

.32.:

use:

5&3!“

6051.. £39.00
@525» «Hosea»
nouns—ﬂan Ina-.33

309

«93:00

330...:

. huouou

0:09.00
nuaxduﬁ u Assad»
uauuoomm Ligands

use:
ucﬂcou
330...:
:Couom
£59.00
32.0.3
Icing
swag:

unmanned
Huuuuoam

0.... Rena.
oou b.0umu
02. «19-3
02. Ron.»
cog-«u
83:...

03.6 .82

00.. on 6-3..
03%: «6-03

uom 0.9.8“
00w 3.0.3»
00u>uuu N.ona

v3.3 .82.

i.
-p.’
I .

1+ -.
L

 

—. lulc c:— +§v§

«T... ‘1. l . _ at:

2 r3...

E +6... + ._

0+..-

Liﬂﬁ.

. ~. .a:3~.+~.wu+&w.-.l5£

—

Ailuiv ea: + :5 15..

v.55
58.5. .3"

.59....
Boon—d 2:

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400080032-4
:23. on}: .
3333:: Ina-«v a . 78 . 0234
138% A8 03 ~61: 03% yo: . Azalea-3.: . :85: .3
3300
lam-.00 000 mnudlnh
"a: 000 «30.93“
Inca-Ea 000 thunh
I...” 03—. 50.104
30:
I§EOO .
.8“le m it.“ . n-A
3:00:00 00» 3.9..
3ng 00: hmmodluw .Irn R. . ”1—9
3630:: L553 000 «ﬁn-uh 2% . it +:. 4 .1 yams
.330on LS 1.3.on _~ 5 ii IS... m c. .305: .3
use:
n:.3:00
33.": £0.30» .5 .F .._
H250: 1:09:00 all—I 5H _ rm
noﬁuo 5.“: 31:3.» IN . w... 0 :030300 :In: I.
0.3305 Isa—.3 o... I. _ 63. _ .. ounvsum
:04000umoa I133. "Slick i864 dag—ho:
«=05
u:.3:8
Shauna
I800 000 mmdnv
33:36 o.n..~3
I553 o.~L3

lauds: Nil-«N

71
gunman
.59: 3
o>wumuua
.nso:
Icaucoo
.auooan
Icomaoo
“unaudn
Inuauuwsn

30%
.50 3.
o>uumavo
.auouau
scam-8
unccowu
58.3.35

“.33

«so:
Inducoo
.uoocuu

use:
.>uoucn
nucleon

"Andean
acoswv
sauna:

and:
Inuucoo

.uaocua

Ico:

.huOuau

%N00ﬁ lg
new» unaccuu
luEhOu:H chﬂqucb

oouxauB nu WM? _.

in}: n 6-.»

 

53.38 . -
8.65m E I95.» .Khl
v.1 I &
\
. +m.l
. '
«K n.“ .
Iﬂl.u£.oxnvnr Imus
. «N I
h. I
.m i ..
couao uoz M 325.15% I...

I‘INI f

we :owu

nuomia

a 9:8
£060
.adanuaa
39: 2.0
Loans.
o3 .3

usmuu
Havana .ma

unmzu
soocna .5”

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 6 shows a block diagram of a compensatory tracking loop for the case of a
quasi-linear model. 'Ihis is, from the standpoint of automatic control theory. a
system with a single feedback loop. The inportant traits of such systems include

a single stimulus (error e(t)) and randomness of application of the affecting function
£(t). Taking account of these limitations, the diagran in Figure 6 represents the
most widespread structure of real manual control system. As we can see from Figure 6,
the descriptive function wmjm) is functionally dependent on the spectrum of the
input signal 51;, the transfer function of the object of control Noam), frequency to
and, finally, time t. The first two are the principal variables of this task. 'lhe
rest of the factors, such as training level, motivation and environmental conditions,
are time-dependent factors.

Descriptive function ”ﬁju) may be obtained by a method that was developed practically
simultaneously by I. Ye. Kazakov in the USSR and (Buton) in the USA to analyze non-
linear systems involving Gaussian random input signals. A detailed presentation of
theoretical problems connected with acquisition of Frau) is contained in works by

Mckuer. Krendel , Elkind , (Bike) and others. We will briefly examine the
basic results here.

Were the characteristics of a human operator to correspond to the characteristics of
a linear element, a controlling influence (the operator's output) :40 (t) may be ob-
tained from the equation

' mug; “mu.— 1)dr, ~ (2)

where Mr) is a weight function. In real human activity. however. an operator's
output inevitably differs from the ideal output u°(t) by an error

«ammo—nu). . . (a)

Let us assume that the human operator tries to minimize the variance of the error:

r i
?=um J7. 5 sum. (4)}
—r

'0-
I

It follows from Wiener's filtration theory that for function h(t) to minimize the
mean square error Mica”) J, it would be necessary and sufficient to represent h(t)
by a Hiener-Hopf linear integral equation:

I
K..(!) = 15 M.) K. (new) av. - (5)
. 1 > o

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Here, Kw“) is the mutual correlation function of t(t) and u(t). and K5“) is the
autocorreiation function of C(t). Let us rewrite (5), introducing spectral densities.
Considering the known dependence beween the mutual spectral density between the
input and output of a linear element and the spectral density of the input. and the

fact that the transfer function of a stationary linear system is a Pourier expression
of its weight function, we get

8--(-)=- W419) .7. h). ' (am
Here, Swan) is the mutual spectral density between 5(t) and Mt). and 33(0)) is the

spectral density of e(t).

Let us find the mutual spectral densities between {(t) and (t), and between ﬁt) and
u (t) :

l .

s""”=\l+ .(1-) “Ms" ‘7’
MU)

s“"'"l+ .(M. .u-os“ (8’

The values of (7) and (8) may be obtained experimentally. It follows from (7) and
(8) that

W, (1..) = %f%. .(9)

Here we to represent dependencew) graphically, the approximation of the obtained
curve would be a mathematical model of the human operator's activity. the complexity

of the model would depend on the accuracy with which we desire to reproduce the
characteristics of the human operator.

However, for many practically inportant cases we can limit our approximation to
the following relationship:

5.11.41!) . e'" '

”4”" (Tu/0+1) ﬁn—r "°’

The term 1'} approximates the delay in reaction time and the transport lag in the
neuromuscular system. ‘lhe other term approximates man's capability for adapting his
characteristics in accordance with the requirements of his task in such a way that
the characteristics of the closed loop would correspond to the characteristics of
a “good" control system. here. K is the human amplification factor and TL and T1

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are, correspondingly, the time constants for human anticipation and delay. me numer-

ical values for the paraneters are given in Table 3 in relation to different condi-
tions.

'me transfer function of the object of control is an important variable, because it

determines what the transfer function of the operator should be, at least within
the range of working frequencies.

Table 4. Relationship of [lo (ju) and Fruit»)

 

mm.) | MI»)
Rah".
K' ‘ __(m~+n "
a" ' Kc" '1'
77%. ' «(m-f or“: .1
K -.
WizTT) Kayo-H): ¢"
K(Tl/e+l)a-"l.'. .,'<_'..
K. ., "
.2. +£1.44 .Kld". . I
(«J -- . m' .0:

The effective lag tine 13 in Table 4 is a low frequency approximation of all high
frequency delays in the system, to include delays arising due to transportation
outlays and due to the dynamic characteristics of the object of control. '1!) obtain
the total value for the spectral density, we would need to consider the remainder,
which may be represented as white noise operating on the input of the 'hunan operator“
unit. As an example the spectral density of error e(t) is

S (o) =S,'(e) + S (o) =-

W: (I'HVOU') . (11)
=1n-W,u-—°W. mr+[—+'W]s~‘ "

where 5n: (u) is the spectral density of the remainder, treated as an input signal
introduced into the loop before the operator's descriptive function.

In the derivation of (11) . we accounted for the known result of spectral analysis

that the spectral density of the output is equal to the spectral density of the input,
multiplied by the square of the modulus of the complex transfer factor.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The validity of the quasi-linear model rests on evaluation of that part of the
spectral density of the output which is predicted by the model at different fre-

quencies. 1111s evaluation may be made by calculating the linear correlation of

Mt) and ﬁt) using
3 (0) .
pa: I. . . .. ’_ (”I

According to research data. 930.9 for a flat spectrum with cut-off fmquency
uo=o.75 hz. Linear correlation decreases quickly with increase in the frequency
contained in the input signal. when tee-1.6 Hz, 9-0.75, and when (no-2.4 Hz,

9 -0.6 for a flat spectrum. Experimental data show that the remainder grove as the
control object's amplification factor K0 increases (for K0100”), as '2'; grows. and
as the object's instability increases.

Several ways for reducing the inﬂuence of this remainder are described in the
literature. Perhaps the most important of them is to modify the dynamic character-
istics of the object of control, (no, in such a way that little anticipation would

be needed from the human operator (TL<<l). It follows from this that in a region of
frequencies corresponding to the conjugate (or fundamental) frequency of the control
system, it would be desirable to have wo-Ko/p or «no IKo. Another method entails
adaptation of the object's anplification factor K to its optimum value. Unfortunately
the latter method is still basically eapirical. Finally. low frequency filtration

of the human operator's output has been proposed.

Use of the Parameter mning Method for Mathematical Description of a
Hts-an Operator's Activity

The paramter tuning method, created in the theory of adaptive control systems, has
enjoyed broad application in the developunt of mathematical mdels of activity. '
In general form, the parameter tuning method may be stated as follows: A certain
physical system P and a set M of potential lodels are given. - By choosing the appro-
priate paramters, we are required to find a model MEN having an output which,

in a certain sense. corresponds most fully to the output of P, given an identical
input.

In our case the physical system is the object controlled by the human operator.
Figure 7 shows the general block diagram of the parameter tuning method for the
case of developing a mathematical model of activity. the sale signal is fed to the
input of the model and the human Operator. The output of the model and the control
system are cospared, resulting in formation of an error signal. The latter is fed
to the input of the parameter tuning mechanism. we tuning mechanism changes the
parameters of the model in such a way as to minimize a certain criterion describing
the quality of the mdel.‘ Thus when we use the parameter tuning method we must
consider the problems of selecting the mathematical model, selecting the function
for the quality criterion. and selecting the procedure for parameter tuning.

 

'In the particular case, when sinple tasks are involved, the function of the tuning
mechanism may be performed manually.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 7. General Diagram for Acquisition of a Hathemtical m1
Describing the Activity of a amen Qerator by the Parameter

mning Method
Key:
1. Human operator 3. Parameter tuning equations
2. Model with parameters 4. Sensitivity equations

The form of the mathematical model must be selected depending on the tracking task

involved. In the particular case of single-coordinate compensatory tracking,
representation of the mathematical model by a second-order equation is fully suffi-
cient (the model represented by equation (10) is an example).

The functiOn for the quality criterion is usually selected in the form of a mean
square error:

(«tr 1.4-?

I: 5' «4:: If [h,(¢)—-a,.u)_|'d¢. " . «a
lo ' o _

The parameter tuning method is determined on the basis of the optimization algorithm
involved, and it may entail procedures such as the Gauss-2e1del procedure, the
gradient procedure, the fastest descent procedure, and the extrapolation procedure.
'1!) create a mathematical description of. activity, special studies show, it would be
suitable to use the fastest descent procedure. The merit of the parameter tuning
method lies in that it makes consideration of nonlinearity and change in the
characteristics of human behavior over time possible in the mathemtical description.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a number of cases parameters may be tuned manually within an acceptable period of
tin. Ablock diagram for this case is shown in Figure 8 (40). 'lhe human operator
tracks input signal Z(p) displayed on oscilloscope “W. M signals are fed to the
input of oscilloscope ”0" (correspondingly to the vertical and horizontal deflector
plate). One signal represents the reaction of the human operator 17 (p) to input
signal 2(p), while the other represents the model's reaction Yum). when the
parameters are selected correctly, 1' (p) al’m(p) and a straight line is observed on
oscilloscope "0". Otherwise we observe an ellipse. (he shortcoming of this system
is the absence of parameter variation laws. m; shortcoming may be cospensated
partially by using weight coefficients when detemining the parameters. Height co-
efficients are read from a volunter.

, .
Vu-

  

33‘ .
Figure 8. Diagram Showing Acquisition of a Mathematical lbdel of
Activity in the Presence of Manual Parameter Tuning (Prom
v. A. Taran and Yu. N. Kome (40): oscilloscope display:
1--when disagreement with the mdel is significant:
2--when there is agreeInnt with the model '

1. 'lb experimenter
2. Parameters

Optimum Models of Activity

Development of the theory of optimum control had a significant influence on the
methodology associated with mathematical modeling of activity. Optimum control
theory has special significance to modeling in that by using its methods. we can
obtain mdels for the activity of a human operator in complex lultiple-loop control
systems by utilising the state concept . Activity models created with the methods
of optimum control theory are called optimal mdels. ‘me plausibility of optimum
models has been confirmed by numerous experimental studies that have demonstrated
the fact that when man performs tracking tasks, he operates with what might be called
an optimum strategy.

It should be noted that very complex and cumbersome mathematical machinery is used

to build optimum models. This prevents us from explaining, in detail and precisely
within the limits of this book. the existing methods for building optinum models.
'Iherefore we will examine. in the most general form, only one possible model building
scheme based on certain results of the theory of optimm estimates.

78

FOR Ol-‘HCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hut»: ‘1)
y'naﬂumu

 

(6) ”mu m“ I

l

l

l

l

:

Woman-01002»:- lath, me) mm 31“."

Figure 9. Block Diagram of a Control loop Accounting for a timber of
Characteristics of the Human Operator

Key:
1. Control fixture 7. Dynamic nature of the neuromuscular
2. Object of control system
3. Affecting function 8. Mechanical noise
4. Display 9. mntrolling influence
5. Displayed variables 10. Timing characteristic
6. Human operator 11. Time delay

12. Observation noise

let us examine the control loop shown in Figure 9, containing a human operator.

As we know, whenever we build a mdel we met account for certain limitations.

In this case we assume that the human operator introduces a certain time delay
associated with visual processes. intonation processing in the central nervous
system and so on, and the time lag of the neuromuscular system: this lag. in the
opinion of a nunber of authors, is approximated sufficiently well by the expression

. I .
”""’"‘W-

change in characteristics depending on the control tasks and the dynamic properties
of the object is represented in Figure 9 by block ”(v). In addition we assum that
when a state variable is displayed, the individual will perceive both this variable
and its first derivative.‘ In this case observation noise Vy(t) would exist. One
or several values of the system's output may be displayed for the individual, but for
the sake of simplicity we will assume that he can perforn only one controlling in-
fluence Mt) together with a certain amount of noise Vu(t) (mechanical). Special
research has shown that Vyi(t), t=l,2,...,In, and that Vu(t) may be interpreted

as Gaussian white noise.

 

mus assumption has been fully justified by experimtal studies.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main task of the human operator is to control the system in a certain prescribed
fashion. Consequently the moment we introduce the appropriate limitations and the
noise contributed by the individual, selection of the appropriate optimization:

criterion becomes the main problem. In the case under examination here, the
following functional was selected as the criterion:

I(u)=£ ﬁg,x,'+ru'+gﬁ' . (H)
' III

men the task of the operator would be to select that u*(t) which would minimize
functional (14). In (14). subjective weights satisfy the conditions c190, no,

g>0. It should be noted that selection of the weight factors is far from a trivial
task. The term containing 14 is introduced due to the need for approximating the dynamic

characteristics of the neuromuscular system.

he system‘s movement is defined by the following state equations:

5(1) a 4 5m + by!) + gm.

(15)
1(¢)= 614:).

where the n-dimensional vector .3 represents the state of the system, g represents
the operator‘s controlling influence (a scalar), and E represents external perturba-
tions. Considering the limitations noted above, at a current moment in time the
individual would have the following at the input:

z,(c)=gx(t—¢ + Lou—i). (:6)

Selection of functional (14) as the criterion in the presence of motion equations
(15) results in the presence of linear feedback. then, if we accept the general
assumtions concerning the controllability and observability of the control system
with regard to the conditions named above, development of the model would boil down
to solving a problem that has been worked out well and which has been illuminated
with sufficient detail in special studies--that of analytical design of regulators
characterized by a time delay and presence of observation and output noise. An
optimum estimte may be arrived at and the controlling influence may be selected
with a combination of a (Kalmen) -wiener filter and an optimum predictor.

It should be noted that a Kalmen filter includes a model of the dynamic characteristics
of the object of control--that is, this approach may also be used to describe activity
in the case where the characteristics of the system change with time. Considering

the fact that almost all limitations significant to quasi-linear models are removed
from an optimum model, we feel that the latter will soon assume a leading place in

the mathematical modeling of tracking activity.

80

FOR‘ 0mm“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Bxan'ple of Using a Mathematical Model

The first task of an engineering psychologist in planning a certain form of
activity is to work out the requirements to be imposed on the displays and controls.
Mathematical models of activity must be the main tool he uses for this task. Let us
illustrate the possibilities of modeling with a concrete examle.

ma
(”#0sz mum M) '

tumuul) .
npemmuun ‘ - .
' 9"
u . .
mad/"wen
‘39”?! magma” (15)
(14) at Museum
7 ,r , « ‘ , ‘
mama w .
apt/Jon - «. .

mom 1 3

  
  

  
   

     
 
 
 

6110mm:
mama:
muana
mum
MINI '
am am
Momma
topm)
( 1 2 )

 

   
 
 
  

(5 '

we:
“((1ch

Figure 10. Block Diagram of a Control Loop Containing a Prediction Display

Key:
1. Input (desired output value) 9. Initial conditions for the model
2. Prediction display (CRT) 10. Model of. object of control in
3. Human operator accelerated time
4. Control fixture ltl. Prediction signal
5. Controlling influence 12. Future value of signal (tine is
6. Object of control reckoned from moment of reset)
7. Output 13. Wclic reset unit
8. Sensors 14. Reset signal

15. Controlling influence for prediction

16. Programing unit (generates suggested
controlling action during prediction
time )

 

Figure 11. Diagram of a Control loop Used to Calculate the Difficulty Index

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI UI'I'ILIAL USE. ONLY

A so-callcd prediction display, a block diagram of which is shown in Figure 10,

has recently been enjoying increasingly broader application. Such displays have
been found to be an extremely effective means of controlling complex dynamic objects.
Development of prediction displays requires, in particular, an ansuer to the questim
as to what is the optimum prediction time. he choice of prediction time not only
determines the requirements to be imposed on technical comments, but it also has

a significant influence on the characteristics of human activity.

let us try to calculate optimum prediction tin: using certain modifications of the
general quasi-linear model represented by expression (10), and the calculation
scheme proposed by Hollister (41). let us assume that an individual is included in
the control system as shown in Figure ll, and that an ordinary compensatory system
is used to display the error signal to him. Let us assume furthermore that the

anticipation tim TL contributed by the individual not correspond to an optimal
prediction time. (This assunption may be justified with Homer's “intersecting”
model (see Table 3)). At frequencies at which the individual introduces the element
of anticipation, the value of the controlling influence Mt) is greater than the

error produced by amplification er. At frequencies at which the individual intro-
duces a time delay, Mt) is less than Kpc.

let us introduce the anticipation coefficient:

(Fir '

 

L = '(17).

As we can see from (17), if anticipation tile 2'; dominates, then L>l; if time delay
2'1 dominates, then [K12 when Hrw'u) “KP, L81. Next-let us introduce difficulty index
D:

 

As we can see from (18), difficulty grows as 2'1, and T1 increase, and it is equal .to
zero at L - l, which generally agrees with the enpirical data. let ”0 (Jo) IKo/(Jw)2.
As follows from Table 4, for an object with such a transfer function,

Mu») = K,(TLJ--)-|)- ' <19) ‘

It is assumed in (19) that by introducing T5. the individual also compensates for
the effective lag time--that is, 13-0.

Let .1: -const,- then the system would be influenced by noise Mt), which we can treat
as white noise with spectral density SN-A/n Without sacrificing the model's gener-
ality. Applying the known procedure of spectral analysis, we can obtain

82

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
A(K,K.1i+n

E'= T. (20)
_ A , ' .
" = 75:77- . (2|)

'lhen the anticipation factor would be

-.

_ I“ __ a
L— (770' —K.K,TL+1." (22)

 

Substituting fork? and TL in (20). (21) and (22), we get

- A‘K L’
"" Gr)? ' “(T—If“ (2”

Let us assume that the quality criterion that is minind.zed by the human operator
is a linear continuation or the root mean square error and the root mean square

deviation. men activity would be optimum at 5-3 (Figure 12).

TLopt corresponds to the optimm value of L in (22) ,

xoxprbopt a 2. (24)

 

Assuming that

Figure 12. Dependence of Tracking Quality on the Difficulty Index

for a Second-Order Obj: ct

For simple cases, K may be determined from (17), if we assume that LII-3.

tuting for Kp in (24) and (17). we get

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Substi-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1he optimum prediction time. 1L0 t'TLo t! is calculated using formla (25). A more-
accurate estimate of IL may be tainedp by building an optimum tracking model

allowing for prediction. For planning purposes, however, the agreement between data
calculated with formula (25) and the data obtained in our experimnts was satisfactory,
the discrepancy not exceeding 12 percent.

0 t
I

'lhus study of operator tracking activity fro: the positions of automatic control
theory opens up new possibilities for optimizing automted systems.

Further development of the nethods of automatic control theory in application to the
activity of a human operator inescapably needs psychological interpretation and
models that take stricter account of behavioral properties such as ‘gadaptiveness.
nonlinearity, discreteness, randomness, and so on. This is isportant both to solving

the problems of human factors planning and to deeper and stricter analysis of the
Emotion of the medianism of mental regulation.

Chapter III. Investigation of Functional State with the Purpose of Evaluating
Performance, Occupational Selection and Group Cospatibility

510. Effectiveness of Group Work and the Principal Methods of Its Evaluation

Assessing the effectiveness of group work as well as selecting and composing the
group are a natural continuation of occupational selection. Occupational selection
has the purpose of determining an individual's capability to perform activities
associated with the job. while group selection accounts for the additional capability
of effective interaction.

Many works have been devoted to comparative analysis of individual and group work
(122,123,125,126,127). The variability seen in the behavior of individuals performing
various group tasks in groups of different quantitative and qualitative comosition
stems not only from external causes but also from internal ones, manifesting them-
selves in individuals engaged in group work and influencing the nature of the work of
other members of the group performing joint activity.

'me authors of the collective autograph "Inzhenernaya psikhologiya" [Engineering Psychology]
(128) name, among other basic problems of engineering psychology, optinum interaction of

operators in a control system. Organisation of optimum interaction among operators
presupposes composing the group with regard to the individual features and person-
alities of the operators. Sensible composition of small groups presupposes experience
in prediction of group results on the basis of information describing the typical
individual features of the subjects. The group must be composed in such a way that
the results of its work would be most in keeping with the objectives of the joint
activity. Concrete solution of problems associated with making up groups of opera-
tors, crews and so on requires meticulous analysis of group phenomena such as imi-
tation and suggestibility, group conflict. intragroup subordination-coordination
relationships, psychophysiological and psychosocial compatibility of group ﬂowers.
the group's learning ability, intragroup comnication and so on.

8!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is a universally recognized fact in social psychology that the formal organization
of a group must correspond to its informal organization, and conversely, the internal
psychological relationships amongindividual lowers must correspond to the external
objective organization. While the informal principle of unification of the menbers
of a group manifests itself through mutual satisfaction of the needs of the inter-
acting meubers, the second, formal principle of organization often operates indeo

even psychophysiological) relationshipsamng group meters and the external objective
organization. Consequently we encounter the problem of considering, selecting and

composing optimally operating groups with regard to the psychosocial and typical
individual features of the interacting individuals.

Researchers developing projective tests have noted that when human behavior is
rigidly controlled by an external program. personality characteristics are mani-
fested to a lesser extent than if sucha programprovides a certain freedom of choice

in the particular variant of behavior. mnsequently the concrete conditions of joint

activity and the type of operator functions involved dictate the program for selection
and composition of small groups.

Examining the effects of interaction of people, and especially the results of their
joint activity, we may reveal their work to be identically effective, but the price
of this effectiveness may vary. Differences in outlays may be revealed both within
a functioning group and between groups. We is why some methods for evaluating

the effectiveness of joint actions reveal the operational side of interaction while
others concentrate on the functional side (the energy expenditures required to com-
plete group tests). me former include all integrative and some individual methods,
and the latter include individual methods used to evaluate functional states of indi-
viduals working together (changes in mental and psychophysiological characteristics:
sensory-perceptual. psychomotor, hemdynamic, tremor, GSR, body temperature etc.).

Of the different forms of groups in H. A. Novikov's classification (129)--mminal.
associative, consolidated and honphoteric, the last two variants are of interest to
engineering psychology. In addition to comn goals, a consolidated group pre-
supposes distribution of Emotional responsibilities, while a homphoteric group
additionally presupposes high occupational preparedness for a concrete activity and
psychophysiological compatibility of the members.

Inasmuch as psychophysiological compatibility of operators performing joint work is .
one of the key conditions of the group's effective work, this issue must be con-
sidered in detail. Conpatibility is an effect of containing individuals which pro-
duccs the maximum possible results under the given conditions with minimum energy
outlays by the interacting Inellbers of the group. Greater or lesser compatibility
may be evaluated both on the basis of the output data for the work of the entire
"operators-machine" system and on the basis of results of interaction between opera-
tors specifically.

Compatibility may be evaluated on the basis of: work results; energy outlays
(psychophysmlogical changes occurring during joint work): subjectiVe satisfaction

with the joint activity (the activity itself, and interaction). Optic-m compat-
ibility presupposes that combination of interacting elements which promtes

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the greatest degree of possible interchangeability of elements within the system
(interacting individuals) and the best mutual corplenentation of elements within

the system as a whole. Optimum compatibility presupposes not only joint work but
also any other form of interaction. commication, joint relaxation etc. It creates

the groundwork for mutual smathy. conformity and unification of rental and psycho-
physiological functions.

Interaction of operators in an automated control system may be direct (visual,
manipulative and verbal): it may be indirect (by way of displays); it may proceed
through the entire time of joint work) it may manifest itself in the end product of
joint actions, and so on. All methods used to evaluate the joint work of a group
of operators may be divided into two large groups: integrative, evaluating the work
of a group as a whole, and individual or differential-psychological, evaluating
the successfulness of joint work on the basis of individual characteristics (indi—
vidual and personal).

Here are the integrative methods:

1. The homeostat method (allowing for discrete and continuous regulation. and for
stabilization and tracking). ‘

2. he cybernometer method (used to exercise psychomtor action. to solve perceptual
and mental problems. and to determine ”leader-group" coordination).

3. the sociometric method.
4. Methods used to study conformity of merbers in a small group.

5. The method of determining the “conflict resistance' of the participants of joint
work.

Integrative methods of evaluating the effectiveness of group work allow us to
determine: the- psychological structure of the group (equal and authoritarian rela-
tionships); the emotional nature of relationships (the sywathies and antipathies of
the group meters); types of comunicative behavior; the conformity of group members;
conflict resistance in extreme conditions of interaction; the ability to work well
together, psychophysiological and psychosocial coupatibility.

The differential-psychological methods of evaluating the effectiveness of group work
presuppose examination of candidates during joint work. For this purpose we deter-
mine the various typical individual features of individuals who will participate

in joint activity as operators in the future. We determine specific temporal (speed)
and accuracy characteristics of the operators depending on the concrete form of joint
activity involved. In subsequent selection of the candidates for particular groups,
we consider the following basic parameters: the individual characteristics of per-
formance speed and accuracy; the individual range of these characteristics; the
degree of similarity exhibited by the speed and accuracy characteristics of the

future (articipantSOE joint work: the degree of resistance to interference exhibited
in relation to the principal operator functions.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Individual methods of evaluating the ability of group menbers to work together con-
sider: occupational fitness; the typical individual features of neurodynamics,
psychomtor. sensory-perceptual and memory functions; characterological features;
psychosocial characteristics (structure and orientation of interests, relationships,
attitudes).

'lhe unique ways in which habits are developed and material is learned, the orienta-
tion of tracking reactions (anticipation and tardiness), and work stability (vari-
ability of indicators) are subject to special consideration. In addition to the
directly applied parameters of a human operator listed above, special consideration
must be given to the typical individual features of neurodynamics as well as to
specific character features such as extraversion, neuroticism and so on.

Homeostatic methods are used to reveal a group's capability for balancing inter
actions within the group (129,130,131 etc.). Each neither of a group working with a
homeostat is provided with indicators and control levers. Between the levers and
indicators there are anplification units which regulate (set) the mutual relationship
existing between the lever and the indicator of both every individual operator and
of all menbers of the group.

Operators participatimin the joint activity are given the task of using their levers
to set the pointers on the indicators in a certain position. he homeostat can work
in stabilization or tracking node. In stabilization mode the task is said to be
complete when all indicators have been set at the required position. The work time
is the principal indicator of the group's ability to work together. In tracking
mode thisabiliiy is defined by the group's tracking precision.

The mutual dependence among menbers of the group is one of the principal factors
defining the effectiveness with which joint tasks are completed. The homeostatic
method produces an integral assessment of the effectiveness of a group's work in the
presence of changing mutual relationships anong its ushers: the behavioral character-
istics of the sewers of a small group; the overall psychosocial characteristics of

a group having a “leader-followers“ structure.

Roget lambert's cybernometer, and its modifications developed in our laboratory,’
have some similarity with the homeostat (132,133). Some variants of the instrument
can also be used for individual examination of future participants of joint activity.
A knowledge of individual psychomtor data as well as other typical individual
features of operators to be participating in joint activity permits us to compose
the group wore sensibly. The principal component of the device is the working field,
having the form of mazes of different complexity (with paths varying in configuration
and width) through which a slide is moved about by means of levers. ‘lhe overall
trajectory and the oscillatory movements of the hands during work with the levers are
recorded by potentiometric sensors and a special device. In one case the slide is
controlled with a rigid kinematic linkage, and in another case the cybernometer is
operated with a nonrigid linkage. 'lhe nonrigid kinematic linkage restricts the
degrees of freedom of each lever and thus increases the mutual dependence of the
numbers of the group doing joint work.

“TW- o'r‘a'ny of Differential Psydmology and Anthropology, Leningrad State
imiVersity.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'me main condition governing the successfulness of group actions with a cybernometer
is distribution of functions of the same kind between the subjects in accordance with
the spatial relationship of different zones of the maze. While in the zone closest
to him the subject carries the main burden associated with moving the slide through
the maze (providing the driving force, making corrections and so on), in a zone away
from him he only helps another operator, performing a passive function. In the final
analysis, the successfulness of the group's work depends on the degree of passiveness
and activeness exhibited at each noment in time as well as on the way participation
in the work is alternated. Consequently there should be a certain balance between
activeness and passiveness.

Besides studying the unique features of psychomotor cospatibility, the cybernometer
can be used to study the effects of optimum interaction in the performance of various
perceptual and mental tasks by the group. It can be used to record the time of work.
the total nunber of moves and the solution strategy. and the overall motor activity
of each group member taken separately. me verbal reactions of working group ushers
are recorded. and their subjective opinion as to the way the solution to the problem
is sought and as to the convenience of joint work is taken into account. Effective
completion of operational tasks by a group of suajects is possible when there is
optimum correspondence between the psychomotor characteristics of the individuals

and the methods for completing the operational task. and when commication between
ﬂowers is sensibly organized.

We created a special technique using a cybernometer to analyze the activity of a _
controller and evaluate the effectiveness of his interaction with a group of working
operators. 1311: system models the basic functions of group interaction and control.
'Ihe principal activities of the supervisory controller include management of the re-
sources used in joint activity and acquisition of the lost ilportant information on
progress in completing the group task. the proposed technique may be used in the
selection and composition of groups for a subordinate control system. and for special
training of controllers. Psychosocial training presupposes exercising not only the
entire group as a whole and its menbers, but also the supervisor specifically (134).
In additiontomanaging tiebasic information and resources used in the joint activity,
the controller regulates the time the group works on the task. All group ushers
except for the controller perform identical functions. As an exanple every operator
must determine a letter of the Russian alphabet. as is presented a checkerboard
consisting of 25 squares. If the operator touches a square making up part of a letter.
a red lamp lights up on his panel. counters in the possession of the controller re-
cord both the nutter of moves made by each operator separately and the total number
of moves made by the entire group. A stopwatch indicates the time of task co: oletion.
Using a special plotting board, the controller can observe the progress made .oy each
individual operator on the problem. If the group, which also includes the controller.
exhausts its time limit and its nuber of moves, the experimenter turns the system off
and the task is said to be unfinished. As necessary, the controller can temporarily
exclude any operators from the work with the purpose of keeping the group from using
up all of its possible moves and helping operators determine the letter. he con-
troller may be given the task of determining a word consisting of three letters (a
trigram) . 'mis allows the controller a possibility for observing the task at a more-

general level than what each operator sees on his own.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

undergo change as a result of the joint work of a group of operators. It affords a
possibility for graphically recording the entire process associated with switching,
distributing and maintaining attention. In one variant each subject is examined
individually by this technique, before and after a group experiment, while in a

characteristics. Persons interacting effectively exhibit coincidence of variation-
in pulse. and an identical orientation of encePhlJ-quiphic indicators. All of this

conformity and neasuring the i 1dividual potentials of each operator for work accuracy,
we can make up the group in the most sensible fashion, with a consideration for the
specific features of the joint activity of the operators. Ovnformity of operators
may be studied both in structured groups, in which the action of each group newer

is predetermined by the experimental conditions (the method of substitute groups)
(135) and in unstructured groups, where the mutual influence among group msubers
evolves spontaneously--that is, it depends on internal causes (individual and group)
(136,137,138). Study of the conformity of group mowers is especially important

a) conformity (where a value changes over a succession of trials, approaching the
value judgment of partners). b) absence of conformity or its low degree, c) negative
reactions (when a value changes in successive trials but drifts away from a partner's
value judgment). While we do not mean to diminish the significance of conditions
that mainly cause subjects to seek conformity in their reactions (the conplexity of
the task, the entropy of the valued signals, the quantitative couposition of the
group etc.), we should dwell especially on internal causes that produce differences
in the behavior of group (theaters. 'Ihe degree of conformity depends on sensory-
pcrceptual possibilities (the individual's potentials for precision); on other indi-
vidual-pcrsonal features of the group mowers that are not specific--that is, ones
which do not have a direct bearing on the functions by which tasks are carried out
(temperament, character); on the degree of similarity of the sensory-perceptual
characteristics and of other individual and personal features of masters in a small

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In contrast to conforming conditions that elicit convergence in the reactions of

group ushers, a conflict situation creates the situation for divergence of reactions.
By modeling these two contrasting conditions and inspecting the behavior of the meters
of the small group. we can supplement our basic predictions of the effectiveness of
joint work carried out by a group of operators. as conditions of the group experi-
ment are created by a model of an elementary extreme stimulus eliciting corresponding
reactions in the group masters. Addition of stressful stimuli to the initial condi-

tions of stress (in the grow experiment) produces a clearer picture of individual
differences.

By subjecting group conflict situations to experinnntal analysis we can predict the
reliability of the work of group meters in extreme conditions, when the tension of
each Operator taken separately reflects not only upon his own work but also upon the
work of other participants of joint activity contained within a connon control system.
A homeostatic device can be used to study the unique features of the behavior of each
newer and the group as a whole in a conflict situation. This homeostat is unique in
that it permits us to introduce interference into the control system at particular
times.

A conflict situation is a qualitativel: new condition eliciting a sore-cowl”
behavioral and autonomic reaction from the subject. By simlating extreme and con-
flict situations in the laboratory, we can predict the behavior of a given operator
in the complex conditions of his occupational activity. In addition to specifically
behavioral changes, autonomic changes going as far as neurotic breakdowns have been
observed. Many facts have been accumlated in psychology. and incidentally in
physiology as well, indicating that as a task being carried out by an individual
grows in conplexity, individual differences in both the results and the methods by
which the tasks are carried out increase. The same pattern is observed when group
tasks are trade nore couples, the one difference being that the method by which the
group task is carried out grows more complex as well. The time and accuracy of
assignment coupletion increase in both individual and group experiments.

Investigations into the ability to work together against the clock and in emergency
situations deserve special attention. ‘Dension arising in group masters under these
conditions abolishes previously established norm of interaction and deepens indi-
vidual differences, which in normal situations are less pronounced and which are
kept under control in conformity with the plan and the structure of the joint
activity. G. s. Antipina noted: "The work of a small group of people in extreme
conditions places priority on the problems of psychological compatibility” ((139,
page 58). The less similar (the more contrasting) group menbers are, the mre ex-
treme conditions pull them apart. It might seem that selection according to the
"similarity-contrast" principle would solve the compatibility problem, but the real
problem lies with determining which characteristics of the human operator should be
taken into account. Moreover, as the data of differential psychology show, all hunan
characteristics manifest themselves so diversely that for practical purposes it is
almost impossible to select people who are the 'same.” Therefore the main task of
researchers is to distinguish those properties and characteristics of a human oper-
ator which would have a significant bearing on the given concrete form of joint
activity.

Evaluation and consideration of the psychosocial qualities of operators working
together. and of their mutual sympathies and antipathies is a prerequisite that nustbe

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

considered when making up small groups (139,140,141). Socionetric questionnaires'
are used to determine formal (official) and informal (intellectual-emotional) rela-
tionships. Consideration of the first type of commieation, which reflects offi-
cial mutual relationships and is regulated more by individual and characterological
features, has great significance to selection of a group of operators. 'me second
type of relationships is governed to a greater extent by the psychosocial features
of value orientations, interests and various moral attitudes. Assessment of the

way operators perceive and understand one another and of their mutual actions must
also be made a part of research in group engineering psychology.

Special consideration should be given to evaluation of the verbal reactions of the
masters of the group. Communication along the participants of joint activity serves
as an additional regulator of the effectiveness of group work. By considering
verbal reactions and conmunicative behavior, and by optimizing the function of
information outside and inside the group, we can design more-effective "operator-
operator-machine" systems and select and bring operators together for group work

more sensibly. we can make some brief conclusions on the basis of published infor-
mation (l41,142,l44,l45,l46,147) :

The total nusber of verbal reactions is not always associated with the successfulness
of the work of a subject in a group;

the volume of communication increases when the tasks of the group grow in coupleidty,
and it has a greater influence on the effectiveness of joint actions)

out of the whole set of verbal reactions (sounds, instructions, suggestions,
opinions, questions and information), "opinion" and “information" reactions have the
greater significance to the accuracy of group work. In cases where "counand' and

”instruction" reactions dominate, the group's Speed indicators change to a greater
extent;

communication may be maintained with words or with arbitrary syubols depending on the
conditions of the task and the technical possibilities afforded to communication.

Use of the auditory or the visual channel depends on the burden of other information
each channel carries.

indicators of individual characteristics that may be used to evaluate and predict

the effectiveness of group work may be determined from an analysis of data obtained
by 8. v. Bclyayev (127) and of our data (l33,l4l,148,l49). 'I‘hey include: a) the
magnitudes of individual characteristics (speed, accuracy, efficiency, successful~
ness factor); b) the individual range of characteristics, as determined from the
difference between the maximum and minimun indicators of the subject's work. Besides
specifically individual characteristics, the degree of similarity exhibited in the
characteristics of individuals participating in joint work (the difference between
average individual indicators), and the degree to which the ranges of the character-
istics coincide have no less significance. It would be important here to make a

distinction between the zone within which these ranges coincide and the zone of
their noncoincidence.

 

'A detailed description of all of the procedures of sociometry can be found in
I. P. Volkov's training manual (143).

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Depending on the work speed and accuracy parameters considered. the indicate“

for the magnitude of individual characteristics. individual ranges. the degree of
similarity of characteristics and the degree of coincidence of ranges my play differ-
ent roles in evaluation and prediction of the successfulness of group work (133:
140.141.148.149). the degree of similarity and the magnitude of individual character-
istics of members of a small group of operators predetermine the probability of
correct prediction of the effectiveness of joint actions. me better the individual
indicators and the "more similar" the members of a small group are. the higher the
probability of a correct prediction.

The opinion of A. A. neonov and V. I. nebedev can be cited as a confirmation of our
experimental conclusions as to the important significance individual ranges have to
optimum compatibility of group members. 'lhey write: '.'...a pilot who flies with
different navigators and a navigator who flies with many pilots have a broad range
of capabiiities for understanding, leading and adapting to different individualities.
his is what promotes arisal of the needed coordination in joint activity and attain-
ment of high results in flying“ ((150). page 46). ‘mus the significance of teaching
an individual to interact in optimum fashion with other people is obvious. But in
this case we do need to consider precisely who it is that acquires this experience
and who it is that learns to interact—that is. what the individual and personal
features of the person are. The lability and variability of the functional possi-
bilities of individuals participating in joint activity are found to be significant
to compatibility and to the ability to work well together.

he level of resistance to interference can be determined as a special individual
method of predicting the behavior of individuals in extreme and conflict situations
(128). 'lhis can be done. for exanple. with the “leadership test“ (a variant of the
associative experiment) (146). 'lhe task is for the operator to adequately react to
verbal stimuli when interfering words of an I'5.Ilagim!u.'y partner" are introduced into
his reactions. 'ihe "leadership test" may serve as an approximate model of a conflict
situation for the purpose of determining the conflict resistance of operators that

are to participate in joint work in the future.

It should be noted in conclusion that investigation of group compatibility and the
selection and composition of groups of operators have important significance to
raising the reliability of complex automated control systems. (128.129.130.131 etc.).
COPYRlG-l'r: Izdatel'stvo Leningradskogo universiteta. 1974

11004
C50: 8144/1858

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCHOLOGY

EK'TIONAL REGULATION OF VERML BEHAVIOR
Moscow VOPROSY PSIKIIOIDGII in Masha No 4. Jul-Aug 81 pp 60-69

ﬁnicle by N. v. Vit£7

[lexi7 During the last decade the problem of regulation of human behavior has at-
tracted ever greater attention on the part of researchers. Special significance

is attached to it in the psychology of emotions. where the problem of regulation

of nne's own behavior and the behavior of other people, that is the problems of its
internal and external forms. arises. At the same time. despite the fact that the
emotional component of these forms of regulation of human behavior is not examined
especially. it is implicitly present in the context of investigation of each of
them. Thus, the emotional component, obviously, shmld be taken into accwnt in
the analysis of the forgin and regulating effects of social relations and systems
of man's social norms 122 . because they, like any other effects. are refracted
through internal conditions. Nor can the amorional comment of regulation be ex-
cluded from the investigation of internal personality regulation. be_it the vast-
est area of voluntary regulation of the work of the sensory system 1137. or invo-
luntary and partially perceived regulation gf__the dygagica of emotional states dur-
ing the Erformance of_a complex activity 111/ and 122/, during the perception of
images 3/ and music 1297 and during verbal communication ﬂy. the "sensory"
level of internal regulation equated with the incentive level (in contrast to
"conscious" and "perfornmnce" levels). at which independent fmctigns of emotions,
for example, of the initiator and controller, are differentiated 11; 2&7. is

singled out in the context of the study of personality as the subject of activity.

The investigation of the nature of emotions and their functions in the structuri-
za_tion g the mgtal image 1A8] and in the regulation of the subject's activity

1&7. ﬂ] and _/_§/ stresses the need for the study of the mechanisms. criteria and
objects of internal emotional regulation.

The emotional regulation of human behavior is investigated :3me in tea direc-
tions, that is, in terms of analysis of the role of emotions in the formation and
behavior of the integral personality and in terms of detection of the place and
functions of emotions in mn's intellectual activity. The foremtion of the "emo-
tional direction" of personality is due to the emotional regulation of man's
stable inclinations and forged interests and his orientation in the selection of
objects meaningful to him ill]. A special psychological mechanism of emotional
correction coordinating selectivity with respect to emotion producing objects and

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the dynamics of anticipated behavior with the ”sense" of the problem situation for
the subject was singled out experimentally 537. Undoubtedly. this mechanism
forms an important link in the emotional regulation of behavior. Investigations

activity proper is largely determined by the nature of emotional regulation [37.
Recently the roblem of the study of emotional regulation of thinking activity has
5 and the heuristic function of auctions has been investigated.

dynamics of behavior is node a separate md special system of emotional regulation
of human behavior.

In our opinion. the investigation of the functioning of emotional regulation in
verbal behavior is one of the promising approaches to the study of emotional re-
gulation. Verbal behavior. in which both the characteristics of man's verbal and
thinking activity and his emotional states are manifested. makes it possible to
analyze concrete verbal asterial with sufficient accuracy. This material was pre-
viously used by many authors for__the determination of the verbal correlates of
man's current emotional states [107. 1187. [1'27 and so forth. It opens up wide
possibilities for the study of emotional regulation. because it also gives infor-

expression: a) in emotions presenting the subject’s needs to consciousness I37
and b) in the dynamics and quality of Inn's emotional states and emotional-evalua-
:ivr attitude toward reality. 'lhe presentation of needs to consciousness can be
made not only by "current" emotions. but also by preViOusly experienced emotions
forming part of the individual's subjective experience and affectin the selectiv-

to emotion producing objects perform a regulatory Funrtion in the individual'a
view or concrete situations of reality. mn's verbal behavior can mnifest both
the basal emotions of joy. fear (-anxiety) and anger and their selective direction
expressed in the emotional coloring of the subject's response to signals of real-
ity soat meaningful to him. Presumably. the dominating emotion can "color" both
the perception of situations (conditions) of generation of verbal utterances and
the substantive and dynamic aspects of the verbal cos-unications themselves. At
the same time, the level of emotionality. that is. the frequency of occurrence of
emotional states in man (without differences according to the emotional criterion

and modality) determines a greater or smaller nuiser of situations marked by him
as emotion producing situations.
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. the emotional regulation of verbal behavior is connected. first. with the

individual's inclination for experiencinghe group of emotional states that rea-
lise the zone of the dominating emotion [2 , second. with the level of continual—

ity and, third. with individual experience in the realization of verbal cos-uni-

cations in concrete situations. which largely deternines the selective orientation
of emotional reaction.

Individual characteristics of the emotional regulation of verbal behavior are formed
in the process of development of personality in society, when, as X. Men: pointed
out. Inn's notions of himself as a personality and of his behavior are mediated by
his attitude toward other people. that is. canard society at large. Both emotions
proper and the methods of expressing than. including verbal. are transfer-ed under
the effect of external means of regulation of behavior ~[.12]. At first a child's
behavior is regulated by an adult and only after a period of internalization of a

characteristics of social contacts and collimation have a decisive effect not only
on the development of man's emotional sphere j_3_/, but also on the fomtion of the
emotional regulation of the verbal fora of behavior. Under the conditions of var-
bal cosmnication nan develops the standards of verbal expression of emotions. the
"masking" of the expression of his individual emotional states and even the utili-
zation of emotional reactions. which len_d~themselves to control with difficulty.
for the purpose of influencing others 121/.

A detailed study of these problems evokes considerable interest. However. the emo-
tional regulation of Inn's integral typical verbal behavior was not subjected to
an experimental investigation. although in-depth investigations were performed on
the diagnosis and evaluation of verbal expression of emotional states. In the es-
anination of enotional regulation of verbal behavior the following aspects can be
singled out: 1) control of one's own verbal behavior under concrete conditions;
2) effect by means of one's own verbal behavior on other people. ghen. in N. I.
Zhinkin's words. "commnication controls the partner’s behavior" 112; 17; 3) ver-
bal interaction. when each of the people involved in_co-inication can "become at-
tuned to the appropriate action and counteraction" £24; 4527. In this article the
first aspect of the problem-«antral of one's own verbal behavior-~but with due
regard for the two others. is the object of examination. A theoretical examination of
the concept of emotional regulation makes it possible to assume that it is mani-
fested in the substantive aspect of the text reflecting the domination of emotions
and their orientation to certain elements of concrete situations.

To check the advanced hypothesis. we investigated emotional regulation on the ma-
terial of the substantive aspect of_verbal behavior with the use of a model of

verbal comnication in education 1127. ‘lhis model realized under the conditions
of university training of specialists in the area of foreign languages seem ade-
quote to the task of investigation oving to the fact that potential emotion pro-
duc ing situations of verbal behavior exist during studies. They occur in connec-

tion with the significance for the speaker of the quality of his verbal comica-
tion and expectation of the evaluation of this comnication by listeners. as well
as the teacher's authoritative influence.

9S

POI WI. US! ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

No series of a special experiment were conducted with 136 tested students, of whom
86 participated in the first series and 50. in the second. The object of the first

for him. For this purpose it was suggested that the tested students describe the

The experimental material was obtained in the for- of texts presenting detailed
descriptions of various eeotion producing situations (more than 500) and texts-
conclusions of unfinished stories (100). This material_was processed qualitatively
and quantitatively with the use of content analysis 153/ and £327. which was made
as a check on the hypothesis on the nnifestation in speech of the subject's dosi-
nating sections and their orientation to the objects of real situations. The texts
of the first series took into account the existence and frequency of lexical units
naming and evaluating the subject's emotional states and the emotion producing con-
ponents of a situation and the texts of the second series took into account both

lexical units and the context giving information on the emotional modality of a

first series (record of the tested femle student )1. 8.). (In the text of the re-
cord words pertaining to emotional states are emphasized with one continuous line,
words pertaining to their qualitative characteristics in terns of frequency and in-
tensity, with a dashed line, words pertaining to emotion producing coaponmts of
situations, with two continuous lines and words designating their qualitative char-
acteristics. with two dashed lines).

a) what situations during practical speech h) Milt emotional states do you
studies usually produce in you positive experience most often in these
or negative emotions affecting your situations?
speech?

1. I 9.139).? experience a great confusion A state of confusion and fear.

---.-

if I have to speak in front of an un-
familiar audience, or even in the pres~

ence of students of 3995313! group.

 

2. 1 an greatly disturbed when ly speech Mostly irritation and anger.

is interrupted. supplemented or cor-
rected. The instructor s gestions

on "Praktika Rechi" 7Speech Practice?

are an especially his disturbance :3:

the fluency and coherence of my speech.
because I know that this means that I
made a mistake.

 

96
MOMUSEONLV
S.

6.

9.

MML'SEONLY

An interesting subject smelly helps us to (Joyous) animtion and enthu-
........... —— ------- siasn.

express a thought and attitude toward a

problem more easily and freely. In this

 

case one forgets that, nevertheless, one
mat receive a grade for the answer

I feel 32232.12!!! constrained if I have A state of constraint. confu-
sion and fear.

-------..---s--...-

 

tion. I as lost and I an afraid of a
hostile attitude.

 

 

in order for -y speech to be logical and Pleasant emotions and satis-
expressive it is 3551 igortant that I be faction.

supported. even if with individual renrks

 

 

A situation of gogggill and interest on the A state of joyous excitement,
— --------------- a kind of fervor and a sense
part of Iy friends in what I say. In such of risk.

a situation I want to speak. although "I an
pressed for words. mite mistakes and get

excited because of this. but I tg to keep
up this interest.

 

Noise. whispering and laughter when I answer“ A state of conlete confusion.

this is the most unpleasant situation. I be-

 

-—---—-------—-

cone confused. lose the thread of the stogx
and it is difficult for us to collect 91‘

thoughts.
During studies we have so-called gene situa- I experience a kind of joyous
-———- excite-ant.

time. Of course. they evoke pleasant em-

 

 

tions. But the lack of artistic talent makes
me gnggl! rejoice. but get greatlz excited.

 

The gooﬁng tone of some instructors creates Expectation of something un-
—— pleasant; an anxious state.
FOIOW'ICIALUSEONLY

lo. An unexpected appearance of new people during The sane-«upectation and.
---------- ————— perhaps. sons uneasiness.

studies usually does not evoke negative eno-

tions in '12. but the attempt of the entire
group "to show off" also affects me.

 

11. A freguently_gepeated situation: The instruc- Doubt and a sense of un-

-------------------- —— -——— certainty.
ﬂ taps his pencil when one answers. 9;

course. one doubts the correctness of the

 

 

As a result of an analysis of the situation texts presented above it was revealed
that in most of them (8 out of ll) the state of the tested student was anxious.

The presence of the words "confusion," "sense of uncertainty." "to get excited" and
so forth attests to this. The intensity and frequency of occurrence of this state
are shown in the subjectively evaluative lexical units "slmys." "greatly" and so
forth. The repeated use of words and word cosbinations denoting the min orienta-
tion of the emotions of this tested student to individual conponents of situations
nude it possible to determine the min stressor for her. Such components of sit-
uations as "audience." "instructor." "group." "atnosphere" and "subject" are nan-
tioned in her texts. but the most frequently found words and word cobinations show
that this tested student is oriented to a stressor. which we conventionally call
"group." that is. people present during the realization of her verbal connications.

On the basis of the results of analysis of the situation texts prepared by all the
tested students three groups were singled out according to the criterion of doei-
nation of emotions. A description of the conditions of occurrence of pleasant e-
notions and joy predominates in the texts of 24 percent of those tested. A total
of 38 percent of those tested mostly report anxiws states. A total of 28 percent
of those tested nane nainly situations in which they are angry. The domination: of
two enotions is revealed in 10 percent of those tested.

The data of the analysis of these texts also ends it possible to deternine three
types of basic stressors. They were conventionally called as follows: group. that
is. "listeners" of the verbal utterances of those tested; official conunication
leader, who in these situations was the instructor. initiator and active partici-
pant in coraunication; activityneubstantive and organisational characteristics of
the performed work. Furthermore. a fourth type of stressor-the functional state
formed in the tested student before the beginning of the situation presented by
him-«was outlined. An analysis of the texts has shown that the mjority of the
tested students. that is. 36 percent. emotionally react to the official commiss-
tion leader. 30 percent are oriented to the perforned activity and for 28 percent
of those tested the group's attitude toward than is enotionally significant. (In
5 percent of those tested an analysis of the texts did not reveal an orientation
to any specific type of stressor).

A comparison of the nature of connection between the domination of emotions in the
tested individuals and their orientation to types of atressora has shown that the
emotions of certain modalities predeternine, as it were. the fixation on the nain

98

FOIOFF'IGALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and secondary stressor. when joy dominates, the majority of the tested students
are oriented to the group and a slightly smaller number. to the activity. In tes-
ted individuals with doeinating anxiety orientation to the official leader is in
the first place and to the group, in the second. For the Iajority of the tested
students with the domination of anger the activity is the basic stressor and a
smaller number of then are oriented to the official com-unication leader (table).

Table. Dependence Between the Modality of Dominating antions and Orientation to
Types of Stressors (in 2)

Orientation to t as of stressors
Modality of doninating officm cos-Imitation

emotions activity leader group
Joy 33 17 50
Anxiety 15 53 32
Anger 57 36 7

The table shows that orientation to any of the types of stressors is realised in
their ranked order. Thus. the orientation of the dominating emotion of joy can be
represented by the order Or (group)--A (activity)--L (official communication lead-
er). the orientation of anxiety. by the order L-Gr--A and the orientation of an-
ger, by the order A--L--Gr. Apparently. the disclosed connection between the do-
mination of emotions and orientation to the type of stressor reflects not only the
characteristics of this samplkgcﬁ the tested students. but also a deeper internal
dependence between the quality of the emotion dominating in the subject and its
selectivity with respect to elements of real situations. This "ranking" of types
of stressors manifests not only the criterion of orientation of emotions. but also
one of the characteristics of emotional regulation of verbal vehavior. The doli-
nation of joy is aostly connected with such a personality feature as sociability
and the desire to establish contacts with people, as well as with the inclination
to states of interest in and enthusiasm for activity. This is quite clearly mani-
fested in the preferred orientation of the "joyous" tested students to the group
and activity. As is well known. the dominating emotion of anxiety can predeter-
nine the hyperbolization of fear. in particular fear of a negative external eval-
uation. The data obtained indicate that the states of anxiety of the tested indi-
viduals are connected primarily with the expectation of an evaluation on the part
of the official communication leader. When anger dominates. the person is mostly
characterized by a great "rejecting" and "reconstructing" activity. In fact. ac-
cording to the data of the analysis of these texts. these tested students often
subjected various elements of educational activity to criticism and expressed dis-
satisfaction with the remarks and instructions of the official communication leader.

Orientation to a specific type of stressor was manifested in the substantive as-
pect of situation texts. The texts of the tested studuents oriented to the activ-
ity and to the official leader are the most striking examples. A considerable num-
ber of lexical units denoting various nuances of emotional states and attitudes
toward situations in which verbal communications were prepared and realized (for
example. "interest." "expectation of something new." ”feeling of disappointment,"
"desire to restructure boring work," and so forth) are revealed in the texts of

the tested individuals oriented to the activity. Along with this,of interest is

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the fact that twice as many emotions of a positive than of a negative emotional
criterion are mentioned in the texts of these tested students. Tested individuals
characterized by the domination of anger and oriented to the official co-inica-
tion leader mentioned intensive and clearly contrasting enotions; for example.
"enthusiasm." "despair." "pride" and "feeling of humiliation." "Anxious" tested
individuals oriented to the same atresaor cited in their texts the maxim- outer
of the same and similar emotional states in this saning; for exawle. "constraint"
"feeling of uncertainty.” "state of joyous excitement" and so forth.

The date of the first series confirm the assuwtion on the functioning of emotions
as a "mechanism" of mrlting subjectively significant elements of situations in the
process of goal formation in intellectual activity I? and E. At the same time.
an analysis of the texts--products of the verbal and thinking activity of the tes-
ted students--nade it possible to observe the rsgulative role of the contination
of the dominating emotion and orientation to the cowonents of emotion producing
situations that are basic for the tested individuals.

The second series of the experiment was aimed at checking the hypothesis that these
combinations can have a regulating effect on the emotional coloring of freely pro-
duced texts representing conclusions of unfinished stories. (The stories taken
from those usually used during the study of the flexibility of thinking were pre-
sented in the native tongue of those tested for auditory perception). The object
of analysis of the texts prepared by the tested individuals was to determine the
characteristics of the selection and verbalixation of the emotional modalities im-
parted to the texts. Lexical units denoting the emotional states of personages.
the emotional attitude of the tested authors toward them and toward the events de—
scribed in the text and opinion-suggestions and evaluations expressed in the con-
text were recorded. The analysis made for each of the two text versions made it
possible to reveal the emotional modality unintentionally inverted by the tested
students to the first version and the modality that they selected for the second
version so that it may differ from the former.

The nature of the changes in these modalities was especially examined on the basis
of the date on the emotional modalities of the text versions prepared by every
tested student. This examination was rude in accordance with the most numerous
groups of tested students singled out according to the criterion of codination of
certain dominating emotions and orientation to the same streasor. It was revealed
that in the texts of tested students with the domination of the emotion "joy" and
orientation to the group mutual transitions between the modalities of joy and an-
xiety were made more often than between any of them and the modality of anger.

The authors' concentration on the importance of the unfolding events for personages
and an expression of interest in how these events can affect the fate of personages
in the future are observed in the content of these texts. For example: "‘lhia eve-
ning no one will leave the house: It is terrible!" Or. "this will be a happy holi-
day for all." The large nutter of words denoting emotional states and attitudes
lends expressiveness to the presentation. At the same time. however. the subjects
are rather standard or represent obvious borrowings from fiction. Almost the same
nunber of mtual transitions between emotional modalities are revealed in the texts
of tested students with the domination of anxiety and orientation to the official
communication leader. ‘lhe main characteristic of these texts lies in the authors'
emphasis of the role of emotionallv significant external circumstances. For ex-
angle: "They will frighten all the wild fowl and there will be nowhere to hunt.”

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Someone will be on the watch for you and will catch you." "You attract the atten-
tion of enemies!" The lexical units used in the texts are characterized by minor
emotional coloring. It resides in the context. The subjects of the texts often
exceed the limits of the "conditions" prescribed by the presented study. In the
texts of tested individuals with the domination of anger and orientation to the
activity it was revealed that most mutual transitions were made between the moda-
lities of joy and anxiety. An analysis made it possible to reveal in these texts
a large number of lexical units denoting the author's emotional-evaluative atti-
tude toward personages and events. For example: "Ah. how goodl." "this is a dis-
grace," “how happy she is." "how little one needs to be happy" and so forth. A1-
most all the texts are distinguished by a diversity in subject lines. a complete
restructuring of the content presented for a conclusion of the story and introduc-
tion of additions and refinements. It is of interest that, along with the de-
scription and forecasting of events of a positive emotional criterion. initiative
and "offensive" elements with an obvious expression of reproach or punishment of

personages, as well as a certain adification characteristic of fables. are often
verbaliaed.

individuals of dominating emotions and orientation to the type of stressor. This
dependence is expressed in the specific selection of an emotionally colored voca-
bulary. in the nature of subjects and in the attention of the authors of the texts
to the emotional makeup of personages or to emotion producing situations. At the
same time. a more general characteristic of the verbal behavior of the tested in-
dividuals was also detected. It consisted in the fact that in the texts mutual
transitions between the emotional modalities of joy end anxiety were more frequent
than between each of them and anger. The relative number and direction of mutual
transitions between the basal emotions expressed in the texts are presented in
diagram 1. The basic emotional modalities of the texts are depicted in the form
of rectangles, arrows point the directions in the change of modalities and the
width of arrows and the figure symbolize the relative frequency or the mutual tran-
sitions of modalities during the production of the second text version.

 

The direction and relative number of mutual transitions of emotional modalities
imparted to the first and second text variants

Key:
1. Joy 3. Anger
2. Anxiety

101

FOIIOFFKJAL.US£i0NLY
ma OFFICIAL I.“ ONLY

The characteristics of psrformnce of the change in the emotional coloring of ver-
bal communications can be considered the manifestation of voluntary elotional re-
gulation of verbal behavior. lhis regulation is more flexible in tested individ-
uals characterized by the cowination "joy-orientation to the group" and “anxie-
ty-orientation to the conlnmication leader." The codiinetion "anger-orientation
to the activity" is manifested in the fact that it is sore difficult for the tes-
ted individual--author of the texts--to perforn the assignment for a change in the
emotional modality of his ready text. A more flexible regulation is also observed
during the operation of joyous and anxious modalities in the texts. Difficulties
in the reconstruction of the texts to which the emotional modality of anger was
inparted earlier show the lesser plasticity of this modality. Tested individuals
often seemed to be attached to the first text version, in which anger was exprused,
and could not or refused to fulfill the assign-ent.

Results have confirmed the hypothesis that the emotional regulation of verbal be-
havior is manifested in the substantive aspect of the text reflecting man's deni-
nating emotions and their connection with stressors. At the seas time. the exper-
imental data obtained show the prospects for an investigation of the emotional re-
gulation of verbal behavior. Thus. an analysis of the texts made it possible to
observe the characteristics of interaction between the quality of emotions and the
selective orientation to the signals of reality and to disclose the picture of
functioning of the enotional regulation of men's behavior in his direct contact
with the social environment. The singling out by the subject of external and in-
ternal stressors (social environment. activity and the subject himself). orienta-
tion to which lends itself to voluntary and involuntary regulation to a varying
degree. is connected with partiality and selectivity inherent in emotions. Thus.
the essence of emotional regulation of verbal behavior lies in the voluntary and
involuntary emotional "coloring" of acts of verbal behavior and selective orienta-
tion to various objects of reality. This article exasines certain characteristics
of manifestation of the emotional regulation of verbal behavior, which. in our 0-
pinion. are of interest for the problem of eeotions. as well as for teaching prac-
tice and for an increase in the efficiency of various co-micstion system.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Abul'lthanova-Slavskays, K. A.. "Deyatel'noet' i Psikhologiya Lichnosti" [Kc-
tivity and the Psychology of Personalitz7. Moscow. 1980. 335 pages.

2. Artee'yeva. Ye. Yu.. "0n the Description of the Structure of Perceptive k-
periencg7. VESTNIK MOSKOVSKOGO UNIVERSITBTA. seam "PSIIOIOLOGIYA," No 2,
1977. Pp 12-18.

3. Bodalev. A. A., "Continuation and the For-tics of Personality." in the book
"Sotsial'naya Psikhologiya" lSocial Psychology]. Moscow. 1979, pp 25-36.

lo. Breslsv. G. H.. "(h the Place of Emotional Processes in the Structure of
Thinking Activity." in the collection "Psikhologicheskiye Issledovsniya In-

tellektugl'noy Deyetel'nosti" LPsychological Investigations of Intellectual
Activitxl. hoscow. 1979. PP 62-67.

102

”WWW?
9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

18.

”OFFICIALUSEONLY

Brcslav. c. M.. “Kriticheskiy Analiz Kibernetichesltogo Podkhoda k Issledovani-
yu Enotsiy (o l'utyakh Isucheniya Prirody Enotsiy)" iCritical Analysis of the
Cybernetic Approach_to the Investigation of Emotions (on Rays of Studying the
Nature of Emotional]. author's abstract of his candidate's dissertation. Mos-
cow. 1977. pp l-l9.

Vasil'yev‘ I. A.. Poplushnyy. V. A. and ‘l‘ikhonirov. 0. K.. "Bnotsii i Hysh-

leniye" lEnotima and Thinking]. Moscow. 1980, 192 pages.

Vilyunas. V. K.._"Psikhologiya Enotsional'nykh Yavleniy" LFsychology of Eno-
tional Phenomenal. Moscow. 1976. 162 pages.

Vilyunas. V. K.. "Psikhologicheskiy Analis Enotsional'nykh Yavleniy" ancho-
logical Analysis of Emotional Phenonena7. author's abstract of his candidate's
dissertation. Moscow. 1974.

Vitt. N. V.. "Vyrazheniye Enotaionsl'nylth Sostoyaniy v Rechevoy Intonatsii"
LExpression of Emotional States in Speech lntonatiog7. author's abstract of
his candidate's dissertation. 1965.

(:alunov. V. 1.. "Speech. Emotions and Persmality: Perspective Problems." in
the collection "Rech‘. Enotsiya i Lichnost': hterisly i Soobshcheniya Vae-
soyuznogo Sinpozium“ LSpegch. Emotion and Personality: Materials and Reports
of the All-Union Synposiugl. Leningrad. 1978. pp 3-12.

Dodonov, B. I... "Enotsiys Kak Tsennost'" Linotion as Valug7, Moscow. 1978.
272 pages.

Zhinkin, N. 1.. "Pour Conunicative Systens and You; Languages," in the book
"Teoreticheskiye Prgblealy Prikladnoy Lingvietiki" [theoretical Problens of
Applied Linguisticgl. Moscow. 565. PP 7-37.

Zaporozhets. A. V. and Neverovich. Ya. 2.. "(h the Problem of the Genesis.
Function and Structure of Emotional Processes in the Child." VOPROSY PSIKMO-
man. 1971.. No 6. pp 59-72.

Kgchopkin. 0. A.. "Psikhologicheskiye Mekhsnisny Regulyatsii Deyatel‘nosti"
_/_Psychologica1 Mechanisms of Regulation of Activity]. Moscow. 1980. 256 pages.

lemt'yev. A. A. . "Pedagogicheskoye mashcheniye" LPedagogicel Conmication],
Moscow. 1979. 65 pages.

Icont'yev. A. N.. "Deyatel‘nost'. Soznaniye. Lichnost‘" LKctivity. Con-
sciousness. Personality7. Moscow, 1977. 304 pages.

Nayenko, N. 1.. "Psikhicheskaya Mapryazhennost'“ Liental Straig7. Moscow,
1976. 112 pages.

NosenLo. E. l... "Osobennosti Rechi v Sostoyanii Enotsionalinoy Napryazhennos-
ti" lSpeech Characteristics in a State of Emotional Strain]. Dnepropetrovsk.
1975. 132 pages.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

2h.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

me OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

Nosenko. E. I... Yel'chaninov. P. Ye.. Rrylova. N. V. and Petrukhin. Ye. 1...
"0n the Possibility of Evaluating Man's Emotional Stability According to His
Speech Characteristics." VOPROSY PSIKBOLOGII. 1977. No 3. pp 46-56.

Ovchinnikova, 0. V. and Pung. B. Yu.. "btperimtal Investigation of Emotional
Strain in an Bis-nation Situation." in the collection "Paikhologicheakiye Is-
sledovaniys" LPsychological Investigation37. Issue lo. edited by A. N. Leon'-
yev. A. R. Luriya and Ye. D. Rho-okays. Moscow. 1973. pp 49-56.

01'shannikova. A. Ye.. “Psychological Diagnosis of Buotiouality." in the col-
lection "Problesy Obshchey. Vozrastnoy i Pedag icheskoy Psikhologii" _/.Prob-
lens of (lateral. Age and Pedagogical Psychologz , edited by V. V. Devydov.
Moscow. 1978. pp 93-105.

Panto; R. and Gravits. M.. "Mstody Sotsial'nykh Nsuk" ﬁathods of Social Sci-
encegl. Moscow. 1972. 607 pages.

Reykovskiy. Ya., "Bisperinental'nsya Psikhologiya Rootsiy" iﬁperissntal Psy-
chology of Enotiongl. Moscow. 1979. 391 pages.

Rubinshteyn. S. L.. "Omovy Obshchey Psikhologii" iirinciples of General Pey-
chologll, Moscow. 1940. 586 pages.

Simonov. P. V.. "Vyashaya ﬂervnsya Deyatel'nost' Cheloveka. Motivatsionno-

Enotsional'nyyg Aspekty" M's Higher Nervous Activity. Motivational-Bao-
tional Aspects]. Moscow. 1975. 175 pages.

Tarasov. G. 5.. "Sensory-Perceptive Processes and Personality." VOPROSY PST-
KHOIDGII. 1980. No 6. pp 60-68.

Frees. P., "Enotigns." in the book "Eksperieentsl'nsya Psikhologiya" [Experi-

mental Psychologxl. editor-cospiler P. Press and J. Piaget. Issue 5. Moscow.
1975. PP 112-195.

Shinggrov. G. Kh.. "Enotaii i Chuvstva Kak Port-a Otrsaheniya geystvitel'nos-
ti" lEnotions and Feelings as a Port: of Reflection of Realitzl. Moscow. 1971.
223 pages.

Shorokhova. Ye. V. and Bobneva. M. 1.. "Problems of Study of Psychological
Mechanisms of Regulation of Various “Upes of Social Behavior." in the book
"Psikhologicheskiye Mekhanismy Regulyatsii Soteial'nogo Povedeniys" Esycho-
logical Mechanisms of Regulation of Social Behaviog7. Moscow. 1979. pp 3-19.

Russel. R. L. and Stiles. H. 8.. "Categories for Classifying Language in Psy-
chotherapy." PSYCHOL. BULL, 1979. Vol 86. No 2. pp 604-1019.

COPYRIGHT: "Voprosy psikhologii". "Pedagogika". 1981

11,439

CSO:

1860/3333

1010

MWLUSBONLY
POI 051-10 ‘.l. USE ONLY

800K 0" URGENT PROBLEMS OF PSYCHOLOGY OP PERSWALITY REVIEWED
Moscow VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII in Russian No 6. Jul-Aug 81 pp 175476

lieview by K. Tikhomirov. Moscow. of book "Ocherki po psikhologii anomel'nogo rez-
vitiya lichnosti" putlines on Psychology of Abnormal Development of rersonality)
by B. V. Zeygarnik and B. S. Bratus'. Isdr-vo H60. Moscow. 1980. 169 pages]

£1ex§7 It is hardly necessary to convince anyone that the elaboration of the prob-
less of psychology of personality is of paramount isportance both for the develop-
ment of theoretical psychology and for a more intensive solution of applied prob-
less by psychologists. At the same time. we quite often encounter a disappointing
substitution of a list of overall problems of interdisciplinary investigations of
personality and of the formulation of only general sociological premises for its
study. or even sccueulations of correlations among individual differences. for the
psychology of personality proper. The significance of the reviewed book lies prim-
arily in the confirmation of the psychological approach proper to the study of per-
sonality and abnormalities in its develop-eat. The book is written in the genre of
outlines. which reflect a single research trend and are unified by the general neth-
odological basis and general task connected with the "search for new possibilities
of gaining knowledge of the psychological nature of personality" (p b). The authors
selected the theory of activity as the methodological basis for their research.

contradiction and neurotic conflict. which "is a special type of contradiction end
its perverted form. leads to the creation of a distorted activity. destroys the
structure of personality created before the sickness and deprives it of mediation
and control“ (p ll). The development of personality of the person that became ill
with neurosis occurs not because of the neurotic conflict. but despite it.

The book convincingly substantiates the thesis that a mental collapse is not the
negative of development and that different types of the pathological process lead
to qualitatively different pictures of a collapse. The authors see the task of
the true theory of personality in explaining both cases of normal personality de-
velopment and cases of its abnormal development. The very concept of norm. as the

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIJOFFICLAL USEZCHNLY

authors note, "should not be an enumeration of the merits of personality. but an
indication of the general principles of the best course of development, of the ba-
sic contradictions arising there and of the characteristics of overcoming them"

(p 130). Contradictions between the motivational and operative-technical aspects
of activity also arise in a normal mature personality. but this personality is ca-
pable of perceiving and resolving contradictions. which leads to its further de-
velopment.

The problem of the methods of personality study also pertains to the most import-
ant problems. The principles formulated in the book are of a fundamental nature.
It is shown convincingly that it must matter to the psychologist what methods he
brings to practice. "The proposition on the relative independence of a specific
research method of the initial theory... is unacceptable in the study of the phe-
nomena of man's psychic life“ (p lb).

The authors quite soundly maintain that the theoretical and methodological prin-
ciples of psychology are realized through specific research methods and suggest
that functional psychology is the theoretical basis for the methods of measuring
abilities in foreign psychology and that the use of these methods "discloses only
the final results. while the entire qualitative aspect of the tested individual'a
activity remains beyond the scope of reaearc " (p 15). The authors' own position
lies in stressing primarily the need for an analysis of the qualitative character—
istics of the subject's mental activity. The book presents an interesting analysis
of character traits. goal assumption, suggestibility. criticality and sense forma-
tions of personality.

Much attention is given to a description of the specific methods of investigation
of personality disturbances. It is stressed that an observation of the patient's
general behavior during an experiment is a special and effective method of inves-
tigation. The possibilities of analyzing personality changes according to the data
of case histories are disclosed. A description of methods both directly aimed at
the detection of personality characteristics and connected with an indirect detec-
tion of personality changes by means of experiments in which cognitive processes
are investigated is presented. The need to study the onset of psychological phe-
nonena is stressed constantly.

Today ever greater importance is attached to the use of psychological knowledge

for the solution of practical problems. The book by B. V. Zeygarnik and B. S. Bra-
tus' is instructive in this respect. because psychiatric practice is a field where
psychological knowledge was first introduced. The authors' position is also quite
definite here: Applied research must have a clear theoretical basis and. in turn.
make a contribution to the development of the general theory of psychology. In
particular. the significance of pathopsychological research of personality lies in
disclosing the role of the personality (motivational) component in the structure

of cognitive activity. This is connected with the fact that mental illness "prim-
arily affects man's motivational sphere and his emotional manifestations and value
orientations“ (p 6). The formation of new motives, goals and aims and the struc-
ture of self-consciousness and self-regulation--the data of pathopsychology are of
great importance for the study of these problems. The authors see the prospects
for the development of applied pathopsychological research proper in an expansion
of the participation of professional psychologists in the system of rehabilitation
and prevention work.

106

FOR OFTHCJAL USEICNULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhe book by B. V. Zeygernik and B. S. Brntne' enriches the psychological teaching
of personality, makes a contribution to the developnent of pethopeychology end will
be read and studied with benefit and interest both by professional psychologists
and specialists in related fielde of knowledge interested in an alliance with pey-
chologists.

COPYRIGHT: "Voprosy psikhologii". "Pedesogika", 1981

11,639
650: 1840/33

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAhUSE ONLY

HONOGRAPHS 0N PROJECTIVB NITRODS lll PERSONALITY STUDY mum
Moscow VOPROSY PSIKHODOGII in Russian No lo. Jul-dug 81 pp 176-178

lRevieu by A. A. Kronik. Kiev. of monographs "lssledovsniye lichnosti v kliniches-
koy psikhologii (na osnove utoda Rorshakha)" Personality Study in Clinical Psy-
chology (on the Basis of the Rorschach Hethodl by L. P. Burlachuk. Vyshcha_shl:ola.
Kiev. 1979, 176 pages, and "Proyektivnyye uetody issledovaniys lichnosti" iProjec-
tive Hethgds of Personality Studﬂ by Ye. T. SoItolova, lrd-vo mu, Moscow. 1980.
176 pageg/

[Text] The possibility of obtaining objective knowledge of personality and its
inner world hidden fron an outside view has always excited researchers' ainds and '
nade then search for new ways leading to the solution of one of the fundaesntal
probleas of psychological science. Therefore. the first nonographs devoted to
projective nethods of personality study in our country cannot be ignored.

One of the oldest projective methods-~the Rorschach aethod--is in the center of L.
F. Burlachuk's study. The problea of its «perinatal possibilities is solved on
a specific clinical basis. Ye. T. Sokolove's book. along with the Rorschach meth-
od. also gives a detailed description of the thee-tic appercsption test (TAT).
However, the iaportsnce of the reviewed eonographs is not linited only to the area
of specific psychodiagnosis. The special chapters devoted to the problens of asth-
odology of the projective approach to personality study (Burlschult. chapter I) and
to the theoretical substantiation of projective methods (Sokolova, chapter ll)
contained in both works attest to the above.

Projective methods of personality study are unique phanoasna in modern psychology.
The persistent interest in them on the part of various psychological schools, which
has lasted for note than half a century. has produced a special field--projective
psychology. At the same tine. free the moasnt of its appearance to this day pro-
jective methods and the practice of their use raise many questions for researchers.
Here are some of them. What does the psychological mechanism realizedinprojective
methods represent? what relationship do these methods have to the concept of pro-
jection developed by psychoanalysis? To what extent are the characteristics of in-
terpretation of incentives connected with real behavior? Pros what theoretical
positions should the results obtained be interpreted?

In an atteapt to answer these questions the authors of both monographs reveal the
essence of various approaches to understanding projection and its mechanism. This
enables then to draw the sane conclusion on the unsoundness of the concept of pro-
jection developed by psychoanalysis for an explanation of the nechanisn realised

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in projective methods. Supplementing each other, the authors discuss various as-
pects of the concept of "projective method." single out the characteristic features
and existing classifications of these methods of personality study and show the
great importance of the characteristics of the used stimlation.

The problem of theoretical substantiation of projective methods is the most couples
and debatable. Presenting a critical analysis of the attempts at substantiation
from the point of view of psychoanalysis. holistic psychology and gestalt psycho-
logy. the representatives of the "new view" and investigators of the cognitive
style. Burlachuk and Soltolova raise an isportant methodological problem in their
works--substantiation of the projective method on the basis of the principles of
Soviet psychology and the development on this basis of specific schemes of anal-

ysis and interpretation of the results of projective research. This general prob-
lem is solved by the authors. but in different ways.

In Burlachuk's opinion. the principle of activity and personalization of perception
is fundamental for understanding the phenomenon of projection. (in the basis of
this principle projective methods are interpreted by the author as "methods of in-
direct personality study based on the construction of a specific. plastic stimulus
situation creating. owing to the activity of the process of perception. conditions
most favorable for the manifestation of the aims. emotional states and other char-
acteristics of personality" (Burlachuk. p 31).

The position of Ye. 1'. Sokolova and V. V. Stolin. with when the corresponding ps-
ragraph was jointly written. is that the "manifestations of personality disclosed
in projective tests (primarily interpretative. of course) can be adequately under-
stood in terms of personality meanings and the subject's corresponding activity in
the search for or concealment and masking of personality meanings" (Soltolova. p 65).

Thus, Burlachuk's position can be designated as an "aim" position and that of So-
kolova and Stolin. as an "activity" position. Do they contradict each other? In
our opinion. no.

1112 point is that the experimental situation specified by the Rorschach method. es-
sentially. models only the initial stage of any activity-~the stage of perception
and knowledge. At the same time. as Burlschuk rightly stresses. the subject's ac-
tivity is directed toward eliminating the uncertainty of a situation through the
projection of personality characteristics (Burlachuk. p 31). Another activity is
provoked by the thesatic apperception test. Owing to the life reality of the sit-
uations (pictures) presented to the tested individual, as well as the special in-
struction "to invent a story (what happens. what was and what will be...).“ his be-
havior is not iisited only to cognitive activity. but can turn into a purposeful
(not obligatorily. however. perceived) activity. in which using Sokolova's and Sto-
lin's terminology. interrupted actions associated with various inner barriers are
realized.

Thus. in our opinion. the Rorschach method and TAT touch on various stages in ac-
tivity. that is. the former. primrily on the cognitive stage and the latter. prim-

arily on the executive stage. We would like to stress that it is only a matter of
a preferential connection of the method and stage. mus. interpreting ink blots.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the tested individual can get so involved in a picture that he begins to predict
the possible behavior of the imagined picture. 0n the other hand. making up a story
from TAT pictures. the tested individual can "get stuck" at the stage of perception
and instead of a dynamic story give only a description of the present or imagined
situation. However, such cases are not typical.

The above-stated makes it possible to conclude that the initial principles upheld
by Burlachuk and Sokolova do not contradict. but only supplement. each other. In
an attempt to give a universal substantiation to projective methods as a whole. the
authors. essentially. give substantiations only to particular methods: The former.
to the Rorschach method and the latter. to the IAT method. At the same time. in
our opinion. such a way is fully justified theoretically and feasible in practice.
To substantiate projective methods. it is first of all necessary to reveal the unit
and stage in the structure of activity that are mainly touched on by a specific
method and to find the specific psychological mchanisms of regulation of activity
"provoked" by this method. Only in this case will it be possible to "remove" A. M.
Etkind's caustic. but accurate, remark about the analogy between a horoscope and
projective methods (quoted according to Sokolova. p 119). In addition to the pos-
sibility of substantiating existing methods such a way opens up prospects for the
development of new projective methods diagnosing other stages in activity. which
previously have not been touched on.

He have examined only the theoretical problems raised by the authors of the re-
viewed monographs. The basic content of these monographs is something else. that
is. a detailed description of the methods themselves.

Burlachuk's book contains the moat coaplete description of the Rorschach method in
Soviet literature (chapter II). Without dwelling on details. we will stress the
most important. The sections pertaining to the prehistory of the Rorschach method
and to the biography of its developer are successful. “at is the least debatable
and experimentally verifiable was selected from the variants. different in their
theoretical positions. of interpretation of the indicators of this method known
abroad. The last. third chapter is assigned to clinicopsychological research. The
results of the most important foreign clinicodiagnostic studies (schizophrenia.
epilepsy. neuroses and organic brain lesions). as well as the results of the clin-
ical investigations of the author himself. are examined there. As a result. pre-
viously unknown ideas of the characteristics of personality defects in various pa-
tients are examined closely and the place of the Rorschach aethod in a pathopsy-
chological investigation is outlined. Three supplements are given at the end of the
monograph: The basic symbols of the Rorschach method in different language systems
of designation. auxiliary tables for the localization of the answers of tested in-
dividuals and a brief description of the 10 most known projective methods. the
bibliography contains 286 names. All this makes it possible to use the book as a
practical manual for those beginning to work with this aethod.

Sokolova's monograph also contains the most couplets description of TAT and of the
history of its development in Soviet literature. ‘l'he experiaental procedure and
various schemes of analysis are examined in detail (according to c. Mrray. D. Ra-
poport. L. Bellek. s. Tomkins and H. Arnold (chapter III). A description of the
Rorschach method. which slightly supplements Burlachuk'a book with an analysis of

the methods of diagnosis of conflicts and mechanisms of psychological defense. is

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

given in the last. fourth chapter. Unfortunately. this study does not contain spe-
cific experimental data obtained by neans of the described nethods by foreign and

Soviet researchers. The nonograph also contains three supple-ents, that is .charac-
teristics of needs according to Murray. diagnostically significant subjects accord-

ing to TAT tables and a list of popular answers in the Rorschach nethod. The bib-
liography has 83 names.

The reviewed monographs are the first experinent in a critical interpretation of
the largely contradictory theoretical concepts of projective nethods. (he sees in
then not only the desire to show the possibilities of projective nethods. but also
to try to "transplant" then to the soil of Soviet psychology and to renove the dis-
tinctive halo of "accessibility to few only." with which they have been surrounded
for a long tine. Although. in our opinion. a nudser of the propositions of these
monographs should be subjects of debate. there is no doubt that the reader has re-
ceived interesting and necessary books raking a significant contribution to the de—
velopment of the theory and practice of psychological diagnosis.

COPYRIGHT: "Voprosy psikhologii". "Pedagogika", 1981

11.639
CSO: [860/333

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
momaaLusrouu

FOURTH ALL-UNION COORDINATING C(NFEBBNCE cu ROBLES OP SOCIALIST WHITE!“
Moscow VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII in Russian No 6. Jul-Aug 81 p 182

iieport on conference by 0. 1. Zotova. Moscow]

ﬂag The Fourth All-Union Coordinating Cmference of the Scientific Council on
Problens of Socialist Cospetition of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences and the AUCCTU
was held in the ste of Unions of the AUOCTU on 20-21 April 1981. Ye. I. Kapustin.
chairman of the scientific council. corresponding neﬁer of the USSR Acadely of Sci-
ences. presented the accountability report "Results of Fulfill-ant of the Coordina-
ting Plan of Scientific Research on Probless of Socialist Coqetition for 1976-1980
and the Tasks of Scientific Research Organisations working out Problsna of Socialist
(Io-petition in the Iaplenentation of the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress." lie
gave a profound analysis of the present stage of research on socialist cowerition
both in our country and in the countries of the socialist camp.

The Scientific Council on Problems of Socialist Comtition of the USSR Academy of
Sciences and the AUCCTU was organized in 1974. It coordinates all the scientific
research on the study of socialist cowetition.

the coordinating plan of the scientific council envisaged investigations of the
economic. social and social-psychological aspects of socialist cometition. Two
topics--"Coq>etition and Socialist Collectivisn" and "Social-Psychological Problems
of Conpatition"--were developed by the Institute of Psychology of the USSR Acadely
of Sciences during the 10th Siva—Year Plan. 'Ihe renlts of these investigations
are reflected in two collective works published by the Institute of Psychology of
the USSR Academy of Sciences ("Sotsial'no-Psikhologicheskiye Aspekty Sotsialisti-
cheskogo Sorevnovaniya" [Social-Psychological Aspects of Socialist Cmetitiog7,
Ye. V. Shorokhova. editor-in-chief. Moscow. Nauka. 1977. 176 pages; "Sotsial'no-
Psikhologicheskiy Klinst Kollektiva: I'eoriya 1 lbtody Isucheni a" [Social-Psycho-
logical Cliaate of the Collective: Theory and Methods of Study , Ye. V. Shorokho-
vs, editor-in-chief. and O. I. Zotovs. Moscow. Nauka. 1979. 176 pages). In all.
the workers and coexecutors of the Institute of Psychology prepared sore than 100
scientific publications on these topics.

Along with the theoretical aspects of socialist conpatition concrete research at
base enterprises nade it possible to prepare practical reco-Iendations. which were
approved and accepted for introduction by the board of Glavnosnontazhspetsstroy.
These reconendations fornulste proposals on the levels of organisation of social-
ist competition. change in its form. participation of managers and evaluation of
their contribution to the organisation of socialist cowetition.

112

WWW“?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the basis of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress Ye. I. Kapustin formlated
problem, to the solution of which the efforts of scientific research orgsnisetions
met be directed.

The sector for the study of the social-psychological clinte and socialist consti-
tion headed by B. D. Parygin. which has been recently organised at the Institute of
Social-Econonic Problems of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences. perform the functions of
a head organisstion for the elaboration of social-psychological problems of social-
ist certition. In the coordinating plea of the scientific council for the llth
Five-Year Plan the topic "Social-Psychological Aspects of Socialist Cowetition and
its Effect on the Social~Psychologicsl Olin-ts of the Prinsry Labor Collective" was
assigned to this institute. Within the frslevork of this topic the Institute of
Psychology of the USSR Acedeny of Sciences will develop one of its sspects-"Bffect
of the Inclusion of Personality in Socialist Cowetition for an Increase in the Bf-
ficiency of Labor Activity (Based on the Heterisls of the Brigade Porn of Labor Or-
gsnization)."

During the llth Five-Year Plan the scientific council faces the tasks of further
developnsnt of the system of counterplanning of the correlation of cospetition end
plans for the economic and social develop-eat of labor collectives. sectors and
regions.

COPYRIGHT: "Voprosy psikhologii". "Pedagosika". 1981

11,639
CSO: 1840/333

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sum 0N PROBLUS 0F SOCIAL-PSYCIIOLMICAL TRAINING
Moscow VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII in Russian No b. Jul-Aug 81 pp 183-186

lieport on seniner by A. Ya. Varga. Hoscow lh. Kh. Hikkin. Tallinn. L. A. Petrov-
okays. Moscow. and D. V. Rmrin. Leningrad

[Text] The school ssninar "Social Psychological Training: Methodology. Theory.
Procedure and Technique" was held in Novosibirsk tron 29 March through 1 April 1981.
About 80 people froa the country's various cities. that is. Moscow. Leningrad. No-
vosibirsk. “hllinn. Vilnius. Riga. Donetsk. Cherkauy. Sochi and so forth. took
part in the work of this first scientific sesinar organized by the Siberian Depart-
nent of the Soviet Sociological Association in the country. The participants in-
cluded specialists in the field of psychology. philosophy. econosics. pedagogy.
psychotherapy and so forth. The first two days were devoted to a theoretical dis--
cussion of problees. During the following days the participants exchanged prac-
tical experience in conducting social-psychological training.

At present the practice of social-psychological training represents an actively
developing branch of applied psychology. Various terns for its designation. for
maple. laboratory training. active social-psychological training. active social
training and so forth. appear in Soviet and foreign literature. The tern "social-
psychological training" introduced by psychologists in the Ger-an Democratic Repub-
lic into scientific usage has becone nost established.

The content of this field is very mltifaceted and fits into one definition with
difficulty. The nest inortant point is that in this case it is a question of a
certain forts of psychological effect in the process of intensive co-mication in
a group context. The effect is directed toward an increase in the psychological
coepetence of the participants in cos-unicetion.

The reports and the debate that developed touched neinly on three theoretical prob-
lens: the subject and tasks of social-psychological training. the concept of per-
sonality develop-tent and the practice of social-psychological training and the role
of the leader (anger) in the process of training. The report by l. H. Koryak and
V. l. Shalyapin (Novosibirsk) stressed the need for a philosophical-methodological
substantiation of the new area of applied psychology. In the authors' opinion.
during the development of criteria of evaluation of the changes accowanying train-
ing it is not enough to confine ourselves to psychological theory. Training orien-
ted to a mechanical aastering by participants of the patterns of. behavior not so
such contributes to the develop-ant of personality as it blocks it.

11‘

FOIOI'I'ICIALUSEONLY
FORIOFFNJAL.USE(NVLY

l. H. Kebeyko and N. P. Shtentsova (Novosibirsk). proceeding from the idea that the
development of personality is the main objective of training. in their report placed
emphasis on the special nature of activity of the manager of social-psychological
training. In its essence his work represents a creative process. not the realiza-
tion of a set of algorithms. Yu. N. Yemel'yanov's speech (Leningrad) singled out
and described three functions of social-psychological training. that is. training.
diagnosis and correction. In the set of methods special attention was paid to an
analysis of such components as nonverbal means of communication.

method. for example. to sensitivcy training. In particular, methods can vary de-
pending on whether they are oriented to the rendering of psychological help to an
individual or a group as a whole, are applied to a contingent of healthy or sick
people and so forth. She touched upon the following urgent problems in this area:
principles of staffing training groups. vocational training for managers and meth-
ods of measuring effectiveness.

N. s. Govorov (Leningrad) substantiated the need for the realization of the system
approach to social-psychological training. In particular, this presupposes an ef-
fect on various aspects of personality and on diverse behavioral situations. He
expressed doubt as to the fruitfulness of an isolated use of individual methods.
Social~psychological training must lean on a new scientific and artistic discipline

At the seminar such attention was given to problems of the methods and techniques
of social-psychological training. . Kh. Hiktin (Tallinn) discussed the results or
development and problems of use of videotraining. Owing to operative feedback on
the characteristics of behavior in specific situations videotraining makes it pos-
sible to neke a correction in individual skills and habits of professional commu-
nication. The method of the participant's confrontation with himself, realized by
the use of videofeedback. is the central unit here. In the speaker's opinion, suc-
cess in training depends to a large extent on the development of empirical socio-
logical and social-psychological investigations disclosing the difficulties and
contradictions in a certain occupation. branch and enterprise. In this case an
important task of training is to model these contradictions under labor conditions.

E. H. Vernik (Tallinn) analyzed the theoretical and practical aspects of the social-
psychological training conducted in the German Democratic Republic. Special em-
phasis was placed on the logical principles and psychological foundations for the
preparation of training programs. More than 20 such programs have been developed

by now.

T. s. Ystsenko (Chcrkassy) reported on the experience in the use of social-psycho-
logical training as an element of the vocational training of future teachers. The
program includes two stages. that is. general training for communication (sensitiv-
ity training) and special training (development of special occupational skills).
For now the first stage has been approved. A number of difficulties in work are

connected with the factor that this experience is at variance with some established
training standards.

115

FOR OFF"3A1.USE(NVLY
ﬂOIiOFiIClAl.USIE(NULV

A. Ye. Alekseychik (Vilnius) familiarized the audience with the experience in im-
provement of professional skills of medical psychologists and psychiatrists in the
field of medical psychology and psychotherapy through intensive group communication
along with traditional theoretical training through a system of lectures. reports
and so forth. E. F. Laurinaytis (Vilnius) discussed the use of training in the
system of training medical students. 5. D. Kazartsev (Leningrad) made a brief re-
port on the varieties of social-psychological training abroad.

0n the whole. the work of the school-seminar has shown that at present social-psy-
chological training is used for training specialists in different fields (teachers,
managers. physicians, medical psychologists. salesmen and musician performers).
correcting the dynamics of marital conflicts. improving the relations between ps-
rents and children. correcting the social maladaptation of adolescents and so forth.
Social-psychological training includes a wide spectrum of methods, that is. video-
training. sensitivity training. role training. methods of theatralization. group
analysis of evaluations and self-evaluations. nonverbal methods and so forth. The
participants in the seminar became acquainted with some of the enumerated methods
in practice. A. Ye. Alekseychik (Vilnius). L. A. Petrovskaye (Moscow). 1. H. Be-
beyko (Novosibirsk), Yu. N. Yenel'yanov (Leningrad). 3. A. Barash (Leningrad) and
E. F. Laurinaytis (Vilnius) shared their experience in the management of training
groups.

A concluding document generalizing the work of the school seminar was drawn up at
the final meeting. It stresses the urgent need for the substantiation of social-
psychological training on the basis of the principles of Soviet psychology. It is
noted that the use of these methods places high demands on the leader's personal-
ity and his moral, psychological and professional qualities. This raises with spe-
cial acuteness the problem of a search for organizational forms of training mana-
gers of social-psychological training. The available experience makes it possible
to create the basis for such training. The rapid popularization of methods and the
increasing needs for their practical use require a regular exchange of experience
by specialists. The participants in the school seminar elected an organizational
office for the coordination of subsequent work in this area.

The school seminar held was not only interesting. but.undoubtedly.usefu1 and very
productive. It made it possible to become acquainted with the theoretical views
and practical methods of work of those that now use and develop social-psychological
training in our country--active methods of increasing the psychological competence
of workers in many branches of production. domestic services and trade and methods
of psychotherapy and nonmedicsl correction of man's psychological difficulties.

COPYRIGHT: "Yoprosy psikhologii". "Pedegogika". 1981

ll,h39
CSO: 1840/333

116

FOIROUIICIAI.08310NLN
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

SUBJECTS OF DISSERTATIONS FOR DEGREE OF CANDIDATE 0? PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES
Moscow VOPROSY PSIKHOLOCII in Russian No 6. Jul-Aug 81 pp 186-187

liist of authors and subjects of dissertations for the acadenic degree of candidate
of psychological sciences coordinated with the Council for the Coordination of Sci-
entific Research in the ussn in the specialty 19.00.07 and 19.00.09

1§ea§7
Anatuni. I. L., (Moscow State Pedagogical Inatitute ineni V. I. Lenin). Formation

of Value Orientations in Preschoolers and Junior Schoolchildren.

Volkov, Ye. 3.. (Moscow State Pedagogical Institute iaeni V. I. Lenin). Character-
istics of Value Orientations and Social Activity of Personality in Early Adolescace.

Galyautdinova. S. 1.. (Leningrad State Pedagogical Institute ileni A. I. Gertsen).
Correlation of the Cognitive and Enotional in the Process of Develop-ant of Moral
Convictions in Junior Schoolchildren.

Kadayas. Kh. M.. (Scientific Research Institute of General and Pedagogical Psycho-
logy of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences). Characteristics of Spatial
Thinking of Students with Artistic and Mathematical Inclinationa.

Ksrandashev, V. N.. (Leningrad State Pedagogical Institute ileni A. I. Gerteen).
Psychological Conditions .f Formation of the Need for Labor in Students.

Kislenko. V. Ya.. (Moscow State Pedagogical Institute iasni V. I. Lenin). Psycho-
logical Characteristics of the Mastering of Moral Horns at a Preschool Age.

Larionova. L. P.. (Irkutsk State Institute of Physical Culture). Psychological-
Pedagogical Aspects of Retention of Graduates of Vocational and Technical Schools
in Production.

Maralov, V. 6., (Moscow State Pedagogical Institute ineni V. I. Lenin). Individual
Characteristics of the Level of Senior Studenta' Clains (haed on tl'e Materiald Edu-
cational Activity).

Myrsabekov. A.. (Scientific Research Institute of Pedagogy of the Kirgiz SSR). The
Role of Psychological Factors in Music Instruction in Priaary Grades.

117

FOI<OFFHJA1.USI¢INLV
FOI‘OFFKJALIEIiONlY

Skuridina. I. V.. (Moscow State Pedagogical Institute of Foreign Languages ineni
Moris Torez). Psychological Characteristics of Auditing in Various Age Groups of
Students.

Stepchenkovs, L. 1.. (Moscow State Pedagogical Institute ineni V. I. Lenin). Psy-

chological Characteristics of Moral Values of Boys and Girls in Early and Late Ado-
lescence.

Trofinova, N. M., (Moscow State Pedagogical Institute ineni V. I. Lenin). Problems
of Child and Pedagogical Psychology in P. P. Kapterev's works.

Uzbekova, c. K., (Moscow State Pedagogical Institute iseni V. I. Lenin). Character-
istics of Moral Ideas and Concepts in Older Preschool-Age Children.

Shanayeva. V. P.. (Leningrad State Pedagogical Institute ineni A. I. Gertsen). Psy-

chological Basis for the Correction of Relations Between Pedagogically Neglected
Adolescents and Adults.

Yurov, I. A.. (State Twice Decorated Institute of Physical Culture ineni P. P. Les-
gaft). Express Diagnosis of the Sportsman's Mental States Under Conditions of Ac-
tivity.

COPYRIGHT: "Voprosy paikhologii". "Pedagogika". 1981

11,639
CSO: 1860/333

118

HOI‘OIIICJAI.IEHBIHULY
IIMICHNNCJA1.USE(MVLY

INFORMATION ON AUTMORS 0F 'VOPROSY PSIKHULOGII', JULY-AUGUST 1981
Moscow VOPROSY PSIKHOLOCII in Russian No 6. Jul-Aug 81 p 192

lfist of authors and of their titles and affiliations: "Our Authorsﬁ7
lfex_7
Kitov Akhmet Ismailovich. doctor of psychological sciences. professor. head of the
scientific research laboratory of the USSR Academy of the National Economy.

Peysakhov Niaon Meyerovich. candidate of psychological sciences. docent at the De-
partment of Pedagogy and Psychology of Kazan' University. head of the laboratory of
psychological problems of higher schools.

Gal'perin Pyetr Yakovlevich. doctor of psychological sciences. professor. head of
the Department of Age Psychology at the Faculty of Psychology of Moscow State Univ-
ersity imeni M. V. Lomonosov.

Danilov Boris Vasil'yevich. doctor of technical sciences, professor. dean of the
Faculty for Iaprovement of Teachers' Skills at the Moscow Pouer Institute.

Slastenin Viteliy Aleksandrovich. doctor of pedagogical sciences. professor. head
of the Department of Pedagogy and Psychology of higher Schools of the Moscow State
Pedagogical Institute imeni V. I. Lenin.

Kudryavtsev Vladimir Toviyevich and Spitsyn Andrey Konstantinovich. students at
the Department of Pedagogy and Psychology of the Faculty of Pedagogy of the Moscow
State Pedagogical Institute imeni V. I. Lenin.

Petrovskiy Artur Vladimirovich, doctor of psychological sciences. member of the
USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences. head of the Department of Pedagogy. Psycho-
logy and Methods of Instruction in Higher Schools of the Faculty for Improvement
of Skills at Moscow State University imeni M. V. Lomonosov.

Kudryavtsev Toviy Vasil'ycvich. doctor of psychological sciences, head of the lab-
oratory of psychology of vocational training of the Scientific Research Institute
of General and Pedagogical Psychology of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences.

Chernenilov Valeriy Ivanovich. candidate of psychological sciences. decent. deputy
director of the Department of Psychology of Management and Pedagogy of the Academy
of the USSR Ministry of Internal Affairs.

119

FOI:0'IIC1A1.U§I¢IVLY
FOIianNCIAl.USEioNlN

chistyakova Galina Dmitriyevna, candidate of psychological sciences. junior scien-
tific worker of the Scientific Research Institute of General and Pedagogical Psy-
chology of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences.

Vitt Nadezhda Vladimirovna. candidate of psychological sciences. docant at the De-

partnent of Psychology of the Moscow State Pedagogical Institute of Foreign Lan-
guages imeni Maurice Thorax.

Rozov A. I. (Rozet Isaak Moyseyevich). candidate of psychological sciences, head
of the sector of ergonomics of the Belorussian affiliate of the All-Union Scien-
tific Research Institute of Technical Aesthetics.

Pinchuk Vyacheslav Anatol'yevich, instructor of psychology at the Irkutsk Pedago-
gical Institute.

Anbrumova Ayna Grigor'yevna. doctor of medical sciences. professor. head of the
Department of Suicidology of the Moscow Scientific Research Institute of Psychiatry
of the RSFSR Ministry of Health. director of the All-Union Suicidological Center.

Bergel'son Lyubov' L'vovna. junior scientific worker at the Moscow Scientific Re-
search Institute of Psychiatry of the RSFSR Ministry of Health.

Tikhunenko Vladimir Alekseyevich. candidate of medical sciences, junior scientific
worker at the Moscow Scientific Research Institute of Psychiatry of the RSFSR Min—
istry of Health.

Belyy Boris Iosifovich, candidate of medical sciences. physician at a first-aid
station. Moscow.

Korol' Stepan Alekseyevich. assistant at the Department of Pedagogy and Psychology
of the Nezhin State Pedagogical Institute.

Pysin Boris Borisovich. assistant at the Department of Psychology of the Perm'
State Pedagogical Institute.

TVorogova Nadezhda Dmitriyevna. candidate of psychological sciences. senior in-
structor at the Department of Pedagogy and Psychology of the First Moscow Medical
Institute imeni I. M. Sechenov.

Seraenbayeva Botsgoz Ivanovna. graduate student at the Scientific Research Insti-
tutc of General and Pedagogical Psychology of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical
Sciences.

Kovalev Andrey Nikolayevich. head of a sector of the laboratory for mathematical
modeling of mental processes at the Scientific Research Institute of General and
Pedagogical Psychology of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences.

Conchnrov Vladimir Sergeyevich, graduate student at the Moscow Oblast Pedagogical
Institute imeni N. K. Krupskaya.

120

FOIiofﬁKJAI.U§!10NlV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ysroshevskiy Mikhail Crigor'yevich. doctor of psychological sciences, professor,
head of a sector of the Institute of History of Natural Sciences and Technology of
the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Dubrovina Irina Vladimirovna. candidate of psychological sciences. deputy director
of the Scientific Research Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology of the
USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences.

Salnina Nina Gavrilovna, candidate of psychological sciences, senior scientific
worker at the Department of Pedagogical Psychology and Pedagogy of the Faculty of
Psychology of Moscow State University.

Sokhina Viktorina Petrovna. candidate of psychological sciences. senior instructor
at the Department of Pedagogical Psychology and Pedagogy of the Faculty of Psycho-
logy of Moscow State University.

anharova Aida Vasil'yevna. candidate of psychological sciences, senior scientific
worker at the Scientific Research Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology
of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences.

COPYRIGHT: "Voprosy psikhologii". "Pedagogika", 1981

11 .439
C50: 1850/33

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

YONG PSYCHOLOGISTS HOLD REGULAR CONFEREICB
Moscow VOPROS! PSIKHOLOGII in Russian No 3, Hay-Jun 81 pp 178-179

[Article by V. A. Barebanshchikov, Moscow. and A. V. Karpov. Yaroslsvl': "In
the Youth Section of the USSR Society of Peythologiets"]

[Text] The Bureau of the Youth Section of the USSR Society of Psychologists held its
regular meeting in Yaroslavl' on 4-5 February. me following items were discussed
at the conference: the report on the work of the youth section in 1979-1980 (V.
Semenov); the results of a cospetitivs exhibition of projects created by young
scientists and psychological specialists in the Bstonian SSR ('1'. Myth the results
of the second school of young psychologists in Minsk (A. Gostev): participation of
young psychologists in the Eighth Transcaucasian mnfenme of Psychologists (S.
Sedrakyan): the work of the editorial council of the Young Scientists' Council of
the USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences Institute of General and Pedagogical
Psychology (H. Ginsburg); the basic directions and plan of the work of the youth
section for 1981-1982 (A. Asmlov, V. Senenov, v. Barebanshchikov): a report on the
work of the youth section of the Yaroslavl' division of the ISSR Society of
Psychologists (A. Karpov).

me conference participants devoted special attention tothebasic directions and
plan of work of the youth section for 1981-1982. he principal its- in the work

of the youth section of the USSR Society of Psychologists in the llth Five-Year Plan
are to be coordination of the activities of young psychologists. promotion of their
professional growth and their inclusion in the solution of the national econow's
practical problems. In this connection the principal tasks of the youth section
are: coordination of the planning of the section's work with the long-range planning
carried out by the central council of the USSR Society of Psychologists; provision of
assistance to the USSR Society of Psychologists in couamist indoctrination of young
scientists and psychological specialists and in preparation of a generation of
scientists capable of ensuring progress in psychology and introducing scientific
achievements into practice; provision of assistance to young psychologists in organ-
izing and conducting scientific research and in iqroving their professional skills;
achievemnt of broader participation of young psychologists in the develop-ant of
long-range psychological problems, and pro-cation of the developnent and conduct of
joint research by different psychological associations; participation in congresses,
conferences and seminars sponsored by the USSR Society of Psychologists; improvement
of efforts to publicize psychological knowledge.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The plan “the basic directions of the work of the Youth Section of the USSR Society
of Psychologists for 1981-1982 were approved at the conference. A decision van made
to organize end conduct the Seventh Ali-mien Coupetition of Projects of Young
Psychomgists, “Psychology and Social Practice.” dedicated to the 26th CPSU Congress.
The active work being done by the youth sections oi the Estonian and Yeroelevi'

11004
CSO: 8144/1842

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“MINOR!”

MH‘JIOR LIST FOR 'VOPI'OSY PSIWII,‘ HAY-JUNE 1981

macaw VOPRDSY PSIKHOIDGII in Russian No 3, May-Jun 81 p 192

[hat] Yerastov, Nikolay Pavlovich--doctor of peydiologicsl sciences. professor,
Academy of Social Sciences of the CPS!) Central Mitt“.

Lin'kova. Nina Petrovna--candidata of psychological sciences, senior scientist,
lssn APN [Academy of Pedagogical Sciences] Scientitic hsearch Institute 0! General
and Pedagogical Psychology.

Orlov. Yuriy nikhaylovich-ocandidata of. philosophical sciences, chairman, Depart-eat
of Pedagogics and Medical Psychology, lbscov Medical Institute No l inani I. II.
Sechenov.

Verbitskiy, Andrey Aleksandrovich--candidate of psychological sciences. director,
Sector tor Introduction andmuendnationot Advancedskins. Division of Training

Theory and Methods, 1581! Ministry at Higher and Secondary Special Education Scientific
macarch Institute of the Problem of the higher School.

mukov, neonid Alekseycvichudoctor of teclmical sciences, professor, chair-nan.
Department of General Electric Pater angineering. lbscov Institute of Power
Engineering.

aarabanshchikov, Aleksandr Vasil‘yevichndoctor of pedagogical sciences, professor,
Department of Pedagogics and Psychology, Military-Political heads-y ileni V. I. unin.

Harkvardt, Konstantin Gustavovich--doctor of technical sciences, professor, chairman,
Department of Electric Power Supply to Electric hilroeds, Moscow Institute of nail--
road Transport mgineers.

Peygenberg, Ioeii' Hoiseyevich--doctor of medical sciences. professor, Departaant of
Medical Pedagogics, Central Institute for the Advanced Training of Physicians.

Bel'tyukov, Vladimir Il'ich--doctor of psychological sciences, professor-consultant,
USSR APR Institute for the Study of Handicapped Children.

Stryukov. Ger-an Aleksandrovichucandidate of psychological sciences. assistant
professor, Department of Psychology, Cor'kiy Pedagogical Institute.

126

FORWUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Korlova, 'i‘at'yana Nikolayevna--senior scientist, Gor'kiy Scientific lbsearch Insti-
tute of labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases.

Konopkin, Oleg Aleksandrovich--doctor of psychological sciences, deputy director,
ISSR APN Scientific Research Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology.

Yeroshenko, Aleksandr Andreyevichnsenior instructor, 'Ibbol'sk Pedagogical Institute.

Zakharov, Aleksandr Ivamvich--candidate of medical sciences, senior children's
psychotherapist, Leningrad.

Voytko, Vitaliy Ivanovich--doctor of philosophical sciences, corresponding newer of
the USSR APR, director, Scientific Research Institute of Psychology, tkrainian 8511
Ministry of Education.

Lipkina, Anna Izrailevna--doctor of psychological sciences, senior scientist, USSR
APN Scientific Research Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology.

noblayev, Lev Petrovich--doctor of psychological sciences, chairman, departnent of
psycholoqy. Saratov University.

Yaroshevskiy, Hikhail Grigor'yevich-doctor of psychological sciences, professor,

sector director, USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of the history of Natural
Sciences and Technology.

Krichcvskiy, Ebert L'vovich--candidate of psychological sciences, senior scientist,
(SSE APN Scientific Research Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology.

Snirnova, Mariya Hetislavovnaujunior scientist, USSR APN Scientific lbsearch
Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology.

Nemv, mbert Senenovich--candidate of psychological sciences, senior scientist,
USSR APN Scientific Research Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology.

Shestakov, Aleksandr Germgenovichninstructor, Department of Pedagogics and Psycho-
logy, USSR Ministry of Internal Affairs Higher Political School, Leningrad.

Akopov, Anatoliy Yur'yevich--physician-psychiatrist, psychoneurologicel dispensary,
leningrad.

Sluchevskiy, Peder Iznaylovich--professor, chairman, department of psychiatry,
your [not further identified].

'rsibulevskiy, Iosif Yevecyevichndoctor of technical sciences, senior scientist,
School of Psychology: mecca State University.

Veraksa. Nikolay Yevgen'yevich-~cendidete of psychological sciences, senior instruc-
tor, MScow State Pedagogical Institute imeni V. I. Lenin.

Yadov, Nikoiay Vladimirovich--sociologist, ”Kirovskiy saved“ Production Association.
Leningrad.

125

Hill OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
50K WDILIAL USO. ONLY

Pridman, lav Hoiseyevichudoctor of psychological sciences, senior scientist,
laboratory or Educational Psychology. (88!! APR Scientific Research Institute of
General and Pedagogical Psychology.

Kalwkova, zinaida Il'inichna--doctor of psychological sciences, senior scientist,
Laboratory of Il‘reining and Mental Develop-ant, USSR m Scientific Research Institute
of General and Pedagogical Psychology.

Kosova, Nadeshda Aleksandmvna—graduate student. USSR made-y of Sciences Institute
of Psychology.

OOPYRIGIT: "Voprosy psikhologii", 'Pedaqogika", 1981

11004
CSO: 8144/1842 - um -

126

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY