FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10028
5 October 1981

East Europe Report

SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS

(FOUO 9/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
BULGARIA
Report on Launching, Objective of Satellite Intercoo-oe-
Bulgaria 1300
(Serge Berg; AIR 6 COSMOS, 29 Aug 81) ..........
CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Rabies in CSSR Permanent Epidemiological Problem
(CASOPIS Lama casxvcn. No 22. 1981)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BUIQARIA

REPORT ON “WING, OBJECTIVE OP SATELLITB IMBRCOBW-BUIGARIA 1300
Paris AIR & COSMOS in French 29 Aug Bl p 43
[Article by Serge Berg]

[Text] On 7 August. the USSR launched the first Bulgarian satellite. Intercosmos-
Bulgaria 1300, the placing in orbit of vhich commemorates the l300th anniversary
of the founding of the Bulgarian state.

This satellite, built under the Soviet Intercosmos space cooperation program.
incorporates a satellite of the Soviet Meteor satellite type. This 22d Intercou-
mos satellite is one of the most technically advanced or the series. For the
first time, the satellite is entirely covered by a very thin metallic film to
avoid the buildup of electrostatic charges that would otherwise disturb its in-
struments, and all its sensors are mounted at the ends of 4- to S-foot-long masts
deployed in orbit.

The satellite was positioned on an 825-/906-kn orbit inclined at 81.2° and tra-
versed in 101.9 minutes. Its primary mission is the study of the ionosphere and
of the terrestrial magnetosphere during periods of intense solar activity. The
operational life of its active instruments, which are 12 in number (and weigh more
than 350 kg). is 6 months. Its couple-ant of instruments includes:

--seven apparatuses for studying the electrons and ions (concentration, tempera-
ture, energy, ion masses) and the sovement of the ionospheric plasma;

--one apparatus for measuring variable and constant electric fields, and one
ultrasensitive magnetometer;

--one electrophotometer for recording the weak luminous rays of the uppper atmos-
phere, and one instrument for recording ultraviolet radiation:

--and one five-sided reflecting prism for the precision-neasurement of the coor-
dinates of earth stations, movements of the earth's crust, perturbations in the

earth's rotation. movements of the poles, etc. This laser-reflector will enable
the Soviet stations, but also French ones (CBBSA [expansion unknounj), to track

the satellite.

According to Mr Giorgi Kitov of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences Archaeological
Institute, the satellite will also be used for the 'study of 49 Bulgarian

FOR OFFHJAEZUSEiDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY . ,
' o‘

archeological sites, by means of observations (dam to 30-weter depths) that will
help detect the existence of walls and objects buried under tumuli formed in

ancient Thrace.

The Intercoslos-Bulgaria 1300 project includes also a second part, which was
placed aboard the Meteor-Rhoda observation satellite launched 10 July 1981.
This consisted of a Bulgarian multichannel spectra-etc: for earth observations

during different seasons.

COPYRIGHT: A. O C. 1980

9238
C50: 3100/968

2
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

RABIES IN CSSR PERMANENT BPIDEHIOLOGICAL PROBLEM
Prague CASOPIS LEKARU CESKYCH in Czech No 22 81 pp 686-687

[Text] Symposium of the Society of Czech Physicians in Prague. Evening of March 2.
1981. Coordinator: Prof Jiri Havlik. MD, Candidate of Science. Chair of Infectious
Diseases. Hygiene and Epidemiology. Faculty of Pediatrics. Charles University, Prague.

Participants in the symposium: staff members of the Clinic of Infectious Diseases
in Prague 8; State Veterinary Institute in Liberec-Vratislavice; Institute of Sera
and Vaccines in Prague; and Laboratory of Infectious Diseases of the Faculty of
Pediatrics. Charles University. Prague.

J. Havlik: "hat Is New in Clinical Aspects of Rabies

Rabies has lost none of its dangerousness as known in the past. It is still
frequent in wild animals. especially foxes, both in our country and in most of
Europe. Although various prophylactic measures have reduced the incidence of human
infections, the disease is still practically fatal for anyone who shows its clinical
signs. Isolated recoveries are questionable.

Infection follows even small wounds inflicted by animals. dogs and cats in particular.
which were bitten by rabid foxes. The greatest danger comes from wounds. bites or
scratches. on those parts of the body unprotected by clothing. such as the face and
hands Possible. although rare. is indirect transmission when the infectious agent
enters small abrasions on the hands while sick or dead animals are handled without
gloves.

The infection spreads from the periphery through sensory nerve fibers to the posterior
spinal roots and then to the central nervous system. The usual incubation period

is 30 days and more. but it may be considerably shorter. depending on the virulence

of the strain and other factors. Paresthesia at the site of the wound and its vicinity
is listed most among the possible signs of the disease in the prodromal stage.

As the infection develops. nervousness, lack of concentration. aimless pacing.
uncoordinated speech. restlessness and fear of death are typical.

The typical sign of the disease, hydrophobia. appears 2 to 6 days later; painful
spasms of the deglutination muscles at attempts to drink and even in response to the
sound of running water and other light or scund stimuli. Concurrently there is a
rise in the temperature and intensified sweating and excretion of saliva.

FOR OFFICIALBUSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Restlessness increases, tremors occur and tetanic spasms in all body muscles.

During the attack of spasms the patient does not recognize his surroundings and may
be dangerous to the nursing personnel. In between he is fully conscious and aware
of the enormity of his plight. Death generally occurs during the spasms in the
course of several days. If the patient survives the phase of spasm, the hydrophobia
usually disappears. but ascending paralyses soon end his life.

Atypical cases have become more frequent in recent years; at times there was no
contact with a sick animal; at other. paralyses occurred without preceding hydrophobia,
i.e. dumb rabies. Two cases following cornea transplants from deceased donors, in
whom only later rabies were confirmed, were also reported.

Although passive and active immunization does not always prevent morbidity. it is
the chief protection against rabies, when administered in time. of course.

0. Matouch: Incidence of Rabies in Animals in CSR

Rabies is endemic on the territory of the CSSR and represents a permanent
epizootiological and epidemiological problem. In the years 1976-80 a total of
26,203 animals of 44 species were examined for rabies in the CSR. Host of the
animals examined were foxes (62.5 percent), dogs (13.7 percent) and cats (10.3
percent). Rabies was confirmed in 3,460 cases; 3.280 cases (94.8 percent) in wild
animals and 180 cases (5.2 percent) in domestic animals. Among the wild animals,
the highest incidence was recorded for foxes (3.098) which occupy an important
place in the epizootiology of rabies and represent the main vector of infection on
our territory. Furthermore. 77 cases were diagnosed in deer, 49 in badgers and 44
in martens .

Among domestic animals, cats have acquired greater importance in the course of the
last 5 years; rabies was found in 93 cases. while dogs with 62 cases have shown a
declining tendency. The course is characteristic,with maxim incidence in March
and April and a lower one in May and June.

with regard to geographical localization. a gradual spread from the western and
northern borders into the interior of the state has been noted since 1976.
At present. rabies has been recorded in more than 40 districts of the CSR.

Control measures of rabies are directed foremost at the reduction of population
density of the common fox. the main vector of rabies on our territory. Obligatory
and free vaccinations of dogs are carried out on the entire territory of the state.

D. Slonim: Immunization of Man against Rabies ‘

Immunization is the only specific protection man has against rabies. Pre—exposure
immunization is a prophylactic inoculation having practically full (100 percent)
effectiveness. Postexposure immunization is an atypical immunization process. as
it is carried out after the infectious contact and. therefore. at times may fail.
At present, it combines passive immunization (hyperimmune animal antirabies serum
or human antirabies immunoglobulin) and active immunization with vaccines whose
effect is boosted and prolonged by suitably selected reinoculations.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFK3A1.USE¢DNLY

The original Pasteur vaccine (1885). like all its later modifications, were and
are prepared from nerve tissue of animals infected with Pasteur "virus fix."
Beside their other disadvantages. they may produce neuroparalytical complications
in man. Neither the specially purified vaccines nor those prepared from the bra
of suckling animals proved to be better. '

The vaccine from duck embryos marked a considerable advance, but only the vaccines
prepared in tissue cultures ultimately represent a truly modern preparation of
high safety and effectiveness. The most effective and probably the safest of them
are those which use a virus reproduced in cultures of human diploid cells. Virus
of these vaccines is purified, concentrated and either inactivated with beta-
propiolactone (whole-virus vaccine) or inactivated and split with tri-n-butyl
phosphate (subunit vaccine). These vaccines have immunogenic activity about 100
times higher than the vaccines prepared from animal nerve tissues or duck embryos,
and only mild side reactions have been recorded after their administration.

E. Horavcova: Antirabies Centers and Their Importance in Rabies

Rabies in humans is rare but still fatal. The main effort continues to be directed
at prevention of the occurrence of the disease through effective prophylaxis.

Timely administration of antirabies globulin and of vaccine, together with immediate
treatment of the wound. are the main means of protection for man.

The quality and effectiveness of vaccines have improved since the time of Pasteur.

but the basic principles remain the same. Repeated administration of the vaccine

is needed to attain the protective level of antibodies; and with the vaccines prepared
from animal nerve tissues this leads to frequent neurological complications.
Therefore, since 1967, we gradually phased out inoculations with Hemptov vaccines

on the outpatient basis and established antirabies centers in all regions of the

CSR. Their aim was to insure a uniform and safest possible prophylactic approach.
hospitalization of vaccinated individuals and, through proper indications, prevention
of unnecessary inoculations while insuring essential prophylasis.

The basic care for individuals wounded by animals starts with the physician of the
first contact. The district or plant physician, or a pediatrician, provides the basic
surgical treatment of the wound. prophylaxis against tetanus and, if the owner of

the animal responsible for the wound is known, has the animal examined by a
veterinarian. Individuals injured by rabid or suspect animals and unclear cases are
referred to the antirabies center, where indications for prophylaxis are determined

in cooperation with gygienic stations and veterinary facilities. Decision is

often difficult; it depends on the nature of the wound, the animal species and its
behavior at the time the wound was inflicted, and on the epizootiological situation
in the given area.

Between 3.000 and 6,000 people are reported annually in the CSR as being bitten by
animals of various species, and about one-sixth of them undergo antirabies prophylaxis.

At present, a new type of vaccine prepared in tissue culture is used for inoculations;
it has essentially fewer undesirable side effects and higher antigenic effectiveness.

Recent studies have tried to utilize interferon or its inductors for postexposure
immunization with the aim of using such preparations instead of immune serum or
immunoglobulin.

5
son omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. Doutlik: Complications Following Antirabies Inoculations

The development of antirabies inoculation over almost a full century has always
been associated with the incidence of complications. especially of the nervous
system.

It was Louis Pasteur with his vaccine who provided the stimulus for studies that led
to the discovery of experimental allergic encephalonyelitis. which became a model for
human demyelinations related to autoimmune mechanisms. Their prototype was found

in neurological complications following Hemptov antirabies vaccines containing a
suspension of brain tissue. Clinical disorders had their correlate in the EEG
changes and in immunopathological findings which in their frequency have exceeded

the level of tolerance.

Even the improved Rabivac vaccine, used in the period [972-79, produced subclinical
autoimmune manifestations signaling later clinical complications. The surprising
finding of an undiminished percentage of humeral brain antibodies and sometimes

even cell sensitization to brain antibodies following the administration of the
vaccine prepared on kidney cell tissue. and used in the CSR since 1978, is a warning
that neurological complications may occur even with this vaccine.

COPYRIGHT: Avicenum, Zdravotnicke Nakladatelstvi, Prague 1981

9562
C50: 5600/3017 END

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY