FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10675
21 July 1982

Mongolia Report

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms publications contain infomtion primrily from foreign
newapapera, periodicals and books, but also froa news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials froa foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and aaterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ution was summarized or extracted. '

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or nsaes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the [1.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
PDNGOLIA REPORT
(3000 1/82)

Conrau'rs

utter Legislation Relate“! to Other Developmt Aspects or “PR
(D. Dariym; VODNYYB REURSX, lo 2. 1.982) .........

-a- [III-ASIA-I

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HATER LEGISLATION RELATED TO OTﬂER DEVELOPHBNT ASPECTS OF NPR
Moscow VOONYYE RESURSY in Russian No 2, 1982 pp l37-lé3

[Article by D. Dariynaa, Institute of Philosophy, Sociology and Law of the MP8
Acadeay of Sciences: "NPR Hater Legislation"!

[Text] The molding of HPR water legislation is governed by the unique historical
conditions of the development of the country. Mongolia had to traverse the diffi-
cult path from feudalism to socialism. bypassing the capitalist stage of develop-
ment. The means of production of these two socioeconosic formations differ radi-
cally from each other. therefore the process of production influences the environ-
ment differently. The lack of factories and plants did not raise for the develop-
ing state questions of the pollution of bodies of water; the need to adopt any
legislative measures on their protection practically did not arise.

Another characteristic factor. which influences the development of the water legis-
lation of Mongolia. is its intracontinsntal location. The hydrographic features of
the country also play an important role. A portion of the watershed of the Arctic
and Pacific Oceans passes through the "PR. An area of internal-drainage basins and
lakes of Central Asia, which takes qzapproxinstely two-thirds of the area of the
country, is located to the south of the watershed. The basin of the Selenge River,
which is located to the north of the watershed. has the lost developed. quite

dense and branched hydrographic network in the NPR. The Shishhid Col (one or

the headwaters of the Yenisey River), as well as the headwaters of the Korundy
lnzclter Goi) River--a tributary of the Chernyy Irtysh River-obelong to the basin of
the Arctic Ocean.

The territory of the “PR. which belongs to the basin of the Pacific Ocean and
Central Asia. is comparatively poor in rivers and lakes. The Onun, r'vr. "eru-
len and Halhin Rivers. the lower courses of which, except for the In”: unc,
are located outside Mongolia. belong to '.e basin of the Pacific Ocean within the
NPR. The Halhin Col flows with one branch into the Buyr Nuur on the torrilnlv of
the NPR and with the other into the Hu-er-shun Ho in China. The nohd and Mn nan
(Urungu) from the Altay Mountains and the Dzabhan. Tea. naydrag and Tuyn Col from
the Hangayn Nuruu. as well as other, small rivers carry their waters into the
internal-drainage basins of Central Asia.

The following features are characteristic of the hydrologic cycle of the rivers of
Mongolia: 1) for nearly half of the year they are ice-bound and often freeze to

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the hottom, water on top of ice is typical of mountain rivers; 2) minor flooding
occurs in the spring, while the main. but intermittent flooding occurs in the sum-
mer, when in l to 2 days the water level rises sharply as a result of a downpour or
shower (given the high speed of the current as a result of the sharp gradient of
the mountain rivers of Mongolia these floods are at times of a catastrophic nature);
3) the considerable fluctuation of the speeds of the current and the water content,
which stems from the intermittent nature of su-er flooding; lo) the mountain type
of alimentation of nearly all the rivers of Mongolia with developed, mainly erosive

action (acculmslations of river sediments in large mums are observed only in
places).

The very geographic location of Mongolia dictates the need for cooperation in the
area of water resources and their protection with neighboring states. and especial-
ly the Soviet Union. As an intracontinental country. which is far removad from the
open sea, Mongolia, which also belongs to the states of the basin of the Pacific
Ocean, is interested in international cooperation with the countries of the basin
of the Pacific Ocean in the area of the use of the resources of the world ocean.

The process of shaping the water legislation of the M!!! is closely connected with
the progressive socioeconomic development of the country. During the initial peri—
od of the development of Mongolian water legislation the main attention was devoted
to questions of the efficient use of water resources for the needs of the national
economy. Thus, in a decree of the Mongolian Council of Ministers (March 1927) the
question was raised of repairing old wells and building new wells equipped with
pumps. The new equipment was delivered from the Soviet Union, whose specialists
gave much assistance in the mastering of the inorted equipment and the development
of national personnel.

The basic direction in the area of water legislation of those times—the develop-
ment and improvement of the use of the system of wells—was also developed later.
In 1929 the MPR Council of Ministers adopted a decree on the confirmation of the
ukaze on water sources, their use and protection and passed a law on the construc-
tion of a system of wells everywhere for the needs of the national economy of the
country.

In conformity with the agreement reached in 1936 between the MPR and the USSR on
the sailing of merchant vessels of the Selenge River Steamship Company of the USSR
on the Selenge and Orhon Rivers within the territory of Mongolia the Soviet side
assumed an obligation on the appropriate training of Mongolian national personnel.
In [946 the MPR Council of Ministers co-isaioned the MP]! Ministry of Animal aus-
bandry starting in the fall of 1967 to form at the veterinary technical school a
faculty for hydraulic engineering problems. which made it possible to lay the
foundation for the training of water resource specialists.

The skills of Mongolian personnel were improved in the process of Soviet-Mongolian
cooperation within a joint scientific research expedition. which was set up in 1958
in conformity with a decree of the MP! Council of Ministers. for the drafting of

a plan of the water management of )bngolia.

In the 1960's the Mninistration for the Management of Water Resources with the
subordination to it of specialized subdivisions (offices) in the aymags was organ-
ized in the Ministry of Agriculture in conformity with a decree of the MPR Council

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of Ministers, which was adopted in 1961. In some aymags (for example, Dzabhan and
Bayanhonaor) construction and installation offices for the needs of water manage-
ment were established by a decree of the MPR Council of Ministers (March 1965).

The Mongolian Government advanced for specialists in the field of water resources
specific scientific and technical tasks. the accomplishment of which was of great
national economic importance. Thus. the drafting of the Plan of the Efficient Use
and Protection of the Hater Resources of the Selenge, Orhon. Tuul. Herulen. Dzabhsn.
Yoroo. Bgiyn 601 and other rivers to 1980 was called for by a Decree of the "PR
council of Ministers, which was adopted in 1966.

As a result of the strengthening of the international cooperation of the MPR in
several areas of the national economy with CEMA member countries a number of legis-
lative steps were also taken in the area of the water resources of the country.

For example, in 1966 it was specified by a decree of the MPR Council of Ministers
that the elaboration of the water balance of Mongolia should be carried out on the
basis of the method of compiling the water balance. which is used by the OSHA mem-
ber countries, with allowance made for the 5-year and long-range plan of the devel-
opment of the MPR national economy.

A law on the use of MPR waters, which served as the basis for the solution of the
scientific and technical problems connected with the development of the water re-

sources of the country, was confirmed in March 1965 by the Decreeof the MPR People‘s
Great Rural.

The water legislation of this period called for the creation of the materﬂ‘l and
technical base of water management of the NPR. In conformity with a number of de-
crees of the MPR Council of Ministers of 1971 mobile mechanized detachments were
set up for work in Bayanhongor, Gobi-Altay and Dornogobi Aymags, the MPR Planning
and Surveying Institute of Water Resources and a technical school for water manage-
ment were organized, work was begun on the construction of a number of water manage-
ment systems. however, the water legislation existing at that time no longer con-
formed to the scale of the set tasks, in connection with which there arose the need
for the drafting of a uniform Hater Law—-the legal basis for the further improve-
ment of all the water resources of Mongolia. The MP8 Water Law, which went into
effect on 1 August 1976, was approved by the Decreeof the MPR People's Great Hural
of 1 July 1974.

The prevailing MPR Water Law includes six sections: the general provisions; the use
of water and water management structures; the protection of water resources and
water management structures; the control of the harmful effect of water; state reg-
istration, the planning of the use of water and water resources valuation; the re-
sponsibility for the violation of water legislation. In all there are 36 articles
in the law.

In conformity with the Water Law large and small rivers, springs, lakes, ponds and
other surface water bodies. as well as ground waters, irrigation systems, flood
protection structures. reservoirs, hydroelectric power stations, water supply sys-
tems, driven and dug wells, capped springs. as well as other water management struc-
tures and their equipment are state property of Mongolia. which belongs to all the
hongolian people. Hells, irrigation systems, cisterns and capped springs with their
equipment, which were built by the forces of coOperative organizations, are the
property of the latter.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The indicated provisions are in keeping with the MP8 Constitution, in accordance
with which all the water resources of the country are state property, that is, na-
tional property. Water resources, consequently. are granted to interested people
and sectors of the econony only for temporary use. All the waters in the MPR con-
stitute the united state water fund, which includes lakes, rivers, springs and
other surface waters, as well as the waters of canals, ponds and reservoirs, ground
water resources and glaciers.

The basic tasks of MPR water legislation consist in the regulation of the relations
between water users for the purposes of ensuring the efficient use of waters for the
needs of the population, animal husbandry and other sectors of the national econ-
omy, in the protection of waters against pollution, contanination and depletion, in
the prevention and elimination of the harmful effect of waters on the environment,
as well as in the protection of the rights and the observance of the duties of all
water users and the strengthening of the legality of the use of water.

MFR citizens, who wish to build a well or an irrigation canal on a parcel of land
for personal use, should obtain a permit for the construction and operation of the
structure and register it at the water management organisations of the MPR. Joint
stock companies, foreign organizations and persons without citizenship, who wish to
build a well on a private plot for the irrigation of a fruit orchard or a garden,
also should obtain a permit for the construction of the structure and register it
at the water management organisations of Mon lia. Embassies, governments and
diplomatic workers of foreign states, who are in the MPR, carry out all the opera-
tions on the clearance of the construction and the registration of the built water
management structures through the MN! Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Thus, all ques-
tions of water use are regulated on a legal basis and are concentrated in the water
nsnagenent organisations of Mongolia.

The management and organisation of the work in the area of the use and protection of
waters are carried out by the MFR Council of Ministers, the MPR Ministry of Irriga-
tion and the executive comittees of the aymag. city, aomon, regional and horon
assenbliea of people's deputies.

within the cometence of the MPR Council of Ministers there are the management of
the united state water fund; the establishment of the main regulations in the area
of the improvement of the use and protection of waters, as well as the prevention
and elimination of the harmful effect of waters, the establishment of state stand-
ards for water use, water quality and the methods of its evaluation; the establish-
nent of a unified system of the state recording of water use and the state water
resources valuation; the approval of the master plans of the comprehensive use and
protection of waters, water resource balances, as well as designs of water manage-
ment structures which are of state importance; the establishment of the procedure
of the implementation of state monitoring of the use and protection of waters.

0n the basis of the MP]! Hater Law the supervision of water management operations
is included in the function of the MN! Ministry of Irrigation.

The executive co-aittees of the aymag, city, som, regional and horon assemblies
of people's deputies on the territory subordinate to them carry out the supervision
of the work on the supply of water to the population, animal husbandry, farming and
industrial enterprises and monitor the organizations which are in charge of the
protection and use of water resources and water managenent structures.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
State monitoring of the use and protection of waters is carried out by the NPR Coun-
cil of Ministers, the Ninistry of Irrigation, the State Health Inspectorate, the
executive comittees of the aymag, city. aomon, regional and boron assemblies of
people's deputies, as well as specially authorized people. The state inspectors

for the use and protection of waters are appointed by the NPR Ninistry of Irriga-
tion and carry out state monitoring of the use and protection of waters.

The NPR Water Law regulates the conditions of the location, designing, construction,
renovation and placement into operation of enterprises and structures, which influ-
ence -ne condition of water resources; the procedure of the performance of work at
water bodies and in the cosatal zones; the use of water bodies and water manage-ant
structures for the needs of agriculture, industry and other purposes.

The NPR Hater Law prohibits the placement into operation of structures which do not
meet the following requirements: a) enterprises, municipal projects, shops and
units. which envisage the discharge of waste water, should be equipped with facili-
ties for the purification and discharge of this water; b) driven and dug wells and
rapped springs should be equipped with water-regulating devices, health protection
zones should be established for them in conformity with the procedure stipulated by
legislation; c) irrigation systems, canals, ponds and man~made lakes should envis-
age installations which eliminate the flooding, waterlogging and salinization of
lands and the erosion of soils; d) hydraulic structures in the channels of streams
should be accepted for operation only in the case of the readiness of the facili-
ties for the passing of flood waters and of the fish protection structures in con-
formity with the planned designs.

The Water Law charges enterprises, organizations and institutions, the production
processes of which affect the state of waters (contamination and depletion), with
the meeting of the following requirements:

the designing and location of new enterprises and structuresarecarried out only
with the consent of representatives of water management and health organs;

the placement into operation of new and thoroughly renovated enterprises and struc-
tures is carried out only with the official permission of water management and
health organs.

Enterprises and citizens can perform work which has any influence on the regimen of
a stream and the quality of surface waters only after obtaining permission from the
appropriate organs. The enterprises using water for the needs of industry, agricul-
ture, transportation, power engineering, fishing and other purposes, in conformity
with the Hater Law are obligated: a) to maintain the appropriate water level at
the dams, in the reservoirs of hydroelectric power stations and other watercourses;
b) to ensure the possibility of the free passage of ships, floats and so forth on
navigable rivers. After completing the work on timber floating the organizations
transporting the timber are obligated to clear the scraps of wood and other objects
from the channel of rivers; c) for the purpose of preserving the fish stocks to
ensure the free passage of fish through the channels of rivers, without allowing
them to get into the headworks of irrigation systems (special structures should be
built for letting fish pass).

5
FOR‘OFTHCIAI.USEIMVLY
F03lﬂﬂﬂK]Al.USFiONLY

The use of rivers, lakes and ground sources for the discharge into them of indus-
trial waste water and municipal and household sewage is permitted only by the ap-
propriate water management organs, the State Health and Veterinary Inspectorate.

Ail enterprises, whose activity adversely affects the condition of water resources,
upon the approval of the executive committees of the aymeg and city assemblies of
people's deputies. water management organs, the State Health Inspectorate and other
interested organisations implement the appropriate measures which are aimed at the
prevention of the pollution and depletion of water resources. The organizations
carrying out the floating of timber, rafts and other freight take every step to pre-

vent damage of the shores and channels of rivers. as well as the structures built
on these rivers.

State recording of the use of water in conformity with the established procedure

is carried out at enterprises and organizations which use water on the territory
of the NPR.

Long-range planning of the use of water resources for the purpose of optimum dis-
tribution among water users with allowance made for the priority meeting of the
drinking and household needs of the population is carried out on the basis of the
state recording of the use of water, the water resources valuation, the water re-
source balsnces, as well as the master plans of the complete use and protection of
natural waters.

It is stipulated by Article 11 of the NPR Water Law that the united water fund of
the “PR is made available for the use of the national economy first of all for tne
complete meeting of the drinking and household needs of the population and the
needs of animal husbandry. Permission to use water sources for the drinking and
household needs of the population is granted only after making chemical and bacteri-
ological analyses of the water of these sources. At the same time constant moni-
toring of the quality of the water being used is carried out by the analysis of
samples taken on strictly set dates.

The Hater Law provides for the protection of the natural waters of the country
against any interference which is capable of doing harm to their quality, decreas-
ing the capacity for self-purification. altering ecological conditions and leading
to the depletion of their reserves and the undesirable disturbance of the hydro-
geological and hydrological conditions.

NPR water legislation prohibits the discharge into lakes, rivers and other surface
sources, as well as onto the surfaces of glaciers of industrial and household
waste. timber, petroleum and chemical products, fertilisers and toxic chemicals.
The discharge of sewage into water bodies and onto the surface of the land without
preliminary treatment is prohibited.

State enterprises receive permission for the discharge of waste water after its
treatment from the State Service for the Use and Protection of Haters, the State
Health and Epidemiological Inspectorate and the State Veterinary Administration.
while enterprises and municipal services. which have been built by the forces of
aymag and city organizations, receive it from the city administrations and depart-
ments of water resources, the health inspectorate and the veterinary administrs~
tions.

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
The NPR State Service for the Use and Protection of waters jointly with the appro-
priate organizations specifies the sites of the discharge of treated sewage, makes
a laboratory check of the quality of the sewage, carries out the monitoring of the
operation of treatment plants, as well as checks and directs the work of the labora-
tories conducting the analysis of the sewage, keeps track of the use, protection
and pollution of waters. In the case of the violation of the design parameters of
water management construction, water supply systems and water treatment plants,
which has an adverse effect on water quality, the service requires that the work
be brought up to the design decisions. If necessary. with the permission of the
appropriate organizations, it enlists specialists in the monitoring and checking
operations. In the case of serious violations of the water legislation by any
enterprises after a preliminary report to the superior organizations the indicated
service independently or jointly with the health inspectorate has the right to halt

the activity of these enterprises temporarily, until steps are taken to remedy the
indicated violations.

Hater use carried out at the border water sources of the NPR is regulated by inter-
national agreements. If water use on the Nongolian territorial of border waters is
not regulated by international agreements with the participation of the NPR, it is

carried out in conformity with NPR legislation.

In 1976 the NPR Council of Ninisters approved instructions on the enforcement of the
Water Law, which consist of 39 articles and have the following structure: the gener-
al provisions, the use and protection of waters and water management projects, the
control of the harmful influence of waters, the registration of the use of waters,
the responsibility for the violation of water legislation. The instructions set as
their goal the concrete expression of the steps on the enforcement of the NPR Hater
Law and are an integral part of it.

On 1 November 1974 the NPR Council of Ninisters approved the statute on the NPR
State Service for the Use and Protection of Haters, which includes the following
sections: the general provisions; the rights of the NPR State Service for the Use
and Protection of Waters and its duties. This service supervises the work on the
assurance of the efficient use of water resources, the protection of water against
pollution and depletion, the control of the harmful influence of waters, as well as
monitors the carrying out of NPR water legislation. At the local level the aymag
and city departments and administrations of water management implement the deci-
sions of the State Service. Trade unions, youth organizations, conservation organ-
izations, scientific research institutes and all NPR citizens are taking an active
part in the implementation of all the measures on the efficient use and protection
of water resources.

Nongolian water legislation is constantly being improved and supplemented by new
regulations. For example, the conducting of systematic studies in the basin of the
Selenge and the organization of laboratories for conducting analyses for the pur-
pose of establishing the extent of water pollution are stipulated by the decree of
the NPR Council of Ninisters of ll October 1974.

Steps on the steadfast and absolute implementation of the water legislation of

Mongolia are specified in the decree of the NPR Council of Ninisters of 6 July 1975.
In the decree of 10 June 1976 the NPR Council of Ninisters charged the NPR Ministry
of Justice to draw up a statute on the criminal liability for serious violations of

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIN!(M"N(3AL.USE¢JNLV

the water legislation of the country. In this decree it is indicated that the pro-
tection and efficient use of water resources are a matter of all state, cooperative
and other organisations and all the working people of Mongolia and that it is neces-
sary to conduct mass explanatory work among the entire population. The allocation
of the necessary assets for the implementation of the measures indicated in water
legislation is discussed in this decree. Specific duties on the protection of the
water resources of the country are assigned to the State Committee for Building
Architecture and Technical Control, the Ministry of Agriculture and other ministries.

The work on strengthening the material and technical base of water management of
the country is being continued. Thus. the building of an irrigation system at the
"Future" Cooperative innayan-agt Somonof Bulgan Aymag is called for by the decree
of the MPR Council of Ministers of 6 December 1975.

The administrative and organizational system of the management of water resources
is being continuously improved. In particular, the Administration for the Manage-
ment of Water Resources with the corresponding powers, rights and duties was organ-
ized on the basis of the decree of the MPR Council of Ministers of 5 May 1978.

Mongolia is carrying out international cooperation with the countries of the so-
cialist community. In 1974 an agreement was reached between the governments of the
NPR and the USSR on the efficient use and protection of the waters of the basin of
the Selenge which runs through the territory of both Mongolia and the Soviet Union.
This agreement provides for the cooperation of the two countries in the protection
of the waters of the river against pollution, contamination and depletion, as well
as the backing of measures on the prevention of the harmful effect of waters in the
basin of the Selenge.

The MPR and the USSR are cooperating in the implementation of hydrometeorological
and other measurements and observations and are sharing the results of studies con-
ducted during different seasons of the year. These data are the basis for measures
which are aimed at the solution of such important problems as the regulation of
flood and low waters.the passage of ice; the use of structuresandwnter facili-
ties, which is connected with the efficient use of the waters of the river basin.
as well as the keeping of them in the proper technical condition; the implementa-
tion of measures on the prevention of the water erosion of soils in the Selenge
basin. Both parties inform each other in good time about ice conditions, rises of
the water in the Selenge basin above the desired line and damage to water manage-
ment structures. They are taking coordinated actions which are aimed at the elimi—
nation or the reduction of the danger in connection with flooding, the ice flow and
other natural phenomena. Both parties are making joint control measurements for
the purpose of evaluating the quality of the river water at sites agreed on in ad-
vance, as well as are elaborating uniform criteria and standards of the quality of

river waters.

Within CIMA Mongolia is taking part in the fulfillment of three themes which are
envisaged by a number of scientific and technical agreements. Among them are "The
Elaboration and Standardization of New Special Methods of Studying Water Quality."
"The Elaboration of Methods of Evaluating the Influence of the Chemicalization of
Agriculture on the Quality of Surface and Ground Haters and Measures on the Pre-
vention of water Pollution" and "The Elaboration of a Scientific and Technical
Forecast on the Protection of water Resources." The research being conducted by

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lbngolian scientists attests to the increased scientific and technical potential of

.Hongolis in the area of water nanagenent. The shaping and development of Kongolian
water legislation. which was previously unknown in the history of the country, is

clear evidence of the correctness of the policy being pursued by the party and the
govern-em, which, relying on the aid and assistance of the Soviet Union and the
other socialist countries. were able in the shortest possible tine to eliminate
the scientific and technical backwardness in the country.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Nauka, VODNYYB 3380881 1982

7807
cs0: 1819/40 m

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY