FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10495

6 May 1982

USSR Repon

CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT

(FOUO 3/82)

FBI$ FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

ms publications contain information prinrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials froa foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGH' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING OWNERSIIIP OF
MATERIALS KEPROD'JCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLTCATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
CONTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT

(2000 3/82)

CONTENTS

NETALHORKING EQUIPMENT

Report on Exposition "Podoh ipn Hui-81" [nwmmcs—all
(v. I. Antipov, v. A. Pocopov; s'rmx I INSTRUMENT,
Oct 81) 000...... ..... O ..... COCO... ......... 000.00....

- a - [III - USSR

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HETALUORKING BQU 1mm

UDC [061.6:621.822]"l98l"
REPORT ON EXPOSITION "PODSHIPNIKI-Sl" [BALLBEARINGS-81]

Moscow STANKI l INSTRIMENT in Russian No 10. Oct 81 (signed to press 12 Oct 81) pp
33-37

[Article by V. I. Antipov and V. A. Potapov: "'Ballbearings-Sl' Bxhibit"]

[Test] The international "Ballbearings-81" exposition. in which sets than 100 com-
panies from 15 countries took part. was held from 25 March through 8 April 1981 at
the Sokol'niki Exhibition Conplex in Hoscow. The exhibit occupied over 7.000 mg.

Here. we offer descriptions of the designs and specifications of several exhibits by
foreign companies.

Spindle assembly ballbearings were shown by Gamet. Nadella and Timken France (France)
and PAC (ERG). A majority were precision bearings. which high manufacturing preci-
sion and high-quality connecting surfaces, resulting in a high upper limit and ex-
tended range of spindle rotation speeds for spindles mounted on these bearings.

Camet offered single- and double-roller bearings with full rollers for lubricants.
The following types are produced: single-row (type C) with or without bearing col-
lar (25-506 an fit openings. rotation speeds of 10.200 to 760 rpm); single-row (type
P) with a wide outer race and lubricant holes. as well as holes along the outer race
face for installing springs (25- 177.8 m fit openings. rotation speeds of 10.200 to
1,800 rpm); single-row (type Hydro P) with a wide outer race with lubricant holes and
holes around the face for installing springs using an additional pretightened race
whose tension is regulated by outside pressure; fit opening dianeter and rotation
speeds are as in the type P bearings; double-row (type G) with a flush outer race
and lubricant openings (25- 506 mm fit openings. rotation speeds of 10.200 to 760
rpm); double-row_with a wide outer race with collar, fit openings and rotation speeds
as for type C bearings; double-row (type ms) for use in high-speed spindle assembl-
ies (35-210 mm fit openings and rotation speeds of 9.500 to 2,100 rpm).

Comet also demonstrated a lathe spindle with chuck. The spindle design uses special
ballbearings through which the chuck drive pressure fluid moves. This permits elimi-
nating the hydraulic cylinder usually located on the spindle's rear race, inasmuch as
it is designed as part of the chuck. It is the company's opinion that this permits
decreasing the spindle's moment of inertia and freeing the rear race for the addition
of other mechanisms or devices (if necessary).

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One merit of this spindle design is the use of a double-row roller bearing. with the
races located a considerable distance from each other. significantly increasing the
unit's rigidity. The pressure fluid is fed through a baffle race clamped between
the inner bearing races and precisely centered on the spindle at a point where the
spindle strain under external load is minimal. A small gap is anticipated between
the outer bearing race and the baffle race.

The precision parameters of the Gamet ballbearings used in the spindle units are de-
scribed by the following data: clearance along inner fit diameter (d) and outer dia-
meter -- +0.005 mm (for dgl80 u) and +0.010 III (for d>180 m); radial play for inner
and outer race rotation -- 0.0015 and 0.003 In. respectively (dglﬂo all) and 0.001-
-0.006 and 0.003-0.006 um. respectively (d>180 an); end play of both the inner and
outer races -- 0.003 mm (for dgl80 In) and 0.008 III: (for d>180 mm).

Nadella demonstrated a wide range of needle bearings for various machine tools. in-
cludinwes for drilling and boring machine gear boxes controlling wobble in vari-

ous types of machine tools and spindles in lathes. boring and grinding machines. and
other machine tools. '

Figure 1 shows a boring machine spindle mounted on precision needle bearings (with
retainer and control clearance) of the NaZOloDelta (forward race) and Na203SDe1ta
(rear race) types . The outer bearing race strain is compensated for by plate-type
springs adjusted to a certain tension. The unit also uses two needle thrust bearings
of the A307 4062 type. between which a baffle race is installed. This spindle design
ensures a rotation of up to 8,000 rpm. [Caption to Figure 1. not reproduced for this
report: Boring machine spindle mounted on Nadella (France) needle bearings.)

Figure 2 shows the forward bearing assembly of a milling head using a Na2025 Delta
precision needle bearing with no outer race. but with retainer and control clearance;
an ERG 60 tempered spindle journal serves as the race. The bearing is preloaded by
a screw to a special—shaped spring resting on the expansion race lugs. Maximum spin-
dle rotation speed is 1.400 rpm. [Caption to Figure 2. not reproduced for this re-
port: Forward bearing assembly of a milling head with Nadella (France) bearings.]

The Timken France exhibit offered materials showing examples of the use of company
hearings in machine tool spindle assemblies. A majority of the spindle assemblies
(using this company's bearings) are of the double-seat type. For example. in the
spindles of the “IDS NFC [numerical preset control] lathe (Gildemeister, FRG). the
lleynumat 2 (Heyligenstaedt. FRO). the Producent Sl (Bohle. FRG) and 3230 (Steinel,
FRC) multiple-operation machines. the UFZI multipurpose milling machine (SW. FRO)
and the 200-8 eight-spindle chuck automatic machine (Hickman. Britain).

The company recommends that Hydra-Rib bearings with a sliding race permitting adjust-
ment of bearing clearance during operation be used in spindle assemblies with high
rotation speeds. Spindle units with such races have optimum dynamic specifications.
Figure 3 shows a'Producent Sl spindle mounted on Hydra-Rib bearings (100 m fit open-
ing. rotation speed of 11.200 to 4,500 rpm. transferable power of 11 k“). [Caption
to Figure 3. not reproduced for this report: Bohle (FRO) Producent 51 multiple-
operation machine tool spindle on Timken France (France) Hydra-Rib bearings.]

The FAG exhibit was one of the most representative. It demonstrated bearings. grin-
der spindle units. apparatus for monitoring parts quality (including bearing races)

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and so on. This company's bearings are used in various types of machine tools. as
for example. spindle assemblies and swivel tables of heavy-duty NPC boring and turn-
ing lathes (the Innocenti Company. Itals) with 67000 on faceplates. Moreover. FAG
bearings are used in machine tools made by Pittler, Traub. Roller-Hills and Kisser-
1ing_ (PRC) and Ssimp Utita and Canavese (Italy).

Figure lo shows a Heysomat 20 (the Ileyligenstaedt Company) duplicating lathe spindle
using a series PAC NNU 1092!. SK MS? roller bearing on the front race and two series
PAC 751126 KA.SP thrust bearings (angle contace) and a series PAC NR 3019'K.S.P. rol-
ler bearing on the rear race. Maximum spindle rotation is 2,800 rpm and transferable
power is 45 W. [Caption to Figure lo, not reproduced for this report: Heysonat 20
duplicating lathe spindle (Heyligenstsedt Company. PRC) with FAG bearings (1736).]

Nine foreign companies demonstrated equipment (21 units) for abrasion-machining
rocker bearing parts. Inasmuch as the machines are intended basically for mass pro-
duction. they are not equipped with NFC installations.

The largest number of grinders was presented at the GDR display. Among them. we
should note the SWAGLSO automatic cylinder-and—cone grinder (Figure 5), which is
intended for grinding inner bearing races to 613-63 II. This machine, which is
built into an KLRHR63 automatic line, does the final machining of a raceway set on
stationary supports. Maximum circumferential speed of the grinding wheel installed
on the PAC radial thrust bearings is 100 m/sec. The cutting feed is done by a moving
grinding headstock equipped with flat and V-shaped rsce guides. A static frequency
transformer is used to regulate the grinding wheel rotation speed. Precision is:
tolerance -- 0.008 mm; out—of—round, faceting and rippling -- 0.0015 In; roughness
of machined surface -- Ra'IOJo um. [Caption to Figure 5, not reproduced for this re-
port: SWEAGLSO automatic cylinder-and-cone grinder (6010.1

The centerless automatic cylinder-snd—cone grinder based on the SASL 125 (GDR) in the
traditional configuration (with a movable drive wheel headstock) is intended for mach-
ing barrle-type shaping rollers and is equipped with a loading-unloading installation.
No rollers in-feed grind profile circles simultaneously. The circles are guided by
a contour follower using single-point diamend tools. The roller monitoring measure-
ments are made outside the machine tool working zone. The control installation makes
adjustments based on measurement results.

Enterprises of the GDR and Czechoslovak SSR and Japan's Seiko-Seiki Company demon-
strated internal grinders for machining bearing races. Gamfior (Italy) demonstrated
several high-speed race-mounted spindles and one spindle on hydrostatic mounts.

Specialists took an interest in an experimental Czech BDL 50A NPC equipped and inten-
ded for grinding holes 10-50 Ill wide and up to 40 m long in bearing races. The
transverse feed drive and table pitch are changed by hydraulic cylinders controlled
by servo valves. Inductive pick-ups provide feedback on table pitch and grinding
hcatstock position.

Switches on a broad connected to the control cabinet set cutting speed. feed and
machining allowance, oscillation frequency and amplitude, amount of compensation,
number of cycles between wheel adjustments or adjustment orders within a cycle, as
well as operation by cycle, with an active monitoring device or with on-track moni-
toring. Diameter precision is 6 ml, taper precision -- 1.5 um, out-of-roundﬂb’t

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe Oman use ONLY

more than 2 um and roughness - R.-0.32 um. Electric grinding spindles are set in
motion by static frequency transformers which ensure a spindle rotation speed (step-
less regulation) of 20.000 to 87,000 rpm.

In the Sig-O—HB automatic internal grinder (Figure 6) offered by Seiko-Seiki (Japan).
the item is set in a rigid chock and roller; the unit is for making bearing race fit
openings (external diameter -- 1.S-16 mm. internal diameter -- 1-9 mm). It is turned
by a drive roller, and a hydraulic cylinder clamps the piece to the end race. This
eliminates knurling on the parts. The transverse and axial adjustment tables and
sealed hydrostatic guides are independent units installed on a welded base. The mach-
ing can be ordered with an adaptive control system (stabilizing piece precision by
maintaining a constant removal speed when taking off the final allowance). as well

as a machined-piece monitoring system. The high-frequency grinding spindle drive
(also manufactured by the company) is 0.35 k", wheel rotation speed is 100,000 to
150.000 rpm and warranteed service life is 1,000 hours. [Caption to Figure 6, not
reproduced for this report: Seiko-Seiki (Japan) SIC-O-HB automatic internal grinder.]

The unitized machine tools offered by C2" (Strakonice. Czechoslovak 888) for (in-feed)
grinding internal ballbearing races comes either automatic (model BEL214) or semi-
automatic and automatic (model BEL 217). The grinding headstock and piece headstock
are installed on the machine's stand. The piece headstock has magnetic clamping and
feed devices and two sliding supports for the piece being fed in. All working move-
ments in the cycle are done by the grinding headstock. The wheel is adjusted auto-
matically at a prescribed adjustment interval determined by the number of raceways
being machined: 1-63 (model BBL 21%) or 1-31 (model BEL 217).

The cycle is controlled pneumatically and the control impulses are electrical. The
machine can be ordered with an active monitoring device. The diameter of the race
being ground (at speeds of up to 55 m/sec) is 5—30 on (model BEL 216) or 55-225 mm
(model BEL 217). Piece dimensional precision is 20.01 mm. surface roughness is R.-
-0.024 um and rippling is less than 0.8 um.

Superfinishing and finishing machines were offered by Crieshaber, Supfina, Thielen-
hens and Peter Walters (PRC) and ZVL (Povalska Bystrica. Czechoslovak SSR). The
SH450 automatic centerless superfinishing machine equipped with bunder feed (Figure
7) offered by Supfina (with several superfinishing heads) is intended for machining
0.8- to 10-mm needle hearings in one pass. Each head has rail clamping force adjust-
ment independent of the piece being machined. Needle speed across the rollers is

2 m/min. Machined surface roughness is R.-0.02+0.03 um. out—of-round is less than
0.1 um and noncylindricity is less than 1 pm. [Caption to Figure 7, not reproduced
for this report: SH650 superfinishing machine. Supfina Company (PR6).)

The SF" 7702 automatic superfinisher made by Grieshaber is intended for superfinisn-
ing the bearing races. shafts and bushings (o10—40 mm, length 20-170 mm) of water
pumps. It has four working positions. in which two races can be worked simultane-
ously on one shaft. Shaft productivity for 615 mm is five pieces per minute. sur-
face roughness is Ra-0.06 um and race out-of-round is less than 0.5 um.

The automatic superfinishing machines produced by the Czechoslovak 888 are intended
for machining outer and inner radial single-row bearing races with outside diameters
of 6-16 mm (model DSLT 1/16) and 16-35 mm (model DSLT 2/35). The DSLT 1/16 is a
single-spindle machine and the DSLT 2/35 is a double-spindle. Races on sliding

l.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

supports are secured using electromagnets and adjustments are made hydraulically.
On these machines. surface quality is improved 80-90 percent and rippling and out-
of-round decrease 65-75 and up to 50 percent. respectively.

Peter Holters Company demonstrated double-disk vertical finishing machines. 0n the

ALIH. with active monitoring and set up to work the faces of bearing races up to 200
mm in diameter and 80 mm high. the operating cycle can be set from a control panel.

The finishing disks. the upper one of which is hydraulically clamped. are 690 mm in

diameter.

The ALOO-IZ (Peter Halters Company). which is equipped with abs-mm wide finishing
disks. is intended for machining needle and cylindrical rollers up to 35 - wide and
100 mm long. The blank is first precision-ground. The AL-OO (same company) is in-
tended for plane-parallel machining (between 310~mm finishing disks) the faces of
bearing races 1-80 mm in diameter. The faces are set in retainers and make a plane-
tary motion produced by a lantern reduction gear. The disk rotation speed is con-
tinuously variable. The machine is equipped with active monitoring.

The automatic HLRHR 63 line (GDR) is intended for abrading the inner races of ball-
bearings with races 25-63 mm in diameter and 12-30 mm long. The line. consisting of
an automatic SH!AGL50 cylinder-and-cone grinder (for external grinding of the race).
a SIH3B automatic internal grinder (for grinding the inner race opening) and a szwa
automatic superfinisher (for superfinishing the raceway). uses magazines with remov-
able bins, which increases its productivity.

Up to 6.000 races can be put into the removable bin. which is in the shape of a cube
with sides 1,000 mm long. Each bin consists of 26 flat casettes into which the races
are placed. The transport installation includes hoists and a pan system in the form
of flexible belts. Transfer storage units with a capacity of 250-300 races each are
located between machines. The presence of parts in the transport system is monitored
by pneumatic sensors. The line's use coefficient is determined basically by the op-
eration of the internal grinder, whose efficiency is in turn dependent on the dura-
bility of the grinding wheel (approximately 100 races). The electrical equipment
element base of the line is very reliable. The electrical control circuits are con-
tactless sensors with a signal voltage of 12 V.

Cutting and auxiliary tools were exhibited by Sandvik (Switzerland), which showed an
extensive line of cutting tools (various types of blades, cutting points. drills with
multifaceted rotating blades, milling cutters). as well as the Varilock auxiliary tool
set (Figure 8. not reproduced for this report. Caption: Varilock auxiliary tool set
(Sandvik Company. Switzerland): a) system 80; b) system 63; c) system 50).

The Varilock set was conceived as a multipurpose system for fastening tools in the
spindles of multiple-operation machine tools and was structured on a base of mandrels
with 18040 (system 50). 15045 (system 63) and 18050 (system 80) couplings. reducers.
chucks. extensions and tool assemblies. The tools comprising the set are intended
for a broad range of operations. from rough milling to precision boring.

The system 80 and 63 reducers are interchangeable. The elements comprising the sys-
tem are connected by a central bolt (with a cutting-fluid opening), permitting use of
internal cutting—fluid supply tools (the T-HAX. for example) and tools for machining
shallow openings. "hen special tools are used. the set includes movable hone holders

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and semifinished blanks for manufacturing various tools (multiple-blade honing tools.
for example).

Measuring devices were demonstrated by Harposs (Italy). Rank Taylor Robson (Britain),
FAG (PRC) and Steyr (Austria). as well as by CEHA member-nations. The Harposs Com-
pany demonstrated a Hinialsar active monitoring unit used in circular grinding of
smooth and noncontinuous shafts. The range of adjustment of the too-contact clamp

is 3-90 mm. The company also offered devices for step-monitoring shafts and openings.
The device consists of a Tester-type metering unit and manual internal gages. clamps
and races with inductive transformers. The company demonstrated a multipurpose mo-
dular measuring device for monitoring six parameters of variable-speed shafts.

One feature of the Rank Taylor Robson Company's exhibits was the use of computer
equipment for processing measurement results. permitting automation of that process
and significantly increasing measurement precision. The computer equipment is used
in corbination with a Talyrond 73-3R "krugloner" ["roundness neter"] (enlargement
factor up to 200,000) and with a Talyserf ST-120.3A for measuring surface roughness
and rippling. In addition to greater measurement precision, this provides an oppor-
tunity for increasing the number of parameters being measured. The company also de-
monstrated a Talycontor macroprofilograph for monitoring the shape of circular parts.
and bearing races in particular. The dtvice has automatic vertical bit movement
drive with a stop (when necessary) in the middle of the measurement range.

The FPA "roundness meter" made by Steyr is intended for monitoring bearing races
(outside diameter 26-l60 mm, inside siameter lO-105 mm). The device can be built
into automatic complexes intended for machining bearing races.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye", "Stanki i instrument", 1981

11052
CSO: 1821/028 END