FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10108

10 November 1981

USSR Report

SPACE

(FOUO 5/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
SPACE
(P000 5/81)

Courturs

WED MISSION HIGHLICKI'S

'Salyut-7' Orbital Space Station Launching Deemed Unlikely
Before Early 1982......OIO...0......0..OOOOUOO'OOOOOOOOOOOOOOCI 1

shatalov on Psychological Problems in Long-Duration Plights...... 3

Mental and Physical Aspects of Cosmonauta' Efficiency in

PlighteoeOseeoeeeooee0.00000no...Ooteose'vooeoo0000000000000... 5

LIFE SCIENCES
Investigation of Hntagenic Factors of Space Plight............... 9

Problems of Space Biology, Volume 62: Sanitary—Hygienic and
Physiological Aspects of Manned Spacecraft..................... 28

Cardiovascular Conditioning for Cosmonauts....................... 37

Problem of Adaptation in Space Biology and Hedicine.............. 39
SPACE ENGINEERING

Technology of Assembly, Installation and Repair “ark in Space.... ‘7

Thermal Conditions in Spacecraft................................. 60

SPACE APPLICATIONS

Zero-Gravity Metal, Semiconductor Melting, Crystallization,
Phase formation Experiments in Space........................... 66

- a - [III - USSR - 21L SGT POU

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJALIEEZONLY

MARKED MISSION HIGHLIGHTS

'SALYUT-7' ORBITAL SPACE STATION LAUNCEING DEEMED UNLIKELY BEFORE EAREY 1982
Paris AIR 8 COSMOS in French 29 Aug 81 p 63

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Soviet Orbital Station 'Salyut-7' will Be
Launched at Start of 1982"]

[Text] As disclosed by ex-cosmonaut Alexey Yeliseyev, director of Salyut flights,
at a Moscow press conference on 13 July: "The new orbital space station
Salyut—7 will not be launched this year."

"Currently. we are continuing operation of the Salyut-6 orbital station, which

is docked to the Cosmos-1267 satellite." said Yeliseyev, explaining further that
"In preparing for the launching of a new station. we of course take into account
the suggestions of the cosmonauts to improve the station, and this takes tine."

The USSR. therefore, will not launch its next orbital space station Salyut-7
before the beginning of 1982, in other words, not much before the sending up of
a new "international" crew that will include one Soviet and the first trench
spacenan on a flight tentatively scheduled for May-June 1982.

The orbit of the Salyut-6-Cosnos-1267 orbital complex was just raised once
again on 17 July; it is now in a 336-382-km orbit, inclined 51.6°.

It is recalled that Cosmos-1267 was launched on 25 April 1981 and that it was
moored to the Salyut-6 station on 19 June. This array, which constitutes a
38-ton station. prefigures the future multimodule orbital stations the USSR
proposes to launch "within a foreseeable future." Yeliseyev said.

According to Yeliseyev. Salyut-6 has now been in orbit just a little under o
years, during 2 of which it has been piloted. During that period. nore than
1.600 experiments have been carried out aboard the station. Sixteen crews
have boarded it, and there have been 30 moorings, h remoorings of spaceships
and 3 space walks by cosmonauts. as well as 11 refuelings and resupplyings of
food and equipment by Progress spaceships. The total weight of the equipment
used aboard Salyut~6-Yeliseyev said-amounts to three tons, of which one ton
consists of equipment delivered to it by Progress cargo spaceships.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Around one-third of the time spent aboard it by the successive crews-Yeliseyev
said-has been dedicated to the study of terrestrial resources and to other
observations related to the earth's environment for use by 22 sectors of the
Soviet economy. Seven of the cononauts who have flown aboard Salyut-6 have
spent more than 100 days aboard it: two. more than 6 months; and one

(Valeriy Ryumin). approxinately 1 year (in two flights).

These flights have made it possible to "maintain the work capacity of the crews,
study the state of health of the cosmonauts in orbit. and nake their readapta-
cion to terrestrial conditions easier." However-‘academician Oleg Gazenko, head
of the Hedicobiological Institute of Moscow. points out-"There is still much to
be done." This has to do particularlg with "maintaining the metabolism of
calcium by the cosmonauts at normal levels. and safeguarding their bodies'
self-protecting mechanisms against infectious diseases." This is by wsy of

preparation for future flights of long duration (1 year) which the Soviets are
now planning.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1980.

9399
cso: 8119/1900

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SHATALOV 0N PSYCHOLOGICAL mourns IN LONG-DURATION FLIGHTS
Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 19 Sep 81 p 55

[Text] In a recent article in the USSR Air Force nagasine, General Vladinir
Shatalov, chief of the Soviet cosnonaut corps. cites a nunber of problena which
need to be solved in order for long-duration flights to be conducted under good
conditions. "It seens that the search for an optinun solution will require
more than a year." "Nevertheless," asserted Shatalov. "we are not far fro-
pernanent operation of orbital stations, that is. twenty-four hour operation
all year long by crews who will replace each other directly on board and will
regularly receive everything they need."

The problems that must be solved "in the ianediate future", specified Shatalov,
are essentially to conquer the type of fatigue due to routine, if not iron real
boredon. which grips cosnonauts at the and of a prolonged stay.

The psychological and psychic factors thus seen to give cause for concern when
aissions becoae long.

"The tine of active work of a single crew of cosmonauts will. without doubt.
always be below the naxiaun tolerable tine of a stay in space no natter how

well their work schedule. activity, rest and leisure are designed and organised."
Shatalov thinks that "the linited volune of living space. contacts and inforna-
tion produces its effects, as well as the condition of weightleasneas. Sooner

or later, negative enotions appear and with then fatigue, which has as a con-
sequence a lowering of energy and enthusiasn for work. Under such conditions.
rest and a change of conditions are necessary."

Another problem. according to Shatalov, consists in "freeing the cosnonauts
tron tedious tasks of constantly nonitoring the condition of a nunber of
systens which should be handled by autonated systens and the ground specialists."

Shatalov also advanced the point of view expressed by certain other specialists.
according to when an excess anount of scientific equipment aboard a station
disperses the cosnonauts' strength and thus reduces the econonic return.

INNICHNWC1A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally, Shatalov emphasized the need for offering the cosnonauts the means
for varied activity, primarily intellectual rather than nanual, "as has been
done by the Soviets."

Assessing the past twenty years of uanned flights, Shatalov called it "positive."
In his opinion, things have progressed in regular fashion in too basic stages.

The first consisted in teaching nan and space vessels to fly; the second in
exploiting these flights in an efficient any.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1980.

CSO: 1853/1-1’

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 629.78.007
VENIAL AND PHYSICAL ASPECTS OF COSHONAUTS' EFFICIENCY IN FLIGHT

Moscow DEYATEL'NOST' KOSHORAVTA V POLETE I POVYSHZNIYE YEYE BFFBKTIVNOSTI in Russian
1981 (signed to press 2 Dec 80) pp 2-5, 263-264

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Activity of the Cosmonaut in
Flight and Enhancing Activity Effectiveness", edited by c. T. Beregovoy, USSR pilot
and cosmonaut, candidate of psychological sciences, and L. s. Khachatur'yants, doc-
tor of medical sciences, lzdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye", 1800 copies, 264 pages]

[Text] This book examines the theoretical and practical issues related to increas-
ing effectiveness of spaceship crew activity. It studies the problems of engineer-
ing psychology in the interests of providing for safety in space flight. The unique
conditions of flight in space, the specific elements of s cosmonaut's activity, his
mental states and methods for diagnosing and controlling them, are modelled in this
book.

The book is intended for engineering and technical personnel and medical personnel
engaged in cosmonautics, ergonomics and industrial psychology.

FOREWORD

The development of cosmonautics is of tremendous significance in studying the earth
and the near-earth atmosphere, in finding solutions to major national economic prob-
lems. Already the term "cosmization of production" has come into common use. by
which is usually meant the process of people's deliberate activity aimed at direct
or indirect use of the natural scheme of things in outer space in the interests of
social production.

Cosmization of production came about even prior to man's first flight into space.
Designs were developed in laboratories for utilizing the unusual conditions found in
space for earth-related endeavors. Many of these designs are in use today-systems
for global communications and celestial navigation in space, projects in the sphere
of meteorology, oceanography, etc.

However, along with the development of space technology and the increasing complex-
ity of space research programs, responsibility also grows for the man who must par-
ticipate as an independent element in operating the diverse, semi-automatic systems
for spacecraft guidance. In some instances, a reduction in man's reliability, as
one element in the total system of control, can lower the operational quality of the
system right up to the point where execution of one flight operation or another he-
comes completely impossible.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In solving today's problems and those of the near future, particular significance
must be attached to studies related to stability of the human organism when confront-
ing space flight conditions, and increasing man's reliability, especially when he is
controlling complex space-technology equipment.

We see three basic paths for research, which, if followed, will help to achieve the
overall purpose-~increasing the reliability and effectiveness of space flight on the
whole. Firstly, we must optimize the system for training cosmonauts and the scheme
of operational activity on board the spacecraft. Secondly, we must enhance the lev-
el of technical maintenance for on-board equipment and improve its operational level.
Thirdly, we must effect operative guidance of the cosmonaut's mental state during
flight, and of his work efficiency.

Efforts in these three areas are completely different with respect to what methods
are to be used in their accomplishment, whose area of expertise is involved, and what
form of implementation recommendations obtained will take. Those directly involved
in accomplishing these efforts--the USSR pilots and cosmonauts, the engineers, doc-
tors, biologists and psychologists, the technique specialists and designers--are well
aware of this. In spite of a diversity in procedure and technique, the areas of re-
search we have proposed to the reader are logically related and mutually interdepen-
dent.

Material cited in the book's first chapter describes a number of new directions in
space research, and the basic principles and methods for maintaining a cosmonaut's
effectiveness during flight. Despite the fact that it is based on serious experi-
ment, much of this material is open to debate. This can be explained, basically, by
the non-traditional nature of the problems being touched upon, especially those that
concern efforts dedicated to finding new procedures and techniques for studying man's
activity, work that involves the theoretical particulars of cosmonaut preparation,
forecasting the psychophysiological problems the future will bring, and projects that
concern the use of psychophysiological feedback, as well as several other matters.
Material is cited here for the first time with respect to regulating the mental state
of the operator. Chapters two and three discuss optimisation of the activity of the
cosmonaut involved with the spacecraft's guidance system and matters of technical
maintenance. The material in these chapters is of acute practical significance not
only for conditions of space flight, but for other occupational conditions as well.
Finally, chapter four contains material which, to one degree or another, describes
the human operator's resistance to outside interference, and ways to optimize this
resistance in the interest of enhancing safety in flight.

The book is the fourth in a series on this subject ("The Human Operator in Space
Flight", Moscow: Mashinostroyeniye, l976; "Particular Features of the Cosmonaut's
Activity in Flight", Moscow: Mashinostroyeniye, 1976; "Man and Celestial Navigation
in Space", Moscow: Mashinostroyeniye, 1979). This book differs from its predecessors
in that, along with describing the dynamics of a cosmonaut's work efficiency in
flight, it also treats specific measures for optimizing it.

In conclusion, we will note once again that the basic goal of this book is to gener-
alize the firsthand experience the authors have gained over the course of space
flight preparation and execution, and during their specific participation in solving
the problems presented by a psychophysiological assessment of space technology.

:lAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The book is intended for specialists in the engineering and technical sphere, and for
medical personnel working with manned space vehicles. It may be useful to readers
who are students of ergonomics and industrial psychology, and also to all those in-
terested in what the cosmonaut does-s complex sphere of human activity that takes
place in the unusual conditions of space.

We invite the opinions and comments of any reader who might have questions with re-
gard to material presented in this book, and request that he forward same to the pub-
lisher.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
chapter 1. General Issues of Manned Space Flight. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

1. Basic principles and methods for maintaining the cosmonaut's effectiveness in

flight (c. T. Beregovoy) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2. Topical psychophysiological issues related to work in space (current condi-

tions and a forecast) (L. S. Khachatur'yants). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . l3
3. human activity in space--a model (C. H. Kolesnikov). . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
A. Some theoretical particulars of cosmonaut preparation (G. T. Beregovoy, P. R.

Popovich, G. H. Kolesnikov). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5. Use of a psychophysiological feedback system in the interests of optimizing

activity (H. V. Frolov, L. S. Khachatur'yants) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6. Psychophysiological correlates of a cosmonaut's control-related activity

(L. S. Khachstur'yants). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7S
7. Certain aspects of the cosmonaut's visual activity (Ye. A. lvsnov, A. Ya.

Frolov). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
8. Procedural basics for studying operational errors on the part of the indivi-

dual who controls the spsce vehicle (N. D. Zavalov, V. A. Ponomarenko) . . . 100
9. Problems associated with regulating the operator's condition (L. P. Grimak,

L. S. Khachatur'yants) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116

Chapter 2. The Cosmonaut and Systems for Controlling the Dynamics of Spacecraft 138

1. Optimizing the cosmonaut's operator-associated activity and the semirauto-

matic guidance systems of manned spacecraft according to probability cri-

teria (G. T. Beregovoy, V. H. Vasilets, A. I. Yakovlev). . . . . . . . . . . 138
2. Studies on statistical features of the cosmonaut's operator-related activity

in controlling manned spacecraft (B. V. Volynov, V. H. Vasilets, E. 0. Su-

khanov, A. I. Yakovlev). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1&6
3. Studies on cosmonaut activity under conditions of weightlessness artificially

induced through use of a liquid medium (c. I. Vorob' ev, L. D. Smirichevskiy) 156
4. Experimental research on features associated with operator detection of ob-

jects on a television screen under conditions of insufficient time (V. N.

Zhovinskiy). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161

Chapter 3. Technical Maintenance and Work Outside the Spacecraft. . . . . . . . 167

1. Technical maintenance for long-duration orbital flight (E. N. Stepanov, Yu.
N. Glazkov). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Is.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Equipment design for cosmonaut movement in free space (Yu. N. Glaskov). . .
Analog testing of operator activity in the space station's technical main-
tenance system (E. N. Stepanov) . . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . .
A data model for’the dynamics of independent cosmonaut movement in free
space (Ye. V. Dement'yev) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Analog testing of independent manual guidance of the cosmonaut's movement
unit (L. P. Grimak, Ye. V. Dement'yev). . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . .

Chapter A. Effect of Flight-Related Factors on the Quality of the Cosmonaut'a

l.

8.

Activity and Rays of Quality Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . .

0n the effect of certain habitation conditions upon physiological functions,
work efficiency and human sleep dynamics (A. N. Litsov, A. Ya. Frolov, V. N.

Artishchuk, A. V. Chapayev) . ....... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Studies on cosmonaut-operator functions in data systems (N. N. Fefelov, Ye.
A. Cherenkova). . . . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The effect of emotional stress on a cosmonaut's activities in the radio-
telegraph communications system (A. K. Yepishkin) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A comparative psychophysiological evaluation of the effectiveness of psycho-
logical models for hypo- and hyper-Height conditions of the body (L. P.
Grimnk) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hatters related to improving the cosmonaut's work-rest mode of operation

(A. Ya. Prolov, A. N. Litsov, V. N. Nalyugin, V. A. Sutormin, I. F. Sarayev)
Activity of psychological models for hypo-weight conditions of the body in
30-day experiments (L. P. Crimak) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0n the matter of psychophysiologicslly providing for safety in space flights
of great duration (V. S. Hishchenko). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The effect of a sky-blue background on the operator's optic analyser (Ye. N.
Khludeyev). . . . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

BIBLIOGRAPHY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinoatroyeniye", 1981

9768

C30:

1866/155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

172
178
183
187

192

192
198
205

208
222
233
239
2&8

252
FOItoFFK1Al.USE(NVLY

LIFE SCIENCES

INVESTIGATION OF HUTAGENIC FACTORS 0F SPACE FLIGHT

Moscow HUTAGENEZ PR1 DEYSTVII FIZICHESKIKH PIIIOROV in Russian 1980 (signed to
press 10 Nov 80) pp 206-223

[Article by E. N. Vaulina from book "Hutsgenesis Induced by Physical Factors"
edited by Academician N. P. Dubinin, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1300 copies, 225 pages]

[Text] Development of rocket building and cosmonautics has caused a tremendous
upheaval, not only in a number of technological branches of science, but develop-
ment of many basic sciences, including biology. Space biology and such branches
thereof as space genetics, space radiobiology, space microbiology, etc., were
conceived and began to develop. In the 18 years (1960-1978) of development of
biological research aboard space vehicles, the tasks, objectives and directions
of the problem of "space biology" were completely formed, and determination was
made of the objects and methods used in such research.

Before we turn to further discussion of the problem, its inception and development,
we should define the concepts that we impart to the terminology used: "space,"
"space flight," "cosmic space" and "factors of space flights and planets.”

At the present time, the word “space" [cosmos] has two meanings: the broad one
referring to the universe considered as a single entity governed by common laws
that are studied by the discipline of "cosmology," and the second meaning, which
refers to everything beyond earth and its atmosphere (Frank-Kamenetskiy. 1976). In
the latter sense, the concept of "space" is set against the concept of "earth" and
it is used in such terms as ”space flight," "cosmic space," etc. He use these
terms in the same sense.

Then we must make a distinction between the concepts of "conditions of space flight,
space and planets" and "factors of space flight, space and planets." The former
refers to the living conditions of an organism and the latter to the parameters of
these conditions.

Beyond earth, the organism finds rather specific living conditions, and they are
different in different cases; for example, conditions during a space flight in a
near earth orbit, or flight to other worlds and conditions of planets in our
galaxy and their satellites. In virtually all cases, with the exception of planets
that have an atmosphere that is suitable for "terrestrial life," these conditions
will constitute artificial ecological systems that are closed to some extent or
other. And while these conditions on planets with an atmosphere that is compatible
with life may differ in composition of atmosphere and barometric pressure,

9

FOR 0F1ﬁ€1Al.USE1DNlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

level of gravity, magnetic field and radiation, and perhaps a number of other para-
meters. in artificial ecological life support systems the factor of limited space
is added to these differences. A number of the parameters of artificial ecological
systems can be regulated by man at will, for example, temperature. Others, however,
can be approximated to customary terrestrial features only relatively, either
because of the technical difficulties or virtual technical impossibility thereof.
The composition of the gas environment, asgnitude of gravity and magnetic fields,
radiation situation, etc., are such parameters. In terrestrial biology, both these
and a number of other features that determine the ecological system of the "globe,"
i.e., the "biosphere," are generally considered to be relatively stable and unchang-
ing. A quantitative and qualitative change in some factor is perceived as disrup-
tion of the normal course of biological processes. The results of these changes
are viewed as special cases of biological phenomena occurring under the influence
of some environmental factors or other. The. study of these phenomena often leads to
development of new directions in biology. For example, in genetics, the directions
of ”radiation genetics" and "chemical mutagenesis" appeared. The values of the
variables become the principal environmental factors during a space flight or in
space. For example. gravity and magnetic fields may change from zero to values that
exceed significantly those of the fields of earth, whereas in the spectrum of ioniz-
ing radiation there is appearance of high energy hadrons that have virtually no
effects on organism on earth. Thus, the biosphere of a space flight and space would
have qualitative and quantitative differences from the biosphere of earth. The
basic difference in a number of physical processes in the presence of altered
gravity or in absence thereof may affect physiological processes that determine the
function of organisms, and alter heat, mass and energy transfer. This would create
specific conditions and put a certain imprint on genetic processes that occur under
such conditions in terrestrial organisms. It should be stressed once more that the
most important element of these differences, in our opinion, would be the variable
nature of a number of factors that are perceived as constant in earth's biosphere.
The practice of cosmonautics and exploration of cosmic space raises, first of all,
the question of nature of processes of inheritance and behavior of genetic systems
during space flights and in space. We shall have to consider the genetic knowledge
accumulated on earth from a new vantage point to answer it.

At the present time, there are three distinct stages of development of biological
research in space: the first, up to 1960, to the first experiment aboard an
artificial earth satellite; the second. up to 1971, to development of the Salyut
orbital station; and the third, which is developing new and related to performing
research on orbital and planetary stations. He should note one aspect of develop-
ment of space genetics, its close relationship to technological progress. It was
generated by the latter, it appeared, is developing and will develop only as a
result of appearance, development and refinement of rocket technology and means of
interplanetary comunicat ion [or travel]. The stages of development of space biology
follow, to some extent, the stages of development of cosmonautics. and because of
the rather specific technical conditions and possibilities, each of them has differ-
ent goals and tasks. Thus, at the first stage of development of space genetics,
factors were discovered that affect organisms during space flights, and methodolo-
gical approaches were developed to simulate them and analyze the findings. The
second stage of development of research had the objective of genetic marking of

the routes of space flights and investigation of the effects of flights on genetic
structures. The third stage of research, which began in 1971, will permit analysis
of the mechanism of action of flight factors on biological systems, on the basis

of knowledge about environmental conditions of space flights and space, as well as

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The source of development of space genetics is closely linked with the source of
radiation genetics, which emerged in the first quarter of our century.

start of our century: discovery of ionizing radiation in cosmic space (Rossi, 1966)
and proof of the mutagenic activity of ionizing radiations (Nadson, Filippov, 1925;
Muller, 1926). However, at first cosmic rays drew the attention of researchers
only as a probable factor of evolution. Later on, in the 1960's, in connection
with the development of rocket building and appearance of the possibility for man
to penetrate into space, the question also arose as to the biological effects of
cosmic rays. The first genetic experiments conducted in 1935 in balloons yielded

a negative result (no differences were found between the control and experiment),
and for a long time there was no interest in this problem. In the early 1950's,
interest in the effects of cosmic radiation, particularly its heavy component,

on organisms was again revived abroad. The technical refinement of balloons [aero-
stats] and rockets, which made it possible to increase the altitude and duration

of exposure of biological objects in space, and development of high altitude avia-
tion served as an impetus for this interest. While cosmic radiation was the main
factor affecting biological objects in the experiments on balloons, a new group

of factors appeared in those on rockets: dynamic factors (due to the dynamics

of craft flight), the effects of which on biological objects could be considerable.
Although weightlessness was present in these experiments, it had not yet drawn

the serious attention of researchers. However, with the appearance of artificial

sphere) of the flying vehicle itself.

The first group of factors includes the high degree of rarefaction of the atmosphere,
ultraviolet and infrared rays, radiowave and microwave radiation, ionizing radiation
and others. of these factors, the ones of interest to biologists who conduct experi-

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

The second group of factors, determined by dynamics of flight, consists of so-called
dynamic flight factors, which include accelerations (linear, radial and angular),
vibration, noise and weightlessness.

The third group refers to factors that are related to being in a spacecraft: isola~
tion, artificial gas atmosphere, altered biological rhythm, artificial electro-
magnetic fields from instruments, etc.

Cosmic rays are a flux of high energy nuclei and secondary radiation that they form
in earth's atmosphere and in a spacecraft, which includes all elementary particles
known to date. Primary cosmic rays have greater penetrating capacity than all

forms of radiation known in laboratory experiments. At the present time, it is
generally believed that the flux of primary cosmic rays consists of about 852 protons,
13-142 a-particles and 1-21 particles with a charge of 3 or more. The probable dose
levels of ionizing radiation during long-term space flights are listed in Table 1.

Table l. Probable doses of ionizing radiation to crews during long-term space
flights (2 g/cu2 shield thickness) [9]

Irradiation conditions

 
 

  
  
  
  
  

Type of
ionizin; radiation

 
     
    
   
    
   
 
  

    
   
  

  
 

 

 
 
 

   
      

   

     

  

   
  

  

Galactic cosmic Chronic, isotropic 0.07-0.14 2.2-4.3 25-52.6

From solar bursts* Divided doses, 5-10 From 0 to . 3 , u
times/year, 80-15'103 80.15 10 800-15 10
unilateral -

From near-earth and Single dose (when

near-planet radiation flying through belts) 2-4 2-4 2-4

belts* bilateral

From radioactive sub- Chronic, nonuniform 0.00024 0.0072 0.086

stances contained in over body

materials of space- Chronic and recurrent From 0.07 82-150103 825-15°10‘

  
    

to

craft furnishings,
80-15-10’

cosmonauts and foods.
i.e., radiations that
are part of the
natural background on
earth*

*RBE was taken as l in the calculations.

 

 

The effects of dynamic flight factors (other than weightlessness) are related essen-
tially to the phases of ascent, descent and maneuvering the spacecraft. These fac-
tors can be simulated in the laboratory. Since their range is very wide in each
vehicle, it is difficult to reproduce it exactly in every given experiment. In

model experiments, one generally uses tape recordings of the modeled process (Shipley,
Maclay, 1965).

Noise and vibration are similar phenomena. Vibration refers to the mechanical
oscillations of different shaped resilient bodies. The frequency of vibrations
ranges from one to several thousand hertz and is characterized by the freauency,

12

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE20NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

amplitude and magnitude of accelerations. The noise is an acoustical, nonharmonic
sound characterized by a complex time structure and specific property of affecting
the organism. When the engines of the spacecraft are in operation, s noise of up
to 180 dB occurs. There is a wide range of sonic oscillations, from s few hertz to
20,000. Vibration to which the living organism is exposed is characterized by fre-
quency, amplitude and so-called vibroacceleration, i.e., change in velocity per
unit time (m/sz), or vibro-overload, expressed in units that are multiples of
free-fall acceleration c. During a space flight, the organism is exposed to vibra-
tions at frequencies of 2 to 15 as and vibroaccelerations of up to l G.

Acceleration (G force, overload, in aviation and space medicine) is the vector that
determines the rapidity of change in velocity according to magnitude and direction.
The magnitude of acceleration is proportionate to the force acting on a body and
inversely proportionate to its mass, while its direction coincides with the vector
of force. When a space vehicle takes off and when it is being maneuvered, so-cslled
long-acting acceleration appears. Its magnitude can reach 10 6. After ejection,
landing on earth and in emergency situations, "impact acceleration" occurs, which

is notable for its brief duration (less than 1 s) and high build-up rate (from
several hundred to several thousand G per second).

Weightlessness is a qualitatively new factor that is not present on earth and the
organism is exposed to it during a flight. Heightlessness is defined as a state of
a mechanical system, in which the external forces acting on the system do not elicit
reciprocal pressure of system particles upon one another. It is very difficult to
simulate weightlessness on earth. Heightlessness lasting 1-3 s can be obtained on
elevators, swings and "Roman tower" type devices. when aircraft fly over a para-
bolic curve a state of weightlessness lasts for up to 50 s. This is infinites1na1
for biological experiments. In a spacecraft circling around earth weightlessness
lasts for a long time. It is among the habitat features of the craft.

Thus, dynamic flight factors affect an organism in space flight: acceleration, vibra-
tion, noise and weightlessness, as well as space factors-radiowave and microwave radi
athxmandionizingrsdiation-«md factors referable to the internal environment of the
flight vehicle: isolation in a small space, artificial gas atmosphere, altered bio-
logical rhythm, artificial electromagnetic fields snd others.

An inactivating mutagenic or teratogenic action has been demonstrated in ground-
based experiments for each of these factors, perhaps with the exception of weight-
lessness and cosmic radiation. At the same time, the combination of these factors
in qualitatively and quantitatively different variants may have a different effect
on organisms. For example, it was demonstrated that exposure to vibration prior
to radiation enhances the radiation effect, whereas exposure to vibration after
radiation attenuates the latter (Vaulina, Kostina, 1973).

At the same time, it is virtually impossible to simulate in ground-based experiments
such factors as weightlessness and certain components of cosmic radiation (hadrons).
For this reason, one has to conduct experiments aboard space vehicles during orbital
flights in order to demonstrate the mutagenicity of flight factors.

We cannot fail to mention here the distinctions of biological experiments conducted
aboard a space vehicle, as compared to ordinary laboratory experiments on earth.
In addition to the above-listed complex set of factors, concomitant factors may
affect experimental objects, such as temperature, humidity and others. Experiments

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAl.USEZONL¥

almost always involve storage of material before and after exposure to the tested

factors. Storage time sometimes varies from several hours to several dozen days
in different experiments.

Extensive biomedical research is conducted regularly aboard artificial aircraft.
Monkeys, dogs, rats, mice, guinea pigs, amphibians, fish, cultures of cells from
different tissues of man, animals and plants, pieces of human and rabbit skin, pre-
parations of DNA and enzymes, Drosophila, Habrobracon, .' Tribolium, amoebae, bac-
teria, actinomycetes, yeast, chlorella, chlamydomonads, seeds of a number of higher
plants (peas, nlgella, corn, wheat,onion, 1ettuce,carrot, tomato, cucumber, barley,
Crepis, arabidopsis, pine, spindle-tree and others), pollen of higher plants and
vegetating plants (tradescantia, pepper, Chinese cabbage, pea, potato, onion) have
been flown aboard spacecraft. At the present time, the quantity of objects used in
genetic experiments on spacecraft has been reduced. Those were chosen, for which
methods of exposure and treatment have been developed, and for which life support
equipment and apparatus for experiments in weightlessness have been created. The
principal objects are microorganisms, lower plants (chlorella, chlamydomonad).

higher plants (Crepis, Arabidopsis, barley,lettuce,pea),insects (Drosophila,
Habrobracon, Tribolium), fish, mice and rats.

Experiments were performed aboard a number of manned and unmanned space vehicles
with various orbital parameters and different duration of flights, ranging from a
few hours to a few months (Table 2).

It should be noted here that biologists who experimented aboard spacecraft had to re-
solve a number of technical and methodological difficulties. One of the distinctions
of the experiments is the limited weight, dimension and power consumption of equip-

- ment, and participation of an experimenter. EVen the simplest steps, for example,
soaking seeds to allow them to sprout and fixing seedlings, or feeding animals and
watering plants, have to be performed by special equipment. Moreover, in weight-
lessness all liquid or loose substances used in the experiment or excreted by or-
ganisms have to be isolated from contact with the atmosphere of the spacecraft

cabin. For this reason, most objects must be kept in sealed instruments or con-
tainers, and they must often have their own life support system. And, while this
refers to packages and boxes for dry seeds, for the Drosophila we have to deal with
heat-controlled containers with nutrient medium and air exchange, and for mice a
complex system with delivery of feed and oxygen and removal of gaseous, solid and
liquid wastes. All such restrictions and distinctions referable to performing
experiments complicate them considerably and make it difficult to interpret the
obtained results.

The obtained experimental results are indicative of the direct and combined effects
of various flight factors.

The dynamic factors of lift-off and descent of the craft (a set that includes acce-
lerations, vibration and noise) are more or less similar in duration, magnitude and
quality of effect in different experiments, at least in experiments performed on

the same type of spacecraft. However, their effects in different experiments may

be altered due to a change in duration of the interval between lift-off and landing,
i.e., between the first and second exposure to the dynamic factors. Moreover, during
this period organisms are in dynamic weightlessness and may be exposed to cosmic
radiation, which makes its mark on the observed effects.

16

FORGMHHIJAI.USE(NQLY
INDR OFF1C1A1.USIE(MNLY

Table 2. Biological experiments during space flights

Number Exposure
of time,
vehicles da-s

    

  

Biological objects carried aboard
the spacecraft

    

Types of

s ace vehicles

   
    
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
   
  

Satellite spacecraft,
USSR
Vostok, USSR

Microorganisms, lower and higher plants,
insects, mice

Microorganisms, higher and lower plants,
insects

Plants

Lower and higher plants, insects

Higher and lover plants, insects, roe of
fish and amphibians

Microorganisms, higher and lower plants,
insects, fish roe, rats

Microorganisms, lower and higher plants,
insects, roe of fish and amphibians

Microorganisms, protozoans, higher
plants, insects

Lower and higher plants, human leukocytes

Microorganisms. crustaceans

Crustaceans, fish roe

Microorganisms, lower and higher plants,
fish roe

Voskhod, USSR
20nd, USSR
Soyuz, USSR

Cosmos, USSR

Salyut orbital
stations, USSR
Biosatellite, USA

Gemini, USA
Apollo, USA
Skylab, USA
Soyuz-Apollo,
USSR-USA

  

It has been demonstrated that the dynamic factors of lift-off and descent of the
spacecraft induce an increase in incidence of chromosomal aberrations (Arsen'yeva

et al., 1962; Demin, 1964; Vaulina, Kostina, 1973), incidence of embryonic lethals
and chlorophyll mutations in Arabidopsis seeds (Anilteyeva et al., 1978) and the
incidence of dominant lethals and crossing-over in the Drosophila (Parfenov, 1964,
1965); they inactivate respiratory enzymes in cells (Imshenetskiy et al., 1976).
Vibration lowers mitotic activity of bone marrow cells in mice, it causes adhesion
of chromosomes (Arsen'yeva et al., 1961, 1965) and alters substantially the state
of the nervous and hemopoietic systems ("Man in Space," 1974; Antipov, L'vova, 1978).
Several studies revealed that vibration can alter appreciably the organism's reac-

tion to radiation. The direction and degree of changes depend on time and order of
exposure to the factors (Vaulina, Kostina, 1973).

For researchers, the most interesting dynamic flight factor is weightlessness. This
is the factor whose contribution to the effect has still not been sufficiently
studied, since it is virtually impossible to conduct model experiments that would
preclude other factors. Consequently, the conclusions concerning the effects of
weightlessness on biological objects are made on the basis of flight experiments,
which include a set of factors that affect the organism.

It has been found that weight may have both a direct and indirect mutagenic effect.
The direct effect of weightlessness on chromosomes was first demonstrated by N. L.
Delone in Tradescantia microspores (Antipov et al., 1965; Delone et al., 1966, 1968).

Several experiments, conducted with the help of cosmonauts P. R. Popovich, V. F.
Bykovskiy and B. B. Yegorov, involved fixing of Tradescantia buds at different

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY

stages of exposure to weightlessncss. About 31 anomalous mitoses were demonstrated,
which had not been observed in the control. These disturbances consisted of change
in orientation of chromosomes (type III aberrations), retardation of unseparated
chromosomes (type IV), multipolar mitoses (type V) and nonseparation of chromosome
set (types I and II) (Figure l). The authors succeeded in demonstrating unequivo-
cally that this effect is a function of duration of weightlessness (Figure 2). Ana-
logous mitotic disturbances were demonstrated by American researchers in microspores,
megaspores and root tip meristematic cells of Tradescantia (Sparrow et al.. 1968,

1971).

- Telophae nugrate

po en

 

Figure l. Anomalous mitoses observed in Tradescantia microspore cells
(Antipov et al., 1965). Explained in the text

 

a: " y: 1:0 It;
Time in weightlessness, hours

Figure 2. Incidence of mitotic disturbances (X) in Tradescantia microspores
as a function of time of cell development in weightlessness
(Antipov et a1., 1965). 2--Totalnumber of mitotic disturbances;
I-lV—-dlfferent types of disturbances

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F‘WC1AL.USE1NVLY

Heightlessness makes its contribution to the other effects elicited by flight fac-
tors, but it is an indirect effect on genetic structures.

At present, numerous studies have established that weightlessness has an adverse
effect on the functions of a multicellular organism. changes are observed in the
sensorimotor system, skeletomuscular, cardiovascular and endocrine systems, and
fluid-electrolyte balance (Pestov, Geratevol', 1975). It was demonstrated that
metabolism of unicellular organisms also changes in weightlessness. However, the
effect may be dual here, both positive and negative, depending on the prior state
of the culture: growth of a culture in a good state is enhanced and that of a cul-
ture in a poor state is depressed (Kordyum et al., 1976) by weightlessness.

Perhaps such differences in function of macroorganisms and microorganisms in weight-
lessness can be attributed to the difference in attitude of these groups of organisms
to the gravity field. V. I. Vernadskiy wrote (1940): "In essence one can and must
assume that life is manifested in two physically different spaces. On the one hand,
it is manifested in the field of gravity, in which we live and which is the most
ordinary for us. But this gravity field, where the entire set-up of phenomena

is determined by gravity, does not cover all aspects of life. The minutest organ-
isms reach a size close to that of molecules, though the order of magnitude is
different. These organisms, which are smaller in diameter than one hundred
thousandth of a centimeter, come into the field of molecular forces, and their

life and phenomena related to it are determined not only by universal gravity, but
the radiations that surround us everywhere, which could extinguish for such organ-
isms the living condiitons created by gravity" (p 141).

However, altering the functions of organisms in some way or other, weightlessness
elicits more complex genetic changes.

Evidently, the postflight increase in phage-producing activity of a lysogenic cul-
ture of B.coliKr121, which is correlated with duration of flight, constitutes such
an indirect effect of weightlessness (Zhukov-Verezhnikov et al., 1965, 1966). In
these experiments, induction was considerably higher than the level that could have
been induced by the dose of ionizing radiation observed during the flight, while
vibration per se neither induced phage production nor influenced phage production
elicited by ionizing radiation (Figure 3). This could also explain the decrease in
postflight survival of an inactive chlorella culture, which was related to flight
duration (Figure 6) (Vaulina et al., 1967, 1971; Shevchenko et al., 1967; Vaulina

et al., 1968, 1971; Anikeyeva, Vaulina, 1971; Dubinin et al., 1973). Several studies
have demonstrated the effect of weightlessness on some physiological and morphologi-
cal parameters of chlorella (Semenenko, Vladimirova, 1961; Kordyum et al., 1974;
Kordium et al., 1976).

On the other hand, it should be borne in mind that the causes of spontaneous muta-
tions are referable to the natural environmental conditions and metabolic distinc-
tions. As we have already noted, the absence of gravity and weightlessness in
flight alter significantly the environmental conditions of organisms and alter their
metabolism. This cannot fail to affect the level of spontaneous mutations: after
the change in metabolism there is also a change in level of spontaneous mutations.
Thus, there was a 1.5-4-fold increase in incidence of chromosomal aberrations in

dry Crepis capillaris seeds during space flights, as compared to the ground-based
control (Table 3), and it did not demonstrate a clearcut relationship to flight
duration. The incidence of aberrations in C. capillaris seedlings in weightlessaess

17

FKHICNHHCIAL USEICNULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was 2-7 times higher than the spontaneous rate on earth, and it was also unrelated
to flight duration (Table to.

 

st ‘ . t
‘t
3 /
Time in flight. hours Plight duration. days
Figure 3. figure lo.
Degree of induction of E. coli K420) as Survival rate of chlorella (I) as a
a function of space flight duration function of flight duration

(Zhukov-Verezhnikov et al., 1965, 1966)

Table 3. Modification by extreme factors of the effect of exposing air-dried
Crepis capillaris seeds to y—radiation

 
 

  
    
  
 
 

 
  

Spacecraft I-rad. be- -rad. af-
ore other er other
factors factors

0.!"
Soyuz-19 l.l9 050°”
Salyut-S 0.11‘ 0,13
Soyuz-9 . m w'
I 0 [.24 IJO‘ 0.5"
COG-08482 g 0.3 II IJI I390 om-
; l 1.12 ”5‘ o.”-
Salyut-S 19 0M IJO'“ 0,130"
Salyut-S so l,” 1,00 I.”
Cosmos-613 so I." 1.32m 0.71“.
Salyut 'n I. 16 mam mu
Salyut-4 92 3. 82‘" 0.69'” I31'
Salyut-S 249 MP 0.“ 053°“
Vibration + 9 min 6.13 1.02 0.62
accelerations
' x - 1.96 - 96$.
0. ‘ a 2.3. . m
0“ u - 3.29 - 99.9”.

____________________._———

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 4. Incidence of chromosomal aberrations in c. capillaris seedlings that
developed in weightlessness after air-dried seeds were in weightlessness
for different periods of time

—Incidence of

     
 

 

Variant c
edabstrafggas,
~s1_._
Ground-based control 26 use 03130.01
Seeds in flight for 21 038 [9 03410.]?
20 days
Seeds in flight for [6 2m 13 Ht 1 n
229 days L l o'.‘
‘rconi
“P<0.00l.

 

This lack of relationship of the effect to duration of weightlessness indicates that
the latter has an indirect effect (through change in metabolism) on the process of
occurrence and expression of mutations. This is also indicated by the modifying pro-
perties of weightlessness. After exposing seeds to weightlessness, changes were
found in the cells that affect processes of expression of mutations and sensitivity
of chromosomes to mutagenic factors. Thus, after the flight aboard the satellite,
sensitivity of C. capillaris seeds to ethylenimine was increased by over 2 times
(Dubinina, Chernicova, 1968; Dubinina, Chernikova, 1970). An analogous result was
obtained with barley seeds (Carina, Romanova, 1970, 1971). Many researchers have
demonstrated enhancement of the effect of preflight exposure of seeds to radiation
(Nuzhdin, Dozortseva, 1967; Father et al., 1971; Dubinin et al., 1973). Since vibra-
tion does not enhance the effect of prior irradiation of seeds (Vaulina, Kostina,
1973) and the radiation dose observed during the flights was low, the effect is
related to weightlessness (Vaulina, 1976).

Experiments involving exposure of objects to different doses of y-rays in weightless-
ness revealed that both synergistic and antagonistic effects can be observed in the
interaction between flight factors and radiation. Tradescantia irradiated in weight-
lessness showed an increase in quantity of abortive pollen, as well as incidence of
micronuclei in pollen and number of staminal pili with arrested growth (Sparrow et
al., 1968, 1971). In this case, the Tribolium demonstrated an increase in number of
specimens with wing abnormalities and incidence of dominant lethals in females. The
author believes that this occurs due to less efficient function of repair systems in
weightlessness (von Borstell et al., 1971). In the Drosophila, there is an increase
in number of specimens with deformed thorax and wing anomalies, incidence of chromo-
somal breaks and translocations between the 2d, 3d and 6th chromosomes and in number
of sex-linked recessive lethal mutations (Oster, 1971). The author believes that
enhancement of the mutagenic effect of ionizing radiation in space could be attri-
butable to the modifying effect of weightlessness, which apparently makes it diffi-
cult for chromosomal breaks induced by radiation to be repaired. In favor of this
hypothesis is the significant number of chromosomal translocations in spermatogonia
of the Drosophila, which are extremely rare on earth. Vibration lowered the radiation-
induced incidence of translocations in the Drosophila (Browning, 1971).

19

FORtOFﬂKJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY

However, a different effect was also observed in organisms irradiated in space. For
example, in the Drosophila there was less loss of y-chromosome markers, as compared
to Drosophila irradiated on earth (Reynolds. Saunders, 1971). It was demonstrated
that in neurospores there was a lower incidence of mutations in the flight variant
than ground-based control, due to reduction in number of spot mutations, whereas

the incidence of deletions did not change (de Serres, Webber, 1971).

Among the factors of the inside environment of a flight vehicle, the following may
be of interest: the artificial gas atmosphere and its different components, electro-
magnetic fields from instruments.

This is the least studied group of factors. It is assumed, on the basis of some
ground-based experiments, that they may have an influence on genetic structures of
organisms, but no studies have been made specifically to determine the mutagenicity
of the craft's environment or its components. Experimenters have tried to rule out
the effects of these factors with various technical procedures-heat control, seal-
ing and use of protective containers. However, this has not always been successful.

During a long-term space flight, the dose absorbed by living objects in a spacecraft
consists of galactic cosmic radiation, radiation from solar flares, earth's radia-
tion belts, radiation from various instruments and equipment aboard the craft and
secondary radiation occurring when heavy charged particles in the shell of the

craft and other equipment are stopped.

The biological effects of light high-energy nuclei are virtually the same as of such
forms of radiation as, for example, gamma rays and x-rays, whose effects have been
well-studied in radiation biology. The biological effects of heavy nuclei have not
been sufficiently investigated, since it is difficult to simulate them in experi-
ments on earth.

In spite of this, a number of distinctions have been demonstrated with respect to

the action of heavy ions. It was shown on mammalian cells that the effectiveness

of each accelerated ion may be about 1000 times greater than the effectiveness of

its low-density ionizing analogue with low LET. The relative biological effective-
ness of protons with energy of 660 Hev, estimated from the incidence of chromosomal
aberrations in the root meristem of seedlings, was found to be 1 to 5.5 for different
plants (Grigor'yev, Tobias, 1975). Reavy ions induced a large area of damage (groups
of cells) as a result of the action of one particle (Leith et al., 1971). It was
noted that there was nonuniform distribution of absorbed energy due to generation

of secondary particles. This can be seen from the significant scatter of different
experimental values of R83 (Akoev et al., 1971). Prolonged retention of the

effects of exposure to heavy ions was observed. Thus, the high incidence of chromo-
somal aberrations in mammalian liver cells persisted for several months after ex-
posure to carbon ions (Grigoriev et al., 1973). The same was observed in plants
(Heinze et al., 1972; Todd et al., 1973). The survival curves for cells and tissues
exposed to heavy ions show multiple hits (Grigor'yev, Tobias, 1975). It was noted
that damage was not repaired in the postradistion period. This was indicated by

the additivity of delivery of divided doses of heavy ions ("Problems of Radiobiology,"
1971). The usual sulfhydryl radioprotective agents were not effective against heavy
ions (Grigor'yev, TobiaS, 1975).

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5. Examples of Crepis capillaris rootlets containing cells with multiple
chromosomal aberrations

..__._ -—_—_.__ ..

 

  
 

Number of cells with

 
   
 
  

 
  

   

Spa::§raft liesighgdp2¥n€3l1°f
durationof
flight 5

 
 

Plight

- 3 l l 0 0
-8 Y radiation, I2
2k”“d 3 krad
(6 days)
Y-radiation s: 21 52 l) I o o o
, and flight
Soyuz-9 Plight no u so 5 o I o u
(18 days) Y-radiation, 3‘ Is 53 l 7 I o n
3 krad
Y-radiation S1 12 126 20 I 6 2 2
and flight
Salyut orbi- Flight 56 a - I 2 I o o n
tal station y-radiation, 22 30 '36 2 l ‘ I 0
(72 days) 3 krad
Y-radiation $9 MD 185 I) ll 9 1 4
and flight

Note: There were rootlets without aberrant cells in each group.

 

Studies of the biological effects of heavy ions in space are difficult to pursue,
first, because of the difficulty of separating the effects of this factor from those
of many others, to which the organism is exposed during a space flight, and second,
because of the significant rarity of these particles (Table 1). However, various
methodological devices, for example, experiments with a photographic emulsion
control of particle hits, yielded results that are not in contradiction to the
conclusions made in ground-based experiments.

The capacity of heavy ions to inactivate cells, increase the incidence of spot
mutations and chromosomal aberrations is referred to the action of cosmic radiation
(Akoyev, Yurov, 1975). However, these effects were unrelated to either duration

of flight or dosage of recorded radiation (clembotskiy, 1970; von Borstel et a1.,
1968).

Experiments demonstrated mosaicism of the effects observed after space flights,
which consisted of the fact that, in the presence of very mild damage to objects
in a given variant, there was significant damage to individual specimens or groups
of specimens (Table 5) (Khvostova et a1., 1963; Vaulina, 1976).

Multiple lesions were demonstrated in the chromosomal system of cells, and it was
shown that the number thereof is related to duration of flight (Figure 5) (Vaulina,
1976). Model experiments and flight tests with a photoemulsion control confirmed
the assumption that multiple damage to cell chromosomes is induced by heavy ions
(Akoyev, Yurov, 1975).

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICNHﬂC1AL.USEtﬂNLY

Aberrations, X

 

Space flight duration, days

Figure 5. Incidence of cells with single (a) and multiple (b) aberrations as
a function of space flight duration

1) control, seeds exposed to 3 krad gamma rays
2) experiment, seeds exposed to space flight and preflight gamma radiation in
a dosage of 3 krad

We have already mentioned that cosmic radiation has an effect in conjunction with
a number of other flight factors and modifies their effects, or else its effects
will be modified by those of other factors. The influence of flight factors on an
organism would lead to a complex combination of effects in the same or different
directions, and it would result in an effect that would be impossible to attribute
to any single factor, even such a potent one as ionizing radiation.

Research on mutagenicity of flight factors is in its most active phase. Development
of orbital stations and long-term operation thereof will enable biologists to in-
crease the scope and duration of in-flight experiments, and this in turn will augment
the informativeness of the obtained results. All this leads us to expect consider-
able progress in such research in the very near future.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Akoyev, I. c. and Yurov, S. 8., "Molecular Bases of the Effects of High-Energy
Hadrons and Results of Biological Research in Space." IZV. AN SSSR. SERIA BIOL.,
Vol 1, 1975, pp 11-26.

2. Anikeyeva, I. D. and Vaulina, B. N., "Effects of Space Flight Factors Aboard
the Soyuz-5 Satellite on Chlorella Cells,” KOSHICH. ISSLED., Vol 9, 6, 1971,
pp 946-948.

3. Anikeyeva, I. D., Kostina, L. N. and Vaulina, E. N., "The Modifying Effect of
Space Flight Factors on the Radiation Effect of Additional Gamma Irradiation

of Air-Dried Seeds of Arabidopsis Thaliana (L.) Heynch," in "Problemy kosmicheskoy
biofiziki" [Problems of Space Biophysics], Pushchino, 1978, pp 98-108.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

150

16.

17.

FOR‘OFIICIAI.IEIE(NHLY

Antipov, V. V., Delone, N. L., Parfenov, G. P. and Vysotskiy, V. 6., "Results

of Biological Experiments Perforned During Vostok Flights With the Participation
of Cosmonauta A. G. Nikolayev, P. R. Popovich and V. F. Bykovakiy," in "Probleny
kosnicheskoy biologii" [Problems of Space Biology], Moscow, Nauka, Vol 6, 1965,
pp 248-260.

Antipov, V. V. and L'vova, I. 8., "Combined Effect of Vibration and Ionizing
Radiation on the Organism,” in "Kosnicheakaya biologiya i avia-koalicheskaya
neditsina" [Space Biology and Aerospace Medicine], Moscow, Meditsina, Vol 12,
1978, pp 68-56.

Arsen'yeva, M. A., Antipov, V. V.; Petrukhin, V. 6., L'vova, I. 8., Orlova, N.M.
and Il'ina, S. 8., "Changes in Mouse Menopoietic Organs Under the Influence of
Flight Aboard Satellite Spacecraft," in "Iskuastvennyye sputniki Zenli"
[Artificial Earth Satellites], Moscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR, Vyp 10, 1961, pp 82-92.

Idea, "Changes in Mammalian Hemopoietic Organs Under the Influence of Flight
Aboard the Second Satellite," in "Probl. koanich. biol." [Problels of Space
Biology), Moscow, Nauka, Vol 1, 1962, pp 205-218.

Arsen'yeva. M. A., Belyayeva, L. A. and Golovkina, A. V., ”Combined Effect of
Accelerations, Vibration and Radiation on Cell Nuclei of Mouse Bone Marrow,"
in "Probleny kosnicheskoy biologii," Moscow, Nauka, Vol 5, 1965, pp 373-390.

Grigor'yev, Yu. 0., editor, "Biological Effects of High-Energy Protons," Moscow,
Atonizdat, 1967.

Vaulina, B. N., Anikeyeva, I. 0., Gubareva, I. G. and Shtraukh, G. A., "Effects
of Space Flight Factors Aboard Unmanned Zond Stations on Survival and Mutability
of Chlorella Cells," KOSMICH. ISSLED., Vol 9, No 6, 1971, pp 9A6-956.

Vaulina, E. N., Anikeyeva, I. D. and Parfenov, G. P., "chlorella Aboard
Cosmos-110," Ibid, Vol 5, No 2, 1967, pp 285-292.

Vaulina, E. 8., "Effect of Veightlessness on Genetic Structures," in "Probleay
kosmicheslwy biologii," Moscow, Nauka, Vol 33, 1976, pp 179-198.

Vernadskiy, V. I., "Biogeochelical Essays," Moacow-Leningrad, Izd-vo AN SSSR,
1940.

Gol'dberg, Ye. D. and Grigor'yev, Yu. G. editors, "Problels of Radiobiology and
Biological Effects of Cytostatic Agents," Toast, Vol 3, 1971.

Carina, K. P. and Romanov, N. I., "Effects of Space Flight Factors on Barley
Seeds," KOSMICM. ISSLED., Vol 8, No 1, 1970, pp 158—159.

Iden, "Effects of Space Flight Factors and Ethyleninine on Barley Seeds," Ibid,
Vol 9, No 1, 1971, pp 969-952.

Glenbotskiy, Ya. 1., "Genetic Research in Space,” Ibid, Vol 8, No 4, 1970,
pp 616-627.

23

FOI.OFFK]A1.US£(NVLY
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

21..

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Grigor'yev, Yu. G. and Nevzgodina, 1.. V., "Effects of Heavy Ions of Galactic
Radiation on Chromosomal Aberrations in Lettuce," in "Uspekhi kosmicbeakoy
biofiziki" [Advances in Space Biophysics], Pushchino, 1978, pp 52-58.

Grigor'yev, Yu. G. and Tobias, C.A., "Ionizing Radiation," in "Osnovy
kosmicheskoy biologii i meditsiny" [Fundamentals of Space Biology and Medicine],
Moscow, Nauka, Vol 2, Bk 2, 1975, pp 78-136.

Delone, N. L., Yegorov, B. B. and Antipov, V. V., "Sensitivity of Mitotic
Phases of Tradescantia Paludosa Microspores to Space Flight Factors Aboard
the Voskhod Satellite," DAN SSSR, Vol 166, No 3, 1966, pp 713-715.

Delone, N. I... Popovich, P. 3., Antipov, v. v. and Vysotskiy, v. 0.. "Effects
of Space Flight Factors Aboard Vostok-3 and Vostok-lo Satellites on Tradescantia
Microspores," KOSMICH. ISSLED. Vol 1, No 2, 1963, pp 312-325.

Delone, N. I... Trusova, A. 8., Morozova, Ye. M., Antipov, V. V. and Parfenov,
G. P., "Effects of Space Flight Aboard Cosmos-110 Satellite on Microspores of
Tradescantia Paludosa," Ibid, Vol 6. No 2, 1968, pp 299-303.

Demin, Yu. S., "Combined Effect of bow-Frequency Vibration and X-Rsys on
Mamalian Bone Marrow Cells," Ibid, Vol 2, No 6, 1964, pp 939-9105.

Dubinina, L. G. and Chemikova, O. P., "Effects of Space Factors on Crepis
Capillaris Seeds," Ibid, Vol 8, No 1, 1970, pp 156-158.

Zhukov-Verezhnikov, N. N., Mayskiy, I. N., Tribulev, G. P., Rybakov, N. I.,
Podoplelov, I. 1., Dobrov, N. N., Antipov, V. V., Kozlov, V. A., Saksonov, P. P.,
Parfenov, G.P. and Sharyy, A. 1., "Some Results and Prospects of Research on

the Biological Effects of Cosmic Radiation and Dynamic Flight Factors Using
Microbiological and Cytological Models," in "Problemy kosmicheskoy neditsiny"
[Problems of Space Medicine], Moscow, Nauka, 1966, pp 172-173.

Zhukov-Verezhnikov, N. 1., Rybakov, N. 1., Kozlov, V. A., Saksonov, P. P.,
Dobrov, N. N., Antipov, V. V., Podoplelov, I. I. and Parfenov, G. P., "Results
of Microbiological and Cytological Studies Aboard Vostok Spacecraft,” in
"Problemy kosmicheskoy biologii," Moscow, Nauka, Vol 4, 1965, pp 261-269.

Imshenetskiy, A. A., Lysenko, S. V. and Moskvitin, E. V., "Effects of Dynamic
Space Flight Factors on Survival of Microorganisms and Their Ferroporphyrin
Enzymes," MIKROBIOLOGIYA, Vol (.3, No 6, 1974, pp 735-737.

Kordyum, V.-A., Polivoda, 1.. V., Man'ko, V. 6., Mashinskiy, A. L., Nechitaylo,
G. S. and Kon'shin, N. I., "Study of Distinctions of Chlorella Lag Phases Under
Extreme Conditions," in ”Materialy 8-go Vsesoyuz. soveahch. po voprosu
krugovorota veshchestv v zamknutoy systeme na osnove zhiznedeyatel'nosti
nizshikh organizmov" [Proceedings of 8th All-Union Conference on the Cycle of
Substances in a Closed System Based on Vital Functions of Lower Organisms],
Kiev, Naukova dumka, 1974, pp 175-180.

Kordyun, V. A., Polivoda, L. V., Mashinskiy, A. I... Man'ko, V. 6., Nechitaylo,

G. S., Kon'shin, N. I. and Gavrish, T. 6., "Effects of Space Flight Conditions

on the Set of Parameters of Growing Microorganism Culture," in "Bksperimental'nyye
issledovaniya p0 kosmicheskoy biofizike" [Experimental Research in Space 810-
physics], Pushchino, 1976, pp 108-119.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

62.

43.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kordyum, V. A., Polivoda, L. V. and Mashinskiy, A. L., "Effects of Space Flight

Conditions on Microorganisms," in "Problemy kosmicheskoy biologii," Moscow,
Nauka, V01 33, 1976, pp 238-260.

Nadson, c. A. and Filippov, c. s., vnsrn. RENTGENOL. 1 RADIOL., Vol 3, 1925,
p 305.

Nuzhdin, N. I. and Dozortseva, R. 1., "Combined Effect of Gamma Radiation and
Space Flight Factors on Barley Seeds in Different Physiological States," in
"Eksperimental'nyye raboty po vliyaniyu ioniriruyushchikh izlucheniy na
organizm" [Experimental Studies of the Effect of Ionizing Radiation on the
Organism], Moscow, Nauka, 1967, pp 3-29.

Parfenov, c. P., "Occurrence of Crossing-Over in Male Drosophila Under the
Influence of Vibration, Accelerations and Gamma Radiation," KOSMICH. ISSLED.,
Vol 2, No A, 1966, pp 668-657.

Idem, "Occurrence of Dominant Lethals in Drosophila Under the Influence of
Vibration, Accelerations and Gamma Radiation," Ibid, Vol 3, No 4, 1965,
pp 653-651.

Pestov, I. D. and Geratevol', z. Dzh., "Heightlesaness," in "Osnovy kosmicheskoy
biologii i meditsiny," Moscow, Nauka, Vol 2, Bk 1, 1975, pp 324-370.

Rossi, 3., "Cosmic Rays," Moscow, Atomizdat, 1966, 236 pp.

Semenenko, V. Ye. and Vladimirova, M. 6., "Effects of Space Flight Factors
Aboard Satellites on Viability of chiuxella Cultures," FIZIOL. RAST., V01 8,
No 6, 1961, pp 763-765.

Farber, Yu. V., Nevzgodina, L. V., Pap'yan, N. M. and Soboleva, T. N., "Effects
of Flight Factors on Dormant Lettuce Seeds," KOSMICH. BIOL. I MED., Vol 5, No 6,
1971, pp 24-31.

Frank-Kamenetskiy, D. A., "Hhat is Space?" in "Fizika kosmosa" [Physics of
Space], Moscow, Sovetskaya entsiklopediya, 1976, pp 12-16.

Khvostova, V. V., Gostimskiy, S. A., Mozhayeva, V. S. and Nevzgodina, L. V.,
"Continued Studies of the Effects of Space Flight Factors on Chromosomes of
Primary Embryonic Rootlets in Pea and Wheat Seeds," KOSMICH. ISSLED., Vol 1,
No 1, 1963, pp 186-191.

Gazenko, 0. c. and Byurstedt, Kh., editors, ”Man in Space," Moscow, Nauka,
1974, 439 pp.

Shevchenko, V. A., Sakovich, I. S., Meshcheryakova, L. K. and Petrovnin, M. T.,
"Studies of Vital Functions of Chlorella During Space Flight," KOSMICH. BIOL. I
MED., Vol 1, No 3, 1967, pp 25-28.

Akoev, I. 6., Fomenko, B. 8., Leontyeva, G. A., Achmediyeva, A. H., Livanova,
I. A., Lebedev, V. N., Lukanin, V. s. and Jurov, S. 8., "Determination of
Biological Effectiveness of Secondary Radiation with 70-GeV Protons," in
"Intern. Congr. on Protection Against Accelerator and Space Radiation," Geneva,
can“. 1971, pp 122-127. 25
64.

45.

66.

47.

68.

09.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Von Borstel, R. C., Smith, R. H., Crosch, D. S., whiting, A. R., Amy, R. L.,
Baird, H. 8., Buchanan, P. D., Cain, K. T., Carpenter, R. A., Clark, A. H.,
Hoffman, A. C., Yones, H. s., Rondo, 5., Lame, H. Y., Hazianty, T. Y., Pardue,
H. L., Reel, Y. N., Smith, D. 3., Steen, Y. A., Tindall, Y. T. and Valcovic,
L. R., "Mutational Response of Habrobracon1nthe Biosatellite II Experiment,"
BIOSCIENCE, Vol 18, 1968, pp 598-601.

Von Borstel, R. c., Smith, R. s., Hhith, A. n. and Grosch, o. s., "Mutational
and Physiologic Responses of Habrobracon in Biosatellite II," in "The Experiments
of Biosatellite II," NASA, Nashington D. C., 1971, p 17.

Browning, L. 5., "Genetic Effects of the Space Environment on the Reproductive
Cells of Drosophila," Ibid, pp 55-78.

Dubinin, N. P., Vaulina, E. N., Kosikov, K. V., Anikeeva, I. D., Hoskvitin,

E. V., Zapadnaya, A. A., Kostina, L. N., Shtrauh, G. A., Kryzhanovskaya, L. H.,
Gubarcva, I. C., Nechitailo, c. S. and Hashinsky, A. L., "Effects of Space
Flight Factors on the Heredity of Higher and Lower Plants," in "Life Sciences
and Space Research," XI. 3, Akad. Ver1., 1973, pp 105-110.

Dubinina, L. G. and Chernikova, O. P., "Space Effects in Crepis Capillaris
Seeds," JAP. J. GEN., Vol A3, No 6, 1968, p A70.

Grigoriev, J. C., Ryzhov, N. J., Krasavin, E. A., Vorontsova, S. H., Koscheeva,
L. A., Savchenko, N. J., Fedorenko, B. s., Chlaponina, V. P., Popov, V. I. and
Kudryashov, E. 1., "Radiobiological Effects of Heavy Ions on Mammalian Cells
and Bacteria," in "Life Sciences and Space Research," XI. 3, Akad. Ver1., 1973.
pp 247-259.

Heinze, w. J., Craise, L. and Tobias, c. A., "Preliminary~ﬁesu1ts of a Sel'ction
Experiment to Decrease Radiosensitivity of the Floor Beetle, Tribolium Confusum,"
in "Progress Report in Space Radiobiology," LBL-S96, Lawrence Berkeley Lab.,
1972, pp 63-69.

Kordium, V. A., Polivoda, L. 3., Hashinsky, A. L., Hanko, V. C., Nechitailo,
c. s., Zuzanov, D. V. and Konshin, N. 1., "Effects of Space Flight Factors on
Complex of Microorganisms," in "Life Sciences and Space Research," XIV, 8,
“ad. vet-1., 1976, Pp 32-35.

Leith, I. T., Schilling, N. A. and Helch, G. P., "Effects of Accelerated
Nitrogen Ions on the Hair of Mice," in "Initial Radiobiological Experiments
With Accelerated Nitrogen Ions at the Bevation [sic]," LIL-529, Lawrence
Berkeley Lab., 1971, pp 121-131.

Muller, H. J., "Induced Crossing-Over Variation in the x-Chromosome of
Drosophila," AMER. NATUR., Vol 60, 1926, pp 192-195.

Oster, I. 1., "Genetic Implications of Spaceflight," in "The Experiments of
Biosatellite II,” NASA, Washington DC, 1971, pp 61-56.

Reynolds, 0. E. and Saunders, J. F., "The Scientific Conclusions of Biosatellite
II," Ibid, pp 347-352.

26

FOR OFFKJAI.USEZONL¥
56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

03.

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

DeSerres, E. J. and Hebber, B. 5., "Hutagenic Effectiveness of Known Doses of
Radiation in Combination With Zero Gravity on Neurospora Crassa," Ibid,
pp 325-332.

Shipley, H. S. and Maclay, I. 8., "Mariner-4 Environmental Testing," ASTRDNAUT.
AND AERONAUT., V01 3, 1965, pp 42-48.

Sparrow, A. 3., Shairer, L. A. and Harinuthu, K. H., "Genetic and Cytological
Studies of Tradescantia Irradiated During Orbital Plight," JAP. J. GENET.,
Vol 43, No 6, 1968, p 470.

Idem, "Radiobiologic Studies of Tradescantia Plants Orbited in Biosatellite II,"
NASA, washington D. c., 1971, pp 99-122.

Todd, P. H., Schroy, C. 3., Schilnerling, H. and Vosburgh, K. 6., "Cellular
Effects of Heavy Charged Particles," in "Life Sciences and Space Research,"
XI, 8, Akad. Ver1., 1973, pp 261-270.

Vaulina, E. N. and Anikeeva, I. D., "Space Effects in Chlorella," JAP. J. GENBT.,
V01 43, 60, 1968, pp 469-471.

Vaulina, B. N., Anikeeva, I. D., Gubareva, I. G. and Shtrauch, G. A.,
"Survival and Mutability of Chlorella Aboard the 20nd Vehicles," in "Life
Sciences and Space Research," 1x, B, Akad. Verl., 1971, pp 105-110.

Vaulina, E. H. and Kostina, L. N., "Modifying Effect of Dynamic Space Flight
Factors on Radiation Damage of Air-Dry Seeds of Crspia Capillaris (1) Hallr.,"
Ibid, x111, 3., 1973, pp 167-172.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1980

10,657

080:

1866/999

27

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

UDC: 613.693:577.462

PROBLEMS OF SPACE BIOLOGY, VOLUME 42: SANITARY-HYGIENIC AND PHYSIOLOGICAL
ASPECTS OF HANNED SPACBCRAFT

Moscow PROBLEHY KOSHICHBSKOY BIOLOGII, TOM 42: SANITARNO-GIGIYENICHESKIYE I
FIZIOLOGICHESKIYE ASPEKTY OBITAYEHYKH KOSHICHESKIKR KORABLEY in Russian 1980
(signed to press'a Sep 80) pp 4-10, 265-267

[Annotation, foreword (by Yu. G. Nefedov and S. N. Zaloguyev), abstracts and
table of contents from book "Problems of Space Biology. Volume 42: Sanitary-
ﬂygienic and Physiological Aspects of Manned Spacecraft", edited by Yu. G.
Nefedov (editor-in-chief of this volume), Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1150 copies,
268 pages]

[Text] One of the main prerequisites for the successful accomplishment of space
missions is to create beneficial living conditions in the cabin of a manned

space vehicle. This monograph submits a toxicological evaluation of the main
sources of pollution of the air environment by impurities and patterns of
formation of its aeroion composition, with descriptions of the main changes in
man's functional state, discussion of the main microbiological and epidemiological
aspects of habitability of pressurized cabins, physiological and hygienic bases
for the diet of spacecraft crews.

This monograph is intended for specialists in the field of space biology and.
medicine.

Foreword

The problem of habitability of manned spacecraft and orbital stations, which refers
to the provisions for life and professional work of cosmonauts, consists of a

set of physiological and psychological questions, as well as a rather extensive

set of sanitary and hygienic conditions to be formed in the pressurized cabin

of a space vehicle. The many directions inherent in the issues that make up

this problem, many of which have not been resolved, even for man's ordinary
living.conditions, make it impossible to describe in a single book the entire
problem of habitability of spacecraft as a whole.

In this monOgraph, attention is focused mainly on the current status and pros-
pects of solving some of the sanitary-hygienic and physiological aspects of the
problem of habitability of manned space vehicles. The choice of this topic is
considered warranted, in view of the fact that these issues are relevant to a
spacecraft. orbital station or any confined place, regardless of its purpose.

28

FOO‘OFFKJAI.USE¢MVLY
INJR10F1WCLAL UBIICHVLY

ferring to fluctuations in composition of the main constituents (oxygen, nitrogen,
carbon dioxide), but to pollution of the air environment by various microimpurities.

air environment of pressurized spaces by various chemicals. The products of pers-
piration and activity of sebaceous glands, as well as intestinal gases can also

abut 70 various chemical compounds, which were identified and assayed in the
products of gas emission. They include highly toxic substances, such as carbon
monoxide, epichlorhydrin, hydrogen cyanide and fluoride, etc. It is important to

exposure to high temperature, an exponential relationship was established between
concentration of discharged substances and these factors.

discussed in aspects of acute and chronic toxic effects. A particularly close
scrutiny has been given to the possibility of manifestation of a chronic toxic
effect of these substances on man. Among them, alcohols of different molecular
weight, ethers of these alcohols and acetic acid, ketones. aldehydea, aliphatic
hydrocarbons, heterocyclic and inorganic compounds have been found. It is known
that, in the case of chronic exposure, alcohols can affect renal and liver func-
tion, while hypotension and irritation of the lungs are caused by their others.
Low toxicity is inherent in aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons, but in high
concentrations they can elicit certain changes in some internal organs and an
anesthetic effect. A diversity of manifestations is observed for the toxic
effects of heterocyclic compounds.

cabin. when this problem is solved, it will be possible to offer validated re-
commendations on development of effective filters to remove toxic impurities from

29

FOR OFFNJA1.USEGJNLY'
NR Ol-T'ICI Al. I'SF ONI \'

Development of principles and criteria for setting air quality standards for future
spacecraft, with due consideration of specific requirements of living conditions

in a manned space vehicle, as well as the main theses of the Soviet school of
hygienists, should also be considered a task for sanitary toxicology.

Aerosols present a great hazard when working in space; the possibility of their
penetrating into man's respiratory tract in weightlessness may differ substantially
from conditions where there is normal gravity. There are diverse sources of aero-
sols in a spacecraft; they include man himself, various materials and operating
life support systems. When discussing the toxicological hazard of aerosols, it

is imperative to consider the fact that they may serve as adsorbents or condensa-
tion centers for toxic gaseous impurities. This circumsntance may alleviate
penetration into the lower respiratory tract of chemical compounds that are
retained in the upper pathways under earth's conditions because of their good
solubility in water. The difficulty of this problem as it relates to confined
manned systems is that a tendency toward increase in quantity and mean diameter

as time passes is inherent in aerosol particles. Nor has the nature of biological
effects of ionized aerosols and gases been definitively established, particularly
in manned spacecraft cabins. The importance of this problem is attributable to

the fact that the constant background of cosmic radiation, the level of which may
rise periodically, can lead to an appreciable increase in concentration of aero-
ions, by about 2-3 times, in the course of a manned space flight, as indicated by
estimates. All of the foregoing makes it very important to conduct special studies
to resolve the problems that have been raised.

One of the important parts of the habitability problem is to study the mechanisms
of onset of diseases caused by representatives of man's automicroflora. This
problem is difficult to solve, first of all, because the infectious processes
elicited by conditionally pathogenic microorganisms are distinctive, although they
retain the main epidemiological patterns.

This problem is of particular significance in sanitary—hygienic support of cosmo-
nauts in a space vehicle operating for a long time, where the intensity of ex-
pression of the mechanism of transmission, which is the basis for the process of
mutual exchange of man's automicroflora. could increase substantially, as compared
to ordinary living conditions. This is indicated by the consistently observed
increase in size of microbial sites on the integumental tissues of cosmonauts,

as well as increased intensity of elimination of microorganisms from integumental
tissues into the environment, which is typical when people spend time in a con-
fined space.

The findings from the above studies, supplemented by determination of the list
of microorganisms most frequently involved in causing marked changes in man's
automicroflora under such conditions, made it possible to define the most probable
pathogens of diseases among the crews of space vehicles on long-term missions.

As we know, the upper respiratory tract, integument and intestine are the main
sites of localization of microorganisms in man. Bpidemiologically, the upper
respiratory tract is the most important, since there is an increase, by about 20-
100 times, in intensity of elimination of microorganisms from it when people are
in a confined place, as compared to ordinary living conditions. Expressly this
circumstance renders the air environment of a sealed place the principal factor
in transmission of probable pathogens of diseases.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The role of intestinal microflora in polluting a confined environment is less sig-
nificant, and apparently is mostly determined by the extent of personal hygiene.
however, it is worth stressing that, in addition to medical aspects, there is

a hygienic one to the study of human intestinal microflora in a confined environ-
ment, which is related to determination of the mechanism of onset of "autoinfectious'
diseases, since the composition of this microflora depends, to a large extent, on

a number of factors (diet, availability of fluids, etc.), as well as a biological
aspect, which is related to the existing conception of the role of intestinal
microflora in maintaining homeostasis in the human body.

With reference to the question of onset of diseases of the "cross-infection" type
among crew members, we were impressed by the lack of information about conditions,
under which the final stage of the mechanism of transmission is expressed, i.e..
how microorganisms that have penetrated into the human body as a result of reci-
procal exchange "take root." Bxpressly this problem should be the focus of future
microbiological and immunological studies.

We have established that the reciprocal exchangeof microorganisms is most often
temporary. A real exchange of microorganisms should occur when new organisms
become part of the ecological system that is formed when people stay together.
There is also information to the effect that the "root-taking" process for micro-
organisms is determined, to a significant extent, by the state of man's immuno-
logical reactivity, his physiological, anatomical distinctions and other circum-
stances.

All of the foregoing makes it imperative to conduct a wide set of studies in the
future on this problem as it relates to medical support of space missions. We
believe that investigation of conditions for expression of the "root-taking"
process in representatives of the automicroflora of one individual in the organism
of another will bring us closer to solving some aspects of the large, general
biological problem, the problem of "biological compatibility of people."

it is extremely important, in our opinion, to conduct studies for development of
the principles of sanitary and epidemiological support of manned space flights,
which also includes the stages of ground-hosed preparation of crews and space
vehicles themselves. The description of the main directions of this area of
research is the topic of a separate report; for this reason, we shall discuss
only some of the aspects which, in our opinion, are particularly important at this
time.

With regard to sanitary and epidemiological support of manned space flights, one
of the mandatory conditions in manning crews should be the detection of individuals
among them with consistently high initial levels of microorganisms referable to
probable pathogens of diseases. If such individuals are found, it is imperative

to institute a set of sanitation measures.

It should be noted that the problem of "sanation" of healthy carriers to free them
of pathogenic representatives of their automicroflora is still far from being
solved in ordinary clinical practice. In spite of this, studies in this direction
as they relate to the support of space flightsareconsidered extremely important,
and specialists must concentrate on them. One of the rather important aspects

of these studies is to develop and assess the ways and means of using effective
equipment for monitoring the composition of integumental mlcroflora of cosmonauts

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-11F!“ I‘SF "NI \

spending long periods of time in space vehicles, and the list of these means must
include methods of evaluating some properties of microorganisms, for example,
their resistance to antibiotics.

The established active role of man's integument in forming the microflora of the
spacecraft cabin environment gives us grounds to consider development of personal
hygiene measures for cosmonauts as an important and mandatory contribution to-
epidemic-control support of space flights. In this regard, when planning such
studies much attention should be given to the choice and validation, not only of
general measures (hygienic shower, washing hands and face, etc.), but special
ones aimed at maintaining the integumental microflora within a range that
minimizes the possibility of reinfection due to reinoculation of microorganisms.
In the latter case, it is desirable to develop both nonspecific (mechanical removal
of microorganisms from the integument by using appropriate materials for clothing,
bedding and other personal hygiene items) and specific methods (use of various
bactericidal agents, selected with due consideration of the distinctions in the
change of cosmonauts' automicroflora, as well as those that activate the barrier
function of the skin and mucous membranes). '

The adversity of conditions, under which people spend time in a confined environ-
ment, is aggravated by involvement of operating air conditioning system in pre-
serving and spreading microorganisms. Determination of the fact that certain
representatives of the automicroflora are capable of reproducing in condensation
moisture, which collects not only in the air-duct system but, as indicated by
reports of cosmonauts, on some parts of internal surfaces, warrants consideration
of studies of the problem of "bioresistance" of polymers as promising. This
problem has been considered heretofore only in the technical aspect, which is

of course very important, related to the possibility of equipment malfunction
because of reproduction of microorganisms on materials. In solving this problem,
it appears to us to be important to pay attention to another aspect as well,

to which little attention had been devoted up to this time, i.e., the medical
aspect. It is determined by the possibility of involvement in processes of
destruction of polymers of conditionally pathogenic microorganisms that are re-
presentatives of the human automicroflora, and reproduction of pathogens on
polymers before appearance of malfunctions in various equipment sould present a
health hazard to cosmonauts in the epidemiological and toxicological aspects;

Development of a proper assortment of foods and proper caloric value of the diet,
which is impossible without comprehensive physiological and hygienic studies,

is an important part of the work to provide favorable conditions in spacecraft
cabins.

In this foreword, it was not our intent to describe even briefly the contents of
all of the book's chapters; our main purpose was to give an idea about some of the
most pressing problems ensuring from the results of studies submitted in the book,
which must be solved in future studies of the problem of habitability of manned
space vehicles.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“W! "PM” \I "S“ “N! \

UDC: 612.221.2.014

SOURCES OF POLLUTION OF CABIN ATMOSPHERE BY TRACE IMPURITIES, AND TOXICOLOGICAL
EVALUATION THEREOF

[Abstract of article by V. P. Savina and T. I. Kuznetsova]

[Text] The results are submitted of the role of man in polluting the air environ-
ment of a confined space with metabolic products. Heandailylevels of elimination
of toxic impurities in the air exhaled by man are calculated under normal living
conditions; the composition of volatile constituents of perspiration, urine and
intestinal gases is given. A study was made of the effect on composition of ex-
haled air of altered microclimate parameters, different diets, total fast and
antiorthostatic [head down] hypokinesia. The obtained results indicate that
worsening of living conditions affects the composition of end metabolic products.
Fasting, worsening of microclimate with respect to temperature and humidity have
the strongest effect. The findings of the studies served as the basis for select-
ing the main pollutants, the concentration of which is significant in the air
environment and which changes under the influence of some factors or other,

used to assess the sanitary and hygienic status of the air environment of
pressurized places. There are 15 tables, 2 illustrations; bibliography lists

41 items.

UDC: 613.693:615.9
HYGIENE AND TOXICOLOGY 0P NONHBTAL MATERIALS
[Abstract of article by G. I. Solo-in]

[Text] This article deals with questions of safe use of polymers for equipment

in manned compartments of space vehicles. Experimental data are submitted on

the effects of space flight factors on the process of gassing from polymers; the
influence of trace impurities on formation of the gas environment of confined
places is demonstrated. Data are submitted for scientific validation of a system
of hygienic monitoring of safe use of materials at different stages of construction
of space vehicles. A system is offered for setting up experiments, scope of
studies and main directions of work. There is 1 table; bibliography lists 34 items.

UDC:.612.016.464:613.693
HYGIENIC SIGNIFICANCE OF IONIZATION OF THE ATMOSPHERE OP MANNED SPACECRAFT CABINS
[Abstract of article by B. V. Anisimov]
[Text] It was shown, on the basis of analysis of the literature and the author's
own experimental findings, that ionization of the atmosphere during space flights
would have a substantial effect on all functional systems of man. It is con-
cluded that it is imperative to regulate both the concentration of light aeroions

and coefficient of unipolarity in order in assure a biologically ideal atmosphere
in pressurized cabins. Bibliography lists 37 items.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 613-036.22;576.8:629.7.016.18

SANITARY-MICROBIOLOCICAL AND EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF HABITABILITY

[Abstract of article by s. N. Zaloguyev, A. N. Viktorov and N. D. Startseva]

[Text] The probability of appearance in cosmonauts of diseases, the pathogens of
which will be mainly representatives of their own microflora, makes it necessary
to conduct special studies to determine the distinctions of expression of the
mechanism of transmission of microorganisms under these specific living conditions.
It was established that unfavorable changes occur in total amount of micro-
organisms on the integumental tissues of cosmonauts, referable to an increase in
staphylococci, hemolytic streptococci and repres—ettatives of Gram-negative
bacillary and cocal flora, as well as yeast-like fungal flora. A comprehensive
study of the composition of staphylococcal flora of cosmonauts revealed that

there is periodic increase in number of staphylococci on their integumental tissue
with pathogenic traits and resistance to many antibiotics. The presence among
cosmonauts of a rather large number of carriers of pathogenic staphylococci and
other microorganisms, associated with increased intensity of eliminating these
microorganisms into the environment, is indicative of man's increasing role as

the probable source of infection under these conditions. The air environment is
the principal factor in transmission of microorganisms in spacecraft cabins,

and the internal surfaces are actively involved as mode of transmission. The
obtained data, as well as information about the distinctions of formation of bac-
terial aerosol in pressurized cabins of spacecraft, warrant the belief that there
can be faster expression of the mechanism of transmission of microorganisms under

these living conditions than on earth. There are 18 tables; bibliography lists
110 items.

UDC: 612.338.31

HICROECOLOCY OF THE INTESTINE UNDER EXTREME CONDITIONS
[Abstract of article by V. N. Shilov and N. N. Liz'ko]

[Text] This article deals with current conceptions of the composition of intestinal
microflora and its role in vital functions of the body. Along with the positive
role, the authors also call attention to the deleterious effects of microflora on
the macroorganism and potential pathogenicity of a number of representatives of
man's obligate microflora. This work sums up the many years of studies pursued
by the authors on intestinal microflora, both of individuals isolated in a con-
fined placc and cosmonauts, before and after participating in space missions of
different duration. Methods of normalizing the intestinal microflora of cosmo-
nauts during space flights are discussed in connection with development of dys-
bacteriosis under the influence of extreme factors on the body. There are 1 table,
11 illustrations; Libliography lists 61 items.

UDC: 613.693
EVALUATION OFHAN'S FUNCTIONAL CAPACITIES UNDER EXTREME LIVING CONDITIONS
[Abstract of article by G. A. Hanovtsev and V. V. Zhuravlev]

[Text] This section deals with evaluation of different functions of the human
body under conditions of isolation in a pressurized compartment of limited size

36

FTNR11FF1C1AI.1EHE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for several weeks to 1 year. There is discussion of the results of studies of
functional state of the cardiovascular system, external respiration, neuromuscular
activity, acid-base equilibrium and heat regulation in man. The results of experi-
mental studies are described with reference to optimum living conditions for man

and with significant deviation of different parameters of the habitat from optimum
levels (altered gas environment in a pressurized place and worsening of microclimate
condiLions). Information is furnished on functional state of different physiolo-
gical systems of man as a function of parameters of environment in a pressurized
compartment. There are 3 illustrations; bibliography lists 66 items.

UDC: 613.693:612.0l7.l
IMMUNOLOGICAL REACTIVITY OF THE BODY DURING STAYS IN CONPINBD QUARTBRS
[Abstract of article by I. V. Konstantinova and Ye. N. Antropova]

[Text] There is discussion of the distinctions of man's immunoreactivity while
living in a sealed place with maintenance of the main parameters of the micro-
climate within the range of the hygienic standard, as well as with different
degrees of pollution of the air environment by trace impurities of a biological

and chemical nature. Data are submitted from a study of the effects of factors
involved in space flights of different duration on the cosmonauts' iammnity system.
It was shown that changes in parameters of the microclimate elicit changes in man's
immunoreactivity. Long-term space missions (30-140 days) elicit a number of
functional changes in the immunological system of cosmonauts, leading to
diminished function of T lymphocytes, change in levels of different subpopulations
of immunocompetent lymphocytes and immunoglobulins of the G and A classes, appear-
ance of sensitization to bacterial allergens and activation of signs of auto-
immune processes. Brief space flights (6-8 days) do not have an appreciable effect
on immunological reactivity of man. There are 1 table, 3 illustrations; biblio-
graphy lists 22 items.

UDC: 613.693:612.39

PRINCIPLES INVOLVED IN CREATING FOOD ELEMENTS IN LIFE SUPPJRT SYSTEMS FOR
SPACECRAFT CREWS

[Abstract of article by V. P. Bychkov]

[Text] This article submits data on principles for furnishing the food elements
of life support systems for spacecraft crews as related to duration of missions.
There is a summary of experimental data on food supplies for manned space
flights performed in the USSR and the United States. In addition, there is dis-
cussion of data pertaining to the distinctions of metabolic processes in man
during space flights and development of foods for future space vehicles. There
are 8 tables; bibliography lists 205 items.

Contents Page

Foreword 5
Toxicological and hygienic Aspects of Habitability of Spacecraft
Sources of Pollution of Cabin Atmosphere by Trace Impurities, and
Toxicological Evaluation Thereof (V. P. Savina, T. I. Kuznetsova) ll

35

FOR'OFFKJAI.US£(N§LY
INJR‘OFFICIAI.IJSEI(MULY

Hygiene and Toxicology oi Nunmetal Materials (G. i. Solomiu)
Hygienic Significance of Ionization of the Atmosphere of Manned
Spacecraft Cabins (B. V. Anisimov)
Epidemiological and Microbiological Aspects of Habitability of Spacecraft
Sanitary-Microbiological and Epidemiological Aspects of Habitability
(S. N. Zaloguyev, A. N. Viktorov, N. D. Startaeva)
Microecology of the Intestine Under Extreme Conditions (V. H. Shilov,
N. N. Liz'ko)
Some Physiological and Immunological Aspects of Babitability of Spacecraft
Evaluation of Man's Functional Capacities Under Extreme Living
Conditions (G. A. Manovtsev, V. V. Zhuravlev)
Immunological Reactivity of the Body During Stays in Confined Quarters
(I. V. Konstantinova, Ye. N. Antropova) '
Diet of Crews of Space Vehicles
Principles Involved in Creating Food Elements in Life Support Systems
for Spacecraft Crews (V. P. Bychkov)
Abstracts

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1980

10,657
cso: 1866/999

36

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE¢ONLY

545

68

80

150

171

191

214
266
INDR‘OFIWCJALllgﬁiﬂﬂLV

CARDIOVASCULAR CONDITIONING FOR COSHDNADTS

Minsk PERIFERICBBSKIYE "SERDTSA" CHELOVEKA in Russian 1980 pp 64-67

[Section from book "Peripheral 'Hearts' of Man", by N. I. Arinchin, Institute of

Physiology, Belorussian Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Ranks 1 tekhnika",
80 pages]

[Text] In the opinion of S. P. Korolev, any essentially healthy person who can
endure the accelerations during lift-off and deboosting [deceleration] of a

descending spacecraft can fly in space. And the possibility of making such
voyages is increasing.

But, during space flights, particularly long-term ones, the cosmonaut is exposed

to devastating hypokinesia and weightlessness, as we know. Since orbital spacecraft
fly at altitudes of 200-300 km, i.e., in the top layers of the atmosphere, they
gradually "fall" to earth, their orbit changes and cosmonauts experience weight-
lessness under the influence of braking created by air and earth's gravity. It
induces changes in cosmonauts referable to bones, muscles, the vestibular system
and other organs, particularly those of the cardiovascular system.

On earth, in erect position, blood of venous vessels so to speak "falls" freely
from the top of the human body by virtue of its own weight down toward the heart.
It has difficulty in rising from the lower limbs, and for this reason it accumu-
lates in venous and capillary vessels, the tonus of which is considerably higher
than in other parts of the body. In weightlessnass, however, there is less blood
in the vessels of the lower extremities, since it flows to the top of the body,
overfilling vessels of the lungs and brain, which creates the sensation of heavi-
ness, headache, etc.; efficiency of cosmonauts diminishes. During long-term
flights, there is adaptation of the body and its cardiovascular system to weight-
lessness, but upon returning to earth the cosmonauts are again "in the embrace"
of gravity, and it has been found even more difficult to endure it than to become
accustomed to weightleasness. In order to improve the reliability of circulation
in weightlessness and to prepare cosmonauts for their return to earth, there is

a special compartment on orbital stations for diverse biomedical tests and train-
ing [conditioning]. The cosmonauts use a vacuum chamber, which creates negative
pressure in the lower part of the body, as a result of which the veins and capil-
laries of the lower limbs dilate and are filled with blood which flows from the
head. This improves cerebral circulation, and it also conditions the heart and
vessels totheimpending return to earth, when gravity will again attract blood to
the vessels of the lower extresities.

37

FOR‘OFFKJALlﬁﬂioNlY
FOR 0FFK]AI.USEJDNLX

There are bicycle ergometers, treadmills, special 6 suits, expanders, etc., aboard
spacecraft. Physical exercise in a specific volume, of specific duration and
intensity is recmmmended for cosmonauts up to the point when they experience

some fatigue which, in the opinion of Academician 0. G. Gazenko, is beneficial.
For example, at his recommendation, V. I. Sevast'yanov began to take 120, instead
of 100, steps per minute on the treadmill. Upon returning to earth, V. I.
Sevast'yanov crawled out of the landed craft and, having hmmediately taken a

few steps, began to prance: "Look, I can walk. This is a miracle!" The same
miracle happened after the Ibo-day record flight of Vladimir Kovalenko and
Aleksandr Ivanchenkov.

Academician 0. G. Gazenko and his team of coworkers, were awarded the USSR State
Prize for developing the set of methods for preparing cosmonauts for long-term
flights. 0. C. Gazenko and Ye. B. Shul'zhenko believe that venous pumps are
involved in the circulation of cosmonauts. In addition to them, stimulation of
suction-pumping micropump activity of skeletal muscles is also important, since
it is controllable by means of voluntary regulation by each cosmonaut. Skeletal
muscles, which constitute 40-502 of body mass, pull more blood when they are
functional than at rest, and consequently less amounts thereof flow to the brain
in weightlessness. This is instrumental in providing for high efficiency [work
fitness] of cosmonauts engaged in geophysical, astronomical, meteorological, bio-
medical and many other studies. For this reason, all cosmonauts are highly
trained athletes to assure their reliability. A certain time is reserved for
different forms of sports in their multifaceted training program.

A. A. Gubarev and G. M. Grechko trained for their flight for about 4 years. A. S.
Yeliseyev, Ye. V. Khrunov and others experienced weightlessness aboard a laboratory
aircraft. 6. T. Beregovoy believes that sports are to be credited for his 6-day
flight aboard the Soyuz-3 spacecraft. Sports make it possible for a person 40-50
years of age to become a cosmonaut and perform work related to flight for a rather
long time. For this reason, in the village of Zvezdnyy, sports training of cos-
monauts is being conducted so thoroughly and systematically. For this purpose,
there are a stadium, gyms and playing fields, swimming pool and ski centers. A. G.
Nikolayev said that, during the flight with V. I. Sevast'yanov,without any special
physical training it is unlikely that they would have returned to earth without
experiencing some pain, since the unconditioned heart would not have coped with
the effect of gravity.

A. A. Leonov, pilot-cosmonaut of the USSR, chairman of the All-Union Council

for GTO, is handing over to our country's entire population the knowhow gained
in physical training of cosmonauts.

On 17 December 1978, the head of the Center for Cosmonaut Training imeni Yu. A.
Gagarin, G. T. Beregovoy, pilot—cosmonaut of the USSR, made a request on the
pages of the newspaper sOVETSKIY SPORT that suggestions be offered for new types
of sports activities for cosmonauts aboard space stations. Such suggestions must
and will be made, with due consideration of the fact that skeletal muscles also
have their own independent micropumping capacity, which man can control, not only
on earth but in space.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka i tekhnika", 1980

10,657

8 :
C 0 1866/999 38

FOR 0FFK]Al.USEGDNLY
FOIIOFFNJA1.USE(M‘LY

PROBLEM OF ADAPTATION IN SPACE BIOLOGY AND HEDICINE

Moscow OSVOYENIYE KOSHOSA I VZAIMOSVYAZ' NAUK. TRHDY CHETYRNADTSATYKH CHTENIY,
POSVYASHCHENNYKH RAZRABOTKE NAUCBNOGO NASLEDIYA I RAZVITIYA IDEY K. 'E. TSIOLKOVSKOGO,
(KALUGA 11-14 SENTYABRYA 1979 G.) SEKTSIYA: "K. B. TSIOLKOVSKIY I PILDSOPSKIYE
PROBLEMYOSVOYENIYAKOSHOSA" in Russian 1980 pp 80-90

[Article by A. V. Korobkov, P. P. Kosmolinskiy and I. H. Khazen from book "Explora-
tion of Space and Correlation Between Sciences. Proceedings of 16th Lecture

Series Dedicated to Development of the Scientific Heritage and Ideas of K. E.
Tsiolkovakiy (Kaluga 11-14 September 1979). Section of "K. E. Tsiolkovskiy and
Philosophical Problems of Space Exploration", edited by Prof A. D. Ursul,

doctor of philosophical sciences, Ye. T. Paddeyev, candidate of philosophical
sciences and Yu. A. Shkolenko, candidate of philosophical sciences, Commission

for Development of the Scientific Heritage of K. E. Tsiolkovskiy of the USSR
Academy of Sciences]

[Text] It is unlikely that we could find a more important problem of space biology
and medicine than the problem of man's adaptation to life and work under extra-
terrestrial conditions, i.e., living conditions that are known to be unusual for
him. So that it is quite legitimate for K. B. Tsiolkovskiy to pay such close
attention to problems of altering man and his possible evolution in creating and
developing "ethereal cities" of the future [1-3]. Tsiolkovskiy was optimistic
about man living in space for a long time. He advanced a thought which is very
important and promising to research, that man would gradually change in the "ether"
and the danger of "emptiness" and other adverse influences related to being in space
would not be so significant and devastating to him [2, leaf 6].

Man's adaptation to life in space implies both the creation of a comfortable arti-
ficial exogenous environment. which would not elicit significant changes in man
(passive adaptation) and psychophysiological and intellectual adaptation of man,
particularly to the space factors to which it is difficult to adapt by means of
technical devices alone and there are significant adaptive changes in the body
(active adaptation). This conception of man's adaptation has something in common
with Tsiolkovskiy's views of the possibility of man's gradual (over a period of
centuries) adaptation to "ethereal" conditions: "At the present time, the pro-
gressive strata of mankind are striving more and more to place their life into an
artificial framework,and is this not what progress means?.... In the ether

this artificiality will merely reach its extreme, but man will be under the most
beneficial conditions. As the centuries pass, the new conditions will also create
a new breed of beings, and the artificiality around them will be attenuated and,
perhaps, gradually taper off. Would not the conquest of ethereal space follow the
conquest of air: will the air-bound being change into an ethereal one?" [3, p 137].

39

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This quotation is indicative of the profound evolutionary approach to the problem

of emergence of a new type of human beings adapted to life in a space environment.

We are not dealing here with the possibility of life for modern man in space, but
with the basic philosophical and biological approach to the question of possibility
of creating a "new breed of beings" as a result of evolution of the human population.
Tsiolkovskiy views altered living conditions as the cause of such evolution. The
problem of social and biological adaptationtﬁ man to life in space, as the important
basis for creating a space civilization, imparted with new properties that permit

active adaptation to extraterrestrial living conditions, is considered by Tsiolkovskiy
from populocentric positions.

As we consider the emerging routes for solving the problem that was touched upon, it
is imperative to avoid absolutization of the knowledge we gained at different import-
ant stages of exploration of space, and to interpret them as the means of coming
gradually closer to understanding the deeper substance of the processes studied.

At the same time, we must take into consideration the need for an utterly new level
of solutions to basic and applied problems. At the present time, it is characterized
by a change in rating of values in orientation, science and "industrialization" of

a number of means of solving experimental problems. More and more, theoretical

knowledge is gaining features that are essentially similar to a biotechnological
design.

For example, in developing the ways and means of compensating for the effects of
weightlessness and other factors of space flights, on the basis of experimental
work done in 1954 [4], we arrived at the conclusion that nothing can replace
skeletomuscular activity in flight, that it must be used as the most important
factor in the life of cosmonauts, in combination with positive emotions, nutrition
and controlling [regulatory] pharmacology. The obtained data were indicative of
the importance of specific functional conditioning related to the function of the
vestibular system, cerebellum. etc. Concurrently, there was formulation of some
of the distinctions of preflight, in-flight and postflight physical training and
exercise. In the first programs of physical training, broad use was made of data
indicative of the required energy level of muscular contraction, topography of
function of different muscle groups and other data for the practical solution

of this problem. It was stressed that physical and other loads must be optimized
[5]. Subsequently, theory and methods of using local negative pressure (LN?) and
lower body negative pressure (LBNP) began to be used, and this aided in elaborating

the exercise regimen for cosmonauts at all stages of flight, the Chibis device
and Penguin suit.

0n the whole, the fundamental conception formulated in the course of this work, to
the effect that active muscular contraction based on feedback is a factor of
paramount importance to compensate for the absence of effects of gravity, was the
basis for a step forward, both with respect to solving problems of compensation
for the effects of weightlessness and adaptation to it. However. this is only the
beginning, and it is imperative to advance over the ways that were opened toward
solving new qualitative aspects of the problem.

The most important and basically new living factors in space are weightlessneas
and related hypodynamia, as well as cosmic radiation, the hazard of which cannot
be underestimated. In this regard, a question arises: are the genetic system and
functional status of modern man reliable,and what are its capacities for variability

60

FOR 0FF1CLAL.USEIMNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY

for the purpose of adaptive changes and creation of a new level of dynamic equilib-
rium of homeostasis with the habitat? Is it possible for there to be stable adap-
tation of different generations of modern man to living and working conditions in
space? To what extent is Tsiolkovskiy's opinion of the possibility of creating a
"new breed of beings" in ethereal space valid?

Harxist-Leninist theory considers the social essence of man in dialectical unity
with the distinctions of his vital functions (biological characteristics) as a
component of nature. In principle, it does not restrict the possibility of man's
development as a personality and biological processes in his body. For this reason
there are no grounds to reject the possibility of formation of a new human popula-
tion in the space environment.

Consideration of man's evolution from the populocentric point of view over many
generations assures the fullest disclosure of the mechanisms of man's adaptation.
We define physiological adaptation as a process that leads to a new stable level of
cell and tissue, organ and system function, as well as mechanisms of control, which
makes it possible, on the basis of a balance between expenditure and restoration

of the body's resources, for man's vital functions to take place and for him to
work under new living conditions, and for a healthy progeny to develop. At the
same time, this process is very variable on the population level. The role of the
social and biological environment is of first and foremost significance in the
genesis of man's adaptation. Social programs of man's development provide for
transmission of his knowhow to generations through processes of rearing, training
and education. Thereby, man, who is the carrier of the social program, implements
evolution of social forms of movement of matter by means of refinement of education
and labor [7, 8].

On earth, biological evolution of man is very limited in view of the relatively
standard living conditions. The obtained data indicate that 6-5 generations must
live in the mountains to develop a mountain-dwelling aborigene. But the question
of whether the reserves of the human body have been exhausted for deeper evolution
under new space conditions (the possibility of which Tsiolkovskiy does not question)
has not been definitively answered.

Evidently, in the history of the future human population developing in space, which
is the basis of space civilization, social programs of its development will be of
prime significance in the entire scope of life, including deployment of functional
programs and in connection with the need to develop the ways and means of creating
conditions that will induce a change in genetic programs, directed at formation of
new physiological and psychological properties in space organisms. The possibility
cannot be ruled out that "genetic engineering" procedures (although this, unquestion-
ably, already generates and will generate a number of biological—technical and
sociological-ethical problems) will also be used to form biological and functional
adaptation programs in the interests of conquering space. Under the influence of
living conditions in space, there will also be a change in psychophysiological inter-
action between man and the environment, the effects of which are related both to

new space factors and separation from terrestrial living conditions. Dialectical
correlation between structure and function, expenditure and recovery of energy,
structural and other reserves of the body will conform with the new dynamics of
existence, intended for many generations.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Man's consciousness will be of enorloua significance in this change (manifesta-
tions thereof such as knowledge, motivation, needs, purposefulness, etc.), since he
will continue to live in a social environment and act in the sphere of the social
form of movement of matter. In spite of the increasing role of the genetic pro-
gram (particularly during the period related to change in biological and psycholo-
gical status of the organism in accordance with space conditions), the social pro-
gram, which is profoundly linked with various forms of labor, will retain its

prime significance.

The role of level of knowledge and intelligence in the conquest of space is con-
firmed by the current practice of exploration of near space. This explains, in
particular (along with the active medical and technical steps taken to affect the
psychophysiological status of cosmonauts), the fact that, in spite of the signi-
fication extension of time space crews spend on orbital stations, the health status
and efficiency of cosmonauts are not worsening. Prior experience in manned space
flights has its effect, there is less emotional and mental tension, motivational
and competitive stimuli are triggered, there is more confidence in the exceptional
importance of space research involving man, and there is an increase in the intellec-
tual potential of crews (including the ground-based flight support service) and
their experience in working in a specified, strictly circumscribed and self-discip-
lined mode.

In his works, Tsiolkovskiy also analyzed the origin of life, from the initial atomic
level to formation and development of living structures, from consideration of the
principles of structure and properties of animals, as related to their size and
existing gravity, to preservation of vigor, fitness and active longevity [9-11].

It is quite possible that Tsiolkovskiy was aware of the thesis expounded by I. H.
Sechenov as far back as 1863, which stressed the significance of the molecular level
to vital functions [12].

In studies on problems of adaptation, exceptional importance is attributed to
various biological levels of integration of functions, their regulation and compen-
sation. Thus, A. H. Chernykh [l3] discusses 10 levels of self-regulation of the
organism. The highest cortical level includes integration of all other levels and
reflects the multiorganic and intersystem relations. Special significance is attri-
buted to the biosocial level, which interacts with environmental factors [1b, 15].

Starting with the works of I. H. Sechenov, N. Ye. Vvedenskiy, I. P. Pavlov and A. A.
Ukhtomskiy, the teaching on adaptation began to stand on solid scientific positions
and deal with all adaptive reactions of the body as a dynamic phasic process

under the direct control of the central nervous system.

We believe that utmost information can be obtained with consideration of the or-
ganism's responses to a perceived and unperceived interacting stimulus from the
standpoint of theories of Russian classics in the natural sciences.

This direction was successfully developed in the studies of I. P. Razenkov [16],
who also singled out three phases of adaptation (and a fourth, intermediate one).
I. M. Khazen, who worked on this problem, singled out five phases [17]. F. P.
Kosmolinskiy found four [18]. The research of N. V. Lazarev on the state of
nonspecific heightened resistance of the organism (SNHR), developing under the
influence of a special group of substances (adaptogens), is important [19]. On
the basis of teaching on SNHR, there was development of a classification of

42

FOIioFﬁKJAI.USE<0NLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAI. NSF. ON|.\'

«Lapin. .L-uvo o. 1.. .\-.. thumb/i. w. b. Kvukiua and M. A. Uhuiuw iluj: umdu mum-,5
reaction (to mild stimuli), activation reaction (to moderate stimuli) and tension
(stress) reaction to strong stimuli. A. V. Korobkov [5] mentioned five different
phases of adaptation and preparedness of an organism for adaptation as a most import-
ant preliminary stage, stressing the role of motor activity to nonspecific resistance
at all phases of adaptation. The teaching on phasic states of the organism, which
was developed by Soviet scientists, is more comprehensive and a scientifically more
finished entity than Selye's stress theory, which reflects only part of the hormonal
reactions in the hypophysis-adrenal system (which were, unquestionably, submitted

to in-depth investigation by Selye and his school).

Problems related to human ecology are of special importance to work on the problem
of development of a space civilization. Scientific-technological and economic
problems of the "space station (city) - human population -- space" system are
acquiring special and specific significance. In such a system work and other loads
should be such as to permit removal of fatigue before the next work cycle and they
should not affect health. This should be implemented by the industry of re-creating
health, directed at preservation and reproduction of manpower resources in space
civilization.

Longevity has become a necessity dictated by the tasks of space exploration, while
space provides new impetus and means of achieving this. For this reason, problems
of life and death in space require special investigation.

The concept of health of an individual man on earth, as well as in space, cannot

be extended to the population health level. This is a different biosocial category.
Man's health is determined by his activity and life span. But population health

is also characterized by social times, effectiveness of social production, etc.,
which determine the Optimum development of a population. It is imperative to
investigate the very concept of population and criteria that characterize it, as
well as sociodemographic processes in a space civilization on the basis of integra-
tion of data in hygiene, psychology, physiology, biorhythmology, therapeutic medi-
cine and others, with due consideration of the new level and nature of life
support systems, mental and physical activity during life in space.

Thus, socio-anthropo-ecological studies should alter the routes of development of
anthropology that were formed on earth. He must continue the development of the con-
ceptions of V. I. Vernadskiy concerning the sphere of intelligence-noosphere, as
related to a space civilization [21].

The role of man, with his consciousness and activities in a space civilization, will
undergo exceptional increase. He will create a specific, continuously controlled
scientific and technological environment as the basic environment of his existence.
This environment cannot be equated with natural environmental factors. Scientific-
technological factors and substances are natural in origin. But man organizes them
and imparts prOperties to them in such a way that does not exist in nature. At the
same time, technological systems combine the laws of nature (natural science) and
social development. Technology is governed by its own laws, which are formed under
the influence of both natural and social factors. In a space civilization, complex
organization and automation of states, as well as development of a scientific-
technological environment on the basis of interaction between social, natural and
engineering sciences, will reach a new level, higher than on earth, without which
life itself would be impossible in space. This creates additional conditions and
stimuli for disclosure of the capabilities of the human personality.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1i€1Al.USE(NVLY

All of the foregoing is indicative of the need to make a special study of the probe
lem of man and human population in a scientific-technological space environment
(study of capacities of the human body for change in nature of energy exchange with
the environment, etc.). No doubt, in the philosophical respect, the works of the
classics in Marxism-Leninism, as well as Tsiolkovskiy and Vernadskiy [21-23], are
very importanttopredicting man's life in space. At the same time, when discussing
the problem of man's adaptation from the populocentric aspects of evolution, one
cannot equate variability and adaptability [26].

The life of human society will develop on the basis of processes of evolution and
adaptogenesis, both on earth and under extraterrestrial conditions, and the optimism
of Tsiolkovskiy, who maintained that "... there is no end ... to the refinement of
mankind. Its progress is perpetual" [23, p 139], is fully warranted. In the opinion
of Ye. T. Paddeyev, "the ideas of K. E. Tsiolkovskiy concerning the perpetual develop-
ment of intelligent social beings, the possibility of such development for each civi-

lization, including our terrestrial mankind," are of great philosophical importance
[24, pp 29-30].

In conclusion, we consider it mandatory to stress that all space problems were

born on earth, and they will continue to generate and be refined in the foreseeable
fumre, in many respects, on earth. For this reason, the study of ecology of
terrestrial human populations, qualitative aspects of coordination of movement,
metabolism and energy in the human body, as it interacts with the overall natural
environment and the environment created by the course of scientific and technological
process (civilization) will be the basis for developing the entire system of a space
civilization.

Investigation of the reserves of the human body for the continued evolution thereof,
as well as the principal routes, dynamics and structure of this process, should be
considered of special importance.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Tsiolkovskiy, K. 5., "Life in the Interstellar Environment," Moscow, 1966.
2. Idem, "Life in the Ether," ARKHIV AN 8858, Folio 555, Opus 1, File 1, pp 1-9.

3. Idem, "Reactive [Jet—Propelled] Plight Vehicles," "Sobr. soch." [Collected
Works], Moscow, Vol 2, 1956.

4. Korobkov, A. V., Shkurdoda. V. A., Yavlev, N. I. and Yakoveyeva, Ye. 5.,
"Physical Culture for People of Different Ages (Biological Bases),"
"Fizkul'tura 1 sport" [Physical Culture and Sports], Moscow, 1962, pp 7-41.

5. Korobkov, A. V., "Physical Exercise as a Means of Preserving Stable Homeostasis
in Cosmonauts," in "Problemy kosmicheskoy biologii" [Problems of Space Biology],
USSR Academy of-Sciences, Vol 2, 1962, pp 68-74.

6. Idem, "Physiological and Clinical Effects of Local Negative Pressure on Man and
Animals (Summaries of Papers Delivered at Scientific Conference)," Moscow,
VNIIFK [All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Physical Culture], 1972,

pp 6—9.
44

FOR OF11C1A1.USE|DNLY
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

Korobkov. A. V.. "Is Long-Tern Life Possible in 'Bthereal' Cities." "Trudy

XII i XIII Chteniy K. E. Tsiolkovskogo, Sektsiys 'Problemy kosaicheskoy ueditsiny i
biologii'" [Proceedings of 12th and 13th K. B. Tsiolkovskiy Lecture Series,
Section on "Problass of Space Medicine and Biology"], Moscow, 1979, pp 98-102.

Dichev. T. c. and Tarasov, K. Ye.. “The Problem of Man's Adaptation and Health,"
Moscow, 1976.

Tsiokovskiy, K. 3., "The Way to the Stars," Moscow, 1960.

Idem, "Forlation of Different Species of Living Things," mum. AN SSSR, Folio 555,
Opus 1, File 295, pp l-llo.

Idem, "Longevity," Ibid, Folio 555, Opus 1, Pile 518, pp 1-6.

Sechenov, l. M., "Reflexes of the Brain," in "I. M. Sechenov, I. P. Pavlov, N. Ye.
Vvedenskiy. Piziologiya nervnoy sistemy. Izbrannyye trudy" [Physiology of the
Nervous System. Selected Uorks by I. M. Sechenov, I. P. Pavlov and N. Ye.
Vvedenskiy], Moscow. Vol 10. 1952. pp 163-211.

Chernukh, A. 11., "Regulatory Mechanisms and Processes of Getting sick and
Recovering on Different Levels of Integration of the Body,“ PATOLOGICHESKAYA
PIZIOLOGIYA I EKSTREHAL'NAYA TBRAPIYA, No 2, 1972, pp 3-12.

Anokhin, P. K., "Foreword to Russian Edition of Book by E. Gellhorn and J.
Lufborough. Emotions and Emotional Disorders," translated from English, Moscow.
1966, pp 5-18.

Shidlovskiy, V. A., "Multivariant Adaptive Regulation of Autonomic Functions,"

in "Voprosy kibernetiki. Vyp. 37: Sistellnyy analiz vegetativnylth funktsiy"
[Problems of Cybernetics. No 37: Systems Analysis of Autonomic Functions], Moscow,
1978, pp 3-7.

Razenkov. I. P., "Changes in the Process of Stisulation of the Cerebral Cortex
of Dogs Under Difficult Conditions," in "Trudy fiziologichesltikh laboratoriy
akadenika I. P. Pavlova" [Works of the Physiological Laboratories of Academician
I. P. Pavlov], Leningrad, Vol I, No l, 1925. pp 103-117.

Khazen, I. M., ”Classification of Phasic States of the Body Under Extreme
Conditions and the Problem of Retaining Vigor and Effitiency, as Reflected in
the Works of K. E. Tsiolkovskiy," "Trudy desyatykh chteniy K. B. Tsiolkovskogo.
Sektsiya 'Probleuy kosnicheskoy neditsiny i biologii'" [Proceedings of 10th

K. 8. Tsiolkovskiy Lecture Series. Section on "Problems of Space Medicine and
Biology], Moscow, 1977, pp 167-185.

Kosmolinskiy, P. P., "Emotional Stress During Work Under Extreme Conditions,"
Moscow, 1976.

Lazarev, N. V.. "Comparison of Nonspecific Defense Reactions Affecting Generali-
zation of Infections and Metastases of Neoplasms," VOPROSY ONKOIDGII, Vol 8,
No 11, Leningrad, 1962, pp 20-28.

Csrkavi, L. Kh., Kvakina, Ye. B. and Ukolova, M. A., "Adaptive Reactions and
Resistance of the Organism," Rostov-na-Donu. 1977.

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
21.

22.

23.

26.

F0R10FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

Akunov, V. 1., Kosnolinskiy, F. P. and Sorokin, N. V., "Problems of Evolution
in the Works of K. E. Tsiolkovskiy and V. I. Vernsdskiy," "Trudy X11 1 XIII
Chteniy K. E. Tsiolkovskogo. Sektsiya 'Probleny kosnicheskoy neditsiny i
biologiig" Moscow, 1979, pp 148-151.

Ryzhikov, G. V. and Bal'tsev, V. 3., "General and Special Aspects of the
Adaptation Problem," PIZIOLOGIYA CHELOVEKA, Vol 8, No 6, 1977, pp 985-996.

Tsiolkovskiy, K. 3., "Exploration of World Spaces with Reactive Instruments
(1911-1912)," "Sobr. soch." [Collected Works], Moscow, Vol 2, 1956,
pp 100-193.

Paddeyev, Ye. T. "K. B. Tsiolkovskiy on the Perpetual Development of the Uni-
verse," "Trudy pyatykh i shestykh Chteniy K. E. Tsiolkovskogo. Sektaiya
'lssledovaniya nauchnogo tvorchestva K. B. Tsiolkovskogo'” [Proceedings of
5th and 6th K. E. Isiolkovskiy Lecture Series. Section on "Studies of the
Scientific Creativity of K. E. Tsiolkovskiy], Moscow, 1972, pp 26-39.

COPYRIGHT: Not available

10,657

C50:

1866/999

66

FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPACE ENGINEERING

UDC 629.78.002.2(075.8)
TECHNOLWY 0F ASSEMBLY, INSTALLATION MID REPAIR "GK Ill SPACE

Moscow OSNOVY KOSHICHBSKOY TBKENOWGII in Russian 1980 (signed to press 26 Hay 80)
pp 100-115

[Part 3, Chapter 1, Sections 1.1-1.3 from book "Principles of Space Technology", by
Ivan Timofeyevich Belyakov and Yuriy Dmitriyevich Borisov, Iadatel‘stvo
"Hsshinostroyeniye", 2,000 copies, 185 pages]

[Excerpt] Part 3. Technology of Assembly, Installation and Repair Work in Space

The development of rocket and space technology is following the path of the crea-
tion of ever heavier, more complicated and larger objects in space, including the
space technological complexes that will be built in the near future. In order to
build and support the extended functioning of space systems, we now need to be able
to carry out in space the technological processes involved in installing, repairing,
monitoring and testing equipment and maintaining an object in space and its various
systems.

Chapter 1. Assembly of Objects

At the present time we are witnessing the construction of large orbital complexes
of the "Soyuz"-"Salyut"-"Progress" type. At the sane time, however, plans for
large, multipurpose, long-lived orbital base stations are also being developed. An
example of this is the American Hacdonnell-Douglas Company's plan for a base sta-
tion for 50 people that weighs 650 t and has a useful volume of 2,700 n3 and a cen-
tral unit that is 1114 m long. In order to create artificial gravity of up to lgo,
it is specified that the station will rotate at a speed of 3.5 r/Iain relative to
the central unit's longitudinal axis. The proposed power supply is a nuclear power
plant.

As a result of the power shortage that we are experiencing even now, plans for a
photoelectric solar power station in space are beginning to be developed. The di-
mensions of this station are truly fantastic: it will be about 10-12 km long and
S Ina wide. With a solar battery about 4 x S in in size, a parabolic microwave an-
tenna for transaitting energy in the ultrasonic band from the ultrahigh-frequency
generator to Earth, and a total mass of about 20,000 t, the station will have an
output power of 5-10 6". The design, engineering and control problems involved in
the creation of such a station are truly huge. It is necessary to solve problems
about the choice of the structural power system for the station's basic assemblies;
the choice of materials that will provide prolonged strength under the conditions

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

encountered in space; the prevention of the appearance of an lnadnissibly high
space electrostatic charge on the station because of the effect of the cosmic plas-
ma; the delivery of the units forming the station into orbit, their assasbly, the
maintenance of the station and so on.

Calculations show that as the dimensions of objects delivered into orbit and, con-
sequently, the energy expenditures for a given flight increase, there is also an
increase in the ratio of the rocket system's liftoff mass to the weight of the use-
ful load. This makes it necessary to build launch vehicles of gigantic size and
power and makes the development and operation of launch complexes more expensive.
Therefore, the assembly in orbit of the individual elements of spacecraft, as well
as the servicing of such craft in orbit, will make it possible to eliminate this
unjustified increase in the power of launch vehicles and will give us the ability
to build space rocket systems tailored to given problems at less cost. It is also
possible to dmonstrate the feasibility of using a number of assembly methods in
space: docking assembly of objects in space from separate units delivered from
Earth; assembly of objects from transformable parts; assembly of large areal struc-
tures by cosmonauts in open space.

All of these assanbly methods are dictated by the necessity of reducing energy ex-
penditures for the delivery of large objects into orbit.

The development of new technological assembly processes and the determination of
the structural engineering requirements for dockable assemblies and the necessary
technological equipment are both necessary prerequisites for the creation of long-
lived orbital stations and other objects in space.

The planning of technological operations for the conditions encountered in space
involves a complex of technical, technological, design and ergonomic problaas.

As the basic features of the planning of technological operations for space (after
demonstrating their effectiveness or substantiating the need for th-), we can dis-
tinguish the following:

careful development and perfection of operations on the ground but under conditions
as close to those encountered in space as possible;

evaluation of the functional capabilities for the cosmonaut-operator's actions un-
der space conditions with respect to specific operations;

creation of a theoretical (mathematical) model of a process on which a technologi-
cal operation is based, for the purpose of obtaining information about the pro-
cess's basic parameters and their interrelationship, as well as optimization of a
process's basic parameters for the purpose of insuring the required assasbly work
quality;

creation of working facilities and acconodations for the operator-technologist;
guaranteeing the safety of a cosmonaut-technologist while working.

Let us move on to a discussion of methods for assubling space objects.
l.l. Docking-Ass-bly of Space Stations
At the present time we are already carrying out the docking-assembly of space sta-

tions in orbit, using independent units delivered from Earth that have their on
propulsion systass; an example of this is the assembly of the "Soyus"-”Salyut"-

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Progress" complexes. We can expect the development of this assembly method on the
basis of the creation of special technological docking assemblies with a simplified
design. These general-purpose technological assemblies can be used reputedly for
the direct docking of units delivered into orbit and the joining of these units in
the position needed for the realization of a technological process, after which the
docking assembly can be dismantled for the purpose of using it again to assemble
other units.

Docking-assembly of space stations in orbit can be regarded as the first stage in
the development of assanbly work in space. At the present time, docking-assembly
of space stations is the most developed method of assembly in space.

Docking-assembly can be carried out either automatically or manually (by a cosmo-
naut). The possibilities of docking-assembly are determined by the degree of per-
fection of the facilities used to search for the objects to be put together, as
well as the maneuvering, approach and docking equipment, the perfection of the
docking sssemblies' design and--in the case of the use of semiautomatic docking--
the cosmonaut's skill. Despite the huge complexities that must be dealt with when
working out docking-assembly operations in space, this type of assembly should be
regarded as the method of assembling space objects that is most accessible at the
present time. Docking-assembly can, obviously, be only the first stage in the
technological process of the assembly of large orbital stations in orbit. Actually,
after the docking (mooring) of units to be assmabled in space, the technological
process of assembly can carried out inediately. In this case it is possible to
introduce purely technological requirements for assmsblies (units) that are to be
assembled by docking-assembly and the technological processes that are being dwel-
oped

This type of requirement can include the following.

1. Units delivered for docking-assembly must be assembled on Earth in their maxi-
mally finished form. (In particular, in view of the obvious difficulties involved
in carrying them out in space, coating application processes must be implemented
under terrestrial conditions.)

2. The units' docking assemblies must be completely interchangeable.

3. If it is necessary to make a permanent connection at the joint after docking-
assembly, the docking assembly itself Inst insure reliable engagement of the units
(mechanical, electraaagnetic and other types) throughout the entire period that the
work is being done. In connection with this, there must not be any adjustment work
that has to be done when the permanent connection is being made and the connecting
processes must be maximally automated.

a. The design of the docking points must make it possible to perform repair and
restoration work in the case of disruption of a joint’s normal functioning (the
airtightness is lost, for example) without undocking of the units involved (partic-
ularly those joined by permanent connections).

5. Angular compensation can be provided during the assembly of units either by the
design of the docking assaibly or during the connecting process, with the help of
special correcting devices and reference points on the surfaces of the units being
assembled.

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By using the docking-assembly method, it
is possible to assemble rather large space
stations by adding additional units to the
basic one (Figure 3.1).

Let us examine several details of the pro-
cess of the docking-assembly of space sta-
tions from independent units. Each unit
of such a space station must be delivered
into orbit by a separate launch vehicle.
In order to solve this problem, methods
and systems must be developed whereby two
ships inserted into nearby orbits can find
Figure 3.1. Long-tern orbital station each other, maneuver. approach, moor and
assembled from independent units. dock, either completely automatically or
with the participation of a cosmonaut.

 

The automatic docking (and then undocking) of unmanned spacecraft was first accomp~
lished on 30 October 1967, during the orbital flight of the Soviet "Kosmoa-186" and
"Rogues-188" satellites. In connection with this. one satellite was "active" and
the other was "passive." The first satellite carried out such complicated func-
tions as searching for the other one in space, detecting it, approaching it and
mooring; the "passive" satellite was simpler: it was oriented in space in a cer-
tain manner and served as a beacon for the active satellite. In order to be able
to move in space, each satellite had a propulsion system that could be used repeat-
edly for orbital correction and rendezvousing. For orientation and stabilization,
as well as for precise regulation of the mooring process during docking, both sat-
ellites had systems of low-thrust reaction engines. The docking assemblies insured
retraction and provided a reliable mechanical connection between the two satellites.

Docking-assembly is preceded by the following operations:

1. Launch and injection into orbit of the passive object (target), which does not
maneuver in orbit (a situation where both spacecraft maneuver is also possible).

2. Launch and injection of the maneuverable object into the meeting zone.
3. Search and location (capture) of the target.

6. Rendezvous and mooring.

The docking stage begins at the moment of first contact of the docking mechanisms .
and ends with the final mechanical and electrical connnection of the craft that are

docking.

The docking of orbital objects is a critical operation, since the docking objects
enter direct physical interaction with each other (in the general case, with a non-
zero relative velocity and a different relative orientation). The docking process
depends to a large degree on the initial conditions of the docking stage and the
docking mechanisms' characteristics.

0n the basis of experimental data, the following initial docking condition values
are the most satisfactory: relative mooring velocity--0.03-0.07S n/s; lateral

SO

FOR(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NNLY
FOI.OFF1C1A1.USEIDNLN

displacement with respect to the sxis--:p.5 m; angular misalignment (with respect
to all nch)—-15°.

Let us enumerate the docking mechanisms' basic assignments:

reduce the difference in the docking objects' velocities to zero; that is, to act
as a shock absorber by receiving and scattering the kinetic energy;

after first contact, to provide a mechanical connection between the craft so as to
prevent their rebounding from each other after contact;

compensate for the mutual misalignment of the craft's axes that can occur by the
moment of first contact;

insure the matching of the alignment of the axes of both craft and triggering of
the locks after first contact without use of the propulsion systems;

after triggering of the basic locks, provide sufficient rigidity of the connection
and the transmission of loads through the locks Hhen there is joint maneuvering of
both craft;

provide an airtight connection when necessary;

make it possible for the craft to disengage immediately when necessary;

provide repulsive forces during disengagement;

be ready for repeated use immediately after disengagement;

make it possible to transmit electrical signals, transfer fuel and cargo and trade
crews between the two craft;

have adequate reliability and little mass.

 

Figure 3.2. Androgynous docking assembly in the "Soyus"-"Apollo"
system: 1. lock on ship's hull; 2. guide on lateral face of a
lobe; 3. end ring with eight locks; a. power cylinders; 5. guide
ring; 6. lock on lobe.

Figure 3.2 depicts the androgynous-type docking assembly used to dock the "Soyuz“
and "Apollo" ships.

For purposes of simplifying the search and guidance systems and the docking-
assembly of units, it is possible to use special towing and manipulating devices
located on the basic unit of the space station being assembled. In this case the
basic unit can be (for example) equipped with a net, with the help of which it cap-
tures the structural units sent after it from Earth that need to be combined with
the basic unit (Figure 3.3a, b). By unwinding, the braking cable slows down the
captured structural unit and then pulls the units together (Figure 3.3c, d). with
the help of a manipulator on the basic unit. a docking assembly of simplified de-
sign is oriented correctly, the captured structural unit is brought up to the

51

FOR OFFICIAI.USEG)NIN
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

 

E. g Figure 3.1.. Assembly ship (diagram).

4) " ‘) }
Figure 3.3. Diagram of docking- basic unit's docking assembly, and
assembly with the help of towing and docking-assembly of the units takes place
manipulating devices on the basic (Figure 3.3e, f). The capturing net can

unit: a. rendezvousing of units; b. then be spread out again with the help of
capture of structural unit by net; c. a remote manipulator, thereby making it
when the braking cable is unwinding; possible to capture subsequent structural
d. units being pulled together; e. units sent from Earth and combine them
alignment of the axes of the units' with the basic unit.

docking assemblies; f. docking-
assembly of units with each other; 1. In the near future we can expect the crea-

basic unit; 2. structural unit; 3. tion of a special space assembly system
net. consisting of a space tug and an assembly
ship (Figure 3.4) that, after being placed
in orbit (with the help of reusable space transport ships), will carry out the as-
sesbly of individual structural units in orbit. In this case the assembly process
will take place as follows (Figure 3.5): the space tug captures a structural unit
sent into orbit from Earth and tows it into the assembly orbit. In the assembly

 

Figure 3.5. Diagram of assembly ship- operation: 1. assembly
ship; 2. structural unit; 3. space tug.

orbit, the space tug docks with the assembly ship with the help of simplified dock-

ing assemblies on the structural unit and the assembly ship, and "gives" the latter

the structural unit (position 1, Figure 3.5). The space tug sets off for the next
structural unit, and when it returns an automatic device for docking and coupling

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFII‘IGAI. USE ONLY

the structural units moves along the first structural unit, thereby making it ready
to receive (dock with) the next unit being delivered by the space tug (position 2,
Figure 3.5). The space tug delivers the next unit and the two structural units
dock with each other. After the technological operation of connecting the units by
some form of permanent connection (by welding, for example), a special, automatic-
ally operating installation sends the space tug for the next structural unit and
the process of unit "accretion" is repeated. In this case the assembly ship is a
unique robot--a complex cybernetic device. As technical and economic calculations
show, as the size of space objects increases, so does the effectiveness of the
utilization of assembly ships.

1.2. Creation of Objects Prom Transformable Structures

It is difficult to imagine the building of large objects in space without the use
of transformable structures that are delivered into orbit in a folded, compact form.
Special devices are used to transform these structures by unfolding (extending, in-
flating) them until they acquire the desired shape and size. In the future, these
component parts of space objects will assemble themselves into a unified whole.

The use of such structures makes it possible to overcame the difficulties involved
in transporting into orbit units for space objects that are of great length, area
or volume, thereby providing a large savings of delivery facilities and increasing
the transportation capabilities of existing launch vehicles.

Transformable structures must satisfy the following requirements: the structure
must be of minimum volume during injection into orbit and of maximum volume (or
area) after transformation (that is, it must have a maximum coefficient of struc-
tural transformation); the structure must have minimum mass and high strength and
rigidity after transformation; the structure must be highly reliable and durable
during extended use in open space (and must maintain its airtightness, when this is
necessary).

Let us discuss the three basic groups of structures: extendable-inflatable (using
materials with "memory" properties), extendsble-bar and extendable-areal structures.

thendable-Inflatable Structures. This type of structure includes those of the
shell type.

Primarily, these are inflatable structures made of an elastic material or a plastic
metal; they are delivered into orbit in the form of a compressed bellows in folded
or compressed form, after which a gas is used to inflate them into their proper
form.

Suggestions that inflatable structures can be used to build inhabitable and un-
inhabitsble orbital stations have been heard for a long time. One of the basic re-
quirements for an orbital station's shell is that it have low gas permeability and
be durable enough to withstand collisions with meteorites (that it not tear apart
when punctured). Automatic elimination of any openings that might form should be

provided for.

High accuracy in the formation of a shell is achieved by controlling the internal
pressure. The pressure in a shell or individual cavities in it is controlled by

53

FOR‘OFTWCIAI.USIZ(HQLY
POR<0FI1C1AL.USEIDNLY

ﬂpsepanma 1)
up

up“ - m 1’

“k
' .5amvux grununMWs
. (3) emao- cue and
sauna npa nexus

Ddbnavxa

   

ﬂamvuk p“ nsmop
Canuqa pacxaﬁa
dam/nu I:
l acneuun 9)

Figure 3.6. Block diagram of shape-change control system for a
transformable shell.

Key:
1. Program 6. Solar activity sensor
2. Digital computer 7. Flow rate regulator
3. Deformation sensor 8. Power source
4. Control signal amplifier 9. Pressure sensor
5. Shell

feeding in the working body (usually a mixture of a gas and air). On the whole,
the shape and size of an article is controlled on the basis of deviations of the
intermediate article's parameters from the rated ones. Figure 3.6 is a functional
diagram of a system for the automatic regulation of the gas shaping of a shell hav-
ing a single internal cavity with controllable pressure. signals from the pressure,
deformation and solar radiation sensors enter a digital computer, where they are
compared with signals corresponding to the rated values of the measured variables.
when it receives a signal (D) that there is a deviation from the rated values, an
error signal passes through the amplifier to flow rate regulator and power source,
changing the gas flow rate and the voltage at the power source's output, thereby
reducing the error signal. When the voltage corresponding to the assigned deforma-
tion of the shell is achieved, the shaping process ceases.

There is a great deal of interest in inflatable structures made of multilayered
shells; they differ favorably from single-layer ones because of their great rigidi-
ty and greater safety factor during collisions with meteorites. Such a structure
consists of inner and outer shells with a filler between them.

A structure is assembled in the following manner. A shell is manufactured that,
when unfolded, has the shape of the future space object. It is carefully tested,
after which the air is pumped out of it and it is folded and packaged. After de-
livery into orbit the shell is again inflated, with the pressure in the central

part being higher than that in the peripheral compartments. Pipe connections are
then used to inject a special liquid into the peripheral compartments' cavities,
where it foams, fills the space between the inner and outer shells and hardens,
thereby providing the structure with rigidity and protection against micrometeorites.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Unrolling Sheet Bare.

o

>r1c particles, whzch a

table to cover
' there arises the ne-
large shells from rolled sheet blank:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' with the help of a special device (Figure
Q 3.8) for uncoiling the roll, it is neces-

sary to create the torque needed to uncoil

 
 

[Document the blank. A monitoring device is needed
(1) . to insure that the sheet has the required
N curvature.
Pasi‘w‘“) 6. The radius of curvature is determined by
”m“ ' the length of the extendable bar. Final
5 lapping of the shell's curvature is

Figure 3.8. Diagram of unrolling of achieved by moving slide bar 3 in direc-
blank. tion A and exerting the appropriate con-

Key: 1. Motor trol over the mum: of the unrolling

2. Extendable bar mechanism's motor.

After the sheet blank is unrolled and giv-
en the necessary shape and size, spiral
welding can be carried out, thereby pro-
ducing a protective screen or a cylindri-
cal shell for a large orbital station.

 

Figure 3.9. Honeycombs in folded and Extension of Boneycmab Units in Space.
utended states. The well-known method of making honeycomb
units from foil (fro an alumim- alloy,
for example) can be used successfully as a technological process for manufacturing
large platforms for orbital stations in space. Figure 3.9 is a diagram of the
mlizstion of this process. Under the cmditiona encountered in space, the pro-
cess must be maximally automated.

The advisability of using this process in
space is explained by the possibility of
delivering into a satellite's orbit honey-
canb units with unextended honeycombs. In
order to build a large platform, it is ne-
cessary to use a transport spacecraft to
deliver a honeycomb unit that is quite
long but, at the same time, has a small
cross-section. This unit must then be
stretched out with the help of special but
uncomplicated automatic devices. After
this, it is sufficient to use any availa-
ble method to place sheet material on both
Figure 3.10. Module of the "umbrella" side of the extended honeych unit so as

 

type: a. compact state; b. inter- to form a panel filled with honeycombs.
mediate state; c. extended operating This type of structure can serve as the
state; I. brace; 2. rod. _ basis for the framework of a space ob-

ject's assembly area or, for example, as a
framework for solar batteries covering a large area.

Among the number of promising transformable structures we should include various
extendable-bar structures of the "umbrella" type (Figure 3.10). In the folded
state such a structure has a small volume. when acted on by the braces, the

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIHI(HHHCJAI.USE<NVLY

structure's rods can be extended and it will take on the required configuration;
for example, it can be one of the modules of the framework of a space object that

is large in area (such as a radio antenna).
1.3. Assembly of Large Objects Hith the Participation of Space-walking Cosmonauts

Despite the fact that the spacecraft that have been launched in recent years have
become larger and larger, in the future-as in the past--it will be impossible to
launch large antennas, telescopes and other devices into orbit in a fully assembled
state. Therefore, in open space it is necessary to have special methods for assem-
bling large articles from separate parts outside a spacecraft. Let us discuss one
of these methods, for the absembly of a large antenna in space.

An antenna in a modular version is the most attractive (from the constructional
point of view) for the process of assembly outside a spacecraft. The panels of a
modular antenna, which remind one of a honeybee's comb, are assembled in a manner
similar to the way a concrete-block house is built. In connection with this, it is
usually necessary to align and attach panels of the same size, which requires a
minimum of equipment, skill and time. From the viewpoint of this type of assembly,
we preliminarily analyzed a modular antenna 65 m in diameter that consists of 260
standard panels with dimensions on the order of 2.7 x 2.8 m (the longitudinal edges
of the panels are slightly beveled, at an angle of about 7°).

The so-called "escalator" method, where
the cosmonaut stands on a special scaffold
(Figure 3.11) and works as he moves along
a guide rail, is extremely promising for
this type of space object. He begins the
assembly by attaching a standard panel to
the circular (central) base section. when

one row is assembled, he then assembles
Figure 3.11. Structure assembled by the second row and so forth until all 240
the "escalator" method. standard panels are in place.

 

The basic question in analyzing this assembly process was about a man‘s ability to
move and put in place the relatively large panels.

An experiment in a "weightless" water tank showed that the average time for the in-
stallation of a panel measuring 2.7 x 2.5 m is no more than 0.8 min. Such data can
be used when calculating the time required to assemble antennas. Using these data,
it can be determined that the time required to assemble an antenna 45 m in diameter
is about 600 min (or 6 h 00 min), including 1 h for the cosmonaut to rest.

Howevér, it is obvious that for an antenna several kilometers in diameter, this
type of assembly must be performed with the help of robots and manipulators.

0n the Use of Robots and Manipulators in Assembly Operations. It has already been
mentioned that with the increases in the complexity and size of space objects,

their assembly in space will be impossible without the use of manipulators and, in
the final account, assembler robots.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

The creation of robots and manipulators capable of alleviating a cosmonaut's labor,
and in some cases generally freeing him from the direct performance of some opera-
tion or another, is an extremely urgent problem.

Let us discuss several questions related to the prospects for using these types of
devices in space technological assembly processes.

When a manipulator is in operation, its functions consist primarily of grasping
solid objects and orienting them spatially.

In order for the actuating element of a manipulator to have the capability of mov-
ing and orienting in the appropriate fashion its grasping device and the object
held in it, it must have at least three independent advancing and three independent
rotating motions. Besides this, the grasping device must have yet another inde~
pendent motion: opening and closing of the gripping jaws. It is frequently neces-
sary to provide for additional degrees of freedom, so that it is possible to change
the shape of the actuating element or expand the manipulator's area of operation.

A manipulator's actuating element must be light, flexible and strong, have a wrist-
type joint for rapid attachment or removal of the gripping device, and have seven
basic degrees of freedom.

The grasping and installation of parts in ilmobile elements of equipment that are
mated precisely to them should be included in the category of manipulation opera-
tions of average complexity. In order to avoid the appearance of large stresses
and insure the final installation of precisely mated parts, a manipulator's actuat-
ing element must have a certain degree of flexibility. Flexibility is provided
either by elasticity of the actuating element or by slippage of the object in the
grasping device.

The use of systems for searching for and "feeling" objects enables a manipulator to
perform much more complicated operations and, on the other hand, lightens the re-
requirements for mutual orientation of the objects to be assembled and the automat-
ic unit. In this case the automaton and the object of assembly do not have to be
mutually oriented and can be in any position and at any point in the automaton's
operating range. If the automaton is equipped with a "visual analyser," the search
and identification process takes place in the optical channel, and only after it is
completed does the mechanical hand go into operation. In this case the manipula-
tor's hand can perform highly complex operations.

In order to perform a search, a manipulator's grasping device is usually guided by
a sensor that carries out the functions of the automaton's "sensing organs.“ The
automaton is controlled by a computer, the “memory“ of which--in addition to the
program's listed components--stores different subprograms, including a list of com-
mands for setting the manipulator into motion. Structurally, a robot can be a de-
vice, part of the assemblies and systems of which are mounted on a mobile platform,
while the other part of it is a control panel. Between the control panel (base)
and the robot there must be communication channels that solve the following prob-
lems: transmit to the control point information gathered with the robot's help;
transmit control information from the base to the robot; supply power to the sys-
tems installed in the robot.

58

FOI.OFFNJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Depending on the formulated structure of the overall system and the form of conun-
ication between the separate units, robots can be divided into the following
groups: manipulating robots; semiautomatic manipulating robots with remote control
and telecontrol; automatic robots with programing units; autonomous robots.

At the present time the most development work has been done on manipulating robots,
which, by combining in themselves comparatively uncomplicated automata and program-
ming units, possess a comparatively limited manipulating capability. The actuating
elements used in them are devices that automatically perform a cycle of monotypical
measuring, monitoring, manipulating and other operations. Such robot automata
(manipulating automate) are completely determined systems. In order to "teach" a
robot to do certain work, the operator Inst first, with his own hand, perform with
the manipulator all the required operations for entry in the memory units of the
manipulator's work program.

When working at great distances from the control point, and also in those cases
where it is impossible to maintain reliable communication over the radio channel

because of interference or other reasons, programing units can be used to control
a robot.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo 'Mashinostroyeniye", 1980

117106
CSO: 1866/4

59

ron nmnu Iver nmv
FOR‘0FFK]AI.USE(NULY

UDC: 629.78:530.2b

THERMAL CONDITIONS IN SPACECRAFT

Moscow TEPLOVOY REZHIH KOSHICHESKIKH APPARATOV in Russian 1980 (signed to press
23 Jan 80) pp 2-6, 231-232

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "ThermalConditions in Space-
craft" by Vladimir Viktorovich Halozemov, Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye",
957 copies, 232 pages, illustrated]

[Text] This book deals with problems of estimation, investigation and analysis by
methods of mathematical modeling, with the use of digital and analog computers,

of systems of provisions for thermal conditions (SOTR) in spacecraft. The principles
involved in choice of design parameters with the use of optimization methods were
demonstrated. This book is intended for engineering and technical personnel
specializing in the field of SOTR for aircraft and spacecraft. It may be useful to
instructors, graduate and undergraduate students of the relevant specialties.

Foreword

Life support for crews engaged in long-term space flights is one of the most important
problems of cosmonautics. It is a complex task to solve it, and it requires much
effort, as well as close collaboration of biologists, physicians and engineers in
different specialties. *
One of the most complicated elements of the general life support system (LSS),
which creates and maintains the conditions needed for man's life and work in
confined, sealed cabins, is the system of providing the thermal conditions (SOTR).
Its task includes formation of a specified thermal level in a spacecraft, with due
consideration of its correlation to the crew and environment in the presence of

the complex effects of extreme factors. To solve this problem effectively, new
approaches must be elaborated for developing, designing, studying and testing SOTR.

It is generally believed that it is sufficient to create stable thermal conditions,
of the greatest comfort, within the pressurized cabin for normal well-being and
high efficiency of man, both during flights and after returning to earth. In this
case, man is viewed as a certain, specified, static object. However, data that
have appeared in recent times refute this conception. Adaptive reactions of the
body may weaken during a prolonged stay under relatively stable ambient conditions.
Under such conditions, a change in one of the parameters, even when it is within
the permissible range, could lead to loss of resistance of the organism and, consev
quently, to worsening of well-being and capacity for work. Good well-being and

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

work capacity depend more on the dynamics of changes in ambient parameters, state of
adaptive mechanisms of the organism, which was determined by the conditions under
which man lived previously, than on the parameters of the environment at a given
point in time (a man may feel well both in the extreme cold and tropical heat). For
this reason, development of an SOTR, particularly for long-term flights, should

be made with due consideration of its correlation with man, the environment and

the construction of the spacecraft. Only such an approach, where man is viewed as
the main element of a complex system, can assure development of a really effective
SOTR that would guarantee the good physical condition and high work capacity of

crew members. .

There is another important aspect of SOTR design. When preparing for a flight,

the crew undergoes special training with due consideration of future conditions,

to which they will be exposed h1space. As arule, from the very first days of

the flight, the crew starts to prepare for the return to earth, with due considera-
tion of fulfilling the flight program. The SOTR, equipped with an appropriate
conditioning program and devices measuring and forecasting the state of crew members
and all spacecraft systems, could assume some of the functions of a training device
when man is in space.

The SOTR is a complex consisting of functionally interrelated subsystems. Complex
design and estimation of a multi-element SOTR , taking into cosideration the
correlation between the crew and environment, as well as different subsystems, is

a difficult task. The appreciable nonstationary nature of the main processes
occurring at all phases of flight adds more difficulties of both analysis and

choice of regulatory subsystems. There is still not enough experience in finding
complex solutions to such problems. They can be solved on the basis of a new
discipline, which has gained wide popularity and is related to analysis and syn-
thesis of large systems, which is called systems analysis [8, 61]. Complex systems
theory is the scientific. mainly mathematical, basis of systems analysis. Separation
of real systems into complex and simple ones is largely arbitrary; it is related
essentially to the extent of the role of complex "general systems" questions to

the study of systems. This, in turn, depends on both the properties of the system
proper and on the objectives of the study. Hith regard to the properties of a
system, the presence of which enables us to refer it to the category of complex
systems, we can state the following [41]: "He shall consider a system to be

complex if it consists of many interrelated and interacting eleements. It is

logical to expect that a complex system is capable of performing a complex function."

With reference to the SOTR of a spacecraft, it can be stated with certainty that it
has all the main features characterizing large systems. The considerable number of
complexly interacting elements, its link with the environment and man, justify

our classification of SOTR in the category of large systems, the design, analysis
and synthesis of which are made on the basis of systems analysis and general theory
of systems. However, exhaustive knowledge is required to use this approach, both
about processes that occur in typical elements and correlation between different
units and sybsystems. It is only after studying all of the distinctions of the
processes and correlation of elements of individual subsystems and complexes, and
after constructing mathematical models thereof that we can turn to the systems methods
of automated design and investigation with the use of modern computer technology.

To solve complex problems of design, analysis, synthesis and forecasting, it is the
most expedient to use functional decomposition of the SOTR, drawing upon mathematical

61

FOR OFF1C1A1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

modeling to examine different subsystems and elements, including man. Structural
and functional breakdown ["decomposition"] of systems and mathematical modeling
make it possible to elaborate the methodology of solution and obtain concrete
results for one of the functional subsystems, without losing the general aspect
of the problem but reducing its dimension.

The book offered to the reader is an attempt to present systematized material on
estimation, mathematical modeling and investigation of SOTR for spacecraft. The
first chapter deals with general aspects of thermal provisions and a new version

of system classification. The second chapter is concerned with analysis of external
and internal heat loads. The next chapters describe different variants of sub-
systems for heat insulation and heat regulation. The different subsystems are
examined on the basis of methods of mathematical modeling. Mathematical models are
given for different elements and subsystems, and they are analyzed. Hethods are
described for studying mathematical models of SOTR elements and subsystems with

the use of digital and analog computers. The last chapter discusses problems per-
taining to choice of design patameters for SOTR.

Many of the problems raised in this book are still far from being definitively
resolved. However, formulation and discussion thereof illustrate the importance
and need of continued research in these directions.

Thisauthor considers it to be his duty to express his appreciation to Prof A. P.
Vanichev, corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, for the valuable
comments and advice offered when he reviewed the manuscript, as well as to Ye. N.
Bondarev, doctor of engineering sciences, s. H. Bednov, candidate of engineering
sciences, R. M. Kopyatkevich and other friends who examined the manuscript and
expressed their wishes and suggestions, which were taken into consideration as much
as feasible in the final editing of the book.

This author expresses his gratefulness to V. S. Pichulin, A. Ya. Donov, E. A.
Kurmazenko, V. A. Tomskiy, I. I. Bogachev, S. N. Loginov, S. N. Kutepov, A. G. Bruk
and T. I. Baranenkova for their assistance in the preparation of some of the
material.

without presuming to have shed exhaustive light on the topic, this author would
be very grateful to readers for critical comments and suggestions, which should
he addressed to: 107885, Moscow, GSP-6, l Basmannyy per., 3, "Hashinostroyeniye"
Publishing House.

Contents Page

Foreword 3
Conventional Symbols 7
Chapter 1. General Questions of Providing Thermal Conditions in Pressurized

Cabins and Days of Spacecraft 8

1.1. Purpose of system for providing thermal conditions 8
1.2. Methods of providing thermal conditions 10
1.3. classification of systems for providing thermal conditions 13
1.4. Specifications for SOTR and parameters of thermal equipment 16
Chapter 2. Internal and External Heat Sources 21
2.1. Thermal status of man 21
2.2. Internal heat sources 27

62

F0R40FFKJALIEEIONLY
Chapter
5.1.
5.2.
533.
50“.

Chapter

6.3.
Chapter
7.1.
7.2.
7.3.
7.4.
Chapter
8.1.
8.2.

8.3.
8.4.
Chapter
9.1.
9.2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Main types of external heat sources and radiation models

Estimation of incident and absorbed radiant flow of heat

Use of computer to calculate external flow of heat

3. Meat-Preserving Subsystems of Thermal Insulation of Pressurized
Cabins and Bays

Meat-preserving subsystems based on heat regulating covers

Heat-preserving subsystems based on vacuum-shield insulation

Beat-preserving subsystems based on homogeneous insulation

4. Heat-Dissipating Subsystems of Thermal Insulation With Convective
Cooling

Heat-dissipating subsystems with airtight insulation

Heat-dissipating subsystems with porous insulation

Nonstationary heat transfer in heat-dissipating subsystems of ther-

mal insulation with porous insulation

5. Meat-Regulating Subsystems

Convective heat regulating subsystems

Evaluation of area of radiation heat exchanger

Open subsystems with change in aggregate state of coolant

Closed subsystems with change in aggregate state of coolant

6. Analysis of Joint Operation of Closed Meat-Regulating Subsystem
and Power Plant

Main correlations for power plant and thermal pump

Evaluation of parameters of steam-compression thermal pump and

power plant

Evaluation of parameters of heat-using thermal pump and power plant

7. Mathematical Modeling of Elements of Meat-Regulating Subsystems

Specifications for mathematical models of elements

Mathematical modeling of heat exchangers

Mathematical modeling of radiant heat exchangers

Mathematical models of locally correlated elements

8. Mathematical Modeling and Investigation of SOTR

Objectives and purposes of modeling SOTR

Mathematical modeling and investigation of 8018 with digital

computer

Mathematical modeling and investigation of SOTR with analog computer

Identification of parameters of mathematical models

9. Optimization of SOTR

General tasks of SOTR optimization

Choice of planned parameters of heat-regulation subsystems by the

method of Lagrange factors

Distinctions of the method of geometric programming

Mathematical model of heat exchanger

Mathematical models of radiant heater and ducts

Choice of planned [designed] parameters of heat-regulating subsystems

by the method of geometric programming

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Mashinostroyeniye”, 1980

10,657

CSO: 1866/999

63

F0l10FFKJAl.USEGM9LY

32
38
42

45
45
50
56

80

91
99
99
105
109
115

123
123

127
135
141
142
144
154
162
175
175

178
187
199
204
204

207
210
215
221

224
228
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPACE APPLICATIONS

UDC 536.625:669.275'849

ZERO-GRAVITY METAL. SEMICONDUCTOR MBLTING, CRYSTALLIZATION, PHASE FORMATION
EXPERIMENTS IN SPACE

Moscow PLAVLENIYE, KRISTALLIZAESIYA I PAZOOBRAZOVANIYB V NEVBSOHOSTI in 3088180
1979 (signed to press 11 Sep 79) pp 2. 253-255

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Melting, Crystallization and Phase
Formation Under Zero-Gravity Conditions", by L.I. Ivanov. v.3. Zemskov, V.N.
Kubasov, V.N. Pimenov, I.N. Belokurova, K.P. Gurov, Ye.V. Demina, A.N. Titkov
and I.L. Shul'pina. USSR Academy of Sciences, Institute of Metallurgy imeni
A.A. Baykov, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1200 COP1¢39 255 93808]

[Text] Questions are discussed, relating to the performance of technological
experiments in space for the purpose of an overall study of regularities in the
behavior of metal and semiconductor alloys under conditions of zero gravity.

A central place is set aside for the results of research performed within the
framework of the Soviet-American experiment in the "Soyuz-Apollo" program.
Features of certain kinetic processes under conditions of low gravity

in a space flight are studied, as sell as the prospects for utilizing these con-
ditions for producing materials with special properties.

This book is intended for specialists working on problems of space technology and
can also be helpful to students at technical VUZ's.

CONTENTS Page
Foreword 3
Part One. Metallic Systems
Chapter One. General Information on Phase Formation 10
1.1. Processes in the solid state 10
1.2. Brief description of solidification processes 17
1.3. Some ideas regarding the interaction of a solid and molten metal 20
1.4. Experimental data on the diffusion interaction of a solid and molten
metal 36
Chapter Two. Investigation of Metallic Systems in Space 53
2.1. Goals and objectives of space research 53
2.2. The "universal furnace" apparatus for technological experiments 55
2.3. Results of investigation of the properties of metallic systems after
experiments under conditions of zero gravity 67
2.6. Procedure for preparation of the experiment according to the "Soyuz-
Apollo" program 86
64

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USB1DNLY
F1)!‘0F1ﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(NWLY

Chapter Three. Melting and Crystallization of Metal Specimens Under Zero Gravity

Conditions; the "Soyuz-Apollo” Experiment

3.1. Investigation of a composite material

3.2. Interaction of molten A1 with U

3.3. Phase formation in contact of molten A1 with a H-Re alloy

3.4. Melting an alloy of the Cu-Al system

3.5. Experiment with A1 powder

Chapter Four. Some Mechanisms of the Interaction of Solid Metals with
Molten Under Zero-Gravity Conditions

4.1. Behavior of gas inclusions in a molten metal solution

4.2. Forming of ingots of a composite material in the crystallization

process
4.3. Phase formation with solid-liquid diffusion interaction
4 4. 0n utilizing features of phase formation for producing composite
materials

Bibliography

Part Two. Semiconductor Materials

Chapter Five. General Ideas Regarding Normal Oriented Crystallization of
Semiconductor Materials

Chapter Six. Survey of Results Obtained by American Specialists in the

Skylab and "Soyuz-Apollo" Programs

Crystallization of Ge doped with various components

Crystallization of InSb

Containerless crystallization of indium antimonide

. . Crystallization of solid solutions of AIIIBV compounds

. . Crystallization from the gas phase

hapter Seven. Growing Crystals of a Ge-Si-Sb Solid Solution in the Space
Complex of the Soyuz-Apollo Station.and on Earth

0 o

.
UléuNn-n
O

6
6
6
6
6
C

7.1. Temperature conditions of experiments

7.2. Original solid solution pieces

7.3. Construction of the ampoule

7.4. Characteristics of forces and acceleration acting on a furnace with

ampoules in space and terrestrial experiments
7.5. Methods of studying crystals
Chapter Eight. Key Results of Experiments on Crystallization of Ge-Si-Sb
Solid Solutions

8.1. Distribution of components in crystals

8.2. Investigation of crystalline structure

8.3 Electron microscope study of crystals of a Ge-Si-Sb solid solution

8.4. Results of additional simulation experiments on the earth

8.5 Mechanism of asymmetric distribution of components in cross sections
of crystals

Bibliography

Conclusion

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1979

8831
CSO: 1866/157 - END -

65

FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(NMLV

88
88
94
102
111
115

119
119

122
125

130
134

140

154
154
161
164
167
170

177
177
179
181

182
186

194
196
206
219
228

234
243
246