APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010034-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8227
17 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 14/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily fron foreign
newspapers, pericdicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
(] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sumaarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar naaes rendered phonetically or transliteruted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

PRNUREHDH' 0P PUBLICATIWS

JPlls publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Informtion Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recoaaaended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Govermaat Repgrta
Announcements issued seIi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. 0.5. Government Printing Office, Washington, 0.0.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names.
title and series) are available through Bell 6 ﬂowell. 01d
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio, “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road. Arlington, Virginia 22201.
l6. Alumn- -~

  

The report contains information on aeronautics; astronomy and astrophysics;
atmospheric sciences: chemistry; earth sciences and oceanography: electronics
and electrical engineering; energy conversion; materials; nathesaticel
sciences; cybernetica, computers; mechanical. industrial. civil. and urine
engineering; methods and equipment; sissile technology; navigation,
cousunications. detection, and countermeasures. nuclear science and technology:
ordnance; physics; propulsion and fuels; space technology; and scientists

and scientific organisation in the physical sciences.

     
 
      

. I. \ \-a.l~ .m-I I'm vii-N Amly~n~. 7.. l’o-uurtol‘

USSR Electronics Missile Technology
Aeronautics Electrical Engineering Navigation and

Astronomy .nergy Conversion Co-unications

Astrophysics Materials Detection and
Atnospheric Sciences "schematics counter-assures
Che-istry Hechanical Engineering Nuclear Science and
Computers civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetics industrial Engineering Ordnance

Earth Sciences Marine Engineering Physics

Oceanography Ne thods

"5- H- nnlu-u "re-ml lulul 1min Pmpulsion and Fuels

Equipment Space Technology

 

  

m. I "Mil “Wu-w 01.03.06.07,08.09.10.11.12.13.14,16:17,18.19.20,21.22

II. .\\ "Lei-oh!) Vale-nu III M
For official Use Only. Limited ., ‘ ' ' .

Huber of Copies Available From JPRS

       
   

"""‘ ""' " "" ' ' "' ms you an M: esvsooucco ""°“"°‘ ""'""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8227

i7 January 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(rouo 4/79)

Coureurs
ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

Digital Detection of Incoherent Pulse Signals for the Case
of a Changing Noise Power

(K.K. Vasil'yev; IZVES'I'IYA VUZ MDIOELEKTRONIKA,

N0 1’ 1978) coseseossosooosasoosoeeoeeoeoeeoeeesoseos

No-Stage Search for a Moving Target
(AJ. Terpugov, F.A. Shapiro; IZVESTIYA V02 RADIO-
ELEKTRONINA. No 7. 1978)

PHYSICS

Surface Waves in Distributed-Coupling Integrated Optics
Components (Review Article)
(Yu. A. Bykovskiy. et al.: KVAN‘I'OVAYA ELEK'I‘RONIKA.

“0V 78) eeeoeeoeeooosee-aeoeeeaoaoeeeeoeooease-oases.

Radiation-Optical Stability of Low-lass Class Fiber
Optical waveguides
(A.N. Gur'yanov, et al.; KVAN'IOVAYA ELMRONIKA.

NOV 73) aoeoesoeeoeeooeooseoassaseoaseeooooooeoeoeses

Fiber-Optic Date Link for Telecoeaunications Systeas
(2h. 1. Alterov, et al.: KVAN‘I‘OVAYA ELEK'IRONIKA,

Nov 78) .............................................

Feasibility of Developing Optical Memory Eleaents Based
on GaAs ND? Structures

(V.A. Gaysler, et al.; RVANTOVAYA ELEK‘I'RONIKA.

NOV 78) eoooscooossaeseoooooosooeooeoaaeeoaosooaoooso

Theraal Radio Radiation Fran Clouds

(A.B. Akvilonova, 3.6. Kutuza; RADIO'I'EKNNIKA I
ELEKTRONIKA, No 9. 1978)

PAGE

10

16

A7

51

56

59

-a- [III-USSR-Z3Sﬁ'll’000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Cont inuod)

Alplifying Dynamic Holograms
(Yo. V. Ivskin. ct sl.: ZHURNAL PRIKLADNOY
spmnosKoPII. Jun 78) .00OII.0...UOOOOCOOOOOOOOOUOOI.

SCIENTISTS-IND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

Second International School of Semiconductor Blectrooptics
'Cetniewo-l978'

(P.G. Yeliseyev, HA. Reruns KVANTOVAYA BLBKTRONIKA,

Nov 78) eeeeoeeeeeeeoeoooesoneooeeeeeeeeoooeoeeseoeete

PUBLICATIONS

Pertornsnce of Operating Systems

(EA. Trekhtenberg; MK RABOTAYUT OPERATSION'NYYE
81m. 1978) OOIOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOIOOIIIOOOOOCOOOOOOCO

The Theoretical Principles of Radar
(LA. Korostelev, et sl.; TEORBTICHBSKIYE OSNOVY
WIOWTSII. 1918) soeeeeeeoeeeoeeeeoeeeeeoseoeeeoee

Transition Regions in Bpitexiel Semiconductor Films
(L.N. Aleksandrov; PERMODNYYE OBLASTI
EPITAKSIAL'NYIG! POUIPROVODNIKOVYIO! PLBNOK, 1978) .....

- b -
P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 621.391.2

DIGITAL DETECTION OF INCOHERENT PULSE SIGNALS FOR THE CASE OF A CHANGING
NOISE FOHER

Kiev IZVESTIYA VUZ RADIOELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 21 No 7, 1978 pp 11-18

[Article by K. K. Vasil'yev, manuscript received 29 Her 77, following re-
vision 21 Dec 77]

[Text] Optimal and quasioptissl algorithnsare synthesised
for the detection of signals in the case of a changing
noise dispersion. The asymptotic effectiveness of the
proposed processing rules is determined with respect to an

optimal signal detector for the case of a known interfer-
ence power.

Situations are frequently encountered when detecting radio signals against a
background of interference in which the dispersion of the noise is unknown,
and can vary during the time needed to make the observations. In this case,
an effective solution of the detection problem can be found if in each J-th
signal postionn (j - l, N) the observer positions a set of n independent
readouts {x1ﬂ _1, made in the region of the interference (Figure l). in
addition to ihe readout of the input process so in the region of the supposed
signal. In this case, the difference ("contres ") between the noise and use-
ful signal readouts is employed for the detection.

A large quantity of literature devoted to the problem considered here con-
tains research on optimal algorithms for signal detection for the case of an
unknown noise dispersion, but where the dispersionu is constant within the
limits of all of the reference readouts ({x11}2.1)j_1.

In this paper, the noise immunity of quasioptimsl rules for processing signals
having binary and multilevel asplitude quantization is synthesized and sna-
lyzed. The detectors which are found maintain their effectiveness even in the
case where the ndispersion of the interference remains constant only for the
readouts (s1J)1_1. which correspond to one signal position.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

I, has.

Figure l. The realization of the in—
put random process.

Optimal Algorithms . ,

The synthesis of the detection rule
in the problem considered here with
unknown and changing values 8f the

interference dispersion {as} .1 can
be accomplished in various w ya. the
lost acceptable of which is the fol-
lowing: the nethod of laxiaue like-

lihood (1], the enpiricel theory of
[2] or bayyesovskiy's approach [3].
Considering the agreement in practice of the synthesis results using these
methods. we shall consider a shorter path, which consists in using
Bayyesovskiy's approach. In this case, the unknown values of the dispersions
_ are treated as randoe quantities with distribution densities of (”(0 N.
By assuming the continuity of the true distribution laws, it is ex ient to

choose "nondistorting, improper" distributions as the a priori densities [3]:

(ma!) - 1. aJ ;_ my“.

He shall likewise wﬁite the expressions for the coebined distributions of the
readouts (“11’3'0’J'l in the presence of a signal which fluctuates in anpli-

tude: N .
, .9
”WE Wuvﬁwgﬁyﬁdﬂ 1. “(‘ﬁ)
And for the case of a signal with a constant amplitude -
ll , a
V93 8‘
WWW-4% -f)'°(%)ﬂ%"v(--é)'

where e is the power signal to noise ratio; Io(°) is a nodified zero order
Bessel function [1.],

By writing the likelihood ratio A - w1(x; s)/w1(x; s - 0). where
O n N
mum-j a.“ was) [1 w(o,)do,.
1-:

following integration, we find a procedure for signal detection which'is op-
timal in the sense of the Riemann-Pearson criterion: -

1. l>A.—cersaa ecu, Signal present
<A.—ultsua set. Signal absent,

where A0 is a constant quantity, which is chosen from the specified false

alar- probability. In this case, for the nodal of a signal with a rando-
anplitude statistic:

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A
T-2m(l+‘lr+{T;)’
H
_ (n
where "I-‘ﬂﬂlsz'
For the nodal of a signal with a constant amplitude:
A!
T- — 3 )f[— —0 ;I;- at .
g'“l°"( ITU. ' ‘" '5’ 1733]} m

where L‘llo; B; 6;] is a degenerate hyper-geometric function [A].

The resulting fornulas deternine the critical regions of the local optimal
algorithms, since in the case considered here, a uniform detection rule of
the greatest power does not exist for any values of s, where a << 1 detect-

ors for signals with random and constant amplitude coincide. It can be shown
that in this case

II
T-zhm+m. 0)

1-“

An important specific feature of the procedures found here is the monotonic
dependence of the terns in formlas (l) - (3) on the value of the statistics

A3. This pernits writing a general detection rule with K-level amplitude
quantization for the two signals nodela:

N "-1

8 M1 resent
2 Ekaunl-hIUIkaH-M] F“ 4&3: ’8" (a)
1-: pl <h' 9131‘! ugrunt

where hug) are the quantization levels; k“ - O; is the detection threshold;
h

weighting factor of the p-th level; le - 1 when x g 0 and “[3] - 0
x <_ 0.

The optimization of the derived rule (6) consists in finding a maxim of the
correct detection probability for all values of the para-stars ( :5) and
with the H-superiaposed condition for false alarn probability t t
FQKRP; up)” _ . to) I const. An investigation of this prohlen shows that the
effectiven es of the algorithms will practicsll inot change if values are
chosen from the natural number series (RE-p as the optima set of
on rulei (

weighting factors. In this case, detec l.) is simplified and can
be written in the form:

II 11—!
z gum-MN.
[nip-l

(5)

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Quuaioptimal Algorithms

The resulting digital signal detection algorithm (5) also nakes it possible to
find a number of simple quasioptimal procedures.‘ For this, we shall consider
the critical region of the p-th quantization level:

I
A,—k,=-0 ans 4,—5.2;3—0.
or I'l
It is not difficult to see that the latter formula is the equation of a cone
in the n + 1 measurement space.

He shall construct a hyperpyramid, circumscribed around the cone, as the sub-
optimal critical region. For this, we draw n tangential planes, the inter-
section of which form the suboptimal region (Figure 2). Since the rotation
of the system of coordinates about the general x0 axis of the cone and the
pyramid does not change the quality of the proces ing procedure, we shall
choose that postion of the system {x1 }, for which the planes contain the
straight lines (on - @153 (xkj . )ﬁq, k f “2.1. formed by the inter-

section of the coordinate surfaces {Oxojxij} with the surface of the cone
(0A1 and 0A; in Figure 2). In this case, the conditions of the system of
hyperplanes can be specified by the simpler equations (to: - ypx‘j - 0):“,

where 19 - lit-1:.
It is not difficult to convince oneself that the sample point (1:1.1 )2-0
located inside the pyramid if any of the following conditions are mat:

is

I
xu>m§gwu m (toi> want... an ZUIxu-Wul-n»
or 01' (-I

where sup It” is the value of the greatest of the readouts of {31512.1.

Three comparatively simple quasioptimal signal detection rules follow directly
from these relationships:

II 11-:
2 E Ulw-ruypmlEK. (6’
l-U-I

N “-1 m >

E; ﬂul‘u-Yr‘u)< K0 (7)
M-IU .‘U[ >

'— a! — K
IE”; I; I“ 7 U] n]< 00 (8)

 

which are based on a pair by pair comparison of the readout in the region of
the proposed signal x01 with each of n reference resdouts of the interference

(1:15}.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

{‘ [

”I- U ‘01-? u

by noting that binsry quantization of the statistic .6! ﬂ 1 with
respect to the level n is esployed in the latter algorithn, one can write

one acre suboptinal detection algorithm. which was studied in the literature

[5]: II M-l e

‘ 2 ZUW‘W'JE K" (9)
3-! (II

in which supplemental quantization of the statistic vp is excluded and new
values of the quantization levels (hp) are introduced.

Shown in Figures 3a and 3b are block diagrsns of the resulting algorithns
(6) and (7) for the case of H-level amplitude quantization. As can be seen
from the drawings, the resin operation is binary quantization of the readout
x03, nultiplied by constant coefficients a}; 1/71, o2 . “/72. ... ,

“rd-l . Yﬂ-ZIYH-l’ and of the readouts {‘i 1. by neans of the coeparators K.
In this case. it is simplest to realize a gorithn (6), the circuit of which
contains an “-1 comparator and a sup block for segregating the largest of

the interference readouts.

The block disgrans for algorithns (8) and (9) differ free the circuit of
Figure 3b only in the changes of the elesents of block I. (Figure 3c and 3d).
Nonetheless, it should be noted that to construct the detection rule (9),

it is necessary to increase the voluse of the mory n tines, since the
missus nueber written into the adder at the j-th signal position is equal
to n 14-1).

The aethod treated here for constructing
suboptimal critical regions provides for

invariance of the signal processing rules
with respect to linear transforeations
(£(xj) - cjxj, c, > 0} of the snail

samples :5 - (‘15’3-0 being analysed.

Therefore. the derived algorithle (6)
- (9), just as the optimal ones. are
stable when the dispersion of the input
process changes. Along with this, it is
not difficult to show that the class of
possible transfornstiens of (£00). which
preserve the level of the threshold signal
for quasioptinal algorithla is considerably
Figure 2. Opti-al and quasi opti- broader than the class of linear trans-
:al critical regions in fornstions. In fact, if P00 and Nero)
three—dimensional space are one-dimensional distribution functions
(n - 2). of the readouts x j; i :1 and x0 , then
the probability of exceeding the hreshold
level 7p for procedures (6) - (8) can be
written in the fore:

 

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-° -5‘ (Jhdr 0))'4F(x.),

where 8 - 1/79.

Correspondingly, the probability of exceeding the threshold 73. following
the transformation 3: - ﬁx), is:

p' - [derog'dfm - [(Mjmdﬂxh'dnxo.

where ¢(B) - 1/73.

Thus, P - P' for all of the transformations which satisfy the functional
equation ((8):) -- ¢(a)f(x). The resulting equation is easily reduced to the
well-known one 3(8):) - s(8)g(x) by means of the substitution!“ g(x) - f(x)lf(l).
where the well-known equation has the unique solution 3(a) - x" where x > 0.
Since the analysis carried out here is justified for any (3-th) signal po-
sition. the class of transformations of the input process which preserxe the
level of the threshold signal can be written in the font (f (x) - c x“ ,

63 > 0. NJ I 0}. Thus, suboptisal algorithm (6) - (8) havg specified non-
paranetric properties which favorably distinguish than fros optimal ones

Which are invariant only with respect to scale transformations.

 
   

  
 

.. ignel
n resent I'-

: | Sign].
L- --J Present
‘. I].
Absent (b)! an Signal
Absent

Figure 3. Structural configurations of quasioptilal algorithm.

* The presupposition f(l) 9‘ 0 does not narrow the class of transfornstions,
since in the contrary case. f(xl) - 0(x)f(l), and consequently. f(x) 5 0.

6
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Effectiveness of Optimal and Quasioptimal Algoritlns

To assess the quality of the algorithms which were found, for the case of a
large number of signal postione N, we shall make use of the criterion of
their asymptotic effectiveness (on) with respect to an optimal rule for
signal detection for the case of completely known interference parameters.
Since the law governing the distribution of the accumulated sums for all of
the algorithms considered here approaches a normal law in step with an in-
crease in N, the calculation of the OAR can be accomplished from the fol-

1 f 1 6
m3 ormu a I )3 P_)ﬂ~./N—JLI:[M.{T}/0‘UN°;’

where No is the number of signal postions being analyzed for an optimal de-
tector for the case of a constant noise power; m1('l‘} is the mathematical
mean value of the statistic ‘1' in the presence of a useful signal; oil is

the dispersion of ‘1' in the noise region. He shall find the 0A! of the
signal processing rules (4) - (9) for the extreme cases H -> a and H - 2.

"hen H + I, the effectiveness of all of the detectors considered here coin-
cides with the on of optimal algorithm based on statistics (1) - (3).
To find the magnitude of the effectiveness, we note that the st:tistic 11

takes the form of the ratio of two random quantities x83 and 233'

which when s << 1, follows a game distribution. By using the well-known

rules for the composition of probability laws, we find the following formula
for the distribution density of 11:

MM-n/(l +8)!1 + am/(l MW“.
which is justified for the model of a signal with an unknown amplitude where
s << 1, while for s fluctuating signal, for any values of a. Following
this, it is not difficult to compute the dispersion and the mathematical

mean of the statistic (3) and to derive an expression for the can of optimal
algorithms (1) - (3).

n e
p-n-O-Z

 

when H - 2, the formulas for the on of optimal algorithms (6) and (5)
mes/(1mm war-11
And quasioptimal algorithms (6) - (8)
a 3 n
9.-[}:(7‘/(i+7‘))]/ now/o-n}
(II (III

are found in a similar fashion. He will note that in the case considered
here of binary quantization, when 7 - 1.0, the resulting detection rules (6)

- (8) coincide with the well-known nonparametric criterion of [7] which has
an effectiveness of

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

s I a
p.-p.(v~I)-%(21-'ﬁ).

feel

and in substantially lower than ”V (Pigure 1.), A conpsrison of the optinel
value" of the threshold level 7 (Table l) with the velues v - 1. 0. used in

paper [7]. explains the smell level of effectiveness 90 for lsrge veluee
of no

Also shown in Figure I. are the OAE'e of the processing rules considered here
calculated on s digital conputer as e function of the nusbsr of reference
readouts n in the interference region, for the corresponding values of the
optinel threshold levels 1. k and h (Teble 1). In this csse. fornulse
derived in the literature [5] were used to cslculste the effectiveness "c

of detection rule (9). An enelyois of the results presented here sllowe
the following conclusions.

1. The leest mount of loss with respect to the
cese of completely known interference psrenetsre
is detcrnined by the effectiveness of p of rules
(1) - (3). These sens vslues of the ef ectivene
1‘! nes- are schi sved when using slgorithne (5) -

'[éﬁiﬁllll 5‘9). with eultilsﬁ l enplitude qusntiestion if
i‘l.m.l 2. A substsntisl simplification of the detectors

1 ud
I'll IiEF csn be echieved by using esp it e guaranty,"

o _ , with e seell nueber of qusntizstion with e essll
I 0 ' 7 W ” ’ masher of levels. In this cue, the requisite
increese in the ssnple volune with respect to
the ceee of H -o -. even for the use of binsry
quentirstion. enounts to 1.31 - 1.56 tiles.
depending on n. This loss fells off repidly
with en inereese in the number of qusntisstion
levels. Per exesple. when n - 1. the effect-
iveness of elgorithns (5) - (9) is precticslly
equel to the sexin- snount, if the number of
quentizetien levels is h > 4 (‘rehle 2).

 
  

  
    
 

 

 
   

Figure 4. The ssyllptotic
effectiveness of
the optinsl no.
on end quesiopti-
ul 9 . ac and up
slgorthus es s

function of the
nunber of refer-
ence interference
reedouts.

 

POI OFPICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2

M 2 3 4'6 0 1 on

p I 0.26 I 0.30 I “All 0.32 | 0.32 0.3:! 0.33

3. A comparison of the effectiveness of the optinsl algorithm (4) end (5)

end the sinple quosioptinnl algorithm: with multilevel quantization shows

that the enount of the losses does not exceed 9!. A cooperatively high

effectiveness pi for detection rule (9) is echieved et the cost of soeewhst
II

of en increese

l.

3.

It.

5.

6.

the memory voluse.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Hilks 8., "Metenetichesksye stetistike" (”Mathematical Ststistics"],
Moscow, Neuke Publishers. 1967.

Bogdsnovich V.A., "Prieeneniye printsipe nesseshchsnnosti v sedechskh
ohnsrushneiye s epriornoy neopredelennost‘yu" ("The Application of the
Principle of Papiricisn to Problems of Detection with Apriori Ambiguity").
12‘]. WZOV - RADIOBLEKTRONIKA [PROCEEDINGS OP ‘1‘"! I116"!!! IUCA‘I‘IONM.
INSTITUTES - MDIOBLECTROMCSI, 1972. 15, No 4. p 653.

De Great 3., "Optinel'nyye stutisticheshiye resheniye" ["0ptinel Ststis-
ticel Solutions"l, Roscow. Mir Publishers. 1974.

Gredshteyn 1.8.. Ryzhik I.h., "Tablitsy intesrslov, sum. rysdov. i

ptoisvedeniy" ("Tebles of Integrsls, Sues, Series end Products"]. Hoecow.
Neuhe'Publishers, 1971.

Vesil'yev K.K., Kruushchenko V.I.. "Asilptoticheskeye effektivnost'
nekotoryltb algorithm obnoruzheniys signelov v shunhh neizvestnoy
noshchnosti" ("The Asymptotic Effectiveness of Certein Signsl Detection
Algorithms in Noise of on Unknown Power"l, RADIOTZKHNIKA I RBKTRONIKA
[RADIO snowman AND ELECTRONICS]. 197$, 20, No 5, p 1095.

ﬂensen, Olsen, "Ncpermtricheskoye obnerusheniye signelov s irpol'sovsniyee
ohohshchennogo :nehovogo kriteriye" [”Nonperenetric Detection of Signels

By Home of e Generelieed Sign Criterion"), “RUBEN“ RADIOBLMRONIKA
(A‘OKEIGN RADIOELECTRONICSI, 1972, No 9, p 28.

Dillard, Entonyuk, "Inverientnsys otnositel'no respredeleniys signele
protaedure obneruzheniye dlye nus" ["A Detection Procedure for Redsrs

which is Inverient with Respect to the Signel Distribution”), MUDBZIINAYA
MDIOBLUI'RONIKA, 1971. No D, p 3.

COPYRIGHT: 'itvestiye vuzow SSSR - hdioelektronilze, 1978

8225
080381“ [519

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 519.2
THO-STAGE SEARCH FOR A MOVING TARGET

Kiev IZVESTIYA W2 RADIOELEKTRONIKA in Ruaaian Vol 21 No 7. 1978 pp ao-u.

[Article by A.P. rerpugov and LA. Shapiro, nanuecript received 28 her 77,
following revieion, 10 Nov 77]

[Text] A nodified algorittu for two-atage target aearch
in a multichannel eyeten, which takes into account the
ehifting of the target from channel to channel, in pro-
poaad and investigated.

For target aearch problena in a nultichannel ayaten, the neat uaual nethod
ia the aequential axe-ination of the channela, where a deciaion ia Iade con-
cerning the praaence or abaence of. a target in each of then. Il'he appearance
of inertialleaa twitching devicea and antennae with electrical hea- map,
which permit the practically inatantaneoua connection of the aearch device
to the output of any channel, have ude it poaeihle to use were effective,
even lore conplex algoritlne for target search. Thus. a two-atage target
search algoritlla ie propoeed in [l] (or a nultichannel ayaten, which con-
aiata in the following.

In the tint atage, all of the channela are attained aequentially. one after
the other for a certain tine to. which ia leaa than the tine t1 needed to
lake a decision concerning the praaence or ahaence of a target in the channel.
The value of the logarithl o! the likelihood ratio ia scanned for each
channel, and thia ratio in etored.

All of the channela are ordered. haaed on the decline in the mound valuea
of the logaritll of the likel hood ratio. i.e.. the channel with the maxi-la
logarithm of the likelihood ratio in given the amber 1, while the channel with
the nini-un logeritlu of the likelihood ratio ia given the uni-um m-her.

In the aecond atage. the channela are each attained the order of increaae
in their numbers for a tine t . and in thia caae, a deciaion ie made concern-
ing the preaence or ahaence o} a target in each of then.

However, thia neth of target aearch, juet an the algoritl-a. which are pre-
eentcd in [2, 3. 6], do not at all take into account the fact that over the

10
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tine between the preliminary and the final examination. the target can shift
tron one channel to another (for exanple. a radar target can nove free one
part of the scanning sector into another).

A modification of the algorithn presented in [l] is treated in this article,
which pernita accounting for the possible novelents of the target fron one
channel to another during the tine between the preliminary and final exam-
ination. For this. it is proposed that following the preliminary exaninations
stage, the values of the logarithn of the likelihood ratio be reconputed free
the following fornulax N
U; - 2 41.0..

Isl
where “k is the neasured value of the logarithn of the likelihood ratio in
the k-th channel; q k are certain coefficients, which depend on the rate
at which the target shifts from one channel to another: u is the reconputed
value of the logarithnofthelikelihood ratio in the j-th channel. The
channels are to be ordered with respect to decreasing values of u', rather
than the quantities u . The case studied in this paper is that where during
the tine between the Atelininary examination of the channel and its exanination
in the second stage, there is a probability of l - p that the target can re-
nain in the sane channel where it was, and a probability of p/2 that it can
go to the next channel to the left and a probability p/2 that it can shift
to the next channel to the right, while the reconputation of the values of
the logarithn of the likelihood ratio is carried out fro. the following
fornule:

u;-0u,_‘ +0 -- 29)u,+qul+l. 0 <4 (1/2. (1)

It is apparent that this nodel of target notion corresponds to reality only
for the case where it travels sufficiently slowly through the channels. For

a sore precise study, its transtion to channels renewed by 2. 3, etc. channels
free the initial channel would have to be taken into account. The fornulas
derived in this case will be sinilar to those given in the article, only in
enornously lore conplex.

One of the neat important characteristics of a detection systen is the tine
transpiring between the start of the search and the selection of the channel
with the target (the target detection time). Before loving on to finding the
tine for detecting the channel with the target, we shall introduce the re—
quisite synbols. He shall assume that there are N channels in all (N >> 1).
and the target can be located only in one of then. He shall cssune that there
is one search device. Just as in [1. 4]. we shall assume that the neasured
values of the logarithn of the likelihood ratio are normal tendon quantities
with a dispersion of Zero and a nathenatical nean value of i,"‘o depending

on whether the target is in the channel or is not there." here u is a quanti-
ty which characterizes the channel and has the sense of the signal to noise
ratio, while to is the tine for the prelininary exanination of each channel.
Since the ordering is now carried out with respect to the quantities u; from

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

(1), the conditional average tine for detecting the channel with the target.

given the assunption that during the preli-inary exaaination the target was
in the channel with the number i, is equal to:

+as +ss
a-Nlo +‘I [Pugs 'S'P(u;. u»du;du;+
-2-- vr-vi

+§m§ ‘1 .meruzwuwuzjw. (2)

where p(uj, u') is the combined probability density for the quantities u;
and “k' The kfirst tera in (2) is the tile set aside for the preliainar
examination. The second tern, takes into account the shift of the target
free one channel to another, represents the time needed to study those chan-
nels without the target, which proved to be in front of the channel with
target following ordering. The first tars in the square brackets appears

if the target remained in the sane channel where it was between the prelis-
inary and the final inspection. The second tern will appear in the square
brackets in (2) if during the tile between the preliminary and final in-
spection, the target moved fro. the channel with nusber i to the channel

with the nuaber k . The third tern in (2) is the tile which goes for study»
ing the channel with the target in the second step.

We will note that it is essused in the derivation of this forsula that the
second step is terminated with the correct decision on the presence of the
target in one of the channels. In actual fact. if the probability of ais-
sing the target is equal to B, then the average tile for detecting the target

uﬁ-z+U-”TszMn Tisweunfuacmﬂueumcnh.3y
transforming this expression to the fora:

ﬁ'rd'TLiT'

we see that a relative error on the order of B has been ad-itted in for-ole
(2), which can be neglected for ssall values of a.

It follows free (1) that u' are nor-a1 tendon quantities
' with the dispersiod: 11(u;}-2a(1—4q+6¢) v].

with the average value:

., 00-49) m [-1,

"I'I-w-zq) ’ 1-121.
“ ' Ian-1.1::

12
FOR OI?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and with the covarintion:

coo(u;.u;)-2a.::“-2” :::’l:;:
'0 for the reneining k.

Taking these characteristics into eccount. in which a - ”‘0' performing un-
complicated transformations and taking into account the fact that p“ -
- 1 - pyi while m - m for I: - kl - 1. we find that:

r-~g+:.[a—p)|2o(_vaﬁl_:&ﬁm)+

+’°(‘“Vﬁ§”ﬁ)+‘”"’°(‘ﬁw?%v) +

+'[~':+°( “1%)+°(-Wm-s.w)+

+o(—V3y -w+5¢’ )+(h—no(~vzm)]}+," (3)

here 0 (0 _ (mo-m s‘ e'mdx.

Designating ut - a . introducing the quantity villi in the analysis and going
to the lieit re 9 - in (3), we find

awn/Nun. [a —p)o(- vsrr'gﬁ’ﬁﬁ.) +
+'°(-V;ﬁ%ﬁ)]' (b)

He will note that the average detection tine for the channel with the target
using the algoritt- presented in [l] is derived fron (4) when q - 0. sons-
thing which corresponds to the situation where the ordering is carried out
in terns of decreasing values of uj. and not as. In this case:

?.-c+¢.[(|-P)°(-V3)+pﬂl- (S)

In the following, we will conpare the algorithms studied here with the search
procedure presented in [1], since it is a nodification of the algorithm of [1).

He shall now hove on to the nininitation of the average detection tine for
_t_he channel with the target. It is not difficult to see that the quantity
r in (5). treated as a function of the paraneters q and a - c , has a lini-
eue with respect to this variable, and by choosing the value of the paraseter

q in the best fashion. one can achieve a decrease in the average detection
two

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WHCIAL USE ONLY

   
     
   

V
:

f\3i

I‘.
i

‘l\\\‘m-I
"e

  

‘lmu-I

        

Figure 1. Figure 2.

The optimun values_ of the parameters q and c are derived from the equation
tions at/aq - 0, ar/ac - 0, which take on the fore:

(1—2»
p_ MV‘EW) . (6,
24oz "" 5’ 5+(I-2q)w( )
W- " 44:? W—éfgﬁ m
-—m-4+ __ ,
a (I—p)(I—2o)¢(+‘_:%s)+m(m ‘

He shall coapare the proposed algorithm with a two-step algorithm, which does
not take into account target notion. and which is derived from our's if we
set q - 0. In this case, the optimal value c - c1 is found iron the equation
arp/ac - 0, which has the form:

2t.

"" (i—Tw—‘(co ' (a)
The advantage gained in the average detection time is equal to
A—._ 4+¢nl(l-p)0(-c.)+p/2]

chi-a. (l-p)m(- ﬂ) )+'°( W)

Equations (6) - (8) were solved numerically: by specifying a - c2 and p,

q was found free (6), and then a was found from (7) and c was found
from (8). Shown in Figure l are values of a as a function o al for vari-
ous values of p, free which it follows that because of the time optimization
of the preliminary inspection, the average detection time is curtailed by

an saount which can reach 601. we will note that only is the average target
detection tine curtailed, but also the coaplete scanning cycle time. Shown
in Figure 2 is q as a function of p for different values of a - uto. fro-
vhich it can be seen that the quantity q increases monotonically with an
increase in p, where the result is q - 0 at p - 0 (i.e.. the original

14
FOR OPFXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OSFICIAL USE ONLY

algorithm presented in [I] is obtained for a stationary target). and when
p - l. q - 0.5. The dependence of q on p for various vnlues of a does
not deviate very sharply from the function q I p/2.

Thus, the algorithm modification proposed here, which takes into account the

shifting of the target from channel to channel, can rather substantially
curtail the average target detection time.

1.

2.

3.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Poaner 3.6.. "Optimal Search Procedures", I888 TRANS., 1963, 11-9, No 3.
p 157.

Akindinov V.V.. “Otnositel‘naya effektivnost' optimal'ncgo alsoritme
mnogoetapnogo poiska" ["Ths Relative Effectiveness of an Optimal Algorithm
for Hultietep Search"], 12V. AN SSSR, TEKHNICHESKAYA KIBBRNBTIKA [PROCEED~

INGS 0? THE USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES, ENGINBERING CYBERNETICS]. 196‘, N0 4,
P 310.

Bureyev V.A., Hen'shikov A.V.. "Aneliz kharakteristik ohnaruzheniya sistem
s perelennoy razreshayushchey sposobaost'yu" ["An Analysis of the Charac-
teristics of Detections Systems with a Variable Resolving Pover"],

mmscmm r mmoum [RADIO museums m ELECTRONICS], 1965, 10,
No 12, p 2091.

Torpugov, A.F., Shapiro P.A., "Dvukhetapnyy poisk signala v Inosokanal'noy
sisteme s uporyedochivaniyem kanalov" ["Tuo-Step Signal Search in a Multi-

channel System vith Ordering of the Channels"]. 12V. AN SSSR, TEKHNICHBSKAYA
RIDERNETIKA, 1976, No 2, p 126.

COPYRIGHT: Izvestiya vuzov SSSR - Radioelektronike, 1978

8225
680:8164/0502

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYS 1C8

00¢ 62).. 372.8.09

SURFACE WAVES IN DISTRIW-CWPLING INTEGRATED OPTICS mourns (WISH
ARTICLE)

Moscow WWW. emu in Russian Vol 5 No ll, Nov 78 signed to press
3 Apr 78 pp 2309-2331

[Article by Yu. A. Bykovskiy, v. 1.. Smirnov and A. V. Shnsl'ko. Moscow
Engineering-Physics Institute]

[Mt] A survey of the literature devoted to the interaction
and transformation of surface waves in distributed-coupling
integrated optics elevents is given. A general description
of distributed coupling of surface waves in thirfiln wave-
guides (11") is given and their interaction and transforma-
tion in waveguides with periodic modulation of parameters
are considered in detail. The variom types of periodic
modulation of m paransters are considered and waive
analysis of then is conducted. The main commute and de-
vices of integrated optics circuits based on diffraction-
grating periodic structures are considered. he possibili-
ties of using “aperiodic“ grating structures in integrated
objects are shown and devices with tunnel distributed com-
ling are considered.

Many phenosona in physics and engineering can be regarded as coupled wave
phenomena [1]. here is also a large nulber of phenonena of distributed
coupling of surface waves in coeponents and devices of various functional
designation in integrated optics. 'lhey include radiation scattering on‘the
irregularities of dielectric thin-file waveguides (m). diffraction trans-
fornations of surface waves on grating structures and directional branching
of power. mode conversion: and nonlinear interactions. 0f greatest interest
in integrated optics are devices and cosponents developed on the basis of
the phenol-ens of coupling and interaction of surface waves in M with

periodic modulation of parameters which find application in development of
active devices -- distributed-feedback (maze) and distributed Bragg-mirror

(m) lasers -- and in developnant of various passive devices - filters.
radiation snatching cosponents, node conversion cowonents, diffraction

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OhFlCIAL USE ONLY

modulators and deflectors .and also for spatial-selective radiation filtration
in m. Many of the devices enumerated above may find extensive application
in optical cot-minications lines (018) based on fiber light guides.

A general description of distributed coupling of surface waves in m is
given and the interaction and transformation or surface waves in waveguides
with periodic modulation of parameters are considered in detail. 'lhe main

wave theory [2-5]. According to this approach, the resulting wave caused by
perturbation of. 'er parameters is written in the form or the sun of unper-
turbed modes shoee asplitudes vary along the direction of propagation a due
to sous intermode cowling and it is assumed that variation of saplitudes
by z are small at distances on the order of the wavelength. In the general
case the theory of coupled waves considers the relationship between wave-
guide modes which form a ccsplete orthogonal system, i.e., in the case of
m their nusber also includes radiation modes. for most types or interac-
tion of coupled waves, m are limited by two-wave approximation when the
interaction oi‘ only two surface waves are taken into account for which the
conditiOn or phase synchronisu is tuliilled and for which a significant
exchange of power is provided. and other waveguide modes are disregarded.
He shall subsequently distinguish the coupling of two waveguide modes tro-
mcde coupling with radiation modes and also homogeneous and' hetero-
geneous comling of waveguide modes.

Let us consider two electromagnetic surface waves of m, which are the
natural modes of an unperturbed waveguide:

a..(z. 0-11.. exp lam-pm].
b..(:. 0-3. up “Mimi”. “‘1’

II
where an and an are copier wave aspiitudes and ,0. and ,6“ are their con-
stant propagation. Coupling and exchange or power between modes an and bn
in the direction of their propagation occurs in the presence 01' perturbation
in m and amplitudes a. and 3n become dependent on r. In most cases of
interest to us, perturbation in m may be represented in the form or a
distributed polarization source, while the process of power cowling and

exchange between modes itself may be regarded as interaction of surface

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

for homogeneous interaction of waves (1.1) (the minus sign in the ex-
ponent in (1.1)) when their group velocities are directed in the same direc-
tion. the coupled wave equations may be reprenented in the following for!)
[4. 5]

d4../dI-—!k,"8. exp (—2Mz). (1.2)

dBnldz-—_lk.~An exp (215;). (1. 3)

where the coupling constant k is determined by the type of specific distur-
bance which leads to coupling of the waveguide nodes and S characterizes
aisalignnsnt of e in erecting waves from phase synchronisn and depends on
the difference a) - end the spatial variations of the disturbance
(rather on the difference of the constants of excited wave propagation and
exciting polarizations 2 3 - gAN, g - 2:1/A . and AN is misalignment by
the effective refractive index of M). It follows from) the law of conserve-
ticn of energy that in this case

kns - kit!" (1.4)

For boundary conditions “(0) - l and 39(0) - 0, the coupled wave equations
have the solutions

a. (z) - -0)... [sin (: lfm)/|/m]exp ( —lbz). (1.5)
A... (z) - [cos (2 I '5‘? o )+ idsin (: VFWsz'T on up (1'62). (1.6)

where k2 a [kmrh

examples of single-direction interaction of surface waves nay be sods con-
verters and directional couplers, including the prism cewler used for m
node excitation [6]. This type of wave coupling in M also includes non-
linear optical interactions. phase syndzrcnisaticn by periodic disturbance
and electrooptical and optical-acoustic switching and modulation [2].

heterogeneous coupling of surface waves (the plus sign in the exponent
in (1.1)) may occur when their group velocities are aligned in opposite
directions. In this case the coupled wave equations (1). - direct and an --
reverse) assula the for: [4]

dAJdn—MMB. exp (236:). (1.7)
dBJ‘¢-”¢..A .. exp (—2:&), (1 . 8)
18

FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

where constants km and kn. satisfy relation (1.4).

By using ordinary boundary conditions for houxoggngou. coupling of
waves A.(0) . 1 and am.) - O (I. is the length of the interaction sons):
we find the solutions of equations (1.7) and (1.8) in the following form

MO) - -‘ (Mm/Hill”?-o‘cth(LVP'"-o )+!’6l}exp(l62). (1.9)

A, (L) -' (VF - Elm-’9"— 0‘ ch (LV PT-o') T losh (L V 313*)» x

XexM—ioz). (1.10)

where k 51):”! An exasple of this' type of interaction of surface waves may
be waveguide f 1tere forsed by sodulation of m para-tars. We are also
concerned with heterogeneous interaction of coupled waves in distri-
buted feedback structures used for has and 332 lasers. although there are
some differences here related to asplification in the waveguide and the
absence of an incident wave (the boundary conditions seem the form M0) - o
and Du.) - 0 in this case). uore detailed diecusicn of this type of sur-
face wave interaction is given in [7, 8].

The fora of equation which describe the behavior of two coupled waves is
independent of the nuserical value of coupling constant k. however. the
value of k determines the degree of interaction of the waves or in practice
the distance at which given exchange of power between the interacting sodas
occurs. In the general case It depends directly on the type of the specific
physical cause of disturbance in m which leads to coupling of the wave-
guide sodes. ‘The application of coupled wave theory to a disturbed wave-
guide (2. 3) shows that the value of I: is detersinsd by the overlap integral
of electric field distribution of two coupled waves throw the waveguide
cross-section and by the value of polarization disturbance in the udius.

It is obvious frost consideration of expressions (1.5). (1.6). (1.9) and (1.10)
for the field anplitudes of interacting waves that there is a specific dif-
ference of the phases between their fields. he wave field whose power in-
creases always lags by 77/2 in phase frost the wave field with decreasing
power. Porsally. this directly corresponds to selection of signs in coup-
ling equatione (1.2). (1.3). (1.7) and (1.8). The required phase relation-
ship between polarization created by sods a. and the field of sods bu to
«rich power should be pusped is the cause of the temrary lag free the physi-
cal viewpoint. It is well known [9] that power dissipation in the dielectric
occurs when polarization lags behind the field. Consequently, in our case
the field phase for excitation of node bu should lag behind the polarization
phase which is generated by the field of soda e. in phase with it.

bet u now consider sose characteristics of waveguide node conning with
radiation nodes. Prissatic and diffraction radiation input devices [6) are
characterised by the fact that power exchange occurs bemen the waveguide
soda and the sods continuum. In the diffraction device the sods continuum

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consists of the radiation mode of the waveguide itself and in the prismatic
device it consists of a set of plane waves capable of propagating in the
homogeneous nterial of the prism at different angles. The condition of
phase matching of interacting waves is determined in this case by the equality
of projections of the wave vectors of the radiation modes (for the prismatic
device -- the plane waves in the prism material) and of the constants of the
waveguide mode propagation onto waveguide axis 2. Coupling of the waveguide
modes with the continuum leads to emission of electromagnetic energy from
the waveguide to the substrate or to the surromding medium. As indicated
by the coupling equations for the waveguide mode and continuum [2. 3]. due
to radiation the saplitude of the waveguide mode decreases exponentially:

A.=A.(0) up (—6.2). (1.11)

where A. is the attenuation constant for the n-th waveguide mode, directly
coupled with the value of coupling constant k [l0]. By knowing the attenua-
tion constant of the surface wave a... based on the reciprocity theorem

it is easy to analyze the effectiveness of the reverse process -- wave exci-
tation by a given light beam ispinging on the waveguide surface at the angle
of phase synchronism (see. for erasple, [11]).

2. Interaction and Transformation of Surface waves in m With Periodic
Modulation of Paras-tors

Periodic modulation of the parameters of M (its thickness, the refractive
indices of the waveguide material or of the surrounding medium) along the
direction of propagation of a surface light wave in a waveguide is used
extensively in integrated optics to develop and create diffraction-grating
filters, coupling devices, nos and 832 lasers. for purposes of phase
matching in electrooptical, optical-acoustic. nonlinear and other types

of surface wave interaction in waveguides. The physical processes of sur-
face wave propagation in these waveguides are light scattering on d’l.
periodic structure similar to scattering on a diffraction grating. Various
diffraction transformations of surface waves to each other and to radiation
modes are the basis for operation of many integrated optics coaponants.

Periodic modulation of 11"! parameters leads in the final analysis to modula-
tion of the effective waveguide refractive index. In most practically im-
portant cases, one may limit oneself in analysis of the transformation and
radiation of surface waves to relatively weak harmonic modulation of M
parameters [12-15). this not only sisplifies analysis itself of the fields
in these waveguides, but also makes it possible to avoid significant light
losses due to redistribution to higher order diffraction waves. Calculation
of the effects of the interaction of waveguide modes with slight modulation
of ‘11"! parameters is usually carried out on the assumption of the smallness
of variation of the interacting wave asplitudss at distances cowarable to
the radiation wavelength. In this approximation, using boundary conditions
for the corresponding field cospcnents in ‘l'PV [12-15) or coupled wave theory
[2-5], the analytical expressions can be found for the coupling constmts

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which determine the effectiveness of one or another type of wave interaction
in TN. since only first-order diffraction processes are taken into account
in both cases in the first approximation, both methods of calculation yield
completely identical results for the interaction constants both in the case
of radiation [15] and in the case of resonance transformation of waves in
TM) (sea. for exasple. [13, 5]). Ibwevar. when analyzing the process of
resonance transformation and reflection of surface waves with simultaneous
ejection of radiation on the corrugated section of the waveguide (with a
period coincident with the light wavelength in the medium) . one must also
take into account second-order diffraction processes since the mutual re-
sonance transformations of the waves in the second diffraction order corre-
spond in their intensity to radiation (or excitation) processes of surface
waves in the first order of diffraction [16-19].

Resonance transformation and reflection of surface waves in m. Resonance
transformation and reflection of surface waves in m with periodic varia-
tions of the thickness and refractive index of the waveguide material are
subordinate to the general principles determined by the direction of the
interaction of the surface waves in the distributed coupling structures [12.
13]. However, waveguides with periodic modulation of the refractive index
are preferable in some cases for some applications since deep spatial modu-
lation of the waveguide modes and effective transformation of them can be
ensured by using a volumetric diffraction grating due to selection of the
slope of its optically homogeneous layers.

let u assume that the refractive index of a ‘i'PV is slightly modulated by
sine-wave law (figure 1. a):

"-nn-Hn cos Kr. (3-1)

where lé‘n](< lnﬂt r is the radius vector: K - (21r/AH-coe Z . 0, einz)
is the grating vector: A is its period: and X. is the angle of inclination
of the optically homogeneous layers of the grating with respect to the

z axis (0 ‘ x < 1r ). The surface wave being propagated in the waveguide
plane alone the z axis is sequentially transformed to diffraction waves of
the corresponding orders which are then reflected from the m boundaries
and are again diffracted on the grating structure and so on. Consequently.
the self-congruent field of surface waves in this waveguide is the super-
position of diffraction and reflection waves. with strong interaction of
the two surface waves when one of the reflection waves excited by the
initial surface wave is close to the other surface wave, mutual resonance
transformation of them occurs. determined by the condition [13]

n;+sIV sin 1:33:11}. (2.2)

where n; and n‘. are the effective refractive indicas of the interacting
waves of order m and m': s I #1,- 12, is the order of the diffraction

Zl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

m. of reflection; end u - m; - MA. 111. bottoo sign in the :1th eide
of (2.2) correeponde to different-direction veve oowling in m.

 

figure 1. Somatic Repneeentetion of Verioue We of Diffrec-
tion creting Btmtuf'ee in m

If the perenetere of e voh'netric diffreotion qreting eetieo/ the condition
of reeonence (pheee eynchronien) (2.2), the eurfeoe veve winging on it
even with eliqht eoauletion of the refrective index of the file on euffi-
ciently long eectione cf the qretinq, will be effectively trenefoned to
enother eurfeoe wave. with reeonenoe reflection of the initiel eurfeoe
wave to en inveree veve of the use order (I' - I). deter-in“ by diffrec-
tion to the firet reflective order (0 - -l),

rut/2. N~2n;. (2.3)

end for the cue of e nonebeorbing veveguide (no. n1, n2 end 5 n ere reel
nunbere). the coefficient of reflection a. of e eufeoe veve of 3-0: order
due to e pheee qretinq of length I. eey be written in the fore (13)

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

R... -sh’(vL)llch’(yL)-(AN/t)'l. (2 . 0

here If - (1." - (dummy/2: x - fq/Z ie the coupling conetent) end
AN . 2 '. - N ie devietion tron preoiee reeonence (AN < 1:). coupling
conetent for the oeee of TE-nodee is determined by the expreeeion

k" -6n(n,ln;, )(hnlh; )1/2, (2 . S)

whore Jn ie the noduietion emiitude of the retreotive index of the weVe-
guide meteriei end h; ie the effective thickneee of the wevewide (eee (13]
for the eloreeeione (or h; end h.). ‘lhe coupling conetent of the intereotinq
wevee kn epproeohee the velue of Suﬁ with en inoreeee of the tile thick-
neee (in the renoe thet 9h woo).

Another poeeibility o! eocoepliehinq reeonence treneioreetion end reflection
of euriece wevee in m ie corruqetion of the thin film (or eubetrete) eur-
fece by eine-weve iew (figure 1. b):

x-o sln (K1). (2.6)

where 5- ie the noduletion eupiitude of the wevequide thickneee h) K - “Hr/A
end

(MK). (2.7)

Upon peeeeqe through thie wevequide eection, the eurtece weve ie dittrected
on the corrugeted eurtece of the m. me diftreotion wevee excited in thie
ceee heve projectione or the weve vector onto the 2 exit, equel to on; + ex-
- 9(1); + on) end the condition of reeonenoe interaction of eurtece wevee of
ordere at end I' ie now reduced to the for.

n;+:N~a:n:.» (2.0)

It follow from etricter coneideretion with regerd to condition (2.7) thet
upon reeonenco interection of the two eurtece wevee (e I 0 end ti), their

trenefornetion to dittrection wevee or other ordere cen be dieregerded with
relative eccurecy of (945“)2 (epproxi-etion or etrongly coupled wevee) (12].

In the cue of hoeoqeneoue weve coupling (the upper eign on the right
side of (2.8)) when e eurtece weve or order n' ie excited in the em direc-
tion ee the initiel weve of n-th order. the effectiveneee of trenefornetion
71 ie equei to (12):

n-sin’myl I +(dN/t)'l. (2 . 9)

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI'I’ICIAL USE ONLY

Here Y- (f3 + (Amzlv2 9/2112) 0) and AN - ( ‘ + at!) ; nﬁ. charac-
teriree deviation tron preoiee reeonance and the coupl ng conetant for the
caee o! ‘l'a-nodee ie equal to

3 _ a’o’ (ﬂu-n3: (Iii-4:}. 2 10
‘ "5".» ‘ ﬂ. (II..~HN) ' ( ' )

It ie obviou tron expreaeion (2.9) that the maxim tranefornation o! the
power of interacting wavee ie reached at dietancee of r - ‘1'

2vL.-n(|+20). 090. I. 2. .... (2.11)

and only mder conditione of preciee reeonance AN - 0) can the initial wave
of n-th order be coapletely tranerorned to a wave of order n' and in the

caee or e . -l it can be traneforned to a wave of higher order (n' > I) and
in the caee o! e - +l it can be tranetorned to a wave or lower order (I‘ < a).

in heterogeneoue coupling of waveguide nodee (the bottom eign on the
right eide of expreeaion (2.8)) when the eurtace wave of u-th order paeeing
along the grating reaonantly excitae the counter wave or given order n'. the
coefficient of reflection 1",... (roe: thie distributed mirror of length 1. ie
deacribod by an expreeeicn coupletely ainilar to expreeuion (2.4), only in
thie caee the valuee of Y and 1' are taken by the abaolute value and ”I -
- ”1'2: - (Awning/as pr) (aince now n; + wet-n;- < 0). am. an
increaae in the length or the "dietributed mirror“ kt" ite coeﬂicient of
reflection approach“ unity acre rapidly, the nore precieely the condition
o! reeonance (2.8) ie lulrilled.

the nain paraneter which characterirae the effectiveneae of the coneidered
reeonance proceeeee ie the value of coupling conetant k, mich ie eignifi-
cantly dependent both on the index of the interacting wavea (neinly by n;
and h;) and on their polarization. In the caee or interaction or ‘nl-wam
l4)

(rm-kn». ' (2.12)

were (actor p - l for m with n18 no.3 n; as n' and at other waveguide
paranotere nay ceuee e eigniricant decreaee in the value of lung. ﬂoreover.
with acne quite epeciric periode or the grating and namely when the period
of grating A eatieriee the condition

n;(n;+:N)-—(n./nd' IN,'I IN; I. s--l. (2.13)

where N - A/A and Lug] - (n2 - (n; + “WWI. the comling conatant k1,.
approach" zero. Th e ye cally related to the traneveree nature of the

2!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electronagnetic waves diffractionaily excited in the m. h einilar pattern
is also obeerved with diffraction eniseion of surface waves in m since
condition (2.3) ie generally valid for total internal light reflection and
diffraction on the corrugated surface of the interface of two homogeneous
needle [20, 21).

Diffraction emission and excitation of surface waves in m. Corrugation of
the m surface by harmonic lav (Figure l. b) is one of the nain methods of
diffraction excitation of eurface waves in it [14. 22]. he is known, a wave
propagating along thia waveguide nay be emitted on its corrugated aection
due to diffraction to the nedia adjacent to the waveguide. h diffraction
wave of -l order (s e -l) lakes the Iain contribution to enieeion in appronio
nation of weak coupling (2.7) and the angles of enieeion to these nedia (with
respect to the nornal) are deternined by the relation [:2]

sin O,-(n;—N)m,, [—0, 1.2. (2.10

In this case the direction of light eaiseion is not dependent on which sur-
face of the file ie corrugated -- the upper or lower. and varies slightly
with variation of wave polarization (73 or ‘1"). On the other hand, wave
attenuation in the file ie deteruined to a eignificant degree by its polari-
zation and by the fact iron which direction the waveguide is corrugated.

In view of the revereibility of optical phenoeena in tine. analyeie of
diffraction output of light enieeion from a fill waveguide penite one to
find the option conditione for the reverse prooeee -- emission input to the
1W through its corrugated aection. he already noted above. the nain para-
enter which determines the optim- conditione of enieeion input to the wave-
guide ie the attenuation constant 4. of an n-order surface wave during its
eaiesion along the corrugated section of the m. The expressions for con-
stante d. for 1'3- and thunder of ‘i'PV can be found, for exaaple. in (14.
22, 23). me value of x. is usually greater when the film is corrugated
from the direction of the air. 'ihie is related to the fact that the dif-
ference of the refractive indicee on the film-air boundary ie greater than
that on the filer-substrate boundary. On the "ﬁzz- htnf, with corrugation
of the upper surface of the film waveguide. the interference effects mani-
feeted in the for: of minus: and nininun values of “I”? are expressed
to a lesser extent (2) and consequently the attenuation conetant or. because
less critical to selection of the e-ieeion angles 95, i.e., to selection
of the period of the grating structure A . In this eenee corrugation of
the upper boundary of the m is preferable. 'i‘hoee periods of corrugation
A which would provide emission to one of the nedia adjacent to the wave-
guide (ueually to the substrate) out be selected to accleiah optima
input of enieeion. 'i‘hoee periods to which “back“ emission corresponds are
note preferable since in the given case only the first order of diffraction
is present in eniesion with any form of corrugation profile [22). the
periods A at which light ie enitted only to the eubetrate satisfy the con-
dition

25
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML 088 ONLY

(n;-—n.) < N < (rag—n9. (2.15)

which corresponds to “forward“ enicsion in the direction of propagation of
the surface wave and to condition

(aw-n.) < N < (n,‘_+n.) (2.16)

with ”back” saiseion of light with respect to the direction of surface wave
propagation.

more are some characteristics of diffraction excitation of diffuse optical
waveguides related to the absence of interference effects and which lead to
a saoother dependence of constant «9(0 ) and to its snaller absolute value
conpared to m with sharp boundaries [2 , 17).

with optinun periods of corrugation and with given value of Km the effec-
tiveness of enission input into m n depends only on the distribution of
the exciting li¢\t bean intensity along the length of coupling sons 1. and
for honogeneous distribution of the incident been field excitation is more
effective at chum 1.25: than ﬂux I Bl percent [ll]. If it is necessary
to excite the waveguide froa the direction of the air. it is better to use
corrugation of the substrate since in this case a value of 11 ~50 percent
can be achieved [22].

It should be noted that the large difference in the value of the attenuation
constants for waves of different polarizations («1-3 and aim) at specific
periods of corrugation A [20, ll. 23) can be used for selecting the surface
waves by polariration and to create thin-fil- light polariters based on
diffraction emission of surface waves or on their resonance reflection.

Another possible nethod of diffraction excitation of m is the use of
voluatric phase diffraction gratings applied to the waveguide surface or
formed directly in the laterial of the waveguide itself [24, 25]. Investi-
gation of the process of surface wave emission froa a m with voluetric
phase grating applied to its surface (figure 1, c) shows [24] that only a
~l-order diffraction wave with projection of the wave vector onto the 2 axis
equal to 9n; - 1: sin 1 lashes the stain contribution to eaission in approxi-
mation of weak coupling (lJn/ng“; 1).

Provided that
mm>|n; -N sin 1 |>n.., (2.11)
this wave is propagated in the substrate (or grating) at angle 90“,:

sln Om-(n; —-N sin ﬁlls”. (2.18)

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Providod that

n.. n.>ln;. —N 3;. 1| (2.19)

thin wavo io onittod in both dirootiono oinultanoouoly. Moroowor, tho rola-
tiono of tho intonoitioo with which a -1-ordar wavo io onittod to a nodiun
with grating and oubotrato adjaoont to tho m aro oonoidorably dopondont on
tho anglo of inclination of tho homogeneous layoro of tho photo grating and
nay roach a valuo (10" (9103). 1ho oxprouiono for tho attanuation con-
otanto do for all thou caooo aro found in m). 1ho offootivonoao of in-
put (approxinotoly 71 poroont) aohiovod in oxporinont [261 approaohoo ito
thooroticol linit (approxinatoly so poroont) to a oimifioant dogroo.

‘I'ho provalont ourfaco wavo aniooion to one of tho nodia adjacont to tho wavo-
guido ia cauood by Bragg ooattoring of this wavo to a -l-ordor diffraction
wave. In tho gonoral oaoo tho para-otoro of a voluootric grating ohould bo
ooloctod to aocoaplioh thio Bragg ooattoring to that (24)

mam” N-2n; sln 1(u of. ~- N sin x-n; oos 21). (2.20)

M Bragg inclinationo of hooogonoou layoro of tho grating: 0 < Z], < 17/2
and 2.2 - 1r . Z1. aro pouiblo ot oach valuo of N(<2n;). ff \ooo 2| <
(no/n. and Ila/“:0 than tho ourfaco wowo io oaoontially conplotoly onittod
to tho sodium with a grating ot % - ’h and it Braggoocattorod to tho cub-
otrato at a o 12. If “2(0) >n:[coo an) > no”). tho ourfaco wavo io
onlttod to tho grating (or omotroto).

It ohould ho notod with rogard to tho uoo of a voluaotric diffroction grating
for input of light oaiuion to tho m that tho condition of photo synchro-
nion for a diffraction wavo and for tho I-th wavoguido nodo oxcitod by it

is inoonpatiblo with tho condition of procioo Bragg rooonanco of tho diffrac-
tion grating. Thoroforo. cont olight nioalign-ant of tho Bragg grating
otructuro fro. rooonanco io roguirod to onouro offoctivo oxcitation of tho
givon wavoguido nodo [ll].

Diffraction of light boa-o on poriodic otructuroo in m. Diffraction of
oniooion on poriodio otructuroo in tho m piano in of intoroot not only
for divioion or dofloction of light boa-o in fil- wavoguidoo [27] but oloo
for opatial-ooloctivo filtration of than [28-30]. ‘no do this. Bragg typo
grating otructuroo can to forlod in run: both at tho roault of modulation of
thichnooo and of tho rofractivo indax of tho wavoguido natariol. For do-
finitanou. lot uo conoidor a m with volunotric oino-wavo photo grating
foraod duo to woak ooduiation of tho rofroctivo indox of tho wavoguido
material Ugh/nag 1). no diffraction-grating otructuro on which non-
colinoar intorac on of tho ourfaco wavoo in tho M can bo accoqliuhod
whon tho diroctiono of propagation of tho intoracting wavoo do not ooincido
with tho voctor of grating K, it ohm ocholaticolly in Piguro l. d. In

27
FOR 0177101“. 053 ONLY
FOR (WNCIM. US}: ONLY

this oaao the Rolf-Bragg condition with rogard to wavoguids propagation of
omission has the form till, 32)

Nada}. sln 0. (2.21)

uhoro 0 is tho aragg diffraction anglo. In the considorod configuration.
the phass grating oporatos in tho transnission soda and its diffraction
offactivonoss 71 in approxination of tho intoraction of plans wavss in the
absonco of lossos in tho m nay ho doocribad by an expression totally
similar to (2.9) [33] vhero tho offoctivo length of tho grating L. - L/ooo 0
”Id AN - (2n: 3: sin 9 - N) sin 9 is introduced instead of s. As one
should also oxpoct, tho constant k is significantly dopondont on tho indox
and polarisation of tho wavoguido nodos. In tho caso of a volunotric

phaso grating for m waveguide sodas. it can be written in tho fora

Mammy/2. (2.22)

‘i‘ho absoluto value of km for tho m-oodos is less and is dotorainod by tho
value of tho anglo of dofloction V - 29 (soo figuro l. d):

knz—bnhllnzﬂllm (08 Q. (2o23’

Hhon tho grating structure oporatos in tho reflection nods [33). its dif-
fraction sfficioncy (ooofficisnt of reflection) can bs dotorlinod by using
exproosion (2.0.

All that considered abovo also remains valid in gonorsl featuros for Bragg
diffraction-grating structuros for-ad by modulation of tho m thicknoss.
Bowsvor, tho for: of tho coupling constants k in this caso will apparently
bo suoro oleox (unlike oxprsssions (2.l0) and (2.12)) sinco Bragg diffrac-
tion on this grating structuro nay ho accoopaniod by transformation of tho
incidont wave to a wavo or orthogonal polarisation and this problol roguiroo
furthor invostigation [32. 34].

It should bo notod that the sloping iwingoosnt of omission on the grating
structure during Bragg diffraction loads to distortion of the spatial shape
of tho diffractod and transient ligat boans and it is stronger. tho broador
tho incident boas spoctrusl cowarod to the band of Bragg diffraction anglos
(froguoncios) [29. 35]. Specifically. tho total width of tho diffracted
band transiont beams is always not loss than a a 2!. sin 9 . Distortion of
tho spatial shape of the signal is usually nanifosted to a groator extant
for grating structuros for-nod by corrugation of the m surface. which is
relatod to a oaallor value of the ochievod valuos of tho coupling constant 1;.

ho high spatial-angular and fregusncy-soloctivo characteristics of Drag
typo diffraction-grating structuros pox-nits highly offectivo spatial-«loc-
tivo filtration of emission in tho m during its inclined ispingonont on
tho grating structuro. 1hoso spatial-soloctivo filtors nay find application

28
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for multichannel 01.8 with channelling [28. 30). The frequency-selective
selectivity of a filter is related to its angular selectivity by the siwle
relation [33)

Allin—A0 cl; 0. aego. (2.24)

which detenines the dependence between variations of wavelength and the
angle of incidence of emission. leading to the eene detuning from Bragg
resonance. for hceogeneoue and syuetrical distribution of the value of
the coupling constant k by the effective length of the grating structure
I... the shape of its spectral characteristic is syI-etrical [36] and the
total spectral width of its resonance ANA during inloined incidence of
emission on the grating nay be written in the form [37]

ammox-ILqmih Lc/nmtn, (2.25)

where their effective values instead of A end I. are introduced in the
direction of propagation of the incident light been (A. - A/sin O ) and
the value of n.- for ensuring a einieue value of AMA does not exceed

7f/2 (or 1r) for grating structures operating to transmission (or reflection).
his approach to determining the selective end diffraction properties of
grating filters is related to the use of epproxination of the plane wave

[33. 37) end is justified when the angular divergence of emission in the

m is significantly less then the angular width of the Bragg resonance of
the grating. In the opposite case when calculating the spectral diarecteris-
tics and diffraction effectiveness of a grating filter, the entire set of
spatial cowonents of the wave vectors of plane waves bringing on the
grating must be taken into accent. The field distribution in the diffracted
and transient beans are then determined by rourier transforneticn of the
product of the spectrue of incident plane waves by the eqlitude coefficients
of reflection or transmission [29, 35].

Oosperetive analysis of different types of modulation of m pereneters.

It is of interest to carry out cowerative analysis of the variou types of
modulation of m parameters for selecting the preferable type of noduletion
of fill waveguide parameters (if there is this type of modulation).

It is obvious from the previous consideration that the effectiveness of
surface wave interaction in m on a grating structure is determined by the
value of the coupling constant I: which in the most general case is propor-
tional to the absolute value of the modulation wlitude of the effective
waveguide refractive index An'. Actually. limiting ourselves to the case
of week nodulation of thickness h and the refractive index of the waveguide
material n1 and taking into account the expressions for derivatives Jazz/2h
end 303/3111 [38], it is easy to show that

I. .. (mm. (2.26)

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where An; for the TB-nodes of m upon modulation of thickness h is equal to
(Ann.-a(n;/In;)l(n.ln;)’.--ll. (2.27)
and upon modulation of the refractive index of the material In is equal to
(An;)..-dn(n‘ln;)(h,.lh;). (2. 28)

For simplicity it was irplioitly assumed here that colineer interaction of
the nodes with identical indices (n' - e) is considered. Comparing expres-
sions (2.27) and (2.28) and ensuing that huesh, which occurs in nest real
cases, we find

.(An;).l(An;).. -(a/h)[ l—(nglno’l/(Gn/n‘). ( 2. 29)

Let u introduce the parameter A, = n; - n; and, since n: ~n1. we finally
find

(An;),/(An;)._~2(A_In.)(a/h)/(6n/n,) (2.30)

since usually A.« n. it follows free expression (2.33) that considerably
less relative nodulation of the refractive index of the waveguide eaterial

is required coqared to the relative nodulation of its thickness to ensure

an identical value of the nodulation emlitude of the effective refractive
index An; or. which is the sane thing. of the value of coupling constant 1:.
Moreover. the indicated difference is eenifested nore stmgly for the lower
waveguide modes and is anlified with an increase of its thickness h. 'lhis
is physically related to the lesser contribution of the modulation of wave-
guide thickness to disturbance of the surface wave field comared to nodule-
tion of the refractive index of its eaterial, which nakes a contribution to
the value of the coupling constant k through the entire M cross-section.
One nay also arrive at a eieilar conclusion on the basis of analyzing the re-
sults of marital calculations obtained for various types of periodic struc-
tures in m [39). ‘lhis conparison is valid only for the Il'e-nodes of m.

In the case of a n4 waveguide node, as was already noted above. the coupling
constant k depends in a sore coupler nanner on the m parameters and returns
to zero during sons quite specific periods of corrugation of its surface

(see (2.13)). Omsequsntly, nodulation of the waveguide thickness does not
lead in this case to coupling and nutual transfornetion of surface waves.

absolute conparison of the effectiveness of one or another type of nodulation
of TN para-stars nay also be carried out for specific m natariels. Thus,
for exeeple, analyses show that the naxinun possible nodulation of the effec-
tive refractive index An. due to variation of the refractive index of the
waveguide eaterial n1 is approrinetely an order or more higher for such a

30
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not material as amorphous chalcogenide semiconductor film [40, All than
(depending on h) in tho case of a corrugated surface.

For definitsnass let us consider a 'l'PV based on M283 films on time; sm-
strates (A :c 0.63 micron, no z 2.29 and n; z 2.48) . Absolute cowarihon
for real or: parameters (h ~ A) shows that the coupling constant due to
nodulation of the refractive index of the waveguide material In is more then
fivefold higher than k for a corrugated surface for the 1'80 waveguide nods
(n3 a: 2.476, h~0.6 micron: Snug 580.06 and we assume that the maxim
depth of the corrugation 26m is equal to 0.2 nicron). me efficiency of
corrugated grating structures say be coaparable to that of a structure with
modulated refractive index and is higher than this efficiency for suffi-
ciently thin single-mode waveguides when working near the cut-off, but in
this case the condition of was): coupling is usually not fulfilled and the
losses in the m increase significantly: moreover. the thinnest possible
waveguide layer does not exhaust all the possibilities of interest froa the
practical viewpoint. There is a sharp decrease of the operating efficiency
of the corrugation with an increase of waveguide thickness h. whereas the
coupling constant. beginning at some value of h (h < N is essentially in-
dependent of waveguide thickness in the case of modulation of the refractive
index of the material n. One should also bear in mind that corrugation of
the M surface is possible on a wider range of materials and realisation
of modulation of the refractive index of the waveguide material itself re-
quires a seardt for special materials for m.

With regard to periodic structures in the substrate (the surrounding nedium) .
they operate much less efficiently cospared to periodic variation of the
refractive index of the waveguide uteriel itself since the values of deriva-
tives Jug/an, (j - o. 2) are usually much less than etc/an. with the
same parameters of the grating structures and reel parameters of m, their
efficiency in the sense of the possibility of providing a given value of k

is approximately 50400 times less. It should be noted that a similar con-
clusion also remains valid for relief type grating structures. Thus when

a thin corrugated layer of another material with refractive index n < n1 is
applied to the M surface, the coupling constant decreases ’(n2 - 2/

(n2 - n§)l times for 1‘8-modes and is somewhat greater for m wavegui modes
(compared to corrugation of the waveguide surface itself) [21, 45).

3. Integrated Optics Oosponents and Devices Based on Diffraction-Grating
Structures

In this section we shall consider some applications of diffraction-grating
structures in integrated optics. Most attention is devoted to periodic
grating structures as the most investigated: the possibilities of using
grating structures with variable period ("aperiodic' grating structures)
are also considered.

Periodic grating structures. me use of periodic grating structures in
integrated objects led to the development of many thin-fil- waveguide de-
vices such es emission input and output devices. band filters and mode

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

converters, diffraction type modulators and deflectors and nos and R32
lasers) phase latching and spatial-selective filtration of surface waves
in 1'90 are acct-pushed by using then.

‘0

 

figure 2. Spectral Characteristics of Reflecting filter

'l‘he operation of band reflecting filters end node converters is hosed on
resonance reflection or on trenefornetion of surface waves on the diffrac-
tion-grating stmcture in m. The condition of resonance surface wave
reflection (2.3) and (2.8) assigns the working length of the reflecting
filter wave and expression (2.4) (where AN - 2 8/9) qivee the dependence
of the coefficient of reflection I). of an n-order surface wave on detming
fron resonance 5 . In practice 8 say be varied due to variation of the
.enissicn frequency or wavelength. The dependence of the coefficient of
reflection a. on the value of 8 La: [(0 - young/cl for xx. - 1.94. which
corresponds to M3 0.9 (here no is the resonance frequency of the
filter). is shown in figure 2. he band width of the min naxisn- reflec-
tion of the lattice structure by wavelength ANA My be deter-ined fro.
expression (2.25). where A. a A and L0 r. 1., while the urine coefficient
of reflection of the filter I)“, corresponds to precise resonance (AN - 0
in (2.0). uoreover. the velue of P.“ is different (figure 3) for different
wavelengths with fixed length of the grating structure L. filters with a
narrower band should have e value of k1. $11. ht Id. 7 1f the side lobes
becces constable to the min lobes (33].

let:
M J
4'
4e
4:

I 4! 40 a! W
figure 3. Maxim Coefficient of Reflection of filter a.“ es

s lunction of Pare-star kl. for Different Wavelengths:
l .. 1.15 uicron) 2 -- 0.86 uicron) 3 {- o.63 licrcn

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Development of narrowband grating filtera for a given wavelength A placea
epecific reetrictione both on the pernieeihle value of deviation from re-
eenance AN, cauaed by the inaccuracy of being given the period of the
grating A. and alao on the peruiaeible variationa of the effective refrac-
tive index of the waveguide n}. camed by the inhomogeneity of ite thickneee
along the length of the grating structure. Deviations in the period of the
grating AAlead to a change in the reeonance wavelength of the filter [d2]

Al,~l(AAI.-\). (3. 1)

while the inhomogeneitiee in the thickneee of the film waveguide Ah cauae
changer in the poeition of the nation reflection of the filter along the
wavelength and coneeguently lead to broadening of ite band by the value [37]

Ma‘(M/h;)l(ngln;‘).-ns (3. 2)

Bxperiuntal inveetigation of narrowband reflecting filtere with half-width
of reaonance on the order of fractione and unite of angetrcne and with
coefficient of reflection of approniaately 0.8-0.9. achieved due to a corru-
gated m eurface (37, 42) and modulation of the refractive index of the
waveguide eatericl [to], ehowe good agreement of the calculated and experi-
mntal reeulte. Thit juetifiee development of nethoda of eyntheeiring
optical waveguide filtere with given frequency characterietice operating

in the reflection and tranelieeion node [43. 44). 1t ie propoeed in [‘5]
that eelection of the incident wave by Ileana of a thin-film node eelector
be ueed to create narrowband frequency-eelective filtere operating due to
node convereien during eingle-direction interaction of then on grating
etructuree in m. Intereeting poeeibilitiee for varioue applicatione in
integrated optice are opened up by node convereion in m on a grating
structure with non-eine-wave profile during noncolinear interaction of eur-
face waves (46]. "weaver, additional inveetigatione are etill apparently
required in thie direction.

Experimental inveatigatione devoted to epatial-eelective filtration of
enieaion in m by ueing periodic grating etructuree [28-30). although they
are few, new indicate new poeeihilitiee of ueing integrated-optice circuite
in 01.3 with channelling. we would eepecially like to enphaeice the proepecte
of ueing for there purpoeee euch m eaterial ae alorphoue chalcoganide
aeniconductor file. which per-it creation of varioua phaee-relief etructuree
in the waveguide iteelf both by optical nethode [30. to) and by ueing elec-
tron been proceeeing (m. The conducted inveetigatione [40] ehow that the
actually achieved characteriatice of Bragg grating etructuree per-it develop-
ment of highly efficient freguency-eelective devicea baeed on then for
coebination (lining) and eeparaticn of optical data channele with diffennt
carrier frequenciee. mitivo analyeie of epatially-eelective filtere
baeed on Bragg grating etructuree forced in the waveguide and due to corru-
gation of ite eurface per-ite one to conclude that the leaet dietortion of

33
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the spatial shape of the signal may be achieved in 'er based on amorphous
ohalcogenida semiconductors when the grating structures are for-ed in the
waveguide itself.

ihs possible variants of constructing optical channel niners are shown
schematically in Figure 4. The siwplest are devices based on a set of
deflecting grating structures with different periods and scanning gradient
channel waveguide (Figure 4. a and b). They are suitable in a spell number
of data channels (approxinately up to 10). More coupler grating structures
which utilize the principle of superposition of three-dimensional phase
hologram (figure 4, c) per-nit one to realize a nixsr with a considerably
larger nunber of packed channels. ‘lhis mixer based on superimposed three-
diasnsional phase grating structures is more universal due to its reversi-
bility and the possibility of operating in the channel-separation node and
provides considerably greater cowactness of the device as a whole. The
wave tracks of separated channels in an optical waveguide are show on the
right in the photograph in Figure 4. c. The nearest optical carriers were
separated from each other by approximately 15-20 nu. which, however. is

not maximum. In real ons circuits. this mixer may operate, as indicated by
analyses. with considerable greater channelling (on the order of $0) with
building up adjacent optical carriers on the order of several angstrou.

 

figure a. Schentic Diagram of Different Variants of Spatial-
Selective filters for Channel Mixers Based on Periodic
Diffraction-Grating Structures in TN
36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Periodic modulation of TPV parameters is also possible by using the electro-
optical effect when the modulating voltage is applied to a periodic system
of antipin electrodes or by using the optical-acoustic effect which utilizes
acoustic waves of the appropriate frequencies. Since the refractive index
of the TPV may now be varied due to the effect of the modulating voltage or
the asplitude of the acoustic wave, this type of thin-film diffraction
devices may serve as amplitude modulators, switches or deflectors. 'lhin-
film diffraction type optical-acoustic devices may also be used in optical
signal processing devices. 111s most significant parameters in this case are
the efficiency of diffraction, the working frequency band, the speed and
number of resolved light beam positions.

A large mmber of both original [47-51] and survey papers [52-53] is devoted
to theoretical analysis of the various aspects of optical-acoustic interac-
tions in TPV. single-direction interaction of coupled surface light waves
during colinear [54, 55] and noncolinear [56-58] interaction of them with

a surface acoustic wave (PIN) is used in diffraction type modulators and
deflectors. Bragg diffraction [56, 57] when only one diffraction order
occurs is usually eaployed to achieve the greatest efficiency. Channelling
of the optical and acoustic beams leads to high power densities, to an
increase of the interaction length and, because of this , to more effective
interaction at low levels of control power. Thus, an optical-acoustic de-
flector-modulator with working frequency above 200 MHz and control acoustic
power not exceeding 7 as! was developed on the basis of lithium niobate wave-
guides [59]. Thin-film variants of optical-acoustic ccnvolvers which utilize
light diffraction in m on PAV and which accoaplish the operation of con-
volution of optical signals, have higher efficiency than their volumetric
analogs [60. 61). They apparently find broad application in development of
various optical data processing devices.

its speed of optical-acoustic diffraction devices is limited both by the
converter frequency band and by the transit time of the acoustic wave
through the optical beam. ‘rhese principal restrictions are eliminated in
electrooptical diffraction modulators in which the phase diffraction grating
is induced by an electric field applied by a system of pin electrodes.
Their potentially possible bandwidth is restricted only by the natural
capacity of the device itself and may be brought up to several gigahertz
[59]. In this case the control voltage is corresponding to the percentage
modulation close to 100 percent do not exceed a value on the order of 10 v
[59. 62]. The disrecteristics of electrooptical modulators of this type
can be optimized by proper selection of the m parameters and of the corre
sponding electrode structure.

By utilizing the respnance properties of periodic grating structures, one
can also modulate the emission intensity in TPV by controlling the diffrac-
tion efficiency of a stationary phase grating structure. The possibility
of this type of emission modulation by using ROS and R82 electrooptically
controlled structures are discussed theoretically in [63]; light modulation
in semiconductor m by using stationary phase diffraction gratings with

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

resonance excitation of the acoustic wave in then was investigated experi-
mentally in [6‘]. Modulators of this type expand the capabilities of known
thin-film diffraction modulators and apparently find application in inte-
grated optics.

Along with diffraction typo electrooptical and optical-acoutic thin-film
devices. deflectors and modulators are beginning to be developed and investi-
gated in which the nagnetooptical effect is mod to control the parameters
of the phase grating formed by the periodic structure of the nagnetic do-
mains [65, 661.

we will not dwell in detail on the problems devoted to experinental inves-
tigation of diffraction-grating enission input and output devices since many
practical anpects of their application in integrated optics were considered
in the previom section: moreover. there is a special survey paper on this
problea [67]. He shall note only the nore significant aspects related to
the new possibilities which grating structures with an says-atrial profile
[68. 69] open up for integrated optics, which make it possible to achieve
single-direction enission fros m to one of the media adjacent to the
waveguide with sufficiently long period of then (and, consequently, high
efficiency of m enission input). and volunetric phase gratings for-ed
both on the surface of and in the M itself [24, 25] in which high effi-
cienq is coabimd with new functional capabilities.

With regard to nos and 332 lasers. many papers. including those of a survey
naturc [5, 8, 16. 70-72) have been devoted to their theoretical and experi-
mental investigations and the practical aspects of applications in integrated
optics, which are of independent interest and go far beyond the franework

of the given survey.

Aperiodic grating structures. Almost periodic grating structures with a
period, varying monotonically along the length of the grating ('eperiodic'
grating structures), are of great interest to integrated optics and open
up broad possibilities for development and creation of a nuer of new
spatially-selective thin-film waveguide devices (73-76). These grating
structures with variable period can be achieved by corrugation of the m
surface (as in the case of strictly periodic structures) when recording
an interference pattern of two laser beans with plans and cylindrical wave
fronts on a photoresistor surface applied to a waveguide (figure 5). In
the considered configuration, the period of the grating structure is a
monotonic function of coordinate M2) - A./[2n3 sin((00 + ”/2”: Uh."
A. is the wavelength of the irradiating emission [731. By introducing
Mr) - R/Au) (here A is the working wavelength of eaission propagated
in the 'i'PV, one can show that in paraxial approximation (when (r - to) 4
<< (a2 + b2)1/2. see figure 5)

”(I)zN(2.)+A(:—z.), (3 e 3)

whero parameter A characterizes variation of the period of the grating which
decreases in our case with an increase of z and depends on the recording

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘HUIM. "SK ONLY

conditione and wavelength A [74]. An aperiodic grating on a m eurface with
paranetere which eatiefy the condition of enieeion output In; - M < no. n2:
will operate ee an output focueing device with focal dietance P. (in a mediu-
with refractive index of n2). dependent on the enieeion wavelength. node in-
dex n and parameter A [74]:

F~~|~3-(n:.-N(a.»'I/An.. «a.»

 

figure 5. Diagram of Achieving Aperiodic Grating Structuree on
m Surface

One of the inortant applicatione of aperiodic grating etructuree in inte-
grated optice my be the enieeion input device into m, the enieeion having
significant divergence. for era-pie, from a eeniconductor laser, or a fiber
liwt guide m natching device [74), but there are etill many mrerolved
problem here. Aperiodic crating etructuree nay aleo find application in
develop-mt of wideband reflecting filtere (36). whoee reeponee (i.e., the
coefficient of reflection an a function of wavelength) may vary due to
variation of the aperiodicity of the grating etructure. Spatial-eelective
filtration of e-ieeion in m nay be accoqliehed by ueing than. froquncy-
eelective devioea for coebination and eeparetion of optical data channel.
with different carrier frwequenciee (nultiplexere and Multiplexers) may
operate on their baeie [75] and lultichannel nos and 8.32 laeere nay aleo
be realized on their baeie [76].

A

l
11

l
‘1 Ar 4: v":

figure 6. Scheaatic Diagran of Spatial-Selective Filter Based
on Aperiodic Grating Structure in ‘I'PV

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A diagram of a spatial-selective filter based on an aperiodic grating
structure in e m is shown in figure 6. Its operation is based on selec-
tive Bragg reflection of emission with different wavelengths fro- different
sections of the grating structure so that spatial separation or combination
of then in the general transnitting channel is eccoaplished. the obvious
design and technological advantage of this channel nixer compared to the
variant shown in figure 4, a should be noted. but it is also suitable for
operation with a snail nunber of data channels. Expressions (2.0 or (2.9).
which correspond to tho resonance case where the effective length I.“ of
the corrugated section within the range of the resonance width of Bragg
reflection (AMo by period Ashould be taken instead of I... nay be used as
a function of the operating node to analyse the coefficient of reflection
I75]. nssuning that variation of the period along the length of the grating

structure is linear. i.e.. limiting oneself to approximation (3.3), one can
find that

There is no doubt that further investigation of grating structures with
variable period for purposes of integrated optics will lead to new advances.

4. Devices with ‘Nnnel Distributed Coupling

M regular closely arranged dielectric waveguides nay efficiently exchange
power due to tunnelling of the electromagnetic wave energy fro. one waveguide
to another. thus providing directional power branching [71, 7a). the condi-
tion of phase synchronisn for the interacting waves (/5. - ) out be ful-
filled to accoaplish effective coupling. The coupling cons ant k is real

in a median without losses and if the waveguides have identical distribution
of the refractive indices. the constants k.“ and km in equations (1.2) and
(1.3) are equal. For waveguides with different propagation constants (/3. f
i ﬁn). coupling say be i-proved by periodic disturbance of the waveguide
parameters, thus ensuring the condition of phase synchronise (6' I 0) which
for sine-wave disturbance may be written in the for:

ba “thrown/A). (4.1)

where A is the period of disturbance in the direction of wave propagation

z and q - l. 2. ... (usually operation at q I l is nest efficient). In this
case power transfer both in the forward and reverse directions is possible
(18. 79]. Couplers with smooth variation of perensters along the length of
the coupling sons were proposed and investigated in [79] to provide noncriti-
cal phase patching of waves to selection of waveguide parameters.

An important exasple of accosplishing tunnel type coupling is a prismatic
coupler which is used for excitation of waveguide modes in m. Although

laser emission rather than the waveguide node is used for excitation in a

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

~ :

prisnatic coupler, its operating principle is similar to tho mechanisn of
coupling between regular waveguides. in both cases "disturbance" of total
internal reflection free the waveguide boundaries and tunnelling of the
electromagnetic energy occur. which also ensures coupling of the interacting
waves. Coupling of this type by ming an exponentially attenuating field
has the advantage of directionality and is mad for directional shunting of
power. Detailed analysis of the operation of a priaeatic device. although
based somewhat differently fret: coupled wave theory. is carried out in [ll].
111a processes of tunnel and diffraction emissions of surface waves in dif-
fusion waveguides with arbitrary transverse distribution of the refractive
index were investigated in {so} and the optimum conditions of effective
excitation of diffusion waveguides were formulated in universal fora. Expres-
sions for the attenuation constants «Kn for both considered cases are presented
in the sent.| paper. me nain conclusions of this paper were checked experi-
cantally in (all where the dependence of the attenuation constants on the
node index were determined and it was shown that the effective input of
enission to diffusion waveguides is possible only through a snail gap of
special profile. 1n. greatest difficulties are encountered during tunnel
excitation of m having high refractive index. for exarple. based on Cans:
the effectiveness of excitation is usually low in this case (approximately
10-15 percent) [82]. However. a significant increase of enieaion input
efficiency is possible for these war when using cowined devices consisting
of a coupling prise and a diffraction grating applied to its base [as].

Realization of monolithic and codained integrated optics circuits with
effective coupling of the emitter and the m [84. OS) is possible on the
basis of an optical tunnel device under conditions of providing phase
synchronise due to the appropriate design version of the enitter. The
effectiveness of coupling nay practically reach its theoretical limit in
this case. mel coupling of a semiconductor laser with a m due to an
exponentially attenuating field way also be accomplished in the absence of
phase latching but in this case. as indicated by experiments, efficiency
does not exceed 25 percent (061. Direct coupling of a m laser to a m
with corresponding selection of the grating structure and waveguide para-
esters is also possible (87].

Upon an exchange of power between two identical coupled waveguidee (the
condition of phase synchronise is fulfilled. 6 - a). the total power true
the first waveguide is transmitted to the socond at sons coupling wavelength
L1. determined from expression (1.8) and equal to

L.--n/(2k). (4.2)

If the interaction length is greater than 1.1. reveree pusping of power to
the first waveguide occurs. 1n. value of 1.1 is determined by the coupling
constant k and depends on the distance between the waveguides and the
parameters of the waveguides the-selves [77]. waveguide system in which
power is puped with very snail gaps between coupled waveguides usually
find application [88]. his pieces serious technological requirements on

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

manufacture of these directional couplers based on channel waveguides. the
distance between which does not exceed units and tens of microns at values
of by on the order of several millimeters. An increase of the gap at this
length of the coupling tone can be achieved by using cosplex profiles of the
refractive index of the waveguides themselves. which provide great depth of
\enetration of the directed emission field [89). By changing the value of
the coupling constant. for exanple. by electrooptical or other methods.
coupling between two waveguides can be controlled at a given value of 1.1
and thus emission can be uodulated. A large nueber of directional controlled
couplers [90] and switches. the typical control voltages of which cosprise
approximately 20 V. has been constructed on this principle [91).

further improvement of 01.8 systems is ispossible without extensive intro-
duction of integrated optics components. Practical use of integrated optics
components in combination with fiber light guides is liuited by the absence
of highly efficient coupling devices between film and fiber waveguides.
The same three main types of matching devices -- tunnel. diffraction and
those with beveled edge of the waveguide ~- are used to accosplish coupling.
but the efficiency of these devices is usually low and they are not all
universal. The greatest ntsnber of developments is devoted to devices based
on the light energy tunnelling effect. Devices for joining integrated
optics circuits by using cowlex ribbon optical fibers have been proposed
(92]. Both input and output of laser esission to 'i'PV is possible by using
these devices and their operating principle is the seas as in a directional
coupler. me eaximss luminous energy transfer coefficient reaches 97 per-
cent. 1“! coupling with ordinary fiber light guides is also possible on
this principle [93). but effective coupling is possible only in the case of
single-node fibers. Another method of matching m and an optical fiber is
light emission tunnelling from a m to a fiber cut at some angle (94] and
return [95] with the end of the fiber being arranged parallel to the wave-
guide surface. The me of this device in combination with the beveled edge
of the 11"! ads it possible to accosvplish emission input into the fiber
with an efficiency of approximately 80 percent (96). Many pattents (97)
have been devoted to problems of tunnel matching of fiber light guides with
. but no actually existing syetens and coupling cosponents having accep-
table paramters have yet been developed. Different variants of realizing
cosbined 'l'PV-fiber ligat guide coupling devices are also possible when dif-
fraction output of emission directly to the optical fiber [98) or the hole-
graphic method of matching [99] is used when recording a hologram on the
surface or in the volt-us of the m: aperiodic grating structures may also
be used for this.

It should be noted in conclusion that the limits of the applicability of
results which describe the considered diffraction processes of transformation
of surface waves are closely related to the axiom persissible relative
value of modulation of the effective refractive index of TN An'ln'. Based
on cosparison of the results of numerical solution of the equations of first-
and second-order coupled waves for spatially periodic India [100]. one may
conclude that the results presented in this survey are valid for An'ln' S
$0.012. which alnost always occurs in host real cases.

A0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

Unfortunately. the linitod acope o! the survey did not peruit consideration
of the variom cathode of achieving diffraction-grating etructuree for pur-
pceee of integrated entice. 1he nethode or their manufacture are c1ocely
related to the techno1ogy of producing m theuelvee [101. 102] and are
mually baled on the uee or holographic methods and photolithcgraphy nethode
with ubeequent etching oi the treated surface (a. 103. 104]. One of the
ecet prcaieing nethede of producing grating etructuree on a m auriace
baaed on eeniconductor coepounde ie the nethod cf photoeelective etching

of their eurtace (103. 106].

BIBLIOGRAPM
1. alaahi. my use, Vol. 64. No. 12. 1976.
2. Yariv, A.. rm .3. 93-9, 1973: Yariv. A.. in "Vvedeniye v integral'nuyu
optiku" [Introduction to Integrated Optics). edited by h. narnoeki.
uoecov. Mir.

3. Hercule. 0.. meory oi Dielectric Optical Waveguidee. New York. Acadeeic
Preec. 1974.

4. Kogelnih, 11.. in Integrated Optica. edited by 1'. fair, New York.
Springer-Verlag. 1975.

S. Yeriv. A. and M. Nakamra. 1m .1. 98-13, 1977.
6. Rogel‘nik. a” m. Vc1. 121. 1977.
7. KocePnik. Ii. and C. V. Shank, J. APP!” PINS" V01. 43, 1972.

8. Luk'yanov, V. 14.. A. 1'. Seunov, N. V. shelhov and s. D. Yakubcvich.
KVANMAYA WI”, V01. 2. 1975.

9. Landau. 1.. D. and Ye. M. urchin. '31ektrodinanika eplcehnykh ered"
(me electrcdynenice of Cccpact Medial. noeocv, Pimtgic. 1959.

10. Taylor and rariv. new man. Vol. 62. No. a. 1974.

ll. Zolotov. Ye. 11.. V. A. Kieelev and V. A. Sychugov. um. Vol. 112. 1974.
12. Kieelev, V. A.. KVAMOVAYA mu, Vol. 1, 1974.

13. Kit-10v. V. A” KVAN'IOVAYA mm, V01. 1. 197‘.

14. Kice1cv, V. A., WWAYA man, V01. 1. 1974.

15. Rigrod, w. H. and D. Harcuee, 1-3. 90-12, 1976.

16. zlenko. A. A.. V. A. xicelev. A. H. Prohhorov. A. A. Spikhal'ekiy and
V. A. Sychugov. MAYA mmn. V01. 2. 1975.

41
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

2Q.

25.

26.

27.

29.

29.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

Prokhorov. A. N.. A. A. aptkhel'ekty. V. A. Sychuqov end a. P. 8h1pu10.
KVAN'NVAYA 31.3mm, V01. 3. 1941 (1976).

Keeerlnov. R. 3.. z. N. Soko1ove end A. A. aux-1e. zm-r. V01. 46. 1976;
2. N. Sokolova and V. a. mum... PIS'NA V M. Vol. 3. 1977.

Oudunko. A. 1.. RADIOTEKIINIKA 1 W1)“. V01. 21. 1976.

Prokhorov. A. N.. A. A. spmwmy and V. A. Sychuqov. AVANmVAYA
mmxn. Vol. 3. 1976.

X19010V. V. A. end A. M. Prokhorov. KVAN'IOVAYA SWIM. V01. 9.
1977.

21enko. A. A.. V. A. neelev. A. N. Prolonorov. A. A. 891m1'ek1y end
V. A. Syehugov. KVAN‘IOVAYA SWIM. V01. 1. 1974.

21enko. A. A.. A. N. Prokhorov. A. A. Spikhn'ekty end V. A. Sychugov.
KVAMOVAYA mum. V01. 3. 1976.

Klee1ev. V. A.. KVANmVAYA “MINA. V01. 1. 1974.

Bozhevol’nyy, s. 2.. Ye. N. u1otov. V. A. neelev. V. N. Pelekhntyy.
A. N. Ptokhorov end Ye. A. stIcherbakov. DAN 8881!. V01. 235. 1977.

K090111111. II. and ‘1‘. P. 800n0Vlk1y. am SYS‘I'EJS W16". m.
V01. 49. 1970.

Chang. H. 3. C.. 1223 mus, urn-21. 1973.

Bykovekty. Yu. A.. V. 1.. 8.1mm end A. V. Shul’ko. Repubnc Beautiﬁc-
hdm1¢e1 Conference ”Integreted end ”he: Opuce Cowonente 1n Counta-
cetione System" (Report M1“): nev. Ukrainian NIIN'n. 1977.

Berenov. 1.. 1.. V. N. Luk'yenov. A. ‘1'. Seunov end N. V. Shem»).
KVAN'I'OVAYA aux-mama. V01. 4. 1977.

Andr1yeeh. A. N.. Yu. A. nykoveuy. V. 1.. “mm. H. R. Oren-11y end
A. V. Shill'ko. KVAN’NVAYA WIKA. V01. 5. 1978.

Kenen. R. P.. J. APPL. PHYS" V01. 46. 1975.

Cudunko. A. 1.. RADIWIKA I mm. V01. 21. 1976.
“901011;. 11.. am sums acumen. JOURNAL. V01. ‘9. 1969.

N001. 6.. H. hogan end 1'. Guy. C. R. ACAD. SCI” V01. 2849. 1977.

Satin. V. Ye.. A11-Unton Sc1enutic-1‘edtn1ce1 Conference “further
Develop-Int o! mectroopuce.' Report mice. Room. 1977.

52
ton criteria. us: ONLY
36.
37.

38.
39.
40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.
‘8.

‘9.

$1.

52.

53.

54.

FOR OFFICIAL USP ONLY

Angolan. II” 3:14. BYWB MIC“. JOURNAL. V01. 55. 1976.

Flanders. D. 8.. N. Kogolntk. R. V. Sch-16c and c. V. Shank. APPL.
PHYS. 1811‘s.. V01. 24. 1974.

11.“; Pa Kn; APP!“ OPTICS; V01. 10' 19710
BIOdI‘n C. ”DC Co Yon. m1” PHYS” V01. 44. 1973.

Andriyuh. A. 14.. Yu. A. Bykovakty. E. P. Kola-”kc. A. V. Makovkin.
V. 1.. sumov and A. V. 32mm... KVAN'NVAYA W11“. V01. 4. 1977.

Romantic. V. 6.. V. A. any“ and V. G. hunt-In. KVAN‘MVAYA WM.
Vol. 4. 1977.

Schmidt. R. V.. D. c. ”mans. C. V. Shank and n. D. Standby. APPL.
Pints. 1311‘s.. V01. 25. 1974.

muuhuC' 14.. K. o. "111 “d A. Ritual”. J. 0". 80¢. Moo V01. 65.
1975.

Crou. P. 8. and ﬂ. Kogomlk. on. 1811's.. V01. 1. 1977.

zlanko. A. A.. V. A. noolov. A. M. Prokhozov and V. A. Bychugov.
KVAN'NVAYA mmxn. Vol. 1. 1974.

Zo1oeov. Yo. IL. A. H. Prokhorov ma Yo. A. Sheltorbakov. KVAMDVAYA
mum, V01. 2. 1975.

“ﬁnd“. Y.. ”91.. Plus” V01. 44. 1973.
Mac. R. v. “a :0 P. W; 1m Jo. 92.11. 1975.

Lin. Y... “Walnut” v taugtn'nwu opttku' [Introduction to muynud
Optics]. «11M by ll. Moon. "ocean. nit. 1977.

Gudunko. A. 1.. 1. 1.. zmnrMI and O. A. Mm. wrommn 1
awn. V01. 22. 1977.

Gudunko. A. I. and 1.. N. “Mn. 12". WW. BER. MIMI“.
V01. 20. 1977.

(All. 3.. D. me. and K. “113100011. W HER. V01. 64. No. 5. 1976.

Gndzonko. A. 1.. O. A. Kurdymv and 1.. A. Oudchov. 211111138va
”0108181110081“. No. 9. 1976.

SW, A. 1.. o. a. Guuv. 1.. N. Doryuqtn. s. A. ubuzov. V. V.
mum... 1.. A. Ooadchov. B. P. mzhivin. G. 1’. Shaun. V. Yo. Satin
and N. N. 010mm. RADIan 1 W10. V01. 21. 1976.

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
$5.

56.

57.

59.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.
68.

69 .

7o.

71.

Gudzonko. A. 1.. L. N. Doryuqin. S. A. ubuzov, V. V. Kludun. 1.. A.
couch“, c. P. Shaun. V. Yo. Scum 8. P. Raquln and A. A.
Tilhchonko. RADIO‘I'EIOINIKA I ”MIRA, V01. 22. 1977.

mm. V. V.. a. V. sukharov, V. V. nudztn and 8. V. Nulakov.
PIS'NA V 2111?. V01. 2, 1976.

mlotov. Yo. 14., V. M. Po1okhatyy. A. H. Prokhorov. Ye. V. Move. 3. A.
Sumatov, s. N. Shkomynxov and Ye. A. Shcherbakov, AVAN'mVAYA
WI”. V01. 4. 1977.

Smolmkiy. 0. A.. N. A. 60:01:, 5. A. Minnow A. N. Agoyov, a. P.
mum and 0. P. Obrubov, PIS'HA V M, V01. 3. 1977.

Zolotov, Ya. 01., V. N. Polokhatyy. A. H. Prokhorov and Y0. A. Qichobekov.
918'!“ V 2m, V01. 3. 1977.

dung. N. s. c., s. an Chem A. A. Becker and I. a. ha, 1‘ 3..
93-13; 19770

Snolomkiy. G. A., N. A. Garcia, s. A. Hironov and A. N. Agonv.
PIS'HA V M. V01. 3, 1977.

Yamuyev, V. N” r. A. Inqachov. N. N. Lyndin. B. a. Noahkov. A. N.
ProkhoroV. V. A. Sychuqov and G. P. 811113010. KVAN'MVAYA WM“.
V01. 3. 1976.

M, J. Cop Y. 010 “d Yo ”‘qu 1‘ Joy ”’1’; 1977.

aykovokty. Yu. A., V. 1.. sum and A. V. Shoal'ko, PIS'MA V m.
V01. 3. 1977.

Hopnor. 6., .7. P. Canton and 3. Donnie“. APPL. OPTICS. V01. 15. 1976.

Smut. G. 9.. H. ll. Nansen and D. 1.. 910.1119. ”PL. PINS. ms” V01.
30. 1977.

Mr, 1., 1:: “Integrated Optics,“ 1975.
Pong. S. '1‘. and ‘1'. Talk, OPTICS cams” V01. 11. 1947.

Takuhi. A., A. Yoshtnobu and N. Sum. APPL. PHYS. ms” V01. 29,
1976.

Prokhorov. A. H” A. A. Spikhal'nkty and V. A. Sychngov. AVAN'MVAYA
EWIKA. V01. 6, 1977.

Mfom‘l. 23). too my V01. 11' 1977’ nt.m' ”I. 10. S. A. 3120th1.
H. N. Ilium and Va. 1.. Potency. PIS'HA V 21m, V01. 3. 1977.

M.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
72.
73.

7‘.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

81.

82.

83.

as.

86.

87.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hing. 8.. 1833 3.. 93-13. 1977.

“u‘ro A0. A. C. uvanov; J. 3. 91.11.“ .nd A. YBLV, 1:“ Jo. 93.130
1977.

aozhovol'nyy, s. 1., Yo. H. ulotov, V. A. unlov, A. H. Prokhorov
And ‘10. A. shchorbakov. PIS'HA V 21m. Vol. 3. 1977.

uvanov. A. c.. A. near. A. Yulv and c. s. Bong. APP!» ms. um"
V01. 30. 1977.

mum, A. and S. 1181", APPL. PHYS. 1311‘s.. V01. 31. 1977.

Smith. 3.. 1n “Woduuyo v intogrnl'nwu optima." odttod by H.
Burnout. macaw. Mir. 1977.

Maxim“, 0., “Opuchom” volnavody" (Optical. waveguides]. Moscow.
Kit. 1974.

nuance. 1.. ‘1. Name. r. Katya and a. and. ANNUAL mom or
mammm: mm 18811101! “PAC. ENG” UNIV. 10160,". V01. 34. 1975.

K1001”. V. A. and A. II. Wm, AVANNVAYA mmn, Vol. 2, 1975.

zolotov. Yo. a” V. II. “women And A. H. Prokhorov. KVAN'IOVAYA
Win, V01. 4. 1977.

Bykovnkiy. m. A.. A. V. mkovktn. V. 1.. sumov and A. V. Shul'xo.
KVAN'NVAYA 3mm. V01. 2. 1975.

Bond, .7. '1'. 016 C. S. m. APPL. OPTICS, V01. 15, 1976.

21m». A. A., V. A. K1001“. A. II. Prokhom, A. A. Sptkhn'lkly and
V. A. Sychugov. WWYA mm. V01. 2. 1975.

Bykovskiy. Yu. A.. A. V. W, V. r. M1061“, V. 2.. 801m“ and
A. V. m1'ko. mm 1 WWI“. V01. 41, 1976.

Cupbon. J. c. and D. H. Bahama. rm J.. 93-13, 1977.

aykovskty. Yu. A.. Yu. P. Mam. A. V. lukovkin. V. K. mlyahov,
V. I. Holoduv. V. L. mm, 0. N. Muddy and A. V. Sit-31'“.
KVAN'I’OVAYA mm. V01. 4, 1977.

Kuz'ainov. Yu. 8.. N. H. Lynch. A. N. Prokhorav. A. A. Spikhd’tkly,
V. A. Sychugov and 6. P. 9119810, MAYA WI“. V01. 2. 1975.

Kenton. R. 1?... OPTICS cans" Vol. 17. 1976.

Aunchor, P” R. Th. hum, It. ll. "1&0. and 6. 2106102. swans PORSII.
um MICK. misses!” V01. 5. 1976.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
91.
92.
93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100 .
101 .

102.
103.
10‘.

105 .

106 .

Schmidt. R. V. And no MCIn‘k' APP!“ PHYS. LENS” Vol. 28. 19760
mun. c. A. and P. J. A. uybourn. OPTICS cams” Vol. 18. 1976.
"O“; R. Po ind A. '0 “ilton' 1388 as. 93.13. 1977.

Bykovnkty. Yu. A.. A. v. mkovkin And v. 1.. salmov. WANMAYA
mmxm, Vol. 2, 1975.

"0161161. ’6 '0 ad C. 0. ”.11. u. 3. Plant. 61. 350-960, NO. 396,077.
punt-Md 6 July 76.

Zolotov. Yo. H” v. n. Polckhaeyy and A. N. Prokhorov. INANMAYA
SWIM. Vol. 3. 1976.

01mm, 3. A. And V. P. Rod'ko, MSWYA WIMMIM, No. 2.
1979.

Nana. J. 14., R. A. Butt-aunt. A. H1110: and c. c. Non. AWL. ms.
6211‘s.. Vol. 28. 1976.

Bykmldy. Y“. A0, A. V. ”Min m V. In Slim. OP?!“ 1
SPBKmsKOPIYA. V01. 370 197‘.

Kong. J. A.. J. 091'. soc. ANSI!” Vol. 67. 1977.

Gonohuonko. A. M. And V. P. Rad’ko. "Wodontyo v Lumen-1mm
opciku' [Introduction to Integratod Optics] . Minsk. mm 1 comma,
1975.

Volkov. V. 6., mrommzn 2A mam, No. 12. 1977.

Smith. s. and a. c. CucyrAPPL. onxcs. Vol. 16, 1977.

Lubunov, V. A., G. I. ml‘ymu. B. I. Vll'kov. m. A. ”dim and
V. M. hl'nov, WYA ”MAYA WM, No. 17. 1977.

Bolyakov, 1.. V.. D. N. Gorylcllev. N. N. mum; and Ye. 1.. Penny.
281?, Vol. 44, 1974.

Alforov, 23.. 1.. D. N. Goryadm. s. A. eunuch, N. N. Mum. Yo. 1..
mum and a. s. W, am. Vol. 46. 1976.

COPYRIGNT: 'xvmtovaya olokuonuu", 1978

6521
C80:

1870

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M8108

UDC $35.8.666.189.2)666.11:62l.039.553
MDXM‘ION-OMICAL 81133.th 0' W-WSS GLASS mm OPHCAL “MID“

Noaoov WW” W!“ in maian Vol 5 No 11, Nov 70 aignad to proao
26m 18 pp net-2406

[Articlo by A. N. Gur'yanov, o. o. Dowatykh. Ya. M. Dianov. L. s. nomiyanko.
Yo. P. Nihitih. A. N. Prokhorov. A. O. Rybaltovakiy. P. V. Chomv and A. 8.
Yuahin. Phyaioa inatituto iaohi P. N. Iahadov of tho 0888 um of Scionooa.
Hoaoov. and tho matituta of atoniatty o: tho 088R Aoadouy o! Scianooa.
cor'kiyl

[me] ha mat advancaa o: tho paat tow van in davolopaant o: low-loan
gloao (that uavoquidoa and “hat-optic oablao lad to tho poaaihility of
oxtonoivo an of thoa in optical miutiooa oyatoao during tho noxt tau
yam. In thia toqard tho quation axiaaa of tho attoct of tho aux-owing
aodiun. apocifioally of ionizing radiation, on glaoa fibor vavaquidoo. 1m
ottoct of gun-radiation on optical loaooa in quart: glaaa and glaaa fibor
vavaguidoo (M) of varioua typoo (aao. to: oxalplo. (1-3)) hao alraaOy boon
toportod in tho litoratura. It vaa ahovn that tho altaot of cam-radiation
loads to a aignitioant inoraaao o! optical loaooa and in thia caoo tho
induood abaoxption dapanda on tho mention of tho glaaa. ita purity. tho
hydroxyl group cootont. inadiation doaoo and a auto: of othor tat-ton.
'ma apocttal dopoMonco o! iMnood ahaorption ia o! apooial intoraat. 'lho
ahaozptiou banda induoad by ioniainq radiation in pm and alloyod quart:
glaaa are uaually locatod in tho w and viaihla uqiona at tho apoctnl.
moutoro. ooo ahould oxpoct an incroaao of radiation-optical atability
(mo) of vavaguidoa aado fro- thia qlaoa with tranaition tro- tha viaihlo
to tho naat 1!! hand of vavolongtho. Moot oxporinonta oh study of low-loaa
ROI) of svs voto conduct“ in tho tango of wavolanqtha of 0.6.1.1 demo.
with ia new of qroatoat intomt {or fibor-optioa micatioua. And
actually. an incroaao of non with a inmaao or vavalauqth vaa obaomd
[1, 2]. An ovon motor inmaoa of mu nay ho axpootod in tho raqion at
tho apootm of 1.1-1.7 aicxooa, pro-1am for fibar-optiea oo-unicationo
[o-sl. Honour. vo know of no papara on invoatigatioo o! low-looa m o!
8V8 in thia apactxal ragion.

(07
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

 

'40 '4: it .. ms

Figure l. spectra of Optical Attenuation o\ of SVS or Piret
(Solid Curve) and Second (Daehed Curve) ”pea

Sena reeulte of inveatigating the effect of game-radiation on the extent
of optical loeaee in low-loee svs or two types: type I -- core of sic; +

0 Geo: (diameter of 45 nicrona) and ehell of 8102 (die-eter or no niorom)
and type I: -- core of no; (diameter of 200 niorone) and ahell o! eilicone
mbber (outer dianeter of 500 nicrone) -- are reported in the present paper.
111a neaaure-ente were nade in the epectral range of OAS-1.7 niorona. me
initial loeeee of the inveetigated waveguides are preaented in Figure l.

The waveguides were irradiated on a eource of €050 gala-radiation with

dose ratee of 250 and 2 rad/e. The induced absorption spectra were taken
every 1 hour after irradiation. uoreover. the induced abeorption in the
waveguide. wae naaeured inediately during irradiation at fixed wavelengthe.
The induced absorption Ipectra of waveguidee of the firet type tor varioue
doeee o! game-radiation are preeented in Figure 2. It is obvious that the
induced aheorption decreaeee monotonically with wavelength and in apparently
determined by the long-wave edge of the abeorption band whoae maxim-I liee
outeide thia range.

«ﬁlo:

 

40 u 1,! 3,."

Figure 2. Induced Abeorption Spectra of svs Piret WP. ﬂeaaured
Mry ﬂour After Exposure to Various Doeee o! Gan-ac
Radiation. the radiation doee rate wee 250 rad/e

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dose dependence of induced absorption in waveguides or the first type
are presented in Figure 3, a. The growth kinetics of the induced radiation
u with dose 0 is nonlinear and is described by the law at ~ vs in the
range of approximately 1.3-1.7 microns. A einilar law of accumulation of
radiation detects was observed in alkali-halide crystals and is interpreted
in [7]. Radiation defects which determine induced absorption in waveguides
of this type are stable at rear terperature: the induced absorption drops
by a total of 5 percent within the first 5 minutes after the end of exposure.
Cooper-hon of the dose dependence of induced absorption at different wave-
lengths shows that the R00 or waveguides of the first type increases sharply
with an increase of wavelength.

 

Figure 3. Dose Dependence of Induced Absorption of svs of First
(a) and Second (b) We at Dittorent Wavelengths.
The dependence for 0.82 micron in Pigure a corresponds
to measurements every hour after irradiation and the
renaining dependences correspond to neasurenents during
irradiation

waveguides are presented in Figure 3, b. These waveguides differ sharply
from those of the first type by the kinetics of the increase of induced
absor wtion with irradiation do“: the induced absorption emerges to satura-
tion at doses of 103-104 rad. Therefore, the dose dependences have a plane
section in the dose range of 104-106 rad. The radiation defects of these
waveguides are unstable and recombine at room telnperature: the induced
absorption drops several times within 5 ninutes after the end of exposure.
The process of radiation defect recombination significantly affects the
dose dependence of induced absorption of waveguides of the second type.
Thus. the same radiation dose of 104 rad received by a waveguide at dose
rate or 2 rad/s induces an order less absorption than that at a dose rate
of 250 rad/s.

Thus, it was shown experimentally for the first time that low-loss R00 of
svs based on quartz glass increases sharply upOn transition to the spectral
region of 1.3-1.7 microns. This circumstance and also the fact that svs

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

based on quartz glass have absolute minimum losses and zero material dis-
persion in this region (4-6) stake the spectral region of 1.3-1.7 microns
vory promising for fiber-optics cos-unications.

It should be noted that the kinetics of induced absorption (or A < 1 micron
deviates Eros: the law A -~ 15. This permits one to state that absorption
in the region of 1.3-1.7 microns is determined not only by the list: of the
UV band. but also by the presence of a second (IR) absorption band.

1.

2.
3.
‘0

S.

6.

7.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Friebele. r. 3.. G. H. Sigel and R. E. Jaeger. A Digest ot the ldepicts}.
Meeting on Optical Fiber Transmission 1:. Tun-9. February 22-24. 1977,
willimburg. Virginia.
Boganov, A. 0. 0t a1.. WWAYA 3W1“. Vol. 4. 1977.
Friebele. E. J. et al.. APPL. Pms. 1.2m“ Vol. 32. 1978.
Belov, A. V.. A. N. Gur'yanov et a1., KVAN‘IOVAYA MW)“. Vol. 4. 1977.
Kobayashi. s. Shibsta. N. Shibsta and 1'. have, Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Integral Optics and Optical Fibers Couunications.
mkyo. 1977.
801091, A. V.. KVAN‘I‘WAYA MINA. Vol. 5, 1978.

Durand. P., Y. Fargo and H. Lambert. J. PHYS. cm. 801... Vol. 30. 1969.

COPYRIGm': ”Xvantovaya elektronika", 1978

6521
C50: 1870

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ m’l’lCIM. USE ONLY

PﬂYSXCS

00C 621.372.8.09
FIBER-OPTIC DATA LINK FOR WICNNONS SYSTEMS

Hosoow KVAN‘RWAYA mum in Russisn Vol 5 No 11. Nov 70 siqnod to pross
26 Roy 78 pp ates-use

(Article by Zh. I. Altsrov, H. I. aolovolov. A. 1‘. Gorslsnok, A. N. Gur'ysnov.
G. G. Osvystykh, Yo. H. Disney, A. Yo. mssik. V. 1. Kolyshkin. P. s. Kop'ysv.
A. H. Ptokhosov snd A. 8. Yuohin, Physics instituts i-sni P. N. may of

tho USSR Acodony of acisncss. Moscow Instituto of Chosistry of tho USSR
Acsdsuy of Soisncos. Gor'kiy. snd Physiootsohnicol Institute isIsni A. P.

tons of tho 0888 Acsdssy of Scionoss, lsninqrsd]

[1‘sxtl mo rogion of vsvolanths of 0.8-1.1 microns is now ussd sxtsnsivsly
{or “bot-optics oo-unicstions. This is xolstod to tho prosoncs o: s voll-
dsvolopod boss of ottioiont rsdistion souross ond dotsctou and slso to tho
sufficiontly low lovsl o: opticol lossss (ssvorol «In/ks) in gloss tibsr
usvoquidss (8V8) in this songs o! vsvolsngths.

Hovovsr. s nors promising spootrsl rogion for dsvoloposnt of noxious wido-
bsnd “box-optics micstions linss (V018) ovsr qrsst distsnoss is tho
rogion of wovolonqths of sppmxiustoly 1.3 nitrous sinos tho utszisl dis-
porsion o! puss snd olloyod got-shim or Enron of quartz gloss possos

through ssro in s narrow songs of 1.3:o.os nicrons' snd tho totsl opticsl
lossos in this bond soy bs rsducod to s 1ovo1 of spproxinstsly 1 43/):- (1-3).
Horsovor. s voxy ispottont circa-stones for s nulbor of applications is tho ,
fsct thst tho rsdistion stability of 8V8 incrsosos significantly upon tronsi-
tion to tho opsctxol :ogion gusts: thon 1 sicron (4].

lusting of s 2-h- vans in which spocislly dovslopsd new unioohductor lsssts
opsrstinq st vsvolongth of 1.3 micron won mod ss tho souroos snd tho
possibility of dots trsnsnisoion ovsr qrsot distsncss vss invsstigstsd, is
rspostod in this pspor. M with cots and shsll disastors of so snd 120
nitrons, rospsctivsly, nu-sricsl spsxtuzs of 0.28 ond icons of 2-4 43/1:-
in tho togion of 1.3 Iicron wsro mod [2]. .

 

"rho sods dispsrsion osy bo ninisissd or oleotoly olininotod by sslscting
tho oorrosponding pmfils of. ﬂro rstrsctivo indsx.

$1
'0'. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The characteristics or the components used and the capabilities of VOLS as

a whole were measured on an experimental data link. The line was assembled
by the typical scheme and its characteristic feature is the possibility of
conducting investigations with signals from different data sources and also
from a digital data pulse simulator (GS-48 generator). me low-noise wide-
band pro-amplifier and main amplifier provided data transmission at a speed
up to 10 Hbits/s. The signal was recorded by germanium photodetectors with
standard characteristics: dark current of approximately 10"7 A and sensiti-
vity of approximately 0.5 m at a wavelength of 1.3 microns. mus, the
minimum detectable output of the optical signal at the input of the receiver
(compared to noise) does not exceed 1-10’7 w.

 

 

5 6
(3.). 1533-. 5.3.). . S‘.L.... "5.3. ass} wk:
sensss- 33"". ac "Lia?" -a sees ”a“... Ins-av DC-

“ ass. mail “I“ as . “n- “ 0- 3' ""‘“"°"'

 

KEY:
1. hype of source 5. Input losses P" . dB
2. Radiation wavelength, microns 6. Dynamic range d, dB
3. losses in SW. da/km 7. Permissible distance between
4. tnergy potential P, db repeaters. km

a lot of semiconductor heterolasers (POL) or band configuration on a system
of solid solutions of ln-Ge-As-P with maximum emission in the region of L3
micron at room tesperature was manufactured for use as sources in the inves-
tigated VOLS. The method of preparing these lasers and their parameters
was reported previously [5]. The Pal. had low thresholds (.s 0.5 A). which
considerably facilitated coobination of the laser modulation circuit with
the data sources.

An excess of optical signal output of the 96!. above the minimum detectable
by the receiver determines the energy potential 9 in the data link and is
one of the most important characteristics of VOLs. Measurements on 10 96!.
models showed that potential P oowrisas 45~50 dB in our system and is
limited mainly by the natural noise level at the receiver input.

The dimensions of the P61. emitting area comprise 1 x 16 microns, while
emission divergence cosprises 50 x 2‘, which permitted efficient use of
various macrooptical devices in the PGL-SVS adapter stbasseﬁly. nadiation
losses of the Pct. to the input Pn in svs with the parameters indicated
above with direct joining cosprised 7 t 0.5 dB. The low losses to the in-
put (.8 2 d3) are achieved by using microoptical devices on the ends of
waveguides (spherical and cylindrical lenses and the cone-shaped sections
or waveguides), but the requirements on adjustment of the joined elements

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increased significantly in this case. The monitored shaping of the micro-
lensee and welding or the segnents of the 8V8 (the fiber channel consisted
of three svs segsente 1. 0.5 and 0.5 he long) was eccospliahed on a special
electric-arc unit. The losses at the joints of the 8% with each other
did not exceed 0.5 dB.

The value or the dynamic range I) of the permissible attenuation of the opti-
cal signal in the fiber chaan (without regard to losses to the radiation
input into the W8) ie dependent on the rate and type or sodulation (upli-
tuda. pulse-code and so on) and is equal to o - P - Pq - P... where P. (in
da) characterizes the required excess signals above the noise level which
provide the required signal-noise ratio in the V013 or which give an error
probability (usually approxinately 10-9) during digital data transmission.
Ne investigated the dependence of D on the type of informative modulation
and its rate up to 10 “bits/s and the derived dependences were close to those
in (6]. ‘lhe value or D comprised more than 40 do during data transnission
with pulse-code modulation (1104) which we tested.

The energy characteristics of VOLS on 901. and the possibilities of using it
for telecomnications during data transmission with m are presented in
the table.

It should be noted that the use of low-noise photodiodes or avalanche
photodiodes with amplification in vats permits an increase in the value or
D by at least 10-10 dB.

Thus. the energy characteristics of the developed semiconductor heterolasers
at wavelength of 1.3 microns peruits data transmission by svs with the para-
meters indicated above over a distance of tens oi‘ kilo-stars without using
interlediate qlifiers.
HEBREW!!!

l. norigushi. H. and II. Osanai, rmcs 1311's.. Vol. 12, 1976.
2. Belov. A. V. at 01., mmwnrn 3mm, Vol. 4. 1917.
3. Belov, A. V. et a]... “MAYA mm. Vol. 5, 1978.
4. Gur'yanov, n. 11., c. G. Devyatykh, Ye. u. Dianov, L. s. Korniyenko.

Ye. P. Nikitin, A. H. Prokhorov. A. O. Rybaltovskiy. P. V. Chernov and

A. S. Yushin, xvmmrn mun, Vol. 5, 1978.

s. Alforov. 2h. 1.. n. 1'. Gorelenok. P. s. Kop'yev, v. N. Mdivani and v. x.
leilov. ”8'!“ V um. Vol. 3, 1977.

6. K30, C. K. and J. B. 60.11. WICS. Vol. 49, 1976.

correlate: 'Itvantoveya elehtronika". 1978

6521
cs0: 1870 53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 0131.?

PMICB

UDC 631.327.68

FEASIBILITY OP DEWPING OPTICAL mm! W M580 0" W8 MD? M

hcsoov WW“ Burma!!!“ in Ruesien Vol 5 No ll, Nov 78 signed to press
14 Mar 70 pp 2495-2497

[Article by V. n. Geysler. A. r. Kravchenko. v. P. solov'yev end A. 8.
‘norokhov. Institute of Semiconductor Physics of tho Siberion Departunt of
the USSR noedeny of Sciences. Novosibirsk]

(Text) Hotel-dielectric-sesiconductor structures rind broad application in
development o! the component base of optical ooaputer technology, speciti-
celly in dovelopcont or nedie (or optical date recording and storage. The
dete in MD? metal-dielectric-soliconductorl structures is stored in the
ﬂora of e potential relief created by the trep charge in the dielectric
leyer of the structms [1-4]. The etcrege time may reach several tens of
thousands of hours. A method 0! date storego in HDP-atructuros based on
chergo capture by the dielectric states and on the final relaretion tins
of the nonequilibriun region or the space charge (on) in Imp-structures is
considered in the given paper. ‘lhe data recording-readout cycle begins with
transnission of e voltage pulse with polarity corresponding to ejection of
the coin charge cerriors fro. the semiconductor to the soul electrode of
the HOP-structure. in this case a nonequilibriun depletion zone is tor-ed

the width or the forbidden zone 29: light generation of electron-hole peire
leads to repid relaxation of nonequilibriu OPz. Il'he potential in the m?-
structure is redistributed end the greeter pert o! the applied voltage drops
in the dielectric. Intonation is read by the light with photon energy 11w
sonevhat loss than 29. The reading light. passing through the “DP-structure,
is aaplitude-noduloted due to the Prantrkoldyeh effect. 'i‘ho date storage
tine in an ideal EDP-structure is determined by the relaxation tine or non-
equilibrium on. 'ihe bios is not topped fro. the motel electrode of the
structure during the record-readout cycle. One of the advantages of this
type of date storage in imp-structures is the possibility of data transmis-
sion from one memory olenont to another (transsiseion soy be ecooqlishod
the some so in Pas-structures).

SI.
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A siniler opereting principle is considered in (S. 6] . where the possibility
of creeting e dynenic opticelly controlled trensperency (001') wee investi-
geted [7]. The possibility or creeting en our with eenory hesed on cm MD?-
structure ie studied in the given peper.

‘nue beeis for eenuiecturing the structures wee the epitexiel leyer or gslliun
ersenide epprorinetely 10' on thick with tree electron concentretion of

n £510M ce'l, grown by the ges-trensport method in en open chloride systes
on e strongly elloyed smstrete (n a! milieu-3). An Sign dielectric epproxi-
netely loo nn thick wee epplied to the surfece or the epitexiel leyer. ‘ihe
dielectric wee epplied by pyrolytic decoepoeition of cilioon tetrechloride
SiClq end hydroeine N284. mic peruitted e significent decreeee o: the
silicone nitride production teepereture end ends it possible to evoid theml
diseocietion or the Gene (8]. A ee-itreneperent slminun electrode wee
sputtered onto the dielectric surrece. lhe volt-rered cherecterietics were
eeesured on the produced structures. ‘lhese Insecure-vents node it possible

to determine the relexetion tine of noneguilibriun on [9), which comrlsed
eevsrel hours et 1' - 77 x in the ebeence or illuineticn. the width of the
hysteresis loop of the volt—tend cherecteristics did not exceed 1 v, i.e..
the concentreticn o! the cherge-exchenge slow treps in the investigeted
structures wee low. The electric strength or the dielectric leyerc coeprieed
(4-5))0106 V‘oe'l. 'ihe instelletion described in [10] wes used for opticel
neeeurenents. me spectrel end tine functions of the noduletion coefficient
I end controst k of the structure were assured.

m: an 1,55 to,»

Figure l. Spectrel Dependence of contrest kmu); Mplitude of
the Voltego Pulses Applied to the Structure Wrs v. -
ISOV: O-- At-OuiOu At-0.$Ioz A --
At- 33x0 -- At-9-

The neeurensnte were node in the following nenner. Squere-weve negative
polarity voltage pulses were led to the soul electrode. A dete record
li¢zt pulse end within tine At e dete reed light pulse were led to the
MOP-structure during the effect of the pulse. A helium-neon leeer been
with photon energy of 1.96 eV wee used to record the dete. Since the dete

55
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are read with partial destruction of it caused by absorption of the reading
light. it is necessary that the reading light pulse energy be much less than
the data record energy when making the optical measurements. Analyses showed
that the energy density of the data record pulse cosprises approximately

10-6 J-cm'3 and that of the reading light pulse does not exceed approximately
10'7 J-cm”. All the measurements were made at 'l' - 77 K. This was deter-
mined by the following factors: the coefficient and efficiency of Prantr-
keldysh modulation [10) increases with a decrease of tamerature due to an
increase of the curvature of the edge of natural absorption and. which is
also significant. the relaxation time of nonequilibrium 0P2 increases. The
spectral dependence of the modulation coefficient m .- IA‘r(v)/'r(0)| . whose
maximum value cceprised 93 percent at?! w o 1.507 av. was measured. 'lhe
amplitude of the voltage pulses applied to the structure was equal to so v.
The spectral functions of the contrast of the device. which is determined

by the following relation. are presented in figure 1:

has. 3.): Tutu. lei/Tue. o).

where 13ml». v) is the transrdseion of the structure during data recording
and ran... v) is the transmission of the structure without data recording.
The maximum contrast (like the maximum modulation coefficient) is reached
at he: - 1.507 ev. As can be seen from Figure l. the contrast decreases
with time. The functions kiAt) at fixed values of hu were constructed
to determine the data storage time. These functions are presented in
Figure 2. The data storage time. which we determined as the time during
which I: a 2. ccaprises approximately 10'2 s. It was established that a
decrease of contrast occurs due to a decrease of 13mm. v). m value of
'th. v) does not vary in the investigated range of At from 0 to 9 as.
he most probable cause of data destruction (decrease of contrast) is
leakage of holes from the inversion channel through the dielectric to the
metal; these currents were observed on some structures during measurement
of the volt-fared characteristics and the area of structures during masure-
ment of c-v characteristics cceprised 0.5 m3. while it comprised approxi-
mately 30 m3 during measurement of the optical parameters. i.e.. the pro-
bability of a hole in the “DP-structure increases by almost a factor of 2.
The currents flowing through the dielectric break dam the inversion hole
layer. the width of the on increases in this case. the transmission of the
structure T301.» . v) decreases and consequently the contrast also decreases.
The data storage time is determined in the given case by the currents
flowing through the dielectric rather than by the time of nonequilibrium
092.

Thus. the possibility of using Game rim-structures for development of opti-
cal memory devices with data storage time of approximately 10"? s. having

high modulation coefficient and low data recording energy. is shown on the
basis of experimental data in the paper. It was established that the data
storage time in the investigated structures is determined by the hole con-

centration. It can apparently be increased to the relaxation time of non-
equilibrium on by iwroving the technology.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

‘0

s.

6.

7.

9.

FOR IWI'ICIAI. "8P2 ONLY

mm N

ozoooam

noun 2. use function of Contxut Ame): 0 "-9! w I 1.05 0V:
0 -- Ila) I 1.504 0V1A "flu I 1.507 0V: 0 «1|!» I
I 1.508 0V

3181.100”

Bulm'kov. N. 1., V. D. mus-am. A. I. Plotntkov, V. N. Salem», 0. N.
mam and G. P. torch“. mmn 31.3mm. Vol. 3. 1976.

1’10va. A. In. V. N. 8010mm V. 3. Shubin and A. a. luavdmmo.
mums 80038va 90 912118, No. 10. 1973.

Knvchcnko. A. 3., A. I. Plotntkov. m. u. Popov, V. N. Solemn and
V. B. Shubtn. PIBIXA I ma WNW, Vol. 8, 1974.

Atkhtpov, A. ll.. :1. 1. human. A. G. than, V. B. Witty and
A. A. Sign». PIZIKA 1 mm WWW. Vol. 11. 1977.

Plomikov, A. In. V. N. Solomv. D. N. mkuchuk ﬁnd 6. P. Pordnov.
WWAYA mm. Vol. 4, 1977.

Agrarontn. Yu. V.. V. Yo. Goulov. V. )1. 2.10m, A. P. navehenko and
A. 8. 1‘0an, W”. Vol. 6, No. 4. 1977.

Svtdzinokiy, K. K” MAYA PWW'. No. 6, 1973.

Somehonko. O. V.. 1. Yo. “grandam: and Yu. 2. mam,
HIKROWKA. V01. 2, No. 3, 1973.

”Sway-tn stratus: null-atomutk-polwmodntk' [The Proportiu of
mul-Dtouceuc-smmuctor structural , edited by A. V. Rahmov.
1976.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. Bobylw, a. 1.. A. P. Kuvchonko and A. s. Torokhov, 2mm 1 amount
pomnovoonncov, Vol. 6. 1972.

cownzmm ”many: oloktmika". 1978

6521
080: 1870

58
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY
PHYSICS

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TﬂBRHAL RADIO RADIAIION FROM CLOUDS

Moscow RADXOTBKﬂNIKA I BLBKTRONIKA in Ruaaian No 9. 1978 pp 1792-1806

[Article by A. B. Akvilonove and b. c. Kutute. received by the editora on
15 March 1978)

[Text] The reeulte of theoretical and experimental
reeearch into radio radiation of cloude in the wave
band of 0.3 to 10 cm are preeented. The effect of
various phyeicel characterietice of cloude (teapere-
ture, water content. water reeerve, noieture content)
on the epectrue of brightneee teeperaturee wee etudied
baeed on eodel calculatione. The nature of the de-
pendency wave lengthe on the zenith eagle wee etudied.
Calculations were made both for caeea of eaaeureeente
from the earth'e eurface ae well ea for the taco of
eaking eeaeureeente free aircraft. A technique for
deter-ining the integral paraeetere of the ateoephere
(total eaee of water vapor in the ateoephere and water
reeerve of the cloude) according to S"? redioeetric
neaeureeente ie preeented. zetieatee of the pereie-
eible errore of eeeeureaente of brightneee teeperaturee
at wavea 0.8 and 1.35 ca at the required accuracy of
pereeetere being determined are given. Experieentel
data obtained by eeaeureaente from etationary ground
eitee, from a laboratory aboard an aircraft and free
the "Koaeoe-I‘J” eatellite ere preeented.

Since Dicke and hie aeeociatee eeeeured radio thereal radiation of the
eerth'e ateoephare ll, 2] for the firet tiee in 1965. eyeteeatic reeearch
into ite radiative and ebeorbent propertiee hae been underway in eeny coun-
triee. At firet intereet in thie reeeerch wee prilarily eeeociated with
problelo of radio eetronoeicel obeervetione where the eteoephere at wavee
shorter than 3 co created coneiderable interference to reception of radia-
tion free coeeic eourcee and wee lieited to determining the radio charac-
terietice of the free ateoephere. The theoretical worke of Van Vleck [3. 4]

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

were of great importance for the formation of Sh? radiometry of the atmo-
sphere. The absorption spectrum of millimeter and centimeter waves in
molecular oxygen and in water vapor was calculated in these works. These
calculations were subsequently refined by S. A. Zhevakin and A. P. Naumov
[5-7]. Experimental research of radio radiation of cloudless atmosphere in
the sur band was conducted in the 50's by s. A. Zhevakin. V. S. Troitskiy.
A. Ye. Salomonovich. A. Streiton. D. hogs and others [8-13].

At the ins AN SSSR [institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics of the
USSR Academy of Sciences]. SH? radiometric research of the atmosphere was
begun in 1961 at the initiative and under the direction of A. Ye. nasharinov.
In the process primary attention was focused on research of the radiative
and absorbent properties of a heterogeneous atmosphere containing clouds

and precipitation as well as on the elaboration of methods for determining
meteorological parameters by measurements of radio characteristics of the
atmosphere. This article presents the basic results of work performed on
8"? radiation of a cloudy atmosphere. part of which was published in [29-43].

1. The diffusion effect in cloudy atmosphere in the SN? band is negligible.
Under these conditions as well as under the assumption of a local thermo-
dynamic equilibrium the radio brightness temperature of a stratus hunilis
atmosphere during an observation from the earth's surface can be presented
in the form [9, l6]

~Smmmua:
Ts“: 3)-§ T(’O)?t(h)¢' stem. (1)

where T (h) is the temperature of the atmosphere at altitude h: Y (h) is
the total absorption coefficient: a is the zenith angle; A is the wave length.

The total absorption coefficient in a cloudy atmosphere is computed from
the molecular absorption in the oxygen and in the water vapor, as well as
from the absorption in the small droplets of the clouds. The absorption in
molecular oxygen depends on the temperature and the pressure. Information
on this can be found. for example. in [6. 7]. The absorption coefficient
in water vapor. in addition, has a dependency. close to linear on the abso-
lute humidity [5. 17]. For the absorption factor in a water cloud the ex-
pression [18. 19]

h-l
“53"“7‘” 7.5 M (2)

Key: (1) c lo

is valid where c is the complex permittivity of water; and w is the water
content of the cloud. The frequency dependence of water permittivity in a
radio band is determined by the Debye formula:

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFlCIAL USE ONLY

'0‘“ X. 30"“

"""+ Mum" T'a'+' (175- (3)
where .f+2
k-M’ m 3

tp ia the relaxation tine of the water aolecules: c. is the water peraittiv-
ity at frequencies rp << l/v: co is the water pernittivity at frequencies

tP >> l/v. The parameters to. to and 1’ have been rather well investigated
at teeperaturea higher than the aelting point of ice [1b. 15. 20. 21].

During neasureaents free aircraft the brightness tenperaturea of the systee
"ateosphere--underlying surface" is foreed fro: the right ascending radia-
tion of the ateosphere. the radiation of the underlying surface of the earth

attenuated by absorption in the etnosphere. and radiation of the atmosphere
reflected free the surface:

s
- ”mnuur

" (to)
1.0., o) .. m (x. o) rum” +§ rum»): x

- In“? as aw

x moan-mu. ovum-m; rooms). seeOdh.

where Tn’ X(l. 0) and R(l. 0) is the tesparature. asissivity and reflection

factor of the underlying surface respectively; a is the altitude of the air-
craft above the surface;

'00-! 1.0:)“

is the total vertical absorption; and 0 is the angle road fro. the nadir.

2. Let us look at the effect of various physical characteristics of clouds
on the radio frequency radiation of the atmosphere during observation free
the earth's surface "froe below" and free an aircraft ”from above.” Model
calculations of brightness teeperatures were perforsed for this purpose in
the band of waves of 0.3 to 3.0 cs. excluding the region of resonance ab-
sorption of oxygen in the neighborhood l . 5 an. In selecting the eodels
we used statistics on the temperature. humidity. water content, and alti-
tudes of the upper and lower boundaries for stratus (8t). stratocunulus
(Se). altostretus (As). and altocunulus (Ac) clouds [22-25]. as well as

for cumulus clouds of varying capacity [26, 27]. The basic characteristic
of the cloud aodels are shown in Table l.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Basic Characteristics of Clouds

warm cold
hal half Cumed
ear ear
1

 
    
 

 
 

Cloud shape

     
   
   
   
 
   

Model No

lleight of lower boundary. “16' km 1.6 0.71 3.5 4.0 1.1 1.1
Thickness. 11. Ian 0.3 0.35 0.3 1.0 1.0 0.5
Temperature at lower boundary.
1- . '0 8
lb
6 water reserve. 1:. Its/n2 0.10 0.00 0.06 0.3 0.15 4.70
* Total mass of water vapor in
the atmosphere, 0, 3/an 1.01. 0.66 1.30 1.6:. 1.71 2.28

 

* By the water reserve of a cloud and the total mass of water vapor in the
atmosphere is neant the quantity of water in liquid droplet and vsporous2
states respectively contained in a column of air vith a base area of l m

and l cnz.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

W a m»: an

'0 80 ’ w "70 GD 30 U "00:01:08:
‘ ‘5

Figure 1. SH? spectra of the brightness temperature of a cloudy atmosphere
during observation from the earth's surface in the direction of the zenith.
1-7 is the cloud aodel number according to Table 1.

Key: (1) standard at-osphare

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 1 shows the spectra of brightness temperatures of 7 types of clouds
during observation to the zenith from the earth's surface. The figure also
shows the spectrum of brightness temperatures for a standard clear atmosphere
[28]. The strongest effect of the clouds is in the wave length band from

1 to 0.75 cm (v-30-40 GHz) and from A to 2.7 mm (v-7S-110 Ghz). In these
spectral intervals the increment of brightness temperatures AT, can reach
200' K for cumulus clouds. while for the stratus shaped clouds this value

is considerably smaller and ranges from 2 to 60'K. At the frequencies

v 3 15 OH: only the extended cumulus clouds make a noticeable contribution
to the brightness temperature. Thus at the frequency v-lo GHz the estimated
value of AT” for the Cucong [cumulus congestus] clouds was 42'K. The region
of resonance absorption of water vapor in the neighborhood A = 1.35 cm for
stratus shaped clouds remains quite sensitive to change of the total mass

of water vapor in the atmosphere which is quite evident from curves 1 and
2 in figure 1. '

The estimated dependencies of increments of brightness temperature of the
atmosphere at waves 0.33. 0.8. 1.5. 3, and S cm on the water reserve of
clouds during observation to the zenith are shown in figure 2. In the
linear range (T < 30‘ K) the slope of the curves (logarithmic scale) for
all waves is about the same. For millimeter waves the nonlinear range of

variation in brightness temperature 31th the water reserve of the clouds
begins at values greater than 1 kg/m .

The nature of the dependency of the brightness temperature of stratus shaped
cloud cover on the zenith angle varies with the wave length and is determined
primarily by the ratio between the absorption in the cloud and absorption in
the oxygen and in the water vapor. In the long wave portion of the centi-
meter band full absorption in the atmosphere is less than 1 neper right up
to zenith angles of 80' which provides for linear growth of the brightness
temperature with sec 2. However in the millimeter waves this dependency has
another form. The curves shown in figure 3 show that at the wave 0.4 cm
the brightness temperature of the clouds increases with the growth of the
zenith angle, reaches maximum at angles 65-75'. and then monotonically sub-
sides. At the greater angles. despite the fact that the fundamental absorp-
tion in the cloud is great, the contribution made by the cloud to the RP
radiation of the atmosphere at the wave 0.4 cm becomes comparatively small
due to the large absorption in the oxygen and in the water vapor.

During observation from aircraft the effect of clouds on the received RP
radiation of the system "atmosphere-underlying surface" substantially de-

pends on the type of underlying surface. Clouds create the greatest cen-
trests when measurements are made over a smooth water surface. Figure 4
shows the frequency relationships of increments of brightness temperature
during observation to the nadir caused by the appearance of clouds. The
calculations were made for a smooth sea surface at a temperature of 288.1'K
and for the cloud models shown in Table l. The increment values for strati-
form cloud cover are similar both when observing "from below" and when
observing "from above." The radio brightness contrast during observation
"from above" of extended cumulus clouds are approximately twofold smaller
than during the observation "from below."

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

we: «0 w mun/a

Pigure 2. Brightness temperature Figure 3. Brightness temperature of a

of a cumulus cloud in direction of stratus cloud '1' as a function of the

zenith as a function of lower secant of the zenith angle for three

boundary of cloud an, - 1.1 km. values of water reserve during observe-

thickness 2.0 km tion from the earth's surface at wave-
length of 0.6 cm.

 

 

 

s",- ._-... __ - .
‘ ’ A 5:
:3 5 / :—
20 t r 5—
.7 5 y—
’0 '.~ .—
.. =“=‘EE.=-'— -
5 nun-r J -—"----
i ' ' .—
J l’ __

 

 

.I_:__.__
to 20 do so 70 so 90 I00 ﬂog/W 6H:
:0 I: m i‘! 5' 6 .15 In! I.

Figure la. Spectra of increment of brightness temperature At” (v) of the
system "atmosphere-underlying surface" due to clouds during observation
from space in the direction of the nadir. 1. 3-7 is the cloud model nun-
hcr according to table 1; smooth sea surface

Droplet temperature varies with the altitude of the cloud. The temperature
of the horizontal layer which divides the cloud into the upper and lower
parts with equal values of water content may be used as the parameter

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu UFFNIIM. "SH UNIX

describing the effective temperature of the cloud. Data on the maximum
deviations of brightness temperature of the system "atmosphere--ocean sur-
face" with a change in cloud temperature by S'K are shown in Table 2.

The calculations show that for stratiform clouds the effect of variations
in the profile of the liquid-water content on the brightness temperature
is negligible (ATg < 0.1’K). For clouds with vertical development this
effect becomes noticeable at a thickness of 1.5 km or more. The maximum
deviations in the brightness temperature through variations of the profile
of the liquid-water content inside the cloud are observed with cumulus con-
gestus clouds in a wave band of l to 1.5 cm, reaching values of ll'K during
an observation "from below" and S‘K during observation "from above."

An increase in the total mass of water vapor due to the saturation of it in
the cloud layer leads to an increase in the brightness temperature which

is most noticeable in the region of resonance absorption A - 1.35 cm. On

a percentage basis the increase in Ta for stratiform clouds is greater than
for cumulus. Thus. for example. for stratus and stratocumulus clouds an
increase in the water vapor (AQ-O.lb g/cmz) increases the brightness tempera-
ture at the wave 1.35 cm by 1.4-2.1'K, which is 33-67 percent of the total
contribution of the cloud. A cumulus congestus cloud may increase the mois-
ture content of the atmosphere to l g/cm2 which would lead to a change in
the brightness temperature by 6-7.5'K. and compared to the contribution to
T” of the water reserve this would be only 6-6 percent.

Colloidal-steady cloud formations may contain large droplets with a radius
of r > 30 mkm. for which the conditions of a Rayleigh scattering are not
met and the calculation of the absorption according to formulas (2) and (3)
may lead to appreciable errors at the millimeter waves. For droplets with
a radius of 65 mkm calculations according to the precise formulas of His
and the relationship (2) already yield a discrepancy of 5-6 percent at the
wave 0.2 cm. however taking into account the distribution of droplets ac-
cording to size [22] this discrepancy would not exceed 1-3 percent except
for cumulus congestus and cumulonimbus cloud cover where it may be appre-
ciably large.

3. Measurements of radio radiation of a cloudy atmosphere were made in the
wave band from 0.6 to 10 cm from stationary ground sites, aircraft and
satellites. The ground experiments were used to study the mutual relation-
ships among Sh? spectrums of absorption and radiation of the atmosphere and
physical parameters of clouds. as well as for working out the technique of
aircraft and satellite measurements of the radio radiation of the atmosphere.
Measurements of radiation characteristics of the atmosphere were made simul-
taneously at several waves in different sections of the spectrum; this tech-
nique is discussed in [30. 32]. Table 3 shows the basic characteristics of
superheterodyne, Dicks radiometers developed under the direction of V. s.
Ablyazov which were recently used to study the radiative properties of the
atmosphere during observation from the earth's surface and from an aircraft.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 2.

Cloud shape

St. Sc; warn As,

Deviations in brightness temperature AR (v), caused by 5'K

change in cloud temperature

Cuned. Cucong.

 

- I. . I . I .
aniugnpera :ali‘zgar. Tclo 13 c Tclo 0 c Tclo - 13 0
ch
v-22.235 an: 0.4 2.1 2.4 6.7
v-37.5 GR: 0.9 2.4 4.3 1.1
v-90 an: 0.5 2.0 0.6 0.05
Table 3. Bauic characteristics of rsdionetera
Wavelength, cu Sensitivity. ‘K Frequency Tine constant:
Reception Band. NH: sec
0.41 3 30 8
0.8 0.4 800 1
1.2-1.5 0.6 30 3.5
1.55 0.2 800 1
2.25 0.16 1000 1

Table 4. Hean and maximum values of T2 for clouds of different shapes

 

Shape and tapera- Cut-ed Cucons St. Sc; uinter 8t. Sc: smr
ture of clouds. 'c -10 5
A - 0.41 cm 79 clo so 90 20 35
1"“ 140 160 35 70
:10
A - 0.82 cm TM;o 30 70 12 15
1;:10 120 162 20 35
A - 1.6 cm 79 :1o 1° 25 " 5
ﬂ clo 40 67 7 11
we» 2-: :2
5; do ' '
66

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in addition to this equipment radiometers with low noise amplifiers at in-
put in the hand of wnveu 3 and 10 cm with a sensitivity of 0.2 and 0.07’K
ruupvcthcly wlth a ilmv constant of i see were used in some periods.

The radio radiation of the clouds was detected from stationary points using
a non-scanning antenna or with rotation of it in azimuth. During these ex-
periments observations of the temperature. pressure and absolute humidity
at the earth's surface were made regularly. In a number of experiments an
aircraft furnished meteorological information and joint radar and radio-
sonde measurements were performed (30, 32. 35]. As an example figure 5 a
and b shows the profiles of the brightness temperature of the atmosphere
obtained during passage of cumulus clouds through a non-scanning antenna.
The measurements were made on the "RT-22" radiotelescope of the FIAN SSSR
[Physics Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev of the Academy of Sciences, USSR]
[65]. In the first case (Figure 5a) the radiation of the clouds was re-
corded at the zenith angle of z - 60' simultaneously on waves 0.41, 0.82
and 1.6 cm and in the second (Figure 5b) at 3-78’ simultaneously on waves
0.82. 3.3 and 10 cm. The superimposition of the electrical axes of the
antenna at these waves was achieved using a special exciter located at the
focal point of a 22-meter mirror. For convenience of comparison the curves
are normalized for maximum values and the intervals of averaging of the
brightness temperatures lie within the range of 5 to 16 sec. Some dif-
ference between the profiles is caused by disturbance of the linear relation-
ship between the brightness temperature and the water reserve which shows
up in the millimeter band (see Figure 2). clearly evident in these curves
are the discontinuities of the radio radiation of the clouds which are pri-
marily caused by the pulsations of the field of the liquid-water content
and which disturbed the smooth change of brightness temperature during pas-
sage of the clouds. Cloud brightness temperature measurement errors are de-
termined by the fluctuating threshold of sensitivity and stability of the
gain factor of the radiometer as well as by errors in the measurement of
parameters of the antenna. The accuracy of an individual reading of Ta of
the clouds shown in Figure 5 was about 5 percent at waves 0.41 and 10 cm
and 2-3 percent at the other waves.

Brightness temperature values of stratiform clouds increase as the zenith
angle increases. For waves A 2 0.8 cm this increase is approximately pro-
portional to sec 2. With a cumulus cloud cover the dependency of the bright-
ness temperature on the zenith angle shows up to a lesser degree. The in-
crease of it is noticeable when 2 is varied from 0 to 60'. The maximum
increases of Ta at waves 0.8 and 1.6 cm during passage of the cumulus clouds
was recorded at the interval of angles of z from 60 to 80°. The mean and
maximum values of brightness temperatures shown in Table 6 were obtained

as a result of processing of the recordings of the radiation of clouds of
various forms.

The data in Table 4 was obtained during observation of cumulus clouds at
angles of z-60‘ and of the stratiform clouds in the direction of the zenith.
Comparison of the experimental and calculated data on brightness tempera-
tures of clouds shows satisfactory agreement of them. A direct comparison

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the measured values of TR and those calculated according to data from
aorological sounding is not possible due to the great variability of the
water reserve of the clouds in space and in time [31. 60-63]. as well as
the inertia of aerological methods. The spatial-time dependencies of the
intensity of fluctuations of the radio brightness temperature of a cloudy
atmosphere are discussed in [31. 63].

' “I at:
I. h..." m

 
 
 
 
 

Cu can war
a, i

at

  
    

5 6 '0

 

5; ﬂ‘mrm
Figure 5. Profiles of increments of brightness temperature of the atmo-
sphere, obtained during passage of cumulus clouds through a superimposed
electrical axis of a non-scanning antenna. Reading was made relative to
level of a clear sky; a--composite measurements on wavelengths 0.6. 0.8
and 1.6 cm. brightness temperature of a clear sky at these vaves vef 100.
38.5, and 22°K respectively. zenith angle 60°: 1—) - 0.4 cm, Tacox -
- 160'K; 2--A - 0.8 cm. 1', 3% - 159's; 3--A - 1.6 cm, 1', a}: - 69 K:

b--same but on wavelengths 0.8, 3.3 and 10 cm, brightness temperature of
a clear sky was 96, 23.6 and 20.5'K respectively: l--X - 0.8 cm.

19 :3: - 79%; 2-4 - 3.2 cm. 1-,, 3: - 8.5'K; 3-4 - 10 cm, r, 5;: - o.7°x

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. The simultaneous measurements of absorption in a cloud at several
waves makes it possible to derive information on the permittivity of the
water. If we know the total absorption in the cloud simultaneously at 2
waves A and A along the same propagation path. the relationship of the
absorptions fa; a thin cloud according to (2) will have the form

 

Ml.) -i ] (S)

In: '
k(rsu.1|.)..)- 1—. [‘40‘C)+J

“mnsgx

 

 

After conversions relationship (5) can be presented:

k ls’Hn'c‘r,’
- *—

M'+4m‘c'r,' ‘ ‘6’
Thus the cloud absorption ratio will be dependent on the parameter T of
the Debys formula which describes the relaxation time of the water mgle-

culee. if one of the long waves used is comparable in magnitude to the
value 2ncrp, from which the following expression can be derived for the

relaxation time of the water molecules

 

i M-klu' (7)
" " WV k-l

This parameter of the Debys formula experiences the greatest variation with
the temperature and determines the nature of the temperature dependence of
the water permittivity under the conditions of super cooling Tc1° < o‘c.

An experimental study of the effect of temperature on the spectrum of rela-
tive absorption in the cloud was done by observations of the radio radiation
of the sun at the waves 0.61. 0.82 and 1.6 cm [32, 34]. The cloud absorption
measurement accuracy depended primarily on the instability of the gain 0.61
cm, and 0.01 neper at the others. The observations were made during the
presence of cumulus and stratocumulus cloud cover, and the thickness of it
did not exceed 1-1.5 km. The effective temperature of the cloud during the
experiment varied from 5 to -13'c and it was found from the data of aircraft
or radiosonde aerological measurements. Figure 6 shows the derived experi-
mental values of the relaxation time as a function of temperature. as well
as calculated values of it during negative temperatures. One can see that

a smooth increase in the parameter T is observed with a decrease in tem-
perature. From a comparison of axpegimental and theoretical values of r

the conclusion can be made that curve 5 derived by extrapolation of the P
data in [21] does not match the measured values. Curve 6 which is an extra-
polation of data in [20] with positive temperatures lies below the experi-
mental points although one cannot state with certainty that it contradicts
the experimental data. The calculated values of the parameter YP derived

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from the formula cited in [15] (curve 3) as tall as through extrapolation

of the date in [16] agree with the experimental data if one takes into con-
sideration the errors in measurements of absorption and temperature of the

cloud and the latter were estimated for l-3'c. The experimental values of

rp of supercooled water agree better with the following approximation re-
lationship (curve 1):

r.-oxp{9.8(-57:1+m-u-o.oss)} 40-". 5:1” (8)

In the domain of positive temperatures Tclo > 0' C the values of tp computed

from formula (8) do not differ by more than 7 percent from the data in [lb]
when 0‘ c g Tclo g 40°C and from the data in [15] and [20] when 0' c

g Tclo g 15°C. For confident selection in favor of one of the approximations

shown in Figure 6 research into absorptions in a cloud must be done at lower
temperatures or the accuracy of measurements must be improved.

5. The theoretical possibilities of solving the inverse problems of SB?
radiometric sounding of a cloudy atmosphere are based on the fact that a
clear relationship exists between brightness temperature and meteorological
parameters as well as that oxygen, water vapor and clouds have a distinct
effect on the spectrum of radiation of the atmosphere. The problem of de-

termining the integral parameters of a cloudy atmosphere has been discussed
in [29. 30. 32-35].

when the absorption in the atmosphere is not too large (T g l neper). the
integral relationship (1) may be written in the form

1.0.. z)-T.,[i—e"‘"‘"']. (9)

where rep is the mean absolute temperature of the atmosphere. During ob-

servation from aircraft the expression for brightness temperature of the
system "atmosphere-underlying surface" (6) will have the form

1.0.. 0) -T.x(l. 0) s"“"‘" '+T.,'[i-e"“"" °l+ (10)
we o)c-""~ 'r..'u—e-""- '1.

where Tcpf and rcp+ is the mean absolute temperature of the atmosphere during

rising and descending radiation in the direction of the angle of view. If
the temperature, emissivity and reflection factor of the underlying surface
are known, then by the relationships (9) and (10) one can find the total
absorption in the atmosphere which is associated with the integral meteoro-
logical parameters by the following relationship [29]:

(LO— 1. +K, +Kw
r to.( ) (M0 (lo. 739‘“ (11)

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

-u -m -s o s 288‘

Figure 6. Experimental and theoretical values of relaxation tine T as a
function of tenperature. Curve 1 is calculated according to relatignship
(8). Curves 2. 6 and 5 were constructed by extrapolating experimental data
on TP. obtained with positive tenperatures in (lb. 20 and 21] respectively.

Curve 3 shows the values calculated according to [15]. The triangles depict
the experiment at waves 0.61 and 0.82 ca; the circles depict the experiment
at Haves 0.82 and 1.57 on.

Table 5. Permissible errors in measuring brightness temperatures at waves
0.8 and 1.35 6?” and effective temperature GTclo when deteraining
water reserve

 

St. Sc’
Cloud shape were half As Cuned Cucong
year 3
Absolute error
cu kg/m2 0.05 0.1 0.2 0.2
61y(0.8). ‘K 1.7 3.6 2.0 0.18
61§(l.35). 'K 4.6 10 lb 0.3
0

61°01. K 20 11 3.1 1.3

 

 

"here 102 is the total vertical absorption in the oxygen, KP(A1) and Kw
(A1. 1°10) are the weighting absorption factors in the water vapor and in

the water vapor and in the clouds respectively which depend in the general
case on the upper-air distribution of the aeteorological elements. Variations
in the coefficient KP(A) as a function of the profiles of the temperature,

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR nl’l-‘ItilAl. IISH "NLY

pressure and humidity do not exceed 5 percent with the exception of the
resonant transition in the vicinity of l - 1.35 cm. where they may be some-
what large [‘0‘]. Variations in the coefficient (A) as a function of the
profile of the liquid-water content in the cloud t a given temperature do
not exceed 1 percent for clouds with a thickness up to 1 km end 10 percent
for extended cumulus clouds with a thickness of 5 km or more.

when measuring the total absorption at several wave lengths a system of equa-
tions (ll) is formed which is linear with respect to the unknown parameters
of total mass of water vapor and water reserve of the clouds, and nonlinear
with respect to the unknown effective temperature of the cloud. Measurement
of the total absorption in the atmosphere at 2 waves is sufficient to de-
termine parameters Q and H when the effective temperature of the cloud is
known. The working wave lengths should satisfy 2 evident conditions: the
total absorption in the water vapor and in the cloud added together should

form an appreciable quantity that can be measured with the required accuracy;
the determinant of system (ll) must differ considerably from zero:

04mins.)«diatom.

The radio windows of 0.6-1.0 cm, 0.3-0.6 cm and 1.6-3 cm as well as the

range of resonant absorption of water vapor 1.2-1.5 cm are the most suit-
able for solving this problem.

Instrument and methodological errors affect the accuracy of determining the
integral parameters. Instrument errors include errors in measuring bright-
ness temperatures and total absorptions; methodological errors include those

in the selection of the weight factors KP and K". The contribution of the

errors in measuring absorptions 61(l1) and 61(l2) in the error in determin-

ing meteorological parameters Q and H can be estimated from the relation-
ships

60 _ikwugdru.)I+lKu-(M)6t(h)l

Q Ar()..)K.r0.,)-.\r()..)Kur (M) (12)

 

 

ow image's.) 1+ ”Emanuel
w mama.)-~.\z(;..)1c.o..)

 

where AT(X) - 1(X) - t02(h). The errors in determining the total mass of

water vapor and water reserve of the clouds are associated with the errors
in measuring the temperature of the cloud by the following expressions:

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

00 _ mums:(x.)-M(A.)K.u.)1x
‘6‘ Twnnmm.)democrat.)l ‘

, 0K. 0..) Okay (3..)
X[A~(l.) "a and.) u. ]or...

0" l 8" (3n)
V-ﬂmm—«nw

 

 

(13)
OKVQs)
013a

 

or... lot...

Table 5 shows the maxi-um errors in measuring the brightness tenpereture
of the atmosphere and the effective temperature of the cloud which allow
finding the value of the water reserve of the clouds with s given accuracy.

From table 5 it is evident that with the sane errors in determining the
parameter H the requiresents for accuracy in measuring the brightness tea-
perature at the wave 0.8 cm are higher than at the wave 1.35 cm and depend
on the type of cloud cover. with 2 wave measurements the combination of
waves 0.8 and 1.35 cm provides relatively high accuracy in determining the
water reserve of stratiform and cumulus cloud covers at values of w < 0.5

kg/mz.

In the case of cumulus congestus cloud cover a higher accuracy in determin-
ing parameter H is achieved if a longer wave. for example, the wave A - 2
cm is selected instead of the wave 0.8 cm.

The accuracy in determining the meteorological parameters 0 and H are also
effected by the errors in finding the mean temperature of the atmosphere.
the requirements for which are approximately by one order of magnitude less
severe than for measurements of Th. Additional errors occur when observa-
tion is made "from above." These are caused by the effect of variations of
the temperature and reflection factor of the underlying surface [36]. The
relative error in determining the total mass of water vapor 60/0 has a lin-

ear relationship with the errors in finding the coefficient KP' For example.

with variations in the coefficient K at 5 percent the value of 60/0 is 6-7
percent. in the process an additiongl error will be introduced into the
cloud water reserve value that is being determined which is 1-6 percent

depending on the value of the total mass of water vapor and absorption in
the cloud.

6. Observations of descending radio radiation of the cloudy atmosphere were
also made using a laboratory on board an aircraft. The laboratory contained
Sh? radiometers [62] in the 0.8, 1.35 and 2.25 cm wave length band. The
flights were made in a number of areas in Central Asia, Siberia and the Far
East during 1975-1977. Radiation from the upper hemisphere was received
using horn antennas. The antennas for the 0.8 and 1.35 cm channels were
directed to the zenith. while the third antenna was at a zenith angle of
75’. At the 2.25 cm wave the radiation was measured at 2 polarizations.

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm (ll-'I’ICIM. IISH UNIS

Measurements were taken on the aircraft at the seas tins of the outside air
temperature and the height of the upper and lower boundaries of the clouds.
Figure 7 shows the exanples of the profiles of the radio brightness tempera-
turn at the 0.8 on wave length for 3 types of clouds: Sc. Cucong and Cuhun.
The flight was made at low altitude which was lower than the lower boundary
of the clouds and aircraft speed was 100 n/sec. Spatial resolution was
about 0.3 km. The level of radiation of a clear sky is shown by a dashed

line. The profiles of the radio brightness temperatures basically describe
the profiles of the water reserve of the clouds.

3:

If: [SM

(n bun

53134060504".

Figure 7. Profiles of radio brightness tenperaturee. obtained from an

aircraft at wavelength of 0.8 cn for three types of clouds: stratocunulus
(Sc). cumulus congestus (Cucong). and cumulus hunilis (Cuhun). Radiation
level of a cloudless sky is designated by the dashed line.

      

a an m I” W U"

Figure 8. Data on the total mass of water vapor Q and water reserve of
clouds H. obtained during aircraft experiments in the rear of an occluded

cyclone with an intersection of a secondary cold front. 26 March 1975.
flight Tashauz-Chardzhou.

The aircraft neasurenents make it possible to obtain the detailed structure
of the field of humidity and water reserve of the atmosphere. Figure 8
shows the variation in the total mass of water vapor and water reserve of

the clouds during a flight at the rear of an occluded cyclone with an inter-
section of a secondary cold front. The data was obtained in horizontal

74
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flight at an altitude of 200 m in Central Asia. Three distinct sections

can be identified in the graphs. The first section is cloudless. A transi-
tion from cold air to warm is observed in it. At a distance of about 90 km
the air temperature changed from 20 to 25°C, while the value of the meteo-
rological parameter 0 increased from 0.85 to 1.6 g/cm2. The second section
is in the zone of the warm air. It has the sharply jagged shape of the pro-
file of H and this is where the cumulus clouds were. A gradual breakup of
the clouds with a decrease in their water reserve occurs in the third sec-
tion. During measurement from the aircraft the error in determining the
brightness temperature of the cloud at the 0.8 and 1.35 cm wave lengths

was 0.6 and 0.9'K respectively. The minimum reported value of the water
reserve of a cloud was 0.03 kglm2 and that of the total mass of water vapor

was 0.05 glcmz. For the values of Q and H. which substantially exceeded
these values, the errors are 10-15 percent.

An experiment on the "Rosana-243" satellite (1968) showed the possibility
of obtaining data on the integral parameters of the atmosphere above the
sea surface [37-60). Radiation leaving the system "atmosphere-underlying
surface" was received by 6 radiometers in the direction of the nadir in the
following sectors of the spectrum: A.-8.5 m: “-33 cu; l.-l.35 on u l.-0.8 av.
The temperature of the ocean surface and it: emissivity on short wave chan-
nele 3 and 6 were found by the values of the radio brightness temperature
on long wave channels 1 and 2. Then the integral parameters of the atmo-
sphere Q and H were determined using the technique described earlier. Fig-
ure 9 shows an example of the profiles of the brightness temperature at the
wave lengths 0.8. 1.35 and 3.6 cm during the flight of the "Kosmos-Zél"
satellite over the Pacific Ocean. The large values of brightness tempera-
tures at wave lengths 0.8 and 1.35 cm. reaching 266 and 233‘K respectively.
as well as the noticeable brightening at wave lengths 3.6 cm (61h - 20’K)
show that the satellite orbit projection intersected a large thick mass of
clouds with large values of water reserve. The SH? radiometric measurements
correlated well with the television and infrared images of the cloud cover.
Date on the total mass of water vapor and water reserve of the clouds along
the projection of the satellite "Rosana-263" in the northern part of the
Atlantic Ocean are shown in Figure 10. One can see very substantial varia-
tions in the meteorological parameters 0 and H during intersection of the
three frontal sections. The areas with thick cloud cover are characterized
by increased values of moisture content. In this experiment the errors in
determining the total mass of water vapor were 0.2-0.5 g/cmz. At greater

values of it the absolute accuracy of a single measurement of H is estimated
to be 30-50 percent.

Conclusion

The results of the theoretical and experimental research performed estab-
lish the dependencies of the SH? spectrum of brightness temperatures of
the atmosphere on water reserve. temperature. altitude. moisture and other
physical parameters of clouds. They also demonstrated the possibility of
determining the integral meteorological parameters of the atmosphere by

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mam

 

[£0
30’ 35' 60‘ “any
man

HOE C: 1
um
30' 35’ ‘0' 'mu. 9'

Figure 9. Profiles of the brightness tenperature of the system "Atmo-
sphere-Surface of the Ocean" at wavelengths 0.8, 1.35 and 3 en along the

projection of the orbit of the ”Roms-263" satellite over the Pacific
Ocean.

 

Figure 10. Data on the total tease of water vapor Q and water reserve of

the clouds H, obtained during intersection by the "Rosanna-263" satellite
of three frontal divisions over the Atlantic Ocean.

name of SR? radiometric sounding. Starting in 1965-1966 parallel re-
search of radio theml radiation of clouds was performed at the Main
Geophysical Observatory imeni A. I. Voyeykov. the Central Aerological
Observatory and other organizations and was directed basically at determi-
ning the relationship of radio brightness tenperstures to meteorological
parameters. The effectiveness of the SR? radiometric method for studying
the cloudy etnosphere was confirned by experiments performed on the
"Ninbue-S" (1972). "Ninbus-6" (1975) and the "Meteor" (1975) satellites.

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The authors are grateful to N. F. Kukharakaya for compilation of programs
and calculations run on the computer.

Bibliography
1. R. H. Dicke . REV. SCIENT. INSTRUM., 1966, 17. 268.

2. R. H. Dicke . R. Beringer, R. L. Kyhl. A. B. Vane, PHYS. RBV., 1966,
70. 360.

3. J. H. Van Vleck, PHYS. RBV., 1967, 71, 413.
4. J. H. Van Vleck. PﬂYS. RBV., 1967, 71, 425.

S. S. A. Zhevakin. A. P. Naumov, IZV. VUZOV HVO SSSR [Ministry of Higher
Education, USSR], (RADIOPIZIKA), 1963, 6, 6. 674.

6. S. A. Zhevakin. A. P. Naunov, RADIOTBKHNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA, 1965, 10,
6, 987.

7. S. A. Zhevakin, A. P. Naunov. IZV. VUZOV HVSSO SSSR [Ministry of Higher

and Secondary Special Education, USSR] (RADIOPIZIKA). 1967. 10. 9-10,
1213.

8. S. A. Zhevakin, V. S. Troitakiy, N. H. Tseytlin, IZV. HVO SSSR (RADIO-
FIZIKA), 1958. l. 2, 13.

9. S. A. Zhevakin, V. S. Troitskiy, RADIOTEKHNIKA I BLEKTRONIKA. 1959,
4, 1, 21.

10. A. Ye. Salononovich, O. M. Ateyev, IZV. VUZOV HVO SSSR (RADIOPIZIKA),
1960, 3. 6. 606.

11. a. c. Iiogg, n. A. Seaplak. am. svsmt rm. 3., 1961, 1.0. 1331.
12. a. c. Hogg, J. APPL. PHYs.. 1959, 30, 9, 1117.
13. c. Tolbert, A. Straiton, BRIT. J. mm. 91113.. 1959. 29. s, 776.

16. J. A. Sexton, PHYS. SOC. AND ROY. METEOROL. SOCL, London, 1946, pp 292-
320.

15. V. I. Rozenberg. ”Raaaeyaniye i oalableniye elektromagnitnogo izluch-
eniya atmoafernymi chastitaami" [Scattering and Attentuation of Electro-
magnetic Radiation by Atmospheric Particles], Gidrometeoizdat, 1972, 348

16. K. Ya. Kondrat'yev. "Luchiatyy teploobnen v atnoefare“ [Radiant Heat
Exchange in the Atmosphere], Gidroneteoizdat. 1956.

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. H. Barrett. V. K. Chung. J. GEOPﬂYS. RES.. 1962. 67. 11. 4259.

K. s. Shifrln. ”Rasseyaniyc sveta v nutnoy srade" [Light Scattering
in a Turbid Medium]. GTI. 1951.

G. Van de Khyulst. "Rasseyaniye svsta malymi chastitasni" [Light
Scattering by Small Particles]. translated from English. IL. 1961.

c. u. Collie. J. a. llasted. o. n. Ritson. Pnoc. ms. soc.. 191.8. 60.
pt 2. 338. 145.

M. H. Hngat. J. CHEM. PNYSIQUE. PHYSICOCRIHIE BIOLOGIQUE. 1968. 45.
4-5. 93.

Ye. M. Peysel'son. "Luchistyy teploobmen i oblaka" [Radiant Heat Ex-
change and Clouds]. Gidroneteoizdat. 1970. 230.

i. P. Polovina. "Vozdeystviya na vnutrinassovyye oblaka sloistykh fora"
[Effects on Internal Stratiforn Clouds], Gidroneteoizdat. 1971. 215.

L. S. Dubrovina. TRUDY VNIIGﬂI-HTsD [All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Hydrometeorological Information]. 197b, Issue 7, pp 3-11

:1. A. Devyatova. mum: crownsomn. rer-ru sssa. 1971.. Issue 148.
pp 73-90.

H. s. Shneter. "Fizika konvektivnykh oblakov" [Physics of Convective
Clouds]. Gidroneteoizdat. 1972. 231.

F. Ya. Voyt. I. P. Mazin. 12V. AN SSSR. PIZIKA AIHOSPERY I OKZANA.
1972. 8. 11. 1966.

Yu. A. Glagolev. "Spravochnik po fizicheskin parametraa ataosfery"

[Handbook on Physical Parameters of the Atmosphere]. Gidroneteoizdat.
1970.

A. Ye. Bashsrinov, S. T. Yegorov. M. A. Kolosov. B. G. Kutuza. TRUDY
coo [Main Geophysical Observatory ineni A. I. Voyeykov]. 1968. issue
222. 153-158.

A. Ye. Basharinov. B. G. Kutuza. TRUDY 660. 1968, issue 222. 100-110.

N. I. Ananov, A. Ye. Basharinov, K. P. Kirdyashev. B. c. Kutuza.
RADIOTEKHNIKA I BLEKTRONIKA. 1965. 10. 11. 1961.

A. Ye. Bashnrinov, B. c. Kutuza. "Trudy 3-30 Vsesoyuznoso soveshchsniya
po radiolokatsionnoy meteorologii" [Hbrks of the Third All-Union Con-
ference on Radar Meteorology]. Gidroneteoizdat. 1968, 96-106.

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

33. A. 3. Bulwttnov, B. G. Kutuzn, BULL. AMER. METEOROL. 800.. 1968, 49.
5. vs 2, 597.

310. A. Yo. Buharinov, B. G. Kutuza. IZV. VUZOV W880 888R (RADIOFIZIKA).
1974, 17. 1, 52-

35. A. Ye. Baaharinov, A. G. Goreuk. V. V. Kalashnikov, B. c. Kucuu,
12V. AN 885R, FIZIKA ATMOSFBRY I OKEANA. 1970, 6, 5, $26.

36. B. c. Kutuzn, 1.. H. Hitntk. A. H. Shutko, TRUDY GIDRONBTEOROL. TSBNTRA
SSSR, 1969. issue 50. pp 86-93.

37. A. Yo. unharinov. s. T. Yegorov, A. S. Gurvich, 0010... AN SSSR. 1969,
188, 6. 1273.

38. A. H. Obukhov. A. Ye. Baohnrtnov at a]... KOSHICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA.
1971, tune I, 66.

39. A. B. Akvuonova, B. 6. Kutuu, 1.. H. mum. 12V. AN SSSR, FIZIKA
AMSFERY I OKEANA, 1971, 7, 2, 139.

60. A. 8. Akvnonova, M. S. Kronva. B. G. Kutuu. 1.. H. Httnik, TRUDY
TSEN'IR. AEROUOG. OBSERVATORII, 1972. issue 103, 73-81.

61. A. 8. Akvnonova, A. Ye. Maharinov at ‘1... IZV. AN SSSR. FIZIKA
ATMOSFERY I OKBANA, 1973, 9, 2, 187.

1.2. V. s. Ablyazov, A. B. Akvnonova at a]... ”Radionuchukiyc tando-

vnniya nun-fury" [Radiophyotcal Research of the Atmosphere].
GIdroneteotzdat, 1977, 206-207.

’03. S. P. Gagatln, B. G. Kutuu, IZV. AN SSSR, FIZIKA ATHOSI-‘BRY I OKEANA,
1977, 13, 12, 1307.

No. A. P. Nlulov. IZV. AN SSSll. FIZIKA AWSFBRY I OKBANA, 196B, 6, 2,
170.

45. P. D. Kalachev, A. Ye. Salmnovich, RADIOTBKHNIKA I BLEKTRONIKA,
1961. 6. 3, 622.

commcn'r: Izdacel'stvo "Nauka," "Radiotckhnlka 1 Elekcrontka." 1978

8545
680: BIN/0518

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSICS

UDC 621.378:535.k
AMPLIFYINO DYNAMIC HOLOGRAM81

Minsk ZuURNAL PRIKLADNOY SPBKTBOSKOPII in Rusaian Vol 28 No 6,
Jun 78 PP 992-996

[MuuewYmmemmam.humhIJ.humRMam
A.S. Rubanov]

[Text] The recording of a dynamic hologram in a so-
lution of polymethine dye on the basis of
saturation of amplification has been experi-
mentally carried out. The dependence of the
diffraction effectiveness on the pumping pow-
er and the recording field is investigated.
It is shown that it is possible to increase
the sensitivity by one or two orders over the
bleachable media. The main experimental pat-
terns are qualitatively confirmed by calcula-

ons.

The known methods for recording and reproducing wave fields are
based on the absorption of light energy. This applies to both
photoemulsions and to nonsilver light-sensitive materials. In
dynamic holography, when bleachable recording mediums with a
short information storage time are used [3], the recording and
(or) reading of a hologram can be accompanied by optical ampli-
fication of the light beams. In this case the hole ram is a
substance with spatial modulation of the amplificat on factor.

Among the extensive class of bleachable substances for the re-
cording of amplifying holograms, the most premising ones are
solutions of complex organic compounds [#1, which make it pos-
sible to achieve a high amplification factor value. When ex-
cited in the absorption area (Figure la) the substance is

 

1Presented at the 2d All-Union Conference on Holography (Kiev,
1975) and the 8th All-Union Conference on Coherent and Non-
linear Optics (Tbilisi, 1976) [1,2].

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL

A”

Figure 1. Absorption (1,2)
and luminescence (3) spectra
of a d e solution: 1. un-
distur ed- 2. in a powerful
pumping field.

hologram in which amplification
stage. The recording
dye solution.

the dye's absorption band.

USE ONLY

bleached while an lification
appears {Figure 1c inside the
boundary of luminescence (Fig-
ure lb). Recording of the wave
front in band a leads to spa-
tial modulation of the sub-
stance's optical and spectro-
scopic properties: the absorp-
tion coefficient's hologram is
recorded in the absorption area
(a) while that of the amplifi-
cation factor is recorded in
the luminescence area (b).

In [M] the authors realize one
of the variants of a dynamic
is used at the reproduction

medium was a thin layer of polymethine
The dynamic lattice was

sions of a monopulsed laser with a wave
Diffraction of the

registered by the emis-
length corresponding to
sounding beam in

the amplification band was observed to occur simultaneously

with registration of the lattice.

lification of both the sounding

the conditions of the experiment reported in [h]

diffraction effectiveness D was

In this case there was amp-
and diffracted beams. Under

, the value of
more than 200.

In this article we discuss the possibility of using the phenom-

enon of amplification saturation in the recording

holograms. In
in the inverse
interfering waves
and amplification of additional

this case, the process of recording the
medium is accompa
' intensity and the simultaneous ap

of dynamic
hologram
nied by amplification of the
pearance
diffracted light beams (self-

diffraction in the amplifying medium).

Figure 2 is a schematic

diagram of the experimental setup. A

solution of polymethine dye ##568 was placed in container 1

which has clear

ports (for the
tion).

us of T

, an exact measurement was not made).

pre ention of spurious oscilla-
The initial transmission T

thickne§s d = 1 mm is less than 10 2 (

(A = 69* nm) of a layer of
acause of the small val-
The center of

the dye s absorption band corresponds to wave length la = 682

nm, while the center of the luminescence
Amplification appeared in

I =69" m.
effect of emissions (A
which has a phototropig

energy density of 2 J-cm' .

81

= 69% am) from monopulsed ruby
shutter.
er corresponded to transm ssion T

81m

outline corresponds to
the dye layer under the
laser 2,
Maximum bleaching of the lay-
(AP = 69+ nm) ~0.2 at an

uftaneously, part of the emis-
sions of laser 2 were shunted off

by mirror 3 and used to pump

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

liquid laser k, which uses a
solution of the same dye and
operates on wave length he a

= 730 nm. The generation spec-
trum was narrowed to 0.3 nm by
adding a dispersing element to
the resonator.

In order to form the amplifying
hologram, the emissions from
. .- source h were split (with the
L_—#-" '''' help of light-splitting device
Figure 2. Optical circuit 5) into two beams of approxi-
for recording dynamic holo- mately equal intensity that
gram in the inverse medium. were then directed into the
plane of container 1. The
beam-splitting method insured combination of the mode structure
and path difference compensation. When propagating in the in-
verse medium, the interfering waves were amplified and caused a
spatially nonuniform (with a period A = 100 [4) reduction in the
population of the excited state. As a result of this, the amp-
lifying lattice on which the incident waves were diffracted was
recorded in the medium.

 

The results of an experimental
measurement of the effective-
ness of self-diffraction D1
(the ratio of the intensity of
the emissions diffracted in the
first order to the intensity of
the original beam) and amplifi-
cation of the dye layer (holo-
0' gram) Tc are given as functions
‘ of the energy of the interfer-
fering beams, for three differ-
Figure 3. La er amplifica- ent pumping intensity values,
tion T (1-3 and diffrac- in Figure 3. The intensities
tion effectiveness D1 (1'- of the diffracted beams forming
-3') as functions of pumping the hologram were measured with
energy Ep and recording the help of photoreceivers 6
field E i Ep = 0.“ (l,l')2 and 7 and oscillograph 8 (Fig-
o.9 (2,§ ), 2 (3,3') J/c . ure 2). The linear amplifica-
tion Tc on the 730 nm wave
length was 20, 35 and HO. The maximum self-diffraction effect-
iveness D reached nulO percent in the experiment. As the in-
tensity o the interfering beams increased so did the diffrac-
tion effectiveness. This increase was most clearly expressed
for high pumping energy values.

n a:
m m

 

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFNCIAL USE ONLY

As is obvious (Figure 3), the amplifying mediums' sensitivity
during the recording of holograms is higher than in the bleach-
able substances. In the case of bleachable dyes, diffraction
effectiveness on the order of 1 percent is reached when the -l
densigy of the interfering beams' radiation is E°~u(0.5-1)-lo
J-cm‘ . Under the condit one of this experiment, the use of
the amplification effect made it possible to increase the san-
sitivéty substantially and to push the value of EC to nelO‘
J-cm' . In connection with this, the sensitivity decreased
slightly as the pumping energy increased.

A detailed theoretical analysis of the features of self-
diffraction in the inverse medium would be quite complicated.
However the possibility of increasing the sensitivity when us-
ing amplifying mediums for hologram registration can be illus-
trated in the following manner. It follows from Figure 3 that
the appearance of diffracted beams (indicative of the recording
of the interference field) corresponds to the transition from
the linear to the nonlinear amplification area. This fact
makes it possible to formulate approximate theoretical esti-
mates of the dependence of sensitivity on the dye's properties
and the power of the pumping wave that are based on an examina-
tion of the features of the light beam's propagation in the
amplifying medium. For our calculations we will start with the
equation describing the change in the flow when it interacts
with the excited dye [6]:

d_’r.._..___'_+_rz.’L.. 1.21,. (1)
dz ' + as]: "‘ a"?

where

(2)

B g = Einstein coefficient; 1 = lifetime of the dye in the ex-
c} ed state; c = speed of light- N = density of the molecules;
T : temperature of the medium; lp(v ) and Icévc) = pumping in-
tensity in the absorption band and light beam intensity in the
amplification area.

In accordance with (l), the relationship between the dimension-
less intensities upon emerging frOm the layer (2 = d) is

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ”Fl-'ICIM. "SI-Z UNLY

- marl-1‘1)---

" l T a..l,,(d) (3)
which determines the degree of amplification saturation. We
will characterize the transition to nonlinear amplification by
the value C "‘ <1. The threshold intensity of the wave as it

enters the'laye¥ (I hr) that is necessary for hologram record-
ing will then be de ined as

19* _ ;,(I — a;l}T,.)-arTc- (1+)

where 10 = intensity of the pumping wave as it enters the lay-
er. Sigce amplification saturation is assumed to be only
slight in the entire layer Tc can be derived frOm equation (1)

by ignoring the nonlinear ependence of the absorption and amp-
lification coefficients on IC:

#3 l‘ l‘ e]
um T;{Inr,(I—;:-) :5 m”. (5)
In the same approximation, pumping wave transmission is deter-
mined frOm the transcendental equation

(I —T,)a,lﬂ - InTP—Inrﬁ. (6)

Figure h shows the results of
«493, the calculation of pumping wave
, transmission T , amplifying
flow transmission Tc an the
threshold intensity «YIchr that
determines the medium 3 sensi-
tivaty, all as functions of
u chp. Calculations w re made
frT°=lO' and 10 . The
425 valueg kQ/ko = 0.00 and rp/q -
= -lO.l corgespond to the cog-
_ ditions of the experiment des-

I I
dlc

 

«-
u

c‘

  

i
. I,”
05:“
i
l
I
|

Figure h. Dependence of The existence of an optimum for
pumping transmission TD (1), the amplifying layer's sensi-
layer amplification T (2) tivity, which for the given
and threshold intensity of parameters corresponds to the
the recording field we thr value prI°)° ~10, follows

(3 3) on pumping intensity from the cglcgfative data (see
ogi . T3 = 10' (1-3) and Figure h, curves 3 and k).

lO'e (k). This result is natural and is

caused by the competition be-
tween the increase in amplification and the decrease in the
value of the effective parameter of nonlinearity

. (1.. _
a: ' m: (7)

81.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as pumping intensity « I? increases. For small values of a 13,
the increase in ampliffc tion is predominant because in thgs

casa u‘ de reases comparatively slowly. In the area of values'
a I >$xp1 )o t, amplification converges on saturation with e-
sBeBt to p ping, while «3 decreases in proportion to l/(upIp).

The experimentally observed decrease in sensitivity (see Figure
3)188 pumping increases is apparently related to the excess of
up p over the optimum value.

Within the framework of this approach, let us correlate sensi-
tivity to hologram recording on the basis of the mechanisms of
amplification saturation and absorption. By analogy with (3),
we assume that hologram recordings in the absorption band are
achieved in connection with the transition to nonlinear trans-
mission of the layer at the value «tItth = 0) = 4‘ <1. As-
suming equality of the parameters gtag , the gain in sensitiv-
ity during the transition from absorpt {n
be estimated from the relationship

:br “r Tc

.___;2__________ , (8)

o
I?" a, l -|- up], 7',

In the area of the absorption and luminescence bands' maximums,
0% and qt are approximately identical. For parameter values
corresponding to those in Figure h, ﬂat::0.8. In this case
it follows from (8) that there is an crease in sensitivity in
the area of the optimum (see Figure k) by one or two orders in
comparison with a recording in the absorption band, which
agrees qualitatively with the result of the experiment.

Additional Notes: After this article was published, the auth-
ors worked on improving the experiment described in it. For
this purpose, they succeeded in matching the generated wave
length of laser M (A = 720 nn) with the center of the circum-
ference of amplification of the registering layer 1 (a solution
of ##568 dye from which the impurities have been removed). In
this case, the layer's linear amplification Tc (A = 720 nm) was
.9103. As should have been expected from (8), the sensitivigg
gain in comparison with the absorbing layers was ore t n l ,
while the energy's threshold density 33h =g2o10- Jocm‘ . Dur-
ing the experiment, it was observed that D1 and Te were not de-
pendent on E in the section of substantial saturation. In
connection with this, the value of D1 reached nvlz percent.

The given experimental results agree with the theoretical esti-
mates given in the article.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ivekin Ye.V. Petrovich I.P., and Rubenov, A.8., MATERIAL!
II vsnéoyuzuoi Konrsnnuréxr P0 GOLOGRAFII (Mbteriels or the
2d all-Union Conference on Holography), Kiev, 1975, Vol 2,
pl.

Ivakin Ye.V. Lazaruk A.M. Petrovich I.P. and Rubanov
La humﬁmumvhuvﬁmmmwkwmﬁmmzmx -
anurﬁoy I NELINEYNOY 091133 (Summaries of Reports Given at
the 8th All-Union Conference on Coherent and Nonlinear 0p-
tics), Tbilisi, 1976, Vol 2, p 382.

Stepenov B.I. Ivakin Ye.V., and Rubanov, A.S., DAN SSSR
igggcoedéggs o} the usén Academy of Sciences), Vol 196,
9 P o

Ivekin Ye.V. Petrovicb I.P. Rubanov A.S., and Stepenov,
3.1., AVANTOVAIA ELExrnoﬁIKA (duantum Electronics), Vol 2,

1975, p 1556.

Stepanov, B.I., and Gribkovskiy V.P. UFN (Progress of
Physical Sciences), Vol 95, 1965, p ué.

COPYRIGHT: "Zhurnel Priklednoy Spektroskopii", 1978

117%
cso: BlM/oan

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTI?IC ORGANIZATIONS

UDC 691.132.65
sooouo INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL OF smoounocnon BWPTICS 'CB‘i‘NIm-IS'IB'

Moscow KVANTOVA‘IA mzn in Russian V01 5 NO 11, NOV pp 2503-2506

(Article by P. G. Yeliseyev and M. A. Herman)

[meat] The Second International School of Semiconductor Blectrooptice
'Cetniewo-l978“ (naned after the sports base on whose territory the parti-
cipants were housed and where the lectures were given) was held at
Wladislawovo (not far Iron Gdansk, Poland) iron 6 through 14 Hay 1978. The
first school, as reported previously [1], was held at the same location in
October 1975. The organizers of the school are the Polish hoadeny of
Sciences (Institute of Physics of the Polish Academy of Sciences at Warsaw)
and the Polish Physical Society.

The international school aseesbled more than 200 students from 13 countries
who heard 23 lectures on various problems of semiconductor electrooptics,
mainly concerning radiation sources. Specialists working actively in elec-
trooptics appeared at lectors. Soviet science, occupying the leading posi-
tion in semiconductor electrooptics, was eost widely represented - seven
lectures tron the academic institutes of Moscow, uningrad and Kiev. me

lectors also included representatives of Poland, con, Japan, Great Britain,
the United States, Canada, Brazil, France, Sudan, west Germany and Italy.

me lectures were divided into the following sections:

physical phenonena in electrooptical materials and devices (tour lectures):
technological problem (four lectures):

electrooptical devices (six lectures):

injection lasers (six lectures):

optic" commications and integrated optics (three lectures);

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the lectures were read in sequence in the same hall so that the students
could visit all of them. since the tine allocated for each lecture was
almost 2 hours and since the lecture itself coeprised 1-1.5 hours. there
were good opportunities for discussion or the problems touched on and for
explanation of questions which arose. The library. containing copies or the
texts of all lectures. was eade available to the students.

The director of the Institute of Physics of the Polish Academy of Sciences,
Corresponding Hesber of the Polish Academy of Sciences Professor 3.
Kolodzeiczak. chairmen of the progren committee of the school. opened the
work of the school. Neuter of. the Presidium of the Polish Physical society
Doctor a. Kuyevskiy end Claim of the Wladislawowo city Council S. Sarafin
greeted the participants. the regular work c'. the school was then begun
with the lecture of the Corresponding Heater of the USSR Acadese] of Sciences.
winner of the Lenin Prise Professor 211. I. hlferov "Beterostructures in Semi-
conductor Blectronics.‘I

As indicated by the experience of the past few years, the idea of using
heterojunctione in semiconductor devices was exceptionally fruitful. speci-
fically with regard to electrooptical devices. Heteroetructures - Mina-
tions of one or several heterojunctions and p-n junctions in a unified
multilayer system -- became the basis for new types of radiation sources and
detectors: heterolasers. heterowaveguides and heterophotodiodes. New
trends in electrooptics are being developed -- integrated optics. image oon-
verters and amplifiers. optical memry systeu and so on. The contribution
of Soviet scientists was of decisive significance in these fields. 'Ihe lec-
ture of at. I. Alfarov (Physicotechnicel Institute imeni h. 1'. Iorfe of the
USSR Academy of Sciences) contained a survey of the advances in development
of electrooptical and other semiconductor devices based on mam/Gan hetero-
structures, whose technology is more developed. Expansion of the range 01'
applications of heterostructures is of isportant practical significance.

A decisive step was made recently in this direction which made it possible
to create many new hetercstructures. The essence 0: this new stage in deve—
lopment of semiconductor electrooptics consists in the use of multicomonent
solid solutions within the Ironwork of which a wide range of ideal pairs of
semiconductor materials can be accomlished which are suitable for joining
in heterojunctions. ‘me lecture of P. G. Yeliseyev (Physics Institute imsni
P. N. Debedev of the USSR Academy of Sciences) "Type III-v Quaternary Systems
for Coherent and Noncoherent Radiation Sources" was devoted to the problem
of creating new heterostructures. ihe development of the world's first new
heterolasers based on GaInPAs/InP. GaInASSb/GeSb and AlGaAssb/GaSb systems.
which cover a wide spectral range of IR radiation. in the USSR was Specifi-
cally reported in this lecture.

The Soviet delegation also presented the following lectures: “the Quantum
Efficiency of Light Diodes on Binary Heterostructures: Theory and Experi-
mental Investigations“ (D. 2. Garbuzov, P'l'I [Physicotedinical Institute]
imeni A. P. Ioﬁfe); "Photodetectors and Radiation Converters Based on Hetero-
structures" (v. I. Korol'kov, P'rI imeni A. F. Iotfe): 'nnos System for

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Optical Reversible Memory Devices in Conputers“ (Yu. H. Popov. PIAN [Physics
Institute imeni P. N. lebedev of the USSR Academy of Sciences). "GaAlAs
Heteroetructures in Integrated Optics“ (Ye. L. Portnoy, m ineni A. P.
lofts): and "Electroluminescent Image Converters and mlifiers" (s. v.
Svechnikov. Institute of Semiconductors of the Ukrainian 853 Academy of.
Sciences).

Timely developsents were presented in the theoretical and experimental
aspects in these lectures. Specifically. methodical problems of determining
the internal quantun yield of radiative reooabination in AlGaAs heterostruc-
tures were considered in the lecture of D. A. Garbusov. Improving the
characteristics of photodetectors by using heterojmctions and development
of new types of photodetectors and converters (selective photodiodes, elec-
troluminescent photoresistors, solid-state converters and so on) were de-
scribed in the lecture of v. I. Korol'kov. New promising mos structures
(metal-nitride-oxide-semiconductor) as reversible data carriers for optical
monory devices were presented by Yu. H. Popov. me use of heteroetructures
with Bragg reflectors in the integrated optics comment base was discussed
by Ye. L. Portnoy. He reported, for example, about continuous injection
heterolasers with Bragg reflectors developed at "I imeni A. P. Ioti'e.

Corresponding member of the Ukrainian 5511 Academy of Sciences 5. V. Svechnikov
talked about efficient image amplifiers based on multileyer structures in
which the photosensitive material is odSSe and the scintillating material

is ZnSan. Image intensity in contrast anplification of 200 was adaieved

on a mockup with illumination of 10"3 lux.

A nuaber of lectures was presented by the hosts of the school, Polish
specialists. Academician of the Polish Academy of Sciences 1.. Sosnovski
gave a detailed survey of the characteristics of the most imortant narrow-
band semiconductors in a lecture on the topic ”type IV-VI Semiconductors

as Haterials for Infrared Blectrooptics." Researdi associate of the Insti-
tute of Physics of the Polish Academy of Sciences. Doctor M. A. Herman gave
a lecture entitled ”The Coherence of Semiconductor Laser mission“ and a
research associate of the same institute Doctor 1'. bryshkevich gave a lec-
ture entitled ”The Electroepitaxy of Conpound aIIIsV and Its Application
in the Technology of Electrooptical Devices.“

A detailed survey of the advances of Polish electrooptics and of the pro-
duction o! electrooptical devices was given in the talk of Doctor D.
Hroriyevich. director of the Institute of Electronic ‘Dechnology (ITS). which
is part of the Polish Electroindustrial Company Unitra. During the past

3 years the institute has achieved significant success in development and
production of electrooptical devices. New light diodes, digital displays,
photodetectors and optrons have been introduced into mass production. New
models of powerful GaAsxSi light diodes. GaAs22n light diodes for fiber-
Optics communications lines and silicone avalanche photodiodes, specifically,
have been developed. Green light diodes based on Cam have apparently
appeared in mass production for the first time in worldwide practice.

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USK ONLY

Fundamental investigations, for example, in the field of the radiative
nedzanism of recombination in compensated Gumsi and AlGaAsxsi semiconduc-
tors are being carried out extensively.

The lecture of Doctor D.-I. Nishidzava (University of Tohoku, Sendai. Japan)
"Method of Stoichiometric Crystallization of III-V Ccapounds for Light
Diodes and Injection Lasers" aroused special attention among the lectures.
Investigations directed toward optimization of the liquid-phase epitaxy
(th3) node of Gap, GaAs and other electrooptical materials were generalized
in the lecture. The novelty of these investigations is that. unlike the
generally accepted approach when only pure hydrogen is controlled during
21:2: in the gaseous phase over the liquid phase. an optimum value of the
partial pressure of the volatile ccsponents of the compound (for each ten-
perature) is selected and maintained in the given case. This procedure
provide reproducible production of the crystallographic and electrcphysical
parameters of the compound and, which is very significant for the technology
of radiation sources. apparently provides minimum deviation froa stochicmetry
in the solid phase. This in turn improves the radiative characteristics of
the materials by reducing the point defect concentration.

Doctor '1'. Nishinaga (Tokyo Technological Institute. Japan). in his lecture.
illuminated another technological aspect of ZhPB -- the causes and methods
of preventing nonplanarity of the epitaxy front. His lecture was entitled
”me Morphology of the Crystallization Front and Inhomogeneities in Inpurity
Distribution During Multilayer Liquid-Phase Epitaxy.“

The greatest attention in the lectures was devoted to the theory of injection
lasers and to their fundamental properties. These problems were considered
in the lectures of Doctor H. Pilkun (Stuttgart University. Rest Germany) _
“Investigations of mtical Amplification and Its Saturation in Semiconductor
Lasers." of Doctor M. Adams (University of Southhampton, Great Britain)

"A Unified Approach to Theoretical Problems of Injection Lasers," of H.
Bachert (Central Institute of Optics and SpectrosOOPY. Berlin, nest Ger-any)
"Investigating the Possibility of Controlling the Spectral Behavior of
Injection Lasers,” of Doctor K. Dnger (Leipzig university imeni K. Han.
East Germany) ”The Statistical Approach in study of the Effect of strong
Alloying and Mixing of Type III-V Compounds on the Electrooptical Properties
of These Materials' and of Doctor H. E. Ripper (Physics Institute of Canpinas
University, Brazil) "Injection Laser Modes." One isportant theoretical
problem of interpretation of the dynamics of generation in band injection
heterolasers was touched on in several lectures and was outlined in more
detail in the lecture of Doctor 6. M. Thompson (Standart Telecommication
Laboratory (STD). Great Britain) "Heterolasers with Band Geometry and the
Effects of Optical and Electronic Restriction." The increased interest in
the problems of the dynamics of band heterolasers is related to the fact
that lasers of this type are ideal sources for fiber waveguide communica-
tions lines. They are exceptionally coapact, sisple. easily matched with
waveguides without intermediate optics and permit direct (internal) modula-
tion of radiation over a wide frequency band. However, some anomalies,

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

specifically. discontinuities in the output characteristics related to in-
stability ot’ the generation channel. were detected in planar band hetero-
lasers. Narrower band structures and the use of lateral optical and elec-

systems was given in the lecture of Doctor J. Diamond (Bell Northern Research
Laboratory. Ottawa, Canada) "The Characteristics of Blectrooptical Devices
for Optical cosnunications Systems.” Attention was turned here, specifically.
on the significant success in optimisation of spectral matching of the source
and i’iber waveguide. Actually, due to development of heterolasers based on
the GeInPAs/InP quaternary system. the band of wavelengths of 1.0-1.5 microns

attenuation of emission, but also in a smaller value of the phase velocity
dispersion passing through a minimum at a wavelength of approximately 1.3
microns. Restrictions on the line capacity on the part of dispersion oi’
the material are essentially negligible near this wavelength. Heterolasers
for this wavelength based on the GaInPAs/InP system, accomplished tor the
first time in the Soviet Union. are being investigated intensively in many
laboratories of the world. Directly connected to development of fiber-
optics communications lines. some problems and investigations on waveguide
optics were considered in the lecture of Doctor 3. Crosinniani (Central
Institute of Hail and ’helevision, Italy) “Mode Dispersion in an Optical
Fiber with Regard to Mode Coupling.”

provide the basis to assume that this problem has been completely resolved
since service-lite values on the order of 10‘ hr in the continuous mode
can be achieved at elevated temperatures. These results indicate that this
level of durability will also become accessible for mass production in the
near future.

The detailed processes which cause degradation of heterolasers were dis-
cussed in the lecture of Doctor H. Hulhaus (Optical Information Systems
of the Exxon Company. United states) "Generation of Dislocations in
Electrooptical Materials and Their Behavior During Optical Excitation.”

Methods of electronic microphotography permit expansion of the detailed
structure of accelerated degration foci (so-called dark line and spot
defects). Luminescent topography makes it poesible to follow the growth
kinetics of these defects. Doctor H. Wulhaus showed a movie in which the
evolution of degration foci is shown in real time. Experiments indicate

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010034-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the important role which mchanical ntreueen and dislocations in hetero-
structures play in acceleration of the degradation process.

I’mblem concerning the proportion of deep luminescent centers in widezone
materials were illuminated in the lectures of Doctor ll. 0. Grimis (Techno-
logical Institute, Lund. Sweden) "Deep Inpuritieu in Semiconductors and
Their Role in Blectrooptical Devices” and of Dr. P. Ozel (National Center

for Telecomunications Research (cm), France) ”The Use of Strongly Alloyed
Rare-Earth Materials in tlectrooptical Devices.“ Brie! surveys of advances
in various laboratories given outside the regular lectures by representatives
of Poland, France, Great Britain, Canada and Japan aroused great interest.

2h. I. Alferov, who expressed the cannon opinion about the exceptional
importance and undoubted success of the Second International School of
Semiconductor Biectrooptics. gave a talk at the concluding session in the
new.- of the participants with gratitude to the organizers of the school.
Doctor M. A. Home. chairman of the organizing coundttee of the school.
gave some concluding words. no repor god that the proceedings of the Second
International School will be published in English under the title "Semicon-
ductor Optoelectronice" (Proceedings of the Second international School on
Semiconductor Opto-Electronlcs “Cetniewo-l978,” edited by H. A. Herman.
Polish Scientific Publishers. Warszewa, 1979) and will be distributed to
the participants during the first half of 1979.. It is planned to hold
the Third International School of Semiconductor Siectrooptics at Catniewo
in 1981.

 

'Send orders to the address: om (Osrodek Rozpowsuchniania widawnictw
tlaukowych) PM. Palac Kultury i Nauki, Harszawa. Poland.

SIBLIOGRAPNY
l. Eliseycv, P. G. and H. A. Herman, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol. 3, 1976.
COPYRIGHT: "Kwantovaya slektronika". 1978

6521
C50: 1870

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

PERFORMANCE OF OPERATING SYSTEMS

Moscow KAK WAYUI‘ OPERATSIONNYYE 8181194! (How Operating Systems Function)
in Russian 1978 signed to press 15 Jun 78 pp 2-5, 191-192

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents from book by E. A. Trakhtenberg,
Nauka Press 22,900 copies, 182 pages]

[Text] The book describes the principal functions of operating systems, their
structure and their mode of operation. It discusses the kinds of these sys-
tems, their reactions to signals received from external devices, the computa-
tional situation and the manner in which th: computer resources are taken into
account, and the sequence of implementation of tasks is determined.

Foreword

The first computer employing electronic circuits to perform arithmetic and
logic operations appeared in 1965. Since then, and until the present,
computers have passed through three stages of development or, as the saying
goes, three generations. Each computer generation differed from its prede-
cessor in the components of its assembly, in its design and in its software.

The first-generation computers were or the vacuum tube kind. The number of
toes reached several thousand and they often broke down, so that computer
reliability was low. The operating speed of these computers also was low.
Essentially, they were large arithmometers. The computer then included an
arithmetic device, a control device, a memory and several external devices.
Computers 01' this kind virtually lacked any software except perhaps subroutine
libraries. Programs for these computers were written in instruction codes or
in primitive mnemocodes. During that period the concept of the “operating
system" had not yet even existed.

The second-generation computers, which appeared in the 19503, were already
built from discrete semiconductor elements. Their reliability tnd operating
speed: increased markedly, and their dimensions decreased. A large number of
electromechanical memory devices and input/output devices had appeared. In
operating speed these computers were markedly inferior to electronic proces-
sors and hence, to reduce processor idling, computer design was adJusted for

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI’ICIAL USE ONLY

llu: inlrmluvtion ol‘ inl.-.~rnmtion systems, armory protection and special
apparatus for the control of external devices which made it possible to
den-lop multiprogram systems. The computers were provided with algorithmic-
language and code translators, sophisticated subroutine libraries and service
systems assuring the adjustment of programs and solution of problems. The
first operating systems, est-urine packet. single-9mm and mitiprosrw
operation, had appeared. The first series of Joint-program machines were
developed. The instruction system and the software of all the machines in
a series of this kind was either the same or a component part of senior
models with respect to Junior models. Models in a series differed chiefly
in productivity and direct-access memory volume. The more "senior" a model
was, the greater its potential was.

lastly, computers began to be designed on the modular principle. That is,
they could be connected to varying numbers and types of external equipment,
varying volumes of direct-access memory, or special units could be attached
to the control device and arithmetic device, and so on.

The tni rd-generation computers which appeared in the 1960:: are based on
integrated circuits, and their reliability and operating speeds are still
higher while their dimensions are still smaller. In this connection, the
nardware potential of computers has markedly increased, and their software

has developed extraordinarily to where its cost has begun to exceed greatly
the cost of the equipment upon which it operates. The development of series
of computers has become the norm. The productivity of a Junior model in the
series may sometimes differ by a factor of tens of times from the productivity

of the senior model.

The design of third-generation computers is characterized by both the further
development of the hardware devised in the second generation as well as design-
ing of new hardware. This primarily applies to hardware support for operating
systems, including the development of microprogram control, addressing and
input/output systems combined with fairly complex exchange devices termed
enamels. A typical example of the set of program-compatible computers of

the third generation is the series of Yes computers.

The principal feature of the software of third-generation computers is the
availability of sophisticated operating systems.

Operating systems are complex ensembles of programs controlling the computa-
tional process. They have relieved the programer of a large part of the
exhausting and laborious work connected with the programing "cuisine," and
they haVe assured computer control. But unfortunately, their "control
apparatus“ has proliferated and the intonation links have become numerous

and coni‘using.

This hook I: devoted to these unique and interesting control systems. It
describes the nature of the operating systems, the manner of their response
to the requirements of users, and to the signals received from various external

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

devices as well an to the operational situation arising in the course of
computationn. The book also describes how these systems allow for and dis-
tribute computer resources, programs and data files, how they determine the
sequence or implementation or various tasks, and why they expend on "them-
selves" a substantial part or computer operating time.

The book may be of interest to specialists working with computers as well
as to readers interested in computer methods or control.

Contents Page

Foreword.c......n.....”nun...”nu"Hummus”...”nun. 3

Chapter I. Introduction to Operating Systems..................... 6
Classification and Design Principles of Operating Systems . . . . . . 6
Basic Functions and Structure of Operating Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Operating Features of Real-Time Operating Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Operating Features of Operating Systems in Computer Networks . . . 30

Chapter 11. Organization of Exchange Hith External Memory Devices 101
External Memory Devices. bl
Distribution of Information on Carriers........................ he
Organization of Data in External Emory Devices................ 5h
Data Exchange Control. 63
Buffer Control................................................. 68
Virtual Memory................................................. 73

Chapter III. Preparing Users' Programs for Implmentation........ 91
Program Modules........... ..... . 91
Assembling the Modules and Organizing Their Linkages........... 93
Libraries...................................................... 107

Chapter IV. Description of Task and Its Preparation for
Implementation................................................. 110
Description ofTasks........................................... 110
Preparation of Task for Implementation......................... 117
Sample Program Selection Algorithm for Solution According to
the 30813?criterion...n......o..............u......nun... 29

M10 Program Selection Algoritlu {or Solution According to
the Vectorial Criterion........................................ 137

Chapter V. Controlling the Computational Process 1&7
initiation and Cuspletion of Tetks............................. 1'07
Inurmption sy‘meeoseeeoeeeooeeeseeeeeeeeeooseeeooeeeessesee 15].
Organization of Responses to Interruption...................... 165

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00850R000100010034-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tillie Schiccu...anu...n...........n.....”nun...
D1010; with the Weratoruoooncoo.-ooaunotuouoouluotooooo

Instead of aConclusion....................................

BibliosnphleoioDl0.0.0.000...0.00.00DOIIOOIOOIOOIOIIOOOO.
COPYRIGHT: Izdstcl'stvo "Hanks," 1978

1386
C3): 1870

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: CIA-RDP82-00880R000100010034-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.396.96 (078.5)
Ill! THEORETICAL PRINCIPLES OF RADAR

Moscow TBORBTICHESKTYEOSNOW MDTOIDKATSII in Russian 1978 signed to press
12 May 78 pp 24, 604-607

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents fro- the book by A.A. Koroatelev.
NJ. Klyuyev, Yu.A. Hel'nik, A.A. Veretyagin. V.A. Gubin. V.Ye. Dulevich,
Yu.s. Zinov'yev and A.V. Petrov, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 18,000 copies.
608 vases]

[Text] A systenatic presentation of the principles of radar, a description
of radar signals, questions of the synthesis of devices for detecting signals
and neasuring their para-stars. and procedures for estinating target posi-
tions or the paranetera of its notion based on neasuranent data are given

in the book.

The presentation enploys the statistical theory of space-tine filtering: the
initial signal is the electronagnetic field in the aperture of the antenna.
while the radar itself is treated as a single space-tine filter or correlator.
The theory of the dynastic search and detection of signals is presented, as
well as the various devices for processing than, including digital, optical
and holographic ones. The theoretical fundanentala of the statistical syn-
thesis of tracking neters are presented, and their curcuit designs. both
analog and digital, are given. Methods of protecting against active and

passive ja-ing are analysed, including polarisation netth and NT! circuits.
Data is given on Lids: and thsml radar systens.

The book is intended for students in the radio engineering specialties of the
higher educational institutes, and can also serve as a textbook for graduate
students, engineers and scientific workers. Sons 212 figures, 11 tables

and 116 bibliographic citations.

Foreword to the Second Edition

Since the publishing of the first edition of the book. "The Theoretical Prin-
ciples of Radar", the theory and engineering of radar havenoved far ahead.
however, the new achievencnts in radar have not been adequately reflected
in teaching literstura. In this regard. the authors set themselves the goal

97
FOR OFFICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in reworking the book of methodically working out and presenting the theo-
retical principles of radar, including new sections, from unified scientific
and procedural viewpoints. This required such a substantial revision of the
material, that the revised edition offered to the readers here is in essence
an entirely new book, both as regards contents and the method of presentation.

The basic directions of the revision reduced to the following.

i. The presentation of the material is based on the statistical theory of
space-tune filtering developed in recent years. This has permitted a de-
scription of the processes in the antenna and in the remaining receiving
channel radar for a signal in the form of an electromagnetic wave as a func-
tioa of time and space, from unified viewpoints. The description of the
optimal space-time structures is given as applied to radars with phased and
synthesized antenna arrays, working with both a reflected and a thermal
signal, as well as applied to optical-holographic devices for signal pro-
cessing.

2. The characteristics of resolving power, precision and uniqueness of the
measurements are treated as a applied to any measurable parameter or set of
parameters. which are then given specifically, something which has permitted
curtailing the volume of the material through the elimination of repetitious
calculations and discussions.

3. Dynamic signal search and detection theory is presented, which most com-
pletely describes the potential capabilities of radars having phase antennas
and which are controlled by digital computers.

lo. The statistical synthesis of tracking meters (automatic tracking systems)
for a measurable process in the general case, encoded in the signal being
received, is treated for the first time in textbook literature. Such an
approach has allowed a more in-depth description of the properties of track-
ing meters in general and their specific designs, both analog and digital.

S. A description of optical and holographic signal processing methods is
included, and more attention is devoted to digital processing.

6. The characteristics of radar signals, in particular the polarization
characteristics, as well as methods of processing and selecting signals based
on the utilization of these characteristics, are presented in a more thorough
fashion.

7. A description of laser radar methods, employing laser radiation, is in-
cluded, and the information on radiothermal radar observation is expanded,
including a treatment of the questions of generating thermal images using
synthesized antennas.

The personal theoretical and procedural developmental work of authors, as
well as experience in the lectures they have given were widely used in

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

writing the book. In working on the book, the authors have made an effort
to see that in terms of its scientific and procedural level. it meets the
standards for a textbook for the higher educational institutes of the radio
engineering profession. Also given in the book is saterisl intended for
use in the diplosa project. It can be useful to engineers, graduate degree
candidates and scientific workers studying new problems in radar.

The book was written by a large collective of authors under the general
editorship of Professor V.Ye. Dulevich. and he wrote chapters 2 and 16.
Chapters 1, b and 5 (with 55.3 and 55.4 ). and 9-13 were written by

A.A. Korostelev, where 9.3 was written in conjunction with A.V. Petrov.
chapters 3, 6-8 and 35.3 were written by N.F. Klyuysv, chapters 15, 19,
55.6, 17.1, 17.6 and the last section of 32.3 by Yu.A. Hel'nik, chapter

16 by V.A. Gubin, chapter 17 (with the exception of 517.1 and 17.6) by

A.A. Veretyegin, chapter 18 by Yu.s. Zinov'yev and chapter 20 by A.V.Petrov.

The authors consider it their pleasant duty to express their gratitude to
Professor S.Ye. Pal'kovich and the faculty of the depart-ant. headed up
by Professor A.G. Saybelem, for their valuable remarks and requests which
were sade in editing the manuscript, as well as their gratitude to readers
who expressed their opinion on the first edition of the book.

'Table of Contents

Foreword to the First Edition 3
Chapter 1. General Information on Radar 5
1.1. Basic definitions 5
1.2. The classification of radar stations
(systems) 7
1.3. The principles of measuring coordinates
and their derivatives 11
l.k. Methods or measuring coordinates 16
1.5. The generalized structural configuration
of radar systess , 18
1.6. The design specifications of radar stations 21
Chapter 2. Radar Targets and the Characteristics of Return
Signals 26
2.1. Producing radar return signals 24
2.2. Radar targets of the simplest configuration 31
2.3. The statistical characteristics of radar
returns 36
2.6. Complex and group targets 48
2.5. Spatially distributed targets 50
2.6. Surface distributed targets 53
99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. Optimal Methods of Receiving Radar Signals
3.1. Evaluating reception quality
3.2. Optimal detection methods
3.3. Optimal methods of measuring signal parameters

3.4. The statistical characteristics of fluctuating
interference

3.5. The optimal reception of radar signals in
noise

3.6. Digital methods of detecting pulse signals

3.7. Calculating the output voltage of an optimum
receiver by the complex envelope method

3.8. The effectiveness of optimum signal detection
methods in the presence of fluctuating inter-
Eerence

3.9. Signal detection for the case of incomplete
a priori data on the statistical characteristics
of radar signals and interference

Chapter 4. The Space-Time Theory of Radar Signal Reception

4.1. The space-time description of the received radar
signal(vava)

4.2. The space-time correlation function

4.3. The potential precision and resolving power
when measuring a single parameter of a wave
(signal)

4.4. Thepotential precision and resolving power for
the case of the joint measurement of several
signal parameters

4.5. The optimal receiver as a matched space-time
filter or correlator

4.6. Space-time equivalency

.Chapter 5. Radar Signal Processing Devices
5.1. Electronic analog devices for signal processing
5.2. Optical-acoustical analog devices for signal
processing

5.3. Digital devices for processing pulse signals
5.4. Displays

Chapter 6. Target Search and Detection
6.1. General information on scanning methods
6.2. Types of sequential scanning of space
6.3. Target detection during radar scanning
6.4. Optimization of radar scanning

Chapter 7. Range Measurement
7.1. Methods of Range Measurement

7.2. The utilization of signals with a complex
waveforn in range measurement

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 8.

Chapter 9.

Chapter 10.

Chapter 11.

Chapter 12.

Chapter 13.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.3. Range measurement errors

Radial Velocity Heaauranent

8.1. The basic relationships for the Doppler effect

8.2. The measurement of radial velocity with an
unmodulated signal

8.3. Radial velocity measurement errors

8.6. The joint measurement of range and velocity

HeasuringAngularCoordinates and Angular Velocities

9.1. The potential direction finding precision and
azimuthal resolving power

9.2. Amplitude and phase methods of direction
finding

9.3. Direction finding by the analysis of a
signal envelope

9.6. Synthesized antennas arrays

9.5. Keasuring angular velocities

The Design Principles of Tracking Meters
10.1. The structural configuration of a tracking
neter

10.2. Descrininators

10.3. The extrapoletor

10.6. The optimal structure of an extrapolator
and tracking meter as a whole

Range Tracking Meters

11.1. The functional schematic of a range tracking
meter

11.2. The elements of analog range tracking meters

11.3. The circuits of analog range tracking meters

11.6. The elements of digital range tracking
meters

Velocity Tracking Meters

12.1. The specific features of the functional
schematic of a velocity tracking meter

12.2. Analog circuits of velocity tracking meters

12.3. Digital discriminators

12.6. Digital frequency synthesizers

Bearing Tracking Meters

13.1. The structure and classification of bearing
tracking meters

13.2. Angular discriminators

13.3. Rotation synthesizers

13.6. The circuits and components of moaopulse
bearing tracking meters

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISH ONLY

13.5. Single channel bearing tracking meters
vith conical scanning

13.6. The digital logging of angular coordinates

13.7. Bearing tracking meter errors

Chapter 14. Radar Range
‘ 14.1. The radar observation range in free space

14.2. The radar observation range for the case of
active transponding

14.3. The influence of ground returns on radar range

14.4. The influence of the earth's curvature on
radar range .

14.5. The influence of atmospheric refraction on
radar range

14.6. The influence of electromagnetic wave
attenuation in the atmosphere on radar range

Chapter 15. Atmospheric Errors in Radar Measurements

15.1. The influence of the atnosphere on the
propagation velocity of radar waves and the
signal waveform

15.2. Systematic errors in range measurement

15.3. Systematic errors in the neasurement of the
elevation angle

15.4. Systematic errors in the measurement of
velocity

15.5. Random atmospheric errors in measurements

Chapter 16. Active Jamming and Methods of Combatting It
16.1. General information on active jamming
16.2. The spatial-power engineering relationships
for radar surveillance and their suppression
by active janning
16.3. Methods of protecting radara against active
janming

Chapter 17. Protecting Radar Stations Against Passive Jamming
17.1. Protection nethods
17.2. The physical principles behind Doppler
methods of moving target indication
17.3. The effectiveness of “TI systems with period
interlsce compensation
17.4. The principles of polarization gating

Chapter 18. Optical Radar
18.1. The physical principles of optical direction
finding
18.2. The scattering properties of targets and the
characteristics of ref1 cted signals in the
optical band

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 19.

Chapter 20.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

18.3. The statistical characteristics of the signal
and noise at the output of a photodetector

18.6. The optimal reception and the detection
characteristics of a pulsed, incoherent
optical radar system

18.5. The effective range of optical radar systems

16.6. Measuring the motion parameters of objects

Radiothermal Radar
19.1. The characteristics of rediothermal radiation

19.2. The reception of radiothermal signals
19.3. Radiometer circuits

19.4. The space-time processing of radiothermal
signals

The Secondary Processing of Radar Measurement Results
20.1. The tasks of secondary processing
20.2. The identification of trajectories
20.3. The precision in the determination of the
position and velocity vector of a target
from measurement data

20.4. Determining the Parameters of trajectories
from the data of redundant measurements

20.5. The specific features of the determination
of the trajectories of maneuvering targets
and nonmaneuvering objects

Bibliography

Subject Index

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio," 1978

8225
CSO:1870

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBL ICAT IONS

UDC 539.23‘0’5‘8.”
TRANSITION REGIONS IN BPI‘IAXIAL SENIOONDUC‘I‘OR FIUIS

Novosibirsk PERMODNYYB OBLASTI BPITAKSIAL'NYKH PowPROVODNlKOVYKﬁ PLENOK
in Russian 1978 signed to press 29 Apr 78 pp 2, 272

[Annotation and table of contents from the book by L.N. Aleksandrov. Nsuka
Publishers, Siberian ﬁepartnent, 2,300 copies, 272 pages]

[Text] The physical laws governing the processes which occur with the
formation and epitaxial growth of films and which cause the appearance of

a transition region at the interface of the substrate and the file are
treated in this book. The elimination or reduction of these regions is
particularly important for seniconductor fills in connection with their

use in nicroelectronic, acoustical—optical. laser end other devices. The
process of file ;.owth is treated theoretically on the basis of probability
statistical and kinetic methods. The influence of the chip-substrate (nia-
natching of the lattices and the moduli of elasticity. the orientation and
processing of the surface, dopant-diffusion). the role of the growth pro—
cesses (nucleus formation, the change in the nicroreliet of a surface, the
distribution of the doping agents. the dynamics of dislocations). the inv
fluence of changes in the initial phase (the nonsteady-state nature of the
nodes, auto-alloying through a gas or liquid phase, the change in the growth
conditions) are shown sequentially. Actual ways of elininsting transition
regions in epitaxial structures are shown and experinental results are given
which were obtained in the leading research centers in our country and abroad.

The monograph is intended for scientific workers and engineers, as well as
for students of the higher educational institutes and graduate degree can-
didates specializing in the growth of crystals and fills, solid state physics.
semiconductor physics and semiconductor electronics.

Table of Contents
Foreword 3

Chapter I. The Epitaxial Films of Semiconductors and Transition
Regions 6

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter II.

Chapter III.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The thickness inhomogeneity of epitaxial films,
the transition region and dimensional effects
Germanium epitaxial films, methods of obtaining
them and their properties

Gallium arsenide epitaxial films, methods of
obtaining them and their properties

New film semiconductor materials in micro-
electronics

Polycrystalline silicon films in microelectronic
devices

General Laws Governing the Growth of Epitaxial Films
and the Formation of the Transition Region

1.
2.
3.

be

5.
6.

7.

A thermodynamic and kinetic treatment of epitaxial
growth of semiconductor films

The statistical theory of the initial crystalliza-
tion stage

The kinetics of the initial stage of layered
epitaxial growth of films and the formation of
the transition region

The influence of substrate surface orientation
on the effective growth rate of an epitaxial
film and the formation of a transition layer
Simulating the growth of the epitaxial films of
semiconductors on an electronic digital computer
The interaction of screw dislocations with
interphase boundaries in a substrate-film-transi-
tion region structure

The mechanism of film growth in the liquid

phase epitaxy method

The Formation of a Transition Region and the Decisive
Role of the Substrate

1.
2.

'3.

Chapter IV.

‘e

The preparation of the substrate surface for the
epitaxial precipitation of films

The action of a substrate during heteroepitaxial
deposition of films

The diffusion of impurities from the substrate in
into the film

The influence of the change in substrate proper—
ties during heating

The Formation of a Transition Region During the
Growth of Films

1. The epitaxial growth of semiconductor films
2. The distribution of impurities and structural

defects during the growth of films

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

3. uouoepituxlul growth of the files of an
acoustically puro surface

a. The heteroopitoxial growth of silicon and
gerlaniun fills

S. The forlation of a transition region during

the heteroepitaxial growth of cod-tun sulfide
fills

Chapter V. The Forlotion of o Transition Region During a Change
in State of the Initial Phase

1. The forastion of a transitionregionduring changes
in the gaseous phase

2. The formation of a transition region during
changes in the vacuum or liquid phase

Chapter VI. Hays of Decreasing the Transition Region in api-
toxisl Structures

Bibliography

COPYRIGHI! Iedatel'atvo ”Nauka," 1978

8225
C5081870

106
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY