FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10079
28 October 1981

Translation

FINESTRUCTURE AND SYNOPTIC VARIABILITY OF THE SEAS

Ed. by

AM. Aytsam

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10079

28 October 1981

FINESTRUCTURE AND SYNOPTIC VARIABILITY OF THE SEAS

Tallinn TONKAYA STRUKTURA I SINOP'I‘ICHESKAYA IZMBNCHIVOST' MOREY in
Russian 1977 (signed to press 23 Oct 80) pp 1-200

[Text of book edited by 3.11. Aytsam, Eesti NSV Teaduste Akadeemia,
1980, 200 copies, 200 pages]

CONTENTS

Poreword....................................

Pinestructure of Deep Raters of the Open Part of the Baltic Sea. by

A.Aytsam,Ya.Laanomt8,IL-Ya.Lilovcr...o.......-.......

Spatial Variability in the 'Desperature of the Surface Layer of the Baltic Sea,

byA.M.Ayatsan,Yu.lOI.Pavel'son .....................

Investigation of the Variability of Oar-rents on a Synoptic Scale in the

Central Part of the Baltic Sea in 1977-1980, by A. Aytsan, L. Talpsepp . . . .

Results of STD Mapping in the 3088): Traverse on the Baltic Sea, A. Aytsam,

Yu.£1'keﬂ......o....o....o......oo......-...o

Finestructure of the memcline in the Ocean, by.V. S..Belyayev . . . . . . . .

A mdel of lnterstratified Turbulence in the Ocean, by V. s. Belyayev,

R.V.OZII1®V...-...c..........o.....o......o.o..

synoptic Variability of Equatorial Currents in the Pacific Ocean, by

V.A.Bubnov,\'.D.Yegorikhin........................

Vertical Structure of (hurrent Velocities and Internal Haves in the Ocean,

by Ye. P. Varlatyy, V. V. Navrotskiy, I. D. Rostov . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Some Results of Synchronous Measurements of the Vertical Structure of
Temperature, Salinity, Speed of Sound and the Current Vector Velocity,

byYe.P.Varlatyy,I.D.lbstov.......................

An Acoustic Measuring Complex for Research on the Hicrostructure of

Hydrophysical Fields in the Ocean, by Ye. P. Varlatyy, V. P. immirov . . .

Possibilities for Studying Pinestructurc and Turbulent Pulsations of the
Ocean's Density Field with a Laser Photoelectric Interferometer, by

V.D.V1asov.................................

- a - [I - USSR - E FOUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13
17

21

25

29

33

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'me Diversity of Physical Cycles in the Upper Layer of the Ocean, by
A.I.Ginzburg,K.N.Pedorov ....................... ‘5

Internal Waves and Turbulence in Synoptic Eddies According to Data on

Vertical Finestructure, by V. 2. Dyknan, O. I. Yetrenov, 0. A. Lioyeleva.
N. A. pmuleyev O I O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O I I O O C O D O I O O ‘9

kansfomation of the Energy Density of Internal waves in a synoptic Eddy,
byv.z.Dyknan,A.A.SIepyshev...................... 54

Interpretation of KhV'I‘ Data in a Statistical Analysis of Density Field
Variability,byA.I.Yermlenko...................... 58

Numerical Models of Synoptic Variability in Delimited M10113 of the Oceans
and Seas, by V. M. Kanenkovich, V. D. urichev. B. V. Rhar'kov . . . . . . . 63

Simulation of the Upper Quasi-miforn Layer, by '1'. R. Kil'natov,
S.N.Prvotasov.......,........................ 66

Current and Average Wee-Dimensional Spectrum of Synoptic Variability
of a Current Field, According to "Polymde' Data, by It. V. lanyayev.
K. D. Sabinin O O O O O O O O O O O O I 0 O O O I I O O O O O I O O I O O 0 70

A Model of the Dynamics of an Isolated Mtic Eddy, by G. K. Komtayev . . . 72
Experimental Research on Synoptic Eddies in the Open Ocean. by H. N. Konlyakov 76

Free lbssby Haves as a Factor Responsible for Fluctuation of Synoptic-Scale
Oceanological Characteristics (Using the Kuroshio and Oyashio water
Systemsasanzxanple).byl..x.xranareva.... .. . .. .. . .. . .. 78

Modeling the Rater 'nenperature of the Baltic Sea, by 'r. Kullas. R. Tamalu . . 82

Spectral Structure of Vertical Temperature “munifornities in the Ocean, by
I.D.I.ozovatskiy,ﬂ.N.xorchashkin.................... 87

A Particular Model of Turbulence Interstratification,.by II. M. Lyubilltsev . . 91

Use of Dynamic Stochastic Models for Integrated Treatment of Oceanological
Measurements. by V. A. Hoiseyenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........ 95

The Concept of Finestructure and Its Discrimination in the Ocean, by
v. V. Namt‘kiy O O O I O I I I O O O O O I O O O O O O O O I O C O C e O O 99

Intrusions and Differential-Dittusional Convection in mmn's Current.
by v. T. Pm I I O O O O O O O I O O O O O O I O O O I C O I O I O O O O O 102

Apparatus for Studying the Finestructure of Bydrophyaical Fields, by
V. To Pak‘ O I Q o c I Q 0 O O O 0 O O O I O O O O I O C C 0 O O O O I O I O 1106

Activation of Small-Scale Turbulence by Internal Waves in the Presence of
Fine Microstructure. by Ye. N. Pelinovskiy, I. A. Soustova . . . . . . . . . 110

Space-Time Spectrum Analysis of the Wrature Field of "Polymde'
Traverse,byV.G.Polnikov ........................ 114

Laws Governing the Distribution and Variability of the Characteristics of
the 'Ihcrmohaline Finestructure of the Northwest Pacific, by I. D. Rostov . . 118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

misotropicSpectx-ums of Waveform Mbulence in the B-Plane, by A. G. Sazontov.

Eddy-Resolving Nunerical Models of Ocean Currents, by D. G. Seidov. .
x. K. “338th O 0 O O O U I I I O I I I D O I O I O O I I O I O O I O t 0

Formation of the Synoptic Variability of Sean Experiencing Free and
limited Exchange with the Ocean, and the Problems of Its Computation
andPtediction,byYu.v.Sustavov.....................

Linear Reaction of a Stratified Ocean to a Moving Tropical cyclone, by
G. G. sityrm O 0 I O O O O I 1 O I C O O O O C O O O O 0 O I O O O O C O O

ANewviewpointonPronteintheOcean,byK. N.Pedorov......... ..

simulation of Hydrodynamic Processes in the Sea with a mdel of btationally
Anisotmpichzbulentﬂowmbyi'a. Khoynloo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

A Cascade Model of Mbulent Diffusion, by Ya. Kheynloo. 8. Roman . . . . .

Investigation of the Fineatmcture of Bydrophyaical Fields by a Inmate
Acousticuethod,byV.P.Shevteov.....................

'me Mechanism Behind Pinestructure Generation by Narrow-Spectrum Internal
Haven-airmbyv.I.Shriza........................

ListotAuthors ...............................

ListofAbbreviations ............................

cc—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

120

125

129

134
139

143
147

152

156

160
160
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PORB'ORD

In recent decades oceanologists have established presence of significant variability
in ocean waters, embracing tree several seconds to several years in tins, and tron
millimeters to thousands of kilometers in space. Variability of ocean waters is
elicited by various physical processes; however. the laws of these processes are
not always sutticiently well know.

Scientists of the Baltic Sea Division of the Institute or ’lher-ophysics and Electro-
physics began intense research on variability of the Baltic Sea in 1976. Expeditionary
research conducted aboard the scientific research vessel "Ayu-Dag" also established
significant variability in waters of the Baltic Sea. In 20 trips made in 4 years,
many typical traits of the variability of Baltic waters vere determined. especially
in regard to finestructure and synoptic variability. The necessity for extracting‘
optima information from the accumlated experinantal material, and ﬁor critically
discussing the obtained results, led to the idea of holding a seainar-syaposiun on
the finestructure and synoptic variability of the seas and oceans.

The idea of conducting such a selainar-syaposium was approved by the scientific
society of oceanoloqists. as is evidenced by the present collection of report
sol-arise.

Discussion of. the latest results of research on variability of the World Ocean at
different scales, and cooperative analysis or these results and information on the
variability of the Baltic Sea will probably promte further develop-ant of research
on variability o: the seas and oceans.

'lhe report smaries were placed in this collection in the tors: in which they were
submitted by the authors. therefore the editor of this collection claias no responsi-

bility for misprints and mistakes in the text.

FOR omcw. USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL [BE ONLY

Finestructure of Deep Waters of the Open Part of the Baltic Sea
a. Aytsam, Ya. Laanenets, H.-¥a. Lilover

Introduction

The open part of the Baltic Sea say be divided into four layers in relation to
vertical temperature distribution: an upper nixed layer, the thermcline, an
intermediate cold winteroonvection layer and an abyssal layer (halocline). Ihe
average structure of water in the abyssal layer is governed by intrusion processes
through the Danish straits (saltier and warmer water enters the sea) and by vertical
exchange processes. Research on processes occurring in the marine environment and
assess-ants of vertical exchange of scalar magnitudes make broad use of the results
of vertical somding of tesperature and salinity fields with salinity-temature-
density probes. Vertical structure may be interpreted as the result of the inter-
action of different processes. ones which often overlap in scale. These problem
are reviewed in (l,2.3,4).

manurenents and Imalysis Procedure

Several series of vertical soundings were made with a mrk III Neil Brown probe

at the central station of the 3088)! traverse in 1979 and 1980 in order to study
vertical ntructure foraation in the abyssal layer of the Baltic Sea. In spring 1979
six series of 30 soundings each. in an interval of depths from 70 to 95 meters, were
made from aboard a drifting vessel in still weather. following each series the
vessel returned to its starting point. me vessel drifted 1-2 kn. me time inter-
val between soundings was 3 ninutes.

In Spring 1980 two series of 20 soundings each were made in the 3088! transverse in
an interval of depths from 60 to 90 meters and a time interval of 3.5 minutes. The
first series was oospleted beﬁore a stern, and the second series was cowleted

3-4 days following the end of an 8-9 point storm.

the probe was lowered at a rate of 25 alsec, and the recording rate was 30 times
per second, which made a depth resolution of about 1 on possible. During initial
treatment. all readings were interpolated to a constant interval of 2 cm. ‘Ihe

reasured series was divided into an average and a pulsating component with the
help of a cosine filter.

FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'me 8?? [not further identified] lethod was used to despite spectral densities
following preliminary snoothing with e fourepoint laiser-BesseLfilter (5).

Discussion of Results

The influence exerted by shores and the Danish straits nay be assumed to be low
within the area of the 30538 traverse. The vertical tameratnre, salinity and
density profiles varied eonotonously with depth in the interval free 60 to 95 eaters.
It was hypothesized that wave-generated vortical turbulence, laminar convection
(because temperature and salinity increase with depth in the Baltic See's abyssal
layer) and the kineaatic effect of internal waves are the principal processes
forming the vertical structure of scalar eegnitudes at the finestructural and
microstructural levels. abreever when the first two processes occur. they are
acwwied by vertical transport of scalar magnitudes.

‘lb determine the conditions under which lasinar convection occurs. we calculated

the function Rodi) _B( ) ' with the vertical interval being A2310 cn. Analysis
0. ') i

of the fmction Rodi) showed that 89(2) <15 only at sons specific points of the

vertical profile. and that for the last part 139(k) >15, which implies purely molecu-

lar diffusion. Of course, a final conclmion as to the iqortance of laeinar cons

vection to vertical transport in the ahyssal layer of the open part or the Baltic

Sea would require analysis of greater detail. Me sure thing we should note here

is that in double-diffusion processes, the ease flew is directed downward. which re-

quires additional upward turbulent flow or vertical transport.

me 3?? nethod was used to calculate the spectrelvdeneities of vertical discontinuities
in temperature. salinity and specific gravity. 'me naadm wave minor is
Ku-l/ZAz-zsu‘l. A transition zone bounded by wave nulbers 3 <K <6u" exists in
individual spectral curves. 'me spectral densities of tauperature $11K). salinity
Sea!) and specific gravity Satan are apprcainted well by an exponential law in

the interval 6 <1! <25:

. .- _-—_.... -.._ _-

, 511k)-5$\K)v5«.\m~K.’.

'lhis indicates that internal gravity waves have an influence. In the range K < 3,
the slopes of the spectral curves are steeper. figure 1 shows set-averaged spectral
curves for temperature, salinity and specific gravity. ‘Bie transition zone is less
noticeable on the averaged spectral curves. A swinterval of fine-scale turbulence
was not noted in any of the spectrum. Nor was a zone with significant negative
gradients observed on the profiles of the vertical specific gravity gradients.

All of this indicates that fluctuations in telperature. salinity and density in
the interval froa several neters to 4 cm were generated by internal gravity waves.
In the case where the average gradient changes little with depth.

5('~) :UIU‘ '5“, "
5§(n‘(ﬁ—1‘f/ 1) (35'32)’ (3.2/51;
. FOR OFFICIAL US? ONLY
:m‘iu) u. '

(rt-Yo")
[PA-Wm I .

 

w " ll «[4 "I
Figure l. Set-Auraged Spectral Densities of 'resperatures -). Salinity (“)

and Specific ﬁavity (oo) in the Abyssal Layer

where E is vertical displacement. Using the spectral densities of tequrature,
salinity and specific gravity, we deter-inst! the man square value of vertical
displacements, which was approximately equal to 0.2 meters.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Pedom. K. N” ”Wye termkhalinnaya struktura vod okeana' rm. Pine
‘mernohaline Structure of Ocean Haters]. Gidrouteoisdat, Leningrad, 1976.

2. Osnidov, R. v., 'mrbulentnost' v verkhnen sloye okeana. nekhanilu shidkoeti
i gaze” [Turbulence in the wper Layer of the Ocean. Fluid and Gas Mechanics],
Vol 12, 1976.

3. Garrett. Cu "Mixing in the Ocean Interior,“ ma 0? ammm AND
0m, No 3- 1979.

4. Gregg. M. c., "Micmatructure: signatur- of listing in the Ocean.” NAVAL
RESEARCH. 1976.

S. uarris, Pr. 3.. “a: the (be of Windows tor aarmic Analysis With the Discrete
Fourier Transform," PROCEEDINGS 0? 1113 Ian, Vol 66, No l, 1978.

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Spatial Variability in the ‘neaperatuft of the surface Layer of the baltic Sea
A. H. hyatsan. Yu. Rh. pewl’son

A relatively large nutter of works have been devoted in recent years to uasurennt
and analysis of the teqerature of the surface layer of the oceans (see the review
in (2)). Bowever, similar resesrd: on inland seas, including the Baltic, has been
clearly lacking. Various factors for- the thermhaline structure of waters of the
Baltic Sea. We can arbitrarily divide them into three categories: Inteoroloqicel.
geographic and vortical.

me first category includes the following factors: variable winds, which determine
the mixing time of the surface layer;

irregular cloudiness. resulting in irregular heat absorption by the surface layer;
the diurnal air teqerature trends
precipitation, whid: basically influences the salinity field:

changes in atmospheric pressure, as a dynanic factor in evolution of thermbaline
fields.

'lhe second, so-called geographic grow includes water exchange throug: the Danish
straits. river runoff and dynnic effects associated with the shore line (upwelling.
Kelvin waves). Synoptic vortices recently discovered in the Baltic Sea (3.6) make
a significant contribution to the variability of physical fields: these vortices
are explained by baroclinicity phenomena in the presence of an irregular bottos.

Considering the above. the horizontal distribution of tenerature in the surface
layer of the Baltic Sea may turn out to be relatively coupler. this is confirmed
by our leasuressnts. started in 1979, with a towed thermistor. 'Ihe analysis was
performed on cross sections measured in different seasons and in different parts of
the Baltic Sea, having a total length of about 6,000 km. It should be noted that
the cross sections measured by a towed thermistor are not instantaneous. however,
considering the scale of the studied phenomena (1-50 In or are than 1 day), we
may soon; the cross sections to be quasistatio. Moreover inasmuch as the cross
sections were measured without prior information on the tamer-stuns field, the ex-
treme values of perturbation characteristics (uplitude. horizontal dissnsions) may

MOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be distorted. Following conversion of analog teaperature recordings into digital
form. the resulting series were subjected to couputer processing. The average
dimensions of perturbations, their uplitudee and their gradients were determined.

In order to reveal the contribution of difterent processes and the most preferable
scale, the series were subjected to spectral analysis. For this purpose we evalu-
ated the maxim entropy spectrum (4). me choice of this method was predicated upon
the frequency of the processed series, since it was impossible to penetrate into

the domain of small wave numbers by traditional methods. ‘Ihe principal results of
the analysis are sumarized below.

1. In open areas of the Baltic Sea, during spring warning (May, June) and fall
cooling (September. October), the teqerature of the surface layer exhibits a coupler
structure. with the perturbation amlitude averaging 0.7'c (Figure 1). In sole
cases the anplitude could reach 2-3'C. 'Ihe horizontal scale of perturbations is

within the 10-50 km range, with met falling in the 15-25 kn range--that is, one
to two lbssby detonation radii.

 

0 M I” an “ ”0‘

Figure l. iypical Horizontal Temperature Profiles for the Surface
Layer of the Baltic Sea

a.
5.

((1) , (‘Y

 

It . In"
Figure 2. Spectral Densities of the 'resperature of the Baltic See’s
Surface Layer

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. In sun-hr (July, August) the tenperaturs distribution is miforn in these
sane areas of the sea. Smooth temerature changes of up to o.3°c can be noted.
'mese changes were not dependent on the diurnal water tespsrature trend or the
meridian temerature trend along the towing route.

3. Irrespective of the season, well-pronounced fronts were discovered in shore
areas, and especially near the ﬁnish straits. fronts with a cementum
difference of 2.3’C in 200 asters can be noted. Additional neasurensnts indicated
a salinity gradient of 0.30/00, though without a noticedsle jinp in density. me
mique feature is the existence of a snail temeraturs decrease (0.2‘C) on the cold
side directly before the front. A sinilar phsncuenen is described in (8).

4. According to our data, fronts are rarely encountered in the open sea. Gradient
analysis, performed in keeping with the criteria that the simultaneous tenperature
gradient had to exceed 0.2°C/kn and the teqerature difference had to be not less
than 1°C, resulted in 31 km as the average distance between fronts. This estimte

is significantly higher than that given in (l), in which the strictness of the chosen
criteria was lower. 01 the other hand nunsrous sharp teperature gradients not
associated with fronts could be ﬁomd on sons curves. for example 51 cases with a
teaperature difference between neighboring points greater than o.2°c are encountered
in curve 2 of Figure 1: when conversion to digital for- is considered, this neans

a .gradient estimate greater than 0.8’C/kn.

5. In the 0.05-1 kn" wave nunber range. the found spectrum are basically
characterised by a k'" dependence, which is in keeping with Cheney's geostrophic
turbulence hypothesis (5). Qirve 2 on Figure 1, discussed earlier, is an exception.
Its spectrun is approximated by a F2 dependence, which, considering the sharp
gradients present, pendts the use of Saffnan's model (7). mm which could
define the lost preferable and "energy-carrying" scales are entirely absent from
these spectrum.

As we can see, the couples distribution of telperaturos in the surface layer of
the Baltic Sea agrees well with theintricate couples of toning factors. be ob-
jective of this paper was to demonstrate the variability of the tesperature field
in the neso- and synoptic scales, as well as the need for expanding the research
to the entire quasiunifora layer, taking salinity and density fields into account
as well.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Karabasheva, E. 1., Paka, V. 7., and Pedomv, K. 11., ”Are Thermal Fronts Frequent-
1y mcountered in the Ocean?“ ornammcnm, Vol 18, No 6, 1978, pp 1004-1013.

2. Krasnopevtsev, A. Yu., Vinogradova, R. 6., and Kus'nina, N. P., "Spatial
Variability of the temperature Field in the Surface Layer of the Ocean," in
"Hezonasshtabnaya isnenchivost' polya toweratury v okeane“ [Mesoscale Vari-
ability of the ‘relperature Field in the Ocean], macaw, 1977, pp 6-32.

3. Aitsan, 3., Elken, J., Pavelson, 3., and 'i‘alpsepp, i.., "Preliminary Results of
the Investigation of Spatial-lenporal Characteristics of the Baltic Sea Synoptic
Variability,“ in I’lnvestic_;at.i.on and Modelling of the Baltic Sea,” Tallinn (in

press) .

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
4.

S.

6.

7.

8.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anderson. N. , "m the Calculation of tilt”- Oootticients to: Maxim- mtzopy
spam“ Myeisyu GmPHYSIS. W1 39' N3 1' 197‘. w 69-72.

Gurney, J. 6., “Geostmphic Malena,“ J. A1108. SOL, Vol 28, No 6, 1971.
pp 1087-1095.

Kemecke, K. 8., and Hagaard, I... 'Haasureunts by Means of Med met-mister
Cables and Problems of Their Interpretation ﬁlth inspect to Romania
Processes.“ EH. SOC. m 08 set. In LIBE- Vol 7, No 6. 1974, pp 147-160.

Saffman. P. G. . '01 the Spectmn and Decay of Random ﬁlo-Dimensional Vorticity
Distribution,“ STUDIES IN APPLIED “my V01 50. lb 34' 1971; PP 377-383.

Simson, J. 8., Allen, C. BL. and Morris, N. c. 6., 'P'ronts on the Continental
Shelf." J. GBOPHYS. 888., Vol 83, No Q. 1978, pp 4607-4614.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Investigation of the Variability of currents on a
Synoptic Scale in the central Part of the Baltic Sea in 1977-1980

Academy of Sciences Institute of 'lhersophysics and Blectrophyeics on the Baltic Sea
in 1977-1980 chm: that there are different form of variability in the Baltic Sea.
playing a significant role in the control of the spread of pollutants and in re-
search on the distribution of the phyto- and aooplankton in the sea. All of these
measurements iaply that oscillations with an inertial frequency having a period of
13.9—14.2 hours in the region of investigation possess a noticeable part of the
sea's kinetic energy. It was found that a signiﬁcant alount of kinetic energy is
contained in. besides inertial oscillatians. variations on a synoptic scale. Bx-
perinental studies using Aanderaa Rad-4 and ma flow rate and teaperature gauges
were conducted in 1977. 1979 and 1980.

In fall 1977 we dropped two buy stations 20 nautical miles apart for a period
of 20 days. Gauges were suspended from these buoys at live horizons. It was
established that at one of the stations (station N) synoptic-scale kinetic energy
grew with depth in the layers close to the bottom. It was found that the tine
series of flow rates and toweratures in the batten layers were typified by the
same periods (over 40 hours), shifted in phase. A sore—noticeable correlation
between tenerature and the current component directed upward along the slope
exists in the interval from 1.3 to 4 days. we facts agreed well with the theory
of topographic waves entrained by the bottom suggested by shines (2,3) . when the
stratiﬁcation. bottom slope and water depth were typical of the given region. It
was found by the least squares method that the dosinant periods for the bottom
layers of station N were 68 and 44 hours. which exceeded the theoretical lower limit
for the periods of topographic waves. Basing ourselves on the theory of topographic
bottom-entrained waves. we fomd the theoretical wavelengths (employing the measured
vertical distribution of kinetic energy) . which exhibited little dependence upon
frequency and werewithin 12-14 kilometers. In order to find the direction of the
wave vector, we found the orientation of the new coordinates in such a way that the
coherence between the flow rate components in the new coordinate system was minimal.
Minimization of coherence, accounting for invariants relative to rotation of the
coordinate system (1). results in the formula
' 1
- z 3*

tau 11' - m (II

9
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 8““, Sop are the spectral densities of the rate component, Pay is the
synphasal comonent of mutual spectral density, and p is'the angle between the new
and initial coordinate system. Have orientation and energy are described by energy

ellipses (Figure l), where orientation was found with formula (1) and from an
ellipse as eigenvalues of the correlation mtrix.

(5.“ 2. )
.8. S... .
'Ihe axis of the ellipse represents the energy of the rate comment in the new
coordinate system, where coherence between the rate comments is minimal (where

orientation is a function of frequency). We can sea from Figure 1 that there is
more energy in the frequency range of the proposed topographic waves. mpographic
waves were not discovered at the other stations. more, the batten was more even

and the station was too far may from a region with a sloped bottom (more than
30 km away).

\ -©.

Figure 1. Energy Ellipse: at the Ila-Inter Horizon of Station N in 1977

 

Figure 2. 'nemporal Sequence or Mean Daily Currents in the 1979 Traverse

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A cross-shaped traverse consisting of five buoy stations with one gauge for surface
layers and one for bottom layers was placed -' in the sane region in thy-June 1979.
The stations were spaced 10 nautical miles apart. Additional recorders were set
up at the central station to study vertical distribution of synoptic-scale kinetic
energy. This year. growth in kinetic energy with depth and other clear indications
of topographic waves were not observed. We period was dominated by still weather,
and this perhaps explains the relatively lower energy in the synoptic range. The
pattem of currents observed is generally coaplex. with typical flow rates of 5-7
cn/sec in the botto- layer. me teworal sequence of mean daily currents is shown
in Figure 2 for a horizon located 15 asters above the botton, beginning on 12 Hay.
Vortical currents may be observed at the end of the neasuremnt period. The
appearance of the mean daily current vector diagrams and the appearance of the
current vectors are correlated. Il‘he appearance or the current vector diagram tor
the surface layer at station SR is the ease as that observed ﬁellowing the passage
of a vortex with a scale on the order of 30 In, in a northwesterly direction at a

speed of 2-3 can/sec. 'Ihe diagram for the bottom layer differs from that for the
surface.

' ...... m." .. "-t‘m 1 .... .1.“
. 1 .. . . an”? ,
I

mxm . 5

s— /

.ges urns .v
or“ his”

e'.’ h'“'
.mpnuv ( .
was new , O - ' ,
gals am V J , r 1
: I , I .
.. ‘ . 6/) '
.... . ~ 0 . I ' l
I ,‘ t
a ' ’J

:1

 

Figure 3. Bottom mpography or the 1980 Traverse

A cross-shaped traverse (Figure 3) was laid out in 1980, consisting of stations
A-F for Hay-August and temporary (it-weeks) station 6 between stations C and t.
Figure 3 also shows the location of part of the 1979 traverse (stations C'. sw, SB)
and the botton topography.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is concluded that the current flow-stars indicate the axiatanca of vortical

cuxrent and that strongly pronounced bottom-entrained topographic waves may exist
under favorable conditions.

BIBLIOGRAPKY

l. Foromff. N. P.. "Spectral Gnuactaristics ot mama]. Waves in the Ocean,‘
DEEP-SEA 1138., Supplement to V01 16. 1969, pp 59-71.

2. mines, P.. ”Edgc-, Bottom- and baby Have-.11: a ibtating Stratified Fluid,“
EOPHYS. FLUID MN” Vol 1, .1970. pp 273-302.

3. things, P.. "me manic: ot mstcady mmntsu' Vol 6. “mo Sea,“ 1978.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Results of 5m ﬂapping in the BOSBX ‘rraverse on the Saltic as
a. Aytsaa, Yu. Bl‘ken

A series of STD [salinity-tewature-density] nape were plotted with the assistance
of a Neil Brown probe in 1979-l9w during cruises of the scientific research vessel
”Ayn-Dag” in the BOSBX traverse located in the central part of the Baltic See.

me spacing of the square network of aeasuring points was 5 nautical miles. the

y and z axes were oriented 30° left of north and east respectively, and the dinen-
sions of the traverse were 20 or 25 nautical miles on the a: and y axes. The time of
one napping session was about a day and a half.

me main object of interest was symptic variability and its manifestation in the
distribution of thermohaline fields. While the napping was going on, buoy stations
carrying current flow nters were dropped off in the traverse in order to obtain
an integrated picture of the dynamics of synoptic processes in this portion of the
sea. 'me 1980 saterials had not been subjected to cowarison yet.

One unique feature in the stratification of the 3083! traverse is presence of a
halocline with its upper boundary located at an average depth of 70 waters. In
sunset a very steep that-Incline appears at 15-30 asters. Analysis of the correla-
tion functions would show that some characteristics of internal waves that are
less-perturbed by the presence of noise are sufficiently well correlated (K >0.2-0.3)
at a lbseby radius of approximately 10 Jul. 'lhis means that such waves can be lapped
with the assistance of option interpolation. Mlative dynastic topography (m)
maps and isopycn depth naps offer greater interest. At given depths. the distribu-
tions of temperature and salinity are disturbed by considerable noise, while at
given densities, their distributions are uniforn.

Using naps plotted sufficiently close together in tire. we can distinguish two
"scenarios” forthe evolution of perturbations on a synoptic scale:

1) vertical perturbations reeeubling the topographic wave with the horizontal di-

mension L 2284 discovered in August 1979. Deforaation of the thermocline and the
halocline was of the sane sign, both being raised above their “average position.”

Geostrophic shifts relative to the rotation rate were greater in the balocline than
in the thermcline. ‘me perturbation moved along the isobath at a rate of about
2 csVsec. In 10 days the relative rate of rotation doubled. concurrently the

axis of the perturbation was tilted, such that the perturbation spread faster in
the thermcline. 'lhis “scenario' may be explained by the theory of topographic
waves (1):

13

POI: OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2) the "large" decomposing vortical perturbation with dimnsion L 2'de discovered
in May-June 1980. At this time a developed thermoeline was absent, such that the
perturbation revealed itself in the halocline. 'me amlitude of the isopycn depth
attained 22 meters, and the geostrophic shift in rotation attained 15-20 cn/sec
between the 60-weter and 90-uter strata. Figure 1 shows the evolution of this
main perturbation in successive Rm' naps (the difference in dynamic depths was

70 and 30 decibars). In 9 days the center of the main perturbation loved 5-10
nautical miles transverse to a submarine chant“; from one edge of an even portion
of the bottom to the other edge. In the periphery of the vortex the field was
deformed in conparison with the previous map. In map No 4 (plotted 10-11 June
1980) the traverse was shifted, and the initial phase of decomsition of the ”large'
perturbation into two "small" ones with dimension D =ZRd could be seen on the MD

mp.

 

Figure l. Deconposition of a Vortex on m Maps

In addition to these two time-dependent “scenarios". we discovered the following
perturbation structures on single maps:

3) an open perturbation (the maximum of the anomaly intersected the bottom slope)
in late May 1979 with dimension L ﬁll-SIM:

14

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY "

 

Figure 2. no ﬂaps tor D (70.30)

4) a tongue-shaped perturbation (a meander) in early May 1980 with dinension
L =4-6Rd (Pigure 2a):

5) the periphery of a perturbation with dimension D sot-634 in early June 1930
(figure 2b). ﬁne structure of the thernocline was distorted by a store, which
began toward the end of the napping session (according to (6). erosion of the
thermocline begins 6 hours after the start or a stern). It appears as it detona-
tion of the thernocline and of the halocline ie of the sane sign;

6) two vortical perturbations in aid-August 1980 with dimension L IZRd. ‘me thereo-
clines 0: both perturbations were low. while the halocline or one perturbation was
raised higher while that of the other was lower.

According to Kielnann (personal counnication) synoptic baroolinic perturbations
may arise owing to fluctuating atmspheric inﬂuences. to de-onstrate this. he
used a linear digital barocline Iodei tor which the initial and boundary conditions
were similar to those in (3). A pattern sinilar to that in the first "scenario“
was observed in the 3082)! region following interruption of the effects of wind
fluctuations.

However, the second "scenario“ penits suggestion of another hypothesis concerning
generation of synoptic variability and various vortioes. According to calculations
made by H. Payuste using Tang's nodal (5) for baroclinic instability. supplemented
by a bottom slope factor (this nodal contains both a particular case or Tang's two-
layer model. Idi's model and the Blmsack-Gierasch nuclei (2)) . in different condi-
tions perturbations with dimensions within L I 3-484 exhibit nxim instability.
'meretore it may be suggested that owing to baroclinic instability, first “large”
vortices arise owing to the available potential energy of large-scale notion, and
then these vorticss. after growing to a certain maximum amplitude. deoomose into
smaller-scale vortices in View of nonlinearity.

15

me omcw. use ONLY
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGM‘I
Aitsan, A” men. J., Pavelson. J.. and Talpeepp. I... “Preliminary units of.

the Investigation of Spatial-Tenors). Omaraeteristics of the Baltic Sea

Synoptic Variability,‘ in "me Investigation and Modelling of Processes in
the Baltic.“ Tallinn (in press).

Slut-sack. S. I... and Gierasch. P. 6., "Mars: 11:. Effects of 'lbpography on

Kielmann, 3., "Hssoscele Eddies in the Baltic,“ in “Proc. of x: Cont. of
Baltic Oceanographers," Vol 2, lbstock. 1978.

Kraus, 11.. ”Inertial Waves and Hiring in the memcline (BOSBX Insults)"
in "Prue. of )0: am. of Baltic Oceanographers.‘ Vol 2, Mstoek. 1978.

Tang, C. IL, ”Baroclinic Instability of Stratified shear Flows in the Ocean
and Atmophere.” J. GDOPHYS. 338., Vol 80, 1975, pp 1168-1175.

16

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pinestructure of the 'lhernocline in-the. Ocean
V. S. Belyayev

1. Continuous growth in the value or research on the finestructure of cosmological
fields has been observed in recent years (2). the ocean's interstratification,
which is typified by quasiunitorn strata alternating with interlayers of signifi-
cantly lesser thickness, and by sharp changes in medium properties. has a typical
vertical scaleonthe order of 1-10 meters. “unis tinestructurs of the ocean was
undeled by a stepped distribution or properties in relation to depth (3.4). however.

. 900- wM-Ji“); ' ("H

the values of parameter u (where u" is the average thickness of a quasi-isotherm“
layer) for the stain and upper themclines are ‘0. 92 and 0.29 n'1 respectively.

The distribution or the amplitudes of temperature gradients in the interlayers,

as determined from measurements in the wiper thermcline. were also approximated
by an exponential law with a parameter of 41 PC)“.

2

Figure l .

 

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 2.

Figure 3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

2."

Mean Temereture Profile fox'tixeu'i‘iixnreﬁe (mick curve):
'lhe thin curves indicate the standard deviation of

temeretures (non the mean value at individual sounding points

     

F€"T’.s:).’7’°°

6

4.

2

0
M 02

W

8

S .

I.

2

0
”0203“” 0..”030‘05

[integral of Mature Gradient Estimates Based on Finite
Difference: at A2-2 (a). 4 (b): 8 (o) and 16 Ieters (d): Con-

tinuouscuxvee :epreeent the node]. luv (2)

18

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR omau. USE ONLY

 

3
Figure 4. Pragmnt of myth (l) and lumperature (2) Signal hoardings
at a Pined horizon in the ‘Ihermocline

2. A model representing stepped distribution of tesperature in relation to depth

is exanined (tigure l): in this case the teslperature difference in the depth interval
AZ is

neat

where 01', and n are random. If we assume that the distribution of temperature
gradient amplitudes is exponential (l) with parameter 8". than for a Poisson
distribution of tenperature gradients in relation to depth. the probability density
for estimates of the tequerature gradient. e-waz (where the Z axis is oriented
upsard) . has the for.

ago-gamer)“NEW“ (2)

after the values of the principal para-stars u and B are chosen on the basis of one
consideration or another. function (2) would depend only on A2.

3. Infornation on vertical temperature distribution obtained during the 22d cruise
of the research vessel 'mitriy Mendeleyev' in a traverse in the Indian Ocean south
of the island of Smatra (stations 1819-1830, 1032) was used to experimentally

test the validity of relationship (2)-. In an interval of depths from $0 to 130 meters
the vertical gradient of the mean tamerature varies little. being 0.15'<:°n'l
(Figure 2). The histograms of tesperature gradient estintes for different AZ,
obtained in this layer, are shown in Figure 3.

ﬁne estimates of the principal parameters in law (2) were obtained as the first

two moments of random variable 5 at AZ-l6 meters. assuring the values u-l.3 n"
and 8’1 -9.1 ('c)". Probability density curves cowuted with fornula (2) for A2
values of 2. 4, 8 and 16 meters are shown in Figure 3. the model of distribution
law (2) for the tesperature gradient estimates reflects the basic features of the

histograms obtained for 6. Good agreement between the emirical data and the nodeled
distribution of temperature gradient estimates indicates that the finestructure of an

upper thermocline with a thiclmess less than 16 meters may be adquately described
by a stepped function with certain probability characteristics.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Existence of individual quesi-isothernic layers in the upper thermcline is
chnonstrated by Ieasurenents made during the 50th cruise or the research vessel
”Vityaz" (1976) in the central part of the northern Pacific. Figure 4 stvs

a fragment of a recording of telperature 1' and depth 2 signals (the measures-sat
horizon was located in the thermcline). Fluctuations with periods or 7-10 see
elicited by rolling of the ship can be distinctly seen in the T and Z signals. In-
ﬁomtion on synchronous changes in depth 42- and .telperature 62' can be used to deter-
mine local values of the vertical telperature gradient AT/Az. Snell local values

for AT/AZ in individual time intervals indicate that the sensors entered quasi-iso-
thermic layers.

5. It would be suitable to perform further experimental research with the objective

of finding the dependence of parameters of the tinestructure of the upper oceanic
thermcline on the background hydro-eteomlogical conditions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Omnidov, R. V.. ”me 22d Cruise or the Scientiﬁc Research Vessel 'mitriy
Mendelsyev',’ ommwcxu. Vol 19, No 5. 1979, pp 948-954.

2. Gregg. H. C.. and ariscoe, H. 6.. "lntemal Waves. Pinestructure. Hicrostructure,
and Mixing in the Ocean,“ m or GEOPHYSICS AND SPACE msns. Vol 17, No 'I,
1979. pp 1524-1548.

3. Hayes, 5. 9., Joyce, '1‘. N., and nillard. R. c. Jr.. Measurements 0: Vertical
Pinestructure in the Sargasso Sea,“ J. or GEOPHYSICAL mm” Vol 80, Mo 3,
1975. pp 314-319.

4. Joyce, '1'. H.. and Desaublies. Y. J. P., 'Discrinination Between Internal

Waves and Wrature Pinestructure.‘ J. PHYS. 0mm. Vol 7, No l, 1977.
pp 22-32.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A Model of Interstratified ,‘mrbulence,in the Ocean
v. s. Belyayev, R. v. Ornidov

Extensive observations nade in recent years on smell-scale turbulence in different
regions of the ocean shaved that oceanic turbulence is typified by intense inter-
stratification: Zones of highly turbulent liquid alternate vith layers in which
water flow is close to laminar (2). 'mese data fundamentally alter the existing
idea that turbulence is continuous in the ocean. typified by son coefficient of
vertical turbulent exchange. K (1). In the first approximation this coefficient was
thought to be constant in relation to depth, while in lore-sophisticated mdels of
vertical turbulent exchange in the ocean. K was given as some function of depth 8.
insoles of using different types of functions X(s) in a model for e cospletsly
turbulent ocean are shown in Figure la (Ink is constant in relation to depth.
2--the exchange coefficient decreases smoothly with depth).

 
    

eq—o—---.

2

Figure 1. Schematic Distribution of the “efficient of Vertical Turbulent
Exchange in Elation to Depth: annodels of a continuously
turbulent ocean; bus model of interetratified turbulence

The interstratified nature of oceanic turbulence iwlies the following pattern for
vertical turbulence distribution. At certain horizons 21;, there exist turbulent

fluid 18%“ With aim! hi. 'ihe levels of turbulence in these layers (the mean
square values of turbulent pulsations in velocity) are wrrespondingly equal to of,

at a certain fixed moment in time. Variables $5. hi and 01; are random. with time,

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

the turbulence in these layers would decrease. and in the end these layers would
dissppear, but concurrently new turbulent zones would appear at other points in space.
which in turn evolve and then disappear. 'lhe uchanisns responsible for generation
of new turbulent zones of liquid my include inversion of internal waves. the shear
instability of oceanic currents and other processes. According to the available
measurements the novenent of liquid between turbulent zones may be assmd to be

close to laminar. with a molecular kinematic exchange coefficient v.

Generally speaking K5, the effective value of the coefficient of vertical turbulent
exchange in each of the turbulent layers of liquid, depends on both the intensity
of turbulence in the lsyer a; and the vertical dimension of the layer htuthat is,
Ki-f(a1;,h1;). A possible form of function ﬂoahﬂ will be indicated belov.

'Ihe instantaneom distribution of values for the coefficient of vertical turbulent
exchange in relation to depth my be described as a first approxiution by a random
impulse function (Figure lb):

0 ﬁx“
for all other a:

Q
i . . l~ - .
x (4-5 5(6..k)r(_,5.). mm. to) {a
If we make the natural suppositim that “i and hi do not depend statistically on

Z5 and that the distribution densities of these variables do not depend on i, then
the conditional mean value of function 1(a) for n turbulent spots in the ocean layer
under analysis, 11, would take the form

IN?

a

(Kl n) - § 8»; {Wu M) 9M4; .hsth; £4513“th .

I
I: v

where P; is the distribution density for Z; and P51; is the joint distribution density
for 0,; and h-i- Given a uniform distribution density “for the location of an individual
impulse in the depth interval Huthst is, when “(1041‘ . if.“

0

l ' i FG—ht‘) 94") "e. ' '5; £F(L§f‘)'¢t

If the thickness of turbulent layers is significantly less than the total thickness
of the column of ocean water under examination. then 1' ski/ll and

4x1») - I; 33‘ %§(¢5.K)P“(dukwédk"3'“‘9‘

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Averaging in relation to n, we get the unconditional mean (10- (gov).

Pbr a Poisson distribution of the amber of iqulses in-interval,

'4") V533? e-P(-M")——o‘ where 721-01)” is the mean nuﬂaer of turbulent layers
in a an: interval of depths, we 9.: <10 -h;<hf).

It would be natural to assume from considerations of scale that K; -f(ai,h£) sought:
where a is a certain dinnsionlees miversal constant. M

(K)‘ :5“. SSK‘5Pﬁ.(‘u")M“- . . (1)
1: o and h are statistically independent, then Pn(3-")- 9409.19.“ and
(x). on. §6P‘(6)d6§wh(u)dh. I I ('2,

When a and h are statistically dependent. ”5“»: "RG9. V49"); P¢(d)";(hld), (3)
where v; and #2 are the corresponding conditional probability densities.
Extremely few empirical estisates or the distribution laws in formulas (l)-(3) have

been obtained thus far. the distribution of the thicknesses of turbulent layers in
the Gulf. of Tunis was approximated in (5) by a logarithmically normal law:

mu). ﬁzzw‘lwlp. ...‘

where no and A are. correspondingly, the man and standard deviation of ln 1!. In

this case (“‘)"’7["(J‘°’°7]° the values for the parameters errived at in (5) are:
Ito-2.3, A-o.60, (a)n0.6 cn/eec and n1-0.081.

At the Second International Colloquium on GeOphysical Hydrodynamics in Liege (4),

H. Gregg presented data on the thicknesses o! turbulent layers in the main thermo-
cline of the central part of the Paciﬁc Ocean's northern suatropical circulation.

The distribution of values for these thicknesses may be approximated by an exponential
law:

- m«)-¢.«p(-y.u)”"

where "1' 0.46 m'l. such that (122) -2/u§-9.42 In, and the value for parameter n1,

given a Poisson distribution. was bound equal to 0.21 It“ for a 200-400 meter layer
and 0.14 r1 for an soc-1,200 Inter layer.

23

FOR OFT-10M. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Numerous measurements were made of the vertical profiles of the nicrostructure of the
current velocity fieldduring the 22d cruise of the research vessel nnuitriy Mendeleycv'
in the Indian Ocean within a traverse south of the island of Sumatra (3). For

the upper 250-mter layer of the ocean, the value of m arrived at on the basis of
these data is 0.021 In", while the values of the other parameters are:

(0) =1.0 cn/sec and (h2)-21 1112.

me values of the coefficient of vertical turbulent exchange. couputed with formula
(2) at c-0.l and n1 a0.l75 n" for typical values (o)-0.1-1 can/sec, lie within 1.6
and 16 an/sec (for the central part of the northern subtropical circulation of the
Pacific Ocean). the corresponding value of (K) for the Gulf of Tunis attained 97

cuz/sec, while according to neasurenents made in the traverse in the Indian Ocean,
(10- 4.4 an/sec.

lino-dimensional density distributions for probabilities Poh(0,h) are given in (6).
The values of (K) obtained with formula (1) on the basis of these data are 40 and
16 cmz/sec correspondingly for the western and eastern parts of the Gulf of Tunis.
lhe corresonding value of the coefficient of vertical turbulent exchange based on

measurements made in the Indian Ocean traverse is 6.8 cnz/sec. The scatter of (K)
values obtained above for different regions of the World Ocean may be the product
of differences in the average hydroneteorological conditions of these regions.

he proposed statistical model, which accounts for interstratification of oceanic
turbulence. permits computation of the effective coefficient of vertical turbulent
exchange on the basis of information on the distribution laws for the thicknesses
of turbulent spots and the intensity of turbulence within then. Such representation
of turbulent exchange processes in the ocean by parameters also pernits us to ads-

quately account for the specific features of turbulence in different regions of the
ocean and in different hydroneteorological conditions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Oznidov, R. V., “Horizontal mrbulence and mrbulent Exchange in the Ocean,"
Moscow, 'Nauka“, 1967.

2. Oznidov, R. v., "Turbulence in the Upper Layer of the Ocean," I'mGI munu I
TEKHNIKI. WM ZHIIKOSTI I am, VINITI, Vol 12, 1978, pp 52-143.

3. Oznidov, R. v., "me 22d Cruise of the Scientific ksearch Vessel 'uaitriy
Mendelsyev‘," 01mm“, Vol 19, No S, 1979, pp 948~954.

4. Ozmdov, R. v.. and Pedomv, K. 8., "ambulance in the Ocean (Second International

Liege Colloquim on Geophysical Bydsodynanucs and the Second International
Symosius on Turbulence in the Ocean, Liege, Belgium, 17-May 1979),“ Izv. AN
SSSR. FIZIKA AMER! I cram, V01 15, No 12, 1979, pp 1330-1333.

S. Pozdynin. V. 0., "Statistical Characteristics of Turbulence Stratification

and of Fluctuations in the Vertical Flow Rate Gradients in the Gulf of Mia,“
OIGANOIDGIYA, V01 18. No 2. 1978, pp 226-231.

6. Pozdynin, v. D., "lhe Vertical Structure of the Snail-Scale ‘mrbulence Field in
the Gulf of 'rmis," OKBANOUOGIYA, vol 19, No 5, 1979, pp 776-781.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Synoptic Variability of Equatorial Currents in the Pacific Ocean
V. A. 3W, V. D. Yegorikhin

In February-Hard: 1980, during the Zdth cruise of the scientific research vessel
"mitriy Mendeleyev,“ measurements were made in a special traverse with the purpose
of studying the average structure and symptic varidaility of equatorial currents in
the Central Pacific. me traverse contained ten autonomous buoy stations (ABS)
carrying current flovmeters. 'nmose stations were located on two meridional sections
through the equator at 167° W. long. and 163°15' W. long. near mapping points 1°30!
N. Lat” 0'45' N. Lat., 0° Lat.. 0'45‘ 8. Let. and 1'30' 8. Let. he obtained
series of observations covered 28-39 days, and the time of synchronous observations
along both cross sections of the traverse vu about 27 days.

'nxe vertical dynamic structure in a water layer dovn to 600 aeters in the traverse
is formed by three flows occurring in different directions: the South Tradevind
current, the Equatorial swsurface Countercurrent (lel's oirrent). and the
Equatorial Intermediate Current.

The South Tradevind Current erbraces the upper layer, and its thickness varies from
70-100 meters near the equator to 120-150 meters at 1'30' N. and s. Lat. me
velocity of this current varies within broad limits (from 30 to 100 cm/sec) , averaging
about 60 cIVsec (at a lS-neter horizon).

Cromwell's current is an eastward flow «bracing a layer about 200 meters thick.

Its lower boundary is usually at a depth of 260-280 meters, and the center of

maxim velocities is within the center of the pymocline, at a depth of 140-170
raters. 'lhe average velocity in the center of the current is 75-80 ctr/sec. while

in certain periods it exceeds 100 u/sec. Below Crowell's Current the water flow
once again acquires a westerly direction, and it is called the Equatorial Intermediate
Current. In the vicinity of the traverse this current has a vertical dimension of

up to 180 meters. and it is typified by a marina: velocity of \q) to 30 ciVsec at a
depth of 300-400 meters.

Containing quantitative (computation of energy spectrum) and qualitative (examination

of different sorts of time and latitude-time graphs of flow velocities) analysis of

the observation data from the traverse, we determined the variability of the velocity
field in the equatorial zone within a range of periods from half a day to 2 weeks.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ralf-day and daily fluctuations in velocity associated with tidal forces of the
moon and sun were revealed by spectral! analysis in both the surface layer. «traced
by the South Tradewind Current, and in the deeper reaches of. women's current

(Figure l) .

A93. 5 we: ‘3 we: “zest 2,
.e‘o-‘wﬁ 1dd‘dc‘o‘xo‘v: .v‘o‘w'i #O’W‘O“ISM

J

hula-Mac!

n‘ . . 5,2.”

‘0‘ E ‘i; ‘0
\0’ °vo"n ‘0‘0’ 10" 0‘10‘

\0'\ \dto‘1d‘ c‘aoﬁo‘ioH

3:“

d'
Ic'ﬁ'mo‘ov ‘61 \010 101 1c

   

Cl

 
 

cu c“.

(4)2

Figure l. Exalplee of Kinetic Energy Spectrum for the zonal (u)
and Meridional (v) Comte of the (an-rent Velocity
in the Equatorial Traverse

1. ABS 3. cheemour
2. ﬂour: 4. Greet

 

09' 02 ‘ .03

Figure 2. Change in Mean Daily Values of the Heridional Comment
of the Current Velocity at the 15 Meter Horizon: 1-167'

H. Dong. meridian, 2—163'15' W. long. meridian. Data are
averaged for the interval from 1‘30' N. Let. to 1°30' S. Lat.
26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

mm mm 1.03 - :00: $03

Figure 3. Change in Mean Daily Values of the hridional Oolponent
of the mrrent Velocity at the 165 Hater Horizon:
1--167' w. long. luridian, 8--l63°l$' w. long. urdian.

mta are averaged in the interval from 0? hat. to 1°30'
S. Lat.

Within the limits of the South 'l‘radswind Current and Cromell's Current. we also
observe fluctuations with a 3-4 day period (figure 1) . which are also typical of
the atmspheric pressure and wind fields in the equatorial region. It nay be

suggested that at this frequency, the ocean receives energy free the atmsphere
by mans of direct wind effects.

me energy-richest fluctuations in flow rate of the South Tradewind Current are
those with a period of 12-14 days (Figure 2). (bservations did not reveal a direct

connection between these fluctuations and changes in local winds in the area of the
traverse.

the main feature of synoptic variability in Cronell‘s (harreht is the meandering of
its axis relative to the equatorial plane. Ibmdering is a complex mstable
phenomemn, a product of the polymodal nature of the fluctuations, which cause
superimsition of waves varying in physical nature. 'nae awlitude of meanders is
30-40' of latitude. Fluctuations with a 10-day period are the met regular (Figure 3).
the directions and velocity of propagation, and consequently the length of these

waves cannot be determined uniquely from observations made in the traverse due to

our ignorance of the nulber of whole waves falling within the'distance between the
eastern and western cross sections of the traverse. 'mree possible interpretations

of the data in Figure 3 deserve attention:

a) very long waves propagating quickly eastward (length about 400 kn, phasal velocity
about 5 Much-possibly Kelvin waves, having their origin on the eastern shores of
Australia and being entrained in the equatorial zone:

b) eastern waves of moderate length and propagation velocity (length about 330 km,
phasal velocity about 0.4 Need;

c) western waves of moderate length and propagation velocity (length about 460 kn,
phasal velocity about 0.5 n/sec).

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Waves of the last two types may be interpreted as baby waves entrained by an

equatorial waveguide; according to anytsev et a1. (1), such waves nay propagate
both eastward and westward in eastward currents.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. zaytsev, A. 3., Zubin, A. 3.. and ”coin, A. 8., “Rendering of mmnosov's
current,” may AN 888R, Vol 248, No S, 1979, pp 1229-1232.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vertical Structure of Current Velocities and Internal Raves in._the Ocean

Ye. P. Varlatyy, V. v. Nemtskiy, I. D. lbstov

me fine vertical structure of current velocities in the ocean has not been studied
adequately due to difficultigg inneasuring oontinuomvelocity distributions in the
vertical plane (1.3.4). It is usually explained by the sliding. in ditterent
directions, of water layers having different densities, especially near straits

and frontal zones. In the open ocean, such structures may be the consequence of
internal waves with almost-inertial periods. (2). 1311s paper analyzes observations

that rather clearly reveal the effect of inertial-gravity waves with snall periods
on the vertical distribution or horizontal current velocities.

Let us write the equation for inertial-gravity waves shifted 1.23%: on axes
3:, y, 3 relative to the steady state, using Bussineek's approximation:
‘ '4 m
‘ - .
a - 5:3, . (a)

where n,Z--vertical and horizontal coqonents o: wave vector fauna!) , which tor
simplicity of notation is assu-ed to lie in plane cs: m--wav_e_trequency; Q--vertical

comment or the Coriolis vector (inertial frequency): 7.6 F)’. ...Waysyal'-Brent
frequency. 3

me dispersion ratio for these waves may be written in the form
3 . l
w’: A! m 0 oB‘m‘o, (3)

where 0 is the angle between wave vector 1 and the vertical axis.
It would be interesting to note that «:2 42.11.20 is the dispersim ratio for internal

waves of a nonrotating stratified liquid, while «)2 Ilﬂzcosze is the dispersion ratio
for inertial waves in an unstratified rotating liquid.

Displacements [J are expressed by the derivatives of vertical displacements
{a from the notion equations. Given a constant vyaysyal' frequency Ms) -const,
we get:

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

Pinning-5.434% . (4)

The projection of the particle projectory onto plane [coordinates omitted in the
original} is the same ellipse seen in relation to internal waves in the absence of
rotation, while the projection onto plane ay results in the sane ellipse seen with
inertial waves in a unifon liquid. ‘ihe trajectory in space is an ellipse inter-
secting planeayon axis a: and tilted at an angle d; to the vertical:

9‘: 'Ilfl:§(£::‘§:)@ é" . (a)

gsing ‘3). we can easily obtain angles d2 aid :1; for phasal and group velocities
v and u, and the known orthogonality relationship for then:

94"£'945";”9¢%' "'1' (a)

It follows from these relationships that when aovensnt occurs from the top downward
(the positive direction of axis 8) , we would observe the sam law applicable to

purely gravitational inertial waves in a nonrotating liquid: clockwise rotation of the
horizontal velocity vector in the presence of a positive s-cosponent of the phasal
velocity (the vertical cosponent of the wave nmiaer is directed downward). and
counter-clodcwise rotation in the presence of the opposite s-oosponsnt of phasal

velocity. The difference from the case of inertial waves in a nonrotating liquid
would lie in the sire of the horizontal ooaponent of rhital velocity-in our case.

given identical phasal velocities and tilt angles of in relation to the vertical.
the velocities in rotating and nonrotating system would be associated by the rela-

tionship

umt‘Wt'Sin die (1)

In principle. these relationships yield to experimental testing. but this could
not he done with sufficient reliability in the ocean due to the cosplex vertical

structure of the average currents and of the inertial wave field. visual observa-
tions in the upper thersocline that can confirm the spiral behavior of the velocity
vector on the vertical axis are very rare, they encomss too ssall a layer, and
therefore they may apply only to very short waves. Continuation of the relation-
ships is inportant to choosing the leans for mdeling inertial waves in the ocean:
inasmuch as the most popular nethod of normal nodes physically presupposes reflection
from boundaries to form standing vertical sodos--that is, it presupposes predoninantly
horizontal waveguide propagation of energy without its noticeable vertical flow.
Domes as to the physical reality of this approach in relation to the open ocean

have already been stated by some authors.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In June 1980 observations doimtlessly demonstrating the presence of vertical flows
of wave energy and asymetry of internal waves were made in the Pacific Ocean in a
traverse with coordinates 35‘53' N. Lat.. 154'57' B. tong. A region was fond in
which a layer 300-400 meters thid: at depths of 300-100 meters had a temperature
gradient that was almst constant in relation to depth. and was separated from the

\pper thermcline by a quasi-uniform layer at depths of 100-300 meters, with an
almost constant current direction.

'lhe observations consisted of repeated somdings of current velocity, temerature
and electroconductivity (All: and "Istok-4" probes) at 30-minute intervals for periods
of not less than a day, and of continuous recordings of fluctuations in scattering
layers by mans of echo somders. m principal observation results are as follows:

1. In a layer with a non-zero average density gradient, beginning at a depth of
300-400 meters there appear quasiperiodic velocity fluctuations on the vertical
axis, with a vertical scale varying from 20 to ma meters. are maxi-1m amplitude of
the velocity fluctuations, 5-8 cm/sec, corresponds to a vertical scale of about loo
meters. ‘lhe fluctuations deteriorate as the density gradient decreases at depths
below 700-800 meters.

2. no current. which remains almost constant in direction and velocity to a depth
of about 400 meters, begins to'change direction rather abruptly below 400 meters.
when the shift in current direction in the layer below 600-100 meters relative to
the upper layer is greater than 120°, spiral clockwise rotation of the current
arises in the intermediate layer; the spacing between spirals is 30-100 meters, and
the rotation rate is nearly constant: do/ds sax/x, - n sconst. In this case the
direction of the lower current establishes itself opposite to that of the upper
current. After a set of spirals passes through (up to three or four 360' revolu-
tions) , the directions of the upper and lower currents converge to 90', the number
of spiral coils decreases or they disappear altogether, and the aaplitudes of

the oscillations decrease as well.

3. The mean density profile changes little. but the finestructure undergoes
noticeable intensification when spiral coils appear.

4. 'me dominant periods of oscillations in the scattering layers at depths of
400-600 meters are 20-30 minutes, with periods of 90-120 minutes arising signifi-
cantly less frequently. The vertical shifts in the layers are 10-20 meters.

we interpret the observed processes as propagation as trains of inertial waves. a
number of good conclusions and numerical estimates of the wave parameters can be
made on the basis of the relationships given above. According to theory, clockwise
rotation of the velocity vectory corresponds to propagation of dominant internal
waves from the top downward. Inasmuch as a oomlete revolution of a spiral occurs
within the wave period, if we assulu the vertical scale to be 13-100 meters and a
time scale of about 30 minutes, we get approximately 5 culsec as the estimate for
the vertical component of phasal velocity. 'lhe vertical shifting velocity for the

scattering layers is significantly smaller.

0n the basis of relationships (4). at the observed horizontal velocity asplitudes
of about 5 cm/sec. we get an estimate of Az-soo meters for the horizontal wave
scale and V3- 30 can/sec for the horizontal phasal velocity. Using (5). at

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N/u = 2, we get d1 = 12' for the orbital ellipse and d2 =78° for phasal velocity.
Angles d3 and d1 are very close. 1m orbital velocities are about 1 cn/sec greater
than the observed horizontal velocity alplitudes.

were practically no correlations with internal waves in the upper loo-Deter layer.
Considering the high correlation between appearance of spirals with significant
amplitudes and growth in the difference between the directions of the current in
the upper and lower layers, it bould be natural to suggest that we are observing
a shift in velocity in countercurrents serving as the sain factor responsible for
generation of trains of short-period internal waves propagating nonhorisontally.
Waveguide properties were practically absent from the layer. Growth in imulse
transfer under the influence of internal waves significantly changes the deep
current, and the difference in directions and the corresponding velocity shift
decrease. In this case the internal waves attenuate, resulting in recovery
(asplification) of the displacements, and generation of a new set of waves. ’me
vertical component of the Coriolos force may be a significant factor in the large
and fast oscillations of horizontal velocity. When we take it into account, fre-

quency in the dispersion relationship becomes asyuetrical, and the phasal veloci-
ties of waves propagating in different directions may differ noticeably. In

correspondence with (S) and (7), the orbital velocities, which make a noticeable
contribution to the measured currents. will differ significantly as well.

'me objective of this report was to demonstrate, on the basis of visual data, the
influence internal waves have on the observed vertical structure of the velocity
field. It obviously follows from the observations that the finestructure of the
velocity field may usually be the consequence of kinematic or irreversible effects
produced by passage of internal waves. A more-form statistical analysis of the
measurements will be presented in a separate paper.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Monin, A. 5., "'me Vertical Heso- and Microstructure of Ocean currents,”
DAN 5558, Vol 208, No 4, 1973.

2. leanan, K. D., and Sanford. '1'. 8., "Vertical Energy Propagation of Inertial
Waves: A Vector Spectral Analysis of Velocity Profiles," .1. GROWS. 1135.,
Vol 80, No 15.

3. Perkins, H. , and Van beer, 3., “Simultaneous Current 'nelperature Profiles in
the Equatorial Comtercurrent,” J. PHYS. oc., vol 7, No 2, 1977.

4. lbssby, H. '31., and Sanford, 1h. 3., ”A Study of Velocity Profiles 1hrough
the Main 1hermocline," J. PHYS. oc., Vol 6, No 5, 1976.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some Results of Synchronous Measurements of the Vertical
Structure of mentors, salinity, Speed of Sound and
the mrrent Vector Velocity

Ye. P. Varlatyy, I. D. mstov

'lhere are certain methodological difficulties in sinultaneously measuring the
vertical profiles of a current velocity vector and the basic themdynanic para-
meters in the ocean; consequently such measurements are few in miner today. he
theraohaline and We structure of waters in a 0-1000 aster layer in a water
area including the Kanohatka and Xuril‘ currents and the antarctic front of the
Northwest Pacific were subjected to detailed investigation during the eighth
cruise of the scientific research vessel "Professor Bogorov' with assistance of an
acoustic measuring complex (All) and “Istoh-d' probe. Synchronously with these
observations, we recorded the para-stars of internal waves in a layer reaching from
the surface down to several hundred asters. An analysis of the results permitted
us to refine existing ideas concerning the unique features of the stratification
and the neso- and small-scale variability of the fields.

the observations showed that the Kuril' current. the area of the northern subarctic
front and the interfrontal zone can be classified as regions having a finestructure

of clearly greater intensity. 'iypical features of stratification are propagation
of inversional structures in these areas and a high degree of spatial-tenporal
variability in its characteristics. in waters of the Kuril' aodification of the
subarctic structure. the finestructure is well developed in sue-er within the
limits of the cold subsurface reduced-salinity layer and the internediate layer.
where the conditions for double diffusion are present. ‘lhe temerature field is
dominated here by nonunifonities with a vertical scale on the order of meters. In
the zone of the subarctic front, where war-and saline waters brought in by the
Kurosio current interact and nix with cold and less-saline subarctic waters. the

conditions are created for develop-ent of various nechanisse generating fine-scale
structures. which leads to greater diversity in the forms. para-stars and variability

of the finestructure in the entire analysed range of depths.

Analysis of the amplitude-frequency cosponent of profile perturbations with a verti-
cal scale of 2-50 meters in the 0-1000 meter layer, perfomd for stations along
a meridional cross section from Kandxatka to 35‘ N. Lat” shoved that the standard
deviations of fluctuations in temperature, salinity and density for the region of
the frontal zone exceed, by an average of 1-2 orders of magnitude, the analogous
estimates of the finestructure of swarctic and subtropic waters. Moreover, far
from coastal regions in a 400-1000 meter layer, finestructure lakes practically no

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

contribution to the total dispersion of telperature gradients in subarctic waters.
'me averages and standard deviations of layer thicknesses and of the vertical
gradients of temperature. salinity and density were relatively stable in time within
a period of around a day, and in space within tens of nautical miles: however. they
did differ significantly for traverses lying in different structural zones, or in
individual sections of the profiles.

Measurements made with the AIR along a cross section within the frontal zone at

155° 8. long. confined the presence of northeasterly (northern front) and south-
easterly (southern front) average currents with velocities from 40 to 80 cn/sec.

The Kuril' current is a water flow loving soutln'est at a velocity of up to 30-50
chsec, and it is relatively stable in its direction. The principal contribution to
total dispersion of vertical variations in current velocity is wade here by perturba-
tions with a vertical scale of 10-100 mters. in the region of the Kamchatka current
by perturbations with a scale of 3-10 meters, and in the region of the north branch
of the subarctic front by perturbations with a scale of up to 100-200 esters. Selec-
tive analysis of the profiles showed that the sapirical distributions of the thick-
nesses of layers with approximately constant gradients for the current velocity and
sound velocity fields are described reasonably well by a log-normal law, and that

the gradient distributions are close to a nornal law, with a positive excess
dominating.

A colparison of curves describing vertical distribution of Vyaysyal' frequency and
the shear modulus of the current velocity established that the nature of changes in
these paramters was described in most cases by the following:

1. Changes in current velocity and direction at some stations reflected the basic
structural features of the density proﬁle. ~ As a rule in this case, the values for
the velocity shear modulus increased as the vertical scale of nonuniformities de-
creased.

2. The extremes of the curve 1N8) are well correlated with the extremes of the
velocity shear modulus averaged at a vertical inth of 5-10 mters. This strati-
fication feature was usually observed in the thermcline. in portionsof the profiles
having a significant density gradient and at the boundaries of layers exhibiting
quasistationary tenperature inversions. In the region of the kuril' current the
changes in velocity direction in inversions from 5 to 50 meters thick occurred at

the boundaries of the layer with an increment of 10-30‘.

3. Sawtooth changes in the profile of current velocity and direction with respect
to depth appear on a background of a smooth te-perature profile. Given a value
of 10-30 meters for vertical isotherm fluctuations within the field of internal
waves. the amiitude of velocity changes in layers 50-100 meters thick is about

10 sin/sec, while direction changes total up to 30-60‘.

4. Sharp growth in the amplitude of fluctuations in current velocity and direction
at different horizons in the shelf and coastal zones, indicating an influence by
bottom relief and water exchange through straits. In this case the correlation
between current density and velocity gradients was low; and conditions favoring
propagation of thermohaline intrusions transverse to isopycnio surfaces evolved.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. abnormally large changes in current direction in layers on the order of tens
of meters thick, going as far as its three-told 360° rotation, without noticeable
detornations in density structure.

the last case was observed several tins in soundings made at 24-hour stations,

and it can apparently be explained by unique features in the interaction between
the average current and fluctuations in the inertial and tidal periods. cyclic
fluctuations in the dispersion or the velocity shear modulus that correlated with
tidal phases were revealed at some stations in the Kuril' current. line contribution
of fluctuations created by vertical shirts in current velocity and direction in
response to waves occurring in the tidal period and waves of higher frequencies
represented itself as velocity changes of 10-12 cs/sec. An analysis of the distri-
bution of Richardson nulber values and the coefficient of vertical turbulent ex-
change shoved that these fluctuations episodically intensify the critical velocity
shifts in the average current, creating the conditions for development of hydro-
dynamic instability and for local mixing. similar assessments were made for the
subsurface layer on the basis of observations nade during passage of a storm. In
conclusion, the results are used asabasis for examining the causes and mechanisms

of formation of inversion'layers in the studied region.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An Acoustic Heasuring Coupler for Research On the Micro-
etructure of Hydrophysical Fields in the Ocean

Ye. P. Varlatyy. V. P. 'l‘ikhoairov

M acoustic masuring complex (MK) was developed by the Pacific Ocean Oceanological
Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences Far Eastern Scientific Center for research

on the finestructure of hydrophysical fields. m. an is capable of parallel measure-
mnts of current velocity and direction, speed of some and the sound velocity
gradient.

'lhe apparatus consists of a sounding and an onboard systes. Figure la shows a block
diagram of the an. The sounding system contains an acoustic current velocity
measuring device based on a single-channel freqmncy-iepulse circuit. ‘lhe measuring
unit includes acoustic base 1, measuring device 8, square pulse delay oscillator 3,
band filter 4. auplifier 5. and converter 8. The measurement process involves the
following. Assume that at some moment in time the measuring unit emits a pulse in
the direction of current flow. The next pulse would be emitted after time

t1: 2/0 H). Propagating against the current. this pulse reaches the converter

of the acoustic base after time t2 -Z/o-v. Next, the entire process is repeated
with a period of T-t1+t2, the length of which, at a known base length l. is deter-
mined by the speed of send a in a notionless medium

#1: '1‘: ' «p

M identical trains of pulses with period 1', shifted relative to one another by
a time interval At, are fed to delay oscillator 3 from measuring unit 2 (Figure lb):

at'-£+AT 1‘

Ta)"

where aT-I‘g-n «difference in time of propagation of the acoustic signal in the

presence of a current and in a motionless mdiu: V--projection of the current velocity
vector in the direction of the acoustic beam. A train of pulses (Figure lb--D) passes
from the square pulse oscillator to band filter 4 and amplifier 5. A sinusoidal
electric signal is picked off from the amplifier output: the frequency of this signal
depends on the speed of sound in a motionless mediu- while its asplitude is deter-
mined by the current velocity. me signal at the amlifier output has the form:

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

udn‘k-wtosdif'ti, . f3) .

where N'%'—’("m(13$€) --a coefficient defining the instrument's sensitivity in

relation to current velocity; "(r-square pulse asplitude; kl—filter and amplifier
transmission factor: T--pulse length: c--speed of sound; Z--measurenent base length.

 

Figure 1. Block Diagram of the Acoustic assuring Cowlex (a)
and the signal Time Diagram (b): 1,9—acoustic base;
2--measuring unit; 3—delay oscillator: 4-band filter:
5--anplifier; 6,8.16--oonverter: LIP-multiplier;
10--speed of sound measuring block; 12--direction sensor:
13--pressure sensor; Munixer: 15--natching unit:
17-19--two-coordinate recorder; 30--digital recording
system 21--period meter: 21,23--perforator

The size of It depends on the speed of sound. which is undesirable because change in
it may distort instrument readings during measurements of current velocity. In
this case the relative error would be:

(-97: - Ling-(I- 19, £910“, (4)

where (Av/v)c--relative current velocity measurement error due to change in speed
of sound; co--average speed of sound: Ao--deviation of the real speed of sound in
the ocean from its average; fo~pulse repetition rate in the measuring unit's
synchro-ring at the average speed of sound co: ‘l--length of square pulses at the
output of oscillator 3.

It follows from equation (4) that depending on t, this error may take values from
zero to a maxim value equal to relative change in the speed of sound in the ocean.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1o reduce this error, it would be advantageous to use pulses of low duration, while
to increase measurement sensitivity, the reverse would be required. 'lhe optimum 1
can be found from the condition of ensuring a given measurement accuracy. Let us
assume that the maximum permissible error is 6. men, expanding the cotangent into
a series and retaining the first two terns, we get the following from equation (4) a

"I“; :86 . .‘°’

where To al/fo is the pulse repetition period.

Substituting typical values for the ocean in equation (5)--co-l,500 m/sec and

Ac: :50 m/sec, we find that the relative error, equal to 0.5 percent, may be ensured
by using pulses with a duration 1 ITO/6. Another way is also possible for reducing
the influence of the speed of sound, one not imposing limitations on pulse duration:
me instrument readings are automatically corrected by adding a feedback to the
current velocity channel's saplification tract. In this case the control signal

is picked off from the output of the speed of sound channel.

According to the results of tests with the hydrochannel, the intensity of signals
at the output of the current velocity masuring unit depends on current velocity

within a broad range of change in the latter. we sensor measures current velocity
on the basis of the speed of sound; therefore the magnitude of the latter is measured
simultaneously with current velocity using the same acoustic base.

“to acoustic bases separated by a certain vertical distance and two identical
measuring circuits feeding signals to multipliers 7. ll (Figure la) with a multipli-
cation factor of 100 are used to measure the speed of sound gradient. Multiplied
signals are subsequently fed to a subtraction unit.

the size of the speed of sound gradient is determined by the equation:

6 -{-(-§ﬂa}- 5’44, - gf—ac). (e)

where Guspeed of sound gradient: l--vertical distance between sensors: H--frequency
multiplication factor; Al . 12-11; ll-lz—distance between converter and reflector
in the acoustic bass; Af--signal frequency: couaverage speed of sound in sea water;
Ac-c1-co--deviatim of the real speed from its average.

The first factor in the parentheses reﬂects the relationship between the frequency
of the electric signal and the speed gradient. The other terns are additional
correction factors depending on Al. One of the correction factors is constant and
has practically no influence on metrological characteristics while the other de-
fines the dependence between the gradient nsasurenent and the relative change in

speed of sound in the medium under consideration and is coapletely a part of the
total error. '1!) decrease it. it would be sufficient to reduce the difference in

lengths of the acoustic bases.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sounding unit also contains a sensor that determines the instrument's azimuth
orientation relative to the earth's magnetic mridian, and a standard DOV-200

pressure gage.

'me somding part of the MK is connected via a current collector to the onboard
unit by means of a winch cable. Signals received aboard are filtered and fed to the
appropriate recorders. mac-coordinate recorders and a digital recording system are
employed.

The neasuring part of the probe is contained within a deepsea cylindrical container
made from nonmagnetic material. It is equipped with control vanes used to orient
the probe in line with the current. and it is supplied with a linking unit that
keeps the acoustic bases horisontal irrespective of the tilt isparted to the housing
by the oncoming current. 'ihe measuring couple: possesses the following character-
istics: current velocity measurement range-mp to 2 meters/sec: directions—0460‘:
speed of sound--l,430-l,540 meters/sec: range of measurement of speed of sound
gradient--from +2 sec'l to -30 sec“; vertical resolution--O.l-l meters: measurement
accuracy for current velocity-~0.S cm/sec, for speed of sound-“0.3 meters/sec,

for direction-~3’. for the speed of sound gradient--0.0l sec‘lx taxi-um sensitivity
in relation to speed of sound-~l W801}: maxim depth-~2.000 meters.

....

    

H i .
Figure 2. Recordings of Current Velocity and Direction Profiles
Obtained in the Pacific Ocean: Incurrent velocity:

2--direction

'me am was used in a nusber of expeditions aboard the scientific research vessels
"uaitriy Mendeleyev" and "Professor Bogorov.” The measuremts Vere made by taking
soundings from a drifting vessel. his instrument was used in a cycle of research
projects having the objective of studying the finestructure of the dynamic character-
istics of the water environment, and its relationship to microstratification of
temperature, salinity and speed of sound. In particular, the obtained data indi-
cated that the finestructure of current was often the product of hiya-mods internal
waves.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Possibilities for Studying Pinestructure and mrbulent Pulsations
of the Ocean's Density Field with a Laser Photoelectric Interferometer

v. D. Vlasov

'Ihe Institute of Oceanology ineni P. P. Shirshov has developed a unique instrument-
a submersible laser photoelectric interferometer that can siuultaneously manure

and record. with high spatial resolution and accuracy, the average and pulsational
densities of the ocean (1).

This interferometer is based on an interference-resistant method, protected by
several author's certificates (2.3). of dynamic Inasureuent of the optical differ-
ence in the path traveled by light beans through the medium under analysis. we
method is based on phasal photoelectric registration of the relative displacement
of two systems of sawtooth-seaming interference bands. and on an instrument
optical system desigxed in such a way that destabilizing factors elicit their
identical drift and fluctuation, and their relative displacement a is associated
only with change in the optical difference in the path As resulting from change

in the mediun's refraction index AM

Where ‘1 '-% Mi '- I , (I)
az.M.-l.s_-- - . a.)

Z--length of measurement base (Figure la):

A--length of a light wave produced by a helium-neon laser, equal to 6.328 X. In
turn, change in density of sea water, A0. is associated by a linear relationship
with change in the refraction index (1):

Arman. -=' " "_-(2)

Although the present measurement accuracy for relative displacement of the two
systems of interference bands is five one-thousandths of a band (4,5) and although

the interferometer itself is practically noninertial, because of isperfections in
the digital and analog recorders (figure 1) the instn-ent accuracy is, respectively,
20.05 and 10.025 of a band (which at 1-0.5 cs is equal. for M and do, to 23.1.10‘ ,
21.55-10'5 and 18.3-10'6 gn/cm3, 14.15-10-5 gI/cn3 respectively), while its drift is
wont 0.01 sec.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OROI’FICIALISEONLY

 

Figure 1. Block Diagram of Apparatus ﬁor masuring the Finestructure
o: the Ocean's Density Field by the Optical Interference

Method
Key:
1. Oomensator 10. Analog measuring wit
2. Hirrors 11. Digital reversing unit
3. Light beans 12. Adapter unit
4. Porthole 13. "-327
S. Submersible laser phote1ectric 14. lbcorders
interferometer 15. KSP-l‘s
6. Photouultiplier block 16. Digital display
7. Photoaultiplier aperture 17. 10-16
8. Interference bands 18. Pit-150

9. 0nboard part of the instrumnt

Figure 2 (1) shows a portion of the vertical density profile Ap(s) obtained by the
described instrument in the Philippine Sea during the 19th cruise 0! the scienti-
fic research vessel 'lhnitriy Mendeleyev“ (1). It is clear from the results of
spectral statistical treatment of a series of six similar profiles (extending to

a depth of 120 meters with a sanpling interval of 0.48 meters) that their variability
at scales greater than 8 meters is associated with internal waves. while variability
at scales less than 8 meters is apparently the result of the mixing action of micro-
turbulence (1). 1he inset in Figure 2 (1) shows an intrastratification 1 meter
thick, recorded with an "-327 high-speed recorder in profile (1) , in which fine-
structural inversions of the density field with vertical scales of 10-5 on and less
are observed.

‘1!) reveal their nature and origin, similar profiles were recorded during the 22d
cruise of the “nitriy Hendeleyev" using. besides the standard technique (Figure 1
(a) and Figure 2 (2)), a method requiring installation of a glass compensator in
the path of both been (Figure 1 (a) and Figure 2 (3)) and a zero uasurement base
(Figure 1 (b) and Figure 2 (4)).

The beam path was 7 cm, the distance between beans was 1.2 cm. and the length of the
measurement base was l-0.58 cm. Given such relationships. our analysis showed.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

s

Figure 2. Vertical Profiles of. Changes in Sea Water's Refraction Index
(1) at Station 1611 (28 Septeuber 1977, 10°40' 8., 126'45' 2.).
(2) at Station 1801 (7 February 1979, 0'8.5' 8.. l39°48.5' 3.).
(3) at the Same Station with a Corpsmator. (4) at the Same
Station with a Zero Heasurensnt Base

disappearance of small-scale pulsations in the presence of the cospensator and
their appearance without the coupensator is possible, even with a zero leasurensnt

base, only it fluctuations of the refraction index are randon and uncorrelated at
a spatial scale of about l on (6). his is an indication that these fluctuations

arise in response to active small-scale turbulence in the stratified median. In
this case. similarly as in (6). the dispersions (mean squares) of fluctuations in
As and M are associated with each other by the following formula:

6:. 'L-‘c‘in . . m

.
where L'énsumdi "midimsnsional integral scale of fluctuations, equal in

our case to 1.2 cm HEP-spatial autocorrelation function (given statistical

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

35f

3. .....l -- --- -..---

OR

   
 

‘P
.n- 0,09 ~10"
‘——-—q
39.191101???

50
In

Figure 3. Evolution of Portions of the Vertical Profile for the
Index of liftsction and Density of Sea Water in bsponse
to Pine-Scale ‘mrbulence (1-5) and Internal Haves (8-7)
at Station 1843 (31 March 1979, 9.43.5' IL, 127'12' 8.):
Tine between somdings--2S minutes.

isotropicity of fluctuations). As we can see from a comparison of formulas (l') and
(3), as well as from the scales of Figure 2 (3) and 2 (4), the instnnent's sensitivity
to small-scale random pulsations (at L<<l') is five times greater than it is in re-
gard to masurensnts of the average (or the 60(8) profile. ibis is a direct conse-
quence of. the fact that the mean square of ﬂuctuations is proportional not to Z but

to Z'-that is. to the nulber of moorrelated nonunifornities in the path of the

light been (6).

using this instrument during the 22d cruise of the scientific research vessel
"uaitriy Hendeleyev“ in the Timor Sea. we were able to reveal formation of a jump

in density that grew with title (Figure 3 (3,4,5)) in a portion of the profile where

it experienced a discontinuity in response to seall-scale turbulence (Figure 3 (1,2)):
which had been predicted theoretically by Long as one of the aechanisms of formation
of the ocean's finestructure (7)) we also observed erosion of this jump (Figure 3

(6.7)) in response to the action of internal waves (7) . which is readily apparent tron
Figure 3.

43

NROFHCIALUSEONLY
1.

3.

4.

S.

FORGFFICIALUSEONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

aelyayev, v. s., Vlaaov, V. I... and Omnidov, R. V.. “Investigation of the
Pine Vertical Structure of Water Density in the Ocean by the Optical Inter-
ference Method,“ 12v. AN 8588, PM, Vol 15, No 8, 1979, pp 855-863.

Vlasov, V. I... "A Hethod for ﬂeasuring Fractional Shifts in M System of
Interference Bands in Interfere-atom, and the Device for this Hethod's
Application," Author's Certificate No 124676, arm. 120811., No 23. 1959.

Vlasov, v. I... and Hedvedev, A. N., "A Device for Measuring Fractional Shifts

in M Systems of Interference Bands," Author's Certificate No 509761. 31014..
12088., No 13, 1971.

Vlasov, V. I... and Hedvedev, A. 8., "Precision Measurement of a Fractional
Relative Shift in I‘m Syetem of Interference Bands,“ PRIBOR! I mmu
BKSPERIHBNTA, No 4, 1972. pp 198-206.

Vlasov, v. I... and Medvedev, A. N., “A Photoelectric Method of Precision
Measurement of Small hiative Shifts in 'No System of Interference Bands,‘
12H. TEKHNIKA, No 8, 1975, pp 47-49.

‘ratarekiy, v. 1., ”Rasproetraneniye win v turbulenmoy atnosfere" [Propagation
of Waves in a mrbulent Atmosphere], ”Baum", 1967. pp 233-237.

“areanologiya. Pizika okeana" [Oceanoiogy. Ocean Physics], Vol 1, ”Mun",
1978, p 257.

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Diversity of Physical Circles in the Upper Layer of the Ocean
a. I. Ginsburg, K. N. Pedorov

In oceanology, it has become a universally accepted practice to refer to the ocean‘s
upper layer as "quasi-miform" and to describe it with unidimensional models. lb-
search conducted in recent years. motivated mainly by fast development of remote
ocean sounding resources. revealed higher variability in hydrophysical character-
istics in a layer near the surface a few meters thick. It was established that

the greatest variability in horizontal and vertical thermostructure is observed
during the time of intense solar heating in still weather and in the presence of
light winds. and that it is basically associated with volume absorption of the
sun's radiant energy, with convection, with modulation of the surface layer by
internal waves and with unique features in salt stratification near the surface in
response to precipitation and evaporation. Variability of salinity is mainly the
product of freshening of the surface layer by rainwater. In this case differences
in salinity of about 1 0,50 at distances on the order of a kilo-star may be observed

Variability in thermal structure of the surface layer exhibits a clearly pronounced
daily trend associated with the daily trend of solar heating and with the thickness
of the layer in which convective mixing occurs. Maximum heating of the surface layer
is observed at about 1500 hours local sun time. no thickness of the convective layer
is, in the absence of salt stratification, within 10 cu in the hours aromd mid-day.
it attains 1 meter by 1600 hours (3). and then it quickly grows. exceeding 10 neters
at night, according to our observations. Given intense solar heating, low thickness
of the unvectiva layer near.- Lhat the greatest increase in heat content occurs in

a surface layer 0.5-1 aster thick. In this case the difference between its teapera-
ture and that at a depth of 7-10 meters may attain 3°C (5). As the thickness of the
layer affected by convection grows. the profile of T“) gradually smoothes out, and

at night we observe practically conplete homothermy in a layer about 10 meters thick.

Arisal of persistent salt stratification near the surface as a result of rains addi-
tionally complicates the picture. During the day. a sudden change in salinity at the
later border of a freshened area, which prevents heat exchange and convective mixing

with lower layers, leads to extreme heating of the surface layer. As an examle
in Sumner 1978, in the region of the someone experiment, in still weather the water

temperature near the surface in freshened areas attained 29-32'C, while in neighboring
points where rain had not fallen. it did not exceed 27.5-28.5'C (1). In this case a

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a lore-abrupt vertical salinity gradient corresponds to sure-intensive heating,

as is readily apparent from Figure l, which shows three profiles of deviations in
teuperature AT(a) and salinity 135(8) from the corresponding values of 1' and S at
the lO-meter horizon, recorded in sumer 1978 in the Sargasso Sea with an MST.

At night, meanwhile, freshened areas cool more intensively owing to the small thick-
ness of the freshened layer subjected to convection (l). 'mus torrential rains
cause arisal of horizontal kilometer-scale nonuniformities in the surface layer.

me most universal mechanism of formation of horizontal kilometer-scale nonuniﬁormi-
ties is modulation of the thickness of the heated surface layer of the ocean by in-
ternal waves of the seasonal thermcline, appearing in still weather and in the
presence of light winds during intensive solar heating (4). The amplitudes of such
nonunifomities may attain l-2°C. In this case very sharp horizontal telperature
gradients (up to 2'C and sore per km) are observed at the margins of warm and cold
areas. An example of typical recordings of "still weather teaperature nonuniformities,‘
obtained with a temperature gage towed at a horizon s-0.15 meters in susaaer 1978 in

the Sargasso Sea, is shown in Figure 2a.

 

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such nonuniformities arise at about 1000-1100 hours local sun time, they reach their
maximum amplitude at 1400-1500 hours-that is, by the moment of maxim heating of
the surface layer. and for practical purposes they disappear by 2100 hours. When
intense heating occurs, kilometer-scale nonuniformities (Figure Za. broken curve) are
recorded at 3-4 meter horizon as well (Figure 2b), while uniformities with a scale
on the order of 100 meters and an asplitude of several tens of degrees are observed
only near the surface (Figure 2a), disappearing after about 15 hours.

An appraisal of the typical horizontal scale L of areas containing a temperature
nonuniformity, made in (4) in accordance with the results (2) of analysing modulation
of motion fields and passive perturbation in the surface layer by a random internal
wave field. produced the value L =l,200 meters for the region of observations, which
agrees well with the measurement results (Figure 2a.b).

In addition to cycles associated with surface freshening and with modulation of the
heated layer by internal waver-cycles typical of windless or light-wind weather.

we see the widespread occurrence of ”Langmuir circulations (or cells)," establishing
themselves at winds from 3 to 10 enters/sec. Langmuir circulations are the result
of interaction of drifting currents and wave action, and they manifest themelves

on the ocean surface in the form of numerous parallel bands of convergence, stretched
out along the wind direction or at a slight angle to it. ‘lhe distance between con-
vergence bands is approximately equal to the thickness of the upper quasi-uniform
layer, and it may vary from 5-10 to 100 meters. Area of divergence are situated
between the convergence bands, above ascending branches of vertical circulations.

In transverse vertical section. Langmuir circulations appear as closed cells pene-
trating downward usually (but not always) to the lower bomdary of the mixed layer.
In light winds and intensive solar heating. the water temerature in the convergenc
bands is higher than in the intermediate ban . Heat carried downward by descending
currents creates abanded theml structure within a layer several meters thick.
Inasmuch as wave and wind mixing operates in this case as well, the amplitudes of
horizontal tenperature changes in these banded structures are not so high as in still-
weather nonuniformities, and they apparently do not exceed 0.2-0.4'c. Languir circu-
lations are an extremely effective mechanism of heat transfer into deep water, and
giVen intensive development, they may predetermine the position of the daily thermo-
cline. which under various conditions may locate itself at horizons from 3-5 to 30-40
meters by the end of the light part of the day. mdulation by internal waves may
elicit local deviations in the position of the daily themcline within :5 meters of
the mean. Intense freshening by precipitation may cause formation of a very shallow
(3-5 meter) daily thermocline.

Internal waves and currents modulate not only the thermal pattern but also the
characteristics of surface wave action. Such effects occur with practically all
wind velocities. me modulation patterns of the surface in the presence of intense
winds are revealed best of all by observations from airplanes and from outer space.
However, sharp disturbances in the state of the ocean surface, connected with fronts
and large internal waves ((solitony) for exasple) , usually are readily visible
from a ship.

47

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ginzburg, A. 1., Zateepin, A. 6., Sklyarov. V. Ye.. and Pedomv. K. 8.,
"Effects of Precipitation in the Surface Layer of the Ocean,‘ WA.
W1 201 Pb 51 1930, W 828-836.

Monin, A. 8., and Piterbarg, L. 1., “Statistical Description of Internal
Waves,” DAN SSS“, W]. 234' NO 3' 1917' w ““567.

Solov'yev, A. V., I'1“:I.ne Them]. Structure of the Ocean's Surface Layer in the
Vicinity of the 'POLYDDDE-TI' Traverse,‘ 13V. an 8853. nzm M10583!
1 exam. Vol 15, No 7, pp 750-757. 1979.

Pedorov, K. 11.. Ginsburg, A. 1., and Piterbarg, L. 1., "me Physical Nature of
"Still Weather Nonuniformitiee' 1n the Ocean's Temperature meld," Win,
1980 (in preee).

Bruce, J. G., and Firing, 2., “unpereture Ileaeurenente in the Upper 10 a With

Modified Expendable Bathythemgraph Probes." J. Gnome” 3138., V01 79, No 2,
pp 4110-4111. 1974.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. 2. Dylan, 0. I. Yefremov, 0. A. noyeleva, N. A. Pantaleyev

the study of internal waves has a direct relationship both to the main-source of vari-
ability and, in all probability, to the main contributor to nizdng processes in

deep ocean layers in the absence of shearing currents. ihe influence of synoptic-
scale eddy i formations on small-scale motion and on internal waves was studied
within the franewrk of an integrated experiment performed in the 'Polymode' program
with the purpose of investigating these formations. Information on vertical fine-
structure and microstructure of the teuperature field 'was used with this goal in
mind. Obviously there are grounds for doing so in the open ocean,outside water
mixing zones of various origins. the researd: was performed in the Sargasso See at

a depth of 1,000 meters. It say be hypothesized that under these conditions, the
finestructure is ”reversible"--that is, it is a consequence of deformation of the
density field by internal waves: on the other hand its “irreversible structure'--

a product of different mixing processes—makes a relatively small contribution (3,4).
'lhus information on finestructure and microstructure was used to appraise the de-
pendence of the energy characteristics of mall-scale turbulence and internal waves
on local hydrological conditions within a zone of eddy formations and in so-called
background conditions (the average hydrological conditions of the 'Polymode"
traverse).

Average hydrological characteristics were obtained from infomtion contained in
density laps of microtraverses sounded at a spacing of 15 nautical miles with
ISM-4 and ISM-S hydrological probes. In order to reveal the influence of

eddy formations on small-scale processes, we analyzed data for a layer extending
fron 280 to 405 meters, exhibiting the greatest deformation of the density field in
cyclonic eddies, and a layer extending from 550 to 800 meters, in which this defor-
mation was minimal. For the purposes of conparison, data obtained in background
conditions within these same layers were analyzed.

The small-scale structure of the temrature field was investigated with the help
of cable-drawn probes which, in terse of their spatial resolution (3 on) and sensi-
tivity (‘10'3‘C), permitted analysis of the finestructure range (loo-1 meters) and
a portion of the microstructure range (100-7 cm) (1).

2
Using the formula P)‘ 'f/(ﬁ') , we computed the spectrum of internal wave prom-
nences in quasi-uniform portions of tenperature profiles (eadtibiting constancy' of

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

temperature gradients dT/ds). It may be noted that the P5 spectrum are approxi-
mated well by the power of the dependence Pukﬁk", where n--3. within a wave
nulber range of 0.1-1.0 cycles/meter. The shortwave portion of the spectrum. 1.0-14
cycles/meter, is approximated by an exponential dependence with power n-1.0-1.8.

'lhe variance of internal wave prominences, computed from the P500 spectrums in a
fixed spectral range, 0.1-1.0 cycles/aster, is distinguished by significant vari-
ability in relation to both depth in background conditions (approadmately 50-fold
variability) and the area occupied by the eddy formation. In general, we can note
that within a zone of eddy formations of the cyclonic and anticyclonic type: the
potential energy density E-oz-F" of the internal wave field exceeck background
values by a factor of 5-10. does not exhibit any sort of law in its distribution
over the area occupied by the eddy. Normalization of the prominence spectrum. per-
formed 2n the basis of m [not further identified) considerations with the approxi-
mation g-N/No- 52(1). where y alt/N and No -l cycle/hour, permits us to appraise the
potential energy nsity of internal waves "of identical origin." The essence of
such normalization entails acquisition of internal wave characteristics with a con-
sideration for changes in vertical scale during propagation in a nonuniformly'
stratified medium. In keeping with this notion, th normalized prominence variance
was computed on the basis of normalized spectrum, 5. It can be noted that
following normalization, the prominence spectrum corresponding to background condi-
tions and the conditions in layers between 280 and 800 neters agreed well with each
other, which is an indication in favor of the wave nature of finestructure. The
normalized variance of prominences. 3%, is about 0.17 m2 in the 290-405 and 550-300
Inter layers: this is sufficiently close to the value obtained with the 64-75 model
in the same spectral range. 0.1-1.0 cycle/aeter-approxinately 0.1 :12. The distri-
bution of 3;. which is proportional to the potential energy density of internal
waves, is i lustrated in Figure l for a cyclonic eddy formation. In the center of
the eddy, 82-03-042 m2, while on its periphery it is approximately 1.0 m2. This
internal wave energy distribution is also typical of an anticyclonic eddy. Thus we
can conclude that the energy of the wave field at the periphery of aneddy is about
10 time-:- greater than the energy level in the center and in background conditions.
meoretical analysis of internal wave propagation in a nonuniform eddy velocity
field can explain the observed increase in energy.

 

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key :
l. wclee/hr
2. cycles/Inter

 

Analysis of the depth distribution of 32 in a broad range of Vyaysyal'-Brent tre-
quencies--l.5-l$ cycles/hr--revealed significant variability: 'me variance of the
prominence: decreases abruptly in layers with large density gradients typical of a
thermocline. Such a significant decrease in internal wave energy cannot be explained
by the (34-75 universal-spectrum model. Cne of. the possibility explanations may be
arise]. of instability in internal waves, having limitation of wave uplitude and
generation of small-scale turbulence as a consequence. ﬁlms we need to examine the
joint distributions of their energy characteristics.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Key :
l . Cycles/hr

Information on finestructure and nicrostructure was used to reveal the dependence
of the energy supply of small-scale turbulence on local hydrological conditions

in the absence of significant vertical shifts in the current velocity field. Hiero-
structure is the smallest-scale variability in the ocean, having a scale on the
order of l mu - 1 meter. turbulence participates in its formation; at this level,
the molecular processes associated with viscosity and diffusion begin to have an
effect.

The position of the boundary of the spectral range corresponding to microstructure
depends on the stratification conditions (particularly on the Vyaysyal'-Brent fre-
quency N) and on the rate of energy supply to small-scale turbulence. '1!) determine
the naxinum vertical scale . corresponding to the bomdary between finestructure
and microstructure, we used" rature dissipation“ spectrumB-—PT.(k)k2, where k is
the vertical wave nuuber (Figure 2).

Defining Lkp to be the external (energy-supplying) scale of turbulence. using an
equation suggested in (2), e-C N3. we determined the rate of influx of
kinetic energy. me 2 values we avenged on the same vertical scale used in
determination of N and 0%. Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of t values in
relation to the surface of aneddy formation within a 290-405 meter layer. cowering
the distributions of 0% and t, we can note that the maximum potential energy on the
periphery of the eddy corresponds to a minimum rate of influx of kinetic energy into
turbulence. The reverse pattern is observed in the center of the eddy. This mutual
relationship between the energy characteristics of internal waves and turbulence is
typical of background conditions. In general, we can conclude on the basis of a
larger quantity of data (Figure 4) that as the density gradient increases, the poten-
tial energy of the wave field decreases and the influx of kinetic energy into small-
scale turbulence rises. 'mis permits the assumption that as density gradients in-
crease. the probability of arisal of local hydrodynamic instability in internal
waves rises, owing to which the energy of internal waves is consumed in excitation
of turbulence.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Dyknan, V. 2., Yefremv, O. 1., and Panteleyev, N. A., "A Sounding Complex for
msearch on Vertical Pinestmcture of the Ocean," in 'Eksperinental'nyye

metody iasledovanlya okeana" [Experimental Methods of Ocean msearch], Sevastopol',
Izd-vo MI, 1978, pp 125-136.

Ozmidov, R. v., "Gorizontal'naya turbulentnost' i turbulentnyy Ohm v okeane"
[Horizontal Turbulence and Turbulent Exchange in the Ocean], Moscow, 'Nauka".
1968, p 105.

Fedorov, K. 11., ”Maya struktuza vod okeana' [Pinestructun of Ocean Waters],
Gidmmeclzdat, Leningrad, 1976.

Gregg: H. C., and Briscoe, M. 6., "Internal Raves, Plnestmcture, Micmstzuctnre
and Mixing in the Ocean," EV. OF EOPR. AND SPACE PHYS., Vol 17, No 7, 1979,
pp 1524-1548.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Transfomtion of the Energy Density of Internal Waves in a Synoptic Eddy
V. 2. Dyhman, A. A. Slepyshev

One of the principal objectives of the Soviet-American 'Polymde" program was that of
studying the local kinematics anddynamics of synoptic eddies. It would obviously
be insufficient to study the large-scale structure and kinematics of aneddy if we
intend to build an adequate physical model of an eddy. We would also need to analyze
the energy interactions of the eddy with movements occurring at different scales.

ation of the "wave background“--lbssby waves: about 2.10”3 w/mz. a reverse flow of
energy, one of. approximately the same order and proloting a quasistable energy state
in the eddy, cones from average currents due to their instability. Batimates also

the sane order as energy expenditures on baby wave generation. But because the
energy of large-scale processes balances itself out for practical purposes, the
energy drain into small-scale phenomena (internal wavesI turbulence) must have funda-
mental significance to clarifying the total local dynamic balance and to estimating
the rate of dissipation of an eddy's kinetic energy.

Experimntal research on the variability of the potential energy of internal waves
within a zone of synoptic eddy formations, performed on the basis of estimates of

periphery of aneddy exceeds, by 1 order of magnitude, the average "background“
values (measured in an area known to be outside the eddy) , and that it once again
decreases tcmard the center of the eddy, approaching the "background' level. with
depth, as the Vyaysyal'-Brent frequency 17 varies from 15 cycles/hr in the seasonal
thermocline to 3 cycles/hr in the coo-1,000 meter layer: the energy or internal
waves also changes within 1 order of magnitude. decreasing with growth of N.

0n the other hand appraisal of the rate of influx of kinetic energy a into small-
scale turbulence (1) would show that t is 5-6 times greater within an eddy than
outside it. As the vyaysyal'-Brent frequency N increases, the rate of energy influx

into turbulence within the seasonal thermocline grows significantly.

me spectral density of the energy of wave trains is defined by an equation for
conservation of the density of wave action (3) . which in the stationary and axi-
symmetrical case transforms into:

54
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

33(3)-3313%(%)-o «v

where 0. m 0- us. VI. ' J-mx... ”($0, Kg- Jx‘ot‘ «horizontal wave number, It and 0--

horisontal components of current velocity, :40 - v/uz-wz, and 0 and O—angular coordi-
nates of the horizontal wave vector and the current velocity vector.

Frequency v is the first integral of equation (l)--that is,

c ~ J.- 5.0)) (2)

the spectrum of the finestructure of the ocean's temperature field is associated
with the spectral energy density by the relationship (3):

in“.

' PAH-J) - NI if . {If “‘99..

(3)

-

Using e as stated in formula (2) and the empirically known slope at the spectrum of
vertical finestructure. ”1'3. we find that elhm'vz.

Let us determine the potential energy density in a "floating" spectral window by
integrating e in relation to all horizontal wave nunbers, and in relation to vertical
wave numbers within the limits or variables 7;, 12 depending on the Vyaysyal'JBrent
frequency N:

L "Vat-o.
"i" i is ’- ‘M‘udﬂ‘t‘ 5.45.“: (4)

where y I’ll/N is the vertical wave number normalized in accordance with the linear
wave theory (6). the choice or values for n andyz--0.l hr/meter and 1.0 hr/meter
respectively-~is made in accordance with the scale range of vertical tinestructure
under examination. E0 is the energy density in the center of the eddy. where uo =0.

uo is the orbital velocity of the eddy. B.‘ 151(515.)'-u%.1ana Ko-l cycle/meter.

According to dependence (4), the energy density in the center of the eddy is close
to its value outside the eddy, in the 'background,‘ where no =30.

He can attempt to associate the observed experimental variability in the rate of
inf) uv. of kinetic energy from internal waves into turbulence within a synoptic eddy
with the mechanism responsible for limiting wave amplitude due to local hydrodynamic
instability. Presence of. this instability is met probable within the layer of
steep density gradients in the thermcline,.where the greatest vertical shifts in
velocity are usually concentrated.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fillips (4) obtained. for a three-layer model of the ocean with a Vyaysyal'-Brent
frequency ”(2) experiencing a sudden change in the thermocline, an equation de-
scribing limitation of the amplitude of a minimm-mode wave by the mechanism of
local shear instability.

It would not be difficult to show. using a VKB approximation, that for a Vyaysya1'-
Brent frequency 1V, changing slowly in the spatial scale of internal waves, the

. . . . ' ‘1 I
stability condition K - N13?) >%- where dI/ds is the local horizontal velocity

gradient in the wave, limits the wave amplitude and, correspondingly, the potential
energy density

c ' -‘..N'..- If...
N a I (”"951743- (5)

If an average current with velocity shift “as exists in the ocean, the condition
limiting the amplitude of internal waves would have the form:

I
ma! . .UftlbﬁXEkﬂ (s)

It is easy to see that as the Vyaysyal'-Brent frequency grows, the right side of
equation (5) decreases.

Reaching the upper limit of energy density (5) with growth of N, the wave train
should lose energy--that is, if the vertical conponent of group velocity is oriented
in the direction of rising N, the energy density of internal waves would decrease
due to the limitation mechanism indicated above. his decrease in energy may be
associated with expenditure of wave energy on turbulence generation. It the vertical
component of the group velocity of the wave train is oriented in the direction of
decreasing N, the upper limit for energy density does not decrease, and the wave
amplitude is not limited by the indicated limitation mechanism--that is, there is

no drainage of energy from the waves.

mus if we differentiate the right side of equation (6) along the trajectory of the
wave train (see (5)) and take the average of the set of wave trains, we can obviously
obtain the energy flux 5 from the internal waves into turbulence:

‘ W' “In. ‘ _ ‘ . '
C" F'iﬁm . Li 5 ﬁ Wiﬂlngu
. .‘IsmgouhuajiL‘, («LL n2")- 3 -"‘-""—u’.‘-"— ‘k~.("2-"§:)'

I.
' 35- :i—..,.- ” “r “or Hm

The numerical values of Khmax 210'2 cycles/meter, mm=l cycle/meter, and
mm =10"3 cycles/meter correspond to real observed maximum and minimum horizontal

and minimum vertical internal wave scales. 'me numerical values showed that, for

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

example, at ”-6 cycles/hr and dN/d8=0.l cycles/hr meter, and in keeping with the
shifts in the current velocity, the energy flux would be cw 10‘7 j/sec. which
corresponds in order of sagnitude to the experimental value of c. The first term
in (7) is the dominant one--that is, energy flux e is proportional to Nz'dN/dl. no

dependence of e on the Vyaysyal'-Brent frequency NR: agrees with the ssperimntal
data (1).

Here are the basic conclusions of the research.

In an adiabatic approximation-«hat is, on the condition that wave action persists
in a shear current, and where the energy density of wave trains was not known, we

obtained the distribution of the energy density of internal waves in a synoptic eddy
(4) , which provides a qualitatively comet picture.

no adiabatic approximation was found to be insufficient for appraisal of the rate
of flux of kinetic energy from internal waves into turbulence, and so we examined
a mechanism limiting wave amplitude through local shear hydrodynamic instability.

me theoretically obtained value for energy flux from internal waves into turbulence
and the dependence of energy flux on the vyaysyal'-Brent frequency J] are consistent
with the experimental data.

BIBLIOGRAPRY

l. Dykman, V. 2., Yefremov,o. 1., Kiseleva, O. A” and Panteleyev, N. 1A.,
"Internal Waves and Turbulence in Synoptic Eddies According to Data on Vertical
Pinestructure," (in this collection).

2. Korotayev, G. K., 'Structure, Dynamics, and mergeties of Synoptic Variability
in the Ocean," MBSKIYE GIDROFIZICHESKIYE ISSI£DOVANIYA, Ukrainian SSR Academy
of Sciences Marine Bydrophysical Institute, Sevastopol', 1980.

3. Korotayev, G. K” '"lhe Spectral Density of the Energy of Wave Trains,”
MORSKIYE GIDROPIZICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA. Ukrainian 558 Academy of Sciences
Marine Hydrophysical Institute, Sevastopol', No 2, 1977, pp 41-47.

4. Fillips, "Dinamika verkhnego sloya okeana" [me Dynamics of the Upper Layer of
the Ocean], tbsoow, Izd-vo Mir, 1969, p 139.

5. Brethcrtone, F. P., and Carret, C. J. 8., "Wavetrains in Inhomogeneous Moving
Media," Pnoc. ROY. 5°C.. Ser. A., Vol 302, No 1471, 1968, pp 529-554.

6. Hayes, 5. 9., Joyce, 1'. M., and Millard, R. C., 'masurement of Vertical
Finestructure in the Sargasso Sea," J. EOPI'I. 31-25., Vol 80, No 3, 1975, pp 314-319.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interpretation of KhV'r Data in a Statistical Analysis of Density Field Variability
A. I. Yeruolenko

STD data picked up by an ”Istok" probe in a quasiregular measurement network were
used to obtain field density figures during hydrological mapping performed in
traverses under the Soviet-American 'Polynode" program conducted in 1977-1978.
Moreover the temperature field was measured with ION? [not further identified] quick-

action probes in a denser network along the path of the vessel. The work was done
in the western Sargasso Sea in a traverse measuring 300x300 nautical miles.

The three-dimensional structure of the density and teuperature fields, deduced from
measurements made in nine surveys (their mmbers in the program were: 2. 3. 5. 8.

9, 10, ll, 15, 16) was subjected to statistical analysis. The surveys correspondingly
took 8, 14, 15, 19. 12, 10, 16 and 8 days--that is, the duration of each survey was
short in conparison with the time of the cosplete “Polymde” program. 'l'he vari-
ability of the analyzed fields during the time of one survey is significantly lower
than their annual variability; therefore in the analysis of the evolution of field
structure, the leasurements of one survey could be treated as applying to the mid-
point of that survey's duration. while observations from all surveys can be inter-
preted as sanples applicable to different mnths of the year. Figure l schemtically
shows the temporal distribution of the midpoints of the time intervals, the days

in which the surveys were conducted and the survey serial numbers.

he nusber of measurements made in each survey vary, with KhV'r sounding data making
up a significant proportion of the sasples. no representation of STD and KhV'r

measurements in the surveys is shown in Table l.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l
____Jr—SWN°- iiiiigilisg
STD measurements 38 83 43 39 88 56 37 75 101
MW masurements 65 76 141 121 177 156 95 110 73

'ibtal neasuremnts 103 159 184 160 265 212 132 185 174

Availability of IOWT temerature data from a denser neasurement network made it
possible to subject the density and temperature fields to statistical matching, and

to get more-precise data for the density field in regions in which s'm measurements
were not made (4).

'Ihe data to be analyzed were eanpled from eight depth horizons, beginning with 0
meters, spaced 100 meters apart. Depth was limited to the 700 meter horizon because
of the absence of KhV'r masurements below 700-750 meters.

Statistical analysis was performed within a field of deviations from the means,
computed in relation to the total measurements in the given horizon. is a conse-
quence regularly occurring discrepancies between STD and 101W data, varying with
depth, were excluded from the analysis (5).

If there are k observations of the relative density field °t at points 31‘, and m
observations of the temperature field t at points int—that is, if fa‘3k) and

fﬂfc’m) are known, then the density field value f0 at point 5, matched with telperature
would be sought in the form of the sum:

mi»-ggxiixmci’.)geniihsgti “’

where 91 and 92 are weight factors determined from the conditions of minimum mean
square error of interpolation by solution of a system of linear algebraic equations:

{Mism- mama-3.1; Eydiilw “2.551. .
with gangsmayoggﬁimaﬁ). (2’

Here, K0 and Kt are spatial correlation functions of fields at and t respectively,
Kot is the mutual spatial correlation function of these fields, and 2, m, n, and k
are the nunber of observations falling within the correlation interval.

1hen the error in determination of the density field would be defined as

“,2, .‘. “do!” E,,(i,x‘-.)K,(i.i',)~ gmﬁilmﬁfn), (3)

where K°(O) is the variance of field at.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Formulas (l)-(3) were also used to recreate the density field on the basis of

measurements made only of this field. In this case the terns containing informa-
tion about the other field were correspondingly absent.

(1)

        

          

i

   
  
 

   

‘I
I.

I!
‘3‘
- ‘9‘ 'I
i‘i-SMS

h‘.
tan-5mm?!
5

III all

ET -l-i
‘ 4n: - '
EﬁI! I“;

x ‘E

gun-5:.
\
I“.

‘1;
‘\ “
I

In
Filo

.1-

‘

mama! '
my

       

I.-

L

     

(3 Menu.

Figure 2. Change in Orientation of Correlation Ellipse: at Different
Horizons 'lhroughout the Year

1?

Key:
1 . anths 3. Scale
2. Surveys

 

. I3 3 .I'II ”I‘éllal
W

Huntlvmm

Figure 3. Behavior of the Standard Deviation in Different Surveys

1 . Surveys
2 . Months

Calculating the spatial correlation functions for the horizons, we analyzed their
dependence on direction a. me conputationa were performed in accordance with
the procedure explained in (3). Functions were calculated for directions of

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0, 30. 45, 60, 90, 120, 135 and 150' relative to the equator for the eight horizons
using data from all surveys (576 functions in all). 'me correlation interval was
determined for each of them, and its length was plotted in each appropriate direction.
the resulting figures are well-approximated by ellipses. which is an indication that
the density fields are nonisotropic. Evolution of the three-dimensional statistical
structure is represented in Figure 2. me ratio between the lesser and greater

seaiaxes of the ellipses varies between l:l.5 and 122. me values of the former
vary within 80-200 km, while those ofthe latter vary from 200 to 500 km.

field "rotates“ in the course of the year. comleting one revolution. The broken
curve in Figure 2, which joins together the ends of the greater semiaxes ofthe
correlation ellipses of each survey. illustrates this fact. Several eddy formations
representing a single mutually associated dynamic system passed through the traverse
(l). Oorparing the orientation of the ellipses with the pattern of motion'of the
eddies (2), it would be easy to note that the mutual location and direction of the
mean vector of eddy travel is fully defined by the nonisotropic nature of the density

field (or the telperature field).

The mutual spatial correlation fmctions of fields at and t exhibit negative correla-
tion with a maxim at zero displace-ant. The greatest statistical correlation can
be seen at distances up to 250-300 km.

When plotting the field density maps at values appearing at the intersections of
a regular measurement network with a spacing of 17 nautical miles, we evaluated
the degree to which these values were iqroved by the addition of UN! data. with

this purpose the results of two calculations-mm made on the basis of STD data
alone and another based on all data-were interpolated back to the observation
points. and the standard deviations were counted. It was revealed as a result
that all maps based on the second calculations were typified by either a smaller

or a coumensurate error in relation to maps based on the first calculations. As an
example Figure 3 shows the typical behavior of the standard deviations of two calcu-
lations for the 400 aster horizon based on data from all surveys (filled circles
correspond to the first calculations while asterisks correspond to the second).
with depth, the difference in the standard deviations decreases.

Thus KhV'r data from a denser measurement network provides a possibility for improving
the accuracy of a density field map through its statistical matching with the temper-
ature field: the obtained results indicate the suitability of a such a procedure.
BIBLIOGRAPRY
l. Bulgakov, N. P.. "A General Description of Synoptic Eddies," in "Disperimen-
tal'nyye issledoveniya po mezhdunarodnoy programs ‘Polimode'” [Experimental
Research in the International "Polymde" Program]. Sevastopol'. 1978, pp 44-54.

2. Grishin, G. A. , and Dotsenko. S. P., ‘Kinenatic Features of Eddy Formations
in the 'Polymde' Traverse," MIGKIYE GIDROPIZICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA,
Sevastopol'. No 2, 1979, pp 158-166.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

4.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

Yormlenko, A. L, Yeayunin, R. Ye., and Solodova, s. 14., "ﬂapping Bottom bite!
on the Crest of the Reykjanea Ridge by the Hethod of majective Analysis,"
mlSKIYE GIDKJPIZIGIESKIYE ISSIBIXWANIYA. Semtopol', lb 5. 1971, pp 216-225.

Koleanikov, A. 6., Yemlenko, A. 1., Nova-010v, A. A” and Mama, I. Ye.,
"A Method for Plotting menial ale-eat Maps for Ocean Areas Insufficiently
Illuminated by momentous." Home GIDNFIZIGIBSKIYB ISSWYA,
Sevastopol', No 3. 1976, pp 5-16.

Plierl. 6., and Rabinson, 3., ”NWT managements of met-ml Gradients in
the IDDB Eddy.“ J. pays. OCEANOGR., v01 7, 1974, pp 300-302.

62

N! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Numerical Models of Synoptic Variability in Delimited kgions
of the Oceans and Seas

V. n. Kamenkovich. V. D. Lsrichev, s. V. xhar'kov

Dynamic modeling of synoptic variability in delimited regions of the seas and
oceans is of interest in regard to both interpreting traverse observations and
developing hydrological forecasting methods for different regions of the oceans
and sees. Several numerical models have been proposed thus far. (he of then will
be described in sections 1 and 2, and numerical experiments with different models
will be subjected to conparative analysis in section 3.

I. Dynamic lbdel

A frictionless guasigeostrophic model is used to describe evolution of synoptic

scale movements within donain D. we grounds for the applicability of such a model
to the movements mder examination are provided. 'me model equations are:

Geostrophic relationships

.9 _1_ l
“”3”“? w u"

quasistatic relationship

9’--§’-’;’-:

eddy equation
o-gv-(IJ+¢})($*+¥”§X
entropy equation
(5*“%*V§’)?'- EgéN-o

'me boundary conditions are:

l) veg - W' fk. on the ocean surface (8-0);

63

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2) wag”; at mean depth 8 in domain a (s--il);

3) the normal velocity ”u is given for the entire lateral boundary:

4) eddy Ad is given for those portions of the lateral boundary where liquid flows
into domain D:

s) '§£5¢*£(‘*W)W-P-

me initial condition is:
The current function 0 is given.

Here axis a: is directed eastward, axis 3; is directed northward, axis a is directed
vertically upward, u. v. v are velocity cosponenta on axes x. y. a, v is the current
function, 9', p' are the density and pressure deviations from equilibrium distribu-
tions, 90 is mean density. fo is the mean of the (briolis parameter f. B-df/cw.

N is the equilibrium distribution of the square of vyaysyal"s frequency. (--
level, hndepth perturbations (relative to mean depth H) , n-external normal to the
lateral boundary. assured to be perpendicular.

2. Difference Approximation

First a barotropic model is examined. ‘lhe spatial resolution of the numerical
Iodel is determined with regard to the-typical horizontal scale of perturbations.
Difference approximation of advective term in the equation for an eddy inside
domain D requires the use of an (Arakava) design with second-order precision, which
in turn requires establishment of the couputational boundary conditions in those
points of the lateral boundary where liquid flows out of domain 3. A brief review
of these conditions and the results of numerical calculations are presented. 'lhe
problem of calculating eddy M in relation to current function u in those areas or
the boundary where liquid flows into domain D is discussed. The derivative with
respect to time, dAdo/dt, within douain D is approximated by the central difference
derivative; the temoral resolution of the model is chosen with regard to the
typical time scales and the stability conditions of the different models. ‘lhese
conditions are derived for a problem involving frosen coefficients in mlimited
and delimited areas: their validity in relation to the initial nonlinear problem
is tested by numerical experiments. Current function 0 is calculated in relation
to a known eddy At directly (by means of a fast tourist transform in relation to
variable y and a trial run in relation to variable x). The test calculations are
presented, demonstrating the advantages and shortcomings of the various difference

approximations of the initial differential problem

For the barocline problem. the difference approrisation in relation to the vertical
is selected in such a fashion that the laws of conservation of total energy, eddy

potentials and snstrophy are satisfied for the differential difference model
(entailing a difference approximation only in relation to r, y, s). moice of the
number of levels in relation to s is determined. for exawle. on the basis of the

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accuracy of the calculations for phase]. velocities of baroclinic tbssby waves

in a real stratified nedium (for exasple in the vicinity of the Polymde traverse).
Inasmuch as the required nuﬂnr of levels is found to be high, the vertical struc-
ture of the difference problen is approinIated by mans of a linear coinination

of a barotropic node and a small hunter of baroclinic nodes. A numerical approxi-
mation is arrived at by colocation. 'me results of nuaerical calculations using
the barocline Iodel and illustrating the effectiveness of the lethod are presented.

3. Forecasting Experiments

'me objective of these experimnts is to determine the possibility for making a
successful forecast depending on the quality of the input data (initial and boundary
conditions. the forecasting interval and the parameters of the numerical design).
In the first attempt, using "ideal” initial and bomdary conditions applied to
test exasples, the parameters of the nunerical design were selected in such a way
that they would ensure effective integration (from the standpoint of accuracy and
the computer melory and tine expenditures) for a period significantly exceeding
the proposed forecasting tine. by 2-5 timer-that is, on the order of many Innths.
Ihen calculations were conducted with inaccurate or incomplete information for the
boundary of the area in order to study the spread of errors from the boundaries
into the area of the forecast. For examle the values for the eddy or the current
function at the boundary did not change throughout the entire forecasting period,
which corresponds to the case where only the initial data are known. In this case
the time of a satisfactory forecast did not exceed 2 weeks. Then cases were
exanined in which data were provided for only part of the boundary or a part of
the boundary that was variable with respect to tine, or in which boundary informa-
tion was fed in periodically. 'me relative inportance of information on different
physical factors was evaluated in cases such as, for examle. a current fmction
that is imprecise in conparison with the eddy fmction. Errors resulting from in-
accurate initial information were oospared with errors due to imprecise bomdary
conditions.

65

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Simulation of the lpper Qaasi-mifors Layer
'1'. R. Kil‘natov, S. N. Protasov

l. A large number of mathematical models, reviewed in (1,4), describing vertical
mixing in the upper layer of the ocean have recently appeared. mese models are
conditionally divided into two types (3) depending on the approach taker-integral
or differential. The main difficulty in building integral mdels lies in adequate
description of the production and dissipation of turbulent energy in a quasi-uniform
layer. Differential models, in which mixing is described within the framework of
the seni-espirical theory of turbulence, are hard to run, and they provide too ouch
detail to the vertical structure of the guasi-miforn layer. considering that the
characteristics are computed at a synoptic tine scale. m. nodal of guasi-unifors
layer evolution suggested below is based on both approaches, which makes it possible
to avoid both the difficulties of parametrization of energy production and dissipa-
tion and solution of the equation for turbulent energy in a seni-espirical approxi-
nation.

2. The following assuuptions are made in building the model: 1) at the lower
boundary of the quasi-uniform layer, s -h, Richardson's umber attains its critical
value, and the following condition must be satisfied:

«99' a #6 -°: . w

2) mixing within the quasi-uniform layer may be described by means of the turbulent
exchange factor K in the following fashion:

“-13.5: . (2)

3) below the quasi-uniform layer, drifting currents attenuate, such that ﬁ-O at
8-72. Here, u--drift velocity vector, Lg Q’nvork done by buoyancy forces, v."
dynamic velocity, d--constant. 'me first assuwtion defines the thickness of the
quasi-uniform layer, h: the second determines vertical turbulent exchange; the
third is the boundary condition for the lower boundary of the quasi-uniform layer.
'lhese assusptions are the product of the differential model (3).

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oil-1C1“. USE ONLY

Using (1) and (2) and performing silple transformations (2). the essence of which
is similar to calculations associated with integral models (5). to calculate the
thickness and tenperature T of the quasi-uniform layer, we get

"ﬂ'afnﬂ' 1 M .(a)."-

m1.“ - HWW ‘ “'1" ‘0 m

where a #3 I. , Lr-Monin-Obukhov length scale. L2-thiclmess of the planetary

boundary layer. Quheat flux to the ocean surface, normalized in relation to
density and heat content. 6T--the teaperature gradient in the thermocline, 3--
unit function of the argument dh/dt. nquations (3)44) were obtained without regard

to advection, salinity and penetrating radiation. me model is built and described
in detail in (2).

Equation system (3)-(4) has clear physical meaning: Equation (3) describes the
heat balance in the quasi-uniform layer while (4) describes deepening of the quasi-
uniform layer as a result of wind-caused mixing (the first term on the right side)
and owing to convection (the second term) (0%). A general description of mdel

(3)-(4) taking account of advection, penetrating radiation and salinity is given
in (2).

3. let us examine some consequences of system (3)-(4). In the time of sun'aer
heating Q>0. and at the equator the thickness of the quasi-uniform layer is propor-
tional to the Honin-Cbukhov length scale, h= (2/d)L1, inasmuch as a-o. For moderate
latitudes, expanding (4) into a series and expressing the thickness of the quasi:

uniform layer'explicitly we get T-‘ialhlli'u—{cﬂli‘l 1, , where f is the

Coriolis parameter: this formula is similar. in term of the dependence of the
variables contained within it, to that derived from experimental data under the
same conditions (1), which confirms the correctness of the hypothesis subodied
within the model. the value of proportionality constant d, which is on the order
of 0.05, agrees with the values given in (3). Thus at the equator. h is propor-
tional to the Monin-Cbukhov length scale, as we move toward higher latitudes the

Coriolis parameter exerts an increasingly greater influence. and h becomes lore
proportional to the thickness of the planetary bomdary layer.

4. Numerical experiments were conducted and natural oouparisons were made in order
to test the mdel. Calculation of the seasonal trend of the quasi-uniform layer's
evolution on the basis of weather station data showed (2) that the model accurately
describes the behavior of the quasi-uniform layer. me following values were ob-
tained for the coefficient of vertical turbulent exchange in the quasi-uniform
layer: KNlozaaZ/sec in moderate latitudes in summer. K~103auzlsec in moderate
latitudes in winter, and KNIO3an/sec in lower latitudes , changing little throughout
the year.

67

MOMGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

The thickness of the quasi-uniform layer was calculated with a consideration for

the contribution made by salinity to the buoyancy flov in the warning period (July in
the Northern Hemisphere and January in the Southern hemisphere) in different water
basins of the World Ocean. 'me initial data covering a 20'X20‘ grid were taken from
atlases. 'lhe calculation results for the Pacific Ocean are shown in the figure. in
which h is given in meters. The calculations show that the agreement is satisfactory,
with the exception of the equatorial zone. for which the calculations produce an In
value about five times greater than that observed. A possible reason tor this is
apparently that upwelling is observed in the equatorial region) if we consider
vertical velocity 5' in our calculations of the thickness of the quasi-uniforu layer.
then we would get the following for the equator (4):

3
Va (5)
1‘ . W3 . _
I 3 -
Here, n is the buoyancy flow and 69/9 is the relative deviation of density. Using
equation (5), we find that if h~1oo meters at the equator, then Ir-s-io-“cn/sec.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Kalatskiy, V. 1., "Hodelirovaniye vertikal'noy teruicheskoy struktury

deyatel'nogo sloya okeana" [Simulation of the Vertical ‘l'hernostructure of

the Ocean's Active Layer], Leningrad, Gidroneteoisdat. 1978.

2. Kil'aatov. '1‘. 8.. and Protasov, s. N., "a lbdel for Calculating the Thickness
of the Ocean's Quasi-(hiforn Layer,’ HETEOROIDGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA, No 3, 1980,

pp 59-64 .

3. Harchuk, G. 1.. Kochergin. V. P., Klimt, v. 1.. and Sukhormcov, V. A“ I‘Mathew
natical Simulation of Seasonal Variability of the Ocean's mbulent Surface Layer.“
IZV. AN SSSR. PIZIKA AMSPBH I OKBANA, Vol 14, No 9, 1978. pp 945-955.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. 'Modelimvanlye 1 prognoz verkhnikh sloyev okem" [simhtion and Forecasting

of the Ocean's Upper Layers], collection of articles edited by Ye. L. Inns,
Gidroneteolzdat, 1979.

5. Runs, 2. 8., end mrner, Y. 5., “A Che-Dimensional Model of the Seasonal
momenta,” TELLUS' vol 19, No l, 1967, pp 88-108.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

current and Average Three-Dimensional Spectrum of
Synoptic Variability of a Current Field. According to 'Polynode" Data

x. V. Konyayev, K. D. Sabinin

'me two typical arrangements of current velocity vectors in the traverse have
specific three-dimensional spectruns. In the period from 7 to 2‘) April 1918 there
was an eddy in the southeastern sector of the traverse with current velocities

up to 40 cu/sec. In this period the three-dimensional spectrum of the current
field had the torn of a half circle in the western bearing sector (Figure 1).

me three-dimensional spectrum for clearly pronounced stream currents, which under-
went slow deforlation in the period from 28 February to 20 March 1978. appears as
a narrow band along the current axis (Figure l) (l).

(l) .

 

Figure l. Arrangement of current Velocity Vectors and the Corresponding
“tree-Dimensional Current Field Spectrum
Key:
1. Cum/sec 2. cycles/kn

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USEONLY

 

Figure 2. Cmuulative 'mree-ninensional Spectrum of the current Field at
the 700 and 1.400 Meter Horizons: Isolines represent 20, 40,
60, 80 and 95 percent of Mn.

when the three-dimensional spectrum are averaged for the entire period of observa-
tion, characteristics produced by selective variability disappear. tor fluctuations
with an observed period of 85 days, to which the main peak of the tine spectrum

corresponds, the three-dinensional spectru- takes the tor- of a narrow band, and its

parameters agree with those of node one baroclinic mssby waves. For ﬂuctuations
within observed period of 51 days, to which the second highest peak of the tine

spectrum corresponds. the three-diunsional spectrm contains two peaks that prosote
formation of. tightly packed, round eddies in space. The fluctuations are barotropic
nossby waves.

'me cumulative three-dinnsional spectrum (stunted for all temoral frequencies)
has the form or a narrow band at the 700 meter horizon (quasi-flat baroclinic waves
dominate), while at the 1,400 meter horizon it is somwhet diffuse along its nein
axis (the role of barotropic waves traveling at an angle to one another grows).

BIBLIMRAPHY

l. Kort, V. 6., "me Polynode International Large-Scale Oceanic Experiment,’
OKEANOIDGIGIESKIYE ISSLEIDVANIYA, Sov. radio. No 30, 1979. '

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A nodal of the Dynamics of an Isolated Synoptic Eddy
G. K. Korotayev

Analysis of observations made during the "Polynods" experiunt shows that the
ocean's synoptic variability manifests itself in two fornsnas intensive eddies
occupying 30-40 percent of the ocean surface and as a wave background. was latter
is formed mainly out of mssby waves generated by traveling eddies. The relatively
sparse distribution of eddies over the ocean surface serves as the grounds for
building models of isolated eddies. Observations show that eddies are highly
nonlinear, that they exist in quasi-equilibrium state and that they generate

lbssby waves--that is, by analyzing real data we can fomlate the principal criteria
whid: a mdel of the dynamics of intensive eddies lust satisfy. An eddy is hence-
forth defined as a certain enclosed area-~a core-"within which a vorticity of the
same sign is initially concentrated (for the sake of concreteness, we will examine

a cyclonic eddy). and an entrainment zone surrounding the core, within the limits
of which particles of fluid are brought into action on trajectories aromd the

core. The size and shape of the entrainment zone changes as the eddy travels in
View of the nonstationary nature of the process.

Motion within the entrainment zone and outside it is described in different ways
(1). within the limits of the entrainment zone, the following equation is satisfied:

'AVopw-JWoESWSM I '- . (1)

Outside the entrainment zone, notion is described by a couplets equation for conser-
vation of the eddy, while at its boundary, 2 -R(0,t) (7 and 8 are polar coordinates
with their origin at the center of the eddy), we imose the conditions of ”splicing"
of two types of motion. used in many works devoted to research on eddy notions (2) z

a 2. mo WWW-«mom, [gr/.3.

and the condition that the current velocity tune to zero at the critical point:
at z-Ru-{Zh 3.3.W.w I -

where d is the angle between the direction of eddy travel and axis x.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9, 4
Next we reduce the equation to its dimensionless form, selecting W as the
lengthscale and W as the time scale, and we seek their solutions in the

form of series in relation to parameter 15172, where 17 >91 is dimensionless
shifting of the eddy along the meridian. when this solution method is enployed, we
encounter an additional difficulty associated with the nonunifornity of expansions
in the vicinity of the coordinate origin when the values of variables are large.

in view of this. to arrive at a uniformly suitable solution, we use the method of
uniting asylptotic expansions.

'Ihe analysis shows that the structure of an eddy-em configuration and the distri-
bution of velocities--is determined locally for the most part, without significant
influence coming from distant areas. At the sane time. the "external' area is signi-
ficant from the standpoint of the eddy's kinematics and energetics. ‘me equation
used to find the main approximation: for the external area is written in the form:

.uga‘i'- vL‘gﬂchls-(fo- 'VﬁﬂWﬂsw, , ‘( 2)

where 1" is the total intensity of the eddy. We can see that in the “external“ area,
the solution is a superimsition of quasi-stationary lbssby waves.

By uniting the solutions for the external and the internal areas. we get a uniformly
suitable equation for the current function. men. to coupute the forces acting on
the eddy from the surrounding fluid, we derive a formula associating pressure with
the velocity field, equivalent to the Cauchy integral for potential notion of a fluid.
Forces acting on an eddy have the following form

X" L52". QN wviosw‘ L’E l(8ﬂf)""‘ V .

.asﬂ’ [2:1mé)T (4.w)x(;ln§)]ll

V131“? V“ 19.5.“. ‘Sj «Masada- '
. gﬂpqug) (uWNW-ﬂl‘l '

(.3)

The first terms on the right sides of the formulas represent that part of pressure

which coupensates exactly for the mean Coriolis force acting on the eddy. This is
a reflection of the well known fact that when an incoupressible fluid is stbjected

to two-dimensional notion, the Coriolis force can only cause redistribution of
pressure. The weaning of the second terms on the right sides of formias (3)
becomes clear when we note that circulation of Velocity along the boundary of the

entrainment zone is equal to $5111. merefore these terms represent Zhukovskiy

component forces acting upon a traveling volume of rotating fluid. 'me third cospo-
nents are an addition to the Zhukovskiy force associated with presence of waveform

movements in the fluid.

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY

the energy flux elicited by lbssby waves was calculated in order to clarify the
meaning behind the last terms of expressions (3). we iind that I. -xu-~(v .
Consequently the last terms in formulae (3) represent the force of wave resistance
experienced by the eddy as it generates mssby waves.

Thus far we have not imposed any sort of limitations on the eddy's rate of travel-
that is, for practical purposes we have solved the somewhat more-general problem of
an eddy saving in a prescribed way, and we have calculated the pressures acting on
the eddy. in order to get the equation for eddy mvement we would need to write out
the condition under which forces operating on the eddy would be balanced. we should
note that in this asymptotic case, as follows from all of the previous discussion,
the force of inertia is low and the mtion equation is found as a quasistatic
approximation, in which the Coriolis force acting upon the eddy is balanced by
pressure forces.

Integrating the notion equation in relation to the area of the entrainment zone,
we get

I... 3:" .3...
-;_’..’.VIX --3-—u' a, y

and consequently, as we had expected, the left side of the equations takes account
of the average Coriolis force acting on the eddy, which is cospentated exactly by
pressure. Poreover an additional term appears in the left side of the second

equation, associated with change in the Coriolis force in the meridional direction

(lbssby, 1948) .

The last formalas provide a couplets description of the kinematics of the eddy
formation in the asymptotic conditions examined here. mat these conditions exist
is established by research, which reveals that for barotropic mvements, these

conditions are such that the vortex saves predominantly in a westerly direction
with constantly diminishing velocity, and with a small northern cyclone cement.
The dynamics of an intensive barotropic eddy are determined by the balance of three
principal forces: forces acting in the meridional direction and brouglt about by
variability of the Coriolis parameter, Zhukovskiy's force acting on the forward-
traveling volume of rotating fluid, and the force of wave resistance. a baroclinic
eddy has the form of a core--a volume of ,fluid within which potential vorticity of
the same sign is concentrated. within the limits of the entrainment zone, which is
now a volum delimited by the ocean surface and a certain surface s-h(:c,y,t), the

following equation is satisfied (1) :
twig ﬁgw-ww m

where w is the initial vorticity distribution. Given s-h(z,y,t), the following
condition is inposed on the boundary of the entrainment zone:

locum/4“,“, [ﬁlm , (s)

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL (SE ONLY

Switching to dimensionless variables and appraising the order of the functions and
the variables, we find that on the condition that the current function attenuates
into infinity, in its lower approximation it is identically equal-to zero. and
within the limits of the entrainment zone it is described by the equation:

avoﬁﬁrgf'uL-ii - ' (6)

and the boundary conditions: for s-h(z,y,t), 0-0. «lax-0: for s-o, dw/ds-O.

A cosparison of the sinplest solution of this equation system and observations (3)
revealed that the proposed mdel for the structure of an eddy is satisfactory, and
consequently the structure of a baroclinic eddy is determined locally for the most
part.

Couputation of the kinematics and dynamics of an eddy involves calculation of the
principal forces acting on it. Hith this purpose we calculate the next approxima-
tion of the expanded solution for the initial equation system. As in the barotropic
case, the expanded solution is nonmiform, and it is found by the method of united
asymptotic expansions. In this case the “internal" solution does not accent for
the B-effect while the "external“ solution has the form of superimposed baroclinic
and barotropic mssby waves generated by a loving point eddy. Expressing pressure
at the boundary of the entrainment tone by the current function of the I'internal"
solution, we calculate zhukovskiy's force. Oomuting energy flux I , which is asso-

ciated with the wave field induced by the eddy. we find that the force of wave
resistance is R-I/h’, where h’ is the eddy's rate of movement. 'naen. writing the

quasistatic balance of the resultant of the Coriolis force, Zhukovskiy's force and
the wave resistance force. we get the lotion equation for the eddy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Korotayev, G. K., “Structure. Dynamics and Energetics of the Ocean's Synoptic
Variability.‘ Preprint No 'I, Sevastopol', Izd-vo ml AN USSR. 1980, pp 5-63.

2. Lavrent'yev, H. 5.. and Shabat. a. V., I'li'noblemy gidrodinamiki i ikh
matematicheskiye modeli" [Hydrodynamics Problems and heir Mathematical lbdelsl.
Hoscou, “Nsuka'. 1973. pp 187-199.

3. Puglister, F. C., ”Cyclonic Rings Formed by the Gulf Stream 1965-1966.' in
“Studies in Physical Oceanography." vol 1. Gordon and Breach, 1970, pp 137-168.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Experimental Research on Synoptic Eddies in the Open Ocean
H. N. Xomlyakov

Eddies in western stream-type border currents (Gulf Stream, Kuroshio. East Australian),
formed by meanders cut off from these currents. were well known in the 1950's. As
far as the rest of the ocean is concerned, the true structure, intensity and degree
of spread of synoptic-scale moveaents in the ocean remained practically unclari .‘ied
until the 1970‘s, though the first indications of the existence, in certain

areas of the open ocean, of strong, deep, unstationary currents with a period on

the order of several weeks or months were discovered earlier-in observations made by
Dsh. Svallou and G. Stomel near the Bermuda Islands, by the Soviet "Polygon-67"
expedition in the Arabian Sea, and some other observations.

we first exhaustive direct measurement of an eddy in the open ocean was made during
the Soviet "Polygon-70" expedition in the Atlantic Ocean. The parameters of the
eddy were reliably determined, and the numerical characteristics of its nation and
evolution and its intensity were estimated. It was demstrated that the parameters

of the eddy and its motion are described well by sodels of baroclinic lbssby waves.
Finally, indications that eddy nation is generated by baroclinic instability of a

large-scale current were obtained.

The principal results of the American mus-1 experiment (1973, Sargasso Sea) were
found to be close to the results of “Polygon-70.“ It was also shown that synoptic-
scale motions encompass the sea's entire water colum. Measurements of deep-water
currents with neutral-buoyancy floats revealed that the field of synoptic currents
is noticeably stochastic and that advective effects are well expressed in this field.

me tremendous volume of observations made during the Soviet part of the "murmur"
experiment (Sargasso Sea, 1977-1978) made it possible to plot a unique series of
synoptic maps of the currents and subject the data to thorough statistical treatment.
The high energy level of synoptic currents in the 1’01.me region was responsible
for the high intensity of nonlinear effects; this relationship expressed itself, in
particular, in periodic formation, within the study area, of strong quasi-isolated
eddies and streams separated by areas of very weak currents. Several cases of in-
tense interaction both between individual strong eddies and streams and between
strong eddies and adjacent areas of weak currents were analysed. Several cases were
recorded in which very abrupt velocity fronts underwent formation in the main therm-
cline; a clear mutual relationship between temrature fronts in the upper layer of
the ocean and strong eddies was also revealed. Density mapping of the research

76

FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

ares revealed a relatively small but very intense isolated eddy traveling across
the POLYmDE area. Its upper part consist of water carried into the research
area from the southeastern part of the main circulation of the North Atlantic.

Numerous experimental studies conducted in recent years have shown that synoptic
eddies are the principal tors: or motion of ocean waters practically throughout all
of the world Ocean. In regions remote from the western border currents, the energy
of eddies is approximately proportional to the energy of large-scale currents.
which argues in favor of the hypothesis that baroclinic instability of large-scale
currents is the principal mechanism or eddy generation. In regions adjacent to the
western border currents, the principal source of energy possessed by eddies in the
open ocean is, apparently. Rossby waves generated by border currents and frontal

eddies created by them.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pree lbssby Haves as a Factor Responsible for Fluctuation of
SynoptirScale Oceanological Characteristics (Using the Kuroshio
and Oyashio Water System as an Bxamle)

In K. Kramareva

Investigation of changes in the state of the World Ocean having a typical time scale
of 1-10 years has great significance to climate and weather forecasting. 'lheoreti-
cally grounded forecasts extending over such long periods are practically absent
todsy, even though it is precisely upon their quality that the planning and organiza-
tion of the work of many national economic sectors depend.

Assessment of the role played by fluctuations in hydrometeorological characteristics
and of the contribution these fluctuations make to the overall variability of the

ocean is a prerequisite of clarifying the physical mechanisms of these fluctuations.

An analysis of observations has permitted researchers to formulate a meter of
hypotheses, ones which are basically qualitative in nature and which are not always
obviously valid. If we are to create theoretical uodels of large-scale fluctuations
in oceanologioal fields. mdels havingagoodpbysical basis md eadaibiting satisfactory
agreement with natural processes, first of all it would be most important to analyse
and test out the hypotheses published in the literature. Moreover we would need to
thoroughly study nonlinear processes in the ocean. Soviet and foreign researchers
have now persuasively demnstrated that a certain part of the overall variability of
thermal and circulation processes in the ocean proceed under the influence of forces
having a planetary scale, once playing an isportant role in the formation of the
ocean's hydrological climate.

Measurements made of oceanic currents and the density and tesperature fields and
a nusber of other oceanographic characteristics associated with these currents indicate

significant fluctuations in the latter within a broad range of typical temporal and
spatial scales. A large number of theoretical works have recently been published on

physical phenomena eliciting these fluctuations. It is believed that one of the

main causes is planetary waves produced by meridional change in the vertical coupo'v
nent of the earth's angular velocity of rotation (or lbssby waves). Owing to low
group velocity and. in many cases, weak dispersion, they are among the mast nonlinear
sovements in the ocean. But a nonlinear theory of such waves has not been developed.
today. the study of the dynamics and kinematics of lbssby waves is one of the achieve-
ments of theoretical oceanology. hsearch on Ibesby waves performed thus far has
been devoted nainly to their kinematics and dynamics with a consideration for a
nonstationary wind system, morphometric features of the water basin and vertical

density stratification.

78

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

however, absence of models accounting for horizontal nonmiformities in the density
field, the stationary current velocity field. turbulent exchmge and the viscosity
of the mdium under analysis is a serious limitation on experimentation and applica-
tion of the existing theory to calculation of the parameters of Mssby waves.

In this connection we made it our objective to study the influence of density
stratification. the stationary current velocity field and turbulent exchange on
the dynamics of free lbssby waves viewed as one of the factors responsible for
fluctuation of oceanological characteristics on a synoptic scale. Experimental
data were used as a basis for an attemt to reveal tree Maby waves in the north-
western Pacific (using the Kuroshio and Oyashio water systems as an examle) and to
analyze their relationship to fluctuations in the water surface temperature field.
A three-dimensional hydrodynamic model of the following form was laid at the basis
of the study: .

{g-sc.-tg§.¢m.ﬁ(gﬁ) :3.
it '!“--%.~3§ W“ £043?) ' (3,
555-93 - ' (a)
3'“%"%TV% "$.‘9'%.':i('§) (5).

 

vﬁéﬂa—r-

where “‘N’WA‘). V' “VJ-'4‘). V'Vfim',‘) --currsnt velocity couponents. "Widen --

hydrodynamic pressure, p -o(r,y,s,t)--water density, u -const--coe£!icient of
kinematic turbulent viscosity, w-coefticient of vertical turbulent exchange,
b-~ener9y of turbulent pulsation, c--universal constant. x,y,s--coordinates, t--time.

We use the method of small perturbations and assume that the steady state of system
(l)-(6) satisfies these conditions: 1) motion is geostrophic, 2) the continuity
equation is equal to zero, 3) the isopycnicity equation and the meridional component

of the velocity of the main current are equal to zero.
9

In this case system (l)-(6) would assume the form:
.%-I.,-..t6£;.wm.fi(iggi) ' (7)
V%.§¢..%g§owuoﬂ-(vﬂ) ,(8)
g _ .3- (9)
33.31;: . a“. .o (lo)

3% . as; .Ggguigg .utﬁwgm'ﬁm (n)

d‘ .

.i __
V ‘ 3a ([2)

3'6

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Variables with a prime sylbol correspond .to the system's perturbed state while
those without a prime symbol correspond to a steady state. 'lhe prime syubols will
be dropped in the subsequent solution of equation system I'D-(12).

we solve system (6)-(12) in the presence of the following boundary and initial

conditions:
1.04. m-O [.A(i.3‘£)-l.§“ﬁ 0":0 (13)
rot. v-O [-A(-‘-—5—,— 3.." ‘ 1.9.1:)“ M .o (m
' i
when My — (JAY-(G5?

an. 1’ 3.: T .
2-0 W'--§% 1?"?‘9' V 0 (15)

where 2'3, Ty are, correspondingly, the zonal and meridional wind pressure;
vim-"WW3%)‘tiﬁli-Atti5‘i353” (w

Solving equation system (6)-(12), we get dispersion relationships that permit us
to determine formulas by which to comte tbssby wavelength L. wave frequency a,
phasal velocity c and the coefficient of attenuation (growth) y:

l '”[2,'(‘"5"" ’5 592‘ HIDDJY‘ (17)

‘2‘. .C‘I‘I-l_ .9"! '0)
6 (1% 2-3—3— sc t far) a
c- Wtu'w’ ~99 ~9s£$9:‘)]"" m,

r- Eﬁti'ﬁ'ﬁWI‘ ' ‘3”

The calculations based on formulas (l7)-(20) are analyzed for dynamically stable.
mstable and attenuating wave processes.

'lhe goal of this analysis is to study the nechanism responsible for formation of
free mssby wayes. and their stability in dynamic zones of the region under analysis.
Special attention is turned in the work to revealing the role of lbssby waves as'

a factor responsible for fluctuation of oceanological characteristics in the ocean.

and particularly the water surface temerature field.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'me experimental data were obtained from naps showing the distribution of water
temperature over the ocean surface in the Kuroshio and Oyashio water system

(10°N. Lam-43° N. Lat” 120'8. Inng.-150°B. 10119.). 'lhe entire area was divided
into points, at each of which temporal series were created and subjected to spectral
analysis. The research revealed that the spectrum of oscillations in the water

surface tenperature field differ from one another in relation to their intensity
and the particular energy-contributing zones involved.

Investigation of the three-dinensional structure of fluctuations in the water
surface tenperature field was based on isophase naps, which permitted us to calculate
experimental phasal velocities and the lengths of tenerature waves, and to compare
them with the theoretical phasal velocities and lbssby wavelengths. Investigation
of isophase naps allow us to determine the tonal orientation of temerature waves

in the central part of the region. in the northeastern branch of the Kuroshio

water system. in the region of water mixing and in the area of subtropical conver-
gence. '

Consistency between theoretical and experimental results was observed in the vicinity
of the main Kuroshio current and in the subtropical convergence and water mixing
zones. In other regions we observed differences: me phasal velocities of mssby
waves were 20-50 cut/sec lower than those of temerature waves.

The agreement between the principal characteristics of temperature waves and the

characteristics of mssby waves in relation to magnitude and orientation indicates

that fluctuations in the ocean's water surface telperature field are caused by
lbssby waves.

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Modeling the Hater ‘Deuperature of the Baltic Sea
1. Kullas, R. 'raIsalu

l . Introduction

In term of thermal conditions. the Baltic Sea is divided into two regions. The
first region includes the Gulf of Riga. the Gulf of Bothnia, the eastern part of
the Gilf of Finland and the coastal zone of the open Baltic. its second region

enbraces the open Baltic and the western part of the Gulf of Finland.

In the first region, winter convective mixing proceeds to the bottom, while in
sumr the tenperature drops nonotonously below the uniform layer and the bottom
tenperature is basically the product of an upward heat flux.

In the second region, winter convective mixing proceeds only to a constant halocline.
In sinner, the teuperaturs below the uniﬁorl layer first drops and then grows. ‘I'he
bottom teuperature is basically the product of an advective heat flux through the
Danish straits.

mermal processes occurring in water basins have been studied for a long period of
time by many authors. in recent years two reviews were published on this subject
(2,12), and therefore there is no need to discuss these works in detail here. We
will simply note that all, without exception, discuss water basins in which the
temperature decreases with depth--that is, areas resedaling the first region indi-
cated above. to permit cosparison of the development of temperature in the two
different regions, Figure 1A shows the tomoral distribution of temeraturws in

the vicinity of the Bornholn trench, and Figure 13 shows this distribution for the
Gulf of Bothnia.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A .I.l.l.n.!.!l.n.l.B..X-l-n.
a z 2 new“ «Mano;

WM” Q

           
   
 
   

  

8 ,:.[.a.n.1.n.1.u.B.I-n-l‘

1‘ D It“ QBIOSQ

~c 1.1.l.n.!-a.a.a.g.x.u.a.
(p 1 : yum“ n «neei
i

 
  
       

Figure 7. Temperature Distribution: Auto: the aomboln trench (10):

Bufor the Gulf of Bothnia (ll); Cutor the Bornholn trench,
by computation.

2 . The Equation

The large-scale temerature structure of water basin: is usually described by a
semi-empirical equation for turbulent diffusion of heat. 'me experience of numeri-
cal modeling of themohaline processes in the Baltic (4.8) snowed that it would be
expedient to solve this equation in coordinate system '1- l/"(I-s)‘: in such a case
the equation would have the following form: ‘ "

g .u"[av,.(am)-/m(m) 9 ﬂlw- ' (n

ﬂere, T--teuperature. Hudepth, §--horizontal velocity vector, w-coefticient of
horizontal turbulent diffusion, dthnhorizontal divergence, A--Laplace horizontal,

51.(..u,g),.u{m«<sat%.%%>-
~1“"[(99"(§)‘] H '

82a

FOIOFFICIALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kuooefficient of vertical turbulent diffusion, unvertical velocity. Adding to

equation (1) the equations for motion. continuity. state and salt diffusion, we get
a system for which a numerical solution was found in (4.8).

Analysis of mnerical experiments showed that the proposed approach satisfactorily
describes the thermostructure of the first region. and it is very unsatisfactory
for the second region.

3. Self-Modeling

me self-modeling profile of the temperature of the ocean's active layer was first
used by Kitaygorodskiy and Miropol'skiy (3). Later on, self-nodeling profiles of
tenperature and salinity were used in many other works as well (1.2.6.9). 'me self-
mdeling temperature profile for the Baltic Sea was first discussed in (7). In
contrast to the ocean. the Baltic Sea‘s self-modeling temperature profile enbraoes
the entire depth of fluid stratification.

When we account for the self-mdeling profile. the vertical turperature structure
in the Baltic Sea is described as follows:

0 c 12h 14.03.!)

u an t-um).momma-Rm] w
l >" t‘ t.(l.).t)

Here h--thick.ness of the upper uniform layer, Tr-surface tenacrature, Tr-bottom
temperature. 0,: (E) --self-modeling profile.

Tn summer. 0;:(0 has the following form
a) in the first region

e.(g)-w-zr~_vss" " (3-)

b) in the second region

0(1)- 9‘- arm? ~45!" (as)

In winter, temperature is uniform in the first region while in the second region
0“,) has the form:

Mo- 4:: “ﬁr-sss‘uas‘ . «w

'Z'ne distribution of 0(() in different seasons and in different regions is shown in
Figure 2. mts indicate the distribution of o-[n-TWOr‘e) with respect to C for

computed temperature values borrowec‘ from (4). his shows that the procedure
suggested in (4.8) describes the vertical temperature structure in the first region

well.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3 ' .

Figure 2. Self-mung Mature Profiles in the Baltic Sea

4. Solution of Equation (1) Using the Self-mdeling Profile

we will solve equation (1') by the decomposition method (5). In the first step in
time. we solve the equacion

 

f“‘~ ?‘ '. u-‘[a.,(m)-,a(m]"”-o. (0.

At

and in the second step

T“‘-T"* _. a” -
J . N 7!- o' (6)

Assuming that the telperature of the bottom layer is the product of advective
influx-~that is, that it is described by equation (4), we lay write:

Next, integrating (S) with respect to n, from 0 to 1 using (2) and (8), we arrive
at the expression

. .
13"". (dot... ‘1‘ ‘M, - at:“y(4-a), ‘6,

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where qr-heat flux to the surface of. the sea. R- (141/8).

Following (12), we determined the thickness of the uniform layer h using the ﬂormila:

a . Av: /h I ' $.30
_ h I ‘W‘ ‘ g
T? Av‘lh _. u, ,h,‘ ”.0 (7)

Here. N--Vyaysyal'-Brent frequency, ”P-GYIMIiC velocity, g--gravity. LEAST-coast.
Possessing values for T3, T3 and h at tile t+1, we can establish the tespereture
profile for time t +1 using formula (2). 'me proposed algorithm was used to deter-

mine water teuperature in the Open Baltic. M an exanple Figure 1c shows the distri-
bution of the comuted teaperature for the Bornhols trench.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Barenblat, c. I. , "Self-bbdeling o: 'Ielpereture and Salinity Metributims 'in
the Upper 1hermoc11ne," 12V. AN 5883, PRO, Vol 14, No 11, 1978.

2. Kalatskiyﬂ. 1.. "Modelirovaniye vertiksl'noy tsrnicheskoy struktury deyatel'nogo
sloya okeana" [Modeling the Vertical 'Iheruostructure o! the Ocean's Active
Layer], Leningrad, Gidzoneteoizdat, 1978.

3. Kitaygorodskiy, s. A., and Hiropol'skiy, Yu. 2., ”the theory of the Ocean's
Active Layer,“ IZV. AN SSSR, FAO, V01 6. No 2, 1970.

4. Kullas, '1'. 3., and Tamalu. R. 8.. “A Predictive m1 for the Baltic Sea and
Its Numerical Solution,“ VODNYYE ESURSY, No l, 1979.

5. Marchuk, G. 1., "Hetody vychislitel'noy nateoatiki" [me Methods of Couputer
Mathematics], Novosibirsk. Nauka, 1973.

6. Reshetove, o. v.,and chalikov. D. v., "me miversal Structure of the Ocean's
Active Layer,“ OKZANOIDGIYA, Vol 17, Rh 5. 1977.

7. Tansalu, R. 3., "Modelirovaniye dinsniki i struktury vod Baltiyskogo sorya"
[Modeling the Dynamics and Structure of Beltic Hetero), Rigs. Mygzne, 1969.

8. Kullas, 'r., and Tmelu, 8., ”A Baroclinic Model of the Physical Fields of the
Baltic Sea,” "Anoio Special Import.“ Stockholm. No 5, 1977.

9. Linden, P. F., "me Deepening of a Mixed Layer in stratified Fluid," .7. FLUID
Mica” Vol 71. No 2, 1975.

10. Hattaus, 71., “Zur nittleren jahreseitlichen Wersndsrlichkeit der unperetur in
der offenen Oetsee,‘ BEITMGB SUR mammals, No 40, 1977.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFIGAL USE ONLY

11. "magenta: and Salinity of the Placed Finnish Stations 1965-1966,”
mmmmmnn JULKAISU, scum, lb 231. 1969.

12. zilitinkevich, S. s., Qualikov, D. V., and humanity, Yu. 0., 'kbdeling tho
Oceanic Upper Layer." OCEAIDIDGIA ACTH . Vol. 2, 2b 2, 1979.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Spectral Structure of Vertical ‘i‘esperature Nonuniforlities in the Ocean
1. D. Iotovatskiy, N. N. Korchashkin

Vertical tenperature nonuniformities in the ocean have a broad spectrum of scales-
from fluctuations having dimensions on the order of several hundreds of asters to
small-scale turbulent pulsations of several tenths of a centimeter and less.

Basing himself on an analysis of a large quantity of temperature nonuniformity
spectrmns Eat-(K) , where K is the vertical wave number. obtained by measuring tesper-
ature profiles in the main thermocline of different regions of the Pacific Ocean,
Gregg (4) suggested an average statistical spectrum 8:0!) within a range of scales
from 10" to 1 cm, which was a roximated by the following exponential dependencies:
at x <6'10‘2 ales/meter. 5' dado-Ur” , while at 10° >K >6°10'2 cycles/Inter.
EVE-4540' K‘ao‘. where Ts is the mean vertical temerature gradient.

'ihe results of measurements made in the ocean showed that depending on the relation-
ships between the parameters defining the conditions of small-scale fluctuations

in teaperature, the finestructure subinterval in spectrum 3:00, where ELI-Ari”

(A -4.s~10'3) , may transform directly into a buoyancy interval, where it. 4..¢¥’p'"“n s

or into an inertial-convective interval r, £1,611.57, or into a viscous-convec-
tive interval (6, - “‘va gr‘ ). here, 01, a2, sawmiversal constants, Eunturbulent

energy dissipation rate. Stu—temperature nonmifornity equalization rate, 8-.
buoyancy parameter, *5 = (v/E) V2--Kolmogorov's time scale. v--coefficient of mole-
cular viscosity. Taking account of the asyuptotic nature and differences in dimen-
sions of spectrum stun at large and small It. losevatskiy (1) obtained expressions
desciibing spectrum 5‘00 in the transitions from the finestructure sminterval to
one of the :urbulence subintervals. These expressions contain typical scales L;
Lt and L; separating the finestructure interval from the buoyancy, inertial-convec-
tive and viscous-convective intervals respectively:

a " .g‘ 1“
_ - . h I me", 7 . L..-
- m3": ‘3. l. * . L‘; - (as? we,“

and c1, 02. c3 are dimensionless constants defined as follows:

.‘c.- MAJ“ . q-(A‘ ' .
c,: (#‘Q‘V‘ . / s)

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Measurements of the vertical structure of the teqerature field and simultaneous
observations of the internal wave field showed that in the finestructure interval.
spectrum two 'W3 for sufficiently well developed short-period internal waves,
while for waves of small anplitude, Baum-""5 , and the spectrum is characterized
by a lower level. It may be possible that conﬂuence of the internal wave field

is precisely what causes smoothing of aesoscale nonuniformities in profile 1'(s).
However, we still do not have a firm idea about the dodnant mechanisms responsible
for the form of spectrum 3:00 in the range of 86min. from 10" to (102-101) cm.
'lherefore. rtaying within the framework of diunsional theory, we will attempt to
reveal the dominant parameters that may indicate the mechanism responsible for re-
distribution of the deviations of telperature fluctuations in relation to the scale
spectrum and making it possible to obtain an expression by whid: to describe the
average spectrum at K<(lO"‘-lO'2) cm" (4). If we seems that in a certain layer
of the thermocline. the main processes influencing formation of the fine vertical
structure of profiles Ti?) are turbulence and (or) nonlinear interactions in the
internal wave field, than change in temperature in the vicinity of a fixed point
would be the product of, in particular, turbulent flows of momentum .- and heat.

we know that in the presence of intense, stable stratification, which is observed

in an ocean thermocline. heat exchange is significantly enculbered in mison with
”‘0th exchange (for an experimtal confirmation of this. see for emle (3)).
That is, the main contribution to the heat flux spectrum is made by fluctuations
with scales Zq that are much smaller than for mmentum flux spectrum, 1,. 'lhere-
fore the values for the heat flux q-T’w' and nonentum flun-n-u'v’ per unit aass
would be the external paramters defining nonuniforaities with scales id and

1d, respectively. At Z>Zq and Z>Zt the external parameters would be no onger

the turbulent fluxes q and I memselves. but some averaged characteristics of their
change on the vertical axis. for exasple the mean gradients 3.4523) and eve-a. .

'mus within the scale range Zq<l<Zt the defining parameters are a; and I. while at
Z>lq, the defining parameters are q. and i3. Next, considering dimensionality.

we get the following expressions for spectrum Stat) :.

5"“) ' hi: 33' I" (rat) (0
and ‘
Er“) - {e 3: adv." (“on 4 u‘) (2)

where 11 and 12 are some dimensionless constants. Pbmles (l) and (2) are con-
sistent with experimental spectrum in relation to the form of their dependence on
K at K<Ko and 101% respectively. me interpolation formula for 3:00 for the entire
range of scales under examination may be represented as follows:

510‘) - Te it i" “qt-HEEL ' ,(3)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where scale L1 is defined as L- (Yl/Y2IT/t.. At won, Eta) is described by
formula (2), while when L1K<<l, it is described by formla (1). According to the
available data, [symbol left out; possibly Lt] varies basically within 10 and 20
meters. 'ib directly confirm the possibility of using expression (3), we would
need to calculate parameters 43, 1 and I. using experimental data, and determine
dimensionless constants y 1 and 72. 'lhe first information on nonuniﬁom distribution
of the heat flux of a thermcline, obtained by means of instrumental leesuremnts,
is presented in (2). seat flux estimates were obtained in (3) with the help of
indirect calculations for individual layers: these estimates also vary noticeably
in relation to s; at present, however, direct instrmental measurements of vertical
profiles u'w’(s), suitable for appraisal of 1 and 13, are unavailable.

Expression (3), which describes spectrum 35-00 in the finestructure interval, and
formulas obtained in (1) for the transitional area between the finestructure inter-
val and one of the snbintervals of small-scale turbulence, permit us to derive
general interpolation formulas for spectrum 51;“) within the entire range of wave
withers-"from 10‘“ to 10° cm". Naturally in this case the combination AK in the
expressions for scales L', Lt and Lt‘nust be substituted by “air". ‘lhen, de-
pending on whether the ffnestructure interval is followed by the buoyancy, inertial-
conVective or viscous-convective interval, the spectrum of temperature nonmiformi-
ties at (K) would be described by One of the following equations:

5““- &‘£? 77’. v".“ [“ iLeiiL‘ I ] (‘)

5:0) - “5ng {’3 [h L 11:3 1 (s:
it , (e ,

81k) ' ‘9 Cr NEW." W] ' '

Considering that LRLt, Lg, L: at LtK<<l these formulas reduce to expression (1),
at L1K>>l and at 14K or Lat, L << 1 we get the ”power of negative three interval,“
as represented by formula (2), and at by, L9)! or L£K>>l we get one small-scale
turbulence interval or the other. In those cases where scale L! is found to be
greater than the typical scales of deformation of man temperature and velocity
fields-431., the buoyancy interval would be absent from the tenperature nonuniformity
spectrum, and the general interpolation formula for stun. describing a succession
of intervals with powers -2, -3, -5/3 and -l with growth in K, would be written it.

the form:
' . ' ‘ . v.
51“) ' has}? c. “[hL',” 1“".0.» )5”

where Levi/19g . and t! - (inﬁ-uxolmgorov's scale. Depending on the rela-

tionship between the sizes of scales by, L; and L; in spectrum Stun, both the

finestructure sibinterval, where 3M3, and the inertial-convective interval may
be absent. 'lhe results of comparing these formilas with the experimental data

showed the possibility of their use to describe stun spectrums in an ocean them-
cline.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we should note in conclusion that if we take the approach indicated above in our
analysis of the ctruns of vertical fineetructure nonmitornities in the velocity
field, then at K" >151 spectra: Eu“) say have the torn:

Eu“) - Ci“.: ' (a)

where a is a certain constant. an available intonation on Eu (x) spectrum calcu-
lated on the basis of Remnants of the finestructure of the ocean's velocity
field. indicates that at K">8-10 meters. in a newer of cases we observe a scale
interval for which Eu(K)'\~K'2. Inasauch as L, is close to 10 meters. use of expression
(8) to describe Eu“) nay probably be justiﬁed in these experiaents.

BIBLIOGRAPIIY

l. lozovatskiy, I. 0., "the Spectrum of. Vertical Nonunifornities in the ‘l‘elpera-
ture Field of the Ocean mermcline.' 12V. All 8838, no, Vol 15, No 11, 1979.

2. nozovatskiy', I. 0., and Onidov, R. v., “Statistical Characteristics of the
Local Structure of Developed Turbulence in the Kuroshio Currant,” crewman,
Vol 19, No 5, 1979.

3. bozovatskiy. I. 0., and Ouaidov, R. V., ”’Ihe klationehip Between the character-
istics of Small-Scale Mbulence and the Paramtere of later Stratificatim in
the Ocean.“ WIMYA, V01 19, Ib 6, 1979.

4. Cross. 14. c., “Variations in the Intensity of Snallscale Hiring in the Main
mermcline.” J. O!" PHYS. OCEANOGR" Vol 7, lb 3, 1977.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A Particular Model of 'mrbulence Interstratification

M. H. Lyuaimtsev

Signals representing variables (pulsations in velocity. temperature and so on)
treasured in experimental research on ocean turbulence are recorded by low-inertia
sensors in the form of a succession of pulses (of varying shape and width) separated
by noise intervals of irregular duration. Such pulse mdulation of signals is the
consequence of turbulence interstratitication. An elemtary model is suggested
for description of such signals. It is used as a framework for emzining the

inﬂuence of interstratification parameters on some statistical characteristics
of small-scale turbulence.

Let us examine random process £(t), which is the product of stationary random
process u(t) with a mean <u(t)) IO) and pulse process Hit), in which the time 01
arisal t1; and duration 0,; of the i-th pulse (1'. -l,2,...) of unit amplitude are
random. Process I(t) may be represented in the form Mia-Hat), where Iﬁt) is

the i-th pulse located randomly on the tin: axis. then process €(t) may be written
in the form

:(e-zgh‘<otl<5g&)‘.'§wf - (n '-

Here’ [(9- 1.0:). 1,04), ”(’0 is_ ﬂeaviside's unit fmction. Argument x- (it-ti)”;
was selected in such a fashion that as t varies from ti, to 1:1: +eu-that is, within
the limits of the i-th pulse, a: varies from 0 to l; in this case I(x) -1. Outside
the limits of pulses, 1(a) =0. He will treat process £(t) as a model of a uni-
dinensional section or the turbulence field.

'no calculate the statistical characteristics of process Ett) , we would need to
introduce a nunber of hypotheses on its probability structure: 1. The probability
that exactly )1 pulses would arise in time interval 1' depends on T but not on the
position of this interval 0n the time axis--that is, miformity of the pulse
process is presupposed. 2. 'me nunber of pulses arising in nonintersecting tine
intervals is independent of random variablea--that is, there is no "after-effect".

3. The probability that more than one pulse would arise in a small time interval
at is one order of magnitude less than dt--that is, as tit-'0, this probability
becomes equal to 0(dt). From a physical standpoint this means that arisal at

two pulses simultaneously is imossible. 4. All nut), ti and e; are statistically

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

independent from one another. and their probability distributions (b not depend on
the pulse nmber. It may be shown that aids: these conditions the probability
Pym) that n pulses will appear in time 2' would be described by a Poisson distribu-
tion with intensity A-(nVT.

Let us find the characteristic function 0‘“) for variable €(t) (at a fixed t,

this is a random variable, given within interval [-T/Z, 272]. 11:: probability of
event A--satisfaction of the inequality x<€(t)‘:r+dr--may be written as:
PIN-Hem)”, where Vice) is the probability distribution density for £(t). Event A
occurs together with one of events Rn (rt-0.1,...) forming a comlete set of
mutually exclusive events. where 8" represents arisal of exactly 11 pulses in inter-
val [-T/2,T/21. Obviously, P(Bn)-PT(n). The conditional probability of event A’ is
PMIBn} -V5(rln)dx where VUzIn) is the conditional density. Using the formula for
total probability, we can write

AA] '31 "IN 9 WM ' "3W“‘33. ’"'”’"I(”'“)"£2)

Averaging variable expﬁSE) in relation to probability (2) . we get the characteristic
function

0 *s (3) I g. 910‘) 7‘ (5' W) (3)

where ”(aim is the characteristic function of variable “(9.252”; In view of

the fourth hypothesis all ’11 are statistically independent, and their probability
distributions do not depend on nulber 13. 'mereﬁore we can write

“(SI-n) - [v.(m‘ , ‘ib‘ '

where the characteristic function of variable Ht) has the form
_, - “ - m -----
MS)1;w.(«)wiwmkﬁtw(91(‘3‘-)}w<w (6)

Here. Hum) and "9(6) are the probability distribution densities for variable u(t)
and 8. After some simple transformations we arrive at the formula

v‘ (s).- ”(liuu(u)duiow.(02i[t‘wt(q 1]“) (a)

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Using formula (6). we can find the semi-invariants of the distribution of 1k“)
to the power of k:

"(9: €3.“-‘-"4'~>d»§w.(e)«éi{mwas m

Here parameter .1“ L‘ 9’ ' “9(9) ﬂ is the average interstratification coefficient.

._——e '

In the absence of interstratificaticn, \r - 4(< 9'11“”? and 149' (“‘7'14“)

for k- l, 2, 3. however, for k>3 these semi-invariants are not coincident:
probably due to the rigid conditions imposed on the model.

Let us find correlation function 3«€!§‘<‘(9K"‘)"‘“Oo Similarly as when we

obtained formula (2). we can obtain an expression for the probability of an event
consisting of simltaneous satisfaction of the inequalities

““114: and 3< “$3.43

Averaging the product (61- in relation to this probability. we get the expression

3‘1”) - sum mt) - G's-7, em- &f(9")Vo('M0)

where Bu (1') is the correlation function of process wt). and 81(1) is a dimension-
less correlation function satisfying the conditions

61(9).‘r' 1.3%1L.0--k. 610.1“ 0

We can see from (7) and (8) that C(t) is a steady-state process, at least in the
broad sense. and therefore its energy spectrun is a Fourier transform of function

th).

In order to find function 81(1) in explicit form. we would have to give density
W0 (6) in analytical form. Let us assume. as the evolutionary scheme of turbulent
"spots." their independent fragmentation. Then the distribution of the probabilities

of the dimensions of such "spots" out be described by a log-normal function
. __L__ ﬂail-£13 , (16)
“9(9) «54.; ”{ 26 e _

I
wheremu- <l~0> , 4L0 ' «M‘mw Substituting (10) in (a), we get the equation

93

FOR omcuu. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘

s.(s)- Minty...» z},d{m))» up \
where I "(0 . 4. 7.5-! g' 4;, H.(w¢im'wy4“ .

~.

Function (11) decreases Ionotonously with growth of 1’, and it satisfies conditions

(9). At u-l (<6) -2'), function 51(1) -(l-t/1’).. he the length of the realization
under consideration increases (as T“). function Bron-r1.

'lhus the correlation function 850:) of process C(t) decreases with growth of 1
faster than the correlation function Huh) of process u(t). In this case spectrum
35(1) of process £(t) will decrease with growth in frequency f none slowly than
spectrum Eu(f) of process Mt). since in the limiting case a uniform 'white noise“
spectm corresponds madelta-correlated process. Here lies the 1311133309 02 inter
stratification on the correlation and spectral functions. 'mfortmtely we cannot
obtain spectrum Edf) (which is a convolution of spectrum tuU’) and 8' (m) in
explicit form and evaluate the influence of interstratification paras: ers on

the spectral components of process Mt) in different intervals of frequencies
(scales). since we do not know function Bah) (or function Sud”. while the
Fourier transform of function (ll) cannot be expressed by either elementary or
special functions, and it requires mnerical computer calculation.

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Use of Dynamic Stochastic Models for Integrated
Treatment of Oceanological Measurements

v. A. Hoiseyenko

High cost is a typical feature of oceanographic expeditionary research. ‘iherefore to
raise the effectiveness of expeditions, we usually make integrated neasuremnts of
a large nunber of oceanographic and meteorological paramters using a relatively
rare network of observations. A broad coqlex of seasurements are made today in
traverses: measurements by autonomus buoy stations, density maps plotted with the
help of hydrological stations and depth. teuperature and salinity probes. and so on.
Clearly by raising the informativeness of neasurenents made at each station, we can
increase the accuracy of a particular hydrophysical field mder analysis (2).
Therefore when we plot hydrophysical field naps we must consider the question of
integrated use of all available information, both on the field itself and on other
fields and statistical relationships existing between different fields.

When we study synoptic variability, which reveals itself in analysis of different
fields of the ocean, we must consider the asynchrony of the measurements and the
irregularity of their spatial representation; otherwise maps plotted directly from
such data by traditional methods may reveal a smoothed-out picture (5). Dynamic-
stochastic models permit optimum treatment of practically any quantity of masurements
of different kinds, reported at arbitrary laments of tin from different points in
space. he essence of the dynamic-stochastic approach lies in 'numerical” forecasting
based on a thermohydrodynamic model providing for simltaneous correction of calcu-
lated values by observed data (1,2).

1*“ paper discusses a dynamic-stochastic mdel permitting joint treatnent of measure-
ments of density fields and the horizontal component of current velocities. If we
limit ourselves to a quasigeostrophic approximation and an approximate determination
of surface level (4), we could calculate the correlation and mutual correlation
functions for discrepancies in the horizontal components of current velocity using

the formula

.
arrests-H)"(;%,)3;%.;;ﬁttzaze.wr:

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 5.3-“, may. 3,-2. szmkI-Eﬂﬂim favor-relation function of the

density field prediction errors, f—Cbriolis paramter. gngravity, cur-density of
sea water.

Correlation function Q 95,32” has a large scale. therefore in order to be able
to calculate it with a comuter of average capacity, as a rule we resort to some sort

of approximation. In this model 3 9(3,3',t) was represented by the following approxi-

mate formula:
P,’(c.y.e,a’,y.'!1t)m.y.tI-9ﬁ£1y1t)'8(r-t1y-y)rkM’).

where D(a:,y,t) is an unlmown function (standard deviation) and Po and f9 are known
function: (6).

Let us examine the use of the proposed model (6) to process measurements of density
fields and the horizontal conponent of current velocity vectors. 'me calculations
were performed for the central part of the traverse (O-Z'l'Ol' and 30°59' N. lat..
A=68' and 72° w. long.). The selected region was covered with an observation network
having a spacing Axa Ay I17 nautical miles in the horizontal plane and As .200 meters
in the vertical plane to a depth of 1,600 meters. ﬁne time interval was 1 day. he
density of sea water at the boundaries was corrected after each batch of observations
were received: this made it possible, in the final analysis. to account for evolution

of real boundary conditions.

‘12....

W.

Figure l

     
    

I

V

     
       

Using the suggested procedure for joint treament of diverse measurements, we plotted
density field maps, the surface level and current velocities with a time interval
of 1 day.

Figures 1-3 are maps showing the surface levels for the traverse (arrows indicate
the direction of surface gradient current, and nusbers on isolines indicate the
surface level in centimeters).

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ‘

 

Analysis of surface level maps plotted successively each day allows us to trace

the evolution of surface level in the traverse and appraise the direction and velocity
of travel of eddy formations, as well as trace invasibn of the traverse by new eddy
formations.

Concurrently with optimal assessment of the fields mder analysis. this dynamic-
stochastic model permits cowutation of maps indicating their reliability, which was
determined on the basis of the dispersion of assessne'nt errors. A sequence of such
maps allows us to plan the measurement scheme to be iuplemented in real time (Figure 4).

A comparison of results from processing masurements obtained by our proce "are with
others (3) permits the assertion that the maps we obtained exhibited greater detail

in relation to both time and space.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Gandin, L. S., and Kagan, R. I... "Statisticheskiya metody interpretatsii
meteorologicheskikh dannykh" [Statistical Methods for Interpreting reteorological
Data), Leningrad, Gidronsteoizdat, 1976, pp 312-339.

2. Nelepo, 8. A., and Tinchenko, I. Yen "sistemyye printsipy analiza nablyudeniy
v okeane" [Systemic Principles of Analysis of mservations in the Ocean], Kiev,
"Naukova Ma“. 1978, 250 pp.

3. Nelepo. B. A., Knysh. v. V.. and Tinchenko, I. Ye., ”Evolution of Synoptic
Eddies According to Materials Prom Density Surveys Made by the lltrainian SSR
Academy of Sciences Marine Hydrophysical Institute in the Poiymde Traverse.”
Preprint O3, Sevastopol', Isd-vo HG! AN USSR, 1978.

4. Sarkisyan, A. 5., "Chislennyy analiz i prognoz morskikh techeniy" [Nmerical
Analysis and Prediction of Marine currents], Leningrad. Gidrometeoiadat, 1977,

pp 28-33.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Knysh. v. V., Moiseyenko, V. IL. and Tinchenko, I. Ye., ”Assimilation of Hydro-
physical hummus in a Nautical Ibdel of Ocean unsity and curtain ﬁelds."
MORSKIYE GIDmPIZICHmmE ISSLBDOVANIYA, Semtopol', No 4 (83), 1978, pp 65-77.

6. Tinchenko, I. Ye., nwsh, v. V., and miuyenko, v. 3., “Integrated Use of

aydrophysical Intonation in an Algorithm to: Hour-Dimensional Analysis,“
IDBKIYE GIDMPIHOIEKIYE ISSWYA, mtopOI', Ib 1 (88), 1980, pp 65-76.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhe Concept of Pinestructure and Its Discrimination in the Ocean
V. v. Ravrotskiy

When we refer to the vertical finestructure of hydrophysical characteristics in

the ocean, we ilply presence of layers having properties exhibiting vertical

gradients that change abruptly: in this case the thickness of such layers is much

less than the associated integral vertical scales (total depth. thickness of the
baroclinic layer and so on). In similar fashion we can interpret fast fluctuation

of properties in horizontal coordinates as a manifestation of horizontal finestructure.
but for the soment it is of lesser interest to us.

The importance of studying finestructure stess from its interaction with all dynamic
processes in the ocean--currents, internal waves and turbulence. A universally
accepted definition of finestruction does not exist, and different authors discrimi-
nate finestructure in different ways: as a deviation from some teaporal mean (3.6) .
as a deviation from a hypothetical linear profile (7) and so on. In all cases dis-
crimination of finestructure from fluctuations in characteristics elicited by dynamic
properties, especially internal waves (4,5), is a major problem. And yet such dis-
crimination is necessary. inasmuch as the methods of nathematical description of
hydrophysical processes require us to give the characteristics of the medium as
parameters of a process. or vice versa.

The physical grounds for referring to changing parameters either as an attribute of
the nedium's structure or as a process are the widely different scales of variability--
that is, the great differences in the rates at which these parameters change. In
this case those paraneters of the medium which change little in the time (or space)

it takes for certain classes of processes to occur are applied to the structure of

the medium. me division made between medium structure and process is arbitrary,
and definitions of structure in nest cases iaply a process, the scale of which is

significantly smaller than the scale of the ndium’s structure.

In our case in addition to indicating the class of processes in relation to which
finestructure is a “structure.“ we need to explain the meaning of the word "fine'-
that is, we need to indicate those processes which take no notice of such a structure.
this is rather easy to do: Large-scale currents, mssoscale eddies and tidal waves do
not for practical purposes react to finestructure--that is, averaging in relation to
the scales of these processes would reveal the distinction between unfine. coarse
structure in the low frequency range and finestructure in the high frequency range.
But in this case finestructure and processes with scales less than the discrimination
scale would be mixed together.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Internal waves are the most significant and universal dynamic process reacting re-
sponsivelyto finestructure. But the rangesof scales of internal waves and fine-
structure intersect practically completely, and therefore it is imossible to dis-
criminate between them absolutely. Moreover, as was shown earlier (2) , internal
waves cause arisal of irreversible changes in the vertical gradients of properties
(when averaged over a time period on the order of tens of wave cycles), and therefore
they may be a significant factor in finestructure formation. it the sane time, in-
ternal waves and finestructure distort one another kinenatically.

Defining the finestructure concept with an indication of one of two filtration scales.
both of which are associated with internal waves, is suggested. he first. smaller
scale distinguishes structure (at large scale) from process (at smll scale). The
second, larger-scale filtration distinguishes coarse (meso-) structure from fine-

structure. For tesperature in particular. this definition would have the following
form:

'T/w- 7/2.!» rilw- 912.04 21:. a. ﬁt; am

Here. fnthe corplete structure--that is, the low frequency part of function T(s,t)
when filtration tine is equivalent to the period of internal waves pro gating in

the layer under examination: 2"--process occurring in a structure: neso- (coarse)
structure--that is, the low frequency part of function (s,t) in relation to the second
filtration scale: fir-vertical finestructure of parameter 1'. Distortions in fine-
structure caused by internal waves may be deleted by changing the averaging process:
Rather than function T(s,t), we would need to tim~average the reciprocal function
s(T,t) for the range of values of 2’ of interest to us. this procedure produces
mutually unique correspondence between 2' and in segments of monotonous change in
T03). Given this assumtion, for structure obtained by inverse averaging and re-
gression to the tenperature profile, expression (1) would have the form:

17:, 1/. ﬁg, 1/. 77.51;; 5.0.5,,”grmm

Inasmuch as the internal wave spectrum is very broad, this definition iqlies that
the kinematic effects of low frequency and large-scale internal waves would be de-
scribed as a structure for high frequency and small-scale internal waves, while fine-
structure elements with a life span less than the filtration scale would fall into the
process category. and they may drop out from the averaging process. Physically and
methodologically. such a situation is entirely reasonable, since we are always inte-
rested in specific ranges of scales and periods, into which internal waves and fine-
structure must (and can) be divided.

Large-scale filtration with respect to time, performed with the purpose of discrimi-
nating between coarse and finestructure, would best be substituted by filtration in
relation to the vertical coordinate, inasmuch as the vertical scales of large-scale
processes are well known. '

An analysis of the results of several soundings of temperature and current velocity
fields from the standpoint of the proposed definitions and discrimination methods
demonstrated their suitability. Distortions in finestructure arising due to vertical
uovements and appearance of coupression-rarefaction zones in isolines during the

100

mu omciu. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

passage of internal waves decrease significantly. Maxim gradients increased while
minimum gradients decreased by approximately two tines in observation: of a not-too-
abrupt finestructure in the upper 40-mter layer. Differences in abruptly stepped

structures grow in this case. In term of reducing distortions, description of fine-
structure by means of probability distributions is equivalent (1).

'Ihe proposed definition, which uses internal waves as the reference-point process

for discriminating finestructure, does not exclude the role of nuserous other
factors (laminar advection. double diffusion, turbulence in response to disruption
and so on) in formation of finestructure. but it may change their position in rela-
tion to finestructure. Thus irrespective of vertical scales, long-period laminar
advection may fall within mesostructure, while the effects of turbulence having
periods less than the Vyaysyal’ frequency do not necessarily fall within the fine-
structure category (the highest -frequency internal waves are found to represent

the lower boundary of microstructure). Therefore the advantages and shortcomings

of this interpretation of the finestructure concept require discussion.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Navrotskiy, V. V., ”Distribution of the Probability Characteristics of Fine-

structure in the Shelf Zone of the Sea,” 12V. AN $883. PIZIKA imam I
OKEANA, in press.

2. Navrotskiy, V. v., "Pinestructure and Internal Waves in the Ocean," DOKLAD! AN
SSSR. Vol 231, No 5, 1976, pp 1080-1083.

3. Pedorov, K. N.. ’"lhe Pinestructure of Bydmphysical Fields in the Ocean.'' in
"Seriya 'Okeanologiya', fizika okeana" ["Oceanology' Series, Physics of the
Ocean), V01 1: [Hydrophysics of the Ocean], Chapter III, Nauka, macaw, 1978,
pp 113—147.

4. Joyce, 1'. H., "Pinestructure Contamination of bored Marature Sensors: A
Numerical Experiment," J. PHYS. 0G,, Vol 4, No 2, 1974, pp 183-190.

5. Joyce, '1‘. IL, and Desaubies, Y. J. P., ”Discrimination Between Internal Haves
and Temperature Pinestructure," J. PHYS. OC., W1 7. No 1. 1977, pp 22-32.

6. Hayes, 8. P., ”Temperature Pinestructure Gaservations in the Tropical North
Pacific Ocean." J. GIOPHYS. 335., Vol 83. No 010, 1978, pp 5099-5104.

7. siedler, 6., ”The Finestructure Contamination of Vertical Velocity Spectra in
the Deep Ocean,“ DEEP-SEA 1235.. Vol 21, No l, 1974, pp 37-46.

101

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Intrusions and Differential-Diffusional Convection in Cromwell's Current
V. ‘1'. Fake

The scientific research vessel ‘unitriy Mendsleyev" sailed its 24th trip in February-

March 1980 with the purpose of studying circulation and the structure of hydrophysical
fields in the equatorial system of Pacific Ocean currents (2) . A traverse was selec-

ted between 163‘". long. and 167’“. long.. Z'N. Lat. and 2' 5. lat... who main effort
was concentrated on meridional sections at the eastern and western edges of the tra-

verse. with 11 stations and 5 buoys on each section. The hydrological measurements
were made according to the usual procedure, and they were supplemented by detailed
measurements of drifting current curves, inasmch as the nmber of current recorders
on buoys was not enough to study the profile of current shifts in the vicinity of
Cromwell's current, which was the principal object of the study. Hicrostructural
measurements were made with a falling '8aklan" probe (3) containing sensors for
velocity pulsation u', electrical conductivity 0 '. and the means of electrical conduc-
tivity 3' and tenperature '5.

‘me world's Ocean equatorial currents are known as a region of intense, constant
shearing action coupled with a corresponding rise in the intensity of turbulent
mixing (5,7). This feature manifested itself in our measurements as well. as can
be seen for example in Figure 1, showing oscillograms for vertical soundings of u
on the background ofacross section of the mlcomonent of the current velocity.
plotted by v. A. Bubnov and v. D. Yegorikhin. In normal regions with a moderate wave
state, the thickness of turbulent layers does not exceed 10-30 meters, while in a
region with shearing action we often observe turbulent layers with a thiclmess of

50 meters and more. sonatimes reaching 120 meters. 'lhe weakly stratified layer above
the center of Crowell's current ead'iibits dominant turbulence. 'me center itself is
not turbulent, and as we found in our case. this permitted development of other form
of mixing. A unique frontal zone is known to exist in the salinity field along the
equator in the Pacific (1). At the depth of Crowell's current its smximum is to

the south and its minim is to the north of the equator. outing to the convergent
nature of circulation in the central part of the equatorial zone. currents of differ-
ent salinity invade into the center of Gordon's current fro. peripheral regions.
resulting in formation of teuperature inversions. This phean is illustrated by
Figure 2, which shows the somding profiles for 0'. 'me leftward peaks on these pro-
files correspond to temperature inversion gradients. Inversions were observed on all
cross sections and in all profiles intersecting the axial region of Cromwell's current.
while in the periphery they were found to be atypical. It is interesting that inver-
sions were not observed in Gregg's measurements made further east, at 155° w. long.
(5). Such differences are apparently associated with the unique features of the
convergent regime of the equatorial current system.

I

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

a detailed analysis of the inversions showed that they vary in scale and nature of
acconpanying phenomena. Large inversions in thick layers (10 meters and sore) are
often accompanied by higher activity of microstructural pulsations of o'. and some-
times of u' as well, indicating active intrusion and turbulent injection of water
into the intruding layer out of over- and underlying layers. Thin inversions (less
than 1 meter) are observed as a rule between quasi-uniform layers without signs of
active or relict turbulence. It would be logical to hypothesize the action of
differential-diffusional convection, for the arisal of which all of the prerequi-
sites exist: Temperature inversions are accompanied by an increase in salinity
coupled with maintenance of sustained density stratification, as is evidenced by
the results of selective measurements of the finestructure of temperature, salinity.
and density with an AIS? probe. 'lhe density ratio R9 I8 AS/uAT for such inversion
interlayers is close to 2, which is typical of the action or domale diffusion (4).

20m 200; ‘
20 1 2 2 2 00-2 2 2
n 3 010 099 zoos g: up ,u! 031

 

3 _

Figure 1. Velocity Pulsation Profiles for the Center of meell's Current

' 20m 003 '
201 -- £9} ' 2 s or: 281
»32010 209 am 2 oou 03 Z

x \

nix-3mm».
\h\

 

Figure 2. Profiles of Finestructure Electrical Conductivity Gradients
and Pulsations in the Center of Crowell‘s Current

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
intrusions. Stu ' observed

for 2 months. an ' developed that it could serve as a ttecer for
meen's current.

 

Paka, v. 1., Pozdynin. V. 0., and Bubnov, V. A., “The 24th Trip of the Scientific
kseerch Vessel 'nutriy Mondaleyev',’ mmmczvn, in press. 1980.

Puke. v. T.. " pat-ecu: for Studying the Finestructute of Hydrophysical Fields,"
in the present collection, 1980.
5.

6.

7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gregg. H. C., “Temperature and Salinity Microstructure in the Pacific
Equatorial mdercurrent," J. (moms. £35., Vol 81, No 6, 1976, pp 1180-1196.

Gregg, H. C., 'Microstructume and Intrusions in the California CIment,“ J. PHYS.
Wk" V01 5, 1975, pp 253-278.

Osborn, ‘1'. 11., and mowtord. H. 8., “Hicrostructure Measurements in the Atlantic
Equatorial Undercurrent During GATE,“ DEEP SEA RES” in press, 1979.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Apparatus for Studying the Pinestructure of Hydrophysical Fields

When studying small-scale nonuniformitiss in hydrophysical fields, it is funda-
mentally important to reduce. to a necessary minim. interference caused by vibra-
tion and yawing of the sensor carrier owing to poor streamlining of the housing or
effects exerted bythe cable used to submerge or tow the instrunnt. me of the
sinplest ways to achieve this goal is to use freely felling probes. Different
variants of such probes are known. differing in the particular way smooth motion is
achieved and intonation is transmitted: me completely self-contained probe (3):
a probe which, as it falls, unwinds a thin conductor from a reel, typically used
in disposable temperature probes (4); a probe permanently connected to the vessel
by an unweighted neutral—buoyancy cable that is dropped into the water (2). 'me
“Baklan' probe described here is similar to the last of the falling probe variants
mentioned here. Information is transmitted by a thin. flexible type KG 3-3-70
(It'l'Sh-OB) cable. Presence of a strong cable makes recovery of the probe to the
surface and its reins possible. he “Baklan' probe is equipped with sensors for
electrical conductivity a, velocity pulsations u' . temperature t and depth h. The
electrical conductivity sensor. developed by the Special Design office of oceano-
logical Technology, has as its semitive element a platinu microelectrode with a
diameter of 0.5 on, which permits high spatial resolution. Electric filters divide
the signal into constant and pulsating couponents, which are then recorded separately.
In this case the right channel records the profile of fine stratification while the
second records the superimposed profiles of nicrostructural pulsations and fine-
structural gradients. me latter are recorded owing to the action of an electric
filter that operates as a differentiating unit at frequencies measured in units of

hertz. In the first approximation. the electrical conductivity profiles reflect

temperature profiles. and they are graduated in degrees. A signal fron the tespora-
ture sensor, which due to the inertia of the thermistor does not bear information on

fine stratification itself, is used to account for nonlinearity and zero drift.

'lhe sensitive element of the velocity pulsation sensor is a pair of point electrodes
located within the field of a strong magnet in such a way that when sea water
streamlines the sensor along its axis. pulsations of the oncoming flow's longitudinal
components are recorded (l). m channel's sensitivity is about 0.5 III/sec.

Depth is measured by a standard vibration-frequency pressure gage with an error of
about 1.5 meters; however, because of the high smoothness of its novement, the

thickness and mutual arrangement of individual layers can be determined with an
accuracy in the units of centimeters.

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son omcm. use ONLY

 

Figure 1. Structure of the 'Baklan“ Falling Microstructural Probe‘:
1--o sensor, 2-u' sensor, 3--t sensor, 4ncylindrical
sealed containers. 5—spherical sealed container, 8--
(kukhtyli), ?--cone, Gucable

'me structure of the probe is shown in Figure l. mtion is retarded by the use of

a spherical sealed container with positive buoyancy; the latter. however, was found
to be insufficient. Additional weight compensation is achieved by polyethylene
(kukhtyli) from fishing trawls with a buoyancy of 3 kg each. secured to the inside

of the cone. 'lhe cone is made from close-woven fabric stretched over a framework.
'lhe batteries are located in the spherical container, while the electronic blocks

of the measuring circuit are in the cylindrical containers. 'me signal is transmitted
by cable in analog form (besides the PM depth signal. which is demodulated aboard
the vessel). and it is recorded on magnetic tape and by high-speed stylus recorders.
'me magnetic recording may be made both in analog form (using type loo-62 or 11-400
tape recorders) and in digital form with a quantization frequency of 200 as. this
system is supported by a specially developed cosplex based on an "nlektronika 100 1"
computer and a connected l7-track um tape recorder designed by the Special Design
office of the LSSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Physics of. the Earth. This
provides a possibility for imdiate raw data processing, as a result of which

all of the primary signals are plotted in a scale convenient to analysis as functions
of depth, and the profiles for the mean square values of pulsations, dissipation
velocities e and x, and Cox' number can be calculated and plotted in the same scale.
Parameters x and c are calculated for the profiles of electrical conductivity. which

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I u' Im/u’I «lo/o4

2 1' °c ' 1.00

3 6 "c I.»

o 6- °c -2.7/0/oz.,?

5 run aged 0/25

6 5, c c"- Luna'sua‘?

7 c 1.03m" «10’ ‘
a I ('c)e"l 2.01n0'9olo"

 

07

Figure 2. Examples of Sounding heults Followmg Comte: Processing.
The scale is in keeping with a "Konsul‘ printout: each
scaling segment corresonds to a line in the table above,
indicating the units and values of the scaling marks.

is used as an analog of temerature. though with a consideration for the nonlinearity
of the sensor's characteristic. statistical calculations are made for series of

200 terms, which at a probe submergence rate of about 1 meter/sec corresponds to

a layer thickness of 1 meter. Figure 2 shows an example of data plotted successiwa
profile after profile with a two-coordinate H 306 recorder. Scaling segments are
printed out simultaneously. and all numerical characteristics of the scales, to
include the initial and final depth marks, are printed out and then graphed.

The probe is used with a cable up to 500 meters long. The actual sounding depth
depends on the length of the cable. while the rate of. submergence (l meter/sec) and
the probe's rate of drift relative to the vessel depend on the resultant action of
wind drift and deep-water currents. 'lhe greatest drift was observed in research on
lomnosov’s and Crowell‘s undercurrents: when the cable was coupletely played out
in these areas, the sounding depth was 300 meters.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

the "Baklan" probe has enjoyed broad application in hydrophysical studies by various
vessels. aboard which it was used as a rule together witl. freight winch drums.
Practice has shown that the resultant recording error. in relation to layers for
which pulsations in u' and 0' could be assmed to be absent on the basis of general
physical considerations, does not exceed 1 Ila/sec for the 11' channel and 10'3°C for
the 0' channel, in a frequency range fron 5 to 100 Hz in all sea states. Its silpli-
city and reliability are sufficient to many purposes. Its sensitivity and all-weather
capacity make the probe's future look promising.

BIBLIOGMPB‘I
l. Golubev, Yu. Ye., Vasilevskiy, V. V., and lurenko, V. V., ”A Sensor Determining
the Flow Rate of Electrically Conductive Water. USSR Author's Certificate
No 685954," awn... No 34, 1979.

2. Galagher, B. , "Vertical Profiles of 'nemperature and Pine-Scale Velocity
Structure in the 'mermocline,‘ J. (moms. 1138., Vol 81. No 6, 1976. pp 1201-1206.

3. Gregg. M. C., and Cox, C. 5., “Measurements of the Oceanic Hicrostructure of
'nemperature and Electrical Conductivity.” 123? SBA 1135., no 18, 1971, pp 925-934.

4. Osborn. '1‘. 12., and Crawford, H. R.. “Microstructure Measurements in the Atlantic
Equatorial mdercurrent During GATE,” [ESP SEA 1188.. in press, 1979.

109

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY '
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

Activation of Snail-Scale 'iurbulence by Internal Waves in the
Presence of Pine Hicrostructure

Ye. N. Pelinovskiy, I. A. Soustova

Internal waves are known to interact with turbulence in different ways: On one hand
internal waves may be damped by external turbulence produced, for example, by wind
waves, while on the other hand as a result of shear instability internal waves nay
generate ”secondary" turbulence located in small interstratifications.

This report examines a nutter of questions associated with generation of “secondary“
hydrodynamic turbulence.

l. he relationship between internal waves and turbulent perturbations a", generated
by internal waves, is found.

2. The life span of turbulent perturbations is determined within the framework of
the mstationary problem of generation of “secondary" turbulence by the shear in-
stability of internal waves.

3. Change in equilibrium density distribution is determined on the basis of the
calculated level of turbulent pulsationsB '.

Let us dwell in greater detail on each of these problem.

1. In the absence of wave-caused perturbations, together with the boundary condi-
tions the system of semi-empirical turbulence equations [syntbol omitted from original]
determines some stationary equilibriun distribution defined by the functions Po ts)"
equilibrium pressure, oo(a)--the density, and the energy of turbulent fluctuations--
30(3) (8 is oriented along the nonunifornity gradient). ‘Bie appearance of this equili-
brium distribution depends significantly on the type of boundary conditions. thus for
example. one of the possible types of stationary distributions is 80(3) -oonsty in
this case the buoyancy flux Wps(dpo/ds) (where K” is the diffusion coefficient for
density) and the turbulent energy flux NB;(dBo/ds) (where K3, is the diffusion
coefficient for turbulent energy) are correlated. ‘mis situation is not typical of
VPS [not further identified] (turbulence occupies an area of limited depth). However

by calculating the level of turbulent fluctuations 8' on background 80, we can appraise
the relative value of these perturbations, and from the shift in phases we can appraise
their three-dimensional structure. Analyzing propagation of turbulent perturbations.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. unfailing-(uh) generated by internal waves u'~exyz((wl-tx.i'.uéz) on the
background 80 sconst, we get

- v

6. .Lwaltx(4, K 'szﬂ/Z‘ (ark) . (1)

Here, K3, Kzuhorizontal and vertical wave mature. u—internal wave frequency,
u'--amplitude of horizontal velocity.

R -( I-lw“r¢7¢)( tiara?» -¢w'4ru1_'zu‘/I/zb)

Tar-typical dissipation time for turbulence energy into heatfrdl“ ~( KING "FWD--
diffusion time for tubulence energy. It would not be difficult to show that if

the wave period is small (T<<2'd1g,1’d13). the amplitude of turbulent perturbations

B' would be associated with the anplitude of horizontal velocity by the relationship

Elba ‘ U7“, (Ru) ’kI/u (sad “:5"
676° 417%, (RH)*M/U(l'y’/U') Inseam” (2)

where “in (:2 ”7‘. , Vera/K

In this case the "turbulent” structure is shifted 1/2 relative to the wave structure.
If . however, the wave period becomes comnsurate with one of the characteristic
tines Tdis or Tdif, then the phase shift 9 depends on frequency, and it is defined

by the relationship l]: 0W“! '5!“ )

Thus the level of ”secondary" turbulence changes significantly depending on Raw
11". mus it In 44 ZJA’: . then at tho. l and B'ﬂo'u'ﬂ’w «HI-0.3”; but if
113:21151, then (080.711.

2. Using the nonstationary equation for the balance of the kinetic energy of
turbulent fluctuation, we analyze activation of ”secondary“ turbulence by the

shear instability of an internal wave. Assuming that a) the instability condition
(du/d8)2>u_12 is satisfied (where du'/ds is the vertical shift of horizontal velocity
and N2 Igpo (doe/dz) is the square of the Vyaysyal' frequency); and b)

Gu/d‘lfya' >u/1/q, (where VO is the phasal velocity of internal waves). then
for the conditions of the real ocean this equation has the typical form

Muax- 1/36- 313%,: a6}3§(x.§26):x:ggﬁ}_n

111

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IS}: ONLY

Here, I", v'--horizontal and vertical velocity of average wave notion.

Kﬁqpx ,K‘aqiﬁeL-diffusion coefficients for density 90 and energy 8, HIKE-~-
7

coefficient of turbulent viscosity, lﬁ~turbulence scales, c'hu, (szyzégn

dissipation of the energy of turbulence into heat. He will assume scales It; to be
given in regard to activation of secondary turbulence.

If u(u’,v’) is a flat traveling wave propagating in a medium with Il-const, then it
would not be difficult to show that the main contribution to activation of I'secondary"

turbulence in tine T<<Tg££is made by a constant shift cosponent (du/ds)2. Inasmuch

as in this case (du/ds) as not depend on the coordinates, (3) becomes signifi-
cantly simler. bus

6 ' 0%! en ﬂail-01W! In!" (21:; ail/757nm?”

(K: a la)

At small t. the level of B grows in proportion to 1:, while the rate of growth is
dB/dtw". At large t, B attains a value on the order of

50. - apln (2x:u‘-A/')/oc (nah)

‘lhe typical growth time is .h c In M (Ind)!

When the internal wave is "switched off" (when du/ds I=0) the stationary distribution

dissipates in tine f-(ZpdV'I'I‘JT‘méq‘Kg, 4?. Inasmuch as the growth time depends
on the size of,shift du'lds), at large’ shif values: lm.‘ may beeignificantly lower
than the dissipation time (or the diffusibn‘ time) of secondary turbulence. one
means that the generated perturbations are' long-lived (Tdifis'on the order of
several ms. t =1-1o min). i .

3. The "secondary"- turbulence diffusion problem must be solved as a nonlinear problem
with a consideration for natural turbulence. '1!) describe this process, we need to
use the equation for the balance of turbulent energy with boundary conditions

Ks; --M K d.n (F0) (3)
6- oz "a; (7-40 ‘

lbreover we need to introduce the source of ”secondary“ turbulence into the right
side of the balance equation: we represent this source as &A(,6(1.1,)6(t)

where AZ--characteristic dimension of the region within the interstratificatim in
which turbulence is generated, 6(1.z,)d({;) -Delta function, so--depth of

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interstratification. Inasmuch as adjustment of the equilibrim profile Bo(s)mu(s),
determined by boundary conditions (5) , proceeds slowly (Id-if is on the order at
several hours), we can solve the stationary problem 68/6t-0 at a low level of
secondary turbulence. Relative change in the equilibrium density profile may be
described in this case by the expression

Am,-io’n"M"’Ks.azso(tr§3)" m

Considering the unperturbed distribution of density 90(1), we can find the shift in
level connected with change in density. EI-Apo/pogﬂ. Given typical parameters
for the upper layer of the ocean, the level drops by 50 cm due to "secondary“
turbulence.

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Space-Time Spectrum Analysis of the imperature Field of “Poly-lode” Traverse
V. 6. minikov

1. Space-time spectrum analysis of dataattained in the course of the 'Polymode"
program was first conducted in (1.2.4). Buoy velocity measurements from all 19
buoys, covering a period of about a year, were used_in (4), while (1,2) nude use of
tenperature data from hydrological surveys of the entire traverse, covering a period

of about 7 mnths. only the first baroclinic made of lbssby waves was identified

at horizons down to 1,000 meters, and a barotropic lode was identified at the 1,400
meter horizon.

a,

'me traditional procedure for calculating the space-tine spectrum S(k,u) was used

in these works. Most of the space-time scales of the studied fields produce a
certain large-scale picture-that is, the best resolution in appraisal of S( ,w)

was achieved in relation to waves with length comparable to or greater-ﬂan the dimen-
sions of the traverse under consideration. 'ihe results of adaptive spectrum analysis

of the temperature field presented below indicate a more-complex wave structure for
the field at a synoptic scale.

I’
2. Estimation of S(k,w) by the method of maxim likelihood (3) requires synchronous
values for the field at several fixed points in the traverse. Out of the data at our
disposal for analysis, we selected the synoptic component of the buoy teqaerature
measurements (with a quantization interval [(-1 day): Five measurements at the 100
meter horizon (buoys 2, 3, 4. S, 6) based on 48 readings each, and three measurements
at the 700 meter horizon (buoys 5, 13, 15) based on 80 readings (5). These data
apply to the season extending from Deceaber 1977 to March 1978 (the fifth and sixth
buoy drops) , and they correspond to the central and southern part of the buoy traverse
(Figure 1). We were unable to select more-representative synchronous sanples, or
samples similar to those above for other seasons and horizons.

Time spectrmns S (m) were plotted for the noted time series by the adaptive method
proposed in (6). Spectral curves Sun) for different buoys and horizons differ
significantly in quantiative respects. The qualitative behavior of the 5(a)) curves
was identical. 'lhe most typical 3(a)) spectrms for both horizons are shown in

Figure 2. One significant feature of the time spectrums is presence of tw clearly
isolated peaks. This indicates existence of two isolated groups of waves in the
field under examination with characteristic periods of 2'1‘440-45 days and T031045
days. Oscillations with shorter periods are significantly less intense, and they
are not analyzed here. Peaks with periods 2'] and To can be identified only following
an analysis of the space-time spectrum.

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

1. "- Rt.

2' Nautical miles (The scale for the broken curves is on

the right.)
Key: .
l. Elative units 2. Days

.9
S(k,u) spectrum for the 100 Deter horizon were plotted using different coabinations
of sets of buoys. A set consisting of three buoys {4,5,6} was found to he the most
suitable; for it, the S( ,m) spectru- did not have (Bliayzing) secondary peaks. the
same was true r buoy set {5.13.15} for the 700 neter horizon. me results of
calculating S( .w) are shown in Table l, which gives period T, correspo ng to
angular frequency w, coordinates of the principal maxim in space “Kr. kg:
and the value for Sm‘ ,w) -Sm(w).

Table 1. Results of Calculating Space-Tine Spectrum

 

120
so
60
08
O0
3.
30
z.
22
20
16
Key:
1. Days 3. Relative units
2. Sec"
115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the examined frequency range, flmcticns 3mm) have two clearly isolated maximum
for each of the two horizons: tor the 100 meter horizon the madam correspond to
periods of 2'; = 34 days and ﬁrm days, while for the 700 meter horizon the naxim
correspond to periods of T1330 days and T0312 days. this behavior of 8mm) agrees
well with the dependence $(u) (Figure 2). me sharp drop in intensity between the
peaks ad the noticeable displacenent of the position of 5mm) from peak to peak
provide the grounds for separately identifying each peak of 502») within its own
range of frequencies.

'lhe principle of identification entails minimisation of the mean square deviations

of the calculated (at given on) coordinates kc, Icy from the variance curve for linear
Ibssby waves:

k
“’“T—qJ—J—“W ”‘2" m
kl " kg ‘ Run

by varying the mode parameter 352. In (I), 8 is the rate of change of the Coriolis
parameter with latitude, Rm is the deformation radim of the m-th node, and u and 0
are the components of the mean transfer velocity, determined in the identification
procedure by the least square lethod, on analogy with (2).

As a result the 3mm) peak for the 700 meter horizon corresponding to period To was
identified as the zero node of mssby waves, while the peak corresponding to period
2'1 was identified as the first mode. 'Ihe velocity cosponents for the different peaks
differed from one another, and on the average they were u--0.09 m/hec, 0-0.03 n/sec,
with an accuracy on the order of 20 percent. Identification of peaks for the 100
meter horizon produced similar results, with the conponents being u--0.06 m/sec,
0-0.03 m/sec. Ihe results permit us to evaluate, with an accuracy of about 30 per-
cent, the typical period T and wavelength A of the noted lbssby wave nodes.

Table 2. Parameters of Identified lbssby Waves

700 Meters 100 intern
Mode 0 l 0 l
1', days 240 380 200 310
A, km 90 160 70 150

3. he obtained results supplement the results given in (1,2,4). In our opinion
absence of the signs of a zezonode at horizons less than 1,000 meters, seen in these
works, is connected with the absence of mutual correlation of this made at 300-400

km scales and wavelength i=90-100 km.

In this connection it would be interesting to note the fundamental possibility for
identifying the second baroclinic mode of lbssby waves. As an exasple using results

shown in Table 1, we can independently examine the diffuse maximum of 5,..(u) for the
700 meter horizon, corresponding to a period of T2=160 days. Given the u and v
values indicated above, it may be identified as the second baroclinic lbssby wave

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mode, with parameters T=l.SOO days and A=Slo kn. However, for final resolution of
this question. we would need to perforl calculations with larger sales and scales
providing reliable information for periods on the order of 2'2.

1.

3.

4.

5.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Yefimv, V. V.. ”Space-Tine Spectrum of. Horizontal Mature “onunifornities
in the Northwest Atlantic,“ mammals, 1980 (in press).

Yetisov, V. V.. Korotayev, G. K., and Shevchenko, B. A.. “Spectral diameter-
istics of Synoptic-Scale Have lbtions," Home 6101:0712:me ISSLBDOVANIYA.
Sevsstopol', No l. 1980 (in press).

Keypon, Dz)», ”Space-Time Spectrum Analysis with High Resolution.“ TIER. Vol 57,
No 8, 1969. PP 69-79.

Sabinin. K. D., and Konyeyev, K. V., “Space-rile Spectrum of the Kinetic
Energy of Synoptic Eddies in the 700 Heter- Horison.’ «ammonia, Vol 20, 1980,
pp 356-357.

‘Otchet o rabotakh v 26 reyse HIS 'Akadenik Xurchatov'“ [hport on Projects
Conducted During the 26th Trip of the Scientific lbseerch Vessel "Akadenik
Kurchstov"). Moscow. IO All 8888. Vol 3, Part 4. 1978, p 128.

Polnikov, v. 6., and 'l‘imchenko, l. Yen ”A Method of Adaptive Spectru- Analysis
of Random Hydrophysical Processes," [DERIYB GIDIDPIZIOIEKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA,

Sevastopol'. 1980 (in press).

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

was used as a basis to study the unique features of fine-scale stratification in
different structural zones of the ocean. to generalize appraisals of the amplitude-
frequency composition and probability characteristics of ditterent regions, to
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Using the methods of factor and regression analysis, we studied the dependence of
the values of a nunber of variables: the means of layer thicknesses, the standard

deviations of layer thicknesses and gradients, the amplitudes of profile perturba-
tions. the slope of spectral curves and the parameters of distribution laws, all
in dependence upon the sun total of the factors characterizing the background

hydrological conditions.

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anisotropic Spectrum of Waveforn Turbulence in the B-Plane
A. G. Samntov
This report analyzes the anisotropic spectrum of weak turbulence of nondivergent

barotropic Rossby waves generated by quasi-zonal external effects, and it discusses
the local nature of the obtained distributions.

As we know, nondivergent barotropic lbssby waves are described by the equation
3 + (iv )-o
3761“} X 3 .M’ (I)

Here, Iaucurrent function. 8-3-0031“, n-r-mriolis parameter,1 ~Jacobian functional
determinant, '1’ - (nub-Cartesian coordinates.

In a Eburier representation, equation (1) would have the form
30—:[+ ital-Ol'l“iﬂi‘u;‘6 (Kg 33‘- K ”E. dkt (a)

E

‘d‘; 7-Pourier component of the current function,

where of“: Imam"

C
(at ' ‘1‘)“: ‘_' "a --the variance law for lbssby waves (XII J2; +115 . and

anpf [#(Kf-KIXE [E If,” «matrix eleunt of interaction (Znunit vector directed
vertically upward) .

As was shown by Ipnguet-Higgins and Gill (4), nonlinear interaction of lbssby waves
is possible at as low as the first order of the theory of perturbations, seaming
satisfaction of synchrony conditions:

w‘~wa+w;‘-0
h' E+K+Rt=o

(3)

120
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘HGAL USE ONLY

Therefore within the framework of the theory of weak turbulence, intonation occurs
at the second-order level in relation to wave energy. Kenyon (3) obtained the
appropriate kinetic equation for spectral energy density Pi, defined by the relation-

ship f l“<0" 0:,>: Fl 6 ( i‘r‘s, :

‘ u..- - ‘
_'L = 2“ 1m {uiﬁi’Fa‘ Fa" ui'ﬁi. F‘; F; +
_ . (4)

to
where u;‘.‘,.=K 5-7.5.

Interaction coefficients ”if 1:2 for resonance surface (3) satisfy the Jacobian
identities:

"u"
I

“'"zi‘f K: "i133 ’ "zugiufo 16’

K 1‘1»: 1‘3 ‘

_1 ..~ - -. .. l

w "W. + cm "W‘ «(run-ti.“ ‘”

In this case (5) and (6) are the consequences of, respectively, the laws of con-
servation of energy T F: (IE and eastmphy I?" di‘ 3 (6) is also equivalent to
the law of conservation of the projection of momentum in the zonal direction

In. [0; Edit; (7) reflects the law of conservation of the projection of momentum
in the meridional direction .

First of all let us find the equilibrium stable solutions to equation (4). for
this purpose we rewrite the integrand in (4) as

.-

.-l -I '. 4 . _ _
"“3. F; F: Fi; ("WQ r. in,” gnaw ”do“ x, *.)i
.d(wa+wi.‘+wa‘)
from which it is evident that in view of (6): equation (4) permits the solution

F,f - comt I - (a)

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ré—L— (mucous) (9)

'lhe most general solution is the drift equilibrium solution,

F‘=_——T--—__ (m)

which tynsform the collision integral to zero in view of conservation of momentum.
i

Vector s an additional distribution parameter proportional to the system's total
nonentun.

Note that spectrums (8)-(10) may hold in exceptional situations when the sources
and flows of turbulence say be ignored.

Equation (4) also has other solutions describing nonequilibriun flow distributions.
For the moment we are aware of only one way to analytically find the corresponding
solutions, based on a factoring procedure (1). In this case transformation of the
kinetic equation into factored form would be convenient not only to explicit
derivation of power spectrum but also to deter-ination of the directions of the
corresponding flows and the level of turbulence (2). For lbssby waves, the factor-
ing method is not directly applicable because, in view of the anisotropy of the
problem, the variance law and the coefficients of interaction are not uniform
functions of their argunents. however, in the case where lbssby waves are generated
by quesisonal external effects (Ké<<1@. whereKz and Kg are projections of the wave
vector correspondingly in the zonal and meridional directions), the appropriate

anisotropic s ctrume may be found exactly. And in fact, the condition
K§<<K§ (K2 =K ) is satisfied in this situation for generated waves, in this case

the law of variance and the coefficients of interaction exhibit scaler invariance:

a ﬁ ‘- "
mlk.‘ ‘ A-E 0“. (“1"-2); Highs.) =19!“ a
5 - " magi 541':
(t-l.r-3). '

~s .
Let us find the solution to equation (4) in the form F. ‘M‘l'kg' where A is a
constant and o ands are unknosms.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Performing a conformal transformation in relation “Kraut! K
fashion (1), we can rewrite the integral expression in (4) ag

J25{(K1KIK)(K9K3'&) Tm..;(a{i(j{lﬁ%i+
(—X4) "545 ”ELEM“: “RH“: )deR

in the standard

where X‘ZL’Z‘a-Zs; V-Zr-h-p- 2p

vaiously the integrand transform to zero at the following values of 5 and P:

0575/2 P= NM #0); 2)s= 312. p 302-0 quz)
315-ID-712(x-1.q:-3)

-a a“
Anisotropic spectrum: reflecting constancy of energy flux F ”K, 7 I; and enstrophy

F ”lg" K, .correspond to the first two solutions. In this case the second solution

is also equivalent to a spectral distribution satisfying c0nstancy of the flow of
mmentun in the zonal direction. 'lhe last solution corresponds to constancy of the
flow momentum in the meridional direction.

We emphasize that the found spectrum were obtained as approximations with weak
nonlinearity, and they are based on the hypothesis of local interaction.

me applicability condition for weak turbulence is satisfied when “(ti-t». :

where 11; MI is the characteristic tine of nonlinear interaction of ibssby waves with

scale K“. Using (4), we can arrive at this estimate for it: taco»: k' F. ,

Obviously the applicability condition for weak turbulence is violated in the ranges
of small wave numbers, where nonlinear effects become significant. and spectrum

ﬂeeting. must transform into the spectrun obtained by mines (5).

Next, in order that the found distributions would have physical meaning, the local
nature of turbulence must be demonstrated. that this means physically is that inter-
action of waves with a scale of the same order is much stronger than interaction of
waves of different scales. Fbrlally, the property of being local requires that the
integrals in (4) would converge upon the obtained distributions.

Elementary analysis shows that within the range Kiwi. the integrals in (4) con-
r2; #32 e found distribution. Let us examine convergence in the range
f: ) in greaterdetail. In this case the most "dangerous” terms (with which

the greatest di rgence is associated) would be ones proportional to F121. Integrating
in relation to 2 in accordance with the law of conservation of the momentum, we get
the following for the 'dangeroue" terns:

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

um
Idwma‘“:.% ”(vi ))—_7— ﬂ{

‘hm‘m.’ Ww‘ak

At small Kra. decoupoalng the amt of the 5-function and 031%; we get an
integral of the fox-n:

hag?) [Kl‘ly «‘45 (1;? * wF;

I

we can see from the expression for the argument of the 5-MCtlon that when we inte-
grate in relation to angular dimension. because K1<<K the integral transforms to.
zero. mus the found spectrum are local.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Kadomtsev. B. 3., and Kontorovich, v. 34., "Mulence Theory in Hydrodynamics
and Plan,“ IZV. WZOV. RADIOFIZIKA, Vol 1.7. Pb 4, 1974. pp 511-540.

2. Kate, A. v., "Spectral Direction of Energy Pumping and [one word illegible]
Nunbers in Stationary Exponential Solutions of Kinetic Have Equations,“
mm. Vol 71, No 6, 1976, p 2105.

3. Kenyon, K., 'Discuaslons,‘ Pmc. my. 5°C., Vol A299. 1967.

4. Longuet-Higgine. M. 8., and Gill, A. 2., “Resonant Interaction: Between Plane-
tary Haves,“ PROC. M. 5°C.. Vol A299, 1967.

S. Rhines, P. 3., ”Waves and 'Nrbulence on a Beta-Plane,“ J. FLUID. HEGL, Vol 69,
No 3, Pt 3, 1975, pp 417-444.

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Eddy-Resolving Mserical Models of Ocean currents
D. G. Seidov, K. K. Rusetskiy

me significant role played by synoptic-scale eddies in the general circulation of
the ocean is not doubted today. But at the same time even qualitative research on
in the interaction between eddies and average currents is extremely difficult owing
to the nonlinear nature of this interaction. 'me sole sensible alternative for
analytical research is numerical modeling of general circulation, which presumes
resolution of synoptic processes with a network analyser-that is, creation of
so-called eddy-resolving models of ocean currents (henceforth abbreviated as

EH's). me first an was Holland and Lin's two-layer model (5). This EH presupposes
constant density in two layers of liquid, and the sole driving force is wind-caused
friction on the ocean surface. under the action of wind-driven circulation in the
upper layer, the interface deviates from its equilibrium horizontal state, resulting
in activation of the mechanism of baroclinic instability. In this case the available
potential energy is released with intensification of horizontal currents, and it
causes intensification of the barotropic instability of average currents. he re-
lease of energy occurs in the form of synoptic eddies, the kinetic energy of which
is comparable .to the kinetic energy of large-scale circulatiOn. In view of the

fact that it assumes presence of two layers, this EH contains a number of signifi-
cant shortcomings. We can cite. for example, the fact that differential heating,
which has been found to be extremely important (2,6,7), is absent from this EM, and
deviations of the interface from its equilibrium state are small, which contradicts
the known fact that the amplitudes of isopycnic surfaces in the ocean are signifi-
cant. As a result this EH obviously overstates the effect of baroclinic instability.

Another BM developed by Robinson et a1. (6.7) is based on couplete equations for the
balance of momentum, heat and mass in a continuously stratified ocean. This is the
nest complete an, which is in a certain sense its weakness, because retention of

all wave motions up to internal waves (surface waves are excluded by the condition
that there is a "hard lid" on the ocean surface) imposes stringent requirements on
temporal spacing. 'lhe numerical network of this an is a high-level network, re-
taining certain mtion integrals, having a second-order approximation with respect

to time, and being free of nonlinear instability. But for practical purposes these
merits of the network are also the weak points of the EM, inasmuch as they preclude
the possibility for numerical simulation of its most attractive side--the possibility
for broad variation of parameters in large experimental series. Even using very high-
capacity computers, the authors of this BM were able to perform only two experiments.
In the model, notion is generated and supported by the zonal pressure exerted by

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

wind friction and by heat flux proportional to the difference between the towers-
ture of the surface layer of water and the given tonal air tesperature. 1he basic
conclusion here was that the role of barotropic instability of the average circula-
tion is significant. however, it was rather difficult in the two experiments to

indicate the role of particular factors in the mechanism of eddy formation and in
interaction of eddies and central currents.

Mention should be made of Rolland's recent work (8), which in physical nature is
close to the Holland-Lin model, but it has been sinplified, and it is a two-layer
quasi-geostropic an. m. approximation significantly increases the effectiveness
of the EM, but it hardly distorts its physics, inasmch as only internal waves are
filtered out. In our opinion however, as in (S), the assuption that there are two

layers present is unjustifiably inflexible, and it excludes extremely important
thermal effects.

One of the authors suggested the EM 3-63, which is practically as complete as the

EM suggested in (6,7) in physical respects, having the sole sinplification of
calculating vertical velocity with a quasi-geostrophic (stationary or complete)
equation of eddy balance. instead of the initial continuity equation (this is the
way internal waves are filtered out). 'Ihe numerical algorithm of our 324 differs
fundamentally from the diagrams for the models of the American scientists. It is
based on a division method using (Laks-Vendroff) diagrams ((leys-aikhtmayr) or
Euler-Lagrange diagrams: see (3)) applied to advection stages. me order of approxi-
mation with respect to time decreases: as was shown. however, artificial viscosity
is not only not detrimental to the calculations, but it may even be useful, inasmuch
as it filters out high—frequency harmonics generated in the network while practically
not distorting long waves (including synoptic eddies). which are of principal interest
in the analysis of large-scale circulation.

First we will formulate the general premises arrived at in (5.6-8), and then we will
summarize our experiments, which supplement the research cited above and shed light
on some important aspects of synoptic processes in the ocean and on their relation-
ship to thermohydrodynamic large-scale circulation.

The main physical result of the EM experiments was the revelation of the significant
role played by synoptic eddies in large-scale circulation. It was demnstrated that
even when external conditions (wind and air temperature, if the latter was taken

into account) are stable, quasi—stationary conditions do exist, accompanied by signi-
ficant transfer of nomentum and heat due to the action of the eddies specifically.
Thus eddies in the EM describe horizontal advection processes brought about by other
than the average currents. Synoptic eddies are generated as a result of the baro-
clinic and barotropic instability of currents experiencing vertical and horizontal
velocity shifts. Transferringenergy from certain parts of a water basin into others,
eddies redistribute the system's energy, and they can either dissipate this energy in
boundary layers through small-scale turbulence (parametrized within the framework of
the semi-empirical theory of turbulence (1)) or intensify average currents as a result
of nonlinear interactions (the so-called negative viscosity effect (1,4)). we should
note, however, that the negative viscosity effect was not dominant in the experiments
under discussion here, since such dominance would require a significant influx of
heat into the system (see below, and (2,4)).

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We enphasize that dynamic equilibrium of general circulation and synoptic eddies
is an iuportant element of the m experiments.

The authors performed the following experiments within the framework of the as dis-
cussed above (see (2.3)). Under the action of the stable zonal pressure of wind
friction and a heat flux over the surface of the ocean, proportional to the differ
ence between the temperature of the water surface and the zonal air tenperature,
which decreases linearly from south to north. currents arise, develop and persist
in a rectangular, enclosed basin of constant depth approximating a beta-plane.

'me role of different physical and computational paraseters in the problem was
studied in a series of experiments. Variations were ads in: the circulation con-
figuration (two circulation gyres with a free flow in the aiddle of the basin, or
one gyre with a northern boundary current): the intensity of small-scale turbulent
exchange of mmntum and heat (different coefficients of turbulent exchange): the
intensity of the flow of mmentum across the ocean surface (different amplitudes of
wind pressure); the intensity of differential heating (different values for the air
temperature differences in the meridional direction); the horizontal dimensions of
the area: the resolution of the couputation network and, finally, the structure of

the model (we ignored eddy advection--that is, we excluded nonlinear interactions:
in this case eddy formation did not occur--that is, nonlinear effects were the

most important elemnt of the EM).
'Ihe results of this series pemitted the following conclusions:

1. Circulation configuration has isportant significance. 'me principal physical
result is that presence of a free, Ieandering flow results in a dynamic cycle funda-
mentally different from that of single-gyre circulation, with not only baroclinic
and barotropic instability but also negative viscosity playing a significant role.

2. The heat flux turns out to be an extremely important factor. When differential
heating grows more intense. eddy formation intensifies, and the effect of negative
viscosity grows larger.

3. Baroclinic instability occurs in slow return currents. while negative viscosity
is concentrated in areas where the flow breaks away from the shore. BarotrOpic in-
stability manifests itself in the eastern regions of the meandering flow.

4. There exists a special zone near the place where the flow breaks away from the
shore; in it, intensification of this flow due to eddies may attain 50 percent of
its "climatic" expenditures (that is, expenditures arrived at with the use of models
of nonresolving eddies).

5. Finally. revelation of north-south asynctry is extranely important. In the case
of two-gyre circulation, eddy activity in the vicinity of the anticyclone (the southern
gyre) is significantly higher than in the cyclonic, northern gyre. We know from ob-
servation that south of the Gulf Stream, for example, synoptic processes are much more
intense than north of this current. The asymtry is intensified when the meridional

gradient of atmospheric tenperature increases.

12?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘lbday the most isportant problem is to arrive at sufficiently reliable parametriza-
tion of synoptic effects in models of large-scale circulation, inasmuch as the
objective need for accounting for these effects in simulation of general ocean

circulation, as well as in climate models and in long-range weather forecasts. is
obvious.

8mm

1. Monin, A. 8.. and Yaglon, A. IL, “Statisticheskaya gidrouekhanika' [Statistical
Hydromechanicsl, Part 1, Moscow, 'Nauka", 1965.

2. Seidov, D. 6., "A Numerical Diagram For Analyzing Synoptic Eddies in the Ocean,"
12V. AN SSSR. PIZIKA AMSPBRY I m, V01 14, NO 7, 1978.

3. Seidov. D. 6.. "Synoptic Eddies in the Ocean. A Nunerical Experiment.”
IZV. AN SSSR. PIZIKA A'i‘IDSFBRY I 0W8. V01 16, tb 1, 1980.

4. Starr, V. , "Pizika yavleniy s otritsatel'noy vyazkost' yu" ['lhe Physics of
Negative viscosity Phenomenal, ibsoow, 'Hir", 1971.

5. Holland, W. 3., and Lin, 1.. 8., ”On the Generation of Mesoscale Eddies and

'lheir Contribution to the Oceanic General Circulation,” J. PHYS. Wk”
Vol 5, No 4, 1975.

6. Robinson, A. 8., Harrison, D. 3., Hints, Y., and Sentner, A. J., “Bodies and the
General Circulation of an Idsalized Ocean Gyro,“ J. PHYS. 0mm. Vol 7,
No 2, 1977.

7. Semtner, A. 3., and Hints, Y., "Nunerical Sinulation of the Gulf Stream and
Hid-Ocean Eddies," J. PHYS. OCRANOGR” Vol 7, No 2, 1977.

8. Holland, H. R. , "The Role of Mesoscale Eddies in the General Circulation of the
Ocean. Numerical Experiments Using a Wind-Driven Quasi-Geoetrophic Model,"
J. PﬂYS. 0mm. V01 8, No 3, 1978.

128

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Formation of the Synoptic Variability of Seas Experiencing Free and
Limited Exchange With the Ocean. and the Problems of Its Gosputation and Prediction

Yu. V. Sustavov

'me influence of the nature of water exchange between the seas and the ocean was
studied in application to formation of synoptic-scale processes on the basis of a
couparison between the unique features of the variability of cyclic characteristics
of two marginal seasuBarents and Baltic.

me Barents Sea is a typical through water basin experiencing free exchange. lhe
waters of the Atlantic (the Norwegian Sea) spread through the entire depths of the
sea via the western bomdary section throughout the entire year (Figure 1A). These
waters circulate within it and then drain out, determining the basic traits of the
water dynamics and creating the unique thermal cycle of the Barents Sea. mder
these conditions the interaction of the sea with the atmsphere above it is supple-
mented by two processes associated with water exchange: variations in the advective
component resulting from variability in the velocity of the principal branches of the
North Cape current and variability in the thermal state of water masses entering the
western boundary section from the ocean (1,2). 'lhe variability of all of these
processes has a coaplex polycyclic structure, with each cosponent exhibiting signi-
ficant instability.

‘Ihe Baltic Sea is one of the seas with one-way water exchange, which occurs through
the system of Danish straits. Salt water from the ocean (the Mirth Sea) penetrates
into the Baltic Sea in the bottom horizons during answer when the thermcline

forms (Figure 18). Filling the deep layers. this denser water has a fixed upper
boundary taking the form of a zone exhibiting stable stratification (the halocline).
which prevents interaction between the deep layers of the sea and the atnosphere

As a consequence the variability of processes in the Baltic Sea depends mainly on
development of short-period wave motions in the basin connected with the'static re-
action of the water column to varying atmspheric pressure and to internal-wave.
inertial and eddy movement (3.4.6).

Of interest is the fact that while the cause is the same (water exchange with the
ocean), the situation is such that in the presence of different water exchange condi-
tions, its effect produces diametrically opposed fundamental consequences.

Penetrating into the Barents Sea, warm Atlantic waters bring with them the unique
variations in hydrophysical fields typical of the ocean , which superimpose the-selves

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORMUSEONLY

 

Figure l. A) nistribution of the hornelired Velocity of the North Cape
Current (Not Cross-hatched) in July: 3) Mean Annual Trend of
the Depth or Isohalines in the Pehnarn-Baelt strait

Key:
1 . Norway
2 . Bear Island

  

Inlay )

Figure 2. A) Hypothetical Spectnnofwater Marature Variability in the
0-200 Meter Layer of the Southern Barents Sea; B) lean Annual

Trend of Water 'nenperature in Horizons of the Central Baltic Sea

1. Years 3. Hours
2. Months

over the general background produced by the natural variability of processes in the
Barents Sea, thus complicating their already complex pattern (Figure 2A). In this
case the roles of ”oceanic" and local variability are comparable in their contribu-
tion, and in certain periods of time they may predeternine the orientation in which
processes within the sea develop: it follows from this that a significant part of
the problems experienced in the Baltic Sea have their causes outside it, and they
necessitate consideration of the variability of the therml and dynamic state of
water masses intruding into the sea tron the Atlantic.

()1 the other hand salt water from the North Sea 'arrests“ a significant part of the
waters or the Baltic below the halocline, in which even an annual temperature trend

is absent (Figure 28). thus creating an additional problem for vertical exchange
between layers and for aeration of abyseal layers where, as we know, stagnation

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

processes develop with detrimental consequences to the entire sea. In this case the
state of the sea depends on the activity of processes penetrating into the sea.

'lhese considerations predetermined the overall strategy behind the design of the

mathematical models: The key problem in relation to the Barents Sea was to consider
the probability structures of the processes and their instability, while in relation
to the Baltic See it was to consider wave and internal wave processes connected with

the unique features of the water basin's vertical stratification and with processes
developing in the thermocline and halocline zones.

‘me physical statistical mdel described here for variability of thermal conditions

in the principal standard cross section through the Barents Sea is based on an equation
for the balance of water teaperature variability in the 0-200 meter layer, given in
spectral form (2). ‘ihe left side of the equation contains the sum of the variability

spectrum of the processes, while the right side contains the similar sum of vari-
ability spectrums for the predictors:

star,» Sadr. ~ 5m... -'S('«h.+ 5m: + M1.

Here Show is the spectrum of water temperature fluctuations produced by heat ex—
change witﬁ the atmosphere, dominated by a cyclicity of 12 months: 5"”)Ta is the
spectrum of fluctuations associated with variability in the advective component
exhibiting 30, 12 and 3-4 month cycles; Shauna is the spectrum of fluctuations
of anomalies in the initial state of the water masses entering the western border
section. in which cycles of Bell years and 30 and 3-4 months are clearly pronounced.
'ihe last two components also exhibit cycles of 100, 24 and 12.4 hours. Due to their
pronounced periodicity, these short-period processes, connected with the passage of
pressure systems above the Barents Sea and with tidal phenomena, do not have a signi-
{icant influence on formation of the basin's thermal conditicns, and they are not
accounted for in the mdel. But at the same time failure to account for trend
components (Sell years and 30 months) that serve as the background for development
of synoptic-scale processes in the cosputational and forecasting models makes the
overall problem meaningless. inasmuch as these trends may have a dominant effect.

we predictor spectrum in the right side of the equation include: Numb-«he

variability spectrum for air tenperaturex 5(m)g.'§--the spectra: for sea level flue~
tuations; S(W)Afa"the spectrum for fluctuations in air temperature anomalies. In
terms of their structure, these spectrums correspond fully with the spectrum of the
resulting processes (2).

me physical basis for the forecasting method is presence of a spectral phase of
mutual fluctuation at all frequencies that reflects the inertia of the processes,
a different one for each frequency band.

he instability of the inertia interval in the first cosponent is accounted for with

the use of a nomgram (Figure 3A); it is accounted for in the second component by
change in time of the spectral phase (Figure 33): it is accounted for in the third
component by extrapolation of trend components by means of an expansion of the form

.‘T; t A; ﬂuent + w). i

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    
   

 
    

.‘&..

“l.‘.\w-.
C‘KK‘“

K‘.“\

'Jn‘ “
“Gf’r ".
.‘3 If: ‘

$9?

-

E1.
lx'
I,
I

inn-nun

 

Figure 3. A) Dependence of the Inertia Interval on Mean lbnthly Air
'nenperature (17”): B) Change in Spectral Phase (0%.15) at
Different Sections: 2.52 (1), 6.28 (2), and 15.7 (3)
radians per year. in mutual fluctuations of sea level and
the advective comment

Key: -
1. February 5. Novenber
2. January 6. April
3. Decenber 7. Inertia (mnths)
4. March

me model has been used successfully to calculate and predict the thermal conditions
of the Barents Sea.

The nonstationary nodel of thermodynamic processes in the Baltic Sea is based on
solution of equations for the dynamics of a two-layer liquid in which a quasi-uniform
layer of constant density and variable depth is located above a layer with density
varying vertically. The problem is nonstationary and nonlinear. and it requires con-
sideration of vertical and horizontal turbulent exchange. A Bussinesk approximation
and a hydrostatic approximation are used. 'me upper quasi-uniform layer, the depth of
which varies with time, is represented by a sum of three variables: the depth of
the interface in the given season (month), shifts in the depth of the interface
caused by internal wave processes. and fluctuations of the free surface. The
dynamics of the interface between water layers of different densities are accounted
for by an approximation of the vertical pressure profile for the upper and lower
layers (5).

Sore approximations of this model have been used successfully to calculate the
fields of internal wave currents and sea level.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Sustavov, Yu. v. , ”A Method for Calculating Hater Temperature in the Southern
Barents Sea on the Basis of Separate Consideration of Renal Interaction and
and neat Advection By currents,” TR. MNII, Vol 321, 1975, pp 133-142.

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sustavov, Yu. V. , "A Physical Statistical Model of Variability in the water
Temperature of the Barents See. and the Method for Calculating and Predicting
Its mmmts'” TR. 601“, lb 1‘7. 1978' Pp 34-“.

Sustavov, Yu. V. . and Guernysheve, Ye. s. , 'lhmericel Shulation of Internal
Waves of the Baltic Sea Based on Solution of ﬁlo-Dimensional Equations for the
Dynamics of e M-Leyer Liquid,‘ 'l'R. com, 80 147, 1978, pp 103-110.

Sustavov, Yu. V., Chernyeheve, Ye. S., and Hikheylov. A. Ye.. ”Concealed Eddies
of the Baltic Sea,” TR. GOIN, lb 152, 1980.

Sustevov. Yu. V. , and Chernyeheve, Ye. s. , "A ﬁlo-Layer Mathematical lbdel for
the Dynanice of the Waters of the Baltic Sea,“ TR. GOIN, lb 152, 1980.

Sustevov. J. V.. Chernyshove, B. 5., and Mikheylov, A. 3.. "0n the Synoptic
Eddy Genesis in the Baltic Sea,“ in “ XI Cont. o! Baltic Oceanogrn" V01 2,.
1973, pp 795-805.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

Linear Reaction of a Stratified Ocean to a Moving Tropical Cyclone
G. G. Sityrin

Interest in studying the variability of the ocean's physical fields connected with
the influence of tropical cyclones has risen significantly in recent years. Analysis
of unique observations made during expeditions sponsored by the State Oomittee for
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Control and the USSR Acadeuy of Sciences has shown
that following the passage of a trOpical cyclone, significant changes in the tenpera-
ture field and salinity persist in both the upper layer of the ocean and in the

main oceanic theruocline (1,2,5). 'me principal traits of the response of the
ocean's upper layer to a loving tropical cyclone have been studied theoretically
within the framework of two-layer mdels (4,7,8).

to analyze the response of an unlimited rotating ocean to a tropical cyclone moving
at constant velocity, we introduce a Cartesian coordinate systen (341,8) moving to-
gether with the tropical cyclone, and we examine steady-state nation, produced
by stably distributed wind pressure 3“ and atmspberic pressure anomalies p“ in the
ocean, proceeding along axis a: with velocity 0.

We divide the ocean into an upper layer with thickness Ho, consisting of a nixed layer
with density so and a seasonal thermcline with density gradient :90, a main thermo-
cline with thickness RT, for which the Waysyal'-Brent frequency is N(Z)>0, and an
abyssal layer with thickness ”A! for which ”-0. He will treat notion in the ocean
as being isopycnic, with the density being 9 -p(8) , where S is the Lagrange coordi-
nate, determined in relation to an unperturbed state for which 8 -Z.

In a quasi-Lagrange coordinate system (3.51.5), quasi-static notion is described in a
Bussinesk approximation by the following equation system and boundary conditions (11) :

(z-')!o¥§xy'vﬁ=m{7a3-§v ' (n
,Who'uuo. (2)
N I
:TWWSJ‘FO. (a)
e “ P.

I"! .T‘Tz-VY at 3'0. (4)

I‘°°V“’ “5-", (s)

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here gs (vwvy) is the horizontal current velocity, V- (d/clr,d/dy) at S I=const,
f is the Coriolis parameter, la is a unit vector directed vertically downward,

ﬁdu-ﬂ‘ﬂlf'. , p is pressure perturbation, g is gravity, g -Z(:c,y,S)-6 is the vertical
I A
displacement of the isopycnic surface, a-dS/dS, x is mmentun flux, and H-Hoﬂlgwl-HA.

Below the seasonal thermocline, we will assure ,‘euo. ht f Iconst, we have the
following linear relationship from equations (1) and (2):

f6 =§(vx1r). (7)

Integrating equations (1) and (2) in relation to S from 5-0 to 8-5;), we calculate,
as a linear approximation, the total change in potential vorticity in the upper
layer of the ocean in response to a tropical cyclone:

I
{050110 _ l , a = A
'.q/”. ~f -m!5(' I )JX _{u°“¢i)'(o)

where Q is the shift in the boundary of the seasonal thermocline (we ignore the

contribution made by sea level to change in the thickness of the upper layer), 0
is the mean current velocity in the upper layer and R is the radius of the trop cal

cyclones. For an axisymetrical tropical cyclone, My) is a synetrical function
and (0(0) =1:

A =..—=...rr:«~s e.

For the distribution N-aniltz‘elMII-j'll.) (8,9), 2-1,:537rm', for 1'}.- 13,171.
at r<L and f;-f,..L/r at rat. (3), t”.- “-37

In a two—layer model of the ocean, if (DC (where 0- 13—97; is the rate of propagation
of long internal waves), gravitational-inertial fluctuations occur in the interface

in a wedge-shaped area behind the center of the tropical cyclone, attenuating at

arm (8). When continuous stratification is present in the main thermocline, isopycnic
variations exist no matter what the rate of mvenent of the tropical cyclone. However,
at a sufficient distance from the coordinate origin in the wake of the tropical
cyclone (.130), the solution of the problem does not depend on :. Atmspheric pressure

p“ and the radial component of wind pressure 1% do not influence the structure of
the wake of a tropical cyclone, given a linear problem.

Flow in the wake of a tropical cyclone becomes geoatrophic, LUV?) -dZ§/dy2/f. and
at N-const we can write the solution to system (3), (7) with boundary conditions
.1? W413. 7 - r“. S - ”-an‘i‘igiii o

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at 8-3044?” with a consideration for a sonewhat simplified version of relationship
(a), my ”fungus/a may“), in the form

. . .
Y(y,5)=-;"1g :ol!1(0‘((.9¢‘osg-’II, (g)

0
where 970=yfvji7%w. ""110.
- _ chINHA'y'NrnlllrI - mum! to
6((.3)-,~. A mg: +1". c I“ Ado—Fr" ,

'me structure of kernel (10) depends on four diunsionless parameters:

I" =(r/L vﬂgﬁl:/L‘: ﬁe‘za" v funds/I;—
ly'””’l’.l,‘r/f . (qlﬂlal’. ("”4~/,.

Here L is the radius of maxim winds in the tropical cyclone, varying within
20-150 kn. At stratification paranters typical of the ocean's tropical sons,
N=4°lO‘3 sec-1, 37-13 Jun, 5-2-10-3, no -200 mters, £14 -3.5 u and f-‘l-lO'sseo",

Analysis of expression (10) would show that as 1'! increases, displacement of isopycnics
in the main thermcline decreases faster with depth. As All”, which corresponds to a
baroclinic approximation, l-l. Maxim displacement of isopycnics occurs in the
seasonal thermocline. in which case the influence stratification in the min them-
cline has on the magnitude of Q, is small, inasmh as it say be assured that No<<l.

In this case for (0-1 at y<L and 19-0 at yet: calculation of ’IM' Q10) gives

_ A _
h.=-,-.-,77.(4.-e "5"), (n)

has presence of a density gradient in the seasonal thermocline noticeably reduces
displacement of isopycnics in the wake of a tropical cyclone at N1:

It should be noted that in distinction from Geisler's linear theory (8), in this case
linearization was person-ed only for the purpose of calculating changes in potential
vorticity (8); therefore the solution remins limited for any value A:I;I<Ho.

Evolution of the wake of a tropical cyclone in the 8 -plane was studied in (9), the
results of which we can use to estimate the typical time of edstence of a baroclinic
wake--several nonths. 'me hypothesis that the cont-shaped wake of a tropical cyclone
may transform into a system of eddies cosparable with synoptic eddies encountered in
the open ocean was suggested in (6) on the basis of an analysis of observations made
of the wake of. typhoon Tess (1975). Analysis of expression (8) would show that flow
within the wake of a tropical cyclone satisfies the necessary instability conditions
obtained in (10); in particular. du/dy changes sign in the upper layer of the ocean.
however, additional research would have to be performed in order to reveal the
possibility for development of instability, and to estimate the typical tins of its
developsent.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cyclonic eddies may form in the ocean direch in response to a tropical cyclone

in areas typified by local minimms for the rate of travel of the thermocyclone.
Formation of a sufficiently intense eddy, conparable with synoptic eddies, requires
that the effect of the tropical cyclone persists for an average of a day (3). Form-

tion of a synoptic-scale cyclonic eddy in response to typhoon Virginia (1978), which
remained in practically the same place for about 3 days, was documented by measurements
made in the ocean (2).

At 0-0, the dome-shaped wake of a tropical cyclone is described by similar equations
analyzed in (3). In this case maxim displacement of isopycnics lay be appraised
using formula (11), where A uthnlde and 1' is the tine of influence of the
tropical cyclone. This formula givesths following figures for tropical cyclones Ella
(1978), Tess (1975) and Virginia (1978): A- 35 meters, run-45 meters; A .70 meters,
renu-SO meters: A = 300 casters. nap-120 meters. 'lbis agrees completely with the
results of observations given in (1,2,5). Isopycnic displacement decreases with depth

fastest in the first case (M3), lure slowly in the second (M15), and it changes
little in the main thermcline in the third (Ml).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Pudov, V. D., Varfoloneyev, A. A” and Fedorov, K. N.. ”Vertical Structure of
the Rake of a typhoon in the Upper Layer of the Ocean,' OKEANOIDGIYA, Vol 18,
No 2, 1978, pp 218-225.

2. Pudov, V. D., "The Hesostructure of 'l‘esperature and current Velocity Fields in
the Baroclinic Layer of the Ocean in the Wake of 'lyphoon Virginia," WYA,
Vol 20, No 1, 1980, pp 19-27.

3. Sutyrin, G. 6., "me Energetics of a Stratified Ocean in the Presence of a
Stationary Tropical Wcloneﬂ' Izv. AN SSSR, rxzm smart!!! 1 mm, Vol 15,
No 10, 1979, pp 1076-1083.

4. Sutyrin, G. 6., “Inactions of the Upper layer of the Ocean to a Moving Typhoon,"
METEOROIDGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA, Db 9. 1980.

5. Fedorov, x. N., Varfolomeyev, A. A” Ginsburg, A. 1., Zatsepin, A.,G.,
Krasnopevtsev, A. Yu., Ostrovskiy, A. 6., and sklyarov, V. Ye.,-"'mermal1eaction
of the Ocean-to Pa sage of Hurricane Ella," OKEANOIDGIYA, Vol 19, No 6, 1979,
pp 992-1001.

6. Pedorov, K. 8., Krasnopevtsev, A. Yu., and Varfolomsyev, A. A” "the Possibility
of Arisal of Synoptic Eddies in the Ocean was: the Direct Influence of Hurricanes

and Wm,“ in "Issledovaniye izmendtivosti fizicheskikh protsessov v okeane"
[Investigation of the Variability of Physical Processes in the Ocean], 10 AN SSSR,
1978' PP 35-40.

7. Chang, S. H.. and Anthes, 8. IL, "Ntnnerical Simulations of the Ocean's Nonlinear,

BarocJ inic Response of Translating Hurricanes," J. PBYS. common” Vol 8, No 3,
1978. PP 468-480.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9.

10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Geisler, J. 2., ”Linear Mary of the Rasponsc of. a M Layer Ocean to 3
Having Hurricane," GEOPHYS. FLUID D!!!" Vol 1, No 4, 1970, pp 249-272.

Ioguet-Higgins, H. 5., “The Raspome of a Stratified Ocean to Stationary or
Moving Hind Systems," DEEP-SEA 1133., Vol 12, No 6, 1965, pp 923-973.

Pedlosky. 3., ”me Stability of Currents in the Atmosphere and the Ocean. Part 1."
J. Aims. SCI" Vol 21, No 2, 1964. pp 201-219.

lbbinson, A. 8., "hue-nimional Dbde]. of Inertial aux-ants in a Variable
Density Ocean," J. FLUID HBO!" Vol 21, Part 2, 1965. pp 211-233.

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A New Viewpoint on Fronts in the Ocean
K. N. Pemrov

Oceanic fronts can obviously be interpreted as a horizontal equivalent to the fine

vertical thermhaline structure of ocean waters. In this interpretation the close
relationship between the initial processes leading to frontegenesis and to fine
separation of the stratified ocean water colums becomes especially obvious. In this
case fronts represent the first stage in transformation of large-scale horizontal
nonunifornities in the distribution of heat, salt. and motion into vertical nontmi-
formities: in particular, they represent the principal generators of the fine vertical
structure of ocean waters (3). We can now assume it to be an established fact that
frontal zones in the ocean contain an abundance of different forms of fine therm-
haline structure, among which intrusive forl- occupy the lost isportant place, as a
rule initiating differential-diffusive convective processes (”salt fingers” for exasple)
(4). Inasmuch as fine thermohaline structure is always a sign of active mixing of
ocean waters. it may be concluded that frontal zones and oceanic fronts are areas of
the most intensive mixing of waters, and of the nest significant vertical transfer of
heat, salt and mosentum through a hydrostatically stable pycnocline deep in the ocean.
Formation of a fine intrusive thernohaline structure at fronts is connected with
ageostrophic notions, which can inclua centrifugal cospcnents arising as fronts
ueander. and inertial fluctuations. Intrusive sags in isotherms and isohalines may
also arise during frontegenesis itself in layers near the surface (10).

The importance of the contribution made by fronts to the transfer of the heat, salt,

and momentum into the ocean water column through a hydrostatically stable pytmocline

becomes even more obvious after we appraise the frequency with which fronts recur

in different areas of the World Ocean (1). Use of satellites to observe the thermal

state of the ocean surface in combination with traditional shipboard measurement re-

sources has made such appraisal possible. It has been found that in coastal regions.
and especially wherever intensive rising of deep waters (upwelling) occurs, in inland
seas and straits, and within the vast frontal zones of large boundary currents, the

average distance between thermal fronts '1- is equal to 30-50 km, while actual changes
in Z are within 5-100 km. In all frontal zones of climatic origin in the open areas

of the ocean (for exauple in subtropical convergences). the typical value of 7
approaches 100 km. In the open ocean, in areas away from the main frontal zones and
coasts, T values rise to SOD-1,000 Jul (1). In special conditions. in connection with
large internal waves ((solitony) for examle). frontal phemnena may arise near the
ocean surface. succeeding one another in space with an interval from 1 to 15 kn.
Inasmuch as arisal of such internal waves is associated with tides, the passage of
series of such fronts may recur in certain tidal phases. Such phenomena have been
observed in the Andaman Sea and at the Serpent's math south of Trinidad. 'lhe

139
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technical possibilities for measuring the actual horizontal temerature, salinity
and density gradients in oceanic fronts have isprovsd significantly in recent years.
Use of new measurement methods has made it possible to establish that the actual
horizontal tenperature gradients are greater by one or two orders of magnitude than
those which had been discussed earlier in the literature in connection with fronts
on the basis of traditional hydrological data. In fronts of the Oregon upwelling
for exasple, horizontal tenperature gradients attain 4-5’C/kn. 'Ihe sane can be

said about upwelling fronts in the Gulf of wehuantepec on the Mexican coast (8).
Even in the open ocean, fronts have been discovered for which a tesperature contrast

on the order of re was concentrated within a narrow band only 10-30 meters wide (7).
Salinity contrasts in fronts occurring in the open ocean rarely exceed 1%03 however,
given a front width of 100 meters to 1-5 kilometers on the surface, this nsans signi-
ficant horizontal gradients. 'me strongest salinity contrasts and gradients are asso-
ciated with river plume fronts, delinited by fresh water draining from large rivers
in coastal regions of the ocean. here, salinity contrasts nay attain lo and sore

"/00 in distances of just 100-200 esters, while in the mst dramatic. cases they

may attain 4-5 0/00 in 20—25 meters (5). 11.: corresponding density contrasts at such
fronts are also very great, inasmuch as tenperature contrasts between river plumes

and surrounding waters are small as a rule.

Host thermal fronts in the ocean are accOQanied by horizontal salinity contrasts.
However, we can encounter both purely thermal and purely saline fronts. 'Ihe latter,
however, are encountered about 10 times less frequently than thermal fronts. A
density gradient across a front, elicited either by thermal or by salinity contrasts
or by both together, usually exists in quasi-geostrophic equilibrium with the velocity
gradient transverse to the front. 'lhe latter always promotes cyclonic eddy action
within the frontal zone. ‘Ihe only exception is found with shall-scale fronts (river

plume fronts for example), for which the frontal lbssby nusber

Ei—
ROO'L..f o

where u9--typical current velocity, Lontypical transverse scale of the front, and
f--Ooriolis parameter, is too great (about 30). Such fronts are not affected by
earth rotation. For nost fronts in the open ocean, however, R0 Il. hence it
follows that in terms of their dynamics, fronts may be divided to two basic groups:
a) large-scale, in relation to which earth rotation is significant, determining the
inclination of the frontal surface through the ratio of density and velocity gradi-
ents: b) small-scale, the dynamics of which are governed mainly by viscous friction
and turbulent intrusion through the frontal surface. However. unique thermohalins
fronts that do not fit in either of these categories are encountered as well. In
then, the density contributions made by horizontal temperature and salinity gradients
compensate fully for one another, such that a resultant density contrast is absent.
If these fronts are able to exist for a period of any length without breaking down
due to intrusive stratification and differential-diffusional convection, their dynamics
would have to include dominant factors entirely different from those existing in the
two other cases-wconpression occurring with displacement for exanple.

Many conceptions developed in research on frontogenesis in the atmsphere, particu-
larly the “deformation fields“ conception, are useful to analysis of frontogenesis
in the ocean. Practically all conditions favoring frontegenesis in the ocean may

be interpreted as one type of deformation field or another. use typical values for

140
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the intensity of deformation fields in the ocean are within lO'S-lO‘Ssec". Deforma-
tion fields of the highest intensity are associated with a typical frontal density
contrast formation time from 3-4 to 10 days, which is confirmed well by the agreement
of the results of modeling experiments (2,6,9) and natural observations.

A significant share of frontagenesis in the ocean is associated with synoptic-scale
eddies. If we interpret eddies and fronts as mifestations of mesoscale two-dimen-
sional quasi-geostrophic turbulence, then fronts would play the role of the required
mechanism transferring enstrophy downward along a scalar cascade. Developing on fronts
and interacting with them, internal waves may apparently cause parallel transfer of
kinetic energy (11). In turn, owing to the baroclinic instability of fronts, eddies
of smaller scale than those which had created the initial deformation field and
which were the primal cause of frontogenesis may arise. This process may repeat
itself several times in the direction of decreasing scale. the possibility is not
excluded that this is precisely the way that three-dimensional variability of hydro-
physical fields in the upper layer of the ocean is carried over from global scales
to the scales of dissipation phenomena.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Karabasheva, E. I., Paka, V. 'r., and Pedarov, K. N., l'Itre mermal Fronts Eh-
countered Often in the Ocean?," 0131401061“, Vol 18, No 6, 1978. pp 1004-1012.

2. Kuz'mina, N. P., and Kutsenko, B. Ya., “Some Ibdels of Oceanic Frontogenesis,“
in "Issledovaniye izmenchivosti fisicheskikh protsessov v okeane" [Investigation
of the Variability of Physical Processes in the Ocean], edited by K. N. Pedorov,
Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 1978, pp 83-89.

3. Pedorov, K. N., ”'lbnkaya termokhalinnaya struktura vod okeana" [Pine mermhaline
Structure of Ocean Waters], Gidromewoizdat, Leningrad, 1976.

4. Feodorov, K. IL, "Intrusive Pinestructure in Frontal Zone and Indication of
Double Diffusion," in "Marine mrbulence," Jacques C. J., Nihous (Editor).
Elsevier Oceanographic Series, Vol 28, 1980, pp 57-63.

5. Garvine, R. w., and Monk, J. D., “Frontal Structure of a ﬁver Plums,“ J. GEO-
PHYS. mesa, Vol '19, No 15, 1974, pp 2251-2259.

6. Kao, 1., Pao, H. P., and Park, 0., "Surface Intrusions, Fronts and Internal
Waves: A Numerical Study,” J. GEOPHYS. 888., Vol 83, No c9, 1978, pp 4641-4650.

7. Knauss, J. 3., ”An Observation of an Oceanic Front,“ m. Vol 9, No 2, 1957,
pp 234-237.

8. Legeckis, IL," A Survey of worldwide Sea Surface Temperature Fronts Detected
by Environmental Satellites,“ J. GEOPHYS. 838., Vol 83, No C9, 1978, pp 4501-4522.

9. Macvean, H. K., and Woods, J. D., “Redistribution of Scalars [hiring Upper Ocean
Prontogenesis: A Nmnerical Model,“ Q. JOUR. 10!. 1481'. 500., Vol 106, No 448,

1980: PP 293- 311.

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. Hoods. J. 0.. “The Generation of 'metnohaline Finescructure at Fronts 1n the
Ocean." OCEAN MDELING, July 1980.

1].. Woods, J. 0., “The Physics of Energy and mamphy Cascades in the Oeean,‘
(Preptint), 1980.

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Simulation of hydrodynamic Processes in the Sea Hith a
Model of Rotationally Anisotropic Turbulent Flows

Ya. Kheynloo

Growth in interest toward eddy for-ation is one of the last typical trends in the
present stage of development of the teaching on turbulence. The eddy concept is
now being encountered lore and more frequently in the scientific literature on

turbulence. including in the literature on oceanology. the concept of eddies as
specific carriers of turbulent current is evolving slowly, but more and sore
definitely. All of this is now having an effect on both the way turbulent current
fields are studied and on the way concrete mdels of turbulent currents are set up.
(he of the main stumbling blocks to significant progress in this direction is the
difficulty associated with inparting more or less strict meaning to the concept of
a turbulent eddy. An original means of accounting for the eddy structure of a
turbulent current field. one which permits us to avoid this uncertainty at least
partially, was suggested in (1). me idea suggested in (l) essentially entails
accounting for the eddy structure of a current field through the correlation between
the kinematic and some geometric characteristics of the current field. This tactic

affords a possibility for considering a meter of characteristics of eddy structure
important to average description of turbulent currents. ones such as the orientation
and rotation rate of eddies in the environment, some aspects of the cascade nature
of eddy fragsentation, and so on. without having to provide an exact definition of
the concept of a turbulent eddy. As the main characteristic of eddy structure, we
introduce the variable

.. 3 ' ~‘ . ‘
Q-¢I,-:;(-;.) - ”‘_

where 3'—~pulsation component of the velocity field; s--length of the arc of the
current line of the velocity field's ulsation component: the bar above the expression
represents averaging. his condition so determines a class of turbulent medias re-
ferred to in (l) as rotationally anisotropic.

me notion equations derived in (l) for turbulent nediuns having a rotationally
ar isotropic eddy structure have the form:

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vé’cF-wwr’vovatvlﬁ +1? .
931.5(6an .gvvﬁ )-H‘o‘a)§ a'
e 2‘9169‘J(';)-6 0-9;" ' I. .(2,

in which, in application to the case of marine currents under discussion here.

(p--sone medium density typical of the current area of in rest to us: p‘-true
medium density; Hemdynmc Pressure; g--gravity; u --anqular velocity of

the earth's rotation: u. hat . O-cviscoeity coefficients for the medium: J-«effective
mutant of inertia of eddies).

Equations (2) should be integrated jointly with the equation for mass balance:

0!
l m. (u): “h, . (“J , .' . l

2 g. - lag. ‘1V‘IQ‘MH. r‘tﬂlv;"l'§ )na] . N)

Let us examine some particular situations described by equations (2), (4).

l. 3'°.5'§M.Vg'-'(°.°.:¥-<ou() . In correspondence with (2). (4). in thi'
case we have

:53: '- {-3- [(H (‘ea)eu“’f-ig')l - Km"? 1663-? (6)

(I--unit tensor).

It would not be difficult to distinguish, on the basis of the appearan of equation
15), the two effects described by this equation: procession of vector about vector
0:0 caused by the moment of pulsation of the Coriolis f rca, and differences in the
rates of attenuation of different conponents of vector caused by stratification

of the medium. In the particular case where the mment of pulsation of the Coriolis
force may e ignored. differences in the at nation rates of different comments
of vector would cause rotation of vector to vector Vp'. Achievement of this
situation would apreclude the further influence of the nediun's stratification on
attenuation of . The situation is diffe ent when the pulsation moment of the
Coriolis force is present. In this case , which is oriented at a certain moment

144

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in time along Vp', will be turned in a subsequent moment of tine in relation to

Vp' by the pulsation moment of the Coriolis force-that is, it would acquire a
component perpendicular to Vo‘, and it would once again be under the power of the
suppressing action of the nediun's stratification. Bence we conclude that the
Coriolis force, when conbiued with medium stratification. plays an important role in
suppression of eddy notion in the environment.

2. {I'MQ'SN‘L 9'- «out . Equations (2). (3) lead us to the following equation
for :

‘oa(o5‘§n-§s-mm§ ‘gaﬁ-‘é'w

which describes diffusion of 5 at the time of simltaneous attenuation of is owing

to friction and fraguentation of eddies and rotation of vector 3 about vector mo
(during mtion along axis 3).

.. ‘. - I
3. o '0 .1"°o°-1\. 3 uﬁhj ).Qo'° »? ' ?.(’-”. The pulsation moment of the Coriolis
force may be ignored. Given our assumptions, instead of (2). (4) we have

e‘ 31" ' . I ..
ﬁre at; s-il-épt'ountmqgl‘ ]Q

, ‘ (a)
all - 3L [(1 .x“'$}‘)EL o‘ l .
at ' 3! 3|

Let 5 be generated by upsetting of surface waves or by drift current instability.
Because 9 decreases in relation to depth a in such a case. the typical diffusion
time for 9" also decreases with depth. Owing to this the near-surface layer would
be mixed in a shorter period of time than would the layer beneath the surface layer,
and for a certain period of time these two layers would be separated by a 'disconti-
niuty" layer-an area of relatively fast change in 13'. Note that stable stratifica-
tion--that is. a time of descent of isosteric surfaces-13 a prerequisite of forma-

tion of this discontinuity. In the case of unstable stratification, isosteric sur-
faces rise; in this case the rate of their ascent increases with growth in 9 (with

decrease in a). and the discontinuity does not form.

An effect of convective accomdation arises at 51%"(-unlltm)/(" --9 increases through-
out the entire thickness of the layer within which - Qf'éu "it"W'j' , resulting
in the mixing of this layer and a return of the situation 393/3. "$-ni(‘u)/v.'"g

within it.

4. £5 -(0.0,Q(|.v)). 9"9'd-1.” . We write the equation for density corresponding
to this case in the fore:

3%

-. . - n) i a
‘(‘-’-.‘n»v.g).g?‘.v.[uov. Q “3 L”)

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Equation (7) SMS that the action of field “3 on formation of the nedium's
density structure is sinilar to the action of the velocity of an incompressible

liquid. In particular, tield VXﬁ may serve as one of the causes for generation of
fronts. and so on.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Neuirovskiy, Yu. v., and Iheynloo, Ya. I... “(he Approach to Describing Turbulent
Gan-eats.” in “Oriolennyye netody mkhaniki sploshnykh sred" [Numerical Methods
of the Heelunics of Continuous Hediula). Novosibirsk. Vol 8. No 4, 1977, pp 116-134.

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂClAL USE ONLY

A Cascade lbdel of 'mrbulent Diffusion
Ya. Kheynloo, A. Wu

1) Let a sequence II of filtration operators be given (as defined in (1)). and let
q, qk, ng represent, respectively. the variable to be filtered, variable q
filtered bya filtration operator with subscript k (k- 1...”). and variable q
filtered by a succession of filtration operators from i to R. For any (1. the
following expansion is valid.:

I

$ P Wu) 'hi" Wu) I")

where (kl, few"; ‘14.. represents pulsation of (10,.” at the n-th level of description.

Next let q represent the concentration of a passive, conservative substance whose
behavior is controlled by the balance equation

(ﬁ-uT-VM -v-i‘m m

(3(0)--vector for diffusive flow of q at the zero level gf description). Substi-

tuting expansion (1) for q and the similar expansion for v in equation (2). after
we apply, to the equation obtained in this fashion, the first k filtration operators,

and accounting for the rules

(HM f’h-I , ""'|

($(n '9‘.“ ‘1'“ - Wu! PIN) t 3 "‘

implied by the definition of the filtration operation (1), we find

‘ -.~
(:7 ' 9“,")‘hu ’ V- Z- 3“) \n (3’

'1'.
in which

.-.

I I
‘h‘"-W(~|$(n )n (““.~--.')

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is the vector representing flow of 4(a) caused by velocity pulsations at the n-th
level of description.

Let c" ""m I, be the deviation of the concentration of this substance at the
k-th level of description, and [Sm-cm... . In accordance with (l), we have

(1')m - ($050 Z W)

The equations for ‘7(N)2 and 000 follow from equation (3), and following simle
but somewhat cmbersome transformations, they take the form

_ e _ .
@vﬁ..-M...’-v-I~<~~n-Z WM

.1.
lei (‘,

(5‘; 50'", cum-v km -§.(' l) aéuhﬂ)

In equation (4):
U'“, H ' 2““‘m "Vi-)-

(1.!) - 2(IW" '4‘") '{ID

are term describing interaction of fields qﬁm and 000. and fields C (k) and C01):

T; (M) - Z 2 av", Tm",

If.

I I

(‘1) - i. (1.00“; 1...)... Z “R" “k", N )m

“I. “II

fl

are vectors for the flow of variables qzm) and 000.

Note that in the general statement of the problem (for angle before the leaning
of the filtration operation is made concrete), variables 05.1,“). (e,n). may assume
both positive and negative values. However, if we are dealing with a substance
being carried by a turbulent flow, and if we select the filtration operations in
such a way that the scales of the described mvements would increase with growth in

[synbol omitted from original], then

(Mme) >0

“W W (a)

148

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Inequalities (S) are the mathematical expression of cascade redistribution of non-

uniformities in a turbulent flow, and they represent the basic Postulate of turbulent
diffision models.

2) It would be suitable to simultaneously introduce several filtration operators to
describe turbulent diffusion (with the goal of distinguishing processes occurring at

different scales) because in a number of cases processes occurring at different scales
either differ in their physical origin or differ in a number of iuportant character-

istics, and thus they require different closure hypotheses. Let us illustrate this
with the example of a model of diffusion in turbulent flows having a rotationally
anisotropic eddy structure. The concept of rotational anisotropy of a turbulent

flow was introduced in (2) to represent a turbulent current field characterized by
relative orientation of eddy motion in the medial. It was also indicated there that
presence of oriented eddy notion in a medium results in a certain degree of correlation
between the kinematic and geometric characteristics of the field of nation. Presence
of this correlation generates a new kinenati characteristic for the medium 5. (See
(2) for greater detail on the definition of g and on the model of turbulent currents

at 5‘0 cm). curiously 510 contributes unique features to turbulent diffusion. In-
asmuch as. on the other hand, only large-scale eddies sake a contribution to the size

of 5 (these eddies are precisely what impart orientation to eddy notion in the mediun),
represents only that part of diffusion in the medial for which large-scale eddies

are responsible.

Let us select, as the zero level of description, ”black-white” diffusion of molecules
of the substance of interest to us (note that in this case In, _ od'q’mt ,é. Cu)

is a variant of any closed volume that does not participate in particle exchange)
and, as the first filtration operator, the operation of averaging in relation to a
so-called "elementary volune"--one sufficiently large enough for all fluctuations of
molecular nature to be filtered out and sufficiently small to permit interpretation
of fields v1, ql as continuous functions of three-dimensional coordinates and tine.
We select the second filtration (averaging) operator in such a way that fluctuations
in fields 1),, q 1 caused by the motion of fine-scale eddies would be filtered out,

and we select the third filtration (averaging) operator in such a way that nonuniform.-
ties in fields 0(2) and (1(2) caused by the notion of large-scale eddies would be
filtered out. He assune the following in relation to the diffusion terms contained

in equations (3), (4):

_I’(3~IQ'). 5"qu

- ( 0", Q')“, . 1' v Q I (5)
-‘-°T“" QI)H) "“er

In equations (5), Q--arbitrary scalar; km, kg (-ccnst)--coefficients of molecular
diffusion and turbulent diffusion (the latter is the product of the mtion of fine-
scale eddies); wag-(mums tensor of the coefficients of diffusion caused by

notion of large-scale eddies.

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Expanding KT into a series in relation to 3 (with regard to the fact that K143) -0),
and limiting our accuracy to second-order tom, we have ._ --

.--u."‘s-6 +12'm‘l-h’5) ‘ (of

(BuLeVi-mivit tensor; Intuit tensor: kg“), 141’ -const). Given the aesuptione
(5), (6), we find the following from (3), (4):

& qua ‘ vim.) . (7)

% Wei": (0 - ’Zunugqu .1,(!$m)‘- 2 l?‘(-V‘“,nﬁ )1

a Cu) - vim ~ 2 n?'( '41,“,§§)'-2 r. (““31” - 9- *n ('%)’)1, ‘
ta ta. - v-Kmoz u. WM)" 2:. ( v14,“ - 7. “on i '1'“; 1‘ 1,.

F?! c m Mum}: n.(!$...)'o2 m. (9%; f. ‘ 2 H mm: )‘u

'-wllere
‘ m
L i -[('~n"y)103(,}'(%u$
‘ Cm ‘

Adhering to the notion that turbulence has a cascade nature, ve ignore the term
in equations (8) describing mlecular “dissipation" of. £1,163 q(3)2 and 0(1). Pbr
the remaining 'dissipation' terns, 2r,(v$«;|"..42¢.. (953“ we name:

21, (vghh‘a. tL Ca)

(9) .

2 u. (vqm’f‘ . %— Cm

1'5 “

Assumptions (9) close system (8). Note that 1:1! and tu have simle physical meaning.
They are equivalent to the typical attenuation time of 0(3) and C (2) in a closed
volume at Vq(3) -0.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. mowuu, A., and Kheynloo, Ya., “A Generalized Representation of a Physical
Situation, and Its Application to Hydrodynamic Problems,“ 12V. AN 3588, Vol 29,
No l, 1980, Pp 22-26.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. ﬂemimvskiy. Yu. V.. and Kheynloo. Ya. I... ‘019 Approach to Describing
mxbulent Currents." in "Guslennyye netody nekhaniki sploslmykh and"
[Numerical Hethods of the Mechanics of (butinuous Mediums], Novosibirsk,
V01 8, No 4, 1977, pp 116-134.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

Investigation of the Pinestructure of Hydrophysical Fields by a
Remote Acoustic Method

v. P. Shevtsov

‘me author shares the point of view of those scholars who attach ilportant signifi-
cance to certain most highly "active” regions of the ocean, from which perturbations
propagate over large water areas. in the formation of the finestructure of hydrophysi-
cal fields. Such regions include frontal zones, straits. dynamically complex regions,
areas of abrupt changes in bottom relief. and so on.

In order to experimentally evaluate the structure-forming effectiveness of such
regions and their influence on meso- and microscale variability. we would obviously
need to directly inspect the formation of individual perturbations and their trans-
formation over a long period of time. It is extremely difficult to do so by the
traditional eethods for making measurements in the open ocean from aboard ship. We
need a more effective method for performing such studies and reflecting the obtained
information, one which should not restrict the maneuverability of the vessel. It
is only under these conditions that we can hope to be constantly in touch with the
area of perturbations. and thus trace their mvewents in space and their change

in time.

'mese requirements are fully satisfied by a remote acoustic method. based on vertical
sounding of the water colunn, to which increasingly more attention has been devoted
in recent times. 'mus in works (1.2.8). the correlation between vertical fluctuations
in sound-scattering layers and internal waves was analysed and the possibility for
observing them with the help of [one line omitted from original] was demonstrated.

however, biological accusulations making up sound-scattering layers have the capacity
for active mvemnt. and they exhibit three-dimensional nonuniformity. hey are
weakly'associated with the structure of hydrophysical fields. and their behavior

is governed mainly by illunination. Moreover sound-scattering layers are located

as a rule in a narrow range of depths, and their vertical dimensions are significant.
For these reasons active sound-scattering layers cannot serve as a dependable indi-
cator of finestructure throughout the entire water coluun.

Acoustic nonuniformities associated more closely with microstratification of hydro-

physical fields are of interest in relation to the problem at hand. “mesa include

passive suspended matter accumlating in layers having a higher density gradient,
high frequency fluctuations in the speed of send, the finestructure of its vertical

isz

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gradient, and so on. Estimates show that anisotropic fluctuations in the speed

of sound scatter acoustic energy with effectiveness greater by several orders of
magnitude than that of a statistically uniform medium (6). and they may be observed
by a remote method (3). The possibility for recording sound reflected from a
microgradient structure was demonstrated in (4), while that of recording sound re-
flected from accumulations of various sorts of suspended matter was shown in (5.7)-

According to our data, obtained with an echo sounder at 30 kHz in different regions
of the Pacific Ocean, the finestructure of hydrophysical fields is completely re-
flected by the distribution of acoustic irregularities. In most cases it exhibits
sufficient contrast. and it may be recorded by reflected scattering. Under favorable
conditions it may be observed remotely with exhaustive completeness.

 

Figure 1. Example of Recordings, Made From a Drifting Platform, of
Acoustic Signals Scattered in a 25-75 Meter Layer

      

Key:
1. Meters
2. Minutes
"Oe-
ll
0. .-
at-.. C.\: D—
". f-Imm mun-nonunion“.
n-L...J...‘..Jl.-u)
a. 03 _
Figure 2. Synchronous Recording of Acoustic Nonuniformities Having a
Layered Structure (a) and of the vertical Distribution of
the Speed of Sound in a 170-270 Meter Layer (b)
Key:

1. Minutes

153

FtﬂliJFFICLAL USII(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As an example, Figure 1 shows a fragment of a tape recording of signals scattered in
a near-surface layer down to 80 meters. Individual layers, including ones less than
a meter thick, with stable boundaries that fluctuate vertically in response to inter-
nal waves, are clearly seen. ’me dark portions of the recording correspond to layers
with a greater capacity for sound scattering. 'l'hey are uniquely associated with
layers of abrupt vertical change in hydrophysical parameters (Figure 2).

vaiously we can use the remte method to easily solve the leen of measuring the
spatial dimensions of individual finestructure elemnts. Figure 3 shows a recording
obtained aboard a vessel traveling at low speed, reflecting the typical distribution
of layers in space. Of interest is the presence of extremely extensive stationary
layers exhibiting considerable tilt in the horizontal plane.

     

-..'..'. .' .

' ' ' 4 - 0......H. .- . . .. . . ,

. -.. , .W . .--..' .H’z‘. . , —v — ,
Mfgwgv ~..- ‘9' .n. ’ ,: I; (a . laL. ,3. a}? z '”‘__.--_x 11““ up,

2w¢‘—=--.- . -. :- . . 2 ' - e 1' W“ “ . '
|.-"‘\‘" ' W‘ - '- . ' ' ’..y’ ' -. ¢ 5 t." ,. ' - -. '; 'v.‘- a... “m
. . ' ‘ .. . '.~ . ' - . ‘. - : .. . .
...4.\....’-I?.:.5‘hmn’u rrfznhin’nﬂio-M'Ivl-iruIHH-w9¥rnnv1r

H= L.__M_____Jmc2)

Figure 3. Structure of the Upper Layer Recorded by the Renate
Method on a Vessel Traveling at Low Speed

Key :
l . in te rs
2 . Nautical miles

  

nu I...”,..........l....u .....'........ ...... ........ [Fl-0|;Ilwell'ql.l""llllif:;ll'ltl"Dlll;qtl.. ‘-
“"(l) "Br—w—Tﬁu (2) *—
Figure 4. Areas With Developed Microstructure Recorded by the Remote
Method on a Straight Tack Aboard a Vessel Traveling at a
Speed of 12 Knots
Key:
1. Meters
2. Nautical miles

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A nunber of the Kuril Islands were studied by the remote method. he obtained data
show that areas with developed microstratification form. 'mey have horizontal
dimensions on the order of 10 Jun, they exhibit great stability over time, and they
move hundreds of kilometers. Figure 4 is a large-scale recording of such areas,

made aboard a vessel traveling at full speed. micany the finestructure of these
areas is extremely stable in the face of the constant influence of intensive short-
period waves. his is evidence of the weak capacity internal waves have for causing
irreversible deformations, and it raises doubts as to their significance to formation
of the fmestructure of the ocean's hydrophysical fields.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Andreyeva, I. 8., and Makshtas, Ya. 11., "Fluctuations in the Depth of Sound-
Scattering Iayers and Internal Haves," WYA, No 3, 1976, pp 436-440.

2. Andreyeva, I. 8., and Hakshtas, Ya. m, “Internal Haves and Sound-Scattering
layers at a Temperature Discontinuity,’ OKEANOIDGIYA, Vol 17, No 3, 1977,
pp 440-444.

3. Korenev, v. G., Iomeyko, A. 1., Lyubitskiy, A. A., and Ibsenberg, A. 0., "mree-
Dimensional Scattering of Sound at 25 kHz in the Presence of a Desperature Dis-
continuity Layer," AKUSTIGESKIY mum, Vol 25, No 4, 1979, pp 556-565.

4. Kaye, G. ’1‘., and Anderson, V. C., "Scattering From Oceanic Hicrostructure:
Detection With a Large Aperture Array," JASA, Vol 66, No 3, 1979, pp 842-849.

S. Orr, H. H., and Hess, R., “newts Acoustic Mitoring of Natural Suspensate
Distributions, Active Suspensate Resuspension and Slope/Shelf Hater Intrusions,‘
J. GEOPHYS. 855., Vol C83, No 8, 1978.

6. Proni. J. R., and Apel, J. R., “Ch the Use High-Frequency Acoustics for Study
of Internal Haves and Microstructurs,‘ J. (moms. 1135., Vol 80, 1975, pp 1147—
1151.

7. Proni, J. 8., Newman, 1‘. C., Rana, D. C., Drake, D. 3., Berberian, G. A.,
lauter, C. A. Jr., and Sellers, In, "Ch the Use of Acoustics for Studying
Suspended Oceanic Sediment and for Determining the Chest of the Shallow Thermo-

cline," DEEP-SEA RES" Vol 23, No 9, 1976.
8. Proni, J. R.. Ostapoff, F., and Sellers, R. 1... "Acoustic (bservations of High-

Frequency, Near-Surface Internal Have Groups in the Deep Ocean mring GATE,‘
DEEP-SEA RES., Vol 25, No 3, 1978, pp 299-307.

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me Mechanism Behind Pinestructure Generation by Narrow-
Spectrma Internal wave Trains

v. I. Shrira

l. A mathematically grounded hypothesis on the mechanism behind generation of fine-
structure by internal wave trains was proposed for the first time in (1.?) : It was
demonstrated that a train of weakly nonlinear short internal waves induces low fre—
quency notion exhibiting fast vertical oscillation; in some cases this notion may be
interpreted as the finestructure of hydrophysical fields in the ocean. while it
describes a number of significant traits of finestructure well, this hypothesis does
nevertheless encomter certain difficulties in explaining the origin of finestructure. .
Hithin the framework of this hypothesis: a) generation of finestructure is reversible--
that is, finestructure disappears after the wave train passes: b) finestructure created
by one wave train exhibits almost regular naturenthat is, it is typified by a specific
spatial scale: c) finestructure is generated by trains of only relatively short internal

waves .

We considered the following fundamental circumtances in our development of the idea
that finestructure is low frequency motion induced, in view of nonlinearity, by a
train of internal waves: in most real situations. as will be shown below, low fre-
quency motions induced by a wave train are superimposed over the dispersion curves

of internal waver-that is, we observe resonance three-wave processes involving two
waves from the wave train and a certain low frequency wave. Such processes have been
solved for an infinite number of low frequency modes. 'mis means in particular that
in the course of its evolution, a wave train generates low frequency waves exhibiting
fast vertical oscillations and lagging behind the wave train, so as to form ”wakes“
after the train passes. We define finestructure as the superiqnsition of such wakes.
This interpretation of finestructure eliminates the difficulties mentioned above. and
leads to some new consequences which will be discussed below.

2. The problem of mathematically describing generation of finestructure by internal
wave trains may be examined within the framework of the basic equation for internal

waves :

I
2“ awaﬁza‘w’OQ’JLV-g (n

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here w--vertical velocity component, N2(s)-Vyaysyal' frequency, {luau-ions para-
meter, F--contains nonlinear terms not explicitly expressed through :9. Using an
asymptotic procedure, we can obtain equations describing joint nonlinear evolution
of the wave train and the low frequency waves it induces (3,”. However, in view of
the large nunber of low frequency modes participating in the motion, it is difficult
to analyze these equations. even numrically. But if we are not interested in the
reverse influence the induced low frequency waves have on evolution of the train,

we can reduce the problem to solving a set of linear one-wave equations with the
source on the right side, proportional to Vldlz (where A is the amplitude of the

train's couplex envelope). The solution to this problem is written as a standard
Fourier integral.

'lhe wave vectors of induced low frequency waves are found from the conditions of
three-wave synchrony between two waves from a train with basic frequency w and wave

vector 75, and the low frequency wave. In this case the usual condition of synchrony
reduces to the following:

V576 - 3, (2)

where Viningroup velocity of the main wave of the train. 3--phasal velocity of the
low frequency mode (throughout the text, the ' syxbol signifies that the variable
is associated with low frequency notion). Dependencies Mk), v(k), and 6(72) are
found by solving the basic boundary problem:

3:, rogk’v-O; via): v/I-I)-o (3)

Here ‘H represents ocean depth. It is easy to see that condition (2) is satisfied in
relation to all modes of boundary problem (3) for which d(i)~£v(k)-that is. for
sufficiently high modes“ (see Figure 1). (However, a finite nuwber of low frequency
nodes is excited effectively).

Thus the wave vectors of low frequency waves induced by a wave train are found in
accordance with condition (2) from the deviation relationship (note that the orders
of magnitude of G) and E are do and kAw/w correspondingly, where Aw is the breadth of

the train spectrum) and their amlitudes are found from the solution of corresponding
one-wave equations with a known right side.

3. Let us discuss the question of interpreting low frequency waves generated by a
train as finestructure in greater detail.

Any excited high low-frequency mode creates velocity, density and pressure fields

that exhibit fast vertical oscillations. The velocities of particles and deviations
in density in low frequency waves are small, while the density gradients (complementary
to the Vyaysyal' frequency) may be sizeable, being comparable with the gradients in
the main stratification structure. mus we should refer primarily to the finestructure

of the density profile or the Vyaysyal' frequency.
'Oondition (2) cannot be met only when the frequency of the main wave is on the order
of R.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LS! ONLY

 

Figure 1. Deviation (hirves for the First Pour lbdes of Internal Haves.
Resonance 'lriad Involving Participation of No Waves Prom
Vicinity ”0' RD and a Fourth-Mode Low Frequency Have

One wave train effectively excites a large master of high low-frequency modes having
different typical vertical scales h (h‘VH/S, where S is the mode Miter). Inasmuch
as low frequency waves remain at a given point following passage of a wave train
(their group velocity is lower). superimsition of their values should produce a
highly disordered finestructure having no specific vertical scale.

The typical scale of horizontal variability in finestructurve generated by a single
wave train is on the order of the length of the wave train--that is, approximately
(km/co)”. The typical scale of tenporal variability is on the order of the reciprocal
of the train spectrum width--that is, approximately (600)". The life span of fine-
structure. interpreted as the typical time of dispersed‘diffusion of the wake of one
wave train, may be assined to be on the order of u/(Aw)‘. mat is. the finestructure
arising as a consequence is an extremely long-lived formation.

The structure of high low-frequency modes may depend significantly on density non-
uniformities of greater scale. In accordance with the properties of boundary problem
(3), the zero values of the fundamental functions concentrate together in areas with

high density gradients. This means that the vertical scale of finestructure must
decrease in areas containing density interstratifications of greater scale, and in-

crease vith decrease in IF. and with depth in particular. 'Ihus finestructure must
manifest itself mre intensively in density interstratifications, which is in agree-
ment with observed data.

The maximum vertical scale h of finestructure generated by a given train depends on
the minimum number m of the lowest excited mode. (In is found from the solution of
boundary problem (3)). Thus for exanple, in an ocean with a depth of 3-103 meters,
with an upper uniform layer lo2 meters thick and a lower layer exponentially strati-
fied with ”-110 - 3-10‘3sec", a wave train containing a main wave with length lo

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equal to 2-1.03 meters generates low frequency waves beginning with the 24th mde
("1:20; when A0 is halved, "1 increases to 92; when 10 is quartered, m increases to
1.4103. Owing to strong dependence upon mug), the mlitudss of low frequency
waves and the density gradients they create depend strongly on the length of the
main wave Ao.‘ Pbr internal waves most typical of the ocean, )«0- 5°102 enters: in
this case the maximum vertical scale of finestructure is h~2 meters. 'Ihe horizontal
scale L of finestructure, estimated as nlo (where n is the nunber of waves in the
train) is on the order of 5-103 meters. The ratio h/L is approximately 4'10“ .

me intensity of finestructure depends not only on the anplitude of the train gener-
ating it. do, but also on the breadth of its spectrum. when a balance exists between
nonlinearityzand dispersion, the intensity of finestructure is proportional to (10%.
and not to do (as in a nonresonant cud—that is. given the sane anplitude for the
generating wave, the finestructure is expressed with much greater clarity. In the
absence of a balance between nonlinearity and dispersion. the intensity of low

frequency waves and. consequently, finestmture is inversely proportional to the
breadth of the train spectrum.

Thus this model for finestructure generation (in which finestructure is interpreted
as superimposition of the wakes of internal wave trains), being a further development
of'the model proposed in (1.2), eliminates a nunber of difficulties encountered with
that model. and it is more consistent with the experimental data.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Borisenko, Yu. 0., Voronovich. A. G., neonov, A. 1., and Hiropol'skiy, Yu. 2..
'"lhe Theory of Nonstationary weakly Linear Internal Waves in a Stratified Liquid,"
12V. AN SSSR. PIZIKA AMERY I 0mm, Vol 12. No 3, 1976. pp 293-301.

2. Voronovich, A. 6.. leonov. A. 1.. and Miropol'skiy, Yu. 2., "The 'meory of Forma—
tion of the Pinestructure of hydrophysical Fields in the Ocean," OKBANOIDGIYA.
Vol 16, No 5, 1976, pp 750-759.

3. Shrira, v. I.. “lbsonant Self-Influence of Internal Haves,“ DAN SSSR. 1980 (in
press).

4. Shrira. V. 1., "Induced Currents and lbsonant Self-Influence of Internal Waves
in a Rotatin Ocean " OKEANOLDGIYA. 1981 (in press).

We emphasize that in the presence of a resonant excitation mechanism, in contrast

to the situation descriLed in (1.2). finestructure is generated not just by short

internal waves alone.

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
w“.

wq.
wo.
wo.
be.
3..
an.
hm.
AA.
am.
am.
“Q.
“a.
am.

um.
um.
we.
3..
w».
mu.

‘1: ¢ :I1II4

<1 a. was :6 H052.

«a. 3.. wu<ow.u°b 3.33
z. w. agnowo<o< :58
«a. z. "6:59.352 .33

<.

m
H
x
I
r
U.
r.
H
5—.
0.
v.
w.
<.
>.
K.
m.

0. ”avian: $65

2. wnonpmoc 388

o. gunoc 3de

a. guano—raw 30:5
P 9955 9H.

0. maﬁa—«9‘ .33

a. morgue 3028

v. 2633:: :8“:

5. 8.5003 avg

<. 9.5.55? .8 8H5
0. mg 3055

>. 8.363% Sen!

n. EDP: “Egan—"m .3.
u. 5.56550“ 365

o. 8036:: 3.33

z. mononod 263:
c.5515: 335

x? v. 5.3550 GENE
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. man - Institute of Oceanology inani P. P. Shirskwv, USSR Academy of
Sciences. macaw

5. IF? - Institute of Applied Physics, USSR Academy of Sciences, Gor'kiy

6. 1TB? - Institute of memphyaics and Electmphysice. Estonian 853
Academy of Sciences, Tallinn

7. no com - State Oceanographic Institute, Leningrad Division, Leningrad

8. 1461 - Marine Hydmphyeical Institute. attainien 583 Academy of

Sciences, Sevaetopol '

9. m1 - Pacific Ocean Oceanological Institute, Far East Scientific
Center. USSR Academy of Sciences, Vladivostok

mPYRIGHT: Eesti rsv 'neaduste Anaemia, 1980

11004
CSO: 8144/1441

.mp.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY