FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10408

24 March 1982

Translation
HOLOGHAPHY AND OPTICAL

INFORMATION PROCESSING IN GEOLOGY

Ed. by

8.8. Gurevich’ and: O.A. Potapov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phoneti.ally or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HOLOGRAPHY AND OPTICAL INFORMATION PROCESSING
IN GEOLOGY

Leningrad GOLOGRAPIYA I OPTICHESKAYA OBRABOTKA INFORMATSII V GEOLOGII
in Russian 1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 1-181

[”Holography and Optical Information Processing in Geology”, edited by
Professor S.B. Gurevich and Candidate of Technical Sciences O.A.
Potapov, Leningrad Physicotechnical Institute imeni A.P. Ioffe, USSR
Academy of Sciences, 500 copies, 181 pages; for related material, see
JPRS L/9206 23 Jul 80 No 13/80 (P000) USSR Report: Cybernetics,
Computers and Automation Technology, pp 76-93]

CONTENTS
Page
Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . J . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....... . . . ......... . . . 2

Geophysical Holography as a New Field in the Investigation of Geological Objects
(O.A. Potapov) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Architecture of an Opticodigital Computer Complex With a Canon Kain Memory
(A.H. Kuvshinov, O.A. Potapov and R.G. Taritdinov) . . ............ 8

Devices for Entering Infornetion From an Optical Computer and Their Coupling
with an Electronic Computer (A.H. Kuvshinov, V.V. Kiryukhin, A.I. Orlov, O.A.
Potapov and L.S. RyazanOV) . . . . . . . . . . . . . - . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

.Power (Illumination Engineering) Calculation of Opticoelectronic Systems for
Processing Graphic Information (Yu.G. Yakushenkov) . . . . . . ..... . . . .25

Some Questions on the Designing of Liquid Crystal Matrix Screens (A.B.
Beklenishev) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........... 28

On the Use of Semiconducting Photoreceivers for the Accelerated Input of Optical
Information (A.v. Dutov) . . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

On the Question of the Phase Encoding of Seismic Signals in Opticodigital
Information Processing Systems (V.P. Ivanchenkov and 3.1. Kochegurov). . . . . 44

[I - USSR - N POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mathematical Modeling of Processes for Recording Seismic Signals on a Thermo-

plastic Carrier During Their Input Into the Optical Computer of an Optico-
digital Complex (V.P. Ivanchenkov and 0.6. Dolnatova). . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

On the Possibility of Optical Modeling of Spatially Nonhomogeneous Mediums
(V.B.KonstantinovandD..F Chernykh).................‘.... 56

Designing Optical Binary Filters by Inman's and Lee's Methods and Using Them for
the Filtration of Seismic Materials (Ye.N. Vlasov, AM. Kuvshinov and 0.1..
Potapov)................................... 62

"Horgol" Marine Seismoholographic System (0.A. Vorob'yev and A.D. Besborod'ko) . 67

On the Possibility of Creating a Closed Cycle of Holographic Transformations
(B.V.Pilipishin)............................... 13

On the Question of Using Holographic Systems in Marine Geology and Geophysics
(A. V. Zuyevich, V. B. Gavryushin, V. V. Alekseyenko and v.31. Sugak). . . . . . . 80

Some Results of the Optical Processing of Geological Data (V.V. Alekseyenko,
A.A. Bevin, A.V. Zuyevich, V.I. Kara and EN. Senin) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88

Using Cathode-Ray Memory Tubes in Seismic Information Processing Devices (Ye.!u.
Yakush)........................ ..... .......95

Principles of the Color Visualization of Seismic Data (v.1. Dubyanskiy and VJ.
Starodubtsev).................................102

Information Characteristics of a Field of Seismoholographic Images (our.
Oleynik).......... ..... ....................109

The Isochrone Method in Seismic Holography (V.N. Moskalenko and 0.A. Vorob'yev). 112

On the Realization of Complex Filters in Polarized Light (V.P. Ivanchenkov and

P.V.Mineyev).......................... ....... 118

Processing Seismic Signals With Depiction of Dynamic Features (I..Ya. Maslina and

L.P.Dunayeva)................... ...... .......123
.. b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTATION

This collection of works is based on reports that were read at the Second All-Union

Seminar on Geophysical Holography and Opticoelectronic Methods of Processing Geolo-
gical and Geophysical Information, which was held in Gelendshik in 1979.

The main theme of the collection is the use of the principles of holography in geo-
physical investigations, the processing of large masses of geological and geo-
physical information. and the creation of new instruments and devices for the
opticoelectronic processing of geological and geophysical materials. Along with
swnnary reports with this'theme. there are discussions of specific methods and re-
sults. The material presented in the articles is of great value for the development
of projects provided for in the national economic plan and the interdepartmental co-
ordinating plan tor geophysical holography. and it enables specialists in geophysics
and geology to become acquainted with the new possibilities offered by holography
and optical information processing methods in problems of searching for and

surveying useful minerals, and also has the purpose of attracting the attention of
specialists in other areas of science and technology to these important problems.

1

FOR 0FFK]A1.USE(MQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOREWORD

The complexity of the problems to be solved during geological surveying work aimed
at various types of mineral raw materials requires an increase in the effectiveness
of geophysical surveying methods that is based on the use of contemporary achieve-
ments in physics, nathematic and the technical sciences. Good prospects in this
field are related to the use of the principles or holography and the processing of
the information obtained by opticodigital computer complexes.

The first projects in this field, which were carried out in various organizations
belonging to the USSR Ministry of Geology. the Ministry of the Gas Industry, the
Ministry of Higher and Secondary Specialized Education and the USSR Academy of
Sciences, indicates the possibility of using the basic principles of holography in
the solution of geophysical surveying and geological problems. The results that
have been obtained make it possible to hope for success in the utilization of geo-
physical holography and the opticoelectronic processing of original data for the so-
lution of practical problems.

This collection of works consists of reports that were given at the Second All-Union
Seminar on Holography and the Opticoelectronic Processing of Geological and Geo-
physical Information, which met at Gelendzhik in 1979 under the auspices of the
Southern Branch of the USSR Academy of Sciences' Institute of Oceanology. The ma-
te.ials published in it will help attract specialists to problems, the solution of
which is of great national economic importance.

2
FOR OFIHCJAL USE2CMULY
I m 550.836

GEOPHYSICAL HOLOGRAPRY AS A NEW FIELD IN THE IRVESTIGATION OF GEOLOGICAL OBJECTS

Leningrad GOLOGRAFIYA I OPTICHBSKAYA OBRABOTKA INFORMATSII V GBOLOGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 6~8

[Article by O.A. Potapov from collection of works "holography and Optical Informa-
tion Processing in Geology", edited by Professor 8.8. Gurevich and Candidate of
Technical Sciences O.A. Potapov, Leningrad Physicotechnical Institute imeni A.P.
Ioffe, 088R Academy of Sciences, 500 copies, 181 pages]

[Text] The author elucidates on the problems that it is neces-
sary to solve in the near future for the purpose of improving the
accuracy and effectiveness of the study of geological objects by
geophysical methods. He describes the structure of the basic di-
rections of the work being done in the field of geophysical ho-
lography, which has been called upon to take up the challenge of
solving part of the complex problems involved in geological ex-
plorations for the purpose of finding various types of mineral
raw materials. He also points out the importance of creating
highly efficient opticodigital complexes for the accelerated pro-
cessing of ever-increasing volumes of inforaation.

The rapid development of the USSR's national economy requires the creation of a
strong material and raw material base, in connection with which a special urgency
is attached to integrated geological and geophysical investigations aimed at the
solution of the important national economic problems formulated by the 25th CPSU
Congress for the purpose of improving the quality and effectiveness of geological
prospecting for gas, oil and other types of mineral raw material.

For the successful solution of the problems set before the branch in the area of
supplying the USSR's national economy with mineral resources-fuel and energy raw
materials, in particular--it is necessary to expand the utilization of progressive
geophysical methods in geological surveying work and provide a considerable im-
provement in the scientific and technical level and effectiveness of geophysical
ixvestigations that is based on the use of the latest achievements in physics,
mathematics and the technical sciences. One of the important and promising areas
for the further development and improvement of geophysical research is the develop-
ment and introduction into production work of methods and systems for the excita-
tion, registration and processing of wave fields (seismic wave fields, in particu-
lar) for the purpose of modeling (visualizing) studied objects on the basis of an
analysis of an entire wave field and its amplitude and phase characteristics. This

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE{NULY
FOR 01-1-10“. USE ONLY

branch of science has received the name "geophysical (seismic, acoustic, electro-
magnetic) holography."

Geophysical holography is a new and higher stage in the development of wave methods
for exploration geophysics, which are distinguished by their extremely good resolu-
tion. This concept encompasses a broad circle of theoretical and experimental
problems in geophysical research: the development of a theory for the recovery of
objects exposed to a wave field; the creation of efficient, nonexplosive sources of
wave energy; the development of techniques, equipment and technology for field ob-
servations, systems for processing and interpreting the information that is ob-
tained, and facilities for the visualization of objects that are being studied. It
is obvious that when developing the fundamental principles of geophysical holog-
raphy, we must take into consideration and use (with the appropriate modifications)
the methods and achievements of optical holography. At two interdepartmental con-
ferences on geophysical holography that were held in 1978 and 1979 on the instruc-
tions of the Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences, the importance, promise,
great national economic value and the high economic effect expected from the intro-
duction of achievements in the field of geophysical holography were emphasized. In
these conferences an extensive, integrated program for the development of projects
in this field was prepared with the participation of many ministries and depart-
ments. This program was used as the basis for the formulation and discussion of
the interdepartmental coordinating plan of work to be done during the 1980-1990
period and the "Physics--to the Depths of the Earth" program.

 

Figure 1. Structure of the basic directions of work being done in the area of
geophysical holography: 1. development of theoretical principles of the use of
seismic (a), acoustic (b) and electromagnetic (c) fields; 2. modeling of pro-
cesses: mathematical (a) by computer calculations, physical (b), utilizing the
principles of optical holography; 3. development of sources of seismic (a).
acoustic (h) and electromagnetic (c) energy; 4. development of equipment for
recording seismic (a), acoustic (b) and electromagnetic (c) fields; 5. creation
of efficient field visualization devices: analog (a), digital (b) and three-
dimensional (c) representations; 6. development of methods for observing and
recording wave fields: land (a), sea (b) and aerial (c) variants; 7. process-
ing of large amounts of information: creation of high-speed (a) systems for
rapid field processing on the basis of opticodigitel devices (d), creation of
expedition-level computer complexes (b) based on opticoelectronic (e) and
opticodigital (f) systems, creation of regional-level computer centers (c) us-
ing powerful computers (g). special high-speed optical processors (h) and opti-
cal displays (i).

4-5

FINICHﬁNCJAl.USB(NNLY
From the structure of the basic directions of work being done in the field of geo-
physical holography that is presented in Figure 1, it follows that in the overall
cycle of necessary developments, an important place is given to the creation of
highly efficient optical, opticoelectronic and opticodigital equipment, both for
the recording of wave fields and the solution of physical modeling problems and for
the processing of data gathered during field observations. This is no accident,
since the practical utilisation of even normal geophysical profile observations
demonstrates that the opticodigital area has acquired great urgency in relation to
the processing of large masses of information [1-3], as has the creation of spe-
cialized seisnbholographs [41. The simplicity of such devices, as well as their
portability, low'cost and economy of operation makes this area one of primary im-
portance.

Based on the work experience that has been amassed to date, it is possible to say
that the solution of problems in geophysical holography by computers may give more
accurate results, but it requires the use of powerful computers and the development
of peripheral equipment, and will be accessible only in large, regional, depart-
mental computer centers after the creation of the appropriate software, specialized
processors, displays and other devices to use with a computer. At the present time
it is a well-known fact that despite the explicit successes that have been achieved,
the development of facilities for the automated processing of geophysical and (in
particular) geological information on the basis of computers continues to lag be-
hind the growing branch requirements. Scientific and technical progress in geology
and exploration geophysics is making ever greater demands on the speed, efficiency
and timeliness of the processing of large masses of data and is forcing us to look
for new ways to solve the problems with which we are faced. In connection with
this, it is advisable to develop and build expedition-level high-speed optico-
digital systems that have a large optical (holographic) memory capacity and the ca-
pability to carry out parallel procedures, and that are distinguished by a rational
distribution of the processing operations between electronic and optical computers.
The presence in such complexes of a coherent optical processor, the appropriate
matching devices and systems for the operational input and output of half-tone in-
formation will insure the rapid processing of geological and geophysical materials
of different types.

The projects in progress at the present time make it possible to state that we have
all the capabilities for the realization in the near future and the introduction
into production work of highly efficient opticodigital complexes that are able to
operate under both stationary conditions at expedition bases and field conditions,
as well as on board scientific research ships. The cooperation of several organi-
zations subordinate to the USSR Hinistry of Geology, the Ministry of Higher and
Secondary Specialized Education, the USSR Academy of Sciences and other departments
is contributing to the successful realization of the program of projects that has
been planned in this field. The work is being coordinated by the USSR Ministry of
Geology's "Soyuzgeofizika" Scientific Production Association. The practical reali-
zation of the plan for geophysical holography as a whole requires the enlistment in
this work of additional organizations that have mastered the contemporary achieve-
ments in the fields of physics, mathematics, cybernetics, instrument building and
production technology.

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Potspov, 0.A., "The Problem of Processing Large Masses of Geological and Geo-
physical Information nnd Ways of Solving It." in "Gologrsfiya i opticheskays
obrsbotks informstsii v geologii i geofizike" [Holography and the Optical Pro-
cessing of Information in Geology and Geophysics]. Leningrad, 1979, pp 5-18.

Potapov, 0.A., Vorob'yev, O.A., and Dubysnskiy, v.1. , "The Holographic Optico-
digital Processing of Seismic Surveying Data," ibid., pp 95-101.

Pocspov, O.A., "Optichesksys obrsbotks geofizicheskoy and geologicheakoy infor-
mstsii" [Optical Processing of Geophysical and Geological Information], Moscow,
Izdstel'stvo "Nedrs", 1977, p 184.

Potapov, 0.A., and Dubysnskiy, V.I., "The State of Seismic Holography and the
Opticoelectronic Processing of Seismic Recordings ," REGIONAL'NAYA, BAZVBDOCH-
NAYA I PROMYSWAYA GBOFIZIKA: EKSPRESS~MORWSWWII “MU“. MINIMU-
NOGO SYR'YA I GEOLOGICHESKIKH RAZVBDOC’ENYKH RABOT, Moscow, “0 13, 1979, pp 29-40.

POROFHCIALUSEONLV
UDC 550.834
ARCHITECTURE OF AN OPTICODIGITAL COHPUTER comm WITH A canton MAIN MEMORY

Leningrad GOLOGRAPIYA I OPTICHESKAYA OBRABOTKA INPORHATSII V GEOLOGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 "av 80) pp 9-15

[Article by A.u. Kuvshinov, 0.A. Potspov and R.G. Tasitdinov from collection of
works "Holography and Optical Information Processing in Geology", edited by
Professor 8.8. Gurevich and Candidate of Technical Sciences 0.A. Potapov, Leningrad
Physicotechnical Institute imeni A.F. Ioffe, USSR Academy of Sciences, 500 copies.

181 pages]

[Text] The authors discuss the problem of organizing optics-
digital compleres for the accelerated processing of geological
and geophysical information. They propose a system with a common
main memory that meets the contemporary requirements for the or-
ganization of computer systems. They also present specific plans
for connecting a coherent optical processor to a Yes-22 computer.

The need for efficient processing of large masses of seismic information makes the
practical realisation of opticodigital computer complexes (OTsK) ever more urgent.
An analysis that we made of methods of combining optical (0V!) and digital (TsVH)
computers enabled us to draw the conclusion that the most realistic way of inte-
grating a TsVH and an OVH at the present time is the creation of multimachine,
directly connected computer systems [1]. After a discussion of the two types of
directly connnected systems--through a common area in the main memory and through
the input-output channels-we selected coupling through the input-output channels.

Basically, the choice of this principle for the physical organization and practical
realisation of the OTsK was the result of the contemporary level of development of
OVH's and memory systems that would make satisfactory OVH'a and TsVH's as far as
operating speed and capacity are concerned. At the present time, a Yes-series TsVH
has a main memory (0?) with a capacity of 0.25-0.5 Hbytes, although on the basis of
its architecture it can have an OP with a capacity of 16 Hbytes [2).

In connection with the already begun industrial production of solid-state, large-
capacity memory elements that are small in size but have the required capacity,
the possibility of using them to create a large-capacity 0P appeared to be quite
real.

There are examples of the construction of an 0? based on solid-state elements that
has a capacity of l H bits and is contained on a single plate [3-5].

llll(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘0FFKJAL.USEIDNLY

A high-speed, large-capacity or makes it possible to build an UTsK acoording to a
better principle of physical organization; namely, the principle of directly con-
nected systems with a common 0?.

In this case the jointly used part of the 0? plays the role of a "post office box”
for the exchange of information between the computers. One of them places some in-
formation in the "post office box" and signals the other that this has been done.
After receiving the signal about the readiness of the information, the second com-
puter can then use it in its work.

The advantage of the coupling of the OVM and the TsVH through the memory line over
coupling through input-output lines consists of the following elements:

the information exchange speed is increased and the exchange program is simplified;
during multiprogram work the TsVM does not waste its memory resources on the stor-
age of large masses of information;

when there is down time, the CV! and TsVM can use the common 0? for their own needs,
thereby increasing their own productivity;

when checking the results of the optical processing of information, the TsVH does
not have to take into consideration all of the prepared information, but can con-'
sider only a few nodal points by checking the results of filtration, while in the
case of coupling through input-output lines, the TsVM is obligated to take all the
prepared information into its own memory. This operation makes it possible to
achieve a considerable reduction in the amount of time needed to select the re-
quired optical filters;

it is necessary to synchronize the operation of the TsVH and the OVH, which makes
it possible to operate the OVM with analog-to-digital (Ala?) and digital-to-analog

(TsAP) converters with any operating speed without reducing the TsVH's computing
power.

Our proposed plan for an opticodigitsl computer complex constructed on the princi-
ple of directly connected systems with a jointly used part of the OP is shown in

Figure l. The complex contains a general-purpose Yes-1022 TsVH, additional inter-
nal storage of the dynamic type, based on solid-state elements (D020) and having a
control unit (BUDOZU), and an optical computer. The Yes-1022 TsVN is in its stan-
dard form. The OVH consists of a laser (0K0), an optical information input device
(OUVV) with a control unit (BUOUVV), a coherent optical processor (K0?) with a con-
trol unit (BUKOP) and an optical memory (OOZU), an optical output device (00V) with
a control unit (BUOUV), and a microcomputer or microcontroller of the “Elektronika

35) type.

The coherent optical processor consists of a set of lenses. as well as spatio-
temporal (PVHS)'or spatial (PMS) light modulators. The KOP's control unit trans-
lates digital information into control signals for the light modulators. The opti-
cal memory is used to store a set of s;andard filters. The OUVV, with its control
unit, carries out spatial modulation of a coherent light flow in accordance with
the information entered in the KOP. The optical output device, with its control
unit, converts light information at the KGP‘s outlet into an eight-bit digital code.
The microcomputer controls information input and output.

When matching the Optical and digital parts of the complex, we took into considera-

tion the bit configuration of the Yes-1022's memory lines and the amount of infor-
mation that can be processed simultaneously in the OVH. For the Yes-1022 and most

Ff”!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬁﬂE(MﬁLY
Key:
1. Magnetic core storage 10. Coherent optical processor control
2. Hemory lines unit
3. Yes-1022 processor ll. Laser
4. Input-output lines 12. Optical information input device
5. Archive memory 13. Coherent optical processor
6. Hiniconputer (controller) 14. Optical information output device
7. Additional internal storage control 15. Optical information output device con-
unit trol unit
. Additional internal storage 16. Optical memory

coo

. Optical information input device
control unit

microcomputers, the word length of an exchange with the OP is 2 bytes [2,6], which
organization was also used for the 0020. The nozu'. capacity is determined by the
number of independent reference points and the dynamic range of the optical input-
output devices. When each point is encoded by a single byte, which provides a dy-
namic range of 48 decibels and an independent point mass of 3,000 x 300, the 0020's

capacity is l Hbyte.

10

FUR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
ml OFFICIAL we ONLY

 

Figure 2.
Key:
1. Yes-1022 memory lines 6. Multiplexer
2. Synchrogenerator 7. Regeneration unit
3. Register block #. 8. DOZU information lines
4. Strobe light operating unit 9. Microcomputer lines

5. DOZU control lines

Since a microcontroller of the "Elektroniks 85" type can address an 0? using only
64 Kbytes [6], it is necessary to add to the BUDOZU an additional register that
switches the DOZU‘s memory areas.

For the actual development, we used the most common Yes-1022 computer model and

K565RU2 solid-state memory circuits of the dynamic type, which have a capabity of
16K bits. For matching with both processors, the DOZU was divided up on plates.
Each plate has a capacity of 32 Kbytes, and there are 32 of them in the 0020.

The DOZU's operation is controlled by the BUDOZU, the structure of which is shown
in Figure 2.

The DOZU control unit must operate in two directions: the Yes-1022's memory lines
and the microcomputer's lines. This is done by two units-~register block 1 and re-
gister block 2. A strobe light operating unit controlled by a aynchrogenerstor is
used to gate the K56SRUZ microcircuits. The multiplexor switches information from
about the 0020's address from three directions: both processors and the regenera-

tion unit.

11

FOR Oi1ﬂ(1Al.USE|NVLY
The regeneration unit is needed to store recorded information in the DOZU, since
the K565RUZ microcircuit is of the dynamic type. when operating with either com-
puter, the other computer's lines are blocked. Both processors have the same pri-
ority for access to the 0021!. the regeneration unit has the highest priority. The
regeneration period is no more than 2 ms, which provides the now with 96 percent
accessibility.

The URI! operates in the following sequence. The TsVH computes the original infor-
mation from the archive memory (magnetic tape) and enters it in the now. Upon
completion of info’i'mation entry in the D020, the TsVH records a code with respect
to a certain address (A0) that contains information about the completion of work
and to what unit this information should be transferred. when it receives an ”Ac-
cess" signal from the rum, the microcontroller takes the control information from
A.) and begins to extract the information from the 9020 and send it to the proper
device. The distribution of addresses in the D020 is strictly defined and corres-
ponds to the optical pattern.

Afte: the optical processing cycle is completed. the information enters the now
through the wow. The microcomputer does the addressing. When the entry in the
D020 is completed, the microcomputer can repeat the optical processing cycle, using
another optical filter, or transfer the processed intonation to the TsVH. The
presence of the conventional code in A0 and the reception of a signal to block the
Yes-1022's memory lines serves as the TsVH access signal.

It should be mentioned that during the processing of information recorded on photo-
graphic film, the O‘IsK can operate discretely; that is, the WM carries out the ne-
cessary filtration without the participation of the TsVH. In this case visual
evaluation of the filtration is required. When the evaluation is positive. the re-
sults of the OVH's filtration can be published as results both through the when
0P into the Yes-1022 and into the archive masory with subsequent processing in the
TsVli. The proposed OTsK structure reduces to a minimum the interdependence of the
ova and the O‘l'sH and, at the same time, makes it possible for them to exchange in-
formation at a high speed. '

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Potspov, 0.A., Vlasov, Yeah, Kuvshinov, A.H., and Kiryukhin, V.V., "Principles
of the Organization of an Opticodigital Computer System for the Processing of
Geophysical Information," BKSPRESS-INPORHAISII, Moscow, VIEH [expansion unknown),
No 10, 1980, pp 1-11.

2. Drozdov, Ye.A., et a1., "Elektronnyye vychialitel'nyye mashiny edinoy sistemy"
[Electronic Computers in the Unified System Series], Moscow, Izdatel'atvo
"Hashinoatroyeniye", 1976.

3. Kouker, "A 16 Kbit ZUPV [expansion unknown] That Simplifies the Realization of
the Memory of Large Computers and Microcomputers," EEKTRONIKA, No 9, 1977

(translated from English).

4. Titov, Yum” et al., "A Semiconducting Memory Module for a Hierocomputer," in
"Hikroelehtronika i poluprovodnikovyye pribory" [Microelectronics and Seni-
conducting Instruments], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Sovetskoye Radio, No lo, I979.

12

I’ll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

5. Ken, Oldkhen, "The First 16-bit ZUPV'a: Design and Organization." WRONIKA,
No 4, 1976 (translated from Engliah).

6. Val'kov, V.H., "Hikroelektronnyye uptavlyayuahchiye vychialitel'nyye koupleksy"

[Microelectronic Control Computer Conplexea], Leningrad, Izdatel'atvo
"Hashinoatroyeniye" , 1979 .

13

MMLUSEONLY
UDC 550.834

DEVICES FOR ENTERING INFOEHA‘HW ERG! AN OPTICAL COMPUTER AND THEIR COUPLING WITH
AN ELECTRONIC CGlPUTER

Leningrad GOWWIYA I OPTICHESKAYA 03mm WMTSII V GEOWII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 16-31

[Article by A.H. Kuvshinov, V.V. Kiryukhin, A.I. Orlov, 0.A. Potapov and L.S.
Ryazanov from collection of works "Holography and Optical Information Processing in
Geology" , edited by Professor $.13. Gurevich and Candidate of Technical Sciences

0.A. Potapov, Leningrad Physicotechnical Institute imeni A.P. Ioffe, USSR Academy
of Sciences, 500 copies, 181 pages]

[Text] The authors discuss the problems involved in matching
electronic and optical computers when organising opticodigital
complexes for the accelerated processing of geological and geo-
physical information. They propose and describe an optico-
mechanical device that has been developed and is characterized by
a comparatively low (in comparison with solid-state coordinate-
sensitive elements) operating speed, but a large dynamic range
and accuracy in information transmission.

The basic technical problems that have to be solved for the creation of optico-
digital systems consist of the development of optical information input-output de-
vices and units for coupling the optical and digital parts of the system. Since
coherent optical computers (OVM) are the ones most widely used in seismic research,

the problem is reduced to the development of facilities for exchanging information
between a laser installation and a digital computer.

The result of the processing of information in coherent computers is presented in
the form of the distribution of the brightness of the light flow from the laser in
the mapping plane (when determining the signal spectrum) or in the image plane
(during optical filtration). In order to enter a light signal in an electronic
computer (m) it is necessary to compute the resulting light pattern, transform
the light signal into a digital code, and match and synchronize the information re-
ception and transmission channels.

Before we determine the requirements that must be satisfied by optical information

output devices and units for coupling them with an M, let us mention the basic
features and specific nature of the output of seismic data. As has already been
mentioned, the result of the processing in an (WM is presented in the form of a

light pattern. This special feature imposes special limitations on the choice of

14

MOI'I’ICIMJJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the image scanning method with respect to the argments during quantification. In
this case it is practically impossible to scan an image by moving it mechanically
or to make calculations with the help of a light beam formed by an optical system.
This special feature can, of course, be eliminated if the distribution of the
brightness in the laser unit's output is recorded on a phototransparency and the
photographic image is then entered in the m. The problem of entering a photo-
graphic image in an M is now solved quite simply, since devices for the computer
input and output of photographic images have been developed. Among them we can
mention the complex of optical half-tone information input-output devices developed
at the IAE 80 AN SSSR [Institute of Automation and Electrometry, Siberian Depart-
ment, USSR Academy of Sciences) and the 8103 [Special Design office] of RP [possibly
Observation Instrumental-«he "Zenit" and the "Bomb"--aa well as the complex of
equipment for the autmatic input and output of inforamtion from photographic film
and photographic paper that is used with the Minsk-32 M [1]. However, it should
be mentioned that the output of information from an OVH onto photographic film is
an undesirable operation, since its realisation takes time and the additimal
transformation of the information is a source of error.

The second special feature is that incandescent lights, gas-discharge tubes and
cathode-ray tubes are used as illuminators in existing input systems. In laser
units , the light flow has a rigorously fixed wavelength. It is necessary to take
this fact into consideration when selecting the devices to be used to convert the
radiant energy into an electrical signal and to carry out the energy calculation.

A third special feature is the specific nature of the actual seismic information
that is being processed; namely, its frequency and dynamic range and the duration
and multichannel nature of the recordings. The basic requirements that must be
satisfied by output devices (NV) for information frmn M's and their coupling
units are determined on the basis of the three special features listed above. Let
us evaluate the basic parameters of an optical output system, among which we will
include: number and arrangement of the elements during quantification of an image
with respect to an argtment, shape and dimensions of the reading aperture, the num-
ber of signal quantification levels. Starting with these parameters it may be pos-
sible to select a specific 00V plan. as well as determine the operating speed and
the accuracy of the transformations.

The number of image scanning elements during quantification should be determined by
the well-knowni-theorem of references [2] and, in addition, should meet the accuracy
requirements for the realization of the computation algorithms in a digital comput-
er. The aperture's dimensions will be selected on the basis of the condition of
obtaining the maximally possible signal amplitude at the OW's outlet in order to
provide the required signal-to-noise ratio for the given image reading error.

with a linear dimension along a line of image taken from the OVH of X t 36 am: for a
seismic signal with duration 1' - 6 s and an upper frequency f“ - 120 8:. according
to the theorem of references we obtain a spatial quantification step Tx s 0.025 am,
while the number of reference points is II - 1,440.

All the basic algorithms in a digital BVM are realized with an accuracy of 2 ms.
Therefore, in order to insure the required accuracy in the computations , the number

of seaming points during quantification will be determined by the following formu-
la:

15

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
”‘7/0 t. , (l)

where At I 2 ms:

The computed N 3' 3,000 reference points for T I 6 s of the realization of a seismic
signal does not contradict the value obtained in accordance with the theorem of
references. It is obvious that the condition of insuring the accuracy of canputa-
tions (1) is more rigorous, so we should accept N I 3,000, while the value of TX
will by 0.012 Ill. ’In order to eliminate intonation losses and mixing of the
tracks, it is necessary to have the number of scanning elements n with respect to
the second spatial coordinate (with respect to a frame) equal the number of tracks
in the time profile being processed. The total number of scanning elements is then
n' I "-11. In order to eliminate information losses, it is necessary that the
height (h) of a reading element be equal to the step of the recording of the seis-
mic traces of the seismic section taken from the EV“. It is necessary to select
the width (A) of a reading element on the basis of the calculation of the permissi-
ble error in the readout of the image. Let us evaluate the error in the image
readout for a signal with a harmonic shape. For this case, the distribution of the
intensity of the coherent source's emissions in the WWII output plane will be de-
ternined by the upression

.‘7Lzls‘g'1U—congx}, (2)
where l- - maximum value of the image's intensity.

When reading an image with an element of width A, the reading error at a given
point will be determined by the expression

”his“; alga-EMA 4'11, (3)

while the relative reading error 6_(_x) .is

2;"? ""1" ‘ '
3...: “13312:... *fti'iii’.xooz. ""

The families of the dependences of the maxim relative error 6 on the frequency
and the reading element's width are presented in Figure l. with the graph in Fig-
ure 1 it is possible to determine that when the reading element's dimension A is
chosen to be equal to the quantification step TX (that is, A I 0.012 In), the mag-

nitude of the reading error will not exceed 6 I 3 percent for signals with spec-
trum within the limits 0-120 Ila.

The second stage in image quantification is quantization of the brightness. In
connection with this, the number of quantization levels, which determines the word
length of the image encoding, is of substantial importance. Quantization of the
brightness of an image's elements is usually done in such a manner, on the one hand,
as to preserve the image's dynamic range and, on the other, that the quantization
required for this number of levels is minimal. During quantization, the entire
range of changes in brightness, from 'n to x' is divided into separate seg-
ments AM, where i I the number of the nterva . The brightness value within each
quantization interval is replaced by a fixed value.

16

FOR MY
FOR OFHOAL USE ONLY

6;% 11in
ea
5 ' .
' 40.92;!
J
2 0,00”
I
8W
7 I do 50 m 00 ’ t " In
Figure 1. Dependence of reading error on width of the reading el-
ement.

The dynamic range of the image at the (Nu'a output does not exceed the input sig-
nal'a dynamic range. Let us determine the number of quantization levels from the

expression .. ‘
n=209£::. ‘”

where D I the dynamic range. when apatiotemporal light modulators, which make it
possible to preserve the dynamic range of input signals of up to 60 d3 [3], are
used for the input into the ova, by using the following well-known expression we
can determine the encoding word length:

gme-m”:m. (w
m
where m I encoding word length. Prom formula (6), m I 10 when D I 60 (13.

For the entry of information frat photographic film in the OVH, it is required that
n I 7.

0n the basis of the calculated value of the word length, it'is possible to select
the specific type of analog-to-digital converter.

Thus. for signal duration ‘1‘ I 6 s, f I 120 Hz, n I 300 and D I 60 dB, what will be
taken out of the OVM is a mass of independent reference points measuring 3,000 x
x 300, with subsequent 10-bit encoding of each signal value.

An important characteristic of the 00V, which determines the accuracy of the infor-
mation transformation, is the static characteristic of the converter that

17

MOWWWLY
transforms the light signal into an electrical one. This characteristic, in turn,
is basically determined by the photoelectronic converter's energy characteristic.
Without discussing in detail the power matching of the laser unit and the 00V, the
technique of which requires a special discussion, let us determine the basic re-
quirements thaE'muat be met by the photoelectronic converter's characteristics and
parameters, as well as the basic power relationships. The equipment accuracy of
the conversion of a radiant beam into an electrical signal will depend both on the
degree of linearity of the energy characteristic and on the relationships between
the useful signalqthat has been received at the converter's input and its internal
noise. Let us write the linearity requirement in the following form:

5% 'fiiiigﬁgﬁggi' (7)

where Kn I required coefficient of linearity of the energy characteristic; I..g,
1min I currents in the photoelectronic converter's circuit for the corresponding
light flows 0,33 and .min at its input.

KA is usually taken to be equal to 0.98-1.02. In view of the fact that between the
values of the light flow 0 and brightness B there exists a proportional relation-
ship and that from the values of B it is possible, by using well-known formulas, to
convert to O, the following relationship should be satisfied:

Egg 9 .6429; (s)
wmin 6’“ '
The second condition for accurate operatipn is determined by the relationship
“Pu." ‘ 0‘49“ (9)

where othr r I threshold flow of the photoslectronic converter with respect to the
radiation source; AOi I change in the flow corresponding to a single quantization
level.

When determining othr r it is possible to use the technique explained in [6], keep-
ing in mind in connection with this that the radiation source is monochromatic and
the fact that the photoelectronic converter operates under conditions of constant
background illumination caused by the specific nature of the readout of signals

from the OVH.

Depending on dimension A, which determines the necessary resolution during scanning
(or the number of independent reference points), we choose the scanning method and

the assembly layout that realizes this method.

The most promising scanning method involves the use of solid-state, matrix photo-
converters. Such photoconverters are notable for high reliability and small size,
as well as a large dynamic range. Of special interest is the use of instruments
with charge communication (P28).

A P28 is a series of simple HDP (metal-dielectric-semiconductor) structures [5,6].

The metal electrodes are several micrometers (6 x 3) in size and are arranged on a
common semiconducting substrate, at a minimum distance from each other, so that

they form a linear or matrix regular system. Each rzs element is capable of trans-
forming an element of a light pattern having the same dimensions. When a matrix

18

ltﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(H¢LY
FIIICNHN€JAI.1”NE(HVLY

rr”
(1

 

J ”K Jﬂﬂ (9)
Figure 2. Diagram of optical output device based on a PZS.
Key:

1. Time pulse generator 5. Scale amplifier
2. Instrument with charge communica- 6. Command unit
tion 7. Analog-to-digital converter
3. Light 8. Sampling unit
4. Output device 9. To computer‘s multiplex channel

photoreceiver irradiates a P28, the entire light pattern is instantly transformed
into a pattern of charge packets.

The device for output from the P28 operates in the following manner (Figure 2).

Light striking the P28 is converted into charge packets that are sent sequentially,
by timing pulses, from the matrix into the output device (V0). The V0 converts the
charge packets into a voltage level, which enters the scale amplifier (EU) and then
the A73? [analog-to-digital converter]. From the ATsP, the information-—in digital

l9

INDI OFIWCIA1.1EEE(HNLY
form--is sent to the coupling unit. The command unit (BK) controls the timing
pulse generator and the ATsP.

st's have the_following photoreception characteristics:
1) light sensitivity—-500 uA/lm;

2) threshold light ssnsitivity--lo lux-o;

3) area of spectral sensitivity A-l.l + 0.4 pm;

0) resolution--10 lines/mm;

5) integration time-tenths of a millisecond;

6) dynamic range-31,000:l (60 dB).

An important advantage of matrix st's is that during an exposure, the entire light
pattern is converted into a pattern of charge packets and then-with the help of
the timing pulsesé-self-scanning takes place. This makes it possible to reduce the
conversion time to tenths of a millisecond. Host ATsP's operate at speeds lying
within these limits, so the questions involved in matching st's and ATsP's pose no
difficulties.

Matrix st's having 102-105 photosensitive elements covering an area of SOD-1,000
umz have already been developed. They make it possible to record information with
a density of (1-2)-105 bits/cmz.

Let us mention here that the existing matrices with 232 x 288, 512 x 520 and 696 x
x 475 scanning elements are not capable of.converting the entire light pattern at
an OVH's output instantanteously, since the required number of scanning elements is
3,000 x 300. Therefore, additional technical facilities are needed in order to
read the entire light pattern. The most acceptable way of solving this problem is:
l) assemble a mosaic consisting of several P28 matrices;

2) read fragments of the optical pattern with the help of coherent light guides on
several P28 matrices;

3) move one st fragment mechanically and then carry out fragment-by-fragment read-
ing.

At the present time, we know that line (linear) 928's based on 1,738 scanning ele-
ments have been developed.

By using such gauges, it is possible to create a combined optical-mechanical reading
device in which scanning with respect to one coordinate is carried out electrically

with the help of the P287gauge, while with respect to the other it is done with the

help of a mechanical assembly.

Thus, such a device can join together two important advantages: the high resolu-
tion of the opticomechanical output device and the high operating speed of the
st's output device.

At the present time we know of examples of the use of television camera tubes
(PTT)--vidicons, in particular--to read the light pattern at an OVH's output. The
principle of the construction of an 00V based on a vidicon is explained in [7].
Figure 3 is a block diagram of an 00V based on a vidicon. The device operates in
the following manner: the complete television signal (PTS) goes from the vidicon
to a scale smpliﬁier (MD) and then into the analog key (K). From the analog key.

the image signal that has been separated from the PTS is sent to the ATsP, where it
is transformed into a digital code.

20

FOI¢0FFIJA1.USI(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Diagram of optical output device based on a vidicon.

Key:

1. Video monitoring unit 6. Analog-to-digital converter

2. Light 7. Coupling unit

3. Vidicon 8. To computer's multiplex channel
lo. Scale amplifier 9. Sampling unit

5 . Analog key

Vidicons use the grating method of scanning an image, with synchronised, staggered
scanning that is continuous with respect to the lines and discrete with respect to
a frame; the grating is rectangular in shape. In addition to the image signal, a
PTS contains a frame-synchronized pulse, a frame-quenching pulse, a line-
synchronizing pulse and a line-quenching pulse. In order to separate the signal
image (which contains the information about the light pattern) from the PTS and in
order to quantify the image with respect to a line, a sampling unit (UV) that opens
the analog key at certain moments of time is used. The transformation process can

be monitored visually on the video monitoring unit (m).

Modern vidicons have sensitivity, resolution and a signal-to-noise ratio that are
adequate for most cases of image input into a computer and are also small and have
comparatively low signal nonuniformity over the target's working field.

At the same time, an output device based on a P'l'l‘ has substantial shortcomings, the
main one of which is the presence in the PTS (in addition to the video signal) of
synchronization and quenching signals , which make analog-to-digital conversion dif-
ficult and require the use of additional equipment. Such an output device requires
a high-frequency reference generator (up to 12 ms) for line quantification of the
image, as well as a high-speed ATsP, which involves considerable difficulties.

In addition to this, vidicons have a light-sensitive port with a small area (up to
l cmz), with a maximum resolution of up to 44 lines/us. This does not make it pos-
sible to read the full output light pattern. The speed reduction method is used to
match a vidicon with an ATsP [7] . This method makes it possible to take one read-
ing from each line when a frame is scanned. In connection with this, the readout
rate is reduced to 15,625 Hz. Such a speed matches that of most ATsP's, which per-
form up to 20,000 transformations per second. The readout time for an optical im-
age fragment equal in area to the light-sensitive port is 24 s. A high rate of in-
formation readout from the WM can be achieved by using uni- or two-dimensional
coordinate-sensitive radiation receivers [8,9]. However, such receivers have poor

21

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
resolution (up 'toI'S-m lines/III) and a small dynamic range. At the same time, when
the signal is presented in the form of a silhouette image or a binary matrix code,

such converters can he very useful. In this case they determine the coordinate of
the image's boundary, proportional to the signal's amplitude, where there is an
abrupt change in :the transmission coefficient.

The most realistic possibility for the complete reading of a light pattern from an
ova, with high spatial resolution, is still the use of plane opticomechanical scan-
ning circuits. "We have developed an OUV with plane Opticomechanical scanning and a
grating scanning method. The coordinate table is moved by a step drive. In the
device there is no system for monitoring the accuracy of the reading element's lin-
ear movement, since precision-machined screws and nuts with no play are used. The
output device operates in the following manner (Figure lb): the computer sends an
inquiry through the coupling unit to the scanning assonbly's camaand unit (BK).

The 3K implements the functions for program control of the scanning assembly. From
the BK the cosnand enters the horizontal-displacement step motor control unit
(BUShDG) and the motor (ShDG) makes a discrete movement of the reading element
along the first line. At the end of the first line, the BR sends a signal to the
vertical-displacement step motor control unit (BOShDV) and that motor (ShDV) moves
the reading element to the next line, after which the process is repeated.

Light from each element of the pattern passes through - light guide into an FBI)
[photoelectric multiplier], which carries out a linear transformation of the light
into an electrical signal. The electrical signal enters the scale multiplier (HO)
and then the analog-to-digital converter (ATsP). the H0 matches the P80 and the
ATsP. The ATsP transforms the sequence of voltage levels into a digital code. In
order to avoid erosion of the image, when the motor is moving the reading element
the BR sends a “Transformation Prohibited" signal to the ATsP.

From the ATsP, the code carrying the information about the intensity of the light
flow from a light pattern scanning element goes into the coupling unit (38).

It should be mentioned that the on we developed is intended for use with a
"Kogerent" laser unit, with a Yes-1022 an acting as the control computer.

The coupling unit's basic purpose is to implement the direct interaction of the
M's multiplex channel with the optical output device. with its help, the most
nearly complete interaction of WM and EVH hardware and software is achieved. The
coupling unit must satisfy the following basic requirements:

1) establish cos-unications by means of standard input-output interface lines (sig-
nals);

2) carry out the exchange of the sequence of signals for address. comand and data
transmiss ion;

3) insure the informational data transmission rate and monitor the data.

Carrying the optical information, the digital code from the ATsP enters the signal
converter (PS), which matches the the ATsP's signals with the buffer memory (3?).
'dhen acted upon by control signals from the control unit (BU), the information
passes from the BP through the comunication unit with channel (38K) and is trans-
mitted hyte-by-byte through the multiplex channel (K!) into the M's main memory
for storage and progrsmed processing. Upon completion of the reading process, the
output device's BK sends the BU a "Stop" signal that is encoded in the cos-land

22

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
X

o

aﬂouwao-I
. .

‘0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(NONUWIOUIUJ you

(In/mm!) - Net (II/U Vet‘A'l/l;

 

u 17) um

 
 

(Pﬁmkenw l

(18) . '

L__________(2gz___'___l
Figure lo. Diagram of opticomechanical output device and coupling unit.

Opticomechanical scanning assembly
Horizontal-displacement step motor
Photoelectric amplifier

Light guide

Light

Vertical-displacement otep motor
Optical bench
Vertical-displacement step motor
control unit

. Horizontal-displacemnt step motor

control unit

10.
ll.
12.
13.
1’6.
15.
l6.
17.
18.
19.
20.

23

Scale amplifier
Analog-to-digital converter
Gourmand unit

signal converter

Control unit

RS [possibly shift register]
Buffer memory

Comnd register

Coupling unit

Coumnication unit with channel
To computer's multiplex channel

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
register (RK) and sent to the EVM. After this, the progrmed processing of the
information that has been obtained begins.

It should be mentioned that the optical output device developed by us matches a
"Kogerent" OVM'very well. The entire mechanism is mounted on a small micrometric
table and installed on the bed of an optical bench. Although the reading time for
a complete light pattern is significant (12 min), in connection with this the WM
does receive the entire mass of seismic data. This makes it possible to test and
develop algorithms for the processing of seismic information with the required 2-ms
accuracy.

BIBLIMRAPKY

l. Crishin, M.P., Kurbanov, Sh.M., Markelov, V.P., et al., "An Equipment Complex
for the Automatic Input and Output of Experimental Ralf-Tone Information With
the 'Minsk-ZZ' Electronic Computer," ammua, No 4, 1971, pp 27-32.

2. Kotel'nikov, V.A., "Teoriya potentsial'noy pomekhoustoychivosti", [Theory of
Potential Noise Stability], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Cosenergoizdat", 1956.

3. Mari, Zh., Dzhonson, Zh., and Azan, Zh.-P., "Image Reproduction Devices Based on
the Pockels Effect and Their Utilization," in "Dostizheniya v tekhnike peredachi
i vosproiavodeniya isobraaheniy" [Achievments in Image Transmission and Repro-
duction Technology], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mir", Vol 1, 1978.

b. Yakushenkov, Yu.C., "Osnovy teorii i raschet optiko-elektronnykh priborov"
[Theoretical Principles and Design of Opticoelectronic Instruments], Moscow,
Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1971.

5. Seken, K.. and Tompset, M., ”Pribory s perenosom zarysda" [Instrtments With
Charge Transfer), Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mir", 1978 (translated fran English).

6. Nosov, Yu.R., and Shilin, V.A., "Poluprovodnikovyye pribory s zaryadovoy
svyaz'yu" [Semiconducting Instruments With Charge Comnication], Moscow, Izda-
tel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1976.

7. Potapov, O.A., and Aftandilov, G.A., "A Device for the Input of Optical Informa-
tion in an Electronic Computer That Is Based on an Applied Television Installs-
him (9111)," RBGIONAL'NAYA, RAZVEDOCENAYA I PRMSLOVAYA GBOFIZIKA. BKSPRBSS-
INFORMATSIYA VNII EKONWIKI MINERAL'MO SYR'YA I GBOLOCICHESKO—RAZVEDOCHNYKE
RABO‘I', Moscow, Branch Center for Scientific and Technical Information, All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of the Economics of Mineral Raw Materials and Geo-
logical Exploration Work, No 13, 1979, pp 1-13.

8. Zotov, V.D., "Poluprovodnikovyye ustroystva vospriyatiya informatsii" [Semi-
conducting Information Reception Devices], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Bnergiya", 1976.

9. Cos'kov, P.I., "Monitoring and Measuring Devices Based on Scanistors," in
"Optiko-elektronnyye pribory v sistemakh Itontrolya i upravleniya" [Optica-
el-ectronic Instruments in Monitoring and Control Systems], Moscow, 1978.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

UDC 550.834

POWER (ILLUMINATION ENGINEERING) CALCULATION OF OPTICOELBGTIOKIG SYSTEMS FOR
PROCESSING GRAPHIC INFORMATION

Leningrad GOLOCRAPIYA I OPTICHESKAYA OBRABOTKA INFOKHAISII V GEOLOGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 32-35

[Article by Yu.G. Yakushenkov from collection of works "Holography and Optical In-
formation Processing in Geology", edited by Professor 8.3. Gurevich and Candidate

of Technical Sciences O.A. Potapov, Leningrad Physicotechnical Institute imeni A.F.
Ioffe, USSR Academy of Sciences, 500 copies, 181 pages]

[Text] The author discusses a general approach to the calcula-
tion of the power characteristics of opticoelectronic systems.

He also derives formulas that are refined enough for engineering
use.

The purpose of a power calculation is to establish sufficiently optimal relation-
ships among the separate parameters of opticoelectronic systems (028). The canon

power calculation technique (1] reduces to the formulation of a generalized power
calculation of the type

A ‘1’». / 4’4» 7‘ .
where “in - a signal (flow of radiation) at the 08's input that exceeds the 088's

sensitiVity threshold °t by a factor of u, and the subsequent solution of this

equation in developed form; that is, in the form of a function of the (Es's parame-
ters relative to one of them.

When calculating and planning an 028 for the processing of graphic information and,
in particular, the processing of seismograms and other forms of geophysical infor-
mat ion representations [2], this technique has certain positive features.

The basic formula for calculating the flow arriving at an 028's input aperture is

[l]:
Ct¥a ”t'L'thg‘AéL'

where r - transmission coefficients of the optical mediums on the path 2 from an
emitter with area Arad and brightness I. to an input aperture of area Ain'

If the glitter covers the 038's entire instantaneous angular field, as determined
by the area of an element of resolution q (the sensitive area of a radiation

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
receiver, for example), it is then the case that

(bif‘f'rLg-fifv

where f' I focal length of the 038's objective.

During scanning of a field of view (seismogran. photographic film or any other
graphic information carrier), if an element of resolution with area q is struck in
turn by radiation from sections of the field with brightnesses L1 and L2, the dif-

ference signal 50in is: w _ _ __ H“
O‘pin 8%7([’a .1“); ‘9’? .

Considering the spectral nature of r I r(A) and L I L(A), for the 088's working
spectral range 11,...,Az we obtain

. n. K... _ ,
4qu =7} ¢-}+}‘fm»[z.,(d) -L, (01d). (1)

In the general case. when the emissions of separate sections of a field or a carri-
er of graphic information are determined to be both intrinsic and scattered or re-

flecued emissions from a foreign source, the values of spectral densities L(l) are

defined as the sum of the intrinsic tie and ch and reflected or scattered L10 and

L20 components. For Lanbertian emitters.

L, MI '6,MIM;I_M +13, til-57,4”,
(2)

L. m =6.!Mﬂ;i.m f}; (AD-era”:

where 61(1), 62(A) I spectral radiating capacities (radiation coefficients); H1(A).
H2(l) I spectral densities of the emissions; 91(1), 92(1) I spectral brightness co-
efficients (or reflection factors); 8(A) I illumination or irradiation created by
the foreign source (such as the Sun, which illuminates brightness fields L1 and L2.
or a laser brightening a phototransparency or seismogram).

The next stage of the calculation consists of determining the signal-toenoiss ratio
at the outlet of the 038's radiation receiver:

”ga‘é/Vhs - (3)

where AVc I A°insv I amplitude of the difference signal at the receiver's outlet
that corresponds to flow 50in; SY I voltage sensitivity of the receiver; V“ I noise

level as adduced at the receiver s outlet.
Expressing the receiver's sensitivity 8v in terms of its detecting capability,

D""“€/M'
n

where an“ I area of the receiver's sensitive layer; of I effective transmission
band of the 088's electronic channel. we obtain

26
F‘ﬂl(1FF1C1Al.lﬂﬂE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. “V
a. " . (b)
3" ' nub]

From this, with due consideration for the fact that 0* - DNA), after substituting
(l) and (lo) into (3), we obtain.

. ,3- .-:__..__ . .
A "' . d s ()
ﬂ=$¢fmnfszgm b.0000: A 5

By assigning the necessary value of u, from this it is possible to deter-inc the
requirements for both the individual 088 assemblies and the graphic infatuation
carrier. As an example let us discuss the case of the processing of graphic infor-
nation presented in the forn of a phototransparency with seisnograns recorded by
the broad track or variable density nethod, brightened by an illuminating system
that creates illumination 80) on the transparency.

In this case the first components determining the intrinsic radiation in for-Isles
(2) are much smaller than the second ones, which are determined by external illu-
mination BU); consequently,

L, m “f, m Em/rr,
LLIM =1), mEm/n’.

Substituting these values into (S), we obtain

in _ __ . .-
= 4:1 [whims mD‘mdA
I“ 4;} ma? . f ’

where ADO) ' 010) - 92(1).

 

If the brightness coefficients 0(1) (scattering and reflection factors) in range

11,...,A2 can be taken as constants, by removing the value 60 from under the inte-
grsl sign in (6) it is possible to determine the requirements for the transparen-
cy's dynamic range or for the density of the recording, as defined by gradient An:

- I
'Wn a ' e -!
Af= #615421 [/cmimbmda] .
, .
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Yakushenkov, Yu.G., "Osnovy optiko—elektronnogo priborostroyeniys" [Principles
of Opticoelectronic Instrument Building], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye
radio", 1977, 272 pp.

2. Potspov, 0.A., "Optichesksys obrabotka geofisicheskoy i geologicheskoy informs-
tsii" (Optical Processing of Geophysical and Geological Information], Moscow,
Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", 1977, 184 pp.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SM QUESTIONS W m [8819!!!” OF LIQUID msm MATRIX SCREENS

Leningrad GOIDGRAPIYA I OPTIGIBSKAYB oamorxn WTSII V csowcn in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 36-44

[Article by 3.8. Baklenishev from collection of works "Holography and mical Infor-
mation Processing in Geology". edited by Professor 8.3. Gurevich and Candidate of
Technical Sciences OJ. Potapov, Leningrad Physicotechnical Institute ineni A.P.
Ioffe, USSR Academy of Sciences. 500 copies, 181 pages]

[least] The author discusses the effect of the ratio of the re-
sistances of. the interelectrode insulation and the electrode on
the voltage levels active in the elements of. a matrix. He shows
that for realistic values of this ratio. the effective voltages
are lower than the set ones by 10-30 percent. He also presents a
convenient and effective formalise of natrices of temporal charac-
teristics for evaluating the capabilities of a matrix screen that
takes into consideration the sun total of the direct and inverse
electro-optical transitions for the voltages active in a screen's
elements.

As is well known [1.2], when designing liquid-crystal (ZhK) matrices it is necessary
to take into consideration the reversible nedium'e electro-optical characteristics,
the control system's output voltages (305) and the methods used to set then in the
matrix. 'no a considerably lesser degree. one must also deal with the question of
the necessity of allowing for the electrodes' actual resistances and the levels of
the substrates' interelectrode insulation (1481).

In this article we discuss several questions related to the creation of nultielenent

matrices controlled on a line-by-line basis from direct-current sources, using as an
example the bistable 'nematik-kholesterik' [translation unknown] and “guest-host"
systems [1].

figure 1 depicts a fragment of a matrix containing four elements and an alternative
way of connecting them. According to the nature of the interaction or the EDS
[electronstive force] source and the matrix's elements, the latter are subdivided
into three types: selected (addressed with a zero potential with respect to the
corresponding line and column): seniselected (addressed with a zero potential with
respect to either the line or the column): unselected (not addressed with a zero po-
tential, but connected to the voltage source with respect to line and column) .

since the intonation entering the matrix is quite variegated (digits, letters.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure l. hagnent of a liquid-crystal matrix.
Key: 1. Selection 2. Seniselection

symbols. graphs and so on) , during the frame-addressing phase each element is re-
peatedly semiselected and unselected. while (in addition) sous relatively small part
of the natrix's elmnts is selected in certain line-addressing phases.

In Figure l, R. - resistance of a transparent electrode made of tin oxide; “MEI -
- resistance of the interelectrode insulation. The superscripts are "c1?“ for lines
and "cm" for coltnlns. while ”0" is the voltage of the source.

The alatrix's operating mode is as follows. Before beginning operation, voltage U is
fed into all the lines and columns of the matrix and converts a unit. (~20 um) film
of the 2mm [liquid-crystal matrix] that is located between the lines and columns
from its original nontransparent state into transparency. The optical system is
constructed in such a fashion that in this case the screen looks dark. 'me working
cycle consists of a frame-scanning phase that is coaposed of successive and identi-
cal line-scanning phases. In the first (and each subsequent) line-scanning phase,
an addressing zero potential is fed into one line of the latrix. while into all the
columns there is fed some combination of zero and nonzero potentials that are formed
automatically in the nus. Thus. both electrodes of the elelent designated as “se-
lection" in Figure l are grounded. while only one of the electrodes of the ”seni-
selection" element is grounded. In connection with this, elements outside the ad-
dressed line can also be of two types: 'seniselection“ and “nonselection.” Voltage
0 is applied to the electrodes of an element of the latter type.

The selected elements of an addressed line are "tripped.” forming a given contine-
tion of colored squares against the dark background. The steady-state values of the
electro-optical responses of the selected (a). semiselected (H) and unselected (H)
elements are depicted ‘in Figure 2. As the response it is convenient to consider
(for exalple) the threshold dependence of the transparency of an element of the ma-
trix on the voltage: that is, if the line-addressing phase equals or exceeds the
setting time, the responses for elements of the indicated types, one would think.
could be represented. respectively. as NO). “0/2) and N0). In connection with
this. the levels of responses "0/2) and NU) are ignorable.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
o - "A u
Figure 2. Function of electro-optical response (3 - selection:
II - seniselection; H - nonselection).

 

 

ﬁn, , ' (a)
Figure 3. Electrical connection diagram.
Key: 1. Semiselection 2. Selection 3. Nonselection

However. let us attempt to discuss the electrical diagram corresponding to the given
fragment (Figure 3). lbs resistive elements R here are elements of the three men-

tioned types.
Practically usable zhlm's have a specific resistance on the order of 1.08 Wan. If

the distance between a line and a column is 0.02 in. while an element aperture is
0.5 m2 (real estimates for laxge~toruat matrices) , than

30
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Obtaining Rum levels of the same or higher orders is an extremely difficult task.
Practical estimates show that when Re 3 10 kn, Rum I 20 xxx-10 m. The specific
level of the “MEI values depends on the electroerosion and subsequent etching tech-
niques [3] . Thus, the voltage in an element of ”ah type can be represented by the

values
f I 1 '
I5 I ~+——f-Ilv 1 or select on,

e! ' hﬁ ' ID for 'nonselection,"
24
c .

IIM-ga'HIlh- “it" for 'semiselection.‘

It is easy to see that, in practice, the voltages acting on the ”selection” and
"nonselection" elements are far from the original estimates. For instance, for

RE; I Re' we obtain (for example)
“9.1m while «the...

It is useful (obviously) to evaluate the nature 0: the regularities:

t'};( (.51.) and I%.j.(f+:l)

 

 

u.
If
_. __-._!._...
u as a “Ii—— 53‘»— a.

Figure 4. Dependence of voltages in ”selection," "seniselection"
and "nonselection’ elements on value of ratio Rut/Re.

The graphs of these functions are shown in figure 4. Here we can see that functions
{1'2 undergo significant changes in the band

0.2 ( [gaé 60.

From the graphs it is easy to derive the voltages that are acting on the matrix ele-
ment under discussion from the normally known values of U, “MEI and Re- For in-
stance, when U I 20 V, R. I 20 k9.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
its obvious conclusion drawn front what has been said is that the choice of a M
must be made wild due consideration for the real values of. any . In any case,
one sust not count on ideal values of 03 and U“ equaling. respect vely. 0 and 0.
since in connection with this the condition Rug; >> Re must be fulfilled.

In the case where Rug; << Re! the diagram under discussion loses all its useful
properties. since the following equality is realised:

I'- 1' - n“.
Thus. let us assune that the values of mm; and B. have been established as the re-
sult of leasurelent of the substrates' resistive characteristics. Their ratio gives

t,tlaie poséﬂtion of the ordinate in the graph (Figure 4) that determines the values of
and .

At the present time, the characteristics of 7(0) have been studied for a considera-
ble number of m coepounds and materials have been published that describe the
transfornation of functions NU) for changes in telperature and the distance between
the planes of the lines and columns [1,2].

Therefore. it is usually not difficult to choose a group of. more that provide the
given contrast ‘I'(UB)/Y(UH).

The further search for the optima zhne in the group is carriedput with the help or
a matrix of temporal characteristics (HVRh) that includes a conplete listing of the
times of direct and inverse electro-optical transitions for the voltage jumps that
were determined above: 03 2 U“. 03 2 O“, on z I)“.

For the purpose of simplifying the designations. henceforth we will drop the letter
'0." The IMO: has the following form

  

1(8 -ell) ﬂu —oll)

 

Each element of the uvxh is the time '1‘ of the setting of functions "B I II):
He 1 5): H11 2 a).

Each of the ma elements is material. Actually, '1'(H + B) and TO! + 8) determine
the tripping tine: that is. they give the nininum value of the line-addressing

phase .

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is useful to have the tripping time as short as possible in order to shorten the
frame formation time, increase the rate of information arrival and renewal in the
2mm, and simplify the buffer zu's [memory unit] and the interface as a whole.

was '* H) and Ms + I!) determine the relaxation time: that is, they give the maxi-1m
value of the frame-scanning phase for given M's and operating conditions.

In connection with this, ratios NB * 11)/'r(n + s) and us -> m/ms + a) give an
evaluation of the maximally possible number of lines in a matrix. No less signifi-
cant are the values cf Ms ¢ 1!) and N1! + E). It is usually necessary to have the
value of 1‘01 + H) on the same order of magnitude as 'i‘(B + 1!). Otherwise. a selected
element will 'go out" when acted upon even once by a "nonselection" voltage.

Thus, of the six m elements. only two (represented in the matrix by dashes) must
be maximally small values.

Let us. for example, design a m with 128 lines. This means that when depicting
the most informative (in the sense of filling the screen) flow of digits and/or let-
ters, 110 lines should be addressed in each frame (the other 18 are spaces when
there is a 7 x 5 sign format). Consequently, it is necessary to insure that

'NB + H)/‘l‘(H '* B) > llo. Otherwise, only part of the screen will reproduce the re-
quired intonation and the person perceiving it will be unjustifiably fatigued by
the flickering.

We should keep in mind the fact that the process of setting the function "0) is
far from always being monotonic, particularly when the levels of the control volt-
ages are comparatively low [2].

By evaluating the functions 1(0) for the recently most popular materials. which are
based on cyanobiphenyls, it is possible to detect substantial deviations that are
related to the presence of oscillatory cmponents. In connection with this, the
basic change in the function NU) takes place quite rapidly, whereas complete set-
ting is achieved in an amount of time that is an order or more of magnitude longer.

merefore. sometimes it is advisable to set the duration of the line-addressing
phase in accordance with the duration of the basic change in function 1(0), making
the necessary corrections in the W and the contrast evaluation.

its experience has shown, in connection with this it is particularly important not
to forget the dependence of the values of Na + II) and '1'(B -* H) on the duration of
the line-addressing phase. As is known [4,5], when it is shortened, the value of
ratio N8 + H)/'1'(H '* s) can not only be reduced by an order of magnitude or more,
but can even turn out to be less than unity. As a result, the 2mm will prove to be
incapable of reproducing information.

In sulmning up what has been said, let us mention that. with due consideration for
the resistances of the electrodes and the interelectrode insulation, it is possible
to evaluate the actual voltage levels acting on the elements of a liquid-crystal
screen. Pornalization of the temporal characteristics in the form of a matrix is a
convenient and effective means for evaluating the possibilities for depicting infor-

mation on a screen that is being designed.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ammonium!

Blinov, L.H., ”Blcktro- i nagnitooptixe zhidkikh krietenov" [Electro- and
Magneto-Optics of Liquid Canton], noncov, Izdatel'stvo ”Nauka', 1978.

Kapostin, A.P., “Blektrooptichenkiye i akusticheskiye svoystva zhidkikh
kxistanov' [Bloom-Optical and Acoustical Properties of Liquid crystals] ,
Moscow, Isdatol'etvo ”Neuka", 1973.

nekueyev, Hlil,‘ and Beklenishev, A.B., "Using Sleotroerooion in the Production
of Liquid-Crystal. Matrices,” m mum, Series 4, No 1, 1979, pp 87-
90.

Makeyeva, Ye.N., Beklemiahev, 3.3., and Kurdyunov, 6.14., ”Sane Characteristics

of Alloyed Liquid-Crystal Materials.“ MA W, Series 6, Katerials
edition 4 (129), 1979. pp 110-115.

Mekeyeva, Ye.N.. Baklenishev, LB” Umpov, A.K., and Serebrennikova, G.A., '0:-
ing Liquid-Crystal Compounds in Geophysical Opticoeiectronics," “Teziey dokledov
Iv Vsesoyuznoy konterentsii po :hidkim kristenan' [Sundries of Reports Given at
the Fourth All-Union Conference on Liquid Crystals], Ivanovo, Inletel'stvo IGU
[Innovo State University] , 1977.

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0130 550.834 :621. 384

WMDSEOPSWWMWMWMWWTBDMOPMICAL
INPORHATIG!

Inningrad GOWIYA I OPNGIBSKBYA osaaso'm WEII V GBOIDGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 45-56

[Article by AA]. mm from collection of vorks “Holography and Optical Intonation
Processing in Geology", edited by Professor 5.8. Gurevich and candidate of Technical
Sciences 0.1;. Potapov, Leningrad Physiootechnical Institute imeni A.P.' Ioffe, USSR
Academy of Sciences. 500 copies, 181 pages]

[Text] The author proposes a parametric method for connecting
photodiode sensors for the accelerated input of information in
opticoelectronic seismogram processing systems.

He presents some results of an experimental investigation of the
conversion of optical signals for different photoreceiver connec-
tion methods.

In the solution of the problem of processing the large masses of information that
are generated when seismic surveying methods are used to prospect for gas- and oil-
bearing structures, particular interest has been aroused by hybrid opticoelectronic
systems, the effectiveness of which is related to the intonation capacity of the
light field as an information carrier. the high speed at which information in analog
form is processed. and the accuracy with which intonation in digital form is hand-
led [1].

Since these light fields are at least two dimensional, the problem of the high-speed
input of optical information into the digital part of the system is solved either by
increasing the scanning speed in scanning-type devices or by multichannel reading.
When contemporary requirements--the creation of systems for the preliminary process-
ing of information under field oonditions--are taken into consideration, the most
promising photoreceivers are assured to be converters based on charge-coupled de-
vices (P25). However. increasing the scanning speed in P25 rulers entails a propor-
tional decrease in sensitivity. while the use of P28 matrices involves a reduction
in resolving power as a consequence of the multiple reflection of the light beams
from the sensor's multilayer structure [2]. In a number of cases, therefore, an in-
crease in input speed can be achieved either by cosbining high-sensitivity photo-
diodes with opticomechanical scanners, the seeming speed of which has reached tele-
vision standards [3], or by the creation of photodiode rulers for mltichannel read-
ing. Both approaches involve an increase in the sensors' total light-sensitive area

35
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
and, correspondingly. the photodiodes' capacity. As a result, the basic short-
comings of photodiode sensors become apparent: the maximum spatial method of con-
necting these photoreceivers and the dependence of the amplitude of the pulses at
the sensor's output on the dynamic band of the light signals.

A/A. ‘ _____...-.

oasoonmuam 1px.

Figure l. scrum of high-sensitivity photodiodes for small values
of RE: 0 I PD-llK; A - PD~7G.

The amplitude-frequency characteristic (which) of two sensitive photodiodes, as
shown in Figure 1. can serve as an example illustrating the possibility of evaluat-
ing unambiguously the tine lag of a converter when photodiode connection is used.
The AChJOI's have been read for those values of load resistance Ra that are normally
used when working with high-frequency elements (50-75 9) and make it possible to
reach a conclusion about the possibility of using these instruments on frequencies
exceeding the frequencies corresponding to the textbook operating speed values
(5°lO‘6 s) by almost an order of magnitude. However, as a result of the fact that
photodiodes are high-ohm elements in the electrical circuit, reducing a" entails a
corresponding reduction in the output signals' values.

 

5
5
s
U
I
1
0

:soomauuuwz

Figure 2. I’D-11K photodiode saturation curves for RH - 10 k :

o - constant canponent: A I variable component at frequency of 30
kHz; ' - variable couponent at frequency of 100 kHz: 2 . 1/c,
where c - irradiation.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Besides this, inherent in the photodiode connection method are limitations related
to the power of the light pulses being received. In connection with this, it has
recently been established (4] that the high-frequency sensitivity of photodiodes can
be saturated at levels of optical radiation that are considerably lower than those
required for the creation of a constant saturation current. Figure 2 shows the de-

photodiode's output on the value of the relative attenuation ot the light flow (in
comparison with its value 0“, which corresponds to saturation of the watt-ampere
characteristic). They enabled us to convince ourselves experimentally that for cer-
tain relationships between RH and photodiode capacitance C“, these limitations ex-
ist even for comparatively low light signal frequencies.

Photoparmetric systems. some varieties of which-obased either on a change in photo-
diode conductivity when acted upon by a light flow 0 or on a corresponding change in
C¢a—-have been Jmown for quite a long time [5.6], are free from these flaws to a
certain degree. However, the necessity of using two identical photoreceivers in the
first case [S] and the narrow band of changes in perceivable light flows in the sec-
ond (6] has caused their use to be limited, and in the literature there is almost a
complete lack of information on the sensitivity and operating speed of photo-
parametric systems in comparison with systems using other methods of connecting the
photoreceivers.

- ---- ‘.__ .
ﬁ—m

0
TM’ //

 
 

amplitude detector (rectifier): UH - pimp voltage.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
c.)

Figure 4. Equivalent circuits: a. of series-connected paramet-
ric system b. of parallel-connected parametric system c. of
systun with photodiode connection of the converter: 313! “POE!

R53, CH3 - equivalent values, respectively, of the power
source's resistance, the photodiode's back resistance and the

load resistance and capacitance.

Here we present two elementary systems for the photoparanetric conversion of light
flows, the schematic diagrams of which are shown in Figure 3.

The role of the first transformer in the series-connected system is limited by the
matching of the high-resistance circuit from the diodes connected in opposition with
the output circuits of the pulping voltage generator. The second high-frequency
transformer in the series-connected system. as is the case with the transformer in
the parallel-connected one, is needed to generate the variable component of the
photodiode's flow on frequency fa, which corresponds to the first haruonic of pup-
ing voltage 0“.

All of the characteristics presented below were read with the help of diode fullwave
rectifiers charged to a resistance of 10 1:0 and the filter'e capacitance. The value
38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

.212; b}

Pigure 5. m's of: a. ‘ - ZD-llS light diode: A - series-
connected photoparanetric system 0 - photodiode Iethod: b)
parallel-mooted photoparanetric system A - for low illumina-
tion of the photodiodes: o - for high illumination of the photo-
diodes.

of R“ for the systems that have been presented can change within quite broad limits,
although the highest output signal values are achieved tor small photodiode current
flow angles; that is. when the condition an > loo-a“ is fulfilled [7], where R 3 is
the back resistance of an open photodiode. (For example. for an Will, R“ 3 0 n,
so for a transformation rate that equals unity, it should be the case that RH >

> 1 k0.)

Onitting the cos-on and quite trivial and awkward computations from the field of
electrical engineering. let us proceed to a discussion of the equivalent circuits in
Figure 4, which model the operation of the series- and parallel-connected parametric
systems, as well as the operation of the converter when the photodiode is connected
(Figure 4c). in the area of high frequencies of changes in light flows: that is. for
those nodes when, under the obligatory omdition 3!! > fob.c (where ‘cb.c is the fre-
quencies of the light signals' higher harmonics) . the value of l/2sfacm turns out
to be comparable with the value of R“ and, at the same time. for the series-
connected system the value of l/Z‘IfaCD ranains comparable with the value of a

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
// /

l # 6 0 '0 1m!

D
Figure 6. Characteristics of perceivable contrast in seismo-
grams: * - for series-connected phctcparametric system-A -
photodiode mode; 0 a valve mode.

(0 -/ 0’.
.—°

darkened photodiode. Let us mention here that the fulfillment of the latter condi-
tion, as it applies to the problem of obtaining the maximum values of the output

signals at the system's output, is possible only if cm >> CD.

Directly from Figure 4 we can see the obvious potential possibility of increasing
the operating speed in the system (Figure 3a) in comparison with the system with
photodiode' connection of the sensor. since in the former, caplcitance Cu; is con-
nected in series with capacitance car This possibility is confirmed by the AChKh's
of the corresponding systems, which are presented in Figure 5a. The mum's were
read with the help of an opticoelectrcnic pair consisting of an FD-ZSK photodiode
and a 21.419 light diode that were excited by light pulses ranging in duration from
100 us to 1 us, with an on-oﬂ time ratio of at least 5. ﬁts light diode's m
was determined with an FED-62 photomultiplier.

Directly from Figure 4b it is obvious that there are no inherent analogous possibil-
ities in the parallel-connected system. However. when operating with a pumping tre-
quency that is close to the antiresonance frequency, this system is of. considerable
interest for the solution of the problem of increasing the noise stability of the
reading process [8] . The mm of such a system (read with the help of I’D-25R
photcdiodes) are presented in Figure Sb, and they make it possible to torn an opin-
ion about the special features of the operating modes of a system with pulping fre-
quencies corresponding to cross-sections F1, F2 and F‘, as well as cross-section F3
(the most interesting mode) . in which output signals of the system that are differ-
ent in magnitude and polarity correspond to the two values of the light flow.

'ﬂ'le sensitivity characteristics of photoparanetric systems are better than the anal-
ogous characteristics of systems with photodiode and valve connection 0! the photo-
receivers. This is determined by the total unidirectional change of both the

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 7. Parametric characteristics of a series-mooted system
with a high-sensitivity p-i-n photodiode.

conductance and susceptance of the photodiodes when the amount of illumination of
the light-sensitive areas changes. However. for the parallel-connected system these
characteristics also depend unambiguously on the value of f3, as well as the sys-
tem's structural parameters and the method used to process the output signals. The
selection of the optima parameters for this system requires a rigorous mathematical
analysis of it, the realization of which within the limits of this article is not
possible.

For the series-connected photoparametric system. several completely unabiguous sen-
sitivity characteristics have been derived by the experimental method. For in-
stance, in Figure 6 we present the characteristics of the change in contrast parame-
ter K [8] as a function of the distance between the film with the seismogram record-
ings and the photoreceiver. The characteristics were read with the help of a high-
sensitivity p-i-n photodiode and a Gus light diode. with f“ - 4 ms. -

In Figure 7 we see, for different levels of illumination of the converter. the
changes in the value of the series-connected photoparametric system's output signal
as a function of the pulping voltage's amplitude. Experimental investigations of
the proposed parametric systems made it possible to discover two special features
of any families of similar characteristics: in all cases the indicated functions
intersect the x-aris and in all cases the increase in the output signal, beginning
with certain values of the punping voltage, moves .toward saturation. The latter
fact means that in photoparametric systems it is possible to realise operating modes
in which instability of the value of 0,, will not have any substantial effect on the
output signals' stability.

Finally. in Figure 8 we see the saturation curve for the series-connected photo-
perametric system in couparison with the analogous characteristics for photodiode
and valve connection of the photoreceiver. which is the dependence of the change in
the output signal's value on the distance r between a photodiode and a light diode
by means of which light pulses with a power of 100 Ill! and a duration of 10 s were
excited. Directly from Figure 8 it is obvious that for systems utilising the photo-
diode and valve methods of connecting the converter. saturation sets in at consider-
ably lower levels of illumimtion of the light-sensitive area than for the indicated
photoparametric system

41
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
\

HW‘N .

 

. —o——-v—-o——o—o—-—o——o-—4——-—
1 6 0 6 10 ‘2. m
Figure 8. Saturation curves for I’D-25x photodiode: ' - tor
series-connected photoparamatric system; A - for photodiode con-
nection; o - for valve connection.

In conclusion we should mention that for a low load resistance value and pulsed
pulping. the photoparametric mode in a series-connected system (Pigure 3a) degener-
ates into the normal mode of photodiode connection with charge accusmlation. In
connection with this. the system's operating speed and sensitivity are deternined by
the relationship between the durations of the light signals and the pumping pulses.

1.

2.

3.

BIBLIWRAPHY

Potapov, 0.3., ”The Problem of Processing Large Masses of Geological and Geophys-
ical Information and Ways of Solving It,“ in 'Gologratiya i opticheskaya
obrabotka informatsii v geologii i geofizike' [holography and Optical Information
Processing in Geology and GeOphysics]. Leningrad, 1979, pp 5-18.

Kobayarsi, Ye., “Solid-State Image Sensors." DENSI 0232180, Vol 17, No 8, 1978,
pp 76-81.

Benedichuk. I.V.. et al., 'A Television Unit With Opticomechanical Scanning,"
nmm mo I 1313110311“, No l0, 1978.

Lawton. R.A., and Young, 14., 'Photodetectors lose Dynamic Range With Modulated
Signals.“ DIM/NBS, Vol 61, No 12, 1977, pp 16-19.

Veronin, v.c., Grebnev, A.x.. Krivonosov, 11.1., and Ruslanov. v.I., “sum.-
avtomatiki s fotochuvstvitelmymi' i izluchayushchisd'poluprovodnilcwvyni
priborami' [Automation System With Photosensitive and Emitting Semiconducting
Instruments], Ibscov, Izdatel'stvo "mes-gin", 1972. p 80.

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Elizbarashvili. 0.3., “A Detector for Weak Light Signals Baud on Photodiodee

Operating in the Petovarikap [translation unknown] Mode," TEDDY msrmm
KIBBRNETIKI All CRUZ. SSR, Vol 3, 1977, pp 133-142.

7. Gonorovskiy. 1.s.'. 'Radiotekhnicheskiye tsapi i. eignaly" [Radio Engineering Cir-
cuits and Signals], Moscow. Izdatel'stvo '80vetskoye radio". 1971. p 672.

8. Dutov, n.v.. "Investigation of the Noise Stability of Several Methods for the Op-

tical Reading of Geophysical Information,” in 'Golografiya 1 opticheekaya
obrabotka infomtsii v qeologii 1 qeoﬂzike". Leningrad. 1979. pp 123-133.

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 550.834.05
ON THE QUBS'I'IGI or 1113 PHASE ENCODING O? SEISMIC SIGNAIS IN OPTIMIGITAL
momma! Pmssmc SYSTEMS

Leningrad GOIDGRAPIYA I OPTICHESKAYA 03mm WHATSII V 68010611 in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 57-64

[Article by V.P. Ivanchenkcv and 5.1:. Kochegurov from collection of works “holo-
graphy and Optical Information Processing in Geology". edited by Professor 8.3.
Gurevich and Candidate of Technical Sciences 0.3. Potapov, Leningrad Physica-
technical Institute imeni LP. Ioffe, USSR Academy of Sciences. 500 copies. 181

pages]

[Text] The authors discuss the possibility of using phase encod-
ing of seismic signals when they are being entered in the optical
processor of an opticodigital computer coupler. 'i‘hey present the
results of their statistical modeling and some evaluations of the
effectiveness of the utilisation of phase encoding in problems
involving the correction of static correction factors.

Increasing the efficiency and productivity of the realisation of hybrid cosputa-
tions in opticodigital information processing systems depends to a considerable de-
gree on the choice of the method for encoding the seismic signals when the data are
being entered in the optical processor. The correct choice of the signal encoding
method makes it possible--depending on the realized processing algoritlnsnto re-
duce their statistical redundancy and to courses the data.

In a number of processing problems where information on the form of the seismic
signals is not used directly, it is feasible to examine the possibility of using
phase encoding methods. For instance. one of the basic procedures in the process-
ing of seinic data is correction of the static correction factors. As is well
known, the most widely used automatic correction algorithm, which is based on cal-
culation of the cross-correlation function (W!) of adjacent tracks, yields the re-
quired accuracy only for rather simple material. When there is a large degree of
wave dispersion with respect to velocity in the interval being analyzed and a high
noise level, the determination of the displacements with respect to the tracks'
maximum cross-correlation can result in substantial errors in their evaluation.
Therefore, the problaa of improving the reliability of the evaluation of the mutual
displacements raisins one of the basic ones when correcting static correction fac-
. tors. In view of this, in this article we discuss the question of improving the
reliability of the determination of the mutual displacements of seismic tracks pre-
sented in the form of nulls of a clipped signal.

44
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' xw

 

, an I Rﬁtt)
H '
W. ..: :
r II I
.0 _: JJ’IWO). “J

Figure 1.

Figure la depicts the realization of process x(t) and its corresponding correlation
function Rx(r). When the clipping is sufficiently thorough, this signal is con-
verted into rectangular pulses (Figure lb) and is frequently called a clipped sig-
nal. The use of character encoding is quite well known. particularly in the reali-
zation of various correlational processing algorithms. At the same time. the ori-
ginal information of phase encoding can be represented in a different form, as eoee
sequence of nulls of the clipped signal xo(t) (Figure 1c) :

[I , all) «(Ii-.4 <0.
‘0! “(l/'cz/t’”>/0.

The sequence of nulls contains all the necessary information about the clipped sig-
nal, as well as information about the initial phase of the original signal's first
harmonic [l].

(1)

In order to evaluate the possibility of using phase encoding in the problem of cor-
recting static correction factors at the stage of determining the mutual displace-
ments of the tracks, we utilized statistical modeling on a computer to investigate
the noise stability of the correction algorithm for such a recording.

The assumed given was two seismic tracks, representing an additive mixture of sig-
nal and noise, it being the case that the signal on the second track had a certain
45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 2.

displacement At:
yulwxn‘; + ”of”.

Wu ut/f‘atlu’ul). (2)

As the useful signal we chose a pulse with a bell-shaped envelope, which is widely
used as the model of a singly reflected wave. Displacement At was determined
beforehand and was chosen in accordance with practical recounendations. Noise Mt)
was generated by a generator of random numbers having a normal distribution law
H[N(t)] = 0 and 02[N(t)] - 1. As an example, in Figure 2 we show the original and
transformed signals, as well as their corresponding correlation functions.

Between the tracks thus formulated. we determined the temporal displacemnt with
respect to the M's maximum. The fact that the solution of any mutational
problem by constructing and realizing an artificial random process can, in the fi-
nal result, give only approximate values of the unknowu parameters. or so-called
estimates of then, applies to a number of features of amthodmith statistical
testing [2]. A solution obtained in this manner is of practical value only if it
is possible to find an area of possible deviations of the obtained estimates from
the corresponding unknown parameters; in other words. if the accuracy of the esti-
mates is investigated. As the estimates in this problem, we chose the mathenatical
expectation It and dispersion of} of the teaporal displacement 1 as a function of
the signal-to-noise ratio. In order to evaluate the noise level, we used the ratio
of the square of the signal's peak value to the dispersion of the noise, which is
used very extensively in seismic surveying [3]:

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.14‘

133?}— ‘ (3)
Analyses were conducted for p = 3, l, 0.5, 0.2. It was assumed that the permissi-
ble measurement error was 2 us. In order to achieve a confidence probability P of
0.95. the experiment encompassed 384 observations. The functions of the distribu-.
tion of the tmporal displacement between the tracks for the given values of p are

shown in Figures 3 and 4 for the standard and converted forms of the recording, re-
spectively.

 

Figure 3 .

 

Figure 4.

The calculated statistical characteristics (mathanatical expectation and disper-
sion) for the obtained distributions are presented in Table 1.

Figure 5 shows the dependence of the deviation in mathematical expectation n‘ on
the true value for the given values of 9, while Figure 6 shows the dependence of

dispersion 0.? for the computed displacement 1’.

Analysis of the results obtained with the help of the numerical experiment with the
computer showed that for a sutficiently large signal-to-noise ratio (9 > 3). Phase
encoding of the original information yields no gain in noise stability in compari-
son with the standard form of the recording, although for small signal-to-noise ra-
tios (p < l) . the gain is obvious (Figures 5 and 6). This can apparently be ex-
plained by the fact that when there are severe distortions of the useful signal (a
small signal-to-noise ratio) . the cross-correlation function for the standard form
of the recording is couputed with more substantial errors than in the second case,
where the form of the recording is not taken into consideration

47
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:
1. Original signal 2.

3 5:93)

 

o I z 3 1"
Figure 5. Figure 6.

 

Further, we carried out an experimental investigation of the possibility of using
phase encoding when processing seismograms. For this purpose we developed an algo-
rithm for computing the waves' mutual displacements for both the standard recording
and the one converted into the form or nulls of a clipped signal: this investiga-
tion utilized materials from the IIrons): Geophysical Trust. The static correction
factors computed with the algorithm were introduced into the appropriate tracks and
the tracks were elm-led with the reference track with respect to which the correc-
tion factors had been computed. The emery recordings for the standard and con-
verted forms of the recordings are presented in Figures 7 and 8, respectively.

A comparative analysis of the results sinned that the location of the main maxim
on the temporal axis of the summary recordings coincided and was 304 us, while the
values of the maximum themselves also dittered very little. At the same time, on
the second recording there is more nearly complete suppression of secondary waves
and discrimination of the basic wave (three wave entries are quite visible in Pig-
ure 8).

48
FOR OFHCIAI. [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

git: .

Figure 7.
ﬁt ' ' -_.‘. . ____

9M

Pigure 8.

Thus, our investigations indicate that the prospects are good to: the utilization
of phase encoding, in connection with which the volume of the original data can be
reduced by a factor of 15-20 and the noise stability of the determination of the
displacements for small signal-to-noise ratios can be improved.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Komolov, V.P., and 'rrofinenko, I.‘l‘., "mantovaniye fazy pri obnaruzhenii
radiosignalov" [Phase Quantization During the Detection of Radio Signals] .
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio“, 1976.

2. Pustyl'nik, Ye.I.. ”Statisticheskiye netody analiza i obrabotki nablyudeniy"
[Statistical Methods for Analyzing and Processing Observations] , Moscow,
Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka", 1968.

3. shestov. n.3,, ”Vydeleniye opticheskikh signalov na tone sluchaynykh ponekh“
[Distinguishing Optical Signals Against a Background of Random Noise] , Moscow.
Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio”, 1967.

49
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 550.834.05

MATHEMATICAL MING 0P PMCBSSBS FOR MIDI)“; SEISMIC SIGNALS on A musnc
CARRIER mm mm INPUT INTO m apnea. PROCESSOR W AN MIWDIGIM comm

Leningrad WIYA I OPTIGIBSKAYA 03m INPOMTSII V GEOIDGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 65-73

[Article by V.P. Ivanchenkov and 0.6. Dalmatova from collection of works “Bolo-
graphy and Optical Information Processing in Geology“, edited by Professor 8.8.
Gurevich and Candidate of Technical Sciences 0.A. Potapov, Leningrad Physica-

technical Institute imeni LP. Ioffe, 0881?. Academy of Sciences. 500 copies. 181

pages)

[Text] The authors discuss questions concerning the mathematical
modeling of the processes involved in the recording of seismic
signals on a thermoplastic carrier. and investigate the effect of
different parameters on the depth of the groove and the rate of
relief development for the purpose of insuring the best matchup
of temporal relationships during data input-output utilizing an
optical processor.

During the development of an optioodigital computer couple: (OM) for the process-
ing of geophysical information as a somewhat complicated computer system, there
arises the problem of choosing the most rational structure for the computer com-
plex, allowing for the properties of the signals being analyzed and the processing
algorithms being realized, the determination of the basic parameters of the sys-
tems' elements and assemblies. and the study of the effect of different factors on
the entire process of the realization of hybrid computations.

'ihe formulation of a mathematical model of the 08V! is of importance both for the
synthesis and analysis of the hybrid opticoelectronic system.

The nathunatical description of an 02V! can be determined in several stages. In
the first stage, for example. on the basis of the required class of processing al-
gorithm that must be realised in the OEVK. the general structure of the system is
planned and several alternative formulations of it are examined.

During the next stage. a functional description of the separate units and assemblies
is determined and the effect of their parameters on the system's characteristics and
operating modes is investigated.

The basic functional elements of an OBVK include a spatiotemporal light modulator
(PVHS) that makes it possible to carry out the operational input of data into an

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

optical processor. A casparative analysis of existing WHS's showed that the use
of light-valve tubes with a thermoplastic carrier shows promise for the processing
of seismic data [1].

The processing of recording a signal on a nu [thermoplastic carrier] with the help
of an electron beam can be broken down into two stages: application of the charge
to the M, which leads to the appearance of electrical forces capable of deforming
the thermoplastic layer. and the recording appearance and erasure stage. Depending
on the mode chosen for the recording of the seismic signals, these stages can be
either carried out at the same time or realized separately.

In order to determine the mathematical description of the relief manifestation and

erasure process, it is necessary to know the medium' In equation of motion and the
nature of the forces causing this motion.

In the literature there are several approaches to the description of the process of
relief manifestation and appearance on a m [2,3] .

Por cases where the applied voltages and deformations are small, a m can be de-
scribed in a linear approximation based on the relationships derived during the de-
scription of the mediuns' motion with a (Fogt) model, which is the most common one
and takes into consideration the properties of an elastic-viscous, .as well as a
viscous. medium.

Under these conditions, the problem of finding the mathematical description of the
appearance and erasure of surface relief on a TM can- be reduced to the three-
dimensional problem of determining the deformations of the surface of an incom-
pressible, elastic-viscous layer of finite thickness d when it is acted upon by
surface and volume forces with an initial disturbance Pop. In Cartesian coordi-
nates x.y,z. the elastic-viscous medium's equations of motion have the following

form [21:
gunﬁgﬂww. ﬁafvutva;
ﬁﬁa‘f-gf-IWAK; ﬁnd fvya a'é Fey; (1)
#=~ﬁ3—+94Vz*iamdé+ﬁ

where Po(x,y,s) - surface density of the forces. the value of which is assumed to
be given at the initial lament: Po(x.y.z,t) - components of the initial volumetric
density of the forces with respect to the axes; p - density of the medium; v - rate
of motion of the medium's particles: A =- a Laplace operator: G - equilibrium shear
modulus: u 3 coefficient of viscosity: u 8 u/px Vx' V , V: '- velocity components,
the initial values of which equal zero.

When recording with an electron beam on thermoplastic layers more than 10 no thick,
it is possible to allow for the effect of only the normal component of the surface

forces c(x,y.z) on relief appearance and erasure.

When the layer is acted upon by a periodical normal force density of the W
e. am" 5-: a E: e “‘ " 03.2% x «a em (2)

51
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the equation for -the deformation of the TPN's surface has the form

Ffaxli=f§Anlmz€pa-£'m”ﬁtf’ (3)

LII

where Auk - the depth of the relief groove of the nk-th harmonic =-
- - a
nu: w- 4; “F“‘L‘e “m"; =
m, ,4 £2 - u; m, (ll/46.11.; mm in ’

where P =- amplitude of the density of the nk-th harmonic's forces; fxn' f k a
spatial requencies with respect to the x- and y-axas, respectively; An]: - eneral-
ised spatial frequency:

4”“ '2’szi'ﬁ'c . %,~;,.iﬁ;$£ﬂ,

70mm) - relaxation time constant of the nk-th harmonic’s forces,

a $13“ ﬂ rd ‘15;
£‘ a“,.‘ I

where Ink - normalized generalized spatial frequency:

‘5‘ 'd-n-n‘
For each individual seismic track during the recording of the signals on a m, ex-
pression (4) can be discussed in a unidimensional approximation; that is, we assume

that Auk - 2ﬁfxn and
. t - l
A = PF "he ‘ , (S)
" rm-w?Ic-nﬁa+rz{/&)‘£7

For known charge motion time constants, the amplitude of the forces' density are
determined by the relationship

'2‘ .(6.Mv87.g *6?) ' ‘6’

where do, 01 - surface density of the electrical charge (constant and sinusoidal
components, respectively); ‘0 = electric constant; :1 - dielectric constant of a
vacuum; 52 - dielectric constant of the thermoplastic.

(4)

By substituting expression (6) into (5), we can obtain an expression that makes it
possible to investigate the dependence of the relief groove's depth on the charge
density and the modulation factor.

In accordance with the model of the appearance and erasure of information recorded
on a m that we have been discussing. we calculated and investigated (with the
help of a computer) the temporal changes in the depth of the groove for several

temperature modes and spatial frequencies of the signals for different charge den-
sity and modulation factor values.

The range of the change in temperature was selected so as to encoapass the possible
thermal operating conditions for a light—valve tube, ranging from the glass-
transition temperature to the 'I'PN's flow temperature (Bo-140°C).

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

     

.. -~—..-.ﬁ.__~_—_..__.g -
I 8 n 2. 0,:

Figure l. Curves 1-7 have been plotted for temperatures of 140,
130, 120, 110, 100, 90 and 80°C, respectively. '

 

The choice of the spatial frequencies was made for a provisional band of seismic
signal frequencies of 20-100 Hz, with due consideration for their recording on a
'I'PN in amplitude-pulse modulation form [4). The light-valve tubes's resolution
with the TM was assumed to be 20 lines/m. which was preliminarily accepted as the
signal quantification frequency during their recording with amplitude-pulse modula-
tion. Starting from what has been said, during the nmerical modeling we conducted
our investigation for spatial frequencies ranging from 10 to 27 lines/m. When
calculating the depth of the relief groova on the TPN, in accordance with (5] it is
necessary to allow for a nunber of parameters, the values of which depend on the
temperature: viscosity factor u. equilibrim shear modulus G, surface tension co-
efficient o. For our calculations. the values of these parameters were taken from
sources in the literature [2].

Figure 2a depicts the dependence of the optimm appearance time on the temper-
ature for different spatial frequency values. Here we understant t to mean the
appearance time obtained for the maximm value of the relief groove's depth.

An analysis of the results that were obtained showed that as the temperature in-
creases to 130'c and the density of the applied charge remains the same. the relief
groove's depth increases and its optimum appearance time decreases. In connection

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 2. Curves 1-4 have been plotted for fx - 10, 15. 20 and
25 “1'1. respectively.

with this, however, there is also an increase in the relief erasure rate, it being
the case that beginning with the temperature at which the thermoplastic changes
from an elastic-viscous state to a viscous state (120°C), its properties change
abruptly and the curves take on a resonance form.

figure 2b shows the dependence of the relief groove's narinun depth on spatial fre-
quency fx for different appearance temperatures '1'.

At high temperatures the characteristics are of a resonance type. which makes it
possible to lower the level of the high-frequency noise in the reproduced image.
However, this property can result in signal distortion because of "butchering" of
some part of its spatial frequencies. It is necessary to take all of this into
consideration when selecting such parameters as the band of spatial frequencies of

the signals being recorded and the temperature at which the intonation is recorded
on and erased from the 1?“.

Using the characteristics that have been obtained, it is possible to construct a dy-
namic nanifestation surface A - Mm) that describes most nearly completely the dy-
namics of the relief formation and erasure process on a m and makes it possible to
select the best relief appearance and erasure mode as a function of the selected du-
ration of a frame of the seismic signal recording.

me graphs that have been presented were calculated for charge density 00 - 0.2-10’3
(Illa2 and modulation factor H I 0.6.

A computer was also used to calculate the depth of the relief groove for different
charge density and modulation factor K values.

The functions An“ - (0.14) are presented in Pigure 3.

From the graphs it is obvious that A”, increases at the depth of the relief groove
does. but--as is denonstrated in [5] --a decrease in the depth of modulation of the
applied charge results in suppression of the nonlinear frequency distortions. Con-
sequently. it is necessary to allow for both of these factors with selecting these
parameters.

54
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

"9" “our.“

 

Pigure 3 .

At the present time. experimental investigations are being made of the processes
involved in recording and erasing signals on 'rPN’s. as well as the correction and
refinement of modeling results. which in the future will stake it possible to choose
optimum conditions for recording. reading and erasing information, thereby insuring
the best natchup of teaporel relationships for date input-output utilizing en opti-
cal processor.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Ivanchenkov, V.P.. “Hybrid Opticoelectronic Systems for the Processing of Seis-
mic Information," "l‘ezisy dokladov Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po avtomati‘satsii
nauchnykh issledovaniy na osnove prineneniye m“ [Sumeries of Reports Given at
the All-Union Conference on the Automation of Scientific Research Through the
Use of Computers], Novosibirsk, 1979.

2. Gushcho. Yu.P.. "Pazovaya rel’yefografiya' [Phase Reliefography], hoscov,
Izdatel'stvo "Energiya", 1974.

3. Nskhodkin, N.G., and Novoselets, H.K., ”Functional Description of a Thermo-
plastic Medium as a Complex Information System,“ in “III Vseeoyusnaya
konferentsiye po golografii. tezisy dokladov" [mird All-Union Conference on Ho-
lography: Smeries of Reports]. Leningrad, 1978.

4. Ivanchenkov. V.P., Poskonnyy, 6.1., and Potapov, O.A.. “Recording Seismic Sig-
nals on a Thermoplastic Carrier in a Real Time Scale,“ "BI VIEHS. Region.
razved. i promysl. geofizika" [Express Intonation From the All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Economics of Mineral Raw Materials and Geological Explora-
tion: Regional Prospecting and Industrial Geophysics), Moscow, No 22, 1979.

5. Preston, K., "Kogerentnyye opticheskiye vychislitel'nyye sashiny" [Coherent 0p-
tical Computers], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo “Mir", 1974.

I

55
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
one 550.834
can an: “$1311.11?! W OPTICAL mm as 5PM! monogram HEDIUHS

Leningrad Gamma I OP‘l'ICEBSﬂYA 03mm Imm'rsn V women in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 74-83

[Article by v.3. Konstantinov and DJ. Chemykh from collection of works ”Bolo-
graphy and Optical Information Processing in Geology”, edited by Professor 8.3.
Gurevich and Candidate of Tecluzical Sciences 0.3. Potapov, Leningrad Physics-

technical Institute imeni A3. Iotfe. 0931! Academy of Sciences, 500 copies, 181

pages]

[Text] The authors analyze the use of holographic technology in
the solution of seismic surveying problems. They determine the
conditions under which an undistorted image of geological struc-
tures can be observed and present example or the use of holo-
graphic technology for the optical modeling of spatially non-
homogeneous phase and amplitude mediums.

The wave nature of the processes on which seismic surveying is based and the pro-
cesses involved in the formation of an optical image make it tempting to use the
achievuaents of modern optics for the solution of seismic and geophysical surveying
problems. The present level of work being done on methods for the optical process-
ing of intonation and in holography makes it possible to hope that it will be
feasible and promising to use these methods .both for processing and storing seismic
surveying data and to interpret them. The discussion of the question of. the teasi-
bility of using optical methods instead of or together with modern computers is an
extranely urgent one in view of the modern requirements for an increase in the et-
ficiency and rapidity of methods for prospecting for useful minerals. In addition
to the possibilities of their use in geophysics. optical methods may also prove to
be useful in audiovisual and sound fixing and ranging systems. We will concern
ourselves with the question or the use of holographic technology to solve seismic
surveying problems.

in this area there exist several possibilities:

l. The visualization of a gemetric structure's profile [1] or a three-dimensional
image of this structure directly from seismic surveying data.

2. The visualisation of a geometric structure's profile or a three-dimensional im-

age from seismic surveying data after canputer processing of the data.
3. The visualisation of models of geological structures calculated by computers.

4. The synthesis of optical images of three-dimensional structures or elements of
these structures with given parameters (optical modeling of spatially
56

FOIOFHOALLBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nonhomogeneous mediums) , both for the purpose of discovering methods for interpret-
ing images of geological structures and directly, in order to interpret three-
dimensional images of structures.

5. The use of analogy with optics, for the purpose of optimization of the number of
seismic sensors used and the placement of seismic vibration sources and sensors.
maximization of the signal-to-noise ratio and so on.

 

a) b)

Figure l. a. Diagram of hologram recording: 1. hologram: 2. ob-
ject: 3. point reference source. b. Image reproduction diagram:
4. reduced hologram: 5. point reproducing source; 6. actual re-
produced image; 7. imaginary reproduced image.

In order to answer questions about the feasibility of the practical realization of
each of the listed possibilities, it is necessary to examine them carefully and,
possibly, even conduct theoretical and experimental investigations. For instance,
in order to obtain a three-dimensional image of a geological structure directly
from seismic surveying data and from date processed by a computer, it is necessary
to record the amlitudes and phases of the seismic waves and then transiorm the
data obtained into (for example) a hologram, assuming that this can be done. There
then imediately arises the question of what will be the nature of this hologram
and whether or not the transformation will result in undesirable distortions. For
this purpose, let us examine the relationships coupling the coordinates (xl,y1,rl)
(Figure l) of a real geological structure with the coordinates (3343.23) of the
points in its optical image. let the intonation about a seismic field be regis-
tered in area xéyi, while the length of the seismic wave is M. In order to repro-
duce the optical image it is necessary to have a reduced hologram with area x2y2 -
= mzxﬁyi for the reproducing light on wavelength 12 - nil, where I - coefficient of
linear reduction of the hologram. while u is the relationship between the registra-
tion and reproducing wavelengths. Then, in the general case, for arbitrary loca-
tions of the point reference source ("oﬂovlo’ and the point reproducing source
(x5,y3,sg), the relationship between the coordinates of the structure's points and
those of its optical image is determined by the following relationships [2]:

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2, ’MfI'Tf'm‘l. : (1)
‘33'&2%“=?%‘£z‘=4‘»%. (2)
53:3 5 =ﬁ‘éf’m4‘5iﬁft. ‘3’
NW2=7J§f-:-§f=r&. (4)
Mwﬁ'=5'f%=, 2,22,?) , (5)

where Mum”. #5909 - scale coefficients for the transverse and longitudinal dimen-
sions of the image. As is obvious from (4) and (5). these expressions are differ-

ent and, in addition, depend on the geometric parameters of the holography and re-
production systems. This means that in the general case, the reproduced image will
have geometric distortions that it is practically impossible to compensate for.

For the case of Fresnel's widely used holography system. where plane reference and
reproducing waves are used (that is, :0 -t 6° and 28 -> o'), expressions (l)-(S) take
on the forms

H=:u'-;i- In"!

7.94 ( HM.) _,%_,' (a)

. n- z a

murﬁﬁwlx. "
~.._ .uz 9

N’W'A'*’m—z'f'=m» ()
H ' r

”120/4 ==ﬁ‘—. (10)

Although in this case the transverse and longitudinal scale coefficients differ
from each other by the nature of their dependence on coefficients n and u. as is
shown in Figure 2 they do not depend on the geometric parameters of the holography
system. This makes it possible to obtain a gemtrically undistorted optical image
of a geological structure when m . u.

However, calculation- of the dimensions of the hologram and the reproduced image, as
carried out for holography system parameters xi - y} - x1 - y; - :1 - 2°105 cm,

X1 = 10-104 cm3 and reproduction system parameter :Xg - 0.63°10‘5 cm, shows that for
m - u - 6.3(10'8-10‘9), x2 - y; - x3 - y3 - r - 1.2(10‘2-10'3) cm - 0.12-0.012 an.
The practical realisation of a hologram of th a size is possible, but in order to
examine the details of the image it is necessary to use optics, which again leads
to geometrical distortion of the isage.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Dependence of transverse “nonep and longitudinal anog
scale coefficients on hologram's linear reduction factor n for

111 = 6.3-10‘3. u; - 6.3-10'9.

Therefore. it is necessary to look for an optimum solution to the problen of se-
lecting coefficient m for a given 11 that will make it easy to observe the three-

dimensional image of a geological structure when there are moderate geometric dis-
tortions or to look for methods of ccupemating for those distortions.

In should be mentioned here that the calculation was made without allowing for the
dispersion of the seismic waves. the nature of which differs from the dispersion of

light.

Thus, even the question of depicting seismic data in the form of a three- '
dimensional image of a geological structure proves to be quite complex.

The problem of the formation of holograms with the help of a computer [3] can be
solved successfully. although there also there are certain limitations caused, on
the one hand. by the small equivalent aperture in which the seismic field is regis-
tered. On the other hand, a significant enlargement of the aperture--that is, an
increase in the number of sensors and. therefore, the volume of information at the
computer's input--can cause a sugstantial increase in the amount of time needed for
the processing. For example, for the formation of a hologram that consists of 106
eluuents and makes it possible to reproduce the image of a plane object with no
more than 105 elements. when a rapid Fourier transform is used the computer coupu-
tation tine will be 20 min [2]. It is obvious that in order to obtain even a ster-
eo image the computation time will at least double, while the question of the

S9
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 3. Holographic modeling of a layered structure: 1, 2, 3.
glass plates with different refractive indices: 4. photographic
plate: 5. parallel reference beam; 6. beam illuminating the ob-
ject.

amount of information the hologram must contain in order to produce a three-
dimensional image of satisfactory quality requires further investigation.

However, even assuming that the question of the formation of a hologram with given
parameters can be solved successfully, it is necessary to be sure that the operator
will be able to interpret the image of the geological structure. In connection
with the holographic image of a geological object, it will be observed as if from
above, from the direction of the diurnal surface. This observation position is not
customary for geophysicists dealing with the profiles of geological structures. In
addition to this, we should (using an optical analogy) regard the geological struc-
ture as a phase object; that is. an object in which the basic intonation is con-
tained in phase, and not amplitudinal, relationships. Some layered structure with
different refractive indices can be used as an optical model of such an object.
Figure 3 is a representation of the simplest structure of this type and the layout
for obtaining an optical hologram. In the reproduced image, the shape and location
of the spots of reflected light on the layers' boundaries depends essentially on
the depth of focus. Therefore, the question of the correct interpretation of the
image by the operator requires special consideration. The creation by the holo-
graphic method of standard optical models of spatially nonhomogeneous structures
may prove to be useful for educating operators. In connection with this, the holo-
grams of these models can be formed by optical methods or can be designed on a con-

In our opinion. the holographic method of synthesizing models of a complex three-
dimensional structure is the most promising one. Figure 4 depicts a system for the
holographic synthesis of a model of a three-dimensional, amplitudinal model. The
point source. which in this case is the light guide's end face, is set, in turn, at
given points in space. Because of the multiple exposure, the photographic plate
sums up all the information about the all the positions of the point source. The

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 4. Diagram of holographic synthesis of model of amplitu-
dinal, three-dimensional object: 1. laser beam: 2. splitter: 3.
microlens: 4. light guide; 5. end face of light guide: 6. given
positions of end face of light guide: 7. photographic plate: 8.
mirror: 9. collimator: 10. reference beam.

set or the point source‘s simultaneously reproduced images'also forms the three-
dimensional image of a nonexisting object.

Conclusions

1. Thus. even when the discussion is only superficial. the use of optical methods
for visualizing geological structures is extremely complicated.

2. In order to make a final judgment about the feasibility of the use of these
methods. it is necessary that at least the rolloving be done:

a. determine the feasibility of creating a three-dimensional image of. geophysical

structures:
b. determine the prospects for methods for the optical modeling of geophysical

structures:
c. cospare the possibilities of optical modeling methods with other methods for

modeling geophysical structures.

3. The achievements that have been made in digital, acoustic and optical holography
and the demonstrated capabilities for the synthesis of images of three-dimensional

structures gives us a basis for hoping for a successtul solution of these problems.

The authors are grateful to 3.3. Gurevich and ILA. Xarayev for the discussions that
led to the appearance of this work.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Timoshin, Yu.V., "Impul'snaye seysmicheskaya golografiya' [Pulsed Seismic Holo-
graphy), Moscow. Izdatel'stvo ”Nedra", 1978.

2. Kol'yer, R... Berkkhart. K.. and Lin, I.., "Opticheskaya golografiya" [Qtical Ho-
lography]: Moscow. Isdatel'stvo ”Mir", 1973.

3. Yaroslavskiy, I..P.. and Herzlyakov, N.S., I'Metody tsifrovoy golografii" [Methods
of Digital 3°1ography], Moscow. Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka', 1977.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 550 . 834

DBSIGNM OPTICAL RWY FILTERS BY man's AND LEB’S m AND USING mm POR
m FILTRATION or SEISMIC MATERIALS

Leningrad GOMGRAFI‘IA I OPTICHESKAYA 08W INPOM‘I'SII V GBOIDGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 84-90

[Article by fem. Vlasov. am. Kuvshinov and 0.3. Potapov from collection of works
“Holography and mtical Information Processing in Geology', edited by Professor
5.8. Gurevich and Candidate of 'nechnical Sciences OJ. Potapov, Leningrad Physico-
technical Institute imeni 1MP. Ioffe. USSR Acadeny of Sciences, 500 copies, 181

pages]

[wort] The authors explain the principles of the filtration of
seismic materials with binary filters. they give the mathemati-
cal substantiation for this technique and present specific meth-
ods for its practical realization.

The production of an optical filter with a given transfer function is a rather coa-
plicated problem. so it is only natural to lock for methods that can sisplify its
solution. In this article we discuss the possibility of applying man's and Lee's
methods for calculating and forming binary digital hologran filters to the problem
of designing different optical filters that can be used in the optical processing
of seismic information.

Among the advantages of filters obtained with Ioman's and Lee's methods over stan-
dard holographic filters synthesized by a computer. first place is occupied by
their binary nature. This eliminates the need for halftone registration of the
computer-synthesized filter and places less rigorous requirements on the nodule-
tor's linear band. since the filter's binary picture is less sensitive to the ef-
fects of modulator linearity. In addition to this, a binary picture can be depict-
ed more easily and accurately with the help of standard devices for the output of
information from a computer onto an optical carrier.

Let us discuss the process of the formation of an optical filter with a certain
transfer function, using man's method [1].

Each element of such a filter can be either transparent or nontransparent; that is.
it takes on one of two values that can be compared with zero or unity. Such a fil-

ter can even be developed on an alphabet printer and then copied onto a photograph-
ic carrier.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.0“an of K0? for Fourier transfor- operation.
Key: 1. Subject plane 2. Frequency plane 3. Laser

Figure l is a diagram of a coherent optical processor (K0?) that carries out a
Fourier transform. net coordinate system OX! be given in plane P. while systa
wxwy is given in plane 0. We will designate the light field after it has passed
the phototransparency in plane P as h(x,y) . mile the field in plane 0 135 Hwyuy) .
It is then the case that

Hm; W‘x’ﬂ/Wle ﬁmww 4;“? m

where A a wavelength of the coherent light: I I focal length of lens L1. Let func-
tion 8&1me) be quantiﬁed in some allowable manner, whereupon

_. "" u (l: . ur/
a We”? Eff/«5,7145% ‘ “6‘ 3‘ {M'OIW 0’
I. 4

Since integral (1) and series (2) converge uniformly, by substituting (2) into (1)
we obtain

”ma, up 3f ~[72: 21“»qu 33““7‘“‘5"’I/a¢ (3)

let us designate the amplitude spectrum as Iﬂml and the phase spectrun of the
quantified function no»: IV?) as ¢m, whereupon

lira/”4:5"; M... I: a... ' (4)

By changing the order of integration and emanation in expression (3) and replacing
(way?) by its value from (4), we obtain

.1 I - O "
Hm, up- 7 -—zz:ijHmle H M “5m "9 5 1‘“ dag, (5)

when the variable Ann: is added to and subtracted from the exponent in expression
(5), it will take on the torn

1/qu j: z:]/7f...le

Let us now select the value of. Ann so that Am: - em - 0; it is then the case that

s '7
”may ﬁzzy/1.21% ”WM“ ‘5 M‘ ms 3’ (7)

Rae-us '4‘,“ 7 J-W'ﬁ
W "*9 '5 Id“; (6)

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE_ ONLY
ﬂaking use of the-relationship

"' 4: '
.I e '7‘ ‘ glam.
where 6 is a Dirac delta function. we finally find

”06.14!“ g 2; )HMIﬂm-ua"ami «M5 "‘9 ‘7 . (s)

For a fixed value of n. we will determine the value of Am from the expression

A... = Lugs/M] (9)

. _.. r.
J " 5- A , (10)
Here. 0 - main value of em, d =- distance between the apertures, 11: = number of the
reading.

while the main value of ‘mn is

Relationship (8) is the expression for the Fourier spectmm of a binary optical

filter. Prom this expression it is obvious that it is a set of transparent, rec-
tangular apertures against a nontransparent background, it being the case that the
width of the aperture is identical for a given filter, while its height is propor-
tional to amplitude Iﬂml at the point with coordinates (wgmny) and its center is

displaced along the “x axis from the grid junction point with numbers (am) by dis-
tance Am.

Let us discuss the process of producing a binary optical filter according to
noman's method. using as an example a matched filter with the transfer function

' 1
Mom (11)
B l
LMvﬂ‘i’ Buns»;
where S'(wx.wy) - s(wx.wy) complexly conjugated to the useful signal's spectrum;
Bn(wx,wy) - energy spectrum of the interference.

Methmis for evaluating the amplitude and phase spectrum of a seismic signal (as-
suming that the signal being processed is a minimal-phase one) , as well as the in-
terference's energy spectrum, are discussed in [3].

with due consideration for the evaluations given in [3], in order to construct a
filter it is necessary to:
1. select distance d between the apertures:
2. select the sire of the aperture:
3. calculate the value of am starting from relationships (9) and (10):
4. determine the apertures' coordinates. (since we need a value that is complexly
conjugated to the useful signal's spectrum, we should use the relationship
- wit-em"

-fe 4.: =¥ﬁfum

We will then determine the apertures' coordinates from the equalities

4M '“Qu' “(s =I'b,

wr-ucv =0):

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. calculate the apertures' heights. which must be proportional to [ill-“I:
6. compute the filter'e transfer function according to formla (ll);
7. transfer the picture obtained from the cosputer onto a photographic transparen-

CYe

 

Figure 2. Element of an optical binary filter obtained by noman's
method.

In Figure 2 we seen an elenent of an optical binary filter obtained by Iaoman's
method.

Here, (ﬂy?) - the distance by which the aperture should be displaced along the '1‘
axis in order to preserve the phase relationships.

Ilti‘. 'I: - E

rm .‘.-.---~o-.-~'~. on. "camp”;‘r‘cmouvt- ..T—......._...‘ . . . .-.‘
' I
- n

; ; ; i - ; . ;
mm. -..~...e .. .m. . - .aw.~m~.....‘M~d—nw

Figure 3. Fragment of a filter.

[Best reproduction available]
Figure 3 depicts a fragment of an optical filter designed on a comuter by Doman's
method and transferred from the computer onto a photographic transparency.

 

Piltration of seismic materials has been carried out with a “Rogerent' unit [4] .

65
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLYf
Another method for encoding the wave front is Dee's method [5] , which also makes it
possible to obtain binary filters.

The Fourier spectrum of a filter obtained by Lee's method can be written in the
form

"mew if; 2; (A... ﬁm-«éﬁcmw-ég'ﬁ

*Bm. flute-«5"— {Afar —u/"7’ '
i I (13)
41),,” Jimmy—”ﬁn; my"! e [sic-mo (12)]
. WMJ/ua. 141%7/06151-(49'7,
where 5(H) is a Dirac delta function.

Coefficients Am, Bun! Cm and am in (13) have the following values:
AM =IHMI «Wm '
3,... =IHMI an 7M,
cm = Am -/Hlml «’1 7M,

on. .5”. - ”(M/m m-

From (13) it is obvious that each complex reading of the tilter's function, as made
at point (wmwy) , is represented in four transparent apertures with coordinates

(”.2 «9‘1, MP}: 14:31, (WV, WI. m9” urn

The aperture's width is identical for a given filter, while its height is propor-

tional to am, new Cm and Om. Filters obtained by Lee's method can also be used
to process seismic materials. '

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Akayev, A.A., and Hayorov, S,A., ”Rogerentnyye opticheskiye vychislitel‘nyye
mashiny" [Coherent Optical Computers] . Leningrad. Izdatel'stvo
'Hashinostrayeniye', 1977.

2. Pedom, B.P., and Bl'man, R.N., "Tsifrovaya golografiya" [Digital Holography],
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka'. 1976.

3. Kozlov, Ye.h.. et a]... "Tsifrovaya obrabotka seysmicheskikh dsnnykh" [Digital
Processing of Seismic Data]. Moscow Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", 1973.

4. Potapov, O.A., "Opticheskaya obrabotka geofizicheskoy i geologicheskoy
infcanatsii" [Optical Processing of Geophysical and Geological Information],
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nedra', 1977, p 184.

S. Lee, ".3” “Sampled Fourier-Transform Hologram Generated by Computer,‘ APPL.
0PT., No 9, 1970, p 639.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. 08!. ONLY

UDC 550.834
'MORGOL' MARINE SBISKOHOLOGRAPHIC SYSTEM

Leningrad GOIDGRAPIYA I OPTICHESKAYA ‘OBRABOTKA INPORMATSII V WII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 91-99

[Article by O.A. Vorob'yev and Lb. Bezborod'ko from collection of works "Holography
and Optical Information Processing in Geology", edited by Professor 5.8. Gurevich
and Candidate of 'nechnical Sciences O.A. Potapov, Leningrad Physiootechnical Insti-
tute imeni LP. Ioffe, USSR Academy of Sciences, 500 copies, 181 pages]

[Text] The authors discuss questions concerning the creation of
a system for continuous marine investigations. 'I'hey analyze the
present state of the development of ship equipment and propose
principles for the organization of a system for the collection,
processing and visualization of geological and geophysical data.

Multichannel continuous profiling (HNP) entails the accumulation of large data
flows. In connection with this, in order to evaluate the quality of the measure-
ments it is necessary to carry out rapid processing and visualization of the data,
in the form of a deep section, on board scientific research ships [1].

The on-board 'Razrez" [Section] recorder, which was developed at the Gelendzhik
branch of NIIngeofizika [probably Scientific Research Institute of Marine Geo-
physics], makes it possible to visualize a black-and-white temporal section on
photographic film [2]. However, this instrument does not permit kinematic correc-

tion factors to be entered.

The my rerecording device and the I'C-l seismic holograph that were developed at
UKRNIGRI [Ukrainian Scientific Research Institute of Geological Exploration] make it
possible to obtain an image of a deep section with velocity and seismic deflection
allowed for. However, the I‘C-l holograph does not make it possible to enter signals
from a multichannel receiving unit ("tail”) during the process of profiling with
parallel visual monitoring of the results of the directed filtration of the image

and scale transformations.

1he construction of deep sections on the basis of the diffraction transformation
proposed by Yu.v. Timoshin leads to regularization of the signals (as a result of

low-frequency filtration), a change in the section's energy, and large expenditures
of computer time for processing (in connection with the selection of the weighting

factors) {3]. The equipment realization of the diffraction transformation method
on the basis of a specialized computer is unjustifiably awkward and expensive. The

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
scientist (Klerbo). However, the realization of this method on the basis of analog
equipment is difficult, while digital processing on a computer requires large
amounts of time.

The "Morgol" system receives signals from a seismic receiving unit (tail) that is
towed behind a ship along with a source. In connection with this, both single-
channel (single-channel continuous profiling (ONP)) and multichannel (HNP) tails are

On a real-time scale (in the on-line mode) the system provides for the visualization
of:

incoming seismic signals (seismograms) from the tail, for the purpose of monitoring
the quality of the data being recorded and controlling the operation of the emitting
and receiving equipment;

temporal sections, for the purpose of determining the filtration modes, the angles
of inclination of the reflecting boundaries, and the choice of the data processing
parameters:

deep sections, for the purpose of geological interpretation, correcting the observa-
tion techniques, and changing the mode of the ship's motion.

tied in to the current coordinates, insures the visualization of geological struc-
tures while the ship is in motion. The interpretation of the deep section enables
geologists on board the ship to institute operational measures at the place where
the work is being done. In complicated situations, for the purpose of selecting
the rule for the change in average velocity V(t) it is possible to turn repeatedly
to the mass of data accumulated on magnetic tape by the on-board "Grad" [Degree]
data collection system (in the on-line mode).

The initial stage in the creation of the 'Horgol" system is the development of a
single-channel deep section (holograph) plotting device, which is being done by
Vbronezh State University's Laboratory of Seismic Holography, under the direction of

68
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

v.1. Dubyanskiy, by agreement with IHGG Yuo. The equipment is intended to operate
by the central beam (TsL) method during ONP and provides for channel-by-channel in-
put, amplification, filtration, compression, color division, light modulation and
storage of seismic signals. when a carrier holding the light guide moves along the
axis of a mirror semiconical converter (ZPP) (developed on the basis of V.D.
Zav'yalov's method) according to the V(t) rule. holographic diffraction conversion
(GDP) takes place: that is, the conversion of the seismic signals into an image of
wave fronts. The use of the ZPP in the holograph results in signal scanning by cir-
cles. and during NSP [probably continuous seismic profiling] provides the following:
correct plotting of horizontal and inclined boundaries;

the possibility of visualisation on a section of diffraction points. which is par-
ticularly fundamental for working in the ocean;

the possibility of preliminarily determining the rule governing the change of the
waves' average velocity in the medium V(t) by focusing the diffracted waves on the
diffraction points:

increasing the depth and the signal-to-noise ratio through the use of diffracted
waves in the formation of the section image.

The basic difficulty in using the GDP methods and equipment developed by v.0.
Zav'yalov, v.1. Dubyanskiy and A.I. Khvatov in marine research is the use of photo-
graphic film as the seismic signal storage medium. The use of photographic film re-
quiring extensive processing makes it impossible to visualize sections on a real-
time scale. The use of thermoplastic and photothermoplastic carriers in marine

sensitivity of these materials.

The holograph with channel-by-channel input that was developed at Voronesh State
University by A.I. Khvatov has inadequate resolution, accuracy and operating speed,
which makes its use during HNP not very effective.

The use of the semiconical converter in Voronezh State University's holographs when
the MN? method is used results in significant distortions in the plotting of the im-
ages of inclined boundaries.

During HNP, the accurate plotting of the images of reflecting boundaries with large
angles of inclination is possible if elliptical scanning of the signals is used to
plot the sections. The realization of elliptical scanning is difficult when optico-
mechanical holographs are used. For the on-board plotting of sections during MNP,
it is most advisable to use the elliptical image scanning (BRO) principle proposed
by v.v. Kondrashkov [S]. This principle has been realized in analogous form in an
experimental model developed at the ”Soyuzmorgeo" VNPO [probably All-Union Produc-
tion Association] by Ye.Yu. Yakush and v.3. Gavryushin. The devices for spatial
filtration and the input of the rule governing the change of velocity in the medium
that are used in this model require further development. The :80 method presumes
the plotting of temporal sections on the basis of the initial seismic traces. using
a new system of coordinates and the input of correction factors. Theoretically

this method is usable for the construction of holographs of boundaries with angles
of inclination of up to 90°. The BRO method is the basis of the construction of
temporal profiles in the "Morgol" system. In connection with this, the average ve-
locity input unit makes it possible to select the V(t) rule on the basis of an anal-
ysis of the section's image by correlation of the holographs of the reflecting boun-
daries.

69

FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
Figure 1. Block diagram of marine holographic seismic survey‘
ing system.

Key:

1. MP!) 8. BS 15. V!!! 21. BRP"
2. UPC 9. V56" 16. BZU 22. PLOT
3. M 10. VVU 17. BRO 23. BEN
4. US 11. VKP 18. 020 24. UV
5. NHL 12. SIP 19. 30 25. PVR
6. PGR 13. APOD 20. BRTv 26. UHF
7. 26 14. Bbv

Operating Principle of the System

The following units (Figure 1) make up the "Morgol" marine holographic seismic sen-
sing system:

a) an input unit (UV):

b) a temporal section plotting device (PVR):

c) a deep section plotting device (PGR);

d) a microfilming unit (UMP).

The input unit makes it possible to enter seismic data from two sources:
a) a multichannel receiving unit (tail);
b) a digital magnetic tape storage unit (NHL).

In preprocessing unit UPO.(2), signals from multichannel receiving unit HPD (l)
undergo amplification. filtration. compression and so on. From the output of UPC
(2), the signals are sent to multiplexer H (3). where periodic interrogation of each

70
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

seismic track takes place; this makes it possible to enter seismic data in the sys-
tem in real time.

Matching device US (4) is used to enter seismograms from magnetic tape storage unit
NHL (5) .

Seismogram visualization unit V56“ (11) makes it possible to exercise operational
monitoring of the primary seismgrams on videomonitor unit VKU 1.118) .

Radio-navigation unit BEN (34) correlates the data being measured to the system of
coordinates and real time.

Temporal section plotting device PVR operates in the following manner.

Signals from input unit UV pass through conjugation unit as (8) into gating unit
SIP (14) for the BRO isoclinals. The BRO isoclinals for boundaries with any angle
of inclination are determined by the formula

= 19(65’501
£0 [mac-e»; . ‘5‘”

where to - recording time; to = current coordinate at the reception :points, as read
{rem the point of emission; in - distance between the emission and reception points;
V - average velocity.

Driving oscillator ZG (7) insures the recording of the information in operational
memory 020 (21) and control the system's switching elements.

Velocity v input unit WU (12) changes the amplitude of the sinusoidal control volt~
age. In kinematic correction factor computation unit VKP (13). recording time to is
calculated with due consideration for the following changing parameters: current
time ti. distance between the emission and reception points in and average velocity
v. In order to determine the amplitude of the sinusoidal voltage, which is propor-
tional to to with respegt to the known auplitudes of the cosinusoidal voltage that

are proportional to (Ln/V and t1, it is necessary to make calculations with the for-
mula

_.-~.__.

{0 = ﬂint-{gag (5.2)

Recording of the data on the temporal section, which is obtained by the accumulation

of the elliptical image scannings. takes place in operational memory 020. The tra-
jectories of these scannings are determined with the formula

" (I-

I.
+ /=1 (5.3)

T;—

v‘ ’1

Operational visualization of the obtained temporal section is realized on the screen
of videomonitor unit VKU 3 (29), with the help of television seaming unit BR'l‘v
(25) .

Plotter scanning unit BRP: is used to send the temporal section data accumulated in

OZU (21) into plotter PLOT (30). The velocity curves are visualized on VKU 2 (24)
with the help of buffer memory BZU (19).

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\2'

with the help of the output unit in FOR (6). the data for a temporal section that
has been obtained can be entered in deep section plotting device 968.

Deep section plotting device PGR operates in two modes.

1) The plotting of deep sections from the primary material is done analogously to
the plotting of the temporal section in the PVR, with the following differences:

a) directed fan filtration is carried out with the help of apodizatsiya [translation
unknown] unit APOD (15):

b) kinematic correction factor computation unit VKP (16)*makes calculations accord-

ing to formula
Hq/(Zle-(5l , (5.4)

where H - radius of circular scanning corresponding to current time t1.

2) Plotting of deep sections on the basis of the temporal sections obtained from the
PVR is done with kinematic correction factor unit VIP (16) turned off.

The deep section that is obtained should be taken off through VKU 4 (31) or plotter
PM (32).

with the help of microfilming unit UN? (26). images from the screens of VKD 2 (24),
VKU 3 (29) and VKU 4 (31) can be recorded on photographic film.

The use of color division according to energy and frequency features in the "horgol"
system's plotting devices results in a significant increase in the geological infor-
mation content of the sections visualized on board ships.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Vorob’yev. 0.A., “Evaluating the Effectiveness of Automated Systems for Collect-
ing and Processing Oceanological Research Data,” “Sb. trudov X shkoly po '
avtomatizatsii nauchnykh issledovaniy" [Collected works of the 10th School for
the Automation of Science Research], Leningrad, 1977, p 240.

2. Malvitskiy, Ya.P., editor. "Horskiye geofizicheskiye issledovaniya“ [Marine Geo-
physical Research], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo 'Nedra", 1977, pp 76-79.

3. Timoshin, Yu.v., "Impul'snaya seysmicheskiy golografiya“ [Pulsed Seismic Holo-
graphy]. Moscow. Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", 1978, pp 125-138.

4. Potapov. O.A., Vorob'yev, 0.A., and Dubyanskiy, V.I., "Holographic Optioodigital
Processing of Seismic Surveying Data,“ in "Golografiya i opticheskaya obrabotka
informatsii v geologii i geofizike' [Holography and Optical Information Process-
ing in Geology and Geophysics], Leningrad, 1979: PP 95-101.

5. Kondrashkov, V.V., "Obtaining a Temporal Section by the Elliptical Image Scanning
(BRO) Method,“ REGION. RAZVED. I PMSL. GEOPIZIKA, No 20. 1977.

72
FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 550.634
on m possmnmr or cm'rmc A cmsao even: or 30mm momnous

Leningrad GOLOGRAPIYA I OPTICHESKAYA 03m INPORHATSII V GWIDGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 100-109

[Article by B.V. Pilipishin from collection of works “Holography and Optical Infor-
mation Processing in Geology“, edited by Professor 3.3. Gurevich and Candidate of
Technical Sciences 0.3. Potapov, Leningrad Physicotechnical Institute imeni LP.
Ioffe. USSR Academy of Sciences. 500 copies. 181 pages]

[Text] The author demonstrates the possibility of creating a
closed cycle of holographic transformations on the basis of mod-
ern algorithms and specialized equipment for the processing of
geophysical information. '

On the accmulative level, the basic purpose of seismic holography is the construc-
tion of a section of a depth scale. This problem is solved cosparatively easily
when the static correction factors and the laws governing the change in velocity
with depth are known. Even in modern geophysical computer centers, static correc-
tion factors are sometimes determined without the use of a computer. Thus, a closed
cycle of holographic transformations for the purpose of constructing a deep section
without using a computer is possible if the relationship v - V(H) (or any relation-
ship that is unambiguously related to it, such as V - V(tm), AT I M‘(tm), where tm I
- time at the minimum of the wave's cophasal axis, A? =- deflection of the cophasal
axis. which determines its curvature, and so on) can be found by using a holograph.

The presently existing method of determining the relationship v - van (or any one
that is unambiguously related to it) on the basis of a holograph, which consists of
plotting a family of wavegrams on the basis of the same seismogram for different ve-
locity values, has a number of disadvantages: the number of wavegrams is determined
by the number of values taken on by parameter v: as a consequence of this, there
arise complications in the identification of the waves (singly reflected. multiply
reflected, regular interference waves and so on) when there is an extraordinarily
large amount of output data. Free from these flaws. for example, is the method of
determining the velocities by summing the instantaneous values of the signals with
respect to the hyperbolic (parabolic) oophasal axes, with subsequent depiction of
the resultant data (a signal function) in the system of coordinates (V.tm). which

method has received the name of curvilinear summation (KS). One of the most power-
ful techniques for determining velocity--Ks RNP [regulated directional reception]--
requires the analysis of a set of signal functions (as in the case of wavegrams) .

although the rate of signal accumulation achieved is higher by an order of magnitude

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
or more than for the methods known at the present time, with all of the consequences
emanating from this. let us discuss the realization of the methods for determining
wave propagation velocities using curvilinear summation-ms and Ks RNPuon the basis
of holographic transformations (having preliminarily described the realization of
RNP. which is the'classical method of seismic surveying) that are most widely used
in computer centers at the present time. We will assume the most characteristic
feature of holographic transformations to be the distribution of the signals' in-
stantaneous values with respect to certain laws (such as circular scannings, but not
them alone) on the,accumulative plane, with natural further sumation of the values
falling on the same (or nearby) points on the plane.

Controlled Directional Reception and Its Realization by Holographic Techniques

We will assume that the observation system consists of sensors distributed uniformly
along a straight line and having the numbers -N,...,O,...,N. Let us also assumu
that the waves picked up by a sensor have plane cophasal axes with the equation

his? IIM +7.

where 1' - signal recording time for the central sensor in the base (n - 0); k - dif-
ference in times of arrival of signals forming the same cophasal axis at two adja-
cent sensors; that is. k I t(n) - t(n - 1) (angle of inclination of a wave, in
milliseconds on a track). In accordance with RNP [l] . standard processing consists
of forming the signal function (RN? summation tape) Aim”) according to the rule

A: (If, I.’ ' E Am; {=FR'” (ml,

where Mn,t) - equation of the seismogram (n - number of the track. t = current
time: 1mm) = kn + r = equation of the summation lines: It, 1’ = variable parameters
of the lines (angle of inclination of the wave on the seismogram (in milliseconds on

the track) and time of its registration on the central track (n - 0) of the seismo-
gram).

The holographic technique for forming the
RH? signal function is as follows (Figure
l--we will not present the proofs). Let us
identify the continuous, limited set of
points that represents the plane of the
signal function's arguments with the plane
(for example) of the photographic layer and
assign on the latter the rectangular system
of coordinates (kn); Ikl é kmax' 0 e T s
6 Tmax- Using the method of variable den-
sity, we will rerecord the signals (tracks)
previously registered by the sensors and
recorded on magnetic tape, on photographic
film. We will match the information re-
cording and rerecording rates so that the

 

I a linear dimensions of the n-th track on the

magnetogram 1p and the same on the photo-

A graphic film ikon satisfy the relationship
Figure 1. Formation of RN? signal sed’n
function Aﬁkn) . in" IN III/Mud 4’

where “const' is the result of equalizing

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0 and E with coordinates (0.0) and (O'Tmax)' respectively. and intersect the t axis
at angle Y (tg y - l/h). During the movement process we illuminate the track with a
parallel beam of light, the source of which we position in such a fashion that the
rays passing through the photographic film strike the photographic layer's surface
perpendicularly. After this procedure has been carried out with all the tracks (but
on the same photographic layer plane (k,t)). on the photographic layer's plane there
forms a distribution of densities corresponding to the RH? signal function A1kar).
where a point of maximum signal accumulation corresponds to each cophasal axis.

This setup can also be realized with the help of other equipment (a cathode-ray
tube. a potentialscope and so on). although all its characteristic features (track
compression, depending on its number. and the angle of inclination between the di-

Curvilinear Summation and Its Realization by Holographic Teohniques

difference in arrival times of signals belonging to the same cophasal axis at the
end and central sensors in the base, divided by n2; that is, k' - [t(N) ~ non/N3 -
- AT/N2 (AT is the deflection of the cophasal axis). curvilinear summation of seis-

Azﬂrfr’MzEA/Igl-Z“ (all,

where A(n,t) - equation of the seismogram (n - number of the track, t - current
time); sztn) - k'n2 + T' - equation of the summation lines; k', 1' - the lines'
variable parameters; k' - AT/nz; T - deflection of the cophasal axis; T . signal
recording time on the central track (n I 0) of the seismogram.
fashion that the linear dimensions of the

n-th track on the magnetogram 2 and the
photographic film "kon satisfy rela-

tionship
‘1» ”V .(n'ﬂl % ;

the projections of the directors of the
photographic film's motion onto the plane
of the photographic layer AC and 30 must
intersect the 1" axis at angle 7 (tg Y -
= 1/n2) .

The remarks previously made are also cor-
rect with respect to the possible equipment
realization of the system.

The Ks RNP algorithm consists of three ba-
sic parts: curvilinear animation (KS), a
Figure 2. Formation of KS signal former and controlled directional recep-
function A;(k',1") . tion, and involves the sequential, joint
processing of a group of seismograms by the
Ks and RN? methods. The rational integration of these methods is described in [7]
and is realized by the former. An investigation of the properties of the KS RNP

complex and its realization in programs for a "sigma-5" computer are described in
[8]: several applied aspects that are related to the use of the complex and its

realization in programs for a “Minsk-32" computer are discussed in [9] .

 

Into the system's input are fed an odd number (25 + l) of OGT [cannon deep point]
seismograms As(n.t) (S = o.;1,...,:s> formed from a series (ZS + 1) of side-.by-side
common deep points. Let us carry out the curvilinear sumation of these points (the
definitions are the same as before):

A; (WI = g; A‘ﬁt 4:“ m}

At the output of the Ks unit we obtain (1.3 + 1) KS sunuation tapes A§(k', ') that
are quantified by the independent variable I". From the KS susmation tapes. we form
group Ks tapes (by analogy with directed RNP group tapes [1, pp 17-19], the only
difference being that instead of the angle of wave arrival we use curvature of the
cophasal axis k') 19$ (5,!) in the following manner: the first KS group tape is put
together from all of the first tracks of the KS sumtion tapes by arranging them
(the tracks) in the order of arrangement of the KS sumation tapes and is labeled
with the indicator “1:" of the first tracks of the KS emulation tapes and so on; the
last Ks group tape consists of all the last KS summation tape tracks. arranged in
the order of arrangement of the Ks stmtmation tapes and labeled with the indicator
'k'" of the last tracks of the Ks sullnation tapes. The Ks group tapes A’t' (5.1")

are formed from the KS animation tapes A§(k',1') by the former. The meaning of the
transformation ASEOK'J') + 5% (5,1') is as follows: if for any of the reflecting
horizons the cophasa1.axis curvature k' - k6 that corresponds to it was selected
during the curvilinear suunation process, on the group tape formed franthese tracks
(and labeled with the indicator k6) is depicted a fragment of the temporal section:
a plane. reflecting area with an unknown angle of inclination. This fact makes it
possible to subject each KS group tape to repeated summation according to m: that
is,

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1’ 1‘; ' ' -
Au (4' 7/ - git; (J, t’- {ﬁrm},

where TRNP(S) = ks + 1 . equation of the summation lines: k, T - variable parameters
of the lines (the angle of inclination of the reflecting area (in milliseconds on a
track) and time of registration of the area on the central track S - 0 of the KS
group tape): A§E(k,t) - summation tapes--signal functions of the KS RNP algorithm,
the number of which equals the number of values taken on by parameter “k.“ From the
description of the complex that has been presented it follows that the number of ac-
cumulated signals equals the product of the number of accumulations during KS and
the number of accumulations during RNP. Thus, the summary signal is frequently the
result of the accumulation of 80 or more original seismic signals (for example, 9
accumulations according to KS and 9 according to RNP results in 81 accumulations

(9 x 9)). The large number of accumulations provides the KS RNP algorithm with a

whole series of advantages over other well-known algorithms.

Let us mention here that the realization of the KS RNP algorithm in accordance with
the setup that has been described (and which is unique at the present time), using

any devices (optical, electro-optical),.is possible-but extremely awkward. During

its realization we have two intermediate masses of information (Ks summation tapes

and group tapes) that have to be recorded, stored and read.

Let us assume that the planes on which the formation of the KS RN? algorithm's sig-
nal functions A§i(k,1) takes place are formed of a continuous, limited set of points
(such as the plane of the photographic layer). On each of these planes we will as-
sign a rectangular system of coordinates (k,1), where Ikl s “max! 0 s 1 s t 3 we
will assume the parameter of each plane to be the corresponding value of k'mggom its
search interval.

The holographic technique for the formation
of the KS RNP algorithm's signal functions
(we will describe it in an example of the
formation of hit-Romp!” coincides with
the technique or the formation of the RR?
signal function that has been described.
The necessary changes are as follows (Fig-
ure 3):

the information registration and rerecord-
ing rates should be matched in such a man-
ner that the linear dimensions of all
tracks of the s-th seismogram on the mag-
netogram 2p and the photographic film ‘kon
satisfy the relationship

{m m - W 3

after the dimensions of the n-th track of
the S-th seismogram are reduced to the val-

 

Pigure 3. Formation of one of the us fk°n(s). the track must be shifted down-
KS.RNP signal functions (k' - k6) ward relative to the 1 axis by the distance
AEx'k6(k,1). kdnz, which has also been preliminarily

transformed according to the formula pre-
sented above;

the projections of the directors of the photographic film's motion onto the plane

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the photographic accumulator AC, 80 must intersect the 1 axis at angle 7, for
which tg y - 1/3 is correct.

The remarks previously made relative to the possible equipment realization of this
system are also correct.

The results obtained indicate the possibility of creating a closed cycle of holo-
graphic transformations on the basis of contemporary algorithms. In order to do
this, it is sufficient to 'furnish' the holograph with curvilinear scanning with re-
spect to a number of directions and possible displacement of the scans along the 1
axis, while the original information is "compressed,” using a certain compression
factor, during rerecording on the photographic carrier.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Ryabinkin, L.A. (editor), Napelkov, Yu.v., Znamenskiy, v.v., Voskresenskiy,
Yu.N., and Rapoport, M.B., "Theory and Practice of the RNP Seismic Method,"
TRUDY, MINKh 1 GP [Moscow Institute of the Petrochemical and Gas Industry imeni
Academician I.M. Gubkin], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo ”Gostoptekhizdat', No 39, 1962.

2. Garotta, R., and Michon, 0., “Continuous Analysis of the Velocity Function and of
the Move Out Corrections," GEOPHYS. PROSP., Vol 15, No 4, 1967, pp 584-597.

3. Chervonskiy, M.I., Pilipishin, B.v., and Mikhaylik, z.M., "A Method for Trans-
forming Seismic Information,“ Patent No 271820, 28 May 1968, BYULL. IZOBR., No
18, 1970.

4. Taner, T., and Kochler, P., "Velocity Spectra Digital Computer Derivation and Ap-
plication of Velocity Functions,” GHOPHYS., Vol 34, No 6, 1969: PP 853-871.

S. Pilipishin, B.V., and Chervonskiy, M.I., 'xrivolineynoye sumudrovaniye
seysmicheskikh signalov“ [Curvilinear Summation of Seismic Signals], Moscow,
Izdatel'stvo “Nedra”, 1974, p 79.

6. Matusevich, Yu.P., Mironov, V.Ya., Binkin, 1.6., and Klochkov, G.D., "Controlled
Summation in the Common Deep Point Method," 538. REGION., RAZVED. I PRDMYSL.
GBOGIZIKA, Moscow, VIEMS [All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Economics of
Mineral Raw Materials and Geological Exploration], 1974, p 53.

7. Mezhbey, V.I., Vaks, z.M., and Daderko, Yu.R., "A Method for Determining the
Propagation Rate of Seismic Waves in a Medium,” Patent No 343235, applied for 14
July 1971, published 5 September 1972.

8. Tsatsko, Ye.L., 'Sistema obrabotki dannykh MOGT na base raznovremennogo
summirovaniya“ [A System for Processing Data Gathered by the cxmunn Deep Point
Method on the Basis of Summation at Different Times], author's abstract from die-
sertation for degree of candidate of technical sciences, Kiev, 16 AN USSR [Insti-

tute of Geology, Ukrainian 358 Academy of Sciences], 1977.

9. Chervonskiy, M.I., Pilipishin, B.v., Sigalova, Ye.I., and Prankovich, M.P.,
'Sovershenstvovaniye metodicheskogo kompleksa izucheniya fizicheskikh parametrov

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omcm. USE ONLY

real'nykh cred primenitel'no k konkretnym ceyenogeologicheskin usloviyan
neftegazonosnykh regionov USSR" [An Improvement in the Complex of nethode Used to
Study the Physical Paraneters of Real Mediums, as Applied to the Specific Seismo-
geological Conditions Encountered in the Gae- and Oil-Bearing Regions of the

Ukrainian SSR], UkrNIGRI [Ukrainian Scientific Research Institute of Geological
Exploration] funds, 1979.

79
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
UDC 550.834
ON THE MSTIW OF USING BOIDGRAPHIC SYS'IEHS IN MARINE GBOIDGY AND GEOPHYSICS

Leningrad WWIYA I OPTICHBSKAYA 03mm INPORMATSII V GEOLOGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 110-121

[Article by A.v. Zuyevich, v.3. Gavryushin. V.V. Alekseyenko and V.H. Sugak from
collection of works ”Holography and Optical Information Processing in Geology". ed-
ited by Professor S.B. Gurevich and Candidate of Technical Sciences 0.A. Potapov,
Leningrad Physicotechnical Institute imeni A.F. Iotfe, USSR Academy of Sciences,
500 copies, 181 pages}

[Text] The authors discuss the applicability of the holographic
method in the sonic band to the solution of exploratory geologi-
cal and geophysical problems under the conditions encountered in
the region of the continental shelf. They describe a multi-
channel. sonic-band holographic device and experiments conducted
under conditions that were as close to natural as possible. They
present the results of these experiments, which involved obtain-
ing images of objects embedded in the ground. Finally, they ana-
lyze the problems involved in realizing marine holographic sys-
tems and give a list of prospective geological and geophysical
problems that can be solved with the help of holographic systems
under the conditions encountered in the area of the continental
shelf.

Long-wave holography is already an effective method for various types of investiga-
tions in nontransparent mediums. A number of authors have attempted to use the
holographic method in the seismic and sonic bands in both land [1-4] and sea [5-8]
research. The interest in holography is explained primarily by its well-known ad-
vantages. such as the three-dimensional nature of the image of objects being inves-
tigated. the high level of noise stability, the possibility of obtaining images of
objects with any configuration, and the possibility of processing multidimensional
information rapidly. Although these advantages are realized only partially in the
long-wave band, the use of holography in the seismic and sonic bands is promising,
according to many evaluations. One cannot think, however, that in most cases ma-
rine holographic systems are regarded as a means of solving certain problems in the
aqueous layer. In only one work [6] is there a report of experiments involving the
obtaining of images of objects located in the nontransparent ocean bottom. For a
number of reasons, however, the techniques used in these investigations are not
widely used in the practice of exploratory work at sea. Despite this. the article
cited is valuable in the sense that it turns a new page in the search for ways and

80

FOR‘0FFNJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

means of investigating the ocean. The need for this search, particularly in view of
the importance of developing the continental shelf, is extremely urgent at the pres-
ent time. In confirmation of this we have the opinion of the well-known French re-
searcher K. (Riffo) [9], who writes: “...marine prospecting for useful mineral de-
posits is an expensive proposition. One of the reasons for this is of a technical
nature-we still have an almost couplete lack of knowledge of how to work under wa-
ter. Modern geophysical investigative methods still do not enable us to determine
accurately the presence of deposits of useful minerals under the ocean bottom. and
the technology of deep-water geological mapping is still far from perfect.“

At NIIMorgeofizika [probably Scientific Research Institute of Marine Geophysics) ,
the “Soyuzmorgeo' VHNPO [possibly Naval Scientific Production Association] is inves-
tigating the applicability of sonic-band holography to the solution of geological
and geophysical exploratory work under the conditions encountered on the continental
shelf. In this article we describe several experimental results of this research
and evaluate the prospects for the use of this method in the future.

1. Multichannel Holographic Systems

    

2

 

. s . ~

Figure 1. Diagram of a holographic system for investigating
the continental shelf.

Figure l is a conventional diagram of a holographic system for investigating the
shelf. The special feature of this system is the necessity of obtaining information
while ship (1) is in motion. The receiving (2) and emitting (3) systems are con-
nected to the ship. The investigated objects are located both on the bottom (4) and
in the rocks (5) of which the sea bottom (6) is conposed. The thickness of the wa-
ter layer over the continental shelf ranges from 20 to 500 m. The rocks that form
the sea bottom are distinguished by the considerable range of their physical parame-
ters such as (for example) wave resistance, attenuation. porosityand characteristic
size of the particles. The nonuniformity of the medium, the broad range of physical

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
parameters, the presence of a layer of water, the specific nature of marine observa-
tions--all of these determine the considerable complexity involved in obtaining and
processing holographic information. This facts results in the necessity of a care-
ful investigation of the capabilities of holographic systems under conditions that

are as close to real as possible.

Investigations of multichannel holographic systems in the ultrasonic band were con-
ducted with a modeling unit. The model was tank containing water, into which vari-

ous objects were placed. In the work we used the aperture synthesis method, which
was realized by scanning with a linear receiving antenna. The techniques used in

the work, the equipment and the basic results of the experiments are described in
[10]. In experiments related to the testing of the resolving power of a holographic
system with a limited aperture under near-field conditions, the plane resolution was
naklv while the vertical resolution was 6X“. During the experiments, we obtained
reproduced images of the model objects with no worse than Zlak resolution.

1.1. Plan of the Experiment

 

Figure 2. Diagram of conduct of experiments in a range holo-
graphic complex: 1. emitter: 2. receiving antenna: 3. load-

bearing truss: 4. rails.

Experiments that were conducted in the ultrasonic band made it possible to evaluate
several parameters of the holographic system. However, the model simulated a homo-
geneous medium, whereas in practice the medium being investigated is essentially
heterogeneous. In view of this, the results of the experiments cannot be used as a
basis for the development of a holographic system that is suitable for the solution
of exploratory problems on the continental shelf. For the purpose of testing the
method under conditions that essentially approximate real ones, a multi channel
sonic-band holographic system was developed and experiments involving the obtaining
of images of objects in the ground were performed. Figure 2 is a diagram of the
conduct of the experiments. 'me work was done in a basin measuring 50 m x 20 m x 5
m. Carrier truss (3), along with receiving antenna (2) and the equipment complex,
moved on rollers along rails (4) . The receiving antenna contained 127 hydrophones
counted at S-cm intervals. When the carrying truss was moved mechanically with the

 

1Here and henceforth, la is the wavelength of the sounding emissions.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

help of a motor and a system of cables. synthesis of a two-dimensional aperture
measuring 6.35 m x 6.35 m was provided. Objects located on or under the bottom of
the basin were irradiated by emitter (l) . The emitter was maunted on a raft and
could be placed at any point in the basin. The information registered during scan-
ning by the receiving antenna was transmitted over cables into the processing sys-
tem. The holograms obtained were photographed and reproduced in tie-Ne laser beams.

1.2. Recording and Processing System and Basic Parameters

The holographic information recording and processing system consisted of a single
stand that contained several functional units: a control unit. a memory unit. a
television unit and a power unit. Part of the units were removable and were placed
on the truss (the blocks of amplifiers and phase detectors and the decoding unit) ,
which made it possible to lower the noise level and simplify the information record-
ing process.

 

Figure 3. Block diagram of processing equipment of range holo-
graphic complex: 111,... .11“ - receiving hydrophones: Y1....,Yn -
- amplifiers: ODp...,ODn I phase detectors; I - emitter; l‘ -

'- generator; 0 - phase shifter; K - electronic switchboard; UR '-
- recording amplifier; an - memory unit; YC - reading amplifier:
TB - television unit.

Figure 3 is a diagram of the information recording and processing setup. Generator
I‘ excites emitter I with rectangular pulses with filling of the working frequency.
Signals reflected by the objects are picked up by receiving hydrophones 111.... .11".
The received signals are then amplified on a channel-by-channel basis by amplifiers
Yl,...,Yn and sent to the signal inputs of phase detectors 001.....ODn. A signal
from the same generator that has passed through phase shifter o is sent into the
phase detectors' reference inputs. the phase detectors' outputs are interrogated by
electronic interrogation coummtator K and the signals are sent into the input of re-
cording amplifier YR. They are then recorded in memory unit ran. for which a

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cathode-ray tub‘e'with a memory (of the m-l‘l type) is used. Upon completion of the
aperture synthesis cycle, a holograph is formed on the cathode—ray tube's target.
It is taken off through recording amplifier YC and sent into television unit T8 for
visualization.- The working frequency selected for the system was 10 kHz ”‘8: - 15
cm in water). "he choice of the frequency was determined by determined by the need
for operation in soil, where attenuation is quite high even for this frequency and
ranges (according to different data) from 1 dB/m to 5 dB/m for the clays making up
the bottom of the basin. The operation of all the system's working assemblies is
tied together by‘a_ crystal driving oscillator on a frequency of 10 101:. The parame-
ters of the emitted pulses were assigned on the control panel board and were varied
within wide limits. The duration of the pulses could be changed in 1 ms increments

in the 1-10 ms band and 10 ms increments in the 10-100 ms band. The pulse repeti-
tion rate could be set at either 10 or 50 Hz, while the filling frequency was 10
kHz. In addition to this, the control unit could exercise continuous control over
the lag time of the signal being read with respect to the emitted pulse within lim-
its of 1-100 ms. Continuous regulation of the time lag insures tuning on the ob-
jects being investigated.

1.3. Results of the Experiments

Using the system described above, we conducted experiments involving the obtaining
of images of objects located on and under the bottom of the basin. Objects in the
shape of the letter "T' and in the shape of two parallel segments were placed on the
bottom of the basin. The "T'-shaped object's dimensions were 8)“ by 101*, while
those of the two parallel segments were 81a]: by 61“, with the distance between the
inner edges of the segments being “air The objects were irradiated from above by
the emitter on the raft. The holograms were recorded in accordance with the de-

scription given above. The quality of the images and the resolution achieved make
it possible to identify the objects quits confidently.

The next series of experiments involved obtaining images of objects beneath the
floor of the basin. When the basin was being built, objects in the form of the let-
ters ”H" and 'S" were buried in its bottom. They were made of sheet steel 1 cm
thick and measured 1.5 x 2 m2 (10 x 13%”, while the width of the individual ele-
ments- was 0.45 m (31“) . The objects were placed one above the other, with the "H'-
shaped one being 3 m below the bottom and the "S"-shaped one 1 m below the bottom.

An object in the shape of a pyramid was made from marble cubes. It measured 0.4 x
0.4 x 0.4 m3 [sic] and was located under the bottom so that the distance from the

pyramid's upper edge to the bottom was 1 m. A stationary source mounted on a raft
at some distance from the synthesized aperture irradiated the objects from above.

The reading time lag was changed by selection of the useful signal during tuning on
an object being investigated. The results that were obtain prove the possibility.

in principle, of using holographic systems for searching for and detecting objects
in nontransparent mediums.

2. Difficulties in the Realization of Marine Holographic Systems
At the present time. many examples of the realisation of holographic systems in the

sonic and ultrasonic bands are known. However, they are all laboratory models. The
practical investigation of these systems under marine conditions is hindered by a

nunber of difficulties that must be overcome. In ‘the first place, the use of holo-
graphic systems under marine conditions is held back by the lack of experience in

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

realizing large receiving apertures at sea. For example. on the frequency of lo
1:82. a 100).“ aperture will be 15 m in size. It is necessary to tow antennas of
such size behind a ship. perpendicular to the direction of the ship's motion, which
is still a complicated technical problem. In connection with this. it is necessary
to take into consideration the fact that the rproblem of stabilizing a towed system
still has not been solved. Holographic requirements for stabilization are quite
rigorous, which leads to a need for looking for and realizing the appropriate sta-
bilization nethods.

Another isportant question is the lack of reliable knowledge about velocity and at-
tenuation in the soil that makes up the sea bottom. Measurement data in the litera-
ture are scarce and are distinguished by considerable variance. The realization of
on-the-spot measurements of these parameters in the search mode'is practically im-
possible; even for the layers near the bottom. The lack of such data is still hin—
dering the accurate interpretation and correlation of the results that have been ob—
tained.

The problem of the rapid and reliable interpretation of reproduced images remains
unsolved at the present time. It is necessary to make this interpretation in real
time, under marine surveying conditions, which is still a difficult problem. To
this problem. also, is related the question of creating memory units with considera-
ble capacity that are suitable for recording and reading information at the rate at
which it arrives. The solution of this special problem must insure the recording of
information and the reproduction of the image directly in the area being investigat-
ed and without interruption or omissions.

One of the problems of marine holography is the depth at which the investigation
takes place. As is known, increasing the depth means lowering the frequency, which
is unacceptable in holographic work. since this results in an increase in the size
of the aperture, the difficulties involved in the realization of which were men-
tioned above. The difficulties that have been enumerated are delaying the practical
utilization of holographic systems for surveying the continental shelf.

3. Prospects for the Use of Holographic Systems in Marine Geology and Geophysics

The world ocean is regarded as a promising area for prospecting for useful minerals.
Until now, vast expanses of the ocean have not been studied thoroughly in the geolo-
gical sense. Acoustic methods have recently begun to be used extensively to look
for useful minerals on continental shelves. This is no accident, since these meth-
ods are quite effective in the solution of problems of detailing the upper part of
layer covering the ocean bottom. Troviding that the difficulties listed above are
overcome, acoustic holography systems can supplement the instrmentation and method-
ology used in investigations at sea. Under the conditions encountered on the conti-
nental shelf, with their help it might be possible to solve a whole series of prob-
lems related to the study of the ocean bottom and the sedimentary layer covering it
to depths of several dozen meters. let us point out some of them:

1. Mapping the sea bottom for the purpose of determining microstages in bottom re-
lief and steeply dipping outcroppings of bedrock, as well as exploring and preparing

areas for drilling under conditions of considerable silting of the bottom or the
presence of a sedimentary layer.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2. Searching for buried river beds, with which the presence of placer deposits of
useful minerals is very frequently related.

3. Searching for dislocations with a break in continuity, which are also related to
the presence of useful mineral deposits.

4. Searching for deposits of phosphate and polymetal concretions.

5. Searching for ore deposits, the nature of which in the shelf zone corresponds to
deposits on land as far as their basic features are concerned.

The special feature of the problem outlined above is that most of them cannot be
solved by well-known traditional methods.

It should be taken into consideration that the problem of developing the shelf in-
cludes an entire complex of problems. Along with the problems involved in prospect-
ing for useful minerals, there will soon arise those related to their intensive ex-
traction, which will require the construction of various types of structures, such
as (for example) oil and gas lines, drilling platforms, oil storage tanks and so on.
This will make it necessary to solve a whole series of problems of a 'service“ type:
the preparation of areas for construction (including looking for outcroppings of
bedrock) , monitoring the safety of structures (such as the integrity of oil and gas
pipelines) and so forth. Such problems can be solved by holographic methods. In
connection with this, we should turn out attention to [7] , in which the author re-
ports on the development by the "Bolosonics" Company of holographic equipment in-
tended, in particular, for monitoring the state of oil pipelines under marine condi-
tions. It is obvious that the solution of even part of these problems with the help
of holographic system will be of considerable practical and scientific use.

Canclusions

l. Tests of multichannel holographic systems that have been developed for the pur-
pose of conducting laboratory and range model investigations demonstrated their
suitability for the solution of the problems involved in searching for and identify-
ing objects in transparent and nontransparent mediums.

2. The tests of the multichannel holographic systems showed that with their help and
a limited aperture (no larger than 45 x 4515;) , under near-field conditions no worse
than 2Aak resolution is achieved, while the reproduced images' quality is adequate
for confident identification of objects.

3. According to its fundamental capabilities, long-wave holography can be an ex-
tremely promising method for detecting, under marine conditions, diffusely scatter-

ing geological and geophysical objects lying on the bottom and in the bottom sedi-
ments at shallow depths.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

. l. Karla, A.K., and Rodgers, PJL, ”Detection of Buried Geological Ore Bodies by Re-
construction Wave Fronts." ACOUSTICAL Howcmuv, Vol 4, .1973, p 686.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fitzpatrick, 6.1... ”First Arrival Seismic Hologram,“ ACOUSTIC". WHY, Vol
4, 1973, p 381.

Fitzpatrick, G.I.., and Price, 7.0., "Acoustical Holography Goes Underground,”
OPTICAL SPECTRA, Vol ll, No 9, 1977, p 57.

Fitzpatrick, G.L., Nicholls, 3.11., and Human, 3.0., 'M apart-am: in Seismic
Holography,” BUREAU OF MINES REPOMS W INVESTIGATIGI,‘ No 7607, 1972.

Booth, IL, and Saltzer, 8., "An Experimental Holographic Acoustic Imaging Sys-
tem,‘ ACGJS'I'ICAL mm, Vol 4, 1973, p 371.

rarer, John 3., “Earth Rolography as a Method to Delineata Buried structures,“
mousncu. HOIOGRAPBY, Vol 6, 1975, p 435.

Peterson, R.C., "3-D Acoustical Holography System Detects Corrosion, Strut,
Cracking," PIPELINE AND GAS Jm, Hatch 1978, p 31.

Holman, 14., and Wade, 6., “Experimental Results Prom an Underwater Acoustical
Holographic System” ACGJS'I'ICM. 30mm, Vol 5, 1974, p 153.

Riffo, K., "Muhcheye-mean' [The Futureuthe Ocean], Indatel'stvo
"Gidrometeoizdat", 1978 (translated from French) .

zuyeyich, A V., Alakseyenko, v.v., and Sugak, V.H., "Recording and Reproduction

of bong-Wave Holograms, Using Small Apertues," 913‘!“ V 2111?, Vol 4, No 6,
1978, p 333.

87
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
SQiE RESULTS OF THE OPTICAL PROCESSIN OF GEMICAL DATA

Leningrad GODOGRAFIYA I OPTICHBSKAYA OBRABUI'KA INFORMATSII V GmLOGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 122-131

[Article by V.V. Alekseyenko. A.A. Bobin, A.V. Zuyevich, v.1. Kara and B.V. Senin
from collection of works I'l'lolography and Optical Information Processing in Geology',
edited by Professor 8.8. Gurevich and Candidate of Technical Sciences o.A. Potapov,
Leningrad Physicotechnical Institute imeni A.P. Ioffe, USSR Academy of Sciences. 500
copies, 181 pages]

[Text] The authors describe a coherent optical system for the

processing of geological and geophysical information that real-
izes the semiautomatic plotting of the radiation patterns of two-

dimensional graphic information. They describe the technique in
detail and present some processing results.

The study of the possibilities of using optical methods to process geophysical and
geological information is being conducted intensively both in our country and
abroad. A review of the basic achievements in this field is given in [1], where,
however, the basic attention is devoted to the processing of seismic surveying data.

At the same time, geological material in the form of different kinds.of maps, which
is practically not suitable for processing by a computer, turns out to be almost
ideal input information for optical systems.

Most methods for the statistical processing of graphic geological information fea-
ture the plotting of rose diagrams. When done by hand, this operation is extremely
laborious, even when special reference grids ((Shmidt), (Vul'f) and so on) are
available. In connection with this. a changeover from manual methods of processing

such materials to processing by high-speed optical systems is extraordinarily ef-
fective.

The first results of the processing of lineament maps by optical methods were ob-
tained by A. Fontanel and G. Grew [2] in 1968. In the USSR, analogous work is being
done by several organizations, such as VNIIGRI [possibly All#Union Petroleum Scien-
tific Research Institute of Geological Exploration], TsGT [Central Geophysical
Trust], NPO [Scientific Production Association] 'Aerogeologiya," PHI AN USSR (Insti-
tute of Physics and Mathematics, Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences]. The results of
this work confirm the prospects of optical processing methods, although the possi-

bilities of these methods'are far from being fully used.

88

lNJI:(Nﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂiE(ﬂ‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

since 1978, the authors of this article have been working on the optical processing
of geological materials at the VNPO [probably All-Union Scientific Production Asso-
ciation) "Soyuzmorgeo.' The goals of this work were:

the development and introduction into production of an optical system for plotting
both radiation patterns of lineaments (DNL) and radiation patterns of the isolines
(0N1) of any parameters, including those found on topographic, bathymetric, magnet-
ic, gravimetric and structural maps, hydrological network maps and other materials:
automation of the production of DNL's and DNI's with a significant increase in oper-
ating speed, which is particularly necessary in view of the large volumes of infor-
mation gathered during regional investigations;

the optical summation and sorting of the lineaments that are obtained.

The authors have built and operated in a production mode an optical device that
plots DNL's and DNI's automatically, with a productivity rate of about 100 diagrams
per hour. At the present time. various algorithms have been used with this device
to process materials covering more than 50 million square kilometers of the Soviet
Union's territory and adjacent waters (several thousand diagrams).

The theory and principles of the construction of analogous systems are explained
quite thoroughly in the specialized literature [3,4], so here we will present only a
brief technical description of the system and the basic stages of the processing op-
eration.

 

Figure 1. Diagram of optical device.

A diagram of the device is presented in Figure l. The light source is He-Ne laser
(1). The laser beam is broadened in beam expander (2) and directed onto optical
transparency (4), which is a microphotocopy of a map. The transparency can be moved
both horizontally and vertically, with the help of micrometric screws. In front of
the transparency there is framing window (3), which consists of two pairs of mutual-
ly perpendicular shutters set up so that the length of the rectangular window's
sides can be changed within limits of l to 20 mm. In our work we basically used a
square window 1-3 mm on a side. The light diffracted by the transparency strikes
lens (5). which has a focal length f - 600 sun In its focal plane the lens creates
a two-dimensional Fourier spectrum from the two-dimensional function of the trans-
parency's transmission coefficient. Binary sector filter (6), which is a non-
transparent disk with symmetrical sector cutouts, the angle of opening of which can
be changed within broad limits, is located in the spectral plane. When the filter
is turned, sequential isolation of sections of the spectrum being analyzed takes

place. The light passing through the filter is concentrated by converging lens (7)
on the photocathode of P80 [photomultiplier] (8). From the PRU, the signal is fed

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 2. Tests (a, b),
pending to them.

into amplifier (9) and then into recording unit (10). The filter's rotation is syn-
chronized with the recording unit by means of synchronization unit (11). The dia-
gram is recorded on blanks with a polar coordinate grid. Figure 2 illustrates the
operation of the system.

tem: the size of input window (3) and the angle of opening of filter (6). The size
of the window is selected on the basis of the original material. It is usually cho-
sen so that it corresponds to a map square with sides ranging from 30 to 100 km in
length. In connection with this, one transparency measuring 20 x 20 mm2 [sic] con-
tains up to 100 sections. The filter opening angle is determined by the necessary
directional resolution. The choice of an opening angle of less than 5° is not advi-
sable, since the plotting accuracy of the original material itself is usually on the
order of several degrees. Moreover, in order to distinguish the prevailing direc-
tions it is sometimes convenient to increase the angle to 15-20°. Basically, we
used a 5° angle.

In order to obtain good results. a map is laid out in lines of equal thickness and
anything not participating in the processing (including isoline numbers, elements of
geographic correlation, the coordinate grid) is removed. The map is then divided
into sections (usually squares) by fine pencil lines. The area of a square depends
on the scale of the investigation; that is, the degree of generalization of the
structures. It has been established experimentally that for a map scale of
l:1.000.000. a grid in which the sides of the square are 3-5 cm long is optimal.
The map is then photographed with a reduction factor of 20-40. When doing the
photography. it is desirable to use a lens with good resolution and a photographic
film of the "Hikrat" type. The film is developed in e high-contrast developer and
the negative is placed in a slideholder before being introduced into the optical
system.

Geological interpretation of DNL's and DNI's is aimed at the solution of the follow~

ing problems:
the detection of systems of lineaments and the study of the laws governing their

90

NOR<0FFHJA1.USE(MVLY
IN]! 0F11CJAI.USEGDNLY

distribution (in plan);

the division of lineaments according to the
degree of expression in profile in geo-
physical fields and structural maps on dif-
ferent levels.

On the basis of the regularities governing
the distribution of lineaments in plan and
profile that were determined, the solution
of these two problems by a single method

As an'experimental region for testing the
technique, we chose the southern part of
the Ukraine. Inside this region we select-
ed sections located in known deep fault
zones: Nikolayev (A). Odessa (B. C) and
the relatively rarely delineated Tarkhankut
(D) zones in Figure 3. These faults--par-
ticularly the first two-~are described

 

ent tectonic structures in this region

EEQ‘Efj'ﬁﬁn’GED‘ '(S.6]. In Figure 3 we present the DNL's
Figure 3. The southern Ukraine: re- and DNI's obtained for the selected areas
sults of testing the technique. and the faults named above on the basis of

data obtained by interpreting space photo-
graphs (KS), gravimetry (G), magnetometry (H) and hydrography (GG). It is clearly
obvious that all of these data unambiguously establish the direction of the faults
that corresponds to their active distribution. As far as the Tarkhankut fault is
described, on the basis of the results obtained it can. with complete substantia-
tion, be removed from the category of presumed faults to the category of established

In order to study the structure of the Sea of Okhotsk with this technique. the fol-
lowing maps were compiled: anomalous magnetic fields. distribution of thicknesses
of sedimentary and sedimentary-volcanic formations and hypsometric with respect to
the foundation. All the maps had a scale of 1:5.ooo,ooo and were divided by a grid
into squares with sides 3 cm long. From each map. 158 DNI's were obtained. As an
example of the original material, in Figure 4 we show the map of the magnetic field
anomalies in the Sea of okhotsk. The small grid in the lower lefthand corner, which
has a cross-shaped spectrum, is used to place the transparency in the optical system
correctly.

91
IIHI(NWWCJAI,USE|3NLV
As a result,
broken down into the four basic types.

area is character-

6 shows the layout
result of optical processing. It was obtained by
:orrelatlng to the magnetic fiel

ts depicted in Figures 5.2-

lysis of the maps of the Sea of
nabled us to draw a number of conclusions of substantial
mportance and to carry out tec

the Sea of okhotsk region.

92
FIMI(MWHCJAI.USEIDNLY

The examples presented of the processing of geological and geophysical materials
again proves convincingly that the use of optical systems makes it possible to in-
crease the yield of information from these materials substantially and to formulate
and solve fundamentally new and important problems while achieving a significant
increase in the productivity of labor at the same time.

In conclusion the authors wish to express their gratitude to 1.A. Garkalenko, A.V.
Semenov and v.8. Gavryushin for their useful discussion and valuable remarks. and
N.I. Yefimova and S.V. Mamontov for their assistance in the work.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Potapov, 0.A.. ”Opticheskaya obrabotka geofizicheskoy i gaologicheskoy
informatsii" [Optical Processing of Geophysical and Geological Information],

Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1977.

Pontanel, A., and Grew, 6., "Fraitement optique de l'information en qeoohysique
et dans le domaine de la photographie alricnne." L'ONDB BLECTRIQUE, Vol 48, 1968.

. Gndmen. Dzh., "VVedeniye v fur'ye-optiku" (Introduction to Fourier Optics],

Moscow. Izdatel'stvo "Mir", 1970.

Soroko, L.M., 'Osnovy golografii i kogerentnoy optiki" [Principles of Holography
and Coherent Optics], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka'. 1971.

Garkalenko, I.A., “Horizontal Movements of Blocks of the Earth's Crust in the

Southern Ukraine and the Basins of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov,“ DOKLADY AN
USSR. Series B. No 2. 1977, pp 99-101.

chekunov, A.v., 'Struktura zemnoy kori i tektonika yuga Yevropeyskaya chasti
SSSR" [Structure of the Earth's Crust and Tectonics of the Southern Section of
the European Part of the USSR]. Kiev, Izdatel'stvo 'Naukova dumka', 1972.

94
FORiOFFKJAl.USE(MVLY
FORGDFFKJAL.USE(MVLY

000 550.834

USING CATHODB-RAY MEMORY TUBES IN SEISMIC INPORHAIION PROCESSING DEVICES

Leningrad GOLOGRAFIYA I OPTICHBSKAYA OBRABOTKA INPORMATSII V GEOLOGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 132-142

[Article by Ye.Yu. Yakush from collection of works ”Holography and Optical Informa-
tion Processing in Geology“, edited by Professor 3.3. Gurevich and Candidate of
Technical Sciences O.A. Potapov, Leningrad Physicotechnical Institute imeni A.P.
Ioffe, USSR Academy of Sciences, 500 copies, 181 pages]

[Text] The author analyzes the basic parameters of Soviet-made
potentialscopes from the viewpoint of their utility for recording
seismic signals. He shows that the parameters of potentialscopes
with grid control make it possible to use them in devices for the
processing of seismic information.

Success in solving problems related to the seismic surveying of the Earth's crust
for the purpose of discovering gas and oil deposits is directly dependent on the
correctness of the formulation of the geophysical work, allowing for the specific
seismogeological conditions. The solution of this problem is facilitated to a con-
siderable extent by the use of the analysis of materials obtained in a profile in
order to make appropriate corrections in the work. Such analysis Inst, naturally,
be conducted at a rate that matches the rate of the performance of the seismic sur-
veying work.

Scientists at the VHNPO [probably All-Union Marine Scientific Production Associa-
tion] "Soyuzmorgeo' (in Krasnodar). have developed devices that make it possible to
carry out a rapid analysis of seismic data on board a ship, construct temporal seis-
mic profiles on a real time scale [1], construct deep seismic sections [2) and moni-
tor the quality of seismic material at different stages in its processing [3].
Cathode-ray memory tubes (ZELT) were used as the operational memories (020) in these
instruments. During the development process there was a study of the parameters of
ZBLT's produced by Soviet industry for the purpose of determining the possibility of

using them in devices for the processing of seismic information [4].

In this article we present some of the results of these studies.

At the present time, ZBLT's with a dielectric target (potentialscopes) are the most
widely used ones. In these devices, the recording process consists of the applica-

tion of electrical charges on the surface of the target, as a result of which there
forms on the target a potential relief that is retained for a certain period of

9S

IKMYOFFKJAI.USE(NULY
time; that is, information storage takes place. Existing ZELT's can be subdivided
into groups according to the nature of the conversion of input information to output
information that they perform [9]:

ZELT's for converting an electrical signal into another electrical one;

ZELT's for converting an electrical signal into a visible image;

ZELT's for converting a visible image into an electrical signal;

ZELT's for converting an image into another image.

of these groups, the most suitable ZBLT's for creating memory devices are those that
convert one electrical signal into another one, since this makes it possible to use
an electronic method and the appropriate algorithm to gain access to the information
recorded on their targets. In Table l we present the basic parameters of several
types of potentialscopes produced by Soviet industry [8,9].

 

Key.

1. Type of ZELT 5. Access time, s

2. Number of beams 6. Readout number

3. Resolution. lines/mm 7. Number of accumulated signals
4. Number of reproducible image grada- 8. LN...

tions

Let us dwell briefly on the characteristics of the ZELT's under discussion. In the
£88 potentialscope, recording and reading are accomplished because of overcharge
processes on the target that are based on secondary electron emission; that is, the
recorded information is destroyed during the reading process. This limits the num-
ber of readouts or, in the case of digital recording, requires regeneration of the
recorded information. The advantage of the LNG potentialscope is its ability to ac-
cumulate (integrate) signals (up to 128). which makes it possible to use it to iso-
late useful information against a background of interference. The LNB potential-
scope's integrating properties make it possible to use it in digital-analog complex-
es for the processing of seismic information (10.11], although the small capacity of
its memory (up to 40,00: bits on the target during digital recording [9]} limits its
utility.

The LN102 and LN104 potentialscopes are two-beam grafekony [translation unknown]
based on the recording of high energy (10-12 kV) excited by conductivity with the
help of a beam and overcharge reading. The recording method makes it possible to
obtain high resolution, although their read time is limited. Grafekony make it pos-
sible to obtain a half-tone image with four or five gradations. The presence of two

96
FOR OFIIC1A1.USE!ONLN
beams makes it possible to have different types of scanning, functioning simultane-
ously, for each beam. This makes it possible, in particular,,to review the recorded
information on the kinescope's screen, the scanning of which is coupled with the
scanning of the reading bean, it being the case that the scale of the image being
read can, within certain limits. be changed by varying the reading beam's scanning
voltages. This makes it possible to review individual fragments of the image on a

larger scale. which reduces to a certain degree the effect of the line structure of
the kinescope's raster on the ZELT-kinescope's resolution.

In recent years, Soviet industry has mastered the production of potentialscopes with
recording because of secondary electrons on a penetrable dielectric target and read-
ing by grid control; these are the I817, LN19 and L819 potentialscopes. In them is
realized a mode in which there is no contact between the target's charged elements
and the reading electrons. As with electron tubes, this is achieved by negative
displacement of the potential of the target's dielectric with respect to the reading
projector‘s cathode. Overcharge processes do not appear in this mode, for all prac-
tical purposes, while the nondestructive access time is determined by the target's
conductivity and ion seeding. As far as resolution and number of gradations are
concerned, ZBLT's with grid control are better than arafekony. The LNl? and L818
potentialscopes are single-beam devices and are used to record single signals or
television pictures, with subsequent reproduction of the information on the desired
time scale and with the desired beam-scanning rule. They have the capability to ac-
cumulate signals on the target by repeated recording without erasing, although this
parameter is not presented in the certification information. The L819 potential-
scope is a double-beam one. Information recording and reading are done on different
sides of the target, in connection with which there is no seeding of the target with
reading electrons, which provides an extended reading time: the best examples of
this potentialscope permit reading for up to 100 minutes. An important feature of
the LNl9 potentialscope is its ability to accumulate incoming signals. The number
of linear accumulation cycles is at least 35 (this parameter actually varies between
45 and 60). As is the case with a grafekon, the LNl9 potentialscope provides the
possibility of reading the information as it is being recorded, which makes it pos-
sible to create different electronic information processing systems that are coupled
with a device for depicting the information on the screen of a cathode-ray tube
(kinescope), thereby providing visual observation of the processing operations.

Having discussed the parameters oi these ZELT's, we can draw the following conclu-
sions:

the best accumulative properties of the potentialscopes we have discussed belong to
the LNG integrating instrument (see Table l).

HoweVer, the low resalution results in the necessity of placing the information from
even a single seismogram on severai ZELT's [ll], which makes it impossible to create
sufficiently simple devices for the visual depiction of the information being pro-
cessed. A substantial shortcoming of the LNB potentialscope is the destruction of
the information during the reading process, which limits the number of readings from
each element to no more than 32. This means that during raster readout according to
the television standard for the purpose of reviewing on the kinesccpe's screen, the

recorded information is destroyed in less than 2 seconds, since thcae are 25 read-
outs per second from each element.

Potentialscopes with grid control can be used to create devices for depicting seis-
mic information. They have the highest resolution, a nondestructive readout method

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and a sufficient number of transferable image half-tones (gradations). of this ser-
ies of potentialscopes, the best parameters belong to the two-beam L819 instrument.
Its great advantage is the possibility of observing the information on the screen of
a cathode-ray display during the recording process.

Let us evaluate the' frequency properties of the L819 potentialscope. It is conven-
ient to relate the temporal frequency at the ZELT's input and output to the spatial
frequency v, which characterizes the ZELT's resolution and is numerically equal to
the number of lines recorded per unit of target length:

°-:€2==&3

where fr! fc - temporal frequencies of the recording and reading signals, respect-

ively: vr, vc = rates of movement of the beam along the target during recording and
reading.

The spatial frequency characteristic of the

g“ LNl9 potentialscope is shown in Figure l,
3 where the spatial frequency. expressed as
g the number of lines on the target's diame-
g ter, is plotted on the x axis, while the
'60: percent of modulation of the signal that
8- has been read is plotted on the y axis.

0

The zone bounded by curves 1 and 2 is the

field of permissible technological varia-

tion in the resolution of individual exam-
ples of the potentialscope. As is obvious
from the figure, when u increases the sig-
nal at the ZELT's'output is reduced because
of the finite dimensions of the electronic
‘° spot during recording and reading.

The recording speed is
‘4 = tr

0

where d - diameter of the target; tr - time

required for the passage of the beam along

the diameter during recording. Taking into

consideration the fact that v - N/d, where

o no no no no moo u. N is the number of recorded lines on the
lines/diameter ' target's diameter, let us find the expres-

Figure 1. Spatial frequency charac- sion for the frequency of the signals being
teristic of the LNl9 potentialscope. recorded:_

ﬁ=w=f§4=¢2¢ -

9
When recording sinusoidal signals, each period of the sinusoid is recorded by two

lines, so that
f}, . 116/" (1)
r’ s

 

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0510A]. USE ONLY

let us evaluate the L819 potentialscope's capabilities for recording seismic sig-
nals. In order to do this, we will find the upper recording frequencies fu for dif-
ferent recording times. When plotting seismic sections, we will obviously not use
the entire area of the target, but only a square with sides 2 - dl/E, so that for
this case equality (1) takes on the form

ﬂ =53“ (2)

where N - number of lines on the diameter, as determined by the curves in Figure 1.

According to the producer plant's specifications. N is selected at the level of 50-

percent modulation.
hlh Figure 2 shows the results of the calcula-
tion of the maximum seismic signal frequen-
cy that makes it possible to record with a
potentialscope, as a function of the re-
cording time. The calculations were made
in accordance with equality (2) for the
cases of maximum and minimum resolution of
the potentialscope (curves 1 and 2 in Fig-
ure 1).

When recording seismic information, one
must deal with seismic waves that have ar-
rived from different depths and, conse-
quently, through different number of layers
of different thickness in a real medium
that has filtering properties and affects
the spectral composition of the oscilla-
tions being registered (12,141. It is a
well-known fact that as the depth of the
_ layer increases, for reflected waves there
0 ' , , ‘1'“""1§7Iiﬁe occurs a lowering of the predominant fre-
Pigure 2, Dependence of maximum seis- quency of the spectrum of seismic oscilla-
mic signal frequency on recording tions being recorded. For recording times
time on the 1819's target. of 3,...,S seconds. the predominant fre-
quency of the seismic signal spectrum lies
in the 20,....30 Hz range, and increases to approximately 100,...,150 Hz for record-
ing times of 0.3,...,0.5 seconds (12]. Comparing the data on the frequency spectrum
of a seismic signal with the frequency characteristic of the Lﬂl9 potentialscope
(Figure 2). we see that the potentialscope's resolution makes it possible to record
seismic information both in the standard recording interval tr - 5 s and when the
recording period is shortened (to 1-2 a. for example) for the purpose of studying
the upper part of a section in more detai . Increasing the maximum possible record-
ing frequency on the potentialscope while shortening the duration of the recording
period makes it possible to record seismic vibrations that increase in frequency as
the depth decreases. The modern technique of multiple observations provides a dif-
ferent overlap multiplicity factor, depending on the specific seismological condi-
tions. The maximum multiplicity factor equals the number of reception points in the
receiving system. For example, for a 24-channel receiving system the number of
overlaps is usually chosen as 3, 6. 12 or 24. A higher overlap multiplicity factor
is used for complex processing algorithms, a high level of interference and when a

  

99
FOR<0FFNJA1.US£‘ONLY
48-channel receivihg and recording device is used. For the sake of achieving opera-
tional and rapid processing, in most cases it is possible to restrict oneself to an
overlap multiplicity factor of no more than 24 or, as a rule, 6 or 12, which makes
it possible to obtain a resultant signal within the limits of potentialscope‘s dy-
namic range when the signal level is chosen appropriately. In connection with this,
naturally, it is necessary to compensate for the nonlinearity of the potential-
scope's modulation characteristic and use the appropriate controls in the seismic
signal channel.

0n the basis of what has been said, the following conclusions may be drawn.

1. High-speed operational memories with an adequate capacity, which are needed for
the creation of seismic section plotting devices, can be built on the basis of
cathode-ray mehofy tubes (potentialscopes).

2. The storage of information recorded in a ZBLT's memory in the form of an image
makes it possible to use ZELT's as a basis for building simple and efficient devices
for depicting graphic information.

3. In order to create devices for the depiction of graphic (seismic) information, it
is advisable to use two-beam potentialscopes with grid control that have high reso-
lution and a nondestructive information readout method.

4. An investigation of ZELT's has shown that the following basic parameters are pro-
vided for seismic section plotting devices based on them:

a dynamic range of at least 30 dB (see Table l):

a frequency range of up to 50 Hz for a recording length of 5 s, and up to 200 Hz for
a recording length of l 3;

high operating speed, which insures the plotting of sections on a real time scale.

5. The use of two-beam ZBLT's having separate scanning devices for each beam makes
it possible to build devices providing:

visualization of the information being recorded during the profile plotting process,
which makes it possible to actively influence the plotting process by making the ap-
propriate adjustments:

evaluate the obtained seismic section and eliminate the recording of intermediate
results during the selection of the parameters:

change the scale of an image by varying the scanning voltages of the ZBLT's reading
beam, which makes it possible to reduce the effect of the line structure of the ras-
ter of the display cathode-ray tube on the device's resolution.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Yakush, Ye.Yu., and Gavryushin, V.B., "Device for Plotting Temporal Seismic Sec-
tions,” GEOPIZICHESKAYA APPARATURA. Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", No 66, 1979,
pp 102-105.
2. Yakush, Ye.Yu., and Gavryushin, V.B., "Electronic Plotting Device for Deep Seis-

mic Sections," GEOPIZICBBSKAYA APPARATURA, Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo "Redra', V0
65, 1978, pp 70-74.

100

FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
3.

4.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yakush. Ye.Yu.. “Seismic Videomonitoring Device,'-GBOPIZICHBSKAYA APPARA'WRA,
Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo "Nedra', No 66. 1978. pp 99-102.

Yakubovskiy. S.V. (editor) , "Analogovyye i tsifrovyye integral'nyye skhemy"
[Analog and Digital Integrated Circuits], Moscow. Izdatel'stvo “Sovetskoye
radio". 1979. 336 pp.

Anisimov, B.v., and Chetverikov, V.N., “Osnovy teorii i proyektirovaniya mvn'
[Principles of the Theory and Design of Digital Computers], Moscow,
Izdatel'stvo "Vysshaya shkola", 1970, 575 pp.

Arkhipov, V.K. . ”Hasehtabno-vremennoye preobrazovaniye korotkikh signalov pri
pomoshchi elektronno-luchevykh trubok pamyati' [Scaled-Time Conversion of Brlef
Signals With the Help of Cathode-Ray Memory 'mbes), Moscow. Izdatel'stvo
"Bnergiya", 1968.

Arkhiporv. V.K.. and Stepanov. 3.11., “Operation of a Cathode-Ray 'mbe in the
Charge AccuImlation Mode With Forced Takeoff of Secondary Electrons During Re-
cording," AVTOHA'I'IKA I With, 2411'! (Moscow Engineering Physics Insti-
tute] . Irdatel'stvo "Gosatomisdat', No 3. 1962.

. Denbnovetskiy, s.v., and Semenov. G.P‘., "Zapominayushchiye elektronno-luchevyye

trubki v ustroystvakh obrabotki informatsii" [Cathode-Ray Memory Tubes in Infor-
mation Processing Devices], Moscow. Izdate'stvo "Sovetskoye radio". 1973. p 472.

Kantsel'son, B.V., et a1., ”Blektrovakuumyye elektronnyye i ionnyye pribory”
[Electrovacuun Electron and Ion Instruments], LS. Larionov, editor, Hoscow,
Izdatel'stvo “Energiya', Vol 1, 1970.

Borochin. A.s., ”The Possibility of Using a Potentialscope for Discrete-Analog
Systems for the Accelerated Processing of Seismic Intonation," PRIKLADNAYA
GEOGIZIKA, Hoscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", No 63. 1971.

Borochin. A.s., and Shestakov, v.I., "High-Speed Device for Processing and Stor-

ing Seismic Information." PRIKLADNA‘IA GEOPIZIKA, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo 'Nedra",
No 66. 1972.

Berzon, I.S., et al.. "Dinamicheskiye kharakteristiki seysmicheskikh voln v
real‘nykh sredakh" [Dynamic Characteristics of Seismic Waves in Real Mediums] ,
Moscow. Izdatel'stvo AN SSSR [USSR Academy of Sciences], 1962, ‘90 pp.

Berzon, 1.5., “On the Change in the Predominant Frequencies of Seismic Waves as
the Distance From the Source of Oscillations Increases.“ Izv. AN SSSR, SBR.
GEOFIZICHBSKAYA, No l, 1956.

Polak, A.S., "Attenuation and Absorption of Reflected Waves in Sedimentary
Rocks," PRIKLADNAYA GEOFIZIKA. Izdatr."stvo “Gostoptekhizdat”. No 17, 1975.

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PRINCIPLES OF THE COIDR VISUALIZA‘I'ION OF SEISMIC DATA

Leningrad GOIDGRAPIYA I OPTICHESKAYA 03mm INPOMM‘SII V GEOLOGII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 143-153

[Article by v.1. Dubyanskiy and V.A. Starcdubtsev from collection of works "Holo-
graphy and Optical Information Processing in Geology”, edited by Professor 5.8.
Gurevich and Candidate of Technical Sciences 0.1L Potapov, Leningrad Physica-
technical Institute imeni AJ‘. Ioffe, USSR Academy of Sciences. 500 copies, 181
pages}

recordings. 'lhey propose methods for the color depiction of seis-
mic sections and specific ways of realizing them.

rithm. There are two ways to obtain a color image of an object: additive (supple-
mentary) and subtractive (deductive) mixing of three colors. Additive mixing of
colors takes place when the retina of the eye is struck simultaneously or in rapid
succession by several emissions of different colors that, in the general case, come
from different spontaneously emitting sources (Figure 1). An analogous effect ap-
pears when one observes a white surface with colored spots. the angular size of
which is less than the minimum size resolvable by the eye. In connection with this,
the eye transmits the impression of a single color. The emery color depends only
on the color of the emissions being mixed. which makes it possible to calculate it
by caloriu'uetric methods. By mixing three colors it is possible to obtain any color
in the color spectrum inside the triangle with apices that lie at points cprrespond-
ing to the color index of the emissions being mixed.
FOR OFIICLALIJSEIDNLY

  

Figure 1. Diagram of color division of a signal u(t): a. with respect to
amplitude (l) and energy, with commutation on three levels; b. with re-
spect to amplitude (l) and energy (2): c. with respect to frequency. Def-
initions: L(R) = divergence function registration unit; Y a amplifier;
e‘O‘R - absorption function registration unit; 1 n/n B. 2 n/n B - half-wave
and full-wave rectifiers: OHH - low-frequency filter: DK - discriminator:
K - commutator: CH1'2'3 a light modulators: 0 - filter: D = threshold di-
vider: no 8H, CH, HH - high-, medium- and low-frequency bandpass filters:
n01'2,3 - color filters for basic colors of the spectrum: Yc - combining
unit: CI - color image: 0 - illuminator: 8/3 0? - black-and-white photo-
graphic recorder.

 

Pigure 2. Diagram for obtaining color images by the additive (l) and con-
tractive (2) methods.

obtaining a color image are: 1. color separation of the original image's parameters
into three components--P1. F2 and P3: 2. coloration of the color-separated functions
by the basic colors of the spectrum of white light--C1. c2 and c3; P1 - f(c1), P2 -
- f(c2), r3 - £(C3); 3. additive or contractive aixing of the colored color-
separated functions in order to produce a summary color image:

[(CI’C2§CS).§ (C).
In seismic surveying, the color spectrum can depict the following basic parameters.
the choice of which depends on the formulation of the surveying assignments: l. dy-
namic characteristics of seismic signals in the spatiotemporal plane of a seismogram
or a temporal section (for example: amplitude, energy. spectral characteristics):
2. dynamic characteristics of a holographic image of a section obtained as the re-
sult of the diffraction conversion [2,3] of seismic signals (the values of the re-
flection or absorption factors); 3. kinematic characteristics of temporal or holo-
graphic sections (distribution of bed velocities, angles of inclination of

103

FOR¢HﬂﬂChULlEHEONlY
reflecting boundaries. diffraction areas): 4. local and integral distribution of
relative values of kinematic and dynamic characteristics and so forth.

The transformation of seismic frequencies into visible spectrum frequencies makes
obvious physical sense. This transformation must be done with due consideration for
some similarity factor (X) that allows for the relationship of the optical (A0) and
seismic (Ac) wavelengths in the scale of the final image. In this case the seismic
image that is obtained will be colored in “natural" light. Let us make our choice
of the similarity factor for the low-frequency components of the spectrum of seismic
and light (red) waves, which are the most stable in an absorbing medium. Let us as-
sume that the length of the low-frequency seismic wave in the medium is “C = 100 m.
On the scale of the seismogram's image (M I l:l0,000, for example), the length of
the reference seismic wave will be A; = ale - lo mm. He will determine the color
similarity factor for the low frequencies from the relationship

.,_
Kn—ég.

where XE? - 71.10'5 mm = the wavelength of red light. The similarity factor turns
out to be

K - 7140-5.

The value of the frequencies of the narrow-band filtration of the seismogram for
isolating the reference wave with length Ac - 100 m in sections with different aver-
age elastic wave propagation rates (vi) is established from the relationship

pun-‘15.
We are interested in the values of the basic band filtration frequencies for a
color-separated seismogram, which correspond (for example) to the yellow and violet
basic colors of the visible spectrum. Taking the previous relationships into con-
sideration, it is possible to write (in general form)

In, =K—:E;M

where ff 9 - necessary frequency of color separation of the seismogram; lg” - wave-
length 0? visible light. The formula that has been obtained makes it possible to
determine the band frequency filtration parameter. for seismic signals for the pur-
pose of color separation for mediums characterised by different average velocities
(Figure 3). For example, for a medium with V a 3.0 km/s, the color red should cor-
respond to seismic frequency f1 - 30 Hr, green to £2 - 40.6 h: and violet to £3 s

- 51.9 Hz. Additivo mixing of the color-separated signals that have passed through
the bandpass filters with frequency characteristic maximums f1, f2 and f3 and have
been colored red, green and violet, respectively, will make it possible to obtain a
color image of a seismogram where the color range corresponds to the distribution of
the seismic frequencies in the medium. The application of the basic colors in dif-
ferent combinations gives a full spectrum of additional colors, which in turn depict
certain frequency characteristics of the seismogram being visualised.

Inasmuch as the relationships depicted in Figure 3 are of a linear type, let us ap-
ply the principle of superposition to the application of the colors. From here it
turns out to be possible to calibrate the additional colors in the image that is ob-
tained according to the seismic frequencies that correspond to them or, according to
the color in the image, to determine to which signal frequency it corresponds. For
example, for 6': 3.0 km/s, orange in the image corresponds to a signal on frequency

104
FORIOFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
I'D“ WHLIAL use ONLY

 

-- M -50-..“
Figure 3. Nomogram of parameters of color separation with respect to fre-
quency: 1. red; 2. orange: 3. yellow: 4. green: 5. blue: 6. violet.

f - 34.2 Hz. while for light blue it is 45.3 Hz (Figure 3). It is a well-known fact
that green is a combination of yellow and blue. If the principle of superposition
is implemented, the arithmetical mean of the color-separated seismic frequencies

Using the graph (Figure 3) to determine the frequency of green, we obtain the value
,5..- «o.s~u 17:.

Color separation of seismic signals can also be done with respect to amplitude-
energy characteristics. In this case the summary color image will depict the dis-
tribution of the dynamic parameters in the plane of the seisnogram. The choice of
the basic tones of the seismic data's color separation will be determined not by the
medium's parameters. but by the interpretation algorithm.

Color separation with respect to an amplitudinal feature must allow for the factors
affecting the amplitudes of reflected waves. In a homogeneously stratified struc-
ture characterized by absorption factor a, the amplitudes of the reflected waves al-
se depend on the source's directivity I(w), the divergence factors L(R), and reflec-
tion from the boundary K(w) and the diurnal surface (conversion) [4,5]:

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘ c-ss
Lw ,
where w - frequency of the oscillation, R - path of the wave in the medium.

AM:

The reflection and absorption factors K(w) and a are immediate characteristics of
the medium's properties. The goal of color visualization is to depict the medium's
dynamic characteristics for the purpose of enlarging the information content of
seismic surveying work, as well as (in some cases) to search directly for deposits
of useful minerals.

In oruer to solve this problem, it is necessary to distinguish and isolate the fac-
tors characterizing the medium from the overall group of functions affecting the re-
flected wave's amplitude and then subject them to color separation. For constant
values of the source's directivity function. the reflected waves‘ intensity depends
to a considerable extent on the reflection factor and the divergence function [3.4].
Permanence of the source's directivity function is best maintained during seismic
observations at sea, while under land conditions--particularly when the upper part
of a section has a complicated structure (in ore regions. the trappean provinces of
Siberia). it is practically impossible to take the source's directivity into consid-
eration. In a rough approximation, therefore, we must assume it to be constant for
standard sources of the explosive type. Exceptions are nonexplosive sources and ex-
plosive sources having assigned and controllable directivity characteristics [5.6],
which must be taken into consideration during color separation of a function of a
medium's dynamic characteristic.

The formula for A(w) is rigorously accurate for any stable frequency and a single
harmonic w = "i (i = l,2,3....). If absorption in the medium is ignored, this for-
mula expresses the wave's amplitude, since there is no dependence on frequency. If
the wave's shape changes, this formula expresses the amplitude spectrum of the com-
ponents. During the standard reproduction of a seismic recording without expansion
of 'ne signals into their spectral components, the formula expresses the amplitude
of a reflected wave on a visible frequency.

The strongest effect on the amplitude is exerted by the divergence function L(R) in
the medium, which in homogeneous and gradient mediums is described by the principles
of geometric seismic surveying [4.5]. In order to obtain a medium's dynamic charac-
teristics in “pure” form, the divergence function must be compensated for by (for
example) using programmed regulation of the amplification. The divergence and ab-
sorption functions in a medium change a signal smoothly in time toward diminution.
Therefore. they can be allowed for simultaneously and compensated for by programmed
amplification of the reflected signals. In this case the reflected waves' ampli-
tudes will depend oly on the reflection factors for I(w) = const. The color image
of the seismogram obtained by color separation of the function

Alan =DFIKm7]
will depict the medium's reflecting properties. Here,

I .. -J‘
11 DMN-Lm (

The energy characteristics of seismic signals can be obtained by full-wave rectifi-
cation and smoothing by low-frequency filters. In this case the modulating function
corresponds to the total area of the signal being reproduced.

106
FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Depending on the method used to synthesize the color image, absolute or relative
values of the parameter being reproduced will be depicted in it.

The use of the method of color separation with discrimination with respect to given
levels and subsequent commutation of the parameter with respect to three color chan-
nels makes it possible to depict the absolute values of the parameter being repro-
duced in color (Figure 1). Each of the color-separated transparencies will contain
parameters only on its own discrimination level. This method, for example, can be
used to obtain three color-separated masses of seismograms, on each of which are
waves with dynamic characteristics given beforehand. On the summary color image,
signals obtained from seismic boundaries with different reflection factors will ap-
pear in different colors. In this case, intermediate reflection factor values (ly-
ing between the three given during color separation) will be depicted by inter-
mediate colors. according to the principle of superposition of the basic colors of
the visible spectrum. The reflection factors' values can be calculated by determin-
ing the color's coordinates by calorimetric methods (quantitatively) or qualitative-
ly, according to a standard scale that allows for the original levels of color sepa-
ration of the parameter being reproduced.

The use of controllable levels of color separation for seismic data makes it possi-
ble to realize the "bright spot" method; that is. discrimination on the image of ob-
jects with dynamic parameters that are given in advance or expected. The "bright
spot" method is used for direct searches for useful mineral deposits.

The method of color separation with respect to dynamics and separate commutation
makes it possible to solve the problem of separating a wave field into its compo-
nents: regular waves and the wave background. If the regular waves, for example,
are reflected as if from a mirror and have clearly expressed dynamic and correlation
properties, the wave background has a diffraction character in the form of separate,
short cophasal axes with different orientations.

The nature of the wave background has not yet been studied sufficiently well, al-
though there are all grounds for assuming that it is related to local irregularities
scattered throughout the medium. The depiction in color of the wave background's
properties will make it possible to supplement our ideas about a medium that is be-
ing investigated because we will obtain the dynamic characteristics of the diffract-
ing objects as well as those of the smooth, mirror-reflecting boundaries.

On the whole, color separation with commutation on three color channels makes it
possible to depict. on a summary color image, any interrelated and unrelated parame-
ters of an object. divided into three independent groups according to the operator's
judgment. For example, this could be the results of directional filtration of the
cophasal axes with respect to three apparent velocity values; the results of exten-
sive profiling, the distribution of the parameters of the average velocities in a
section, the amplitudes of the reflected signals of the visible periods of longitu-
dinal and transverse waves and so on, rising and falling vertical seismic profiling
waves. For'example, the additive combination of the color-separated results of ex-
tensive profiling with respect to three parallel profiles makes it possible to ob-
tain a three-dimensional illusory image.

The use of the method of color separation of seismic information by levels. without
commutation, for three color channels makes it possible to depict on a summary color

107

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
image the relative values of the parameter being reproduced, such as amplitude. In
order to do this, the scale of the amplitudes of the registered signals within the
limits of the recorder's dynamic range are divided into three color-separated lev-
els, while the color signals that have passed through these levels are summed up in
a single channel, as the output of which the following pattern is seen:

P(A1) ~ AC1 - f(C1) - low signal level:

F(Ag) ~ AC2 + C1 - f(C2) . medium signal level;

F(A3) s AC2 + C1 + C2 ' {(C3) =' high signal level.
low—level signals are depicted by variations in the color {(Cl); medium-level ones
by the same for {(C2). in which light C1 is a constant component: high-level ones by
variations in f(c3), in which C2 and C3 [sic] are constant components. Thus, on the
summary color image, the color range depicts the relative values of the seismic sig-
nals' amplitudes.

The use of this method makes it easy to reproduce in color the smoothly changing
functions of a medium such as the average velocity of the elastic waves in the plane

of a section, the absorption function, the average amplitude levels, wavelengths and
other integral characteristics.

The principles of the color depiction of seismic data that were explained above have
been partially realized in the "Geospektr-l' equipment complex, which was developed
in Voronezh State University's Seismic Holography Laboratory.

BIBLIOGRAPBY

1. Elliot, L., and Uilkoks, U., "Fizika" [Physics], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo ”Nauka",
1975.

2. Zav'yalov, V.D., et al., "Holographic Transformations of Seismograms on a Plane,‘
SER. ”RAZVBD., PRDMYSL. I REGION. GEOPIZIKA', ONTI VIBES [Department of Scientif-
ic and Technical Information, All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Econom-
ics of Mineral Raw Materials and Geological Exploration], No 32, 1970.

3. Timoshin, Yu.v., 'Impul'snaya seysmicheskaya golografiya" [Pulsed Seismic Holo-
graphy], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nedra', 1978.

4. Barron, I.s., et al., ”Dinamicheskiye kharakteristiki seysmicheskikh voln v
real'nykh sredakh' [Dynamic Characteristics of Seismic Waves in Real Mediums],
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo AN SSSR [USSR Academy of Sciences], 1962.

S. Petrashen'. G.I. (editor), "Voprosy dinamicheskoy teorii rasprostraneniya
seysmicheskikh voln' [Questions in the Dynamic Theory of Seismic Have Propaga-
tion], Moscow, 1961. -

6. Benderskiy, V.Ya., Raykher, L.D., and Kharaz, I.I., 'Metod upravleniya frontami
voln v seysmorazvedke” [A Method for Controlling Wave Fronts During Seismic Sur-
ingl: Hoseaw, Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", 1973.

108
FOR OFIWCIA1.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.834.05
INFORMATION CHARACTERISTICS OF A FIELD OI" SBISMOHOLDGRAPHIC IMAGES

Leningrad GOIDGRAFIYA I OPTICHESKAYA 03m INFORMTSII V WII in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 154-158

[Article by O.T. Oleynik from collection of works "Holography and Optical Informa-
tion Processing in Geology”. edited by Professor 8.8. Gurevich and Candidate of
Technical Sciences 0.A. Potspov, Leningrad Physiootechnical Institute imeni LP.
Ioffe, USSR Academy of Sciences. 500 copies, 181 pages]

[Text] since the basic intermediate carrier of seismic informa-
tion at the present time is a photographic layer, the author stud-
ies its information characteristics and shows that it is possible
to obtain a dynamic range of seismoholographic images of up to 65
dB and more.

The method of seismoholographic transformations on a plane makes it possible to plot
a field of imaginary emission sources and permits scale transformation of this
field. Scale transformation makes it possible to transfer each imaginary source to
the point of intersection of a reflecting boundary with a central beam [1]. me
transformed field of imaginary points describes geometrically the field of mirror-
reflecting boundaries at the points where they intersect with the central bean.

In view of the fact that the imaginary emission points are formed by broad seismic
pulses, each imaginary point has the form of superimposed rhombs formed by the
intersection of a pair of cross bearings [2]. The rhosbs' long diagonals coincide

with the normals to the central beams. One rhomb corresponds to one observation
base and one detonation point. The sequence of normal rhombs interpolates the re-

flecting boundary in the same manner as wt in graphic plotting by the method of ima-
ginary points is used [3].

In contrast to the graphic realization of the method of imaginary points, in seism-
holographic transformations the essential role is played by the width of the seismic
pulse and its amplitude. They determine the degree of overlap of adjacent normal
rhonbs and the continuity of the correlation of the reflecting boundaries.

In most cases the parameters of the seismoholographic transformations can be chosen

in such a manner that each point of a seismic boundary is acctmlulated by n signals.

where n is the number of observation points of a single installation [2]. This cre-
ates conditions for improving the signal-to-noise ratio by a factor of ’3.

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is a well-known fact that with magnetic tape it is possible to reproduce an ana-
log electrical signal in a dynamic range on the order of 50 dB. Such a dynamic
range is sufficient to transmit, without amplitude distortion, all the information
obtained during recording times that are longer than 1 s [4].

The realization of 24-fold holographic accumulation expands the dynamic range of the
resulting materials by a factor of 24 and extends it up to 54 dB.

When processing the materials of 5-fold overlaps by the seismic holography method
within the limits of a profile length equal to the observation base line, 8 rhombs
that are normal to the central beam are formed, with the number of accumulations
within the limits of the normal being n. For all practical purposes, these normals
overlap completely (the overlap factor is l - 1/5) and form in the field of the
seismholographic image a resulting normal with ns(l - l/S) accumulations. In the
case of an s-fold observation system, this improves the signal-to-noise ratio by a
factor of v‘nS(l - 1/5) and causes an enlargement of the same magnitude of the dynam-
ic range. In particular, for s - 12 the signal-to-noise ratio is improved by a fac-
tor of 16. while the dynamic range of the seismoholographic images can reach 65 dB.

An improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio that appears after summation makes it
possible to distinguish weak signals that remain outside the field of vision during
analysis of the primary materials. This is the basic advantage of stunning systems.

As experience has shown, the high efficiency of summation operations is the basis
for their use in the primary stage of the analysis of seismic information [5]. At
the present time, the method of field observations and the processing of materials
with respect to a cannon deep point [MOGI‘] is widely used under production condi-
tions.

The effectiveness of sunmation of the seismoholographic transformation method is
greater than the effectiveness of HOGT emanation. This follows from the fact that
during the realization of s-fold MOST in the plane of an image, on a profile length
equal to one observation base line. n cannon deep points are formed with a number of
accumulations (for example, 24 points with 12 accumulations): that is, the gain in
the signal-to-noise ratio is only 5. For a 12—fold system it will be 3.5, which
corresponds to an extension of the dynamic range to 51 dB [6].

There arises the question of which accumulation technique is preferable: 24 points
with 12 accumulations each (HOGT) or one normal with 264 accumulations? The un-
ambiguous choice of the transformation technique is determined by the nature of the
seismic material and the purpose of the field investigations.

Under conditions where high resolution along the profile is necessary--that is, when
the work is aimed at finding small structural elements--preference should be given
to differential sumation with respect to individual points, as is done in MOGT. If
homogeneous strata with poorly contrasting transitions are being investigated, then
in order to detect weak reflections it is necessary to increase the statistical ac-
cumulation effect and here the capabilities of the seismic holography method should
doubtlessly be used.

The processing of field seismic materials by the seismic holography method demon-
strated the validity of the premises explained above [7] -

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
There exists yet another fact that demonstrates the advisability of increasing the

number of summed signals: the statistical effect of reducing the summary signal's
dispersion with respect to a single measured signal.

This effect is described by the method of least squares as

where am. “0 - dispersion of the sum and a single signal; I - number of summed sig-
nals.

Thus. for a 12-fold observation system, seismoholographic transformations on a plane
reduce the root-mean-square deviations of the original signals' phases and ampli-
tudes by a factor of 16. while for HOG? the reduction factor is 3.5. From this fol-
lows the conclusion that as far as noise stability and accuracy of the obtained in-
ages are concerned. the method of seismohologmuxuc transformations on a plane is
better than MOGT by a factor of 5. given the same original information.

On the other hand, in order to achieve the same results with respect to the indicat-
ed parameters. the seismoholographic transformation method can use original informa-

tion about phase and amplitude dispersions that exceed the allowable dispersions for
MOGT by a factor of S.

If we take as an example an allowable phase dispersion on an image of 0.1 period
(5-10 m in depth). original M06? materials must be prepared with an accuracy of no
worse than 0.35 period (17-35 m), while for the seismoholographic method the permis-
sible error in the original data input is 1.7 periods. or 85-170 m.

This fact makes it possible to use the seismoholographic plotting technique to pro-
cess seismic materials with a low level of orderlinese and under conditions of lim-
ited knowledge of prior data about the section.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Zav'yalov, V.D., "Introduction to Seismic Holography on a Plane: Review," 838.
REGION., RAZVED. I PROHYSL. GEOFIZIKA, Moscow, VIBHS [All-Union Scientific Re-

search Institute of Economics of Mineral Raw Materials and Geological Explora-
tion], No 27, 1969. p 20.

2. oleynik, O.T.. "Holographic Transformations of Seismograms on a Plane," DEPON.
RUKOP., No 3 (77), 1978, p 149.

3. 2av’yalov, v.D., and Timoshin. Yu.V., "Holographs of Reflected Haves for curvi-
linear Interfaces and Their Interpretation." Izv. AN SSSR, SBR. GBOFIZICH., No 2,
1955.

4. Kauzov, K.M.. Krylov. 1.8., Kuznetsov, V.V.. et a1., “Using Nonexplosive Excita-
tion Sources in Structural Seismic Surveying," in 'Problemy vibratsionnogo
prosvechivaniya Zemli" [Problems in the Vibration Transillumination of the
Earth], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka”. 1977, pp 162-185.

111
FOR 051l€1Al.lﬂﬂE(ﬂVLY
S.

6.

'l‘urchanenko, N.T., and Dyndyura, V.A.. 'Digital Seismic Surveying in the Oil and
Gas Provinces of the Ukrainian SSR,” 630912101. ZHUENAL, Kiev, Izdatel'stvo
'Naukova dunka". No 1, 1979. pp 81-90.

Perel'nan, SLA” "Experimental Data on the Non-Gaussian Distribution of Random

Components of Geophysical Observations,“ Izv. AN SSSR. sun. GEOPIZICH. PIZIKA
zmr. No 9, 1969.

Rakova. N.S., Oleynik, 0.12. and mitsikevich, 1.1%., 'Some Results of the Halo-

graphic Transformation of Seismogrm on a Photoaccunulative Plane,“ DBPON.
RUKOP” No 5 (91). 1979, p 111.

112

FOIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UN 550.834
THE 1806!“! MET}! D IN SEISMIC HWHY

Leningrad (BOWEN-‘1‘“ I OPTICHESKAYA osmso'rxa INPORHNI‘SII V 63010611 in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) PP 159-166

[Article by V.N. Hoskalenko and O.A. Vorob'yev from collection of works 'Holography
and Optical Information Processing in Geology“, edited by Professor S.B. Gurevich
and Candidate of Technical Sciences OJ. Potapov, Leningrad Physicotechnical Insti-
tute imeni A.P. Ioffe. USSR Academy of Sciences. 500 copies. 181 pages]

[Text] The authors explain the results of modeling that they car-
ried out and that indicate the area of applicability of methods
for transforming a wave field T when plotting deep sections, de-
pending on the velocity model a? the medium being studied.

A new field has appeared in seismic methodology: seismic holography [1,2], the ba-
sic assignment of which is to reproduce a deep section by transformation of the wave
field. In a number of organizations in this country that are involved in the pro-
cessing of seismic data, analog equipment has been developed for the processing of
continuous seismic profiling materials by the method of isochrones (by V.D.
zav'yalov [3] in L'vov, by v.1. Dubyanskiy in Voronerh, by Ye.Yu. Yakush [4] in
Krasnodar and in other places). In the Southern Branch of the USSR Academy of
Sciences' Institute of Oceanology. computers have been used for the mathematical
modeling of the method of isochrones realized in these instruments, which are de-
vices for plotting deep seismic sections.

The technique used in seismic profiling work determines the form of the observed
wave field. In single-channel seismic profiling, where the seismic signal source
and receiver are collocated (this profiling technique is sometimes called the cen-
tral beam ('rsr.) method), the wave field is recorded normally to the reflected rays.
In seismic surveying it is called field To. In multichannel profiling, the receiv-
ing system consists of 24 or more receivers arranged in a straight line. As a rule,
' the source is placed at one of the ends of this line. In this case, a spatial wave
field with multiple overlapping (6-. 12-, 24-fold or more) is registered.

In this article we discuss methods for transforming wave field To obtained by
single-channel seismic profiling. The special feature of field To is that the iso-
chrones for the two classes of waver-reflected and diffracted--are described by

the same equations. The registration time of a reflected and a diffracted wave at a
reception point is always twice the time of propagation of the wave from the source
to the reflecting boundary or the diffracting point. Wave field To/Z should be used

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 1. Methods of transforming wave field To/Z into a deep section: a.
circular scanning of the seismic track: b. first method, V - const.; c.
second method, ch - O (2",); d. third method. ch . 0 (z): 1 - true iso-
chrone: 2 =- isochrone calculated by an approximate method.

to obtain an image of a reflecting boundary or a diffracting point. Otherwise, if
the To field is used we will obtain an image of the trajectory of an imaginary
source in the case of reflected waves or a cloud of points corresponding to a dif-

fracting element.

The essence of the isochrone method is well known. On a seismogram, each seismic
wave pulse corresponds (in the ideal case) to a reflecting area or diffracting point
that can be located (generally speaking) at any point on an isochrone (Figure la).
If there is preliminary information on the structure of the section and the probable
angles of inclination of the reflecting boundaries. the area of existence of the
isochrone is reduced. Isochrcnes are constructed for all the seismic pulses. The
brightness (intensity) of the isochrone is determined by the seismic signal's ampli-
tude. Thus. an isochrone that has reached a reflecting boundary or a diffracting
point is depicted by a brighter line. For adjacent points on a profile, isochrones
corresponding to the same reflecting element will be arranged side by side. while
their envelope will depict the location of the reflecting element. The envelope is
not found in any of the deep section plotting devices, which use the points of
intersection of adjacent isochronas. At the point of intersection, the image's
brightness increases. The set of bright points forms the image of a line that cor-
responds to the reflecting boundary with adequate accuracy. The method of iso-
chrones transforms a field of diffracted waves into a image of the diffraction
points.

The accuracy of the isochrone method is determined by the accuracy with which the
shape of the wave front is calculated. The 'degree of distortion of the real

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN UI'HLIAL U3}. URL!

geological section reproduced by the isochrone method depends on the accuracy with
which the wave front is plotted. In order to calculate the shape of the wave front.

several approximate methods are used that differ in the velocity models used for the
medium.

In an example of a very simple model of a medium--a gradient half-space in which the
velocity increases with depth according to a linear law-“we will demonstrate the
differing nature and magnitude of the distortions resulting from the use of approxi-
mate methods of transforming wave fields into deep sections.

First Method. Let us replace the gradient medium by a medium with a constant aver-

age velocity in such a manner that the depth of occurrence of the reflecting element
corresponding to the maximum registration time, as calculated by by approximate and

accurate methods, coincides. For a medium with a constant wave front velocity there
exist neighborhoods

. . . .g .
X‘*Z =(V993'n, (1)
the radius of which changes proportionally to the wave's arrival time. All iso-
chrones differing in time by the constant value AT are equally remote from each oth-
er within the limits of the entire section (Figure 1b). The true isochrones are al-

so presented in this figure. The equation of the isochrone for the gradient half—
space is expressed in analytical form:

I‘ll-j- (airujstI-illgﬁfsh’mﬁi) . (2,

From the figure it is obvious that the first method for transforming a wave field

into an image of the medium is the most approximate one and is characterized by the
maximum distortions.

Second Method. This transformation method allows for a change in velocity in the
medium with depth, but the wave front is constructed on the assumption that up to a
given isochrone (that is, to the depth of the ray's maximum vertical penetration),
the medium is characterized by the constant average velocity

x‘+z‘-(v.,:z.....;-n‘. (3)

This method is realized in the holographs developed in L'vov and Voronczh (by
Zav‘yalov and Dubyanskiy). In this second method the seismic track is preliminarily
transformed and the temporal axis is transformed into a depth axis with respect to
the change in the average velocity with depth. circular scanning is then carried
out on a mirror cone and the isochrones are obtained.

The second method's accuracy varies sharply. depending on the reflecting boundary's
angle of inclination (Figure lc). The larger the reflecting boundary's angle of
inclination. the higher with respect to the isochrone (the section) the reflecting
element must be located. the greater the error admitted in the velocity, and the
more significant the discrepancy between the true and approximate wave fronts. From
the figure it is obvious that even for a boundary angle of inclination of more than
10°, an isochrone calculated according to the second method moves quickly away from
the real one. At a depth of about 9km the difference is about 1.0 km, while the in-
clination of the boundary at that point does not exceed 20'.

Considering the large distortions contributed by the second method to the transfor-
mation of wave fields into a deep seismic section. its area of applicability is

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
extremely limited? _It is suitable for mediums characterized by boundary surfaces
with small angles of inclination amounting to only a few degrees. For almost hori-
zontal mediums. however, it is possible to confine oneself to stretching the tempor-
al section with respect to depth proportionally to the propagation rate of the seis-
mic waves. Consequently, if the wave field is represented by reflected waves. the
necessity of transformation by circular scanning is absent. If there are diffracted
waves in tho wave field, the second transformation method makes it possible to "pur-
ify" the section of these waves (so-called 'whiskers'), but in connection with this
a general transformation background will appear. It should again be emphasized that
even in the case of diffracted waves the second method is suitable for mediums in
which the diffraction points are located close to the vertical axis.

Third Method. he does the second, this
method for transforming a wave field into a
deep section allows for a change in the av—
erage velocity with depth, but differs in

that the isochrone is calculated with a
variable velocity

t‘iz‘awr m 1/1 (4)

The wave front’s'curvature changes continu-
ously, depending on the velocity at the

given depth (Figure 1d). The third trans-
formation method is more accurate than the

two outlined above. A wave front calculat-
ed by the third method has a form that is
close to the real one. For example. the
maximum difference in the position of iso-
chrone To/Z I 4 is 0.43 km (in the second
method it is more than 5 km).

The third method for transforming a wave

field into a deep section also contributes
distortions, with their value basically in-

creasing as the wave front propagation time
does and (to a lesser extent) as the velo-
Pigure 2. Absolute error in calculat- city gradient does. If we set the permis-

 

ing an isochrone according to the sible isochrone distortion at no more than
third method: 1. area of distortions 0.04x, where x is the isochrone's x axis.
of no more than 4 percent. then all isochrones with time To/Z of less

than 3.4 s are located in the area of per-
missible distortions (Figure 2). To a depth of about 9 km, the section will be dis-
torted within allowable limits.

A curvilinear vertical cone is no longer suitable for the equipment realization of
the third method. In the third method it is necessary to have a preliminary calcu-

lation of the isochrone for each moment of time and to derive it on an accumulating
device, such as a cathode-ray memory tube [4]. or a computer's memory. or on a

photographic layer.

The third method for transforming a wave field into a deep section was tested on a
six-layer model that is close to a real section of the Black Sea basin. The

116
F0!(NHWC1ALIEHEONLY
NOR OFTWCJAL.USEZt”VLY

velocity curve was given in the form of a broken line: at depths of 0, 2, 4, 6, 10
and 20 km. the following velocity values were assumed: 1.5, 2, 3, 6 and 8 km/s.

In each layer the velocity changes according to a linear law, with no discontinui-
ties at the boundaries. This velocity curve was used to calculate the curve of the
average velocities, after which the third method was used to calculate the approxi-
mate isochrones. For isochrone To/2 - 3 3, five points were checked by an accurate
solution according to the “Check of the Direct Problem” program formulated by H.Ye.
Romanov, a worker at the Novosirbirsk Computer Center, Siberian Department, USSR
Academy of Sciences. The results of the check with the precise solution are pre-
sented in the table.

Distance with respect to X, km 4.387 4.031 3.508 2.709
Depth 2. km 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0

Error AT, 8 -0.0081 0.0181 0.0754 0.0826
Error Ax, km -0.0122 0.0272 0.1319 0.1652

From the results of the calculations it is obvious that the absolute error increases
with depth. At a depth of 4 km, the temporal error is 83 ms and the distance error
is 165 m. The relative accuracy or degree of distortion of the section is about 3

percent. It is noteworthy that the accuracy of the construction of a deep section

by the third method does not depend on the reflecting boundaries' angle of inclina-
tion. This is quite obvious from the figures and the table. The greater the boun-
dary's angle of inclination. the shallower the depth at which the boundary must lie,

while when the depth decreases there is a decrease (l) in the magnitude of the abso-
lute error.

The mathematical modeling that has been carried out shows that the third method for
transforming a wave field into a seismic deep section can be used when processing
continuous seismic profiling data.

The programs for computing the isochrones were written in FORTRAN, for a BESM-4m
high-speed computer.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Vasil'yev, S.A., Savarenskiy, V.Ye.. and Urupov, A.K., "Results of the Transfor-
mation of Seismic Recordings of Profile Observations Into Deep Sections on the
Basis of the Principles of Seismoholography,” PRIKLADNAYA GEOPIZIKA, Hoscow,
Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", No 71, 1973, pp 3-14.

2. Timoshin, Yu.V., "Impul'snaya seysmicheskaya golografiya' [Pulsed Seismic Holo-
graphy], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo 'Nedra', 1978, 286 pp.

3. 2av'yalov, v.D., and Tsimbrovskaya, L.I., "Methods for the Holographic Transfor-

mation of Seismic Information," in 'Metod, vopr. seysmorazvedki' [Methods and
Questions in Seismic Surveying]. L'vov, 1972, PP 28-36.

4. Yakush. Ye.Yu., and Gavryushin, V.B., "An Electronic Plotting Device for Deep
Seismic Sections," GEOPIZICHBSKAYA APPARATURA, Leningrad, No 65, 1978, pp 70-74.

117

F03‘0FFK]AI.USE¢HVLY
ON THE REALIZATION OF CWIEX FILTERS IN POLARIZED LIGHT

Leningrad GOIDGBAPIYA I OPTICHBSKAYA osmso'rn INPORMATSII V 63010611 in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 167-173

[Article by V.P. Ivanchenkov and P.v. Hineyev from collection of works "Holography
and Optical Information Processing in Geology“, edited by Professor 5.3. Gurevich
and Candidate of Technical Sciences O.A. Potapov, Leningrad Physicotechnical Insti-
tute imeni A.P. Ioffe, USSR Academy of Sciences, 500 copies, 181 pages]

[Text] The authors discuss a method of synthesizing complex spa-
tial filters on the basis of the properties of polarized light.

In an example of a concrete system, they demonstrate the possibil-
ity of obtaining a filter with a real alternating transfer func-
tion. In order to synthesize the complex filter, the function de-
scribing it is presented in the form of the sum of real and imagi-
nary parts. the signs of both of which can change. The authors
show that when the system's elements are arranged in a certain way
and an additional phase shift between the components of the light
field's polarization is introduced, the filter's complex transfer
function can be synthesized.

In connection with the optical filtration of signals, it is frequently necessary to

synthesize both alternating and complex functions. The basic feature of the reali-

zation of complex spatial filters is that in any recording medium, only signals de-

scribed by real non-negative functions can be recorded. When the widely known meth-
ods for synthesizing such filters in analog and discrete form are used, they make it
possible to obtain a useful response located outside a system's optical axis, which

creates definite difficulties during processing [1,2].

The method proposed in [3) for carrying out complex spatial filtration on the basis
of the properties of polarized light forms a filtered image on the optical axis and
has the advantage of a large format, but it requires the use of special film of the
”Polaroid Vectograph' type, which has low resolution.

In this article we discuss a method for synthesizing complex spatial filters in

polarized light that does not require the use of special carriers for its realiza-

tion.

A special but practically important case of spatial filtration is the obtaining of

a filter with a real alternating transfer function. Let us discuss the possibility
118

FIII(HWNCIAI.USE(NVLY
FOR¢0FFKJAleﬁZONLY

  

K .
Figure 1. Optical diagram of filtration of alternating function: 1. plane
of input image: 2, ll. Fourier lenses; 3. 10. semitransparent mirrors; 4,
9. mirrors; 5, 7. polarizers; 6. 8. frequency planes with optical trans-
parencies; 12. analyser: 13. plane of the output image.

of its realization. using as an example the system represented in Figure l. A
transparency with the amplitudinal transmission coefficient Y(x,y) is located in the

forward focal plane of lens 2.

Polarizers 5 and 7, the planes of transmission of which are parallel to the OX and
O! axes, respectively, are set up in frequency planes 6 and 8 in front of the trans-
parencies. In order to calculate optical devices in polarized light it is conven-
ient to use matrix methods [4]. In our further analysis we will use (Dzhons's)
method and limit ourselves to a quasimonochromatic approximation. In connection
with this, the light beams at the outlets of polarizers 5 and 7 can be represented

as Dzhons vectors: 0 . n _
é rain/I }
I. 0 and €y’39rﬁ9/ , (1)

where Ex(Xon£) = component of the beam that has passed through polarizer 5;
(x£,yf) = component of the beam that has passed through polariser 7. Let us as-
sume that the moduli of these components are equal:

If. my”! ”If, my,” = £- Il Yrs/I}. (2)

where P{ } - symbol of Fourier transformation. In the general case. the amplitude
coefficient of the optical transparency's transmission coefficient can be represent-

ed as
tf-‘I, iii = 5‘ [I'I(’tﬁ/I/]n (3)
where g(x£.yf) - a real function limited by the values

-1 gnaw/(1.. “)

Optical transparencies 6 and 8, on which are recorded some functions gl(xf,y‘) and
g2(xf,yf) that satisfy condition (4). will have transmission coefficients t1(xf.yt)
and t2(X£IYf)- The light beams modulated by tltxf.y£) and t2(8f,¥f) can be repre-

sented as
’ .§D[}'[VZﬁfVI £16§ﬁjgil a
(7

" '0 .' ]
“3 [11mph my». (5)
119

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬁ(JAl.lﬁﬂE(ﬂﬁLY
Provided that the state of polarization of the output beam is not taken into consid-
eration. the operation of analyzer 12 can be described by the vector line (3]

Ices YM Y] , (6)

where O = angle between the plane of transmission of analyzer 9 and the on axis. In
this case the resulting distribution of the scalar amplitudes in the plane 13 of the
output image is

." ' JIYI-iJ-iﬂlhmlﬂ.
ma,.,/=;—i{kamr1[nmymw , ‘7’

When (3) is taken into consideration. (7) can be written as
VII-.1311 -fl[l[ﬁ.gyi}[m W M W
‘1; lﬁﬁyﬂm v +’, mag/Io: VJ}.

Let us assume that o - -n/4 and gl(x .yf) - '9;(xt'Y£)' In this case, t1(xf,yf) and
t2(Xprf) are the positive and negat ve recording of alternating function g(xf,yf).
Expression (8) then takes on the fora

7163,71 =Hwtvm,/1grx,, m? (9)

Thus. the desired alternating transfer function of the filter can be realized quite
simply in accordance with (4) and (9).

(8)

In order to synthesize the complex filter, let us represent the function describing
the filter as the sum of real and imaginary parts. the signs of both of which can
change:

HM}. 51,) -ﬂ (.9, 59/ n8 my”. (10)

 

input image: 2, 21. Fourier lenses; 3, 10, 14, 20. semitransparent mir-
rors: 4. 9, 13, 19. mirrors; 5, 7, 15, 17. polarizers; 6, a, 16, 18. fre-
quency planes with optical transparencies: ll. lens: 12. phase plate; 22.
analyzer: 23. plane of the output image.

Let us discuss the possibility of realizing a function of this type with the help of

the system depicted in Figure 2. It consists of two units, each of which synthe-
sizes a real bipolar function according to the method previously discussed.

In order to obtain the imaginary part. between the units we introduce phase plate
12, which introduces a relative difference in phases between the polarization

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

components. Its matrix representation has the following form [3]:

“null ‘ 0
'0 WF‘JJJ . (11)

We will now discuss the possibility of realizing the complex function by turning
pairs of polarizers 5. 1 and 15, 17 and phase plate 12, relative to their own opti-
cal axes, through angles "1' 8 and wz. respectively.

In frequency planes 6 and 8. the distribution of the amplitudes can be represented

“Ii 30%,,” 33:2] [175}.9117. “' (12)
fiergy/J [:iﬁ,g}[1oyrxﬁwﬂ, (13)

The lenses and free space do not exert any effect on the polarization of the light
beams. This makes it possible to examine, independently of each.other, the scalar
and polarization characteristics of the light beams between polarirers 5, 7 and 15,
17.

Lens 11 performs the function of transferring the images, it being the case that
planes 6. 8 and 16. 18 are situated at a distance of double its focal length away
from it.

The rotation of phase plate 12 through angle 9 relative to the ox axis is determined
by the product of three matrices [4):

also»? 7“” 0 Janene} (14)
MI‘Lme m9 “f“; "4”” F059 .
Let us assume. as before, that the amplitude transmission coefficients of transpar-
encies 16 and 18 are

£7.25”) - i- [17 16%,”! ,
t. mag/1 [by my}.
By analogy with (14), the matrix representation of the set of the second pair of

polarizers 15 and 17, rotated relative to their respective optical axes through an-
gle w2. and transparencies 16 and 18 has-the form

«a; mull’i‘lmﬂ W’ 0 (“M ”M
O I .
M.=f[.ﬁ,,%“.‘ 0 9,3,, Man .
The distribution of the scalar amplitudes in the rear focal plane 23 of lens 21
(which carries out the Fourier transform), allowing for the effect of analyzer 22.

can then be represented as

VII-411 ﬁg IUImeIHw no» YJA' ,

' . ' - ' ' (15)
- .mm-maﬁ—ﬂmyxlrwm Human ,
xM’M‘ [“5 “i * ”W‘IMJ.WI(w3u&-4ow&)

where

121

FINICNWHCJAI.USB(M§LY
_ «uni-snub 7" lJ/(“w
# [M V“ VJM3M1 “noﬁ‘ga’m’l’ (a (16)
is nothing other than the filter's transfer function “(1%,ny

Assuming in (16) that "’1 - -n/4, 6 = 1/2, 6 = 11/4, V2 8 V4, Q - 1/2, after the
transformations we obtain

Hfa,,y,l=ﬁ [96%1‘1/ y (4,, 3,1] age/4.3, I’m/s]; (17)
For 'wl = w2 = 11/4, 6 - 11/2. 6 I 1/4, 0 - o,
”WWI: -,L (Quay, 31 y’mwﬂw' [fan/Vamp] (18)

Thus. from (17) and (18) it follows that the system depicted in Figure 2 makes it
possible to synthesize the filter's complex transfer function. The analysis that
was made of expressions (16), (17) and (18) shows that for inaccuracy in the instal-
lation of the polarizers amounting to _+_l°, the values of the factors entering the
complex transfer function will change less than 0.01. Besides this, it should be
mentioned that a change in the angle of rotation of phase plate 12 will have an ef-
fect only on the coefficients for the imaginary part of the complex transfer func-
tion, leaving the real part unchanged. This makes it possible to control, within
certain limits, both the amplitude and phase of the filter's complex transfer funcr
tion.

The filter that we have been discussing has a positive property: the capability of
creating at its output a unique, axial, useful signal. In order to realize the fil-
ter it is possible to use such well-known recording mediums as photographic film or
plates with high resolution.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Gudmen, D. , "Wedeniye v fur’ye-optiku" [Introduction to Fourier Optics) , Muscat,
Izdatel'stvo “Mir“, 1970.

2. Akayev, A.A., and Hayorov. 8.4L, "Kogerentnyye opticheskiye vychislitel'nyye
mashiny" [Coherent Optical Computers]. Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo

"Hashinostroyeniye" . 1977 .

3. Harathay, A.S., "Realization of Complex Filters with Polarized Light,‘ J. 0PT.
SOC. AMER, Vol 59, No 6, 1968.

4. Dzherrard, A., and Berch, Dzh., "Wedeniye v matrichnuyu Optiku" [Introduction to
Matrix Optics]. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mir“, 197B.

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550. 834

PROCESSING SEISMIC SIGNALS WITH DBPICI‘ION OF DYNAMIC WRISTIG

Leningrad GOIOGRAPIYA I OWIGBSHYA osmso'rxn INPOMTSII V 6301151511 in Russian
1980 (signed to press 19 Nov 80) pp 174-178

[Article by L.Ya. Maslina and LP. Dunayeva from collection of works ”Holography and
Optical Information Processing in Geology“, edited by Professor 8.3. Gurevich and
Candidate of Technical Sciences 0.A. Potapov, Leningrad Physicotechnical Institute
imeni LP. Ioffe. USSR Academy of Sciences. SOO'copies, 181 pages]

[Text] The authors explain a method for studying the dynamic
characteristics of seismic waves that makes it possible to obtain
additional intonation for the prediction of the presence of
hydrocarbon deposits.

The use of coherent optical systems for the processing of geophysical information is
an urgent problem [1]. In particular, the utilization of such systems for the pro-
cessing of large volumes of seismic information is promising.

Let us discuss a method of processing seismic signals obtained by the reflected wave
method during geophysical investigations for the purpose of finding gas and oil de-
posits.

Since reflecting boundaries coincide with the boundaries of lithological-
stratigraphic horizons, a study of the nature of the reflections makes it possible
to obtain data on the structure of the geological strata and, in particular, the
presence of a nonuniformity of the deposit type.

Changes in the spectral composition of the waves and their intensity have various
causes: absorption of high frequencies, a change in the shape of the vibrations at
interfaces, interference from nearby boundaries and so on. Because of the diversity
of the wave propagation and interference conditions, the problem of using seismic
data LO discover directly the effect of a deposit is quite complicated. In order to
increase the nonambiguity of the decision made about the presence of an oil or gas
deposit in a section. it is necessary to conduct an integrated examination of the
diagnostic indicators inherent in a deposit, using various seismic (and geophysical)
parameters [2.3].

The special feature of the proposed method is that information about the dynamic

characteristics of the waves is depicted invariantly on an amplitude and time scale,
which insures the possibility of using coherent optical systems for the operational

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
identification of anomalous effects caused by deposits. The effects are identified
by the method of optical matched filtration, using standards obtained for surveyed

deposits in the territory being investigated as the matched filters. As a result,

it proves to be possible to make an operational evaluation, under field conditions

(and on a real"time scale), of the prospects of the section under investigation.

In the method for processing seismic signals that we are discussing. information is
extracted from the relative change in the periods and amplitudes of seismic vibra-

tions with respect to a section. Before this is done, we must synthesize the field
of relative phase changes. which can be registered in any previously assigned scale
invariantly to the amplitude and time scale of the incoming seismic signal [4,5].

The original signals are a seismic station's output signals, stored in analog or di-
gital memory systems and read in the form of electrical signals.

In order to construct the field of relative phase changes, the seismic vibrations on
each track are formalized in the form of pulses, the temporal position of which cor-

responds to the maximum (or minimum) amplitude of the vibration.

The distance between the pulses corresponds to the seismic vibrations' period. In
the chosen time interval, the periods of the vibrations for each of the tracks are

compared.

The field of the relative phase changes is synthesized in the form of signs on each
track that characterize the relative change in the duration of each subsequent peri-
od of the vibrations relative to each preceding one along the track.

As a result of the comparison, the following decisions are made. If the duration of
the subsequent period is greater than that of the preceding one, this situation is
marked by the sign "+"; if it is less, it receives a "-“ sign. A "-' sign corres-
ponds to equality of the periods, while when there is a 'malfunction'--that is, when
the duration of the period being measured exceeds a given value--no sign is given.
The sequence of signs is registered on a common scale for all the tracks and over a
common interval of time. The signs for adjacent tracks are compared and the zones
where identical signs are grouped along a profile are noted, along with their loca-
tion with respect to the seismic section's depth. An alternation of signs charac-
terizes a change in the wave field's phase, while continuity of tracking along a
profile of identical signs indicates stability of the values of a reflected wave's
periods over a given time interval.

The technique can be realized in the form of a structurally simple device that can
be attached to a seismic station's equipment complex and that makes it possible to
obtain a preliminary evaluation of the nature of a wave field, while performing

field research, for the purpose of detecting anomalous effects caused by a deposit.

visualization of the relative deviations of a wave field's phase can be carried out
on a color television screen.

At the same time, the output data can be recorded on any information carrier, such
as thermal paper, in the form of signs (with the help of a thermal printing head).
in the matrix of liquid crystal memories, on standard or color photographic film and
so forth.

124

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Fields of relative changes in periods of seismic vibrations out-
side a deposit (a). near a deposit (b) and within a deposit (c): 1. in-
crease in the period; 2. decrease in the period: 3. equality of periods:
4. gas and oil deposit.

Key: 1. gas and oil deposit

Analogous transformations can also be made in order to obtain information about the
nature of the change in amplitude of the seismic vibrations.

An experimental test of this processing technique was carried out on the basis of
materials obtained in the zhetybay gas and oil deposit (southern Hangyshlak), which
is an area where there has b en intensive drilling. In Figure l we see the original
material and the results of processing in three sections of the profile: outside
the deposit (la). near and on the edge of the deposit (lb). and inside the deposit
(1c). It is obvious that in separate intervals in the section, at distances of up
to 350 m, we can trace groups with similar sequences of phase changes (along the
profile). such as group A at time 1.1-1.2 s.' With some interruptions. the nature

of the phase change in these groups is correlated along the profile and character-
izes stable phase relationships caused by the reflecting boundaries. In the deposit
section (Figure lo), we can trace group A, but in the interval 1.4-1.7 s the tracea-
bility of the identical signs along the profile deteriorates and the field becomes
less regular. In the vicinity of the deposit, on the section of the profile adja-
cent to its edge. we see a ”column" of sequences with periodically changing signs,
to the left of which the field is made much more complicated by interference. The
traceability of the reflections improves over the productive bed.

These features, when used together with other anomalous parameters. can be used to
predict the presence of deposits in a given region by modeling them in the form of
standards of individual patterns and using a coherent optical system. the develop-
ment of one of the variants of which is now taking place at HIREA [expansion un-
known].

The automatic processing of seismic information, with depiction of the field of rel-
ative phase changes on a real time scale, determines the possibility of using the

125

FOR(OFHK]AI.USE(0NLY
model of a signal to isolate information about the presence of features determining
the boundaries of a deposit.

1.

2.

3.

5.

‘ ‘= . BIBLIOGRAPHY

Potapov, 0.3., ”Opticheskaya obrabotka geofizicheskoy i geologicheskoy
informatsii" [Optical Processing of Geophysical and Geological Information],
Moscow, Izdate'stvo "Nears", 1977, 184 pp.

Berezkin. V.H.. Kirichek, 14.3., and Xunarev, A. v., 'Prineneniye geotizicheskikh
netodov razvedki dlya pryamykh poiskov mestorozhdeniy nefti i gaze" [Using Geo-
physical Surveying Methods for Direct Searches for Gas and Oil Deposits], Moscow,
Izdatel‘stvo “Nears". 1978.

Polshkov, H.K., et 81.. ”Method for Processing Seismic Intonation." USSR Patent
No 402841. B. 120812.. No 42. 1973.

Maslina, L.Ya., and Yeroteyev. 6.8.. "Insuring Amplitude~Tenporal Invariance of
Quasiperiodic Signals in Order to Identify Them in Holographic Identification
Systems." MEZHVUZOVSKIY SB. MUCH. TR. “OPTICKESKAYA GOIOGRAPIYA". No 8. 1977.

Maslina. L.Ya., et a]... "Sposob ranpoznavaniya obrazov" (Method of Identifying
Forms]. USSR Patent No 533949. applied for 11 June 1974. granted 7 July 1976.

COPYRIGBT: LIYaP, 1980

11746
C80: 8144/ 1928

-gup-

126
FOR m1. IBE ONLY