Translation

MARINE ELECTROMAGNETIC RESEARCH.

COLLECTION OF THE INSTITUTE OF TERRESTRIAL MAGNETISM.

THE IONOSPHERE AND RADIO WAVE PROPAGATION

OF THE USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES

Ed. by

G.A. Fonarev

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NI! 0511““. "SR ONLY

JPRS L/10061

21 October 1981

. MARINE ELECTRONABNETIC RESEARCH.
COLLECTION OF THE INSTITUTE OF TERRESTRIAL NAGNETISH,
THE IONOSPHERE AND RADIO HAVE PROPAGATION
OF THE USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES

Moscow MORSKIYE ELEKTROMAGNITNYYE ISSLEDOVANIYA: SBORNIX IZMIRAN in

Russian 1975 (signed to press 25 Mar 1976) 200 copies, pp 2-80

[Edited by Gennadiy Aleksandrovich Ponarev, Candidate of Physico-
Mathematical Sciences]

Comems
mnocamntootoiioo.OOOOQOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIO.QCOOOCOOIOOOQOOOOOOO00.000.000.00... 1
Vertical Component of the Electric Field Intensity Induced by the lbtion

of Sea Hater
(L. H. Abrmv" et “0)....OOOOOQOOOOCOOI.I.0.......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODt 2
[xternination of the Conductivity of Sedinnto by honoring the Electric
and magnetic Fields and Have Velocity mnponente at the Bottom of the
Sea
(L. “Q Abrmva)0000000100.0.000...00.0.00...00......000.000.00.00000000 8
Statistical Characteristics of the Elation of the "eve Parameters to the
Induced Electromagnetic Field
(Yu. M. ”rmov, L. H. ﬁrm“)...oOOOOIOOOO'DOOCOOOOOOOCCO00....0.0... 11
Complex Measuremnt'e of Electromagnetic Fields of Haven in the mental
Zone. (Research Procedure and Some Results)
(Yu. “0 ”ram. e: ‘1.)000000000000.0.00000QOOODOOOOOOOOOOQO0.00.0.0... 16
comparison of ‘nm hype: of Device. for Marine Electra-emetic Sounding
(1.. B. Volta-inlays, G. A. Pmrev).................................... 28
Measuring the Sea Have-Induced Electric Field
(60 A. m‘mv' v. Y“. s.m°v)0000O...OOOOIOOCOOOOIOOOOOOO0.0.0.0.0.... 32
- a - ' II - Ussn - a rave]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USU-I ONLY

Estimating Electric Field: Created by a M-Dinensional Have Spectru-
(“o H. Bosorodakiy)cooou000.0.000...000-000....IOICCOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOO

General Properties of the Anomalous Mayretic Field in the World Ocean
(v. c. urkm' e: al.)..lb....00...!00.0.0.0....UOCUCOOCCOIOUOOOCOCOOOO

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANNOTATION

Articles in this collection are devoted to studies of the electromagnetic fields

of sea waves, certain aspects of magnetotelluric sounding and analysis of ano-al-
ous magnetic fields. The collection is designed for specialists working in the
field of studying electranagnetic phenomena in the seas and oceans.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"0R CN'I'IC'I \l I'K‘l "VI \

VERTICAL COMPONENT OF THE ELECTRIC FIELD INTENSITY INDUCED BY THE MOTION 0P SEA
HATER

[1.. M. Abramova, V. N. Mitrofanov, S. A. Skrysbin. pp 3-10]

The vertical component of the electric field Bz induced by the motion of sea vater
in the geomagnetic field B occupies a special position in the studies of the elec-
tric field of a hydrodynamic source and the dynamics of the source itself. This
arises from theexistence in the sea of a sharp conductivity boundary: the"seawater-
air" boundary. The component B , in the general case. in the center of large-scale
movements does not depend on tbs conductivity distribution or the configuration of
the motion, being a function only of the local velocity and horizontal component of
the earth's magnetic field [1].

Ez'VxBy‘VyBx . (1)
V xy are the velocity components of the sea water.
Young. at al. considered this fact for the first time. 88 indicated

in reference [2]. Later this component was used to study the speed of moaement of
sea water [3, lo]. For sea waves 8 was presented in [S], where the solution for the
electric field potential of a two-dinensional progressive wave obtained in reference
[1] was used. For the analysis and estimates of B the above-indicated authors
either investigated the two-dimensional model of m3tion or it was assumed that the
meter was placed at the middle of the flow.

The more general solution by comparison with the preceding one for E was obtained
by D. Sanford [6] for the class of movements, the horizontal dimensisna of which are
much greater than the vertical nonunifornities. In particular, he studied the
model in which there is only a horizontal velocity conponent V (the vertical
velocity component is seemed to be negligibly smll by comparfxon with the hori-
zontal one), which is entirely acceptable for a large class of large scale move-
ments of the sea and waves in shoal water.

The vertical component of the electric field is expressed as follows:

E; Vx Bijy BX -%!Bz(vyvy)d§'%zféz(VX-EM§ (2)

where fo'ﬁ‘ IV” (1? is the speed averaged with respect to depth considering the

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conductivity of the sediments -— the effective speed. D - H + (02/01) (lls - H) is

the average depth of the sea considering the conductivity of the sediments — the
effective depth of the sea. H is the depth of the sea, ﬂ. is the thickness of the
layer of sediments, 01 is the conductivity of sea water, 02 is the conductivity of
the sediments.

For potential velocity distribution (or at the center of symetric distribution)
expression (2) becomes (1), that is, it is the sum of two terms, the ratio of which
depends only on the direction of motion of the sea water. This expression, as was
pointed out above, is validly used in practice when studying large-scale movements
when the velocity distribution is sufficiently stable and known.

In the case of wind waves the velocity distribution is of a random nature, and the

dimensions of the source are small by comparison with the measurement bases;
it is also necessary to consider the last two terms in expression (2) which depend
on the vertical component of the main magnetic field of the earth, 3:.

For a more detailed study of the distribution of E in the waves in the coastal
zone of the sea, let us consider the specific problem with the following velocity
distribution: _ (11-: u!)

._ .

Vx'ivox €05£y8 fx(l) ,

$34,013"?[YCi(kx-M)I,(Z) .

K -V, -=0 for: lylrzq—é‘

This distribution is characterized by the fact that the velocity components along
the crest (the y-coordinate) and along the wave propagation (the x-coordinate)
have different damping laws with respect to depth. The existence of such distri-
bution obviously is realistic [7]. For this model of a wave expression (2) is
represented in the following form:

(3)

«(ix-u!)

V15 -' ,xf fx(z)cos£y-£Bzf.x(z)-sin[y}
’Voy sin 3!fo f,(z)'ka,,(z)] .

where . f.., : ﬁlm)“ ,Jmm.

From formla (4) it is obvious that as a result the characteristic features of the
electrodynamic solution, the functions f (z) and flu) have significantly different
dependence on depth: namely,

(4)

on the surface, 2 - 0

ﬂab-0, 'fl(z)som

on the bottom 2 . -H

Mano, 22(3)”.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" '| \l I'M" ON] \

From this condition it follows that in the general case on the surface of the sun
the vertical component of the electric field E is defined only by the horizontal
component of the field B , and on the botton.zby the sum of two terms, one of which
arises from the verticalxXomponent of the magnetic field of the earth 8:, and the
other, the horizontal component B . Inasmuch as for one term of the expresson (4)
there is no imaginary factor, thexphase B will depend on the relation of the ve-
locity components, depth and position of zthe point of measurement with respect to
the crest. In the middle of the crest (y - 0) the phase B is constant with respect
to the entire depth; for other values of y the phase varies with respect to cross
section.

Depending on these factors. the magnitude of the measured signal. that is, the con-
tribution from each term of expression (6), will vary. The ratio of the contribu-
tions of the horizontal and vertical components of the earth's magnetic field in B:
is defined by the ratio of these components of the geomagnetic field, and it also
depends on the characteristic dimensions along the crest 11123., the coordinate z
(the observation horizon) and the contribution of the conducting sediments.

For the velocity V directed along the meridian the contribution to 8 will occur
only as a result of the vertical component of the earth's magnetic fiefd. Dz,

where it will be the most significant. of course, at high latitudes, on the magnetic
equator with this direction of the wave motion Ez .-. 0.

In the case of latitudinal direction of the velocity and large values (high geomag-
netic latitudes), the contribution as a result of the two components can be consen-
surate in a wave of equivalent dimensions with respect to wave length and crest
length, especially on the horizons 41/2. In the middle and low latitudes the pri-
mary contribution is made by the part 3:1 caused by the horizontal component of the
primary magnetic field of the earth.

in the case of a pure "wave current" where the velocity is uniform to the bottom,
that is, f(z) .. const - f. and Vy - 0,

511mm...“ «1- $93.51. an, (5)

that is. the vertical component of the electric field B of the "wave current" is
equal to zero on the surface, is maximal at the bottom ind has constant phase.

Let us consider this phenomenon in the example of the electric field of sea waves.
In 1973 in the vicinity of the port of Hirnyy (the Crimea) experimental studies were
mde of an electromagnetic field of a hydrodynamic source.

The vertical component of the electric field of sea waves was measured by two static
meters with silver chloride electrodes by the mum-1m system. One vertical
measuring base was locate-1 at the bottom, and the other near the surface (Figure l).
The length of each base was 1 meter; the distance between centers of the bases was
~2 meters. Both bases were located on the same vertical. Along with the electric
field sensors was a wire wave meter for recording the wave height. The depth of the
sea at the measurement point was ~5 meters. The recording of the electric field
measured on the upper and lower bases and the wave height was made on one tape of
the K-12-22 oscillographic automatic recorder. the mean amplitude Ez recorded by
the upper meter was ‘0 to 60 microvolts per meter; the amplitude recorded by the

1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘IU INT 0"" \

lower meter was 30 microvolts per meter. and the average oscillation period '1' ~

L)
seconds. The vertical component was measured during stormy weather.

for

5N.

in

Figure l.
A characteristic feature of the recorded vertical fields is the presence of a sig-

nificant phase shift between the upper and lower field asters. The phase fluc-
tuates from 60° to 120'.

For interpretation of the results of measuring the electric field E of the wave
action, as an example let us consider the model of a wave with creef of finite length
and with a specific velocity damping law with respect to depth. He ehall consider

~ (6)

where k' - Ikz + £2 . This nodel approximates the wave motion in shallow water when
i! < A/2.

In this case

Ez‘EzI 'EzzZ EusFﬂx 3
EthzVo {‘sin tyedh'uuMk’H '

fWI ' rﬁ—thk’Hj. m

The pair of electrodes located near the surface recorded the field amplitude 3
caused actually by the first term 3 . For estimation of the ratio of the sigﬁals
measured on the bottom and on the surface, let us give the actual values of:

v - 2 I/sec, r, - 0.2-10-4, r - 5 sec, k z 0.2. 9. - 0.06. n - 30 meters. Then on
tRe surface, 2 O 0

ih- t)
E1*Ez.'F,\’,=40coslye( w (microvolts/meter).

The second pair of electrodes located near the bottom, 2 - I! neasured the following:

! k l t(k - 0
Eu =V0F, C0$£VE ( x .u )'Eh"kl‘l'H—5 ZﬁCOSZyC .’ Zlmicrovolts/Ieter);

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

tn “var, {esgan‘f‘ ﬂm'u- 51mm}
”‘52 5i” we microvolts/meter) .

The sum of the component E2 on the bottom will give an oscillation with an amplitude of
~27 microvolts shifted in space along the crest with respect to B‘ on the surface by
an angle o 3 60'. The amplitude ratio of the field on the surface and on the bottom

8
z surf
__E_ - 1.5.
a bottom

According to the experimental data, the average value of this ratio will be «2.0.
The scattering can be explained. on the one hand, by the arbitrary choice of the
parameters It and 2. and the field 1' (since the direction of wave propagation was
determined approximately); and on the other hand, by the fact that in real three
dimensional waves the damping coefficient obtained by the experimental data pre-
supposes faster damping of the orbital velocity with depth [8].

The magnitude of the phase shift and the enlitude ratio B near the bottom and near
the surface are defined obviously by all the terms of expriesion (6); for more exact
estimation of these values it is necessary to know the reel velocity distribution in
the wave and the location of the meter with respect to the wave.

By the surface measurements of E . the order of magnitude of the peak. value of the

a
velocity component in the east-west direction ”least-west was estimated.

-5 i
" _ 40'50 "0: o.
le-suu - PF:- 02'50- 2;; m/sec.

(a)

Key: a. east-west max

This is an entirely realistic value for the speed in shallow water during a severe
storm.

In conclusion, it must be noted that inasmuch as the solution (2) which we took from
[6] was obtained for the steady state problem with one restriction — the character-
istic horizontal dimensions of the source are such greater than the effective depth
of the ocean -- the study nsde in this article is valid for an entire class of sea
movements satisfying this condition: currents, tides, long rolling Ben and
tsunami on the shelf and wind waves in the coastal zone.

In the case of measuring the electromagnetic field which can be considered as a ran-
dom process. it is necessary to consider that not only the magnitude. but also the

phase of the recorded components depends upon the position of the meter with re-
spect to the investigated wave.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

l0.

5.

6.

7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

H. Longuett-Higsins, K. Stern and E. Stonel, “1008 501.3 OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTITUTE
CONTRIB” 19614. p 690.

F. 3. Young, V. Gerrard and N. Jerous, PHIL. mm, No lo, 1920.

G. A. Fourev, V. S. Slmeyer, PROBLEM! mm I ANTARKITIKI (Problems of the
Arctic and Antarctic), Leningrad, Gidrouteoizdec, No 31, 1969, p (08.

ll. Harvey, mum-72, HAWAII INST. 0? cm. Honolulu, 1972.

G. A. Pmrev, GBOHAGNITNYYB ISSLKDOVAN‘HA (Gempetic Research), Ho 13, Moscow,
Nauka. 1971.

T. Sanford, J. 0? GEOPHYS. 338., No 15, 1971, p 76.

R. N. Ivenov, 12V. AN SSSR, SERIYA GEDPIZ. (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
Geophysics Series), No 7, 1962.

A. I. Dwanin, VOINOVYYE DVIZHKNIYA V 1033 (Wave Nahume in the Sea), Leningrad,
Gidroneteoizdat, 1968.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DETERMINATION OF THE CONDUCTIVITY OP SEDIMENTS BY MEASURING THE ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC
FIELDS AND HAVE VELOCITY COMPONENTS AT THE mom 0]" THE SEA

[L. M. Abra-ova, pp 11-16]

Electromagnetic fields induced by the movement of sea water in the geomagnetic field
are used in oceanography to obtain detailed intonation about the velocity structure
of the ocean movements which sometimes is very difficult if not in general impossible
to obtain by other methods.

Another aspect of using a hydrodynamic source is the study of the deep struc-
ture of the earth, for the fields induced by it depend on the conductivity. the
thickness of the sediments and the distance to the conducting mantle. The effort to
use this source to determine the depth to the conducting mantle was made by Larsen
[1] by the method of magnetotelluric sounding. Teramoto proposed a method of de-
termining the effective conductivity of the bottom of the channel by measuring the
potential difference across the channel, the electric currmt density and the speed
of the water [2]. By using this method a zone of anomalous conductivity was isolated
under the Sangarskiy Strait} which is a continuation of the conductivity anomaly
Observed in Japan.

In the indicated papers a study was made of a uniformly layered model made up of the con-
ductivities of the ocean 01, the sediments 02, the nonconductimg crust and highly con-

ducting mantle (II [1, Z].

The influence of the mantle on the induction mechanism depends on the ratio of the
linear dimensions of the hydrodynamic source I. end the skin depth of the mantle 5-

at the frequency w. The el7ctromagnetic frequency wave penetrates the mantle toI
a depth a - (2/(p.w. on”

"hen 6 -/I. >> 1 it is possible to neglect the mantle; for 6 an << 1 it is necessary
to consider the effect of the mantle when estimating the conductivity.

In this paper a method is proposed for determining the effective conductivity of the
sediments by neasurements of the electric and magnetic fields and the velocity
components at the bottom. Here the class of movements for which 6 m“ >> 1 can be
used as the sounding source. This includes the wind-driven waves and swell in
shallow water, the stationary and certain other movements for which the contribu-

tion of the nantle to the mutual induction process between the ocean and the mantle
is negligible.

1Tsugaru Strait.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Let us consider a model of the ocean movement with three-dimensional velocity distri-
bution with respect to the x, y and z -coordinates.

In general form the components of the electric and magnetic field induced by the
movement of the sea water in the model with three-dimensional velocity distribution.
according to the solution of Sanford [3] are expressed as follows:

Ex '5 V,” . 11/6! . (l)
5,: F v; 7/6,, (2)
5x+GIEW H) (I-ZHJI}. <3)
h'ﬁ‘EYyU’.‘ NH) (1' )h. (1.)
where jxy' Exy and any are the components of the electric current, the field and

magnetic field. respectively; F2 is the vertical component of the. gaunagnetic field,
u is the mapetic permeability, 2(11 is the specific conductivity of sea water v?” -

(1/0)}? nydﬁ is the average velocity with respect to depth considering the conduc-

tivity of the sediments -- the effective velocity 1) - 8(1 + Y) — the "effective"
depth to which the induced current penetrates (considering the conductivity of the
sediments), Y - S Isl is the ratio of the longitudinal conductivities of the sedi-
ments $2 and the ea water 81. and H is the depth of the sea.

Expressing '1): and 3 from (1) and (2) and substituting in (3) and (lo), we obtain the
value of the xparalne¥er Y - the ratio of the integral conductivities of the layer
of sediments and sea water:

. .5”----_€_5L__ .fxi/L___L_{26 _.
H E! 1‘61“!!! Ex 1“!"1 (5)

Having data available from'bottom measurements on V”, Bay and Bxy’ it is possible
to estimate the total longitudinal conductivity of the aediments $2 - Ysl.

In the case of a model with one velocity coqonent, for example, V f the parameter
Y will be determined from the expression:

FV 26
'.""'E;L”,chFTFI' <6)

The parameter S. as applied to the induction problems of wind-driven waves is quite
provisional in fhe geophysical sense, for the linear dimensions of the source can be
less than the layer of sediments; in this case S defines the effective conductivity
of the part of the sediments to which the curren is closed. For long rolling
seas, meteorological fluctuations, and so on. the linear dimensions of which are
commensurate with the thickness of the layer of sediments, this parameter determines
the effect of the entire layer.

The contribution of the conducting sediments to the process of electromagnetic
field induction as a result of the waves was estimated by the synchronous recordings

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI-‘I-‘If‘IAI. USE ONLY

obtained during bottom measurements of the magnetic field Bx. electric field E and
velocity components vat of the windedrivan waves. The depth of the sea at the {in
of the measurements was 1.2 to 1.5 meters [6]. The vertical componznt of the

earth's magnetic field in the measurement zone was 0-52'10 “‘1.-

By formla (6) an estimate was made of the parameter Y - 82/81. The mean values of

the amplitudes obtained in the time interval of -100 seconds were taken for the
calculations: V - 2.3 Mac. 8, - 8.640'6 volts/mater, B - 1.2 nteala. The
corresponding vafue turned out to be equal to 18. If we tafe the total longitudi-
nal conductivity of sea water 8 - all! - «.8 to 6 (moh), it is possible approximately
to estimate the efiective longitudinal conductivity of the part of the sediment
layer through which the currents are closed

‘51- is, -18o («wanes-1w (noh)
The correctness of the estimate was confirmed by the results of the spectral analy-
sis of these materials when for the given a priori hydrodynamic nodal, the spectra
of the electric field components were calculated by the measured velocity spectra.
The spectra calculated considering the value of S demonstrated good agreement with
the experimentally obtained estimates of the specEraJ. densities of the electric

field. What has been stated here again confirms that the wave move-ants of the
field can he an additional source for studying the deep structure of the earth.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. J. C. Larsen, GEOPHYS. J. ROY. ASTRON. SOC., Vol. 16, No l, 1968, p 47.
2. T. Teramoto, J. OCEANOGR. SOC. JAP. Vol 27, No 1. 1971.
3. '1‘. Sanford, J. GEOPHYS. RES” V01 76, No 15, 1971.
1.. Yu. :4. Abramov, L. H. Abramovs, S. M. Minasyan. V. N. Hitrofanov. A. S. sucherba-

kova. "Complex Measurements of Electromagnetic Fields of Haves in the Coastal
Zone. Investigation Procedure and Some Results (see this collection)."

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS 0? THE RELATION OF THE HAVE PARAMETERS TO THE INDUCED
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD

[Yu. H. Abramov, L. h. Abramova. pp 15-21]

Up to the present time. judging by the published papers only a small outer of stu-
dies were made including simultaneous recording of the parameters of the velocity
field of sea waves and electric and magnetic fields induced by the wave movements.
The small number of such studies is explained by difficulty in stating the coupler
measurements at sea. including the absence of special electromgnetic marine equip-
ment.

Complex studies of the electromagnetic fields of the waves in the coastal zone have
been performed at the mum SSSR [Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism, the Iona-
sphere and Radio Have Propagation of the USSR Academy of Sciences] since 1971. In
the given paper the results are presented from full-scale studies of electromagnetic
fields of waves, the purpose of which was establishment of the statistical relations
between the characteristics of the electromagnetic and hydrodynamic fields of the
waves.

The components of the electric and magnetic fields of the wave action and the hydro-
logic parameters -- the wave velocity and height — were recorded in the coastal
zone of the White Sea (the vicinity of Cape Abramsvskiy).

The measurement procedure is described in [1]. As a result of this study, synchro-
nous recordings vere obtained for three components of the magnetic field of the
waves Bx’ By, Bz’ two horizontal components of the electric field 8‘ and By and also

the hydrc gic parameters - the shift of the free surface h. - 2A (A is the wave
amplitude) and the velocity component normal to the shore. Vx.

when processing on a computer, the recording was usually made at increments of 0.5 to
0.6 second.

The statistical characteristics of the distribution, the mutual correlation and
mutual spectral functions and also the coherence functions were calculated.

The statistical parameters obtained during the processing (the excess and say-retry
coefficients of the distribution functions of the y-axes of the wave height
recordings. velocity and parameters of the electromagnetic wave) demonstrated
that in the first approximation usually the hypothesis of norml distribution is
applied.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An example of one of the mutual correlogrm characterizing the relation of the
parameters Ex and h" is illustrated in Figure 1.

All of the mutual correlograns have the form of functions that damp to the 0.1
level from the laximum value in 10-20 seconds.

The form of the correlograns indicates that in both processes there is a quasiperio-
dic component present with a period of 5-6 seconds which is typical for wind-driven
waves. The processes are close to the ao-called narrow-hand processes with charac-

teristic periods related to the frequency “’0’ near which the maxim- energy of the
process is concentrated.

For all of the mutual correlograns characterizing the relation of the components of
the electric field (E . E ) and the hydrodynamic parameters (V . 2A) the presence of
a shift of a maximum hf the mutual correlation function is typical, indicating the
existence of a phase difference of the oscillations of these conponents. The
degree of the relation of the electric field component B and the velocity paraneters
(the wave height) is low, and the mutual correlation factor 1' - 0.5. the small
magnitude of the mutual correlation coefficient of these para§3ters obviously is
explained by the fact that the measurenenta were taken not at one point, but they
lay on a straight line not coinciding with the general direction of motion of the
wave front. As for the degree of the correlation of the components Bx - V‘. it
appears to be closer, rxy ~ 0.7, and this is explained by the fact that the esters

for measuring these parameters were located in practice at one "point," which re-
vealed better interrelation of the processes.

 

Key: a. 1, sec
12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mutual correlation analysis of ttehydrodynmic and electromagnetic parenters did
not demonstrateasufficiently convincing relation between the processes in the time
region. which is explained by imperfection of the measurement procedure. The re-
sults of spectral analysis. however, indicate the presence of a clear relation be-
tween the investigated processes and the frequency region. A comparison of the ve-
locity spectrum (just 88 the wave height) with the spectra of the components
of the electric and magnetic fields demonstrated that in accordance with linear

theory, there is good similarity of these characteristics in the spectral sense,
Figure 2 a, h.

 

o 2.0 ‘40.“ to :0 I2 :4 (1)

 

Figure 2

Key: 1. second

The curves for the estimates of the spectral density functions of the cave height 2A,
the velocity V“ and the electric field components 8: and B y have basic peaks at the

periods of the wind-driven waves. The peaks are well expressed and coincide with
each other. In the estimates of the spectral densities there are additional peaks

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1DFFKJAL.USE(MVLY

6.0.0.»: (a)

 

Figure 3.

Key: s. radians b. second

at the periods close to the basic period which are lower with respect to amplitude,
but coincide with each other for all components.

The presence of a relation between the electromagnetic field and the velocity field

parameters in the frequency region also confirm the calculated mutual spectra for
these parameters. Figure 3 illustrates the mutual spectrum of the components 3‘ -

Vx, Sxy(m).

The wave frequency is plotted on the x—axis, and the mutual spectrum characteristics
are plotted on the y-axis:

G is the mutual spectral density function.
C is the cospectrum,

Q is the quadrature spectrum,

0 is the phase shift between coaponents.

The graphs of the components of the mutual spectra indicate that the energy exchange
between the investigated components takes place primarily in the range of periods of
b-8 seconds corresponding to the wind-driven waves. 0n the remaining periods, the
energy exchange is insignificant. The nature of the phase curves is different for

14

FIIICIHHCJA1.USE1DNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

different components, which is explained by the separation of the observation
points in space.

The coherence of the investigated parameters is high; its peaks come on the same
frequencies as the spectral density and mutual zspectral density 32““ Figure lo
shows the coherence functions F (m) - sty (03)]2 IS («1)5y (m), 0 < (w) _<_ l as a func-

tion of the vave period calculated for the electric field components, velocity and
wave height.

 

Key: a. '1‘, seconds

The investigated results of the spectral analysis of the parameters of the hydro-
dynamic and electromagnetic wave fields under various meteorological conditions in—
dicate that there is a clear and stable spectral relation between these parameters.

This again confirms that the electronagnetic fields are a sufficiently exact representa-

uonof wave hydrodynamic processes in the sea.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Yu. M. Abramov, L. M. Abramva. s. H. Hinasyan, V. Ii. Mitrofanov, A. S. Shcherba-

kova."‘rhe Complex Measurements of Electromagnetic Fields of Waves in the Coastal
Zone. (Research Procedure and Some Results)," See this collection.

15

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COMPLEX MEASUREMENTS 0P EBCTROHAGNB‘IIC FIELDS OF WAVES IN TEE COASTAL ZONE. (RB-
SEARCH PROCEDURE AND some RESULTS)

I‘m. H. Abramov, L. M. Abramva, S. M. Mnasyan, V. N. Hitrofanov, A. S. Shcherbakova
pp 22-40}

At the present time marine electromagnetic measurements are acquiring great sig-
nificance in the overall complex of marine geophysical research.

In spite of their obvious urgency, the measurements of the variable electromagnetic

field widespread for dryland research has still not received sufficient development
under marine conditions. The reason for this lies primarily in the fact that during
experimental studies in the sea difficulties arise connected with the sealing of the
measuring equipment, its stabilization on a moving platform (buoy and floating sta-
tion) and chemical sgressiveness of sea water. In addition, the studies of the
electromagnetic variations in the sea are complicated by the appearance of an addi-
tional source of a variable electromagnetic field — a hydrodynamic field caused by
movement of the conducting sea water in the magnetic field of the earth.

the most powerful interference when studying the morphology of the variations in the
sea in the short-period part of the spectrum are the electromagnetic fields of
wind-driven waves and swells.

The data from theoretical calculations and experimental measurements indicate
that the maximum amplitudes of the electromagnetic fields of sea waves have values
from tenths to units of game in the magnetic field and from tenths to hundreds of
millivolts per kilometer in the electric field in the range of periods of 1-60
seconds, which is entirely consensurate with the electromagnetic fields caused by
an ionospheric source in the same frequency range (short-period oscillations) and
even exceeds them. The structure of the distribution of these fields in the water
and in the air has a complex nature connected with the conditions of the movement
of waves in the world ocean, the conductivity distribution in the ocean and sedi—
ments, the depth of the ocean, and so on.

The electromagnetic fields induced by a hydrodynamic source can have a significant effect
on the operation of marine electronic reconnaissance gem-of the electromagnetic current

meter (nut), lowering the reliability of the assured values. On the other hand.
the induced fields as a function of conductivity, thickness of the sediments and
distance to the conducting mantle, offer the hope for future use of electromagnetic
fields of the hydrodynamic source to study the geoelectric section [1].

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORtOFﬁKJAl.USE(NVLY

It is no less important to study the electromagnetic Ilelds ot hydrodynamic utlslu
in the interests of oceanography. At the present time the EHIT [electromagnetic
current meter] is widely known and is finding practical application in oceanography.
The electromagnetic fields of wind-driven waves and swells can also be used to study
the nature and the characteristic features of their scurce.

The enumerated factors indicate the urgency of setting up theoretical and experi-
mental studies of electromagnetic fields of wind-driven waves and swell.

The small number of experimental studies of these phenomena is connected with the
difficulty of setting up this type of measurement at sea. The wind-driven wave and
swell fields attenuate rapidly with depth; there is an alternative - either to sta-
bilize the measuring elements in the hydrodynamic field when performing measurements
at the source or remove the sensors from the source. increasing the sensitivity of
the measuring device. Both alternatives still run into technical and procedural
difficulties. 0n the existing level of measurement equipment and means of setting

it up in the sea. reliable measurements of the electromagnetic fields of sea waves
can be taken most successfully under shoal water conditions. Technically it is
easier to measure the magnetic and electric fields of waves in shoal water; both
scalar and component sensitive elements can be used with the same degree of success
here, for they are installed on the bottom. The advantage of measurements under these
conditions is the possibility of using differential devices permitting isolation of
the wave fields in "pure“ form. For this purpose one measuring sensor is placed in
the range of the electromagnetic fields of the waves. and the other at a considerable
distance from the source, on land. In the absence of noticeable geomagnetic variation
field gradients of external sources. the difference of the signals of these sensors
is proportional to the electromagnetic field of hydrodynamic origin. In addition.
for certain wavelengths in the short-period pirt of the spectrum. even a shallow

sea (H" 5-7 meters) can be considered as "deep" (8 > All). which permits use of
short wind-driven waves as a micromodel of long rolling seas in deep water.

In the USSR and abroad there are a quite large number of magnetometric and electro-
metric devices for recording variable electromagnetic fields on the dry land under
stationary conditions. The specific nature of the operation of the meters under
marine conditions as part of buoy. bottom and floating stations limits the possi-
bilities of the application of this equipment. especially when measuring components

[2].

The basic requirements on the equipment for measuring the electromagnetic fields of
sea waves with respect to resolution (0.01 to l p in a magnetic field and 0.1 to 10
microns/m in an electric field) and frequency range (1-0.03 hertz) demonstrate that
such observatiors can be made using the device for measuring electromagnetic field
variations in the sea.

In this paper primarily the results of measuring the electromagnetic fields of sea
waves are considered which were obtained on an expedition for complex investigation
of variable magnetic fields in the vicinity of Cape Abramovskiy in the White Sea in

1973.

Taking measurements of the electromagnetic fields of sea waves in this region
was complicated by the fact that it is in a zone of increased magnetic activity.
On the other hand. the advantage of measurements at high latitudes is that

17-

FOR OFIlC1A1.USEGDNlV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

basically only the vertical component of the earth's primary magnetic field
is present, which simplifies interpretation of the data obtained and the choice of
models.

The region in which the measurements are taken is characterized by a flat coastline
with a slope of 1—2' directed from west to east. At this location the syzygisl
tides have a height on the order of 7 meters, and the quadrature tides 6 meters. and
they have a strict semidiurnal nature.

The diagram for deploying a set of measuring equipment is presented in Figure 1.

Atmaximmnlow tide the depth of the sea at the point of installation of the sensors
is 1 meter, and the distance to shore at low tide is 300 meters.

The electric potential differences were measured by static meters on two mutually
perpendicular bases by 5 silver chloride electrodes of the IZHIRAH-IELAN system.
Different combinations of these electrodes made it possible to select the length of
the aessuring bases equal to 10 or 20 meters. The signal from the electrodes tra-
veled along a P-268 type cable to the recording equipment located on the shore.
All of the measured values a this experiment were recorded on the 12-channsl K-lZ»
22 automatic recorder; the sensitivity of recording the potential differences was
0.03 mv/mm. The diagram of the installation of the electrodes in the sea is pre-
sented in Figure 2. In addition to measurements of the potential difference of the
wave electric field, the potential method was used, the essence of which consists
in the fact that one of the electrodes (the measuring electrode) is placed directly
in the measured field, and the other ("zero") outside the range of this field. The
signal picked up from the electrodes is in this case proportional to the potential
of the measured electric field at the point of installation of the measuring elec-
trode.

Inasmuch as the investigated signal varies synchronously in time with the speed of
the wave relative to the measuring electrode. the component of the measured electric

field parallel to the direction of this velocity is defined as follows:
3! V23!
Ex‘ x 2 v0 at l (1)
where Ex is the electric field intensity component,

o is the signal aessured by the potential method,

.'

V¢ is the phase wave velocity with respect to the measuring electrode.

Lead plates 50 X 700 X 3Ium served as the zero electrode in the potential measure-
ment method. They were dug into the ground a distance of 200-300 meters from the
edge of the water on the land.

The magnetic field components of seawaves were measured by a ferrosonde three-
component magnetometer installed on the bottom. The "y" component sensor was set up

perpendicular to the meridian and parallel to the shore; the "x" sensor was set up

in the direction of the aeridian and perpendicular to the shore, and the "a" sensor,

vertically.

18

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(NNLY

 

A-ﬂAT'IHK cxopacm u Wu” (3)
o~ murpogu (1:)

Pigure l. [-mruuroﬂtrp (c)
Key: a. laboratory facility e. acarp h - 10-15 meters
h. speed and pressure gage f. maximum low tide line
c. electrodes g. depth profile with
d. magnetometer respect to the A'A line

h. depth scale

The general complex for measuring the magnetic field components was made up of the
follon.ug:

1. 86-56 magnetometer with sensor,
2. compensator for the constant component of the earth's magnetic field,

3. connecting cable,
19

F!HI(HWHCLALIJSE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

J- lumps!
z-aa‘ut
5-- normal"

«use»
5- 90.!

Figure 2 .

Key: 1. electrode 6. anchor
2. cable 5. halyard
3. float

lo. recorder.
5. power pack,
6. nonmagnetic container made of fiberglass.

The sensors of the magnetometer fastened orthogonally in a common frame and the
magnetometer were placed in a sealed container. In turn. the container was fastened
to a massive nonmagnetic slab and was put on the bottom from a boat at maximum low tide.
The slab was held on the bottom by weights for greater stability. The signal from

the magnetometer was transmitted over a KNSh-l8 type cable to shore to the recording
system. A composition current was fed over the same cable to the sensors.

The components at, y and z of the magnetic field were recorded with speeds of 6 ml

sec or 1.5 Il/sec. The magnetometer had the following scale divisions of the analog
recording by components: at - 0.52 Y/II. y - 1.0 ylm. z - 0.48 Y/m.

The measurements of the hydrologic paramt :ers of the waves (velocity component normal

to shore. V and wave . height 2A) were taken by electrochemical converters convert-
ing the mechanical inputs to an electric signal.

In addition to the enumerated measurements when performing the operations, the
meteorological and hydrological conditions in the vicinity of Cape Abrsmovskiy were
observed and recorded by the hydrogrsphic service of the meteorological station.

Every three hours the following characteristics were recorded: the wind speed and
direction, the average wave height, the nature and predominant direction of the waves.
the water level at the measurement point. These data were taken into account when
processing and analyzing the observation results.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K crystal variation meter of the V. N. Bobrov system was set up on shore. The
magnetic activity when measuring the electromagnetic fields of the waves was esti-
mated by the readings of this meter.

As a result of the studies. synchronous recordings were obtained for the electromsg~
netic field components and the hydrodynamic parameters at different depths resulting
from the tides. A sample recording is presented in Figure 3.

The procedure for processing the experimental data depends to a significant degree

on the purposes and goals of the study. The following set of parameters was
processed:

l. The electric potential differences Ad on bases perpendicular and parallel to the
shore (the electric field components Ex and By, respectively).

2. The wave potential at the point 0.

3. The magnetic field components Bx, B

’ B O

y 2

4. The velocity components of the water perpendicular to the shore, V‘.
5. The displacements of the free surface at a point, 2A.

In order noestablish the amplitude-phase relations between different field components
from synchronous recordings, the ordinates E, B, V, A were picked up, and the ampli~
tude and phase relations were studied for pairs of these parameters.

When using the statistical method of interpretation of the results obtained, the

recordings were deciphered by special standard curves. The volume of one realization
included less than 80 to 100 wave periods [3]. The digitalization step size was
selected as 0.5-0.6 second. The ordinates were reckoned from the base line.

The primary processing was done on the "Mir-l" computer by the programs of [4].

For each parameter of the electric, magnetic and hydrodynamic fieldsthe statistical
characteristics of the investigated processes were calculated: dispersion, mean

square deviation, asymmetry coefficient, excess coefficient and their errors. These
calculations demonstrated that both the hydrodynamic parameters and the characteris-
tics of the electromagnetic field of the sea waves (periods and amplitudes) are
subject to a normal distribution law on the whole.

Histograms and distribution curves of the wave heights, velocity and electromagnetic
field which had been constructed by empirical data were used to study the statistical
properties of the amplitude and period distribution of the investigated processes.

Let us first consider the amplitude distribution.

Figures 4-5 show the amplitude histograms of the components B , B of the electric

field, the velocity Vx and wave height 2A for different depths ofy the sea H - 1.5
meter and 7 meters.

Ranges of values of the investigated element are plotted on the x-axis on
the graphs, and the number of cases is plotted on the y-axis in percentages of the
total number of terms of the series n (n . 300). The upper scale of the x-axis is

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

WWW
llama)

WWW}

1. - 0.52.1/m
t, - 1,0 I/M
£2 I 0,46 (INN
£4 =' 0.3“"
Figure 3.

Key: a . sec

the transfomd distribution series, and the lover scale is expressed in units of the

investigated element. The relations constructed on the basis of the histograms are
the distribution or recurrence curves of the element.

Using the recurrence curve data, by successive sumation of the nutter

of cases, the x-axes of the integral distribution curve called the elenent guaran-
tee curve in oceanography, were calculated and constructed.

The characteristic values of the investigated element are as follows: ;- is the mean
value or center of distribution, ’50! is the value of the element with 502 guarantee.

yn-nax is the value of the element of greatest recurrence (node); they pernit deter-

mination of what type of distribution is characteristic of the given parameter.
Thus, for y - ySOZ - yn , there is a syuetric distribution curve. Examples of

the recurrence and guarantee curves of the electric field and velocity anplitudes
for sea depths of 1.5 meters and 7 esters are presented in Figures 6 and 7.

Analogous calculations and constructions were performed for the periods of the

electromagnetic field and hydrodynasic paraseters, Figures 8—11. As is obvious from
the histograms, waves are most frequently observed with periods of 2-6 sec. Such
periods have the highest recurrence rate in the electric and magnetic field of the
waves. The analysis of these curves lust give answers to the following questions:

1. Does a relation exist between the alplitudes and periods of an electromagnetic
and hydrodynamic field and in which coqonents is it the closest.

2. lion does the variation of the sea depth at the measure-ant point influence the
properties of the distribution curves.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

80

M
40

         

-‘n I o! I ‘ £9
as M an 25 3'3 XIO’Y'JA) 1 .
Figure Io. x
Key: a. wave height 0. n/sec
b. speed d. B? - electric field

An analysis of the histograms, the recurrence and guarantee curves for the amplitudes
and periods indicates that the statistical relation exists and is quite re-
liable.

The peaks of the distribution curves with respect to amplitudes clearly coincide with
each other, Figures 6-7. The amplitude distribution curves of the electric field

and velocity are closest to each other. The peaks of the electric field and velocity
distribution curves by periods do not coincide with each other. The peaks of the
electric field distribution curves 8 , as a rule. are shifted somewhat in the long-
period direction. y

The estimates of the similarity of the distribution curves made by the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov number A demonstrated that with a probability a - 0.01 all pairs of
velocity and electric field distribution curves give values of the coefficient A less
than Acr’ which indicates the presence of reliable similarity of these curves.

The distribution of the magnetic field components both by periods and by amplitudes
is less clearly expressed by comparison with the other elements. This is explained

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

30 (a)
' (Kapotms
V.

 

«2 d7 ‘ i: (AI/cu) (b)

  

0
is 2'7 5.: (cal/.440“
Figure 5.
Key: a. velocity c. electric field E
b. Ilsec d.(nnuvo1u/neze}S-10'2

by the fact that the magnetic field as an integral characteristic is the Gull
of the interaction of the electric currents in some part of space.

Let us consider the distribution chsracteristics of the elements of the investigated
fields for different sea depths. It is known that in deep water (H. > X12) and

shallow water (H ¢ 2/2) waves are characterized by different types of amplitude distri-
bution.

210

FOR OFT-10A]. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I'l- $5».

 

Figure 7 .

Thus. a symetric gaussian curve describes the wave height distribution in shallow
water, and the asy'nnetric Rayleigh distribution curve is characteristic of deep sea
distribution.

The results obtained by the experimental data confirm this proposition. For E - 7

meters the wave height distribution curves are asymtric; some asymuetry is
observed also in the velocity distribution (y f ym f ySOZ)’ See Figure 7. The

recurrence and guarantee curves of the electric field amplitudes coincide vith an
accuracy to 5-102 with the corresponding wave height and velocity curves. This
case, judging by the eleaent distribution, is an approximation to the "deep" sea
model, although, strictly speaking, at a depth of 7 meters the sea can not be
considered "deep" (H > A/Z) for all spectral conponents.

The statistical wave height distribution in shallow water (Ii - 1.5 meters). as Figure
6 shows, is characterized by a decrease in the variety of the-wave heights

as well as the amplitudesof the induced electric field. This is explained by the
25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sﬂ—v‘ra‘.
0(3)
I0
Tax
7 I: 29 35
2A (a)
so
:0
l0 , .
t0!)
as u 4.5 ““

Figure 8.

Key: n. T, sec

Titer (a)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 11.

Key: a. '1‘, sec

Thus, the investigated distribution characteristics make it possible to consider that
there is a defined statistical-probability relation with respect to amplitude and
period between the parameters of the hydrodynamic source and the components of the
induced electromagnetic field. The recurrence and guarantee curves of the electric
field and velocity are closest to each other.

This result indicates expediency of the search for a functional relation in the
electric fields and velocities during furtherstudiea of the magnetohydrodynamic

processes in the sea.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. J. Larsen, GEOPHYS. J. ROY. ASTRON. SOC, Vol 16, No 1, 1968, p 67.

2. V. V. Novysh, I. I. Belyayev, D. 1.. Finger, 1.. H. Abramova. HORSKAYA MAGNITO-
METRICHESKAYA APPARATURA (Karine Magnetometric Equipment), HG SSSR VIM.
Moscow, 1976.

3. I. F. Shadrin. PRO‘ISESSY RAZVITIYA I HB‘I‘ODY ISSLBDOVANIYA PRIBREKHNOY ZONY MORYA
(Development Processes and Hethoda of Investigation of the Coastal Zone of the
Sea). Moscow, Nauka, 1972.

lo. ALGORITMY I PROGRAM STATISTICIIESKOY 03ml I NABLYUDBNIY NA ETSVH MIR I
“RISK-22 VASKHNIL (Algorithm and Programs for Statistical Processing and Obser—

vations on the Mir and Hinsk-ZZ Digital Computers of the All-Union Academy of
Agricultural Sciences). izd. Pochvennogo inst-ta in V. V. Dokuchayeve, Moscow,

1973.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

COMPARISON OF rm TYPES OF DEVICES FOR MARINE WWTIC SOUNDIM
[1... B. Volkonirskaya, G. A. Fonarev, pp 41-65]

The most urgent problem for interpretation of electromagnetic soundings using natural
fields is the problem of the influence of the horizontal geoelectric nonunifornities.

When performing magnetotelluric soundings in the sea, the effect of the nonuniformi-
ties can be especially perceptible, for the measuring devices can be in direct

proximity to these nonuniformities. In the theory of marine magnetotelluric sound-
ings, the 'rikhonov-Kan' yer bottom unit and separate magnetic device are considered
prospective [1].

In this paper a comparison is made between these two types of mgnetotelluric de-
vices.

Let us consider the two-dimensional model of nonuniformity. Let a plate of finite
thickness d consist of two halfplates in contact along the interface for x - 0 and
having conductivities 01 3‘ 02- At the top and bottom of the plate is an insulating

medium. The external inducing field is uniforn and equal to 30. Let us propose

met at. a depth of d1 I 6 there is a unit'ora field source 8 - {(50 , In this
case in [2] a method was proposed for gradual approximation to construét the approxi-
mate solution. According to this method for the m + l approximation the field com-
ponents are expressed as follows:

3:".(9 z)" 1331‘! o,0)L‘B—U‘EAL—m‘‘19!) '
-JB;(% (@Mdyo; (1)

mo! -
371.90% 'ZBWQID) “5}de <2)

B;pl(q.d)IZBa’I(q'd)_ $4. I “.5Ly‘f-ygal— d9" ' (3)

where I? (“2/ i0) is the Green function. Then for the first approximtion consid-

ering the expressions for the Green functions given in [3]. fron (l. 2, 3) it is
possible to obtain:

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELM-3W8,fad)”:(-if12é1(¢1;&$37c‘&sgz;y;q (4)
51a)--%¥IIB.1(B.A,)§(-Inge;cosgnz-

'dZLIMHI.-d;l)exP(-d,,g)-ﬂ; (5)
WIND-23vf‘aIB.'§(-l)?(8..d)lgéi‘ (6)

-(¢;-J;J{El(¢uy)?"‘_9-Ei(-¢My)e‘""}. ’
B;(q.d)-2f(8.,,d,)-ﬁlaﬁﬁfﬂsmmﬁga ‘ m

'ét:.-d;’.){Ei(d.,g)é‘"y-Ei(¢..9)6‘"y} .

Here

«am-u: en-n 2:3 *1'11'255/‘76

3" '"x/d; . 5-1.2...z

Let us consider the case where Bw(9-dl-&;(y.0)' and let us write the relations of
the components Bx/ByIz-d and Bylz-OIByIz-d’

E. ;%[go;gﬂ§ae:rgﬁ-11M}d;i —

EL, Z'aﬁaTi'n_o('l)"an—‘oéiQT- “)A ' (a)
where: A;;'El(dnzq)b‘:g-Ei(L'duyh‘fu-y}I ‘-

uaz‘éalugrgsue-m '

Byli-d Z'ﬁll‘ﬂx‘lmn a: “-dImM]. (9)

The most general method of interpreting the mgnetotelluric soundings in all cases
consists in direct calculetion and subsequent interpretation of the curve or, the
apparent resistance.

In the case of measuring by the‘rikhonov-Kan'yer bottom device the curve 01. 18 cal-
culeted by the formula:

3:13.423, .— (10)

where l/II|"‘—5:L I!

The methods of calculating the curve 9 for a gradient magnetic sounding are inves-
tigated in [6]. He shall use the for-nah:

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJRIOIFWCJAI.lEIE(M‘LY

 

:.o°r'Psm-E"I%-( d1¥%-2—']zfnmézdl ’ (n)

For our case - athiokplste -— this formula has a small error. Let us convert for-
mula (ll). For this purpose we make the assumption thatgdzln/Re#-

“'P'ﬂ'ﬁ%)‘<w’vb .

Then:

where X‘IIILJ;I;;Z£ .'

It is theoretically possible also to perform more exact calculations by formula (11).
but in this case it is necessary to perform the calculations on high speed computers.

In the figure there is a graph of the functions 191790 for different relations be-

tween the conductivities of two halfplatea. where we denote the apparent resistance
of a uniform plate as p0.

For the calculations of E./QJ;L$ and ~E?4LJLV by formulae (8, 9) we assumed that

v zao’
the measurements are performed in the sea at distances of 0.ld from the nonunifor-
mity. Hith approach of the observation point to the nonuniformity the relations
must be maintained qualitatively. The solid lines join the points calculated by

5/7

9

 

61/61
(8. 9) with limitation to the first term in the series considering smallness of

cozy. “01’; the dotted curves were obtained from the asymptotes of the formulas (8,

9) for 01 = a . Curve 1 is constructed for measurements by the Tikhonov—Kan'yar
method. Curvg 2 is constructed for the method of magnetic gradient sounding.

30

FOR‘OFIICIAI.USE|DNLY
FOR40FFﬂJAl.US£1NNLY

A comparison of the two devices permits the conclusion to be drawn that the Tikhonov-
Kan'yar botton device is significantly sore strongly subjected to the influence of

the nonunifornity. This indicates that the distortions in the electric field are
greater than in the magnetic field.

1.

2.

3.

4.

BIBLIOGRAPEY

H. .. Berdichevskiy. L. L. Vsn‘yan, 12V. AR 8883. PIZIKA ZEHLI (News of the
USSR Academy of Sciences. Earth Phyoics), No 11, 1969, p 51.

R. Trey-an, GEOHAGNETIZH I AERONOHIYA (Geomagnetisn and Aeronony), Vol 10, No 6,
1970, p 588.

R. Treyuan, GEOHAGNETIZH I AERONOHIYA, V01 10, No 3. 1970, p 678.

I. L. Trofinov. G. A. Fonarev. GEOHAGNETIZM I ABRONOMIYA, Vol 12, No 2, 1972,
p 301.

31

FOR‘OFFﬂJAI.USE(NVLY
FIII(HNHC1AI.USE(MVLY

MEASURING THE SEA HAVE-INDUCED ELECTRIC FIELD
[6. A. Fonarev, V. Yu. Semenov, pp 46-51]

It is known that during propagation of sea waves in the earth‘s magnetic field not
only magnetic. but also electric fields are induced. The calculation of the magni-
tude of the induced electric field based on the potential hydrodynamic theory of
motion of a fluid in a two-dimensional progressive wave. was performed by the authors
of [1, 5]. Analogous calculations for waves characterized by the eddy nature of
motion of the fluid in them were performed by the authors of reference [2]. Inas-
much as the process of induction of the electric field by sea waves is described

most simply by a mathematical model presented in the first papers. the analysis of
the measurement procedure and interpretation of the electric field of the waves is
performed on the basis of this model.

The electric field induced by sea waves is measured usually by the method of measur-
ing the potential difference between two different points in space inside the fluid.
The magnitude of the electric field potential d at any point of a two-dimensional
wave is described in the form [1]:

9(x, ; z,)-a(z,)tos(kx,-wt).

fluid particles in the wave and on the intensity of the constant magnetic field of

the earth; k - ZnIA, w - ZI/T, where A is the wavelength, and T is its period. The
waves are considered to be steady. propagated in the direction of the x-axis.

Let us consider the case of measuring the horizontal field induced by the wave. Let
us propose that the potential difference is measured between two points in the sea

lagging behind each other a distance L in the direction of propagation of the wave.
The magnitude of the recorded potential difference is then written in the form:

‘!('L/3 ; lo)‘1(L/3 ; Z.)'-2a(l;)5!n(§L)SInwt .‘

The expression for the potential difference. if it is measured in the vertical direc-
tion can be written in the form:

+06:Add)?»looL);Pl(l.)-a(z.ol;)jcosl(kmot),

32
FOR 0F1ﬂ€1A1,lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

presented in Figure 1. As the unit in the figure, the aaxﬂmua possible signal
picked up from the electrodes equal to 2a is used. Thus. the measured potential

zontal electric field of groups of waves on the recordings. This situation can be
realized when the spacing between the electrodes is equal to or a multiple of the
basic wavelength in the sea wave spectrun. For example, when aeasuring a horizontal
electric field in the sea with a depth of three meters waves with periods of 3.8 and

and 26 meters respectively [3]. The periods of these waves are close and, conse-
quently, the formation of beats on the electric field recording is possible. Thus.

ing of the potential difference of the horizontal electric field of the sea, it is
necessary to consider that the usually applied smoothing of the spectral density
can lead to significant reduction of the signal in the frequency range, the wave
lengths of which are less than the length of the neasuring base.

Now let us consider the experimental data. In Figure 2 spectra are presented for
the synchronously recorded amplitudes of the see wave and variations of the hori-
zontal electric field. As is obvious from the figure. the spectra of the investi-
gated processes differ noticeably: on the spectrum of the electric field recorded
in the direction perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation with a distance
between the electrodes of 300 neters. sharp. statistically significant "troughs" in
the spectral density are obvious at the same tine as analogous phenomena are not

observed in the wave spectrum. Thus. it is possible to propose that waves with

periods of about 10 and 20 seconds have a crest length equal to or a multiple of
300 meters.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lNDI!0l1NC1Al.lEﬂE(NNLV

 

Figure 1.

Thus, using the peculiarities of the procedure for observing the horizontal electric

field induced by the sea waves, it is possible to determine the relation between the
wavelength and the length of its crest and also directly to check the hydrodynamic

disperse relation using a spectral analysis of the recordings of this field.
The conclusions drawn are valid both for stationary neasuring bases and in the case

of moving electrodes. However, in the last case it is necessary to consider that

the recorded period of the electric field oscillations can fail to compare with the
sea wave period.

3‘

INJR OFIHCJAl,lﬂﬂE(HNLY
1.

2.

3.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

BIBLIOGRAPHY

G. A. Fonarev. GEOMAGNITNYYE ISSLBDOVANIYA (Geomgnetic Research), No 13, Moscow,
Nauka, 1971.

A. B. Leybo, V. Yu. Senenov. GWETIZH I AERONOHIYA (Goongnecian and Aero-
nomy), Vol 15, No 2. 1.975, p 231.

B. Moore, WEDENIYE V GIDRODINAMIKU I TEORIYU VOLN NA V003 (Introduction to ﬂy-
drodynanlce and Have Theory in the water), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdac, 1976.

V. S. Bychkov, S. S. Screkalov, HORSKIYE ”REGULYARNYYE VODNY (Irregular Sea
Haves), Moscow, Nauka, 1971.

M. S. [magnet-Higgins. H. E. Stern, R. Sta-n31, PAPERS PHYS. OCEANOG. METEOROL.

HASSACHUSLTTS INST. TEHCN. AND “0005 801.3 OCEANOG. INST. Vol 13. No 1, 1956.
p 1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USEIONLY

ESTIMATING ELECTRIC FIELDS CREATED BY A THO-DIMENSIONAL HAVE SPECTRUM
IN. N. Bogorodskiy, pp 52-61]

Hydrophysical electrical electrode studies are performed for the solution of a
number of scientific and practical problems. In this paper a study is made of the
possibilities of interpreting the data from the point of view of the theory of small-
amplitude potential waves. beginning with the concepts of sea waves as the probable
process having the property of ergodicity. In the linear approximation the surface
can be represented in the form of the sum of a large number of simple waves having
different amplitudes. lengths. propagation directions and random phases [1, 3, b].
The results are found in the form of integral spectra.

Let us introduce the carteaian coordinate system xoy, placing the origin of the co-

ordinates on the level of the undisturbed sea surface. The elementary wave. the
beam of which makes an angle 8 with the x—axis can be written in the form

§(t,y,z,f) -.a 345% earlobe -l(z wﬁoyMOU’ (1)

where ;(x, y. z. t) is the vertical deviation,

k - 2n/A is the wave number (A is the wave length),

m - 2n/T is the angular frequency (T is the wave period).
h is the depth of the sea,

c is an arbitrary phase shift.

Let us first define the electric potential caused in the water by the effect of the
earth's magnetic field Hx. Hy. H with monochrome (l). The results of studying the

electric field of a monochromatic wave [6] permits recording the electric potential
for such a wave in the form:

«pawn -c~ @060 -u, sm0]- will), (
2)

where Hx and "y are the components of the earth's magnetic field,
_ A “H‘.;;
C _- afar/11M“ is the phase velocity.

36

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The wave elevations will he represented in the fore of the sun of the large number
of nonochrones of the type of (l). describing each of the. in the form

Se. <1.y.:.i>=a(wiq,)lw—.o W.
I' WI“?! ' a) ‘H‘W’SBJ 1.501%!) ' (3)

In this case the total wave elevation can be represented in the fore:

Jami). f fancy/m6 W
u-m J's-n. ‘

(4)

.mM. (fume; .ysmw.

Here, in accordance with the papers by Yu. M. Krylov [l] and V. Pierbon [lo] we shall
consider that the phase :1.1 of each term of (3) is a random variable uniformly dis-

tributed in the interval from 0 to 21!. on the basis of which the value of X (x, y,
z. t) is also random. We shall also consider that the phase 813 is an aligned

ergodic function of the horizontal coordinatessnd time so that for the point A (11,
y . z ):
1 1

6&1 :55} (3:! 51,1) , (5)
and also
“a
a? 5"- =0
(6)

The total electric potential of the point A with respect to the bottom where it is
found to be equal to zero will he found by aux-ling the elementary terns of (2):

<f’(1.y.l.l)'-Z Z ‘Kl(w,0.l)-§q (£4.01), (7)

where for multiplicity of the recording the following Emotion is introduced:

91) (u,0,z) =CJH, (058) -!{t anal.) 32: 19-5.: . h) (8)

or. what amounts to the same thing:

$020.91)“ 4}“ it’ll”! ”‘61 #:5me [W12 (9)

The electric potential dispersion of the point (x. y, z. t) can now be written as
the sum of the individual contributions of the type:

My .3! Yuﬂﬂowaa-‘ﬁ; (m)

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On transition to continuity, the integral spectrum of the electric pot:ntial of the
point acquires the fora:

__ -9’
ma) - 24,1[Wmavaﬂaz0Mﬁ-dw <10

The intensity of the electric field 3(1, y, z, t) can also he considered as the
sun of the intensities created by the individual monochrome. From (7) we have:

M

5; :ﬂhﬂé‘hﬁfﬂﬂaﬂ 9/740. (12)

l (010‘! of". -k‘ (1 (050/ oysmgiy;
3 ( . .1!) _
[$ch +-

‘ : inwammewmo use}.

is-m Jpn.

r sm[w‘t '6le 'ka(1 6059145019121;

(13)

£,(z.y.z,:).l,¢%mz=

”Z ZkLW/a)“(%9ﬂa;$sm®- (14)

(3‘0! jl-n

I $043.51 '6"- Li‘- (I 0056?]- ¢g 59:01)]

When making the transition to the continuity the integral spectrum of the components
of the electric field intensity at the point acquires the torn:

__ .. sr .' .

[1" (I)= 3' //k‘(w)c&5 2(3 4) ‘l’quﬂﬁIJﬂMWéﬁ (15)
a -:r

-_ _ .. r '

[Z (Z)--2[-//k’(ar)w‘0 Yz(ﬂ’.9.l)(frz(0ﬂ)d0dw;\ (15)
o -r

_...-. o- 9"

[92(2) = 2!” j {k lady/:30 W70, 9.00/70, 05)“ aw); (17)

where wzau. e. 2) can he represented by expression (9) considering that k(w) is the
solution of the equation:

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICMNNCJAI.lEﬂE(HVLY

It is essential to note that for z > —h even a narrow region of angles 6 for which
e2(w. 6) ¢ 0 makes a defined contribution to the spectre of all three components of
the electric field vector. Prom formulas (12). (lb) and (15) it is obvious that

82 does not have correlation with Ex or By' Simultaneously it is obvious that the

the two-dimensional terms 21“ and 31” are distinguished only by the proportion-

ality factor which permits confirmation of the presence of the correlation between
any mutually perpendicular components of the horizontal intensity of the electric
field at the point with the exception of the isolated directions in which the cor-
relation changes sign.

In the following calculations we shall consider that the two-dimensional energy
spectrum of the electric potential b (u. v, a) is given as a function cf the wave
numbers u and v directed along the x and y axes. respectively. The variables u and
v will be introduced in terms of the variables m and 6 as follows:

a = ((0) cost?
224(9)) m0

where k(w) is the solution of equation (l8).

(19)

In the new varitbles the expression for the integral spectrum of the electric poten-
tial will be written in the form:

52(3) 3 2" lulqual, 1],!) dd‘dy_ (20)

-s-~o-

In particular, the spectrum b2(u, v. a) can be given in the form:

' a"(w,0) 5W wﬂ z
54 (u, v.2)- ”EYE-é?) , (21)

where the inverse transition from the wave numbers (u, v) to the variables (w, 8) is
easily realizable considering (18):

82(6), 9) ‘1‘”(0’, 0,2): 6721(0), 8); v(w,0),1]-
. k(w)- 2,531 , (22)
however, further conclusions do not explicitly depend on the form of expression (20).

Let us consider the potential difference "AB between the points A(x, y. z) and 8(x2.

’2’ z)z Let us mentally connect the points A and B by a straight line making the

8081e U with the X-axis and let us consider. according to the monograph by Yu. H.
Krylov [l], the course of the potential along this line at some fixed point in time.

The potential spectrum along the line AB [Eltd'l L expressed in terms of the wave
number u' taken along the ray:

39
FOR'0FFKJA1.USE(NHLY
FIHICIHHIJAI.IMSEI(MVLY

A

.9. £11.

23
yry‘ , ()

emerging fron the origin of the coordinates of the initial epectrun h2(u, v, s)
has the form:

' ' I‘ 'I “Z ’
g 63%": 0:15,], (my a , (24)

where .
u’:uco.s'0 'l/éiﬂvé
v’=-u smo‘vcas’é - (25)

Inasmuch as the spectrun (26) and the autocorrelation function for the potential
I; k . I- ) with respect to the sane direction are uniquely related [5]. we have:

ﬁg (Ra‘s-riff 6; (aft) wsku’du". (26)
0

Now we can write the dispersion of the potential difference st the points A and B
in terns of the known values of

£77m.z)=(¢",-¢:‘)==z[<mdram] <2"

where

 

12:! . 2. - 2
___(.Z: In) (9: y) (28)

02(2) is the dispersion of the aligned function 0(1). for example, (11), (20).
The magnitude of the sutocorrelstion function of the electric potential with respect

to direction entering into expression (27) can be represented in the form of the
integral frequency spectrum if we consider that free (26), (25), (24). (20) and (19)

it follows that: ‘7
ligvgﬂ=1§J‘ﬂw56;ksm0,4w5[kkw5(0-92’dq

(29)
from which considering (18) we have:
x“ ,2). a5[k,z,k(w m. . (30)
where I ' .
ae ram )J .1 MW .
a! ”Wan/um)
40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 [2’ 571MB kw 911w5[kkw5(0 9MB
W: a:
I“ (Mk/u " )
d”. “'21 W- ,

In the case where the spacing betwen the electrodes is large. that is, for

n»X,Z s%(&zﬂ~0,. on

where f. is the average crest length expression (27) degenerates, acquiring the form:

EEUF%ZFHL " on

In the special case vhere the wave spectru- is linited to a colpsretively narrow
frequency band Au and the directions A6 (swell), applying the theorem of the scan
to the expressions (ll), (16) and (17) and seeming, without liniting the generality
e - 0. considering (32) we have:

'E=k=(a7)$‘(z)=gk‘(m(7‘a); ' <33)
7 .
Eyso. . ‘ on

The courseof the horizontal electric field intensity Ex in the vicinity of the
point (x, y. z. t) can now be approximated in the fora:

[x (1,991). gum/(7‘73 mp: .145) .2], (13,

Sometimes instead of the mean square values for the speed of the estimates it is

convenient to use the nean nodulus values. As a result of the proposition of
narrouness of the frequency band we have:

4177(2) =Z%IU(1)I

and it is possible to rewrite (13) in the fern:
£11.51, If): guaﬂl/(zﬁsmkt 4(0); 05]. (13)

Expressing 1:03) in terns of the average wavelength X, we have the uorking for-ole
for estimating the mean amplitude of the horizontal conponent of. the electric field '
anal!) at a depth 2 for the swell propagated from the direction coinciding with the
x—ax s:

 

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIIICMNHCIAI.USEIDNLY

ﬁ[£x<z?l=%—‘/IT"” add/WIS

Considering (13), (13) and (31), we have:

m[9‘(2)]= Ell/T), -- {71W (35)

where the sign 3; denotes the average amplitude. Let us note that the expressions
(as) and (36) do not depend on the forn (10) of the function 4.20», e, z) or on the
proposition (6) which require [2] confirmation. Significant generality of the
expressions (35) and (36) makes it possible to use than for experimental checking of
the relations (6) and (10).

Conclusions:

1. within the framework of the linear theory of small-amplitude waves propagated
in a sea of arbitrary fixed depth and interacting with the earth's magnetic field,
two-dimensional integral spectra are obtained for the electric potential and three
components of the electric field at the point where the two-dimensional spectrum of
the wave elevations on the sea surface is given. It is demonstrated that for all
horizons above the bottom, even the narrow nonzero region of the two—dimensional
wave spectrum creates nonzero spectra of all three components of the electric in-

tensity field; here the correlation between the vertical and horizontal components
of the electric intensity within the framework of the linear model is absent. and

the horizontal components of the electric intensity, in general, are correlated.

2. In the general case of a two-dimensional spectrum of the electric potential
connected with the two-dimensional wave spectrum, the expression is found for the
integral spectrum of the electric potential difference arising at the ends of an
arbitrarily oriented horizontal base as a function of its length and orientation.

It is demonstrated that if the length of the base is much greater than the mean

wave length (or the mean crest length). and the spectrum of the electric potential
difference at its ends will be equal to twice the spectrum of the electric potential
of the point located at the same depth, and it does not depend on the length and
direction of the base. The relation found from its experimental study of the
variation with depth of the electric potential spectrum. independently of the
propositions regarding the distribution of the phase shifts and the damping with
depth and also independently of the presence of a "zero" point for electric measure-
ments.

3. In the special case of limiting the two-dimensional wave spectrum by the narrow
frequency band and propagation angles (swell). operating relations have been ob—
tained for finding the mean amplitude values of the electric potential and hori-
zontal component of the electric intensity at the point where, for example, by the
measurenent results the magnitude of the mean square (or the mean modulus) value

of the aligned potential difference on a "long" base and the mean wave length are
known. These relations also do not depend on the propositions of the course of the
electric potential field with depth.

The author expresses his sincere appreciation to G. A. Ponarev and V. Yu. Semenov
who looked at the paper and made a number of valuable comments.

42

FIHR¢ﬂWﬂCJAl.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Yu. H. Krylov. SPEKTRAL‘NYYE METODY ISSLEDOVANIYA I RASCEIB‘IA VETROVYKH VOUI
(Spectral Methods of Investigating and Calculating Hind-print: Haves), Lenin-
grad, Gidroncteoizdat, 1966.

A. B. Leybo, V. Yu. Smnov. GBOHAGNE‘I‘IZH I AERONOHIYA (Geousnetisn and Aero-
nomy). Vol 15, No 2, 1975.

M. S. Longuet-Higgins, VETROWYB VOLNY (Wind-Driven Haves). IL, 1962.
V. J. Pearson. VETROVYYE VOLNY, IL. 1962.

V. V. Solodovnikov, A. S. Uskov, STATISTICBESKIY ANALIZ OU'YEKTOV REGULIROVANIYA
(Statistical Analysis of Adjust-ant Targets), Moscow, Mashgiz, 1960.

G. A. Fonarcv. GMGNITNYYE ISSLEDOVANIYA (Gsomgnetic Research), No 13, Moscow,
Nauka, 1971.

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ItIl(HﬂﬂCJA1.USE(HVLY

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF THE ANOHALOUS HAGNBTIC FIELD IN THE WORLD OCEAN
IV. C. Larkin, V. N. Lugovenko, A. G. Popov. pp 62-79]

In accordance with the work program of the Soviet Antarctic Expeditions from 1970 to

1976 on the expeditionary vessels, diesel electric "Ob'." diesel electric "Navarin"
and scientific research vessel "Professor Vite." measurements were made along the

way of the modulus of the total intensity of the earth's magnetic field.

The surveys were made along the longest routes.uhich were in the Atlantic and
Anarctic Oceans (Figure l). The total length of the processed marine magnetic pro-
files is about 100.000 km.

Magnetic observations were performed by the co-workers of the IZHIRAN Institute us-
ing the towed marine quantum T-magnetometer providing for obtaining field values
with accuracy to 3? gamma. The mean square error of the surveys, including the
errors for field variation, inaccuracy in gridding the vessel, and deviation
amounted to about 135 gammas.

All the data obtained on the sparse profile grid permit the solution of the most

general problems with respect to interpretation of the anomalous magnetic field
and its relations to the geological structure of the ocean floor.

At the present time throughout the entire world interest is increasing in the
exploitation of the mineral resources of the world ocean at greater and greater
depths and at greater and greater distance from the shore.

The revelation of the history of the world ocean. its tectonic regionalization are
important theoretical problems. the solution of which is necessary, in particular,
also to discovery of the laws of the location of mineral deposits [1].

Magnetometry is perhaps the only geophysical method which can provide information
not only about the structure of our planet, but also about the evolution of its
development. The geophysical analysis of the anomalous magnetic field in the oceans
is an effective means of determining the chronological, kinematic and geometric
characteristics of movement of the lithospheric plates.

Since the results of the hydromagnetic survey are a continuous recording of the geo-
magnetic field along individual profiles of great extent. it is expedient to sub-

ject the anomalous magnetic field along these profiles to a statistical analysis.
The expediency of a statistical analysis is connected with the fact that it permits

66
FOR¢OFHKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

        
  

  
  

 

: 'EIIII L' '
IIIIIIIIIIRHHIIIIIEIHIIIII'IIIIIHIIIIII
Illllllllﬂtlllllll: ﬁllilllllﬂitlﬂll

E ,
IIIIIIIEIIIEIEEIIIII JEEEEJEEEEISIIIIII

mallii'jdijﬂﬁilﬁlillikiiiil

———’

  

has:

      

Figure 1.

Key: a. chart of the magnetic measurement routes
b. Canary Islands
c. Bellingshausen Ilee
d. Orkney Islands
. Sandwich Islands
. Novolazarevakaya station
. Holodezhnaya
. Amery
. lilrnyy
. Vostok
k. Leningradakaya
1. Kerguelen

urn-zooms

discovery of the principal defining properties of the field which can be related to

the basic peculiarities of the structure of the ocean floor. In contrast to the
usually accepted procedure when individual anossliea are interpreted, in a statis-
tical analysis preliminary separation of the field as a united process into its
individual elements takes place, each of which reflects sose property of the
anomalous mgaetic field which. in turn. is related to ease peculiarity of the
structure of the ocean crust.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us present a brief description of the investigated statistical parameters and
their physical meaning.

The dispersion of the anomalous magnetic field so basically represents the charac-

teristic of magnetization of the magnetic sources' (as a rule. basalts making up
the sea bed).

The correlation radius of the anomalous magnetic field r 3 reflects the horizontal

dimensions of the anomalies. which is basically connectes'with the depth of the
sources and their horizontal dimensions.

The mathematical expectation of the anomalous magnetic field (H) represents the total
effect: inaccuracy of approximation of the normal field, average depth of sources,
measure of magnetization, and so on.

For estimation of the general properties of the field and its relation to the geo-
logical structure of the earth's crust. a statistical analysis has been used more
than once. Thus, in reference [2] a correlation analysis of the anomalous magnetic
field of the Pacific Ocean was performed. and the difference in values of r and
R was noted for the mid-ocean rise and slopes. Tectonic mapping was carries'gut
basically with respect to the general pattern of distribution of the anomalous
magnetic field (the amplitude of the anomalies, their horizontal dimensions) using
data on the statistical characteristics of the anomalous magnetic field (the dis-
persion and correlation radius). In reference [3] a statistical analysis is pre-
sented of the circular latitudinal profile of the vertical component of the mag-
netic field passing near 40° south latitude. and the possibility of applying the
autocorrelation analysis for regionalizstion of the anomalous fields is demonstra-
ted. The statistical characteristics of the anomalous magnetic field in the cen-
tral part of the Atlantic Ocean were investigated in reference [4] in which the
results of the autocorrelation analysis are also presented. In this paper regiona-
lization of the sea bed is carried out with respect to the morphological attri-
butes, and a study is made of the behavior of the statistical parameters within the
limits of the isolated zones. In reference [5] a study is made of the properties of
the anomalous magnetic field in the vicinity of the Indian Ocean using the sliding
energy spectrum procedure. A statistical analysis of the anomalous magnetic field
of the Indian Ocean was also carried out in reference [6] in which a method was
developed for quantitative discription of the variations of the anomalous magnetic
field on long individual profiles.

however, up to now the problem of the difference or similarity in the statistical
properties of the anomalous magnetic field of the continental and ocean crust has
not been finally solved. Thus, in reference [7] the conclusion is drawn that the
structure of the continental crust differs theoretically free the structure of the
ocean crust, which finds it reflection in the difference of the statistical proper-
ties of the anomalous magnetic field. On the contrary, in reference [8] the
authors arrive at the conclusion of similarity of the average characteristics of
the magnetic field of the continents and oceans. This difference in points of
View obviously is related first with the fact that when analyzing the anomalous
magnetic fiefd various procedures were used. and secondly, the fact that in these
papers the regionalization of the territory of the dry land and the oceans as uni-
form regions was not clearly carried out in the sense of the geological structure
of the region.

46

FOR OFINCJAI.1EHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In references [2, 9] an estimate is made of the statistical properties of the
anomalous magnetic field separately for different tectonic provinces and it was
demonstrated that the tectonic provinces uniform in the genesis sense have station-

ary anomalous magnetic fields. For this purpose in order more precisely to define
the concept of the nature of the anomalous magnetic field of the ocean crust and

its relation to the structure of the sea bed, we made estimates of the statistical
properties of the field along a nutter of profiles of the marine magnetic survey.

The statistical analysis procedure was identical to the one used in reference [9]
in which basically an analysis of the anomalous magnetic fields of the continents

was performed.

The ocean floor can be divided into four large provinces differing with respect to
origin and development [4]: the midocean ridges, the slopes of the ridges, the
deep sea trenches and coastal regions. Therefore when generalizing the statistical
analysis of the anomalous magnetic field. average field characteristics were deter-
mined separately for each province.

The procedure for estimating the statistical properties of the field was reduced to
the following. The normal field T was isolated for all profiles of the surveys by
representation of it by aspherical uharmonic: series with n - 9 harmonics. Then the

obtained difference ATa - T - Tu was centered, and the statistical parameters of

the anomalous magnetic field were calculated for the aligned values of the anomalous
field.

In order to obtain information on the statistical properties of the anomalous mag-
netic field along the profiles, a special program was used to perform the calcula-
tions on a digital computer. The essence of the program consists in the following:

1) Information is input to the digital computer on the profile of the field T (the
coordinates of the points of rotation of the profile, observed values of T every 5
km, the magnitude of the secular variation).

2) For each value of the field I the normal field Ta and the field ATa are calcula-
ted.

3) The file of values of ATa formed is aligned for the segment of the profile L
which must "slide" along the initial profile. For the aligned values of the enema-
lous magnetic field. the autocorrelation function and other statistical character-
istics are calculated .

4) Then the sliding segment L is shifted along the file of values ATa by some amount

AL. the calculation is repeated. then a new shift by AL takes place, 8and so on to
the end of the profile.

For all routes L was selected equal to 1020 km, and AL - 125 km.

The selected model of the normal field is not always sufficiently high quality. As
a result of analysis of the mathematical expectation of several sections in the
Antarctic Ocean it was discovered that inexact alignment of the anomalous magnetic
fields along the profiles is connected with the fact that:

l) the variable part of the field is not considered in the analysis;

47

FOR OFEKJA1.USE(NNLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2) the model of the spherical harmonic series approximates the main geomgnetic
field in southern Latitudes with some error (the mathematical expectation reaches
150 gams).

By the results of statistical processing of the analyzed profiles of the anomalous
magnetic field we constructed maps of the graphs of some of the statistical parame-
ters. In Figures 2 and 3 the maps of the graphs are presented for the parameter a,
(0 - fig ) and the correlation radius to 3 of the anomalous field.

The maps were constructed as follows. All of the analyzed sections were applied to
the base with a scale of l:l$,000,000. and the profiles of the sliding uglnents were
numbered along the profiles.

The lines for the arrangement of the profiles corresponded to the median value of
each of the investigated statistical parameters when constructing the graphs of
these parameters along the profiles. The values of the parameters exceeding the
median were plotted to the north (for suhlatitudinal profiles) or to the east (for
submeridianal profiles) of the profile line and they were plotted on the maps by
solid lines on the corresponding vertical scale for each of the statistical parame-
ters. The dotted lines designate the values of the parameters which are less than
the nedian value.

When analyzing the laps of the graphs of the statistical parameters it is necessary
to consider first of all the requirement of co-dimensionality in which the relation
is laid out between the choice of the length of the analyzed section and the size
of the tectonic structures. The selected length of the profile 1020 km, which is
optimal for statistical representativeness of the analysis can be recognized as
comensurate with the large tectonic structures such as the ocean trenches, the
slopes of the midocean rises and the seamounts themselves. Secondly, it is neces-
sary to consider the requirement of sameness of the method of obtaining the
statistical characteristics of the anomalous magnetic field over all the ocean
profiles and for the aeromagnetic profiles on the continent [9], to solve the prob-
lem of similarity and difference of the statistical characteristics of the anomalous
magnetic field for sections of the continent and ocean.

The parameter a (Figure 2) is distributed most regularly. 0n the map it is quite
clear that the increased values of this parameter are associated with the regions
of the midocean rises. Thus, for example, the southern part of the Midatlantic
Ridge, the western and eastern branches of the Indian seamounts have values of

0 . 170-180 games. The deep sea trenches are characterized by reduced values of
the parameter 0 reaching about 100 game here. As for the very large values of
a - 220-250 galmas in the vicinity of the African-Antarctic Ridge on the Pacific
Ocean seamount and also in the African-Antarctic and New Zealsnd trenches, this is

obviously connected with the fact that the profiles of the hydromagnetic survey
in these regions run along the linear anomalous zones.

From the graphs of r0 3 (Figure 3) it is obvious that the minimum values of this

parameter (5-6 km) are characteristic for the majority of midocean ridges if the
survey profiles are run across the strike of the ridges. The deep water trenches

located at significant distances from the axis of the ridges have values of re 3
for the sane arrangement of the profiles with respect to the strike of the '

structures. three or four times greater than over the ridges themselves, and they
are equal to 16-25 km.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
K
0
.<

HMS’NMOO-OO'D

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2.

. map of the graphs 0 of the field (AI)a
. South America

. Africa

. Bellingehauaen

. Novolaurevekaye

. Malodezhnaya

. lenyy

. Vostok

. Antarcuca

. Leningredekaye

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The slopes of the mldocean ridges of seamounts occupy an intermediate position
with respect to the values of o and r0 3.

Since the magnitude of the parameter r0 3 is influenced by the direction of the pro-

file with respect to the strike of the anomalies. when generalizing the results, the
values of the correlation radius of the anomalous magnetic field were used which

characterized the anomalous field along the profiles cutting defined structures
across their strike.

In connection with the fact that the magnitude of some of the statistical parameters
(especially the dispersion and correlation radius) is essentially influenced by the

height of the magnetic survey with respect to the magnetic sources, it is necessary
to reduce the obtained values to the identical relative level of the survey.

For this purpose the calculated mean statistical parameters of the anomalous mg-
netic field for profiles cutting the middle ridges across their strike were recalcu-
lated upward so that the recalculated values of the parameters gave a representation
of the properties of the anomalous field on the same altitude with respect to the
magnetic sources. The parameterso and r0 3 for the midocean ridges were recalcula-

ted to a height of h = 2 km, for the difference Ah between the average depth of the
ocean over the ridge (~2 km) and the average depth above the trenches (~b km) is
about 2 km. The parameters of the anomalous magnetic field for the slopes were
recalculated for Ah - 1.5 km, and Ah of the trenches was taken equal to zero. The
parameters of the anomalous magnetic field for the coastal regions were not recalcu-
lated, for it is difficult to estimate the effect of the magnetically active sources
of the ocean crust in this zone as a result of the presence of magnetic sources of
the continental shelf.

if we approximate the correlation funct 0? of the anomlous magnetic field by an

exponential-cosine function: R - R e'“ T cos BT, in which the parameter a de-
fines the rate of decrease of the function R, and the parameter 8 reflects the basic

periodicity of the tuner ion. we obtain the following mean values of the parameters
of the anomalous magnetic field for different provinces:

Before re—
Statistical parameters -calculation

321.00 2 10225 2
0.1 km'1 0.08 Iun‘1
0.11. rad-km‘l 0.12 m-n‘l

     
  
  

  
 
   

Ocean provinces

 

Nidocean ridges

     
 
     
 
     
      
    

6 km 8 km
Slopes of the ridges 22500 2 1690 2__1
0.7 mild 0.7 km 1
0.09 rad-km 0.039 rad'km' ,
9 km 13.8 km

       
 

In Figure A the relation is presented for the mean value of the parameter 0 as a
function of the distance to the center to the middle ridge with respect to isolated

zones --- the solid line corresponds to the initial values of the parameter. and
the dotted line, to the recalculated ones.

51
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
INJR OWWNCJAI.IJSE2(H§LY

In Figure 5 an analogous relation is presented for the parameter.

The upper solid line corresponds to the average values of the parameter r0 3 with
respect to all profiles. the loser solid line, with respect to the profiles cutting
across the midocean ridges and the dotted line is the analog of the last curve

recalculated upward.

UM“ ; '

150

  

100

cpalumto - (a) Lb) I; d)
onauuvnxvc x u 6' l a m

n as us run n‘oauaruf: 2:3J:::' Is"? on! e -

Figure lo. Graph of the statistical parameter 0‘.

Key: a. midocean rises c. deep sea trenches
b. slopes of the rises d. coastal regions

Since the parameter a is a function of the degree of magnetization of the sources,
it is possible to arrive at the conclusion that in the last ten million years the
magnetization of the rock has decreased somewhat, and at a significant distance
from the rise the rock formed several tens of millions of years ago has still less

magnet izat ion .

This conclusion finds its confirmation in reference [4], the authors of which.
estimating the distribution of the natural residual magnetization of the ocean re-
sults and the dependence of the amplitudes of the ocean anomalies on the depth of
the floor and on the distance to the axis of the midatlantic ridge arrive at an
analogous conclusion: the decrease in the intensity of the magnetic anomalies on
going away from the axis of the ridge is connected not only with an increase in
depth of the floor. but, primarily, with variation of the nature of the sources of

the anomalies.

The average values of to 3 of the anomalous magnetic field turned out to be equal
to 6 km, 9 km and 20 km. respectively, for the middle ridges, slopes and trenches.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INHICNHHCJAL.USE(NNLV

H; .m

l "
£0

 

cpeaumlo - (b) . 69‘0"“: .3")! ate
ﬁﬁﬁ‘éW" nggﬂﬁ. rxomohmu ' pa WIN
Figure 5. Graph of the correlation radius r0 3
Vey- a. r0 3, km d. deep vatar trenches

b. midocean rises e. coastal regions

c. slopes of the rises

After recalculation of the survey for one altitude, new values turned out to be 8
km and 13.8 km, respectively. for the middle ridges and their slopes. This fact
obviously indicates an increase in the horizontal dimensions of the blocks into
which the ocean crust is broken on going away from the axis of the middle rise.

The unrecalculated values obtained for the parameters 0 and r0 3 coincide well with

the analogous parameters of the anomalous magnetic field calculated in reference [6],
in spite of the fact that the authors of this paper applied another procedure for
estimating the statistical properties of the anomalous magnetic field: another
model of the normal field. another (and inconstsnt) length of the investigated
profile and an entirely different stepsize of the sampling of the field values

A): - 0.5 km. This indicates reliability of the results that we obtained and also
that the sample of initial values of the field used by us (Ax - 5 km) was sufficient
in the first approximation to discover the frequency properties of the field even in
the vicinity of the midocean rises, for the difference in values of the parameter
r0.3 which we obtained in reference [6] does not exceed 1 to 1.5 km.

From what has been discussed above it follows that the statistical properties of the

ocean are different for its different geomorphological provinces. Therefore it is
expedient to compare individual uniform provinces of the oceans among each other,
and these provinces with the uniform regions on the continents.

For example, if we compare the anomalous magnetic fields of the most ancient plat-
forms (of the Siberian type) with the anomalous magnetic fields of the youngest
midocean ridges. the difference in horizontal dimensions of the magnetic anomalies

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FI”!CHHﬂ(1AI.lHﬂE(NULY

is isolated clearly (the median of the distribution of the parameter ro of the
anomalous magnetic field of the Siberian platform is 22.5 km). This prégably is

connected with different horizontal dimensions of the blocks of the continental

and ocean crust and. possibly. is defined by different thickness of the entire litho-
sphere within the limits of the compared regions. A comparison of analogous parame-

ters for the same platform and deep water ocean trenches does not give a noticeable
difference which obviously is caused by approximately identical thickness of the
lithosphere of the compared regions.

In connection with the fact that the analysis of the anomalous magnetic field has
great significance for the creation of new global tectonics (plate tectonics), we
studied the anomalous magnetic field in the southern part of the Atlantic Ocean
also from the point of view of the hypothesis of expansion of the ocean floor.

Two sublatitudinal profiles of the marine magnetic survey were subjected to analysis.
the location of which is presented in Figure 6. From a comparison of the observed
value of the field with the curves for the time variations of the field on the same
days when the observations of the magnetic field were made along the profiles in

Figure 7 it is obvious that the measurements were taken on days with undisturbed
magnetic field.

Profile I (Figure 7) has the picture of the anomalous magnetic field which is typi-
cal of the midocean rises. As for profile 11. although it is appreciably south of
the South Atlantic ridge and in the bottom relief of the ocean in this part there is
no significant rise as occurs in the vicinity of profile I, the picture of the
anomalous magnetic field along profile II is astonishingly similar to that which is
observed in profile I.

60 50 AD 50 20 10 0 IO

   

     

      

 

  

no w _
*0 to
so ' so
a!
10 0

Figure 6. Location of profiles I and II.

54

FOR 0F11C1Al.USIZ(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

 

 

 

r—“—‘ . - "

Graphs of TH and Ta along the profiles I and II.

Key: a. profile I
h. profile 11

Considering this fact and also based on the data on the seismic activity in the
vicinity of profile II [10] and the presence in this region of s slight rise of the
ocean floor, we have drawn the conclusion of a continuation of the South Atlantic
Rise from Bouvet Island southwest in the direction of the Antarctic continent.

Thus, it is possible to consider that the rift system of the South Atlantic Ridge

has its continuation to the southwest, and in the vicinity of Bouvet Island there

is a node from which three rift systems radiate analogously to one which is ob-

served in the center of the Indian Ocean. Estimates of the separation of the ocean
floor made by profiles I and II confirm identical rate of separation of the ocean .
floor in the South Atlantic and in the vicinity of the southern Sandwich archipelligot$

Generalizing the results of the studies, it is possible to draw the following con-
clusiona:

1. Regular variation of the statistical properties of the field in various parts of
the World Ocean is demonstrated.

2. It is shown that the magnetization of the ocean rock and horizontal dimensions
of the blocks of the ocean crust vary uniformly as a function of the distance to the
axis of the ridges.

3. When comparing the spectral composition of the anomalous magnetic field of con—
tinents and oceans, differences are discovered in the spectrum of the midocesnic
rises and ancient continental platforms. which indicates a difference in structure
of the ocean and continental crust of these regions.

a. In the spectral composition of the ancient platforms and deep water trenches no

noticeable difference is detected which indicates similarity in the structure of

these regions and also that the thickness of the lithosphere under these structures
in practice is identical.

5. The difference in frequency properties of the anomalous magnetic field 4°95 “0‘ dis-
appear after recalculating the survey level for one altitude.

55

INDR OFFICIAL USI:(HVLY
6.

FINICMOWCJAI.USEIHNLY

On the basis of analysis of the constructed maps of the graphs, an effort is

made at tectonic regionaliaation of the ocean floor.

7.

A continuation of the South Atlantic Ridge to the southwest of Hoover Island in

the direction of the Antarctic continent was discovered, and the conclusion was
drawn of the existence of a node in the vicinity of Bouvet Island fron which three
rift systems radiate.

1.

3.

5.

6.

9.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

V. V. Fedynskiy, V. Ye. Khalil, HINERAL'NYYE RBSURSY HIROVOGO OKEANA (Mlnetal
Resources of the Horld Ocean), Moscow, Nauka, 1974.

H. A. Effendiyeva, ANOHAL'NOYE NAGNITNOYE POLE TIKNOGO OKEANA I EGO SVYAz' SO
STROYENIYEM OKEANICIIESKOGO DNA. AVNREF. KAND. DISS. (Anomalous Magnetic Field
of the Pacific Ocean and Its Relation to the Structure of the Ocean Floor.
Author's Review of Candidates Dissertation), Leningrad, 1970.

Ye. N. Roze, H. A. Bffendiyeva, GEOHAGNETIZH I AERONOHIYA (Geomagnetiam and
Aeronomy), Vol 8, No 4, 1968.

Ye. G. Mirlin, et 81., ISSLEDOVANIYE P0 PROBLEMS RIPTOVYKH ZON HIROVOGO OKBANA
(Investigation of the Problem of Rift Zones in the Horld Ocean), Moscow, Nauka,
1974.

V. N. Lugovenko, A. N. Pushkov, METODIKA GEOFIZICHBSKIICH ISSLDOVANIYE OICEANOV
(Procedure for Geophysical Studies of the Oceans), Moscow, Nauka, 1974.

H. A. Roeser, “Fourier Analysis of widely Spaced Magnetic Profiles from the
Northwest Indian Ocean," GEOL. IB. £2, Bannover, 1974, p 81.

V. N. Belugina, E. A. Burtseva, V. N. Lugovenko, N. N. Lugovenko, IEZISY DOKLADOV
VIII KONFBRENTSII PO POSTOYANNOHU MAGNITNONM POLYU, PALEOHAGNETIZMM I SVOYSTVAH
GORNYKH POROD CH. I. POSTOYANNOYB GEOHAGNITNOYE POLE (Topics of Reports of the
8th Conference on the Constant Magnetic Field, Paleomagnetism and the Properties
of Rock. Part 1. Constant Geomagnetic FieId), Moscow, 1970.

T. N. Simonenko, T. A. Gotshkova, A. A. Petrova, TBZISY DOKLADOV VIII KONPBREN-

TSII PO POSTOYANNOHU HAGNITNOHU POLYU, PALEOHAGNBTIZMU I SVOYSTVAH GORNYKH POROD,
CH. I. POSTOYANNOYE GEOHAGNITNOYE POLE, Moscow, 1970.

V. N. Lugovenko, SIATISTICHESKIY ANALIZ ANOHAL'NOGO MAGNIINOGO POLYA TERRITORII

SSSR (Statistical Analysis of the Anomalous Magnetic Field of the Territory of
the USSR), Moscow, Nauka, 1974.

10. I. S. Kulon. RAZRASTANIYE OKEANICHESKOGO DNA I DRBYF HATERIKOV (Expansion of the

Ocean Floor and Drift of the Continents). Leningrad, Nedra, 1973.

COPYRIGHT: IZHIRAN, 1975

10845

CSO:

8144/1460
END
56

IYHICMNWCJAI.USE‘ONLY