APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOOSOROOO“ 000100544)
TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 6/79)

lL $.JCDNNT'PlKNJCDAJWCNﬂS RESEJNRCJi SENUVNCE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mrl'l'.’

JPRS publicatiwn~ curtain Information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agencv
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSIlIP OF
HATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOEEICIAL USE ONLY.
_ 3. Reelpleu'e Areeuioe No.

open an
29 Janua 1979

. ‘- l N .

3 ' I O
TWSLATIONS ON 0551! SCIENCE AND TECIINOLOGY - PﬂYSICAL
SCIENCES AND TECRNOLOCY, (FOUO 6/79)

_" °‘“‘“"“
9-

- Penance-u chaauaetioa Nose and Mduu IO. Proloct/Teeh/Iuk Uni. No.
Joint Publication Reaeerch Service
1000 north Globe Road

Arlington. virginia 22201

   
   

  

      
 
     
      
   
   
    
     
   
   
   
   
    
     
           
       
       
     
     
         
    
   
   

 
 
 

 
  

H. Contact alt NO.

    

u. Spoaeerlog Organization Hale ead Mdteu

e

 

I). T o! Re a Petlod
cm.“ 9°“

Aa above

Abeuetu

  

The report containa intonation on aeronautics: astronomy and aetrophyaica;
etnoapheric aciencee; chenietry; earth eciencee and oceanography; electronics
and electrical engineering; energy converaion; nateriela; mathematical
aciencea; cybernetica. conputera; aechanical. industrial. civil, and urine
engineering; cathode and equipment; niaaile technology; navigation,
co-unicationa. detection. and comteraeaeuree. nuclear ecience and technology;
ordnance; phyaica; propulaion and tuela; epace technology: and ecientieta

and acientific organization in the phyeical aciencee.

     

. ey «nowhere-«Ana ue. eoaeevi'lete

 

USSE Electronica Mieaile Technology
Aeronautice Electrical Engineering ugugation and
betronony Energy Conversion Comicatione
Aatrophyeice Heteriala Detection and
Ataoapheric Sciencee Hathenatica Comterneaauree
Che-iatry Mechanical Engineering nuclear Science and
Coeputere Civil Engineering technology
Cybernetica lnduatriel Engineering Ordnance
:acrth Sciezcee ﬂarine Engineering Phyaice
eano re
"k Menﬂie‘oeloppez-Eded Tune 23;: igzﬂmggmu

"a. W11 ”en/Creep 01,03,0‘
ll. Availability State-eat

  
   

  

.07.08.09.10.11.12.13.14.16.17,18.19.20.21.22

m omcul m. 0.1,. “.1.“ WW
lube: or eopm menu. m- .ms 1‘ . “

tween.» coco. nut - m6 '0“ MY .‘ unmo wagon.“ near."
TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(F000 6/79)

Coureurs

ELECTRMICS AND ELECTRICAL MMNG

The Raaonance Array and lta Application to the benign of
Solid-State Hicrome Devicea

(I. V. bebulev, V. G. Alybln; m2 RADIOELEKTRONIIA.

(kt 78)....oeoooooooeceooooeoeeoaeeoeoeoeoeeeoaooeeeeeeo

taunting the Propertiea of Periodic Structurea for
Multibeal Hicrovave Devices
(1'. P. Dnbrovlm, et al.; 1W2 RADIOWONIKA,

m‘ 78)..oaeeaeoeoeeoeoeooeoee...eoooeooeoeaeeooeeoeoooo

GEOPHYSICS, 45mm AND SPACE

Experimental Investigation of Oacillationa of a Free
Surface Induced by Internal Haven
(1. s. Dolina. et al.; IZVES‘I'IYA mm: W 8881!,
nzzu Am 1 0mm. No 11. 1978).................

Internal Haves Generated by Local Perturbation in a No-
Layer Stratified Plaid

(I. V. Sturova; IMSTIYA m1 am: 5883. nzm
mm! om. M11.1978).OOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC mmunons

Vaevolod Vladi-irovich Fedynakiy (Obituary)
(mm mm, No lo, 1978)..................

mucauous
The '008' mechanic Calculator

(mm 008 (POSOIIYA DLYA mm
mm W), 1978)..eeooeeaeeooeeooeoooeeeee

Pass.

12

19

2b

37

-a- [III-ussa-zasarmuol

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

HTS (Continued)

loll Holding of 3mm.
(svm mum 3mm, 1977)....uuu...uuu

Corrosion of Structursl laterals in Molten Alkaline
Heals
(mmzru Kons'rwusmm MW V zammm
“W W. 1977)....0OOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI

‘l'sble or Oontents rm Journal 'mmmx examsrcs '
(WA mlzm. m 79. 1977)....000000000000

-5-

M OFFICIAL US! MY

Psgs

«‘02

67

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 621.373.51; 621.372.837.10

TEE RESONANCE ARRAY AND ITS APPLICATION 1‘0 TNE DESIGN OF SOLID-STATE NICEO-
HAVE DEVICES

Kiev IWZ RADIOELEK‘IRONIKA in Russian Vol 2). No 10, Oct 78 pp 26-31
(Article by LV. Lebedev end v.6. Alybin, aenuscript received 23 Nov 71]

[Text] A new variant of a waveguide-rod structure is
described, which possesses parallel and series resonances
and provides for the efficient connection of a large
nunber of seaiconductor oscillator, switching or rec-
tifier diodes. A design exsnple of a aultidinde aicro-
wave switch and liaiter is treated.

Introduction

In the majority of sodern waveguide oscillators, anplifiers, switchers and
limiters, the nicrowave diode is positioned transverse to the waveguide,
parallel to the electrical field vector, or inserted in a break in the inner
conductor of the coaxial line, and coupled to the waveguide in one fashion
or another [1 - A]. waveguide detector heads, phase shifters, modulators,
attenuators and other aicroweve devices using discrete solid state devices
also have a similar structural design. The develop-est of these designs is
now taking the approach of not so such the synthesis of fundsnentally new
systeas, as such as the path of analyzing and refining the parsneters of the
equivalent circuitry and improving the characteristics of the devices on this
basis [5, 6). In searching for new design solutions, there is a special
need for aultidiode nicrowave devices, which attract attention in connection

with the problea of boosting the workign power. in the aajority of cases,
it is necessary to use splitters and bridges [1] in aultidiode devices, anae-
thing which lesds to an increase in the size and weight, or it is necessary
to eslploy power addition using the principle of active diaphragns [8}, anne-
thing which does not provide for the requisite heat sinking and is insdequatc
ly effective. A new variant of a waveguide-rod romance structure is des-
cribed in the following. which provides for the insertion of a large amber
of microwave diodes, where this structure does not have the drawbacks indi-
cated. The electrodynanic properties of this syste- are of independent inte:
est, and in a nunber of cases, pernit a significant i-provenent in the aicro
wave parameters and characteristics of the diode devices.

1

EOE OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Resonance Array in a Rectangular Waveguide

To illustrate the devices and the operational principle of the nultidiode
structure being described here, we shall initially turn to the conventional
resonance netal diaphragm (window) in a waveguide with a rectangular cross-
section using the II node. Such a dinphragn (Figure la) can be described
with sufficient predgsion by an equivalent circuit in the fore of a parallel
resonant circuit, which shunts the Iain tranuission line, as shown in Fig-
ure lb. The bandwidth characteristic of the losses induced I. by the window
(Figure lc) has a nininun at a frequency f0. which corresponds to parallel
resonance and the practically complete passage of the signal through the
waveguide. The quantity f0. as is well known, depends on the relationship

of the dimensions of the window 1. and b'. and the cross-sectional dinensions
of the waveguide a and b .

 

(c)

Figure l. A resonance diaphragn in a rectangular waveguide (a), its equiva-
lent circuit (b) and the shape of the bandwidth characteristic (c).

l I
l' |
I
I
I
v I
I Iq‘

Figure 2. A diaphragn with four supplemental apertures (a) and its equivalent
circuit and response with the parallel and series resonances (b. c).

“Y: 1° 20 parallel;
20 £0 series.

 

He shall consider how the frequency response varies. which is shown in Figure
lc, where there are four aupplenental openings of length 11. which are depic-
ted in Figure 2a, present in the plate of the diaphragm. If the dimension

ll anounts to less than half of the free space wavelength, than each of the
supplemental openings has an inductive conductivity. The equivalent circuit
of the diaphragn takes on the for: shown in Figure 2b. where L' are the equi-
valent inductnces, determined by the dimensions of the supple-ante]. slots
and the width of the conducting strip 0 between then. As a result, there
arises a second resonance at a frequency of to series» which no longer is
of the parallel type. but is rather a series resonance (Figure 2c). This
resonance, which corresponds to blocking of the waveguide, should be posi-
tioned at the higher frequency and with respect to the Iain parallel reso-
nance f0 PI!" since the condition of series resonance of the nsinaperture

2

. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY

of the diaphragm with the inductance of the supplemental aperture is the
capacitive nature of the impedance of the main opening.

It is not difficult to experimentally check the conclusions drawn here, by
using a panoramic SHR meter to observe both nttenuations of the broadband
response of plane netal diaphragms which have fixed dimensions of the main
opening 1 and b‘, and different dimensions of the supplemental openings.

The frequency £0 per practically does not change in this case, but the series
resonance frequency fo .er133 is controlled within a broad range and approaches
the frequency f0 9., from the high frequency side with an increase in the
dimension U.

In making a transition to the insertion of semiconductor diodes, just as in
vacuum tube Iicrowave electronics, it is necessary to take the approach of
organically incorporating then into resonance structure. From this point of
view, the diodes can be positioned in breaks in any of the conductors, which
form the structure depicted in Figure 2a. However, the insertion of diodes
in a break in the conductors, parallel to the electrical field vector in the
waveguide, and which have a width u, is less expedient than in a break in
the conductors parallel to the wide walls of the waveguide. This distinction
is manifest particularly sharply when designing controlling class devices,
for which the first of the variants cited here proves to be unacceptable.
Thus, the insertion of diodes in a nicrowsve structure can have the form
shown in Figure 3a. Pour oscillator, switching or rectifier diodes prove to
be connected in pairs through the narrow walls of the waveguide. The con-
ductors which are the extension of the diodes can have the shape of rods,

in the center of which metal pins are positioned, which are coupled to the
wide walls of the waveguide. The dimension 1, which determines the parallel
resonance frequency, can differ in the general case from the wide sectional
dimension of the waveguide a.

 

Figure 3. The connection of 6 and 8 semiconductor diodes:

l. Rods;
2. Pins;
3. Diodes.

The set of metal rods which are postioned parallel to the wide wall of the
waveguide, with the diodes connected at their ends, and the metal pins, which
connect the rods to the nearest wide walls of the waveguide, which possesses
both parallel and series resonances, can be! alled a resonance array. In

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

following the principle described here, one can create not only 4-diods, but
also 8-diode, lZ-diods, l6-diode, etc. arrays. In particular. an 8-diode
resonance array (Figure 3b) corresponds to the initial dual slot resonance
window with eight supplemental openings, or what is the sane thing, with
two lo-diode resonance arrays in a waveguide of half the height, b/2, with
respect to the plane of syn-etry 33. The increase in the number of diodes
is prinurily limited by the narrow cross-sectional dimension of the waveguide
and the sizes of the diode packages. To further the number of diodes. one
can take the approach of using unpackaged diodes or waveguides with a non-
standard cross-section with an increased height. including nultinode wave-
guides.

The ninillun possible number of diodes, inserted using the principle described
here, is two. Such a configuration corresponds to a sy-etrical division of
the 4-dioda array in waveguide of twice the height of the conducting plane,
arranged on analogy with the M plane in Figure 3a, which can be positioned
between two rods of a waveguide parallel to the wide wall, as shown by the
dashed and dotted line in Figure 3a..

A general feature of the arrays treated in [9] is the positioning of the axes
of the diodes and the rods connected to then perpendicular to the lines of
the electrical field in the waveguide. It is not difficult to see that with
such a configuration, the rods with the diodes prove to be decoupled with
respect to the R10 node field. The part of the devices exciting the rods is
played by the pins, which connect the center tape of the rod to the opposite
wide walls of the waveguide, or when the nulber of diodes is nore than four,
which connect the centers of the center rods in pairs. The sane pins perpen-
dicular to the wide walls of the waveguide are used to feed the suplly vol-
tages in the case of oscillator and controlled diodes. or to couplets the
direct current circuit for the diodes in linitere and rectifiers.

The Equivalent Circuit of the Array

The direct utilization of the equaivalent circuit depicted in Figure 2b in
calculations encounters difficulties in view of the fact that the length of
the rods is co-ensurate with a half wavelength and there is a stronly pro-
nounced variation in the field over the length of the rods. we shall ini-
tially neglect the influence of the conducting planes (the wide walls of the
waveguide) and the inho-ogeneities produced by the diode packages. Then each
pair of rods can be represented in the fore of a sy-etrical two-wire line,
which is excited out of phase in the center with the pins as shown in Fiugre
6s. The characteristic inpedance zcl of this line is deterained by the cross-
sectional diaensions of the rods and the spacing between then.

Treating the rods as a T lode two-wire line is facilated by the above nan-
tioned absence of coupling between the field of the rod line and the field of
the R10 wave in the waveguide.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The characteristic impedance of the
line into which the array is connected
is designated as 2c in Figure he, i.e..
the equivalent impedance of the nain
waveguide 2.. where l is the total
length of the rods between the end
faces of the metal projection. includ-
ing the length of the diodes. The

, l total impedance of one diode is desig-
- ' nated as 2d.
,0.) e b (a): 5'» '

The impedances of each pair of diodes,
Figure 4' ::Q.°::i::::ESGC1:::1t° ce connected at the end of the two-wire
0 0m

array line, proved to be connected in series

' with respect to the high frequency,
although with respect to direct current,
these diodes can have a parallel configuration. We will note that the series
RF connection of the diodes is here achieved automatically without the phys-
ical superpostion of seniconductor structures and without degrading the con-
ditions for heat removal from each of the diodes. The overall capacitance of
each pair of diodes proves to be half the real capacitance of one diode, a
circumstance which plays an important part and is an additional advantage of
a resonance array over hitherto existing diode heads.

   

A further refinement of the equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 6b, where
sections of conductor type lines above the conducting plane are taken into
account, where they are formed by the rods and the wide walls of the wave-
guide close to them. Taking these lines into account, which have a charac-
teristic impedance of leg. is justified for the case of small spacings be-
tween the rods anc wide wells of the waveguides (see below).

Depending on the purpose of the device in which the resonance array is em-
ployed, one or both of the resonances shown in Figure 2c can be used. In
this respect, a typical case is that of a switching resonance array, for
which it is necessary to realize two operational nodes: that of blocking
and passing the signal in the Iain waveguide channel in the same passband.

A Hultidiode Switcher and Limiter

we shall use the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 5a, and we shall treat
the switching and limiting diodes only in two limiting states. In the first
state. which corresponds to direct current flow through the diode, 2g 4 O.
In the second state (high impedance), the quantity la is primarily deternined
by the capacitance of the diode G. Then, in the microwave signal cutoff
node, i.e., in the radar trans-it node, in the case of the "forward“ cir-

cuit of the switcher, the input impedance of the array at the points ab in
Figure 6 proves to be equal to

za-IN(4aIL + 5ft: “’——‘)-I. (2)

5

' roe 017mm. use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where I. is the inductance of the pin: c is the speed of light in free
space and N is the nunber rod pairs.

In view of the purely reactive nature of the impedance 2,1,1. the decoupling
which is provided in the signal cutoff mode amounts to:

I‘decoupling " Leno '10‘41 +(é:)'} (3)

A decoupling naxinun is achieved at the series resonance frequency f0 “,1”
when x.“ - 0, from which:

a; x as; L
”g“ "3' . (a)

In the sicrowave signal passage node taking into account the series connection
of the diode capacitances in pairs, we obtain the input ispedance of the array
with respect to the points at in Figure be:

a” l
zea‘Z—--E'
Z t n 5
Zm-IN ”Li-fmr" -der ()
‘ at c

The subscripts l and 2 in expressions (2) - (5) and the following correspond

to the blocking and passage nodes respectively, i.e., to the radar transnit
and receive nodes.

The losses introduced on receive. Lintroo are detersined by expression (3)
where x,” is substituted for x“), In the approximation adopted here (with-
out taking the active losses into account), the quantity Lintro should be
equal to zero at the parallel resonance frequency f0 P!" for which 8,1,2 -

- ~. Taking (S) into account, we obtain

tan (“0 eeriesz/c) ' '50 series czci (6)

The condition for normal operation of the switcher and limiter is the colo-
cation of the frequencies to and f "u“ at a specified center fre-
quency f0. Pros: this, using 2;; and (g), one can deter-ine the requisite

inductance l. of the pins which connect the rods to the wide walls of the
waveguide 02’
a

L— 8 . (7)
As can be seen free (7), with a decrease in the diode capacitance c or the
characteristic iupedance of the rod line zcl. it is necessary to reduce the
inductance of the pin 1.. For this purpose, for example. one can salts use of
the reduction in the existing length of the pins by scans of choke cylinders.

introduced into the waveguide [10]. The evaluation based on equation (7)
shows that for typical values of c - 0.5 — 1 pl? and la - 100 - 150 otnss.

 

6

'FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the quantity 1. should fall in a range of 0.6 - 2.8 nhy. The length 1. of

the rods which provides for the specified value of to can be found by means .
of (6):

Inﬂamu-ancza- <8)

The quantity 1 always proves to be somewhat greaer than half of the resonance
wavelength in free space, equal to lo - c/fo. With a decrease in the capaci-
tance, the length I should be increased. a maximum where C e 0, l -. A. The
length 1 can be both somewhat smaller and somewhat greater than the wide di-
mension of the waveguide section a, since usually a I (0.7 — 0.8)1.

In practice, it is convenient to position the diodes in pairs on metal inserts.
as shown schematically in Figure 3.

The choice of the characteristic impedance of the rod line Z¢1 requires special
attention. An increase in la following the corresponding correction of the
quantities l. and 1. while observing f0 - const., leads to an expansion of the
bandwidth in the receive (passage) mode and simultaneously to a narrowing of

the bandwidth in the transmit (signal blocking) mode. It usually necessary to '
specify the minimum permissible amount of decoupling in the transmit mode, '
1.10, at the edges of the band and the maximum permissible amount of introcuced
losses L20. Typical values of 1.10 and 1.20 are 15 - 20 dB and 0.5 — 1.0 dB -
respectively. Assuming the indicated values of 1.10 and L20. one can solve the

two transcendental equations for L4“ - [.10 and Lintro - 1.20 by means of equa- _
tions of type (3). The roots of these equations which are closest to the fra- 'T
quency f0 yield the boundary frequencies of the resultant passband in the re- '-
ceive mode at: and the bandwidth in the transmit mode Afl.

Figure 5. The bandwidth in the two operational
modes as a function of the character-
iatic impedance of rod lines for
lo-diode and ZO-diode switchers and

 

limiters: .‘
a - 28.5 I; '
b - 12.6 In;
' p? [.10 - 20 d3; ‘
I , a L20 - 0.5 dB.
.175 ’ -
an to w W (0.0:

The typical depedence of the bandwidth Afl and M; on the characteristic impe-
dance zcl is shown' in Figure 5 for three values 0 diode capacitance C in

the centimeter band for the case of 6—diode (N - l) and 20-diode (N - S) arrays.
The intersection of the Af and of; curves yields the quantity ch, which
satisfies not only the aboxlre mentioned colocation of the frequencies

f0 “:1“ - f0 par I f0. but also the coincidence (equality) of the bandwidth

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in both working nodee: M1 - “2*. As can he eeen fron the figure, with e
decrea'le .diode capacitance or with an increaee in the nunher of rode in
the array, and correspondingly the number of diodee, a notable expenaion of
the working bandwidth in achieved. The requisite quantity rd in thia caee
decreneee with an increase in N.

Figure 6. The hand characteristica of the
decoupling of the introduced loaaee
and diaeipated power for a b-diode
ewitching array:

a - 28.5 II;

b . 12a6 -;
841 O 2 oil";
Rd; - 0.3 clue;
C . OeS 9'.

Key: 1. ”dine/Pine. percent;

2° ldecoupling. “3
3. Laura. ‘3.

 

Another inportant inprovenent in the characteriatica of ewitchee and linitera
ia alao echieved with an incraeee in the nunber of diodes: a reduction in the
electrical load which in characterized by the power diaeipated in one diode.
and a eharp increaae in the uni-u power of the incident wave. The calcu-
lation of the electrical load can he carried out uaing the use equivalent
circuit (Figure be), taking into account the finite anount of reaietance of
the diode R41. A typical variation in the power Pd“. diaeipated in one diode.
referenced to the power of the incident weve. Pine. in ahown in Pigure 6 for
a b-diode array. Aleo derived there are the calculated bandwidth character-
ietice of the introduced loeeea end decoupling, teking into account the finite
valuea of the diode raaietencee in the tramit node I“ and in the receive
node in. Aa cen he eeen fro. theae curvee, the minu- of the dieaipated
power can fall outaide the range of the working bondwidth on the low frequency
aide.

The Influence of the Haveguide Hallo

A more preciae equivalent cirucit, which in depicted in figure lob, penita
taking into accomt the influence of the wide walla of the waveguide on the
characterietice and paranetera of the reaonance array in a firet approxination,

The input i-pedance of the ewitching or limiting array at pointe ab ie dea-
cribed by the general equation in thin ceee:

: Due to the enall any—etry in the bandwidth cheracterietice. there erieta
a certain divergence of the boundary 'frequanciea in the tuna-it and receive
nodes, even when or; - “2. Thin divergence cnn neglected in a firat approx-
iletion.

8
FOR OFFICU‘L USB 0!“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

z gagging} l2nILZ,,(Z.+Iz..t¢-’%-‘-) (9)
Z . ——“--z————;Tr+ T__'ﬂi"
[Zn-la]. "’ .2 f-Hlﬂt-g‘ tuIL(za+IZ.)+-§'(Z.+Ila“7)

here zcz is the characteristic inpedance of the conductor type line above
ground. which is for-ed by the wide wall of the waveguide and the array rod
which is closest to it.

By again applying the condition for the colocetion of the decoupling maximum
in the transnit node and the nininua of the introduced losses in the receive
node, one can derive an expression which detenines the requisite inductance
of a pin: CZ!
L.- .—%——.
4(24 72-) (10)

When zcz e e. (10) transferee into (7). The length of the rods in the approx—
ination considered here is, as before. deter-ined by expression (8).

Calculations show that the influence of line sections with a characteristic
iapedance of leg have the lost pronounced effect on the amount of the power
dissipated in the diodes. and on the frequency characteristics of the entire
array in the trans-it node. It is interesting to note that the frequency
response of the power dissipated in the diode. with a reduction in the imped-
ance 3ch can cease to be a decaying value with an increase in frequency. The
rise in the power dissipated in the diodes at the high frequency edge of the
band is due to the parallel resonance between the inductance of the pins and
the input impedance of the eonductor-above-ground type line. There is simul-
taneously a certain narrowing of the bandwidth of the array in the trans-it
node.

The influence of the sections of lines of the conductor above a conducting
plane type is also asnifest in another fashion. The difference in the induc-
tances of the pins. perpendicular to the wide walls of the waveguide, has
axtreaely little effect on the band response characteristics of decoupling
and introduced losses, but at saall values of leg. leads to isbalance in the
electrical load of the diodes, connected at the ends of the different rods.
For this reason, when aligning an array by neana of loving choke devices,
which provide for a variation in the frequency fo series: it is desirable to
nonitor the sy-etry of the electrical load, which can be accosplished in
practice by a nunber of methods. The possibility of adjusting and sonitoring
the power dissipated by the diodes per-its coepenaating for the scatter in
the production paraneters of the diodes and in the array as a whole.

Conclusion

The analysis and design of other applications of a resonant array can be
carried out in a sisilar nanner: for cases of pwer addition for oscillators

9

FOR OPPICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

end uplifiers using MAT: diodes end Conn diodes. ss well ss for the cue of
aultidiode sicrouove rectifiers. etc. A number of questions of the operstion
of such devices is of independent interest.

1.

2s

3.

lo.

5s

6.

7.

9.

10.

BI BLIOGMPRY

Eisenhsrt Rd... "Understsndins the Hsvesuide Diode Mount". 1m arr; Int.
Hicrwsve Synp.. Arlington heights. Dis. Techn. Psp.. NJ” 1972. 1954.

Lebedev l.V.. ”Nekotoryye prohlesy assorszrysdnykh i tverdotel'nykh SVCh
pereklyuchsteley" [”Sose Problems of Cu Dischsrge end Solid Stste Hiero-
wsve Switchers"), 12V. WZOV - MDIOBLEK‘I‘RONIXA [PROCEEDINGS or m 316m
EDUCATIONAL msrmms - RADIO mmwtcsl. 1973. 16. No 10. p 61.

Liberlsn L.s., Sestroretskiy D.V.. Shpirt V.A.. Yokohen' luau
“Poluprovodoikovyye diody dlys uprsvleniys noshchnost'yu” ("Se-iconductor .

Diodes for Power Control”l. MDIOTMIXA [RADIO momma], 1972. 27.
No 5, p 9.

Kuroknvs K., ”The Single-Cavity Multiple Diode Oscillstor", nu mm.
1971. NIT-l9. No 10. p 793.

willie-son A.O.. Otto D.V.. “Analysis of s Hevesuide "panting Structure“.
P1382. 1973, 34, Ho 3. p 95.

Dussyev V.Ys., nepoport c.N., "Elwivslentnsys sins-s volnovodno—kosksinl'noao
1-sochleneniys" ["An Equivslent Circuit of s Usveauide to Coexisl ‘r-Cooplins"l.
12V. WZOV - MDIOWIKA, 1977, 20, No 2, p 95.

Kano 11.1., Englisch DJ... ”Milli-stems” MATT Power Alplifier Cabinet”.
um M8“ 1976. HIT-26, No ll, 9 758.

Iiefni 1.2.. "Hicrovsve Se-iconductor Device Mount". 08 Pstent, Cl. 333-83.
No 365 2305, Clai- 28 l’eb 67, published 26 Jun 69.

Lebedev l.V., Alybin V.G., ”Ustroystvo elozheoiys Ioehchoostey

sverkhvysokochsstotnykh prihorov" ["Kicrovsve Device Power Cabinet”).

Potent lo 566297. nuum' autumn (warm! 0? WM], 1977,
llo 27.

Baker 1'.ll.l.. "Suttondoctor Diode "New“. Switch”, mm W.
1961. 38, No 8, p 300.

10

M OFFICIAL US! OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11. ubedov I.V.. Alybtn V.G.. thlwnut D.Ya.. Belyayev V.P., ”Hoahchnyy
monodtodnyy volnovodnyy pereklyuchatel'" ["A High Power Hulttdtode
"alumnus Switch”, WYA TWIN!“ [ELECTRONIC ENGINEERING].

0‘11” 1, WM SVCh [KICROUAVE BLECTRONICS]. 1977, [lo 9.

COPYRIGBT: ”Izvutiyn vuzov 888R - udiulektronm." 1978

8225
08031870

11

P03 OPPXCIAL US! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERIRG

00C 621.372.825.10

ESTDMTIN THE PROPERTIES OF PERIODIC STRUCTURES FOR HULTIEEM HICROHAVE
DEVICES

Kiev IVUZ RADIOELEK‘IRONIKA in Russian Vol 21 No 10. Oct 78 pp 90-95

[Article by 7.3. Dubrovlte, v.1. Naydenko and A.A. Sakaloeh, aanuecript re-
ceived 25 Nov 77]

[Text] The expediency of using e chain of coupled ring
resonators in nultibean. type 0 nicrowave devices is
denonstrated. The concept of a generalized coupling in-
pedance is introduced, based on which the properties of
retarding systens are evaluated for the type where a chain
of ring resonators and a chain of inductively coupled re-
sonstore are used as the structures for aultibe- nicro-
wave devices.

the refine-ant of radio engineering equipsent requires the design of high power.
type 0 nicrowave devices which have low power supply voltages voltages. One
of the proeiaing approaches to the solution of this probles is that of going
over to sultibeu devices. in which by virtue of increasing the interaction
region in the transverse direction. one can boost the perveance hy tens of tines,
and thereby, obtain the requisite power levels at cooperatively low voltages.

Of all of the well-known retarding eyetens. a chain of inductively coupled
resonators. which is called a aw mguide in the following. has hecoee
widespread in high power type 0 devices. This is due to its outstanding
electrodynanic, production technology and thernal characteristics. It ia only
natural that a stopped waveguide was used by the designers of Iultibeaa de-
vices. ‘l'he properties of other periodic structures were not investigated as
applicable to their use in sultibean deviccs.

It is expedient to use a chain of coupled ring resonators as the retarding
systaa for sultibean type 0 eicrowave devices. where the central rod in this
chain. which shorts out the diaphragn stops, displaces the longitudinal elec-
trical field fron the central region to the peripheral region, and thereby
increases the region of effective interaction of the field with the electron
(IMs

12
'OR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Described below are the properties of fields in .- chein of coupled ring re-
sonators. A coepnrison is nude on the basis of the introduced concept of a
generalized coupling impedance between the properties of this structure and

of a stopped waveguide fron the viewpoint of their application in nultibeea
type 0 microwave devices.

It is well known [1. 2] that with a phase shift through a period. 0 » 0. the
properties of retarding systens of the coupled resonator chein type becoee
closer to the properties of a systes of uncoupled resonntors the smaller the
thickness of the stops (for the case of zero thickness of the stops, the cut-
off wavelength A corresponding to 6 - 0, is precisely equal to the resonance
wavelength of the uncoupled resonators). her this reason, a good initial
approximation for fields close to O - 0 will he the fields of an isolated
resonator. For a ring resonator with an outer cylinder radius of h end an
inner radius of the (center. coaxial) netal rod c, the longitudinal elec-

tricel fields, where the nueber of variations innziauth is s, are repre-
sented in the fore [3]:

El-AtJI(")~I(u) -J-(*°)N.(MW“M9.

n.-—AE;—(J'.t~)~.(»)-I.(»)M.Mslnmo. (1)

n. - A i'ﬁ-wm Mm -— In») ”.mnoos me-

here J. (x), N. (x), J; (x) and N: (x) are I order Bessel functions of the
first and second kind and their derivatives with respect to the argmsent at;
It - ZIIA is the wave nmber.

For-ulas (1) represent a field which has no variations along the axis of the
resonator. .

the resonance frequencies of the Keno nodes of a ring resonator are found as
the roots 3f the equation

JAM N4») -1.. (0) N. (’0‘) - 0- (2)

He will note that the fields of a stopped waveguide with infinitely thin
diaphrnp steps where e - 0 differ free the fields of (l) by the substitution
of the Bessel function J.(|tr) (or J;(hr) for the ll subscript e couponsnt)

for the expressions in the square brackets. while the resonance frequencies
are found as the roots of the equation

I‘M-0. (3)
The distributions of the electrical field E: and the negnetic field a, in-
tensities over the radius for different ratios of the inner and outer con-
ductor radii c/b are given in figure is, b. the solid lines show the distri-

bution of the fields in a systee without an inner conductor (c/b - 0), the
dashed lines are for a system with clb - 0.02, and the dashed and dotted lines

13

’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are for a system with c/h - 0.5. The nunher of variations of the fields
over the azimuth n snounted to 0.1 and 2 (the corresponding nmhers on
the curves).

As can be seen fron Figure l, the introduction of e center conductor exerts
the greatest influence on the azinuthally homogeneous fields (I I 0); with
an increase in I, the influence of the center conductor falls off. Hi h
an increase in the radius of the center conductor c, the min!- of the
field E; is shifted into the region of greater values of r/h, and the dis-
tributions of the fields with different values of a cone closer together.

The distribution over the radius of the difference in the densities of the
asgnetic and electrical energy ulﬂ.|2 - c|8;|2 - A" is shown in figure 2.
The paraneters c/h and n and the designations of the curves are the ease
as in Figure 1. As can he seen from Figure 2, with the introduction of a
rod AH of the asinuthnlly hoaogeneous type of oscillations changes the soot
sharply: when c/h - 0. the electrics field energy is concentrated in the re-
gion of small values of r/b; when c/h f 0. the energy of the aagnetic field
is concentrated in the ease region. Figure 2, in particular. detersdnee the
regions which are expediently used to realize asgnetic coupling between the
resonators. For exanple, when c/b - 0, it is expedient to cut the coupling
slots in the diaphregn stops in the region of ratios of r/h of 0.6 -— l for
n . 0; 0.77 - l for a - l. and 0.83 - l for a - 2.

Where a center conductor is present, there are two regions in which the neg-
netic field energy predoninates. This penits negnetic coupling not only in
the peripheral part of the ring resonator, but also in the central part.

The nore sharply the fields vary. the nore strongly the resonance wavelength
A changes, sonething which is evidenced by the curves shown in Figure 3.

liars. the ratio of the wavelength corresponding to O - 0 to the diameter of
the outer conductor 2b is plotted along the ordinate. The intersection with
the ordinate axis nerks the point corresponding to l of a stopped waveguide.
It can be seen that with an increase in c. the systen because even nore

short wave and the curves corresponding to various values of a cone closer
together. This conplicates the elinination of interfering nodes, sonething

which should be taken into account when using such systens in electronic
devices.

One of the nein quantities which is used the reset frequently as the charac-

teristic of retarding systens is the coupling inpedence n of the spatial
harnonic which interacts with the electron flow [1. 2].

t
R. - Ell

however. it turns out that the quantity an is an incoaplete characteristic
for a retarding systa. especially in the case where it is used in nultibe-
devices. in fact, one of the nain electrical paranetera in the sheory of
type 0 devices is the Pearce gain paraneter [6] c - (lint/60)" , and is

16
FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Figure 2.

ia determined not only by the coupling reeiatance an of the working epatial
harnonic, but aleo by the current I and the voltage U of the bean. Ne-
glecting relativistic effecta, u I n32 [6], where no in the delay of. the
n-th working epatinl harnonic. Taking thia coupling into account. it in
clear that the propertiae of a retarding eyeten are core conpletely charac-
terized by the paraneter hi. The bean current I - jksk - jcsc ia linited
in the cathode region by t uiaaion current deneity iron the cathode 5!:
and the area of the cathode sh. while in the interaction region, the current
denaity in the channel of the ayaten jc and the area of the channel croee-
eection Sc ia linited by the power engineering capabilitiee of the electron-
optical eyeten. It ie known that the greater Sc in. the lean the coupling
reaietance la la. Thur, the paraneter which noat conpletely characterieea
the ayaten at a epecified wavelength free the power engineering viewpoint to
the product annﬁk” where k, ia the ratio of the area occupied by the be-
to any cheracterietic area. He will note that for a note preciee analyaie,
it would be neceaaary to include in the channel area alao the area in which
the longitudinal electrical field interacting with the bean ia concentrated.
i.a., eleo include the area occupied by the connecting aleevea in the croee-
aecionel area of the channel 8c. however, the croee-aectional area of the
channel ie usually conaiderably greater than the area taken up by the coupling
eleavea. and it in aufficient to juet conaider Sc.

Further, the bend propertiea of the retarding ayate- are characterized by the
group velocity vrp [Vsr] or by the group delay nrp . In“! - c/vs, (where c

ia the Velocity of light in a vacuul. and the greater n“. the greater In,
the anellar the working bndwidth of the device.

15

M ONICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, we arrive at a generalized coupling resistance,
a paraneter which nost coepletely characterizes a\
retarding systen:

R.
7,,"3/‘n' (a)

 

which in the international system of units has the
Figure 3, dimensions of ohms.

He will note that psraneter (4), in contrast to R“, also characterizes the
systems at the edges of the passhsnd, and in particular, it is also suited as
a characteristic of resonators, while at the edges of the passband for any
systen tends to ~. Moreover, the quant ties neasured in the completely
latched node (the standing waves) are specifically proportional to (Rn/Wang.

This also nahes para-star (lo) convenient in experimental studies of retard-
ing systsas.

by returning to a systen of a chain of coutpled ring resonators, we find
AI-I|:- m d.——-#E-,—. 5
“u W lumen—(£5) was)? ‘ ’

where 6. - 1 when an - 0 and 6. I 2 when n f 0; (kb) and inane) are the
values of the II. conponent of the nagnetic field 1) when r - b and r - c;
hb [he I kb (c/b)] is detereined from equation (2). Taken into account in

(5) is the coupling P - ver/L, where H is the energy stored over a period
of the systen L.

In the ri ht hand side of (5), [3,]2 depends on r and O. and for this reason,
(ho/nun is also a function of r and 9. Specifically, one can choose such
values of r and O that Inglis either maxim- or [3‘] is ever ed over the

cross-section of the bean. Given below are values of (Bo/n") at the point
where [3;] has a wins.

The results of calculating ( In ﬁns as a function of c/b for I - 0 are
shown in Figure ’0 by the sol l . "hen c/b - 0, the quantity (Bo/nuns .
- 38.5 ol’s. Hith an increase in the dis-star of the inner ionductor,
(“o/03900 falls off. For exanple, when c/b no.1, (Bo/agano - 12.2 olus,
i.e., it has fallen off to practically a third of its for-er value. But with
the introduction of an inner conductor, as seen in figure 1, the area which
can be occupied by the hen is changed substantially. In other words, a con-
siderably greater current I can be introduced in a systen with a central

inner conductor. for this reaaon, it is also necessary to take into account
the area coefficient k1.

the efficient operation of nultibean devices can be achieved where alllof the
bane are located in an I! field of close intensity.

The level of the pernissible variation in the electric field intensity is de-
tenined by the area which can be occupied by the bean. For ample, as

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
      

!!!!l§!!!!

ﬁlllﬂg

iﬁiiiaéiiiiﬁi
IIIIIIIIIIEIIII

 
   

    

10 '-

,0 .1!"

40! at. f/6

Figure 6. Figure 5.

follows Eros Figure 1. if vertical line |B,|2 1. taken at the 0.81 level
(i.e.. Izzl at a level of 0.9). then the area which can be occupied by the
bean in a system with c/b - 0 amounts to about 6.52 of the cross-sectional
area of the system. If we limit ourselves to the sass level of variation in
Izglz. but use a system with s center inner conductor with c/b - 0.1. then
the area which can be occupied by the bean will be 9.6 tines greater (the
diameter 2b increases. as can be seen froa Figure 3, by 1.37 tiles for the
ease of a constant A).

For a cooperative estisate of a stopped waveguide and a system of a chain of
coupled ring resonators. the parameter k, is determined from the fornula

where Shh/5,0 is the area which can be occupied by the been if a drop in
|t,|2 down t? a level of n is peraitted in the chain of coupled ring reson-

ators, and S‘I c [5.0 is the sane. but in a stopped waveguide.

The results of calculating ”nah/n“ for arisuthally hosogeneous fields is
shown in Figure la by the dsshed lines, where curve 2 corresponds to an e of
0.16; 3 corresponds to a level of 0.25; 5 corresponds to a level of 0.69;

S to a level of 0.81 and 6 to a level of 0.9. As can he can from Figure 6,
with an increase in c/b and the level a, the quantity Ina, increases,
rea hing a level of about 150 oils. we will note that this sane quantity
Mash/Erna, for a syste- without a center conductor (It, . l) is equal to 38.5
obs. us, or the persissibla level of reduction in It‘ll - 0.81, the
paraseter Ito In“ of a systel with a center conductor is three to four
tines greater than the ease paraneter of a stopped waveguide.

These sane curves for aeinuthally inhologeneous oscillations where a - l and

a - 2 are shown in Figure 5 (the deaignat one are the sane as in Figure 6).

"it an increase in clh, the quantity Rang/n“ falls off, while the quantity
In“ resins approxinately constant for both s - l and for n - 2.

The coaparison given here for the properties of systems where a chain of
coupled ring resonators and a stopped waveguide are used applies to a phase

17

'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shift of O - 0. Nuaerous experimental investigations carried out on various
retarding systems have shown that the quantity Rona/ngr. taken at the surface
of the transit channel. in the first place. varies comparatively weakly in the
passband, and in the second place. something which is especially important.
with a change in the geosetry of the system is shifted practically parallel

to itself. This per-its the extension of the results obtained to the entire
passband, as well as a coepsrison of different systems in the passbsnd which
have the requisite information only at one point in the passband. for ex-
ample, at the point 9 - O, as was done above. Consequently. it is obvious
that it is expedient to make practical use of the introduced genralised

coupling resistance. a quantity which nest completely characterizes a retard-
ing system.

Thus. this paper has studied the properties of fields in a chain of coupled
ring resonators where O - 0. The concept of a generalized coupling resis-
tance has been introduced, and it has been shown that this quantity most com-
pletely characterizes the retarding systee of multibean devices. A compari-
son of the properties of a chain of coupled ring resonators and a stopped
waveguide was nade using the indicated quantity; it was demonstrated that a

chain of ring resonators is to be prefered for type 0 multibeam microwave
devices.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Taranenko 2.1.. Trokhinenko Ya.K., “Zanedlyayushchiye sistemy" ["Inter-
active 8ystena"]. Kiev, Tekhnika Publishers, 1965.

2. Silin R.A., Saaonov V.P.. "Zamedlyeyushchiye sistemy" [“Interactive
Systems"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1966.

3. Nikol'skiy V.V., "Blektrodimamika i rasprostraneneiye radiovoln" [“Radio
Have Electrodynamics and Propagation"]. Hoscow. Nauke Publishers. 1973.

6. Geyduk V.1.. Palatov K.I.. Petrov D.H., "Pizicheskiye oanovy elektroniki
SVCh" ("The Physical Principles of Microwave Electronics”l. Moscow,
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1971.

COPYRIGHT: ”Itvestiys vurow 888R - Radioelektronika," 1978

8225
080:1870

18

’03 OFPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPNYSICS. ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

UDC 551.466.8

EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF OSCILLATIONS OF A FREE SURFACE INDUCED
UY INTERNAL WAVES

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAUK 888R, FIZIKA ATHDSFERY I OKEANA in Russian
V01 16. No 11, 1978 pp 1216-1218

[Article by Is Se ”11““. So he Yemkov' Ve Ve Papko and Yea Ne POIIIIOV-
skiy. Institute of Applied Physics. USSR Academy of Sciences, submitted
for publication 21 July 1977]

[Text] As is well known. internal waves in the ocean attain their maximum
amplitudes in layers with the greatest density gradients. At the ocean sur-
face the amplitudes of the internal waves are small (usually about several
centimeters) end they are usually neglected [l]. Rowever, as a result of
increase in the accuracy of measurements of waves at the surface its dis-
placements from internal waves can be registered. Surface oscillations
caused by internal waves lead. for exaeple, to oscillations of ice which
were measured under natural conditions and which at least theoretically can
serve as an indicator of internal waves [2. 3]. The influence of internal
waves on surface displacements can also be of definite interest in an in-
vestigation of the spectrum of surface waves in the low-frequency range
(frequencies of about 10-2.10-6 s'l). since internal waves evidently con—
stitute one of the important sources of its formation. The theory of the
spectra of surface waves induced by internal waves was examined in [6].

This communication is devoted to an experimental investigdtion of perturba-
tions of the free surface of a stratified fluid caused by the internal
waves propagating in it. The theoretical analysis is based on linear ap-
proximation formulas. As a result of an experimental investigation it was
demonstrated that the dependence of surface displacement on wave frequency
is described well by the formulas of linear theory. even after the appear-
ance of nonlinear distortions of the wave form.

Surface perturbations from internal waves are deternined (in the linear
theory) by the structure of the normal mode. being a solution of the prob-

lem [1]
M'Idswtodmn-nvw-o (1)

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Equation (1) is written in the Boueaincsq approximation.) with the boun-
dary conditions: at the free surface

qust/wnwn-o. s-0. (2)

at the ocean floor

v.0, my. (3)

llere "(2) is the eigenfunction for the vertical velocity component; Me)
is the Vlislll frequency; H is ocean depth; 4-5 and It are frequency and
the horizontal wave nulber. Equations (l)-(3) describe both surface and
internal waves. Surface waves with any N(z) have saxinun displacements at
the surface. The structure of the internal waves is essentially dependent
on the N(z) profile. The naxinun water level displacenents in internal
waves are attained at some horizons: however, near the surface the dis-
placenents ere snall so that frequently the boundary condition (2) is
replaced by the simpler approximate"'lid" condition.

was, 3-0. (Zn)

thereby excluding surface oscillations. Nevertheless, "(8). conuted us-
ing (2a). can be enployed for approxilate coqutation of surface displace-
nent (or vertical velocity) by leans of equation (2). relating the sun
value H (z - 0) with the significant value dU/dz Ia - 0; the latter is
found fro- a solution of proqu (2a). Such an algorithn for finding w

(r - 0) is convenient for numerical cowutatione since problem (2a) can
be solved with a lesser accuracy, but for a shorter time. than problem

(2).

Now we will cite the expressions used below, which are easily derived fro-

(l)-(3). for displacenent of the free surface LN“. related to the maxi--
nun asplitude for the internal wave 5 n. for two stratification nodels.

In a three-layer nodal with a linearly stratified niddls layer (with the
Vliaili frequency N)

%--%(%-‘)‘[<W*(f'-.-')W]"=

in a two-layer nodel (density drop AP)

A 1 “I‘II. ”Gk
[W - surf] 9—--.1— ( )

r. p a an! ' (5)

 

where h is in both cases the depth of the upper hoaogeneous layer.

The dependences (lo) and (S) for the nentioned stratification nodels were
checked experiaentally.

20

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”A” 4.323

 

Pig. 3

Fig. 2. Dependence of fluid density P on depth 1; l) three-layer node]. with
linearly stratified middle layer; 2) two-layer nodel

Fig. 3. Theoretical and experiments). dispersion curve for three-layer
nodel.

1'18- ‘0- Theoretical de endences end results of nessureeents of relative
surface displace-est surf, g“: s) on frequency a) of internal wave (1
-- three-layer model, 2 - two-layer Iodei; points 3 -- slopes k;.~0.05,
b -- REIVOJ, 5 -- RC. ~0.15); b) on steepness It; - of internal veve
(‘1‘: 6 sec, three-layer nodal).

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’l’lCML 088 ONLY

In order to carry out the experiment we used a plastic flume (J x 0.5 x 0.2
n). A stable stratification was created by introducing salt solutions of
different density into the flume. Internal waves were excited by a wave-
generntor, having the configuration of a wedge and driven into motion by

.1 notnr with an adjustable rate of rotation. In order to visualise internal
waves in a region with e naxinun density gradient we introduced a colored
layer of fluid with a thickness 0.5-1 cm; however. when working with a
two-layer model we colored theentire upper homogeneous layer (Fig. l). The
amplitudes of the internal waves (about a centimeter) and their lengths
were measured using a scale grid plotted on the front wall of the bath.

we note that similar methods for exciting and measuring internal waves
within a fluid have been repeatedly described in the literature (for ex-
ample, see [5]). However. no study has been made of the surface perturba-
tions associated with internal waves.

In order to measure surface waves we fabricated sensors in the form of metal
plates situated directly above the water surface. The capacitance between
the plate and the water surface was the arm of a bridge circuit supplied
current from an acoustic frequency generator. The signal fed from the
bridge diagonal. after amplification, was fed to an oscillograph and an
automatic recorder. The minimal surface displacements measured by the
sensor were 10pm.

There was also simultaneous registry of the signals from two spaced sensors
on an automatic recorder; this made it possible. using the phase differ-
ence. to measure the lengths of the surface waves. The latter is neces-
sary in order to prove that the waves experimentally observed at the sur-
face correspond to an internal wave (and are not a surface mode with the
same frequency).

In the experiment the amplitudes of the internal waves varied in the range
0.5-1.5 cm, the wave length varied from 15 cm to a meter. the steepness
from 10"1 to 5-10'3. In this case the amplitudes at the surface were about
0.05-0.l mm.

Below we give the measurement results for two types of stratification: a
three-layer model with a linearly stratified middle layer ("~2.6 s’l)

and a model of a two-layer fluid (AP/Pam“) (Pig. 2). Figure 3. for a
three-layer model, shows the dependence of wave frequency «let the fluid
surface on the wave nt-her k (dashed curve) ascertained experimentally
using capacitive-type sensors. It can be seen that the experimental points
agree well with the theoretical dispersion curve (Mk) for an internal wave
of a lower mode, constructed using the known formulas of linear theory [6).

The experimental dependences of the relative amplitude of the internal

wave at the surface I gurfl‘ m on its frequency for two models are shown
in Pig. 6,s. l'or both models there is a good agreement of experimental
and theoretical curves (b). (S). It should be noted that with a wave

22
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICML USE ONLY

steepness of ebout 0.1 the wave configuration differs appreciably frets a
sine curve. The observed distortions of configuration of the internal
waves are sinilar to those described in [S]. The relative displacement

of the surface remained virtually the sense as in e linear case (Fig. Lb).

Thus. the experilental results cited above show that t' neaaured surface

perturbations correspond to internal waves in a stratified fluid and are
described well by the linear theory formulas.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Phillips. 0. li., DlNMilKA VBRIOINEGO SDOYA 0mm (Dynaeica of the Upper
Layer of the Ocean). ”Hir." 1969.

2. Snirnov. V. m. "lee Cover Oscillatione Ceused by Internal Haves in

the Arctic Ocean.“ Datum AN 88!!! (Reports of the USSR Acedeey of
Sciences). 206. No 5. 1972.

3. Bogorodskiy. V. V.. et el.. "slow Oceen Waves." 1 8"an sovmxm
WOW. 117.15? DOW (first Congress of Soviet Oceenologiste,
8u-aries of Reports). lioecov. June 1977.

lo. Yemkov. 8. A.. Pelinovskiy. Ye. 8.. “0n the ‘lheory of lav-Frequency
Surface Haves Induced by Internal "eves in the Ocesn.” XZV. All 8833.
no (lees of the 0883 Acadeey of Sciences. Physics of the Amephare
'0‘ 0cm). ‘2. "o 3. 1976s

5. Thorpe. 8. A” “On the Shape of Progressive internal waves.“ PHIL.
M8. ROY. 806. W. A263, Io 1165. 1968.

6. Month. A. 8.. Knenkovich. V. II" tart. V. 0.. IMCUIVOST' "IMO!”
mm (Variability of the world Ocean). Gidroeeteoiedat. 1976.

WIGHT: ltdetel'stvo ”leaks," “ltveatiya M 8888, Visits amefery i
okeene." 1978

5303
680: 1870

23

POI omcm. 08! 0|“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS. WRONG“ AND SPACE

UDC 551.666.“

INTERNAL HAVES GENEMTBD BY LOCAL PBR‘IURBATIOIIS IN A IVO-IAYBR STRA‘I‘II'IBD
FLUID

lioscow IZVESTI‘M moan: NAUK 3838. 1'12!“ “100an I OKBMM in Russian
Vol l6. No ll, l978 pp 1222-1228

[Article by l. V. Sturova, Hydrodynanics Institute. Siberian Division USSR
Academy of Sciences. subnitted for publication l Novesber 1977]

[Text] At the present title the authors of [1-3] have investigated the in-
ternal waves arising when a submerged inflow and outflow of equal inten-
sity are surrounded by a uniforn flow and when there is collapse of a
""spot of partially or cowletely nixed fluid. for two special Iodels

of density stratification of a fluid: 1) for a constant Brent-Vaisala fre-
quency N and 2) in the case of a thin thernocline in which N differs from
zero only in a narrow zone. A liniting case of the latter nodel is a two-
layer fluid with a density ju-p between honogeneous layers [6].

In this paper we exasine the lore general case of density stratification
of a fluid in which the density distribution in an unperturbed state has
the form (the y-axis is directed vertically upward)

(-."‘°)a (I)
(Halli-«(um (--<r<-m. «new.

Such a density distribution is characteristic for the upper layer of the
ocean in tropical and subtropical regions [5]. The assusption that the
lower layer is li-itless was introduced as a simplification of the prob-
lea. It was denonstrntcd in [I] that with a sufficient distance of the
perturbation f roa the solid boundary the reflection of waves is negligible.

«(n- e.

l. we will investigate the stationary problel of the wave movements caused
by a point inflow and a point outflow of equal intensity s situated beneath
the free surface at the depth h at the distance 2a fro- one another in a
uniforn flow of a heavy fluid. The x- and vans are situated at the un-
perturbed free surface in such a way that the x-axis coincides with the

direction of the velocity vector of the fluid far upstream It is asst-ed
that in a case of sufficiently great subsergence and a weak stratification
the flow around such a co-bination of an inflow and outflow is equivalent

2‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFlCIAL USE ONLY

to flow nround nn vlunnnted axially nymtrir hudy (similar to on unbound-
ed homogeneous fluid). The radius R of the "presentation area." body elong-
otion d and velocity V of the min flow unanbiguously deternine the e and
n values [2]. A sinilar plane problee was solved in [6).

In a linear forsulation with use of the Boussinesq approximation the equa-
tions of mtion of a nonviscous inconpressible fluid have the for:

u n he

.— 0 -— § — s- I“(I’+C)- 0(2-0) litrehlﬁh).
u 0' u (2)
0n 0' 0v 0,
- I -—. 'v-— Q :- ~-- on
9.9 h 0: 9 0: Op ‘9’
,,v1'_'.--.'_'. vi‘ln-‘L-o

e: 0: ‘ u a,

with the boundary conditions
V1 I 0 when y ' O

vu-w- WON/h)ﬂan-HOMO!)-(i+e):p.u. when y - -u
“0 Vs Vs PsP'o UhOI'I :2 + yz *- £20”

here u. v. w. p, p are perturbations of conponents of the velocity vector
in the direction of the r. y- and taxes, pressure and density; 3 is the
acceleration of gravity: 6 is the Dirac delta function. the subscript l
pertains to the upper layer. the subscript 2 pertains to the lower layer.
The free surface has been replaced by a solid cover. which makes it pos-
sible to filter out the surface waves without a significant distortion
of the internal waves.

The function '10:, y. c). deterninins the vertical displacement of a flu-
id particle. satisfies the linearized condition

Mlle-0N. (3)

Ne reduce equations (2) to a single equation for the function v; we in-
troduce dimensionless variables. as the scale unite for length and velo-
city taking the l and V values. we use the Fourier transform for the var-
lables x and t with the real para-store # and v respectively. for the
function f — the double tourier transfers of v, we obtain ordinary dif-
ferential equations whose solutions have the fora:

for case 1 (singularities in the upper layer)

Ia-C‘Illl (uh)Mee"‘”"-z¢h mu 600;.4 “-muomeml/m'
hum ch H no "Hum 43m,

25
'0! OFFICIAL US! MY
I'OR OVFICIM. USE ONLY

for cone 2 (eingularitiee in lower layer)

hue-(ﬂuke) eh Izy up [HUI-h) dill/D.
h-olelgn (pom-MomowM-(kmm‘Ml up mun-mm.

where
o-ueeleua. .V-(k'uh. Du-Neawn).
”-u'ov'. h-M’lu'. A-(R/V‘. e-Sh'lu'. Smith. (A)
D-loDnﬂ-Dm‘”.

lnowing i. (ton (3) we detereine the function 3 .. a double roarier tune-

for? of the V1 function end we will perforn reveree Pourier tranoforne an
in 2):

on 0

w... n- 7km I do 5 mm. mo““mwuo'wmwm. (5)
o \

where the following replacenent ie nade
n-hloo. w-hoooo. e-rcoee. a-ralee.

‘rhe integretion contour in the couple: h-plene rune along the eectione for
the fictitioue and part of the real axie [2]. and in eccordence with the
radiation condition ell the real polee are hypaeeed iron below. ‘lhe polee

of the integrand ere the roote of equetion (6) D(h. 9) I 0. and it in eeey
to ehow thet it hae not note then one poeitiwe root has with e . $>0 only in

e ceee when Mlle)“. with s - o — for )>l/Sll. with 5- 0 there are
M (003'.

tor inweetigeting internel wavee at greet dietancee iron the eource of per-
turhetion. in (5) we leave only the aingle integrale. repreeenting the ree-

idne at the point It - kg. and the double integrele, ceueed by integretion
along the eection (or the reel axle h.

For an eeynototic eveluetion of theee integrale when r-ooo we will use the
etetionery pheee nethod. Piret we will emine the eingle integrele whoee

stationary pointe eatieiy the equetion 11(6) - o, where 1N9) - how)
ein (9:7) end. eccordingly.

—--—— —.

mac-huo' co co n

It in eeey to ohow that when 0<9<a [2 the function 6(0) ie elweye peei-
tive end eccordingly, the etationary pointe have only one of the eingle in-
tegrale. In the ceee when t. 8>0 or when 8 - 0. a MA) 1. for ,(9. there
nre two etetionery pointe 91.2 (91<0.<02) when ?I?. -- on. ultiple
etationery point 9 - 9.. when one there ere no etetionary pointe 1?.
: erctg 6.. c. ie the mint- welne o? the £mction_6(9) when 0< O< a,

9 ie a root of the equation DUES) - 0, 6(0) - 6(9 0 0. G. . (9.)). If
£M<l when S - 0. then for 9‘9. (9. - ercein SBA.) there in one eta-
tlonery point: when 9 9. there ere no etetionery pointe.

" .-.°(°). 0(0)-

26
M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
NR OFFICIAL USI! ONLY

The etetionety polnte of the double integtele ere deter-thee free the eye-

tee of equetlom 3X"; - 31/3? - 0. where
m. 1)-(bcont+metue(gun/m1. km»

(7)

"hen 0< C . Y<nl2 they extet only for the lover elgn end ere equal to

 

‘0 _ m“. u b'ot'
[(n'u'ne‘n'ob'n‘ ' 1' - ”u. u '

The ﬁnal exptuelone for the function ’10:. y, I) heve the fore:

tot cue l

I
m-2uncommon(n-mnn.

0-. .
.133. “I “a
“I 1. (wow)

 

I
m-:ZI.A(~..o.n«oc-mn- («um-am.“

I-I
xmmm-nuwmmuol-vﬁnonutmnn.
for can 2

”5.090)“ to
“linkeum

 

a
Qt-‘ﬂﬂﬂ 210‘ (h. 0¢)c(h)¢"""’# (cm-uumwx
0.0

“(03" 'ﬂUODI? W 1.1- m‘ﬁd-'m. w. 1.”.
m - - zumZ‘wm min-ruqmuw.

0-.
Ce eat 5
0'90

 

lwgdop -(¢n'-‘-')~ pk tie-(“nememou

"ere R1 to I root of the equetton 00:. 9 1) - 0.

“It“! 0
«uh-Vi" Ln}:

.‘.)_,Iuom¢,-ltum. C(k)-¢-Nl¢el-gﬂo-ﬂ.
1!va run/«l... ran/aw...

unl'i “(C-9’0 “I'M“.

 

(8)

C a. Y: (n . 1.....6) an the crltlcel point. of the (metton X in (7)
V

Mb'bn.

.‘-"'o h-hﬂ. OWN-r21. bplhnl.

27

'0! OFFICIAL 088 MY

(9)
NR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

to ﬂuoride t.) snug...» 0

°"' some» ’ ""‘l e'eb.’ ’
r.-[13uet.-¢Aleln 1.+(rIeln tn (9)

«June 1.) up (-3937! eln {Jule 1.))!» 1..
4.4m; {smut-up (-2!“ eln was 1.)lllle 1.

Sinner expreeeione ere eieo ohteined for the other nought-for functione.
in perticuier. the horitontei coeponente of velocity et the free enrfeco
when ")0 ere equel to:

(or ceeo 1
e I
Idlooﬂ)‘ MEN)“ .0. WUA')‘ - ‘ “kw...“
for ceee 2
I
Iu(t.0.t)- L(e..0.)ele0.¢r.eleu.
.24
I
“(3.0.0- - 5(50.94)m90-ﬂ~1e.
where

m. chanson-00m. mun-fr.
w. ”hemmed-0m. empmw-n-m.

!
can...» b (,..,..(¢.uemisunmu-ﬁemmew.

f. O
“I It «90‘1"

 

for the epcciel ceeee u - 0 or S - O expreeeione (8) coincide with the known
eolutione [1. ‘1. It ehould he noted thet theee eolutione erg not uniformly
correct for ? in the neighborhood of the hounderiee |9| - O . Ivl - 9..
IQI - 9 . of the weve eonee, end eleo the rey V- 0. with ouch pere-etere
it ie neceeeery thet the reenlte ohteined ebove be refined.

to Figuree 1e end lo we ehow ieolince of the function 50an for 3/! - 150.
m - s. we - 10. a - 10. s - 0.01. A - 100. e- 0; 0.001. “me roote of
the eqoetione 00:. 0 ) - 0 end (6) were deternined nuericelly.

28
M OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

fig. la. leolines of function son/n with interval 1 for x]! - 150, “In -
5. Mk II 10. d ' 10. 8 O 0.01. A' 100. 8- O

with a positioning of the singularities in the upper layer and abeence of a
density 3w the internal waves are negligible, but with an increase in

5 considerable wave disturbances can arise in the lower layer of the
fluid both in the neighborhood of the discontinuity and far froa it.

2. Now we will examine the plane nonstationary problen of a current ariain;
during collapse of an initially circular spot of the radius R in s cowlete-
ly or partially nixed fluid surrounded by a stratified fluid. ha indicated
in [7]. the properties of such a current are intinately linked to the be-
havior of turbulent regions arising in wekea or during the collapse of in-
ternal waves. and the fine structure of the vertical distribution of density

and velocity gradients in the ocean and atnosphere.

At the initial wt in tine t - 0 the density perturbation has the for-

noun”) (roamed).
“M”- { o q—Mrn >1». «m

in the case of a coqletely nixed spot #- l. Outeide the spot the density
distribution in deter-lined (l) and it is seemed that Ii)“ 4» R. The nethod
for solving this proble. is similar to that set forth in Section 1 (the tile

29
'0! OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

t ploy. the role of the longitudinal coordinate x: for the ocoio units of

length and tine we and the value. R and l/Jot a).
0 Jo II!”

mm:
o... QEIL‘IJ

a‘klﬁl
gin:-
ﬂﬂ§hﬁll
Imus-II
Immanu-
unmann-

 
 
  
 

   

10‘

    
 
 

  

II

25

 
 

J0

 
     

the final notation. for tho function '10. a. t) ontoido tho not have

tho {on

m- 240.. comma-numb» «Mlﬂﬂ- 0800:6090", I"

_2:(_i+o).. “gunman-hmw‘m" “gaunt”-
-00). I?" .. ml“ gaudy-Um.

30
M OHICIIJ. US! ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Caption for Figure 2: Ioolineo of function son/n with interval 1 for t F
-1s..A- sooo. u/n-z,h/n- 5.5-1: ... -0,b— 5-0.001. Tho
ohadod aenicirclo corresponds to the initial poeition of tho spot. The cur-

rent ia not ohovn in the neighborhood of the spot duo to the urging of the
lines.

 

|
m . 240m.) “-er ")upluduﬂ-Ml'

- .77.. (M4,... min «9)»- gm Mahmud-1»
O. + a

Hero k; in a root of the equation
on. o.)-&m0.on.¢(km°c-Da)"""‘""°'

 

(mo-ﬂan «)""“‘°’ m(rhuu(0-v)+-lnhl0.
r elnon'l'ﬂ

T-lD/di IMM- P-l‘V/N'I age.
M-coa MW. D.-)l+a(l!-A de' 0).
A - l/of- R. In. 7.. are critical pointa of the function

m. 1) «Memo-h mama-9mm.
equal to

F.“ “0"): 1o'm'll(.I'93.)/“]3 .30 .0» .5
b2. h3. [M van deter-inn! in (9),

amulet. m-icannwn-m

n-coa'lolh- Mun. +(k. “:"—') Mun-u]
“.1- “. Ia

‘I-(“ﬂ one “at. 1. (kg-value‘).
J2 1' I oecond-ordar loeeel function of the tint kind.

 

The horizontal velocity v at the lrae aurface. vhcn IDO. ia equal to

raw- -0V— (M) E—Mde ”ml-Wehhlm 0le

x cubic alum-9N Iii-Ni”
:(mn.
n’eﬁ'

 

o “outnumblﬂlbdawhwv-hd-w.
O

32
m omcuu. US! OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

ﬁgure 2 ehove ieolinoe of the function 50 "In for :5; - 15. J1- 5000,
III! - 2. h!!! - 5. ﬁ- 1. 6 - O: 0.001. It ie intereeting to note that in
the preeence o! e deneity juep the internal vevee generated by e collepee
o! the niacin; tone virtually will not dietort the (ore of the diecontinuity
along ite entire length. vhereee for internal vevee froe a body (co-pare
lie. l.b) thie ie obeerved only near the exie of the wake.

1.

3.

5.

'6.

7.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Hilee. J. 9.. "Internel Hevee Generated by Horizontally Moving Source."
GEOPHYS. H.010 mm. 2. No 1. 1971.

Sturove. I. 9.. "Have Noveeente Arieins in e Stretified Fluid During

Plow Around e Suheeued Body.” PM? (Applied Hethenetice end Theoret-
icel l’hyeice), No 6. 1976.

Hart-en, ll. 1.. bowie. Ii. 9.. "Hake Collepee in e Stratified Fluid:
Lineer Treat-out.” J. FLUID new” 51. Part 3, 1972.

Sturove. I. 9., ”Have Ibveeente Arieing free e Stepped Stratification
Duties Plow Around e Sub-erged Iody,’I cutsmum moor mm
”LOSING! SW (Nuericel Hethode in the Mechenice of a continuoue
Media). Vol 6. No 3. ﬂovoeihirek, ted-yo m 80 AN 888R. 1975.

Phillipe. 0.. DINA!!!“ W SWA OKZMM (Dynamic. of the Upper
Leyer oi the Ocean). "air,” 1969.

Sturove. I. 9.. "Plane Problee of Rave Hove-ante Arieing in a Stretif-
ied Fluid During Plow Aromd e Suhersed Dipole.” DIM” SPIDSIIIIO‘!
83317! (Malice of e Continuous liediu). No 16. Nmeibirek. 12d. In-te
Oidrodineeihi so MI 8833. 1973.

Bell. 1'. ll.. Dunn. J. P.. "tbdel for Mixed Region Oollepee in e Stret-
ified ﬂuid.” J. m. “Am" 8, No 3, 197‘.

cannon: ledatel'etvo mam.” "Ieveetiye All 8883, Pizilu eteoefery i

5303
G0:

okeeee,” 1978

im

33

M ORIGIN. US! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENI'IFIC ORGANIZATION

VSEVOIDD VLADIMIROVIG! FBDYNSKIY (OBITUARY)
Moscov ASTROIDMIGESKIY VBSTI‘IK in Russian Vol 12, No 10. 1978 pp 2&7-2h9

[‘liext] Associate “ember of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR Vsevolod
Vladimirovich Fedynskiy. editor-in-chief of "Astronomicheskiy Vestnik," died
suddenly on 17 June 1978. This marks the passing of a great scientist. an
eminent specialist in the area of physics of the earth, exploratory geo-
physics, meteor astronomy. an excellent organiser of science.

V. V. Fedynskiy was born on 1 May 1908 in Mix-gored in a physician's family.
From his early years he was interested in astronomy. observed the great
opposition of Mars in 192': with a small telescope. and the next year entered
the mechanics and mathematics department of Moscow University from which he
graduated in 19$ with a major in astronow and gravimetry. As early as 1927
V. V. Pedynskiy had organized a meteor division of the Collective of 0b-
servers of the Moses»: Society of Amateurs of Astronomy (later to be the
Roscov Department of the All-Union Astronomicalcoeodetic Society). This
division started a systematic study of meteor showers. first from visual
observations, and then on the initiative of V. V. Fedynskiy the photographic
and spectral stuw or meteors was begun. In 1932 V. V. Fedynskiy and

K. P. Stawukovich obtained and analysed a basis photograph of a bright
meteor, and used it to determine the distribution of temperature of the
atmosphere with respect to altitude at the 80-100 km level. In 193“. a group
of observers under the guidance of V. V. Pedynshiy obtained a bright meteor
spectrum of la? lines. In 1937, the first meteor patrol in the IBSR was set
up and used as the base for development of a stationary meteor patrol set up
at the observatory in Dushanbe. V. V. Fedvnskiy made a great contribution
to the development of meteoric methods of studying the upper layers of the
atmosphere. One of these methods is the observation of the drift of meteor
trails. These observations vere first made visually, and then by photography,
and most recently, vith the active participation of V. V. Fedynskiy, radar
methods of stuwing the drift of meteor trails have been developed.

m results of these studies was a monograph vritten by V. V. Pedynshiy
Jointly with P. B. Babadthmnov. B. L. Kuhcheyev and V. A. ﬂechitaylenko.
”Rndiometeor Studies of the Circulation of the Upper Atmosphere" (Dushanbe,
1915). his book susmarized the results of the Soviet Equatorial Meteor
Expedition of 1968-1970.

34
30R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

n Povolzh'ye
he was still a student).

or or the gravimetric nethod or

 

In 1936 he had been designated technical direct

sica Trust. During the war,
and other natural riches.

gravimeters. V. V. Fedynskiy was

taneously with the development of gravimeter design, V. V. Fedynskiy was
the director of the Scientific Rea

earch Institute of Applied Geophysics
(1943-1952). In 1952 he was named

r. V. Pedynskiy organized the service of marine
’aciric Ocean and Antarctica. H

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

practice of marine grnvimetry. developed methods of complex geophysical
studies. organised searches for new deposits of petroleum an-. natural gas.
participated in the orgmiization of ultrudceh drilling. iie wrote the funda-
mental work "Exploratory Geophysics” that was published in 1965 and was
republished many times. Although this book is required as a text for students
majoring in geophysics and geology. at the mane time it is also a monograph
on this topic that is necessary for specialists as well.

in his scientific work. V. V. i-‘edynskiy was able to successfully combine his
own knowledge and interests in different areas of science. Its early as 19“
he published an important theoretical work "On the DestructiVe Action of
Meteor Strikes" (Jointly with K. P. Stanyukovich). in this work. V. V.
i-‘cdynskiy and K. i’. Stanyukovich predicted the existence of craters on the
moon long in advance of Heaters scientists. in recent years V. V. Fedynskiy
had turned to the problem of crater formation on planets. 'ihe discovery of
gigantic crater structures on the earth and proof of their impact origin on
many planets of the solar system stimulated him to consider the problem of
evolution of crater formations over prolonged periods (millions of years or
more) under the action of various geophysical processes (isostatic leveling
and so forth). 'lbgether with his students (H. 8. Krass. A. l. Dahisha.

Yu. 1. Favieyev) he made an analysis of this problem and derived interesting
results. At the present time. iiauka Press is preparing to publish a collec-
tive monograph "Meteoric Structures on the Surfaces of Planets” edited by

V. V. Fedynskiy.

From 1956. V. V. Fedynskiy was a professor in the geology department of
Moscow State University. and from 1951 was head of the department of geo-
physical methods of studying the earth's crust. while in his last years he
headed the geophysics division of the department.

ile gave courses in gravimetric prospecting and the theory of the gravi-
tational potential. or his geophysicist students. 20 have become candidates
of sciences. and three have become doctors of sciences. Vsevolod Vladimiro-
vich trained many students in the field of meteor astronomy as well.

Since his youth he was an active member of the All-Union Astronomical-
Geodctic Society. and in various years was the head of the meteor division.
chairman of the Collective of Observers of the Moscow Division of the
All-Union Astronomical-Geodetic 80eiety. and from 1961 to his death was
editor-in-chief of "Astronomicheskiy Vestnik." In 1970 he was elected

an honorary member of the Society and first vice-president of the All-Union
Astronomical-Geodetic Society. lie was a member of the CPSU since 19102.

Tue memory of Pedynskiy -- scientist. organizer. pedagog, editor. educator
of young people. a sensitive and sympathetic man -- will live in the hearts
of all those who had the pleasure of working at his side or profiting from
his council and assistance.

OOPYRiGiiT: i zdatel'stvo ”ﬂauka". ”Astronomicheskiy Vestnik". 1978

6610
(so: 1810

36
roe OHIO!“ US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLIC-“IONS

‘l'llB 'Bl’OS' ELECTRONIC CALCUM‘IOR

Hoacov unknown "08 (POSOIIYA DLYA MWIKOV MSHINOSMWH BWRO)
(‘l’he Bpoa llectronic Calculator-“textbook for uployeea of Machine Account-
ing lureaua) in lluaaian 1978 aigncd to preaa 28 Peb 78 pp 5. 79, 92-96

(Annotation. table of contenta. photo caption on p S and explanatory text
on p 79 for photo on p 80 fro. book by A. ll. Baraboahkin. Stetietilta.
26.000 copiea. 93 pagee]

[Text] The book conridero the technical characteriatica and block diagram
of the Bpoa electronic calculating nachine. clencnta of the functional dia-
gram. the atructure and function of the functional unite of the nachine,
the operational algoritlue, and the conatruction and uintenance of the
Iachine.

The book ia intended for aployeea of co-puter inatallationa-onachine
accounting bureaua, conputer centere. and nehine accounting atationa.

It will he uaeful to Itudenta atudying electronic computer technology in
run and tekhnilu-r.

Contenta Page
Pro- the Author 3
Baeic abbreviationa, ayohola and definitiona of atandard tor-a l.

l. Purpoac end Application of the Blektronika apes Electronic

Calculeting Machine S
1.1 Purpoae and technical characteriatico of electronic

calculating nachinea S

1.2 AritI-etic operationa perforned by the nachine 6

2. Blmnta of the runctional Diagru 8

2.1 Circuita of the A, V, S and I) type kayo 8
2.2 Construction of logical elalaenta on the beaia of the

type kayo l0

2.2.1 "And" circuit l0

2.2.2 ”0r" circuit no

2.2.3 Delay circuit for one hit (D-flip-flop circuit) ll

37
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

2.2.6 Daley circuit for one decimal digit
2.2.3 Circuit for regiater uith roetoring of intonation
2.3 Circuite for latching large integrated circuita
2.3.1 hatching large integrated circuite with each other
2.3.2 Hatching lerge integrated circuita with the dieplay
2.3.3 hatching large integrated circuite with the keyboard
3. Structure and work of the l'unctional Unite or an Electronic
Calculating mchine
3.1 Structural diagru of the nachine
3.2 henory unit
3.3 Synchronization unit
3.3.l Phaee inpulee generator
3.3.2 binary addreea counter
.3.3 Decimal addreee counter
.6 we addreaa counter
put unit
.6.l Keyboard unit
6.2 Digital intonation encoder

0
U

3.6 I

6 3 Operatione regiater

6.6 Input-output regiater (lick tretrad)
.6.5 Counter tor location of point

t

S

3.5 A i betic unit

UNUUUUUB UU
0

3.5.2 8th corrector
3.6 Control Unit
3.6.l Unit for formulating epeciticatione of nicro-
operatione
3.6.2 Micro-progr-ing unit
3.6.3 Cycle counter
3.7 Output unit
3.7.l Organiution of output unit
3.7.2 Intonation decoder
3.7.3 Dieplay unit
3.8 Power unit
6. Operating Algeria-e
6.l Keyboard indication
6.2 Organization of the beginning of perforIing an operation
6.3 Operation of clearing
6.3.1 General clearing
6.3.2 Clearing the keyboard regieter
6.6 Input operation
6.6.l Input of. a «hole nuber
6.6.2 Input of a deci-al point
6.6.3 Input of the fractional part or a umber
6.3 Operation of pri-ary preeeing of aritl-etic keye
6.6 itl-etic oparationa
.6.l Operation of addition-eubtraction
.6.2 Operation of multiplication
.6.3 Operation of diviaion
.6.6 Incorrect operatione

38
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

A!
I.
l.
6
la

l3
l6
16
15
l8

19

2O
20
22
22
23
23
26
27
28
28
29
29
3l
3!
32
32
33
36

36
67
67
69
69
SI
5 l
51
55
55
$5
$7
57
57
$9
39
63
63

66
69
76
78
POI 0??!ClAI. US! ONLY

i. Construction and usintensnce of the hochine 79
5.1 Peculiarities of construction 79
5.2 hethod for locating bugs in the nachine 81

5.1.l General approach to locating bugs in the nachine Bl
5.2.2 Recnnmended nothod (or rapid location of bugs in
the machine 82
Appendix 1. Table of Relations of Elements of tho Machine 86
Appendix 2. Mathenatical Expression oi Signals 88

 

Pigure l.l. Cansrsl Viev of tho Blektronika lpoa Electronic Calculating

Machine:

1. Numeric infatuation display 8. Digital keyboard

2. sutton to turn on the nachine 9. Rnsult key

3. Division key 10. Inset key

A. multiplication key ll. Correction key (key to clear

5. Subtraction hay information iron the display

6. Addition key registe:
12. negative result indicator

l3. Overflow indicstor

39

FOR OPTICIAL US! Oil!
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

The construction of the Elcktronika Epoa machine includes (figure 5.1.)
board 1 -- the output diapley device, board 2 -- the input key device;
can 3 and cover lo. On board 1 are Iounted four large integrated circuit
circuits (aeriea K145 uicrocircuita), a 1m power pover unit in the for.
of a separate device, an Ill-18 diaplay, K2114“! keya for controlling the
anodca and aatricea of the display, and three aeriea K172 nicrocircuita to

40
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
P011 OPPICIAL USE ONLY

eiininate {aloe lighting in the diaplay. Board 1 alao providee a place
for nounting the power unit on diacrete eluente. On board 2 three key-
board unite are nounted ioraing a pegboard:

MiG-1 -- digit keye and decimal point

"116'“ ._ 0+». ".00, 0"». “a a." k."

91116-6 -- “8". "8K”, and ”I" kayo

and the phaae generator in the torn of a mores: nitrocircuit.

Board 2 aleo provider roo- fer oounting a phaae generator nade up of die-
crete eleaenta. Board 1 and board 2. for-ling a couhined unit. are con-
naeted to each other with two lull-22 (5) type connectore attached to the
edgea of the hoarda. The colhined unit it attached to the caae by acrewe
(opening 6) and it cloaed with a cover which ia attached to the caae with
acrewa (opening 7). Special openinge (8) are provided in the tau and
cover to penit the operator to eetahliah the neceeeary angle of inclina-
tion of the nachine to facilitate colputation of data. The open poaition
oi the etand at the cane tine i-provee heat exhauet iron the aachine on
the eidee of the cue. 0n the face eide of the cover it located the on-o.t
button (9), the preaeing of which opene the cover (10) and per-ita acceae
to the digit diaplay (11).

comma: lrdatel‘etvo "Statiatiha." 1978

8542
080: 1870

61

m OFFICIAL US! MY
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLIC”! IONS

UDC 621.791.“:621J71
ROLL HEIDI!!!) 01’ 3mm

§;;cg;88VARKA pnoxerxo! aznnrennov in Russian 1977 pp 2, n.6,

(Annotation, Introduction and table of Contents of book by
Bergey Aleksandrcvich Oclovensnkc, Isdetel'stvo Hetelluﬁgiye,
s

sienna to press 31 Aneust 1977. IM900 capiee. 158 peso
[Text] esmorerros

The author discusses the physicochsnicel processes taking place
in the zone where the neterisls are oined during the produc-
tion of binetsls by hot and cold rol welding.

he describes the production processes involved in obtaining bi-
netels of various types for verious purposes as well as the
principles governing the design of corrosion-resistent bi-
netals and the selection of nter ls for the inter-edicts lay-
ere, which principles are based on a thernodynenic enelysis of
the carbon redistribution prooessee in tho scne where steels of
different classes are Joined together.

This book is intended for scientific end e insering end tech-
nical personnel speoislising in the product on, use develop-
nent, and investigation of binetals and conpound I rials for
different purposes. It sen also be useful for students and
graduate students in technical “12's. Illustrations 69; tables
8; bibliography of 1'68 titles.

IMODMION

the development of nodern technology is inextricably related to
the increasing use of netallic neteriels, tho requirsnents for
which -- fro- the viewpoint of insuring reliability and dura-

bility, econcqy and technologicel qualities - arc steedily in-
creasing because of the intensificatim of ﬁner-e1 effects, in-

creasing nechenicel loeds end working nediun aggressiveness,
and so on.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

In particular, the functional characteristics of aetallic na-
ter ale can be inproysd by the development and industrial adop-
tion of binetallio and composite (combined) materials.

Binetallic and multilayer rolled stock is one of the most pro-
gressive and economical forms of metallurgical production, and
t is being used more and acre widely in branches of the
national econow. The need for increas s volume of its
reduction and enlarging the assortaent 0 available products
ollows from the ass gnnsnt iven netallurgiets by the 25th
CPBU Congress: to increase e output of effective types of

natal products.

Over the last decade, the rcduction and consunption of hi-
netels in our country has reased by 50 percent. There has
been a particularly sharp increase in ths consumption of two-
layer corrosion-resistant steel -- it has nore than doubled.

At the present tine the consunption of binetal is relatively
snall in con riscn with the total steel output (about 0.1 per-
oent), but i plays a very large role. In connection with
this binetal can be used both as a replace-ant for uniforn
notale and se a naterial with s new complex of functional or
technological characteristics.

An ample of the creation of s new complex of proportiee b
combining speciall selected steels is self-sharpening shes
and shaped binetal ic rolled stock. It is used in sgrioultural
cultivating and digging uohines. Self-sharpening during oper-
ation of a plowshare plow cultivator blade, sha low low
disk, and so on, is ur as the result of the sharp dif-
ferent rate of wear of the soft and herd layers when the soil
acts abrasively on the cutting elenent. The relationship of
the binetal oomponents' weer rates must be determined exactly,
and it depends on the wear resistance of the steels and their
thickness. Self-sharpening of the elenents of soil-working na-
ohinee lakes it possi le to reduce expenses for honing and re-
placing parts as well as the force required! that is, the
anouunt 0; fuel consumed during plowing, cult vating and other
.0 m e

Another staple of the new oonplex of properties that are real-
ised in layered netsllic nateriale are the so-called thermo-
elaetic binetsls (or thsrnobinetals). rhcse binetals consist
of two layers of steels or alloys with substantially different
coefficients of thernal expansion. when a piece of the binetal
is heated, this factor leads to considerable bending of the bi-
netsllic elensnt, with the ma nitude of the fleme depending
on the heating tangerature. ese binetallic elensnte are
widely used in ins ments for measuring and regulating

‘3
m OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tenpereture end protecting electricel circuits tron overloed-
ing, es well es other einilsr situetions.

In the electricel engineering industry there is e constent ex-
pension of the use 0 the effect of superconductivity, which is
e propertLposseeeed by e Ina-her or ellcys of retrectc end
rere nets end their cheeicel ocepounds (the interests lidee).
Cop r is not e superconductor but, since it hes e high thereel
c uctivity retin’ when it is ccehined with e superconductive
literidl it is en deel structurel neteriel for the ereetion or
strong negnetic fields.

All these en les show how diversified the functionel proper-
ties ot binete cen be.

The developeent or binetels with e conpletely new set of func-
tionel roperties is e promising eree of the nodern science or
esterie s, since it reises the possibility of reeching cu-
pletely new end originel structure]. decie ons for nechines,
equip-eat end instrunents.

In this book we correlete the results or workdone by the euth-
or end his coworkers et the Centrel Scientific Reseerch Insti-
tute or Ferrous Kstellurgy ineni LP. Berdin end in the lebore-
toriee et e nunber of Societ netellurgicel plents under produc-
tion ccndititns. Use is eleo nede ot the nost interesting re-
sults published in pericdioels.

The euthor wishes to express his gretitude tc Cendidetee of
‘rechnicel Sciences Li. Bytov end 1.!u. lonnove, es well es to
engineer LN. Logvincve, for their greet eseistence in the
preperetion or the nenuscript end their ective perticipetion in
the discussion or its eeperete perts.

The euthor is indebted to the collective of the Binetels Lebcr-
et at the Centrel Scientific Reseerch Institute or Ferrous
he urgy ileni LP. Berdin for its eeeitenoe in conducting
experinente.

rumorcosrma
Peso
m‘r“u%‘°notooooooocOOOOIOODOOCIO.l.

chepter 1. Theory end Technology of Processes for Reducing
hudnetellicneteriele........... 7
l. Generel orleticn end Clessitieetion or Methods for

Prcduo hyeredhsteriels.............. 7
2. Itheory the Joining of Hotels in the Solid Phese . . g
3. Production Processes for Obteining Binstels. . . . . . 2

Mo

M ORIGIN. USB OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Producing Binctals by Mot Roll Welding. . .
Produoi nBinetels by Cold Roll welding . .
The Cast Method for Producing Binetals .
The Blectr c-Arc Surfacing Method. . . . .
Producin Binstalsb by Explosive Holding . . .
k. Classif cation of Leyered Metallic Materials by Types
and Areas of Utilization . . . . . . . . . .
5. Methods of Investi sting the Structure and Properties
of the Transitions Zones of Binetals. . . . .
Optical Metallo graphy and Electron Microscopy
Measuring Micrchardness . . . . .
x-Ra Spectrun Microanal sis. . .
The edioactive Isotope ethod. .
Mechanical Tests. . . . . . . . .

e O. o
o o c o
O 0 o O a
O 0 O O I
O O O. .

Chapter 2. Structure and Properties of Corrosion-Resistant

Bhot‘li e e e e s e e s s s
l. Corrosion-Resistant Binstals with a Cladding Layer of.
Stainless Steel. . . . .

Corrosion-Resistant Binetals Mith a Cladding layer. of.
08Kh13 and 08Mh18MlO(T) Steels. . . . . .
Corrosion-Resistant Binatals With a Cladding. Layer of
08Khl7T end lSKhZST Steels. . . . . .
2. Structure of Mslded Joints in Binstals Mith Cladding
Layers of Nonferrous Metals and Their Alloys . . . .
Carbon Steel + Copper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Carbon Steel + Michel. . . . . . . . . . . .
Carbon Steel + Nickel-Copper All” (Monel). . . . . .
3. Selecting the Ccnposition of Steels for Corrosion-
Resistent Binetels . . . . . . . . . . .
Thernodynanios and Kinetics of the Redistribution of
Elements in the Transitional Layer of Binetsls. . . .
Effect of Alloying on the Diffusion of Carbon in Steele
Effect of A110 ing on the Activi of Carbon in Steels.
Selecting the cup osition of the ternediste Layerw

mrhnuhmhuﬂthmuh.... ....
Seizcting the Composition of Steele for the Cladding
y.’ I O O O O C O O O O O C O O O I

k. Effect of Thernal Action on the Redistribution of Car-
bon and the Properties of Corrosion-Resistant Binetsls
.oeneral Principles for Designing Binetels Mith s
Stainless Steel Cladding Layer . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 3. Hear-Resistant and Tool Binotals . . . . . . . .
1. Types of Hear-Resistant and Tool Binotals. . . . . . .
2. Producm Hear-Resistant and Tool Binetals by Roll

sMolding and Extrusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
d inetsllio Rolled Stock for Self-Sharpening
P mmr.’ D 0 O O O O I O O O O I I O O I O I O I O O

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

86
106
112
118

119
119

122
122
NR OI’I’ICIAL 098 081.?

Pogo
Bhgotlglnotolo for Cultivator Blodoo ond Hoodvorklnc .12“
0° 0 O O O O 0 O 0

Bhopo d and Prouod Binotola tor Hutu-Cutting ‘roolo on.

rﬂogor P1”. 0 O O O O I O 0 0 O O 126

3. Boot hoot-out or Hoor-Roolotont and Tool Elnotolo . . 130

Cox-hon Stool + Chrono-Vaudmn Stool Blutol. . . . . . 130

ﬂoat Trootnont or Voor-Roolatont on! Tool Stoolo. . . . Bk

3

Choptor '0. Multlloyor and Rolnforcod Metallic Motorlolo o
1. “1‘1“”? stwcm.1 muri.1.o o o o o o o o o o o o I“.
2. Huh-Toupouturo Coupoolto mumm- . . . . . . . . . l‘olo

B1b11°‘“w’0 O 0 O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O 151

comma: Indotol'otvo ”Houllunlya". 1977

117%
080 8 1870

‘6
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

unc 621.039.5.053+621.039.553.36
connector or cmucmx. mmms m nouns ALKALINE mm

Moscow KORROZIYA KONBTRUKTBIONNYKH MATERIALOV V ZﬂIDKIKﬂ BROKE-
Lccnuxxn METALLOV in Russian 19?? pp 2-», 262-263

[Annotation Foreword and Table of Contents of book Boris
Aleksandrovioh Nevsorov, Vitaliy Vasil' evich thov ladimir
Alekseyevich Ivancv, Ole Viktorcvich 8 arkov Nikoiaz Dnitri-
xerich Krayev, Yevgeniy asil'yevich ashkin and lsdislav

leksandrovich Bolov'yev, lsdatel'stvc A isdat, signed to
press 17 May 1977, 2,320 copies, 26% pages

[Toxt] ANNOTATION

The authors present {ginarily original experimental and theo-
retical laterial on e corrosive interaction of structural
steels and alloys with uolten alkaline heat-transfer agents
(sodium, sodiun-potassiun alloy and lithiun). The kinetics of
their interaction are described, and there is a discussion of
different models of the mass transfer rocess in s nonisothern-
io circuit systsn. The authors evalua e the basic factors af-
fecting the ease transfer process such as the heat-transfer

a ent‘s rate of novenent, tenpera ure flow rate, the geOmetry
o the stand, and others. They explain the basic principles of
the alloying of steels for the purpose of reducing their rate
of dissolution in alkaline meta .

This book is intended for the use of scientific workers and
specialists on corrosion and the science of naterisls, as well
as for technologists, developers and planners working in the

fields of atonic and r engineer . Figures 88 tables 71
bibliography of 25% titles. ing ‘ ‘

POBSUORD

B.A. levscrov's book "Corrosion of Structural literials in So-
diun,‘ uhich was basically devoted to the erperinental study of
the nechaniems of corrosion, was published in 1968. Using

67
YOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sodium as an example he developed a physicochemical approach
to the explanation of the effect on corrosion of such nonmetal-
lic impurities as oxygen and hydrogen. In the book he present-
ed the results of corrosion tests and inwesti ations of the
basic classes of structural materials in a s ium heat-transfer
agent for the purpose of studying the mechanism of corrosion,
as well as to establish the relationship between the corrosion
resistance of materials and their chemical composition.

the present book, which was written a large collective of
authors, retains some of the ccntinui y of the 1968 book, but
at the same time is more multifaceted with respect to the tech-
niques used in the inrestigations and includes new theoretical
developments and correlations.

The collective of authors that worked on this book considers it
its dut to em hasiae that in the development of the science of
materia s for igh-temperature, molten metal heat-transfer
agents, Doctor of Chemical Sciences Professor Vasiliy Savvich
shsnko nade a significant pioneering contribution. Besides

is, it is necessary to nention that the research discussed in
this book was stimulated by the constant interest in the study
of the behavior of structural materials in molten metal heat-
transfer agents that was expressed by A.I. Leypunekiy, academi-
cian of the Ukrainian 883 Academy of Sciences.

During the period when this book was being prepared for publi-
cation, Doctor cf technical Sciences Professor B.A. Nevzorov a
leading specialist in the corrosion of structural materials in
molten metal heat-transfer agents, died. Research in the cor-
rosion of structural materials in sodiun was begun in our coun-
try by a collective of workers led by V.S. Lyashenko and B.A.
Nevscrov. Simultaneously with the development of testing meth-
ods and the mastery of the technology and techniques for work-
ing with a heat-transfer agent so unusual in ower engineering
as molten sodium, B.A. Ievsorov's initiative ed to the begin-
ning of research in the physicochemical phenomena and rocesses
taking place in a structural material-sodiun system. he col-
lective s achievements in studying the corrosion nechanisme of
structural materials in molten metals and in recognizing the
general regularities of corrosion processes were argely deter-
mined by the fruitful creative leadership of B.A. Nevzcrov.

:::tauthors dedicate this hook to the memory of these scien-
.9

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Pugs
Forum 0 O O O O O I O O I 0 I O O O O O O O I O 0 t O O O 3

68

’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 1. General Intonation and Scientific Concepts
About the Corrosion of Structural Materials in
Molten Metal Heat-Transfer Agents. . . . . . . .

Chapter 2. Ph ical Rules of the Corrosion Processes in
Mo ten Metal Heat-Transfer Agents. . . . . . . .
2.1. For-“latlon of the PTODIOII e e e e e e e e e
2.2. Factors Affecting Corrosion in Molten Metal Heat-o
hamf.r ‘nnts. O O O O O O O O O O O I O O O O O
2. . Solubility Under Isothermal Conditions . . . . . . .
2. . Effect of" the Duration of Tests on the Corrosion of
htor1‘la. O O O O O O O O O O O O O O C O
2.5. The Diffusion La er in Molten Metal. . . . . . . .
2.6. Kinetics of the issolution end Mass Transfer of.
Pure Metals Under Monisotherml Conditions . . .
2.7. Kinetics of the Mass Transfer of Selectively Dis-
solving SteelsandAlloys. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.8. Tenperature Dependence of Mass Transfer Under lion-

isothermal Conditions. . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.9. Effect of the Heat-Transfer Agent's Flov Rate on
Corrosion and Mass Transfer. . . . . . . . . .

2.10. Same Re arities in the Dissolution and Mass Trans-
fer of ustenitic Steels in a Monisothernal System
With a Sodium Heat-Transfer Agent. . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 3. Experimental Inventigations of the Corrosion of
Structural Materials . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1. Corrosion Resistance of Heat-Exchange Pipes of
lKhlSMlOT Steel when in Contact With mzn Steel in
a Sodium Heat-Transfer Agent . . . . . . . . . .
3.2. Research in Ferritic-Perlitic Steels and the Pros-
aeets of Using Them in the Steam Generators of ABS '3
1th a Sodium Heat-Transfer Agent. . . . . . . . . .
3.3. Investigation of the Effect of the Chemical Conposi-
tion of Austenitic Steels on Dissolution and Mass
TransferinSodiun...... .....
3J0. Research in the Corrosion of lK'hlSMldl‘ Steel in So-
dium With an Increased Oxygen Content. . . . . . . .

Page

‘5

81
88
88
101

110
121

3.5. Research in the Corrosion of Austenitic and Chronium

Steels in a Sodium-Potassium Alloy Float. . . . . . .
3.6. A Study of the Rules Governing the Dissolution of

PurelickelinLithiun....... .....
3.7. Kinetics of «at-Phase Formation in Austenitic Steels

SSTheyCorrodeinlaithlul...oo........

Chapter h. Experimental Investigation of the Rules Govern-

1:3 Carbon and Nitrogen Transfer in Oxygen-
rogenCorrosion...............

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .

12‘}
132
136

1‘00
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
lo. 1. Investigation of the Recularities of Carbon Transfer1
1n 8°61“. O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
Thermodynamic Analysis of Carbon Transfer . . . . . . . l'tl
Kinetic Factors of the Carbon Transfer Process. . . . . 1‘09
Techniques for Investigat Carbon Transfer and a Re-
V1.V of th. “ta 111th. L ur.tur.e e e e e e e e e e 158
Kinetic and Temperature Dependences of the Carbonisa-
tion of Structural Haterials. . . . . . . . . . 166
Change in the Mechanical Properties of Steels in Con-
nection With Carbonisation in Sodium. . . . . . . . . lg?
Redistribution of Carbon in Systems . . . . . . 2
The Mechanism of Carbonization of Structural Materials.l
Auressivensss of Carbon-Containing Inpurities in Sodi-

m. 0 O O O O O O O O O O O O 0 O O O 191
Effect of Oxygen-Containing Impurities on Carbon Trans- 197
or e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e

0n the Mechanism of Carbon Transfer in .Sodium . . . . . 205
Bvaluati the Carbon Transfer Process in a Bil-350
pov.r p ant O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
h .2. The Nitrogen Transfer Process in a Sodium Heat-
‘rramr.r ‘Cnt e e e s e e e e e e 21‘.
Thermodynamic and Kinetic Properties of nitrogen in
“undo... 0000.00.00.21”
Nitriding of Steels in a Sodium-nitrogen System . . . . 218
On Evaluating the Allowable Nitrogen ontent. . . . . 22o
Nitridinx of Steels in Sodium With an Admixture of So-
d1“.“1tr.t.eeeeeeeeeeee 0222
lo. 3. Effect of Potassium and Calcium Inpurities in Sodiu-
on the Kinetics of Carbon Transfer to llhlSNlOT
Bum.'.8t..1eeeeeeeeeeeeeee e22“
103.011 the Hechanism of can Corrosion of Structural
Haterials in a Sodium at-TransferA ent. . . . .230,
19.5. A Study of the Corrosion of Structura Ilaterials in
Sodium With Increased Oxygen and Hydrogen Contents . 2&2

Conclmlm. . C . O 0 O . . . . . . O O . O C C . O O 0 C O 2“,
B1b1108r. phy e e e e e e e e s e e e e e e e e o e e s e s e 2"?
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Atonisdat', 1977

117%
080: 1870

50

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIORR

TABLE OF CONTENTS PROM JOURNAL 'mwuronr GEOPHYSICS'

ﬂoacov RAZVBDOCHNAYA 030?!“ch in luaaian No 79. I977 aignad to praaa 26 Aug
77 pp lob-I65

[Tabla of contanta iron publication aditad by V. Yu. Zaychanko. ladatal'atvo
Vadra. 2.800 copiaa. I69 pagaa)

[Taxt] Contanta Paga
Kata. 8. A. “Kinanatic Analyaia Through a Syatan of Adaptive Piltara" 3

Karaaik. B. ”.3 Kata. 3.1m and Sokolov, 8. V. "Sampling of tha Kinc-
natic Analyaia Hathod through a Syatan of Adaptiva Piltera in an
Araa of Conplax ‘l‘actonica" 9

Rapoport, H. 3.: and Karapatov. K. I. ”Extra“ Algorithm and Struc-
tural Program for Saianic Diaplaya” I4

Portnyagin. N. ".5 lapoport, H. 5.; and Ryzhankov. V. R. "Digital
Corralativo Counter for the Hun Pariod of Saianic Oacillationa“ 20

Prolovich. G. 31.; Zhdanov. A. 1.; and Shavchcnko. A. A. "Concarning
tha lntluanca of Curvatura of Raflactiva ldgaa" 23

Koianan. 8. H. and Kopilavich, Va. A. "Optical Filtration of Saianic
Profilaa Through Ralf-Tone Scraana" 32

Starodubrovakaya, s. In; Ganburtuv. A.c.; Saka. Ii. V.; and Afin"ina,
‘l'. V. ”Bxparinantal lnvaatigation of tha Ragion and Have Plclda in
Fracture Zonaa (for axanpla along tha niddla Volga)" 36

Galburtaav. A. 0.; Kurnataov, V. V.; Lavrov. V. 8.; Saval'nav. A. V.;
and Burdina. R. A. "A salaction superman and Analyaia of Vavaa
Aaaociatad with luriad Practura Zonaa (according to data on rift
obaarvationa)" b5

Irylov. l. 3.: turnataov. V. V.; and Rotfcl'd, l. s. "The Applica-
tion Raaulta of mltiplo-l'actor Analyaia in Vibro-Saianic Explora-
tion” 52

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’I’ICIAI. USE ONLY

Ooryunov. 0. m Kortyenovich. H. ".3 end Troyenekeye. l. Ye. "The
leeie tor the Selection of Oheervetion 8yetene by WT [hoecov
lrench or the hein Technologiet] within the Bounde of the Ceepien
Aree'e Southern Slope of the Kerpinehiy Ridge"

Alekeendrov. V. K. "Nooogreu for Proceeeing Seienic Logging Dete”

Doreen. H. l. ”lnveetigetion of the High-Speed Cherecterietice of
the Hezoeoic Covering of the Vilyuyekoy Synecliee"

Konieeerchik. B. 8. ”A Hethod for lnveetigeting the Tectonic Struc-
ture of the Pre-Meeoroic Depoeition Complex in the Teinlyenehiy
Zone"

Kietinev. V. I. end Kozlov. I. 0. "The Geologic end Tectonic Struc-
ture of the horthueetern Pert of the Kot‘yu-Rogovekiy Beein
According to the Dete from the Selenic Bxploretlon Operetione of
mv [reflected veve nethodl"

Denlline. c. 8.; Zhurevlev. A. 8.: end Hirendov. V. 1.. ”Experiment
with the Lithologic-Stretigrephic Anelyeie of the Poroue See
Depoeitione hy Seieno-Acoueticel Hethode”

Kenenetekiy. P. h. end wine. N. I. "An lveluetion of the Influence
of Field heterogeneity on the Treneient Proceee in e Locel Conduc-
tor”

Svetov. I. 8.; hhelicov. A. I"; end Prietevekine, Te. 1. "A Couple:
Interpretetion of the Gein-Pheee Frequency Cherecterietice of
Apperent Inpedence in the negnetotelluric Sounding Method"

Gur'yev. Yu. 1!. end Brue'yenin. 1.. A. "A Celculetion of the Influ-
ence of Locel Topogrephy on the TT [theoreticel plete) Field in
the South Orenburg Greben Zone"

Zneaenelteye, K. P. "An Experiment in Trecing Deep Precturee in
the Pripyetekiy Depreeeion leeed on en lnterpretetion of Crevi-
Megnetic Pielde”

Viehnevekiy. P. v.; Pinyegine. L. V.; Khehibulline. P. 8.; end
Bol'ehov. V. A. "An lnveetigetion of the Keret Porntion of
Cerhoneceoue Rock Depoeite Through Geophyeicel Methode"

Kirehtel'dt, Yu. 2. end Zorin, Te. 2. "A Technique for Proepec-
ting for Oil Depoeite in Cerhoneceoue heervoire in the Upper
Tehlee of Opereting Sitee"

Krivlro. N. 1‘. end Reevenov, R. A. "The Influence of Cleyineee end
end cypeue in hountein Roche on Illa-RV Reeulte”

52
FOR OFPICIAI. US! ONLY

GI
67

70

78

89

93

- I02

I06

II3

II9

I30

I37

I‘I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Deloray. Ya. Lu Karpova. M. m and heretin. v.0. "Honitoring the
naaulta or Blactrochenical Reaponae in Oil and Cu Ileaervoira
Through the lluolaar Magnetic Reaonance Method”

Polyachenko, A. L. and ‘l‘aeyulin. V. 0. ”Algorithm and Calculated
Standard Curvea for Determining the Neutron Capture Profile in
a Stratu- ‘l'hrough mu: [pulaad neutron-neutron logging] and max
[pulaed neutron-gene logging] Hethoda“

Kondaurova. N. V. and Laviton. It. Ye. ”A Current Structural Plan
for the Pre-Devonian Udmrtian Surface and Adjacent Areaa
According to Data fro- 8eiaaic Proapecting and Deep Boring"

COPYRIGHT: luatel‘atvo "ledra". 1977

9082
cam I070 m

53

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY